SOLOMON OR A treatise declaring the state of the kingdom of Jsrael, as it was
in the days of SOLOMON. Whereunto is annexed another treatise, of the Church:
or more particularly, Of the right constitution of a Church. Psalm. 45.14.
Adducetur Regi.

Iere. 29.7. Seek the peace of the City vvhither I shall send you as
captives, and pray unto the Lord for it: for in the peace of it, shall your
peace be.

LONDON, Printed by Robert Robinson for Robert Dexter. 1596.

Regni Angloisraelitici typus.
Bellum de Pace.
Flos de Iesse

Leo de Judah

Reg. Pacis

Rex. Pacis.



Jacobs prophecy of the kingdom of Israel. Genesis 49.8.
JVdah thy brethren shall praise the:
Thy hand in the neck of thy enemies:
The sons of thy father shall bow themselves unto th^e:
Judah my son a Lions whelp, thou have come up from (...) spoil:
Thou have couched like a Lion, yea as a great Lion: and who shall raise him up?
The scepter shall not depart from Judah, nor a lawgiuer from between his
feet till the Messiah come:
And to him shall be the obedience of the people.
TO THE MOST Mighty and Maiesticall, peaceable and happy Monarche ELIZABETH
by the gracious favor of God Queen of England France and Ireland, the most
constant protector of the Gospel and Church of Christ, supreme head of all
estates, ruler of all persons, and judge of all causes within her Majesty's
Dominions,
Thomas Morton her Majesty's unworthy subject desires from God a long
continuance and a daily increase of temporal Majesty: And after the satietie
thereof, the fruition of eternal Majesty and glory with Jesus Christ:

And in testimony of all unfeigned love, loyalty and thankfulness dedicateth
in most humble wise, these treatises of the Kingdom of Israel, and of the
Church.

ISraelitici cernis regina, Leonis
Effigiem: si de nobilitate cupis
Audire, hunc quondam peperit in Gilgale magn^
Iehouae Cerebrum: sanctius ergo nihil.
Obstetricans fidos digitos admouit in ortis
Samuel: effigies integritatis erat.
Nutriuit catulum Saulus: qui rugit, and omnis
Palaestina tremit: non placet iste Deo:
Sufficitur Sauli David, Rex foedere certo
Dictus, cum tota posteritate sua.
Excipit hunc sapiens Solomon qui gloria mundi,
Qui decus est hominum, delitiaeque Dei:
Octodecem varia succedunt sort nepotes.
At memor officij regia progenies
Aeterno cedit regi vacuumque relinquit
Thronum: tum fessus corruit ipse Leo:
Quingentos somno pressus procumbit in annos,
Dum micat in coelo lucifer ille suo
Messiah dictus: magna qui v^ce iacentem
Excitat, and solium ponit in arce suum.
Iam pleno ciclo tua, Judah, gloria mundum
Irrediat, florent lilia Iesse tibi:
Aurea magnificis leo vell^ra gestat in armis:
Tollitur imperij nuntia cauda gyrans:
Horrendo rictu recludit eburnea claustra,
Inque focis remicant ignis vterque suis.
Israelitici moderatur fraena leonis,
Qui caelum, terras and maris ima tenet:
ATque tuam cernit tua plebs (Regina) corona^
Israelitico docta tacere modo.
Multa tuo ductu vidit Salomonia r^gna:
O nimium foelix natio si sapiat.
Palladium ramum Salomoni praeripis: and par
Gloria, constanti relligione prior:
Nemo tibi Christu^ ( Salomoni vt foemina quonda^)
Eripuit, papae despicis arma, minas.
Viue diu foelix, multos numerato Nouembres,
V^ maneat foelix Anglia tota diu.
To the Reader.
Behold (good Reader) that glorious Monarch king Solomon, the fairest flower
that ever stood on the face of the earth, stripped out of his maiesticall robes,
wherein he was as glorious as the Lilie of the field, yea as the sun in his
brightness at noone day, and clad in a most simple and homely weed, having as
we say in as homely a proverb, neither welt nor guard, no bright shining
colors, or curious caruing, no commendation of sharpnes of wit or admirable
eloquence, of great reading or profound learning, of sound wisdom or long
experience, or of any other thing, that is in account or r^quest among men. And
withal pardon we pray thee this bold attempt, in choosing so royal a patronage
for so base a piece of work. We are not so blinded with any fond co^ceite of
the excellency and worthiness o^ these treatises, as to think them a great
dainty, fit for princes only to feed on, the which we judge too course for the
diet of the meanest read^r: but we do it upon those grounds and reasons which
we hope will be if not a full and sufficient defense yet a tolerable excuse and
a probable pretense in this behalf. What is more needful or acceptable in the
eyes of God, then that subjects bear an exceeding great love to their
natural princes, as to their parents by whose means they enjoy all good
things both temporal and spiritual whats^euer: and be ready to testify the
said love whenever any just occasion does offer it self or can be found:
especially by offering unto them as to earthly Gods (for so it has pleased God
to call them) some part of those blessings which God has vouchsafed unto us,
as acknowledging that we have received all that we have by their means. The
want of this duty showed the rebellious disposition of some of the people
against Saul the first of these kings: of whom it is said, 1. Sam. 10.27. that
they despised Saul their new king, and did not bring any gift or present unto
him.

And surely herein the self love of man does notably bewray it self, who does
perhaps, although not thankefully remember for any long time, yet somewhat
regard for the present, those who show themselves good and bountiful unto him:
But as for public benefits whereof many others are partakers, he makes no
r^ckning of them, neither accounts himself beholden to them, who are the
authors and giuers of them: as if he had enmity and war with the whole
world, and so were hurt, whenever others are helped. Hence it comes that so
few are heartely and duetifully affected to magistrates, who are good to many,
and far fewer to God, who is good to all, or perform any duty of love and
thankfulness to either, save only in hypocrisy and for fear. Whereas far
greater love is due to them, then to any private person, because we receive
from them far more benefits then any other can bestow upon us. Yea this
hearty affection and duetifull testification of it is required at the hands
not only of great and mighty men who can bring rich presents correspondent to
the majesty of the greatest princes, but also of the poorest and basest member
of the Church and commonwealth: yea as it is often found in men of mean
condition whenas it is wanting in high degrees and lofty looks, so it is and
ought to be always as well accepted at the one hand, as at the other. We know
that God the king of kings takes in as good part, if the mind be no worse, a
pair of small pigeons as a couple of great oxen, and that the most maiesticall
and stately monarchs (as namely our gracious soueraign inferior to none in
majesty and state) have as willingly stouped to a homely dish of fruit, to a
small posie of three or four flowers, to a sheet of paper containing in it no
great mysteries, as to great and fruitful orchardes, to the most fair and
pleasant gardens or to great and huge volumes, mirrours of wit, and storehouses
of all profound learning. Yea we know that as God himself, so also wise
princes by his example do often more willingly admit mean and simple then
great and rich oblations, as not carrying with them any show of merit, nor
making the receauer beholden and indebted to the giver. In the which respect,
as we do bear in our minds unfeigned loyalty and love (of the greatness
whereof, (as there are many degrees of it) we have nothing to say but only
that it is far less than it ought to be) to her Majesty's state and person,
so we have thought it meet to testify the same unto thee, good reader, by
this means which now we use. Let not we pray thee, the great wantes which thou
may easily espy, or rather can not but see in these treatises (being for
quantity small and contemptible, for style base yea rude, for matter barren
yea altogether void of that deep learning which abounds in every book and
place) breed in thy mind any suspicion of want of affection or make thee
think them altogether unfit for this purpose. We do not go about to make
either comparison or contention between the excellency of the gift and of the
receauer: and thou art not ignorant that pence and half pence do as decently
carry about with them the name, arms and image of the prince as the greatest
pieces of gold or silver, and are as evident testimonies of the loyal
subjection of the people, amongst whom they are current.

How then will some man say, are all to be accounted undutiful subjects,
who do not by some such means testify their good affection toward their
prince? or is it meet that every three half penny pamphlet come forth in her
Majesty's name? No surely: the one is neither needful nor convenient, for it
would be troublesome and tumultuous, the other is not to be allowed. Only we
mean that no man should be wanting as in bearing in his heart, so in
testifying unto others his love and loyalty toward his prince, when occasion
is offered and does so require: And that the smalnesse or meannesse of the
present (especially in this kind wherein it is after a sort commendable, for
we cannot think that great princes have leisure to peruse many great volumes)
ought to make us think it unmeet for this purpose, if that in other respects
it do agree. And whether this be a sufficient defense for our doing or no, yet
we trust that thou gentle reader, to whom only this book (although dedicated
to her M.) is to be offered and presented, will not reject it for the meannesse
of it, but take it in good part instead of a better. Thus we having penned and
being about to publish these two treatises, the one of the state of the
kingdom of Israel, the other of the right constitution of a Church, seemed
both to our selves and also to others to have good o^casion offered of
perfourming the aforesaid duty, and that the arguments of these treatises did
even lead us by the hand to this dedication: It were rashness and folly for
any man to think that every flower in his garden were a fit present for a
prince (although if there were any necessity that he should of a sudden
testify his submission, the meanest would serve his turn to a gracious
prince, as Jacob bid his sons take with them a present to the ruler of Egypt
of such things as were readiest in the house) yet if happily his garden
brought forth a flower of that kind whereof the poet speaks, inscripti
nomina regum, wherein the name, picture or arms of his prince were liuelely
engraven by nature her self, who would not pardon his boldness in presenting
it to him, yea although it were not in any respect so fair, pleasant, and
fragrant as many other. Yea and if he should be drawn by affection or hope of
gain, (which h^ perhaps would hope for rather at a meaner man's hands, as
having leisure to mind and remember the perfourmance of that duty) bestow it
upon any other, judge him an undutiful and unthankful subject. Thus our
poor garden has yielded this treatise of the kingdom of Israel, wherein
nothing is worthy to be either commended or mentione^, but only that it is, if
we be not deceived, a most true and lively picture of her Majesty's state and
crown. There are many fourmes of government beside Monarchies, and diverse
kinds of kingdoms, but as a base pr^uerbe says, one egg is not more like to
another then was this state to that government under which we live. Neither is
there at this day any christian kingdom in the world that comes so near
unto it, or rathen does so match it in great power and surpassing majesty, yea
in all other respects of any moment. Yea we need not here except tha^
notable prerogative, wherewith this kingdom was endued and adorned in that it
was Gods kingdom: founded, established, maintained and repaired by God
himself: for who knows not, that God has from time to time, and does at
this day so watch over this kingdom, and maintain it against all adversary
power wha^soeuer, that it may truly be called Gods kingdom. It is recorded of
one Brightwold a Monk of Glastenburie, that studying of the succession, which
at that time troubled him and many others, he had revealed unto him in a
dream, that Edward should be king: and that he being not so content but asking
further who should succeed him in the kingdom, he received this answer or
rather this reproof, Take thou no thought for such matters, for the kingdom
of England is Gods kingdom. What credit is to be given to the author or what
account is to be made of this dreaming prophet let others judge, yet as we
find it recorded in our Chronicles, so we have thought it not unfit to be
remembered in this place. Besides we know that these powerful and maiesticall
kingdoms, have been and are at this day oppugned by many, yea utterly
rejected as unlawful: and therefore this treatise presuming to give his
sentence on their side, as being most lawful gouernementes, could not more
fitly shrowde it self under any patronage, then under that for the which it is
like to be rejected by some. Again we have annexed to this treatise of the
kingdom of Israel, a treatise of the right manner of framing or building the
Church, as it were joining the Church and the commonwealth into one body under
one head, as we are persuaded that they are not two but one only body: the
which also although in respect of the simple handling of the matter, it be
unworthy to be accepted and red by the meanest, yet no man can doubt or will
deny, but that the fitness of the argument is a probable excuse for this
presumptuous dedication.

Lastly we desire thee good reader to use christian moderation in suspending
thy judgment of us, till happily time make that manifest which now is
doubtful, in regard of two opinions contained in these treatises, the which
will seem somewhat strange to some, and perhaps to thy self among the rest.
The one is that we enfraunchize the papist, Arian and al other heretics
professing the gospel of Christ, into the catholic Church (by the which we
mean nothing else but the whole Church militant here on earth) from the which
many do utterly reject them as mere infidels and strangers from the covenant,
and commonwealth of Israel. The other opinion is, in that we give to the
christian magistrate especially in great and absolute Monarchies greater
authority both in civil and ecclesiastical causes then seems to stand with
the good of the Church or the truth of Gods word. For the former, we need not
trouble our selves with the defense of it any further, then it is declared in
the treatise, it being held and professed by many sound divines, who are in
every respect far more able to maintain it. Likewise for the other, we have
nothing to say in this place, save only that we are to desire thee, not to
attribute it to flattery, rather then to a constant and settled persuasion, the
suspicion whereof it is hard for him to avoid, who does any thing whereby the
power and authority of mighty men is maintained and enlarged, and so their
favor, as usually it comes to pass procured. We do indeed intend in
publishing this treatise, the good and peaceable estate of this kingdom, and
the maintaining of that powerful and maiesticall authority whereunto it has
pleased God to make us subject. Yea we do earnestly desire of him, that these
treatises may have that effect in all their hearts into whose hands they shall
come: that they (if there be any such) who do nourish in their breasts any
sinister affections or opinions in this behalf, may be by means of them won
to hearty love to so gracious a prince and loyal subjection to so lawful and
excellent a kind of government. Yea that they who have already received these
graces from God, may increase in them, and perform all duties which are
needful in regard either of the safety or the majesty of their prince, more
willi^gly and chearefully then before, as being perhaps resolved of some
points, ^hereof before they doubted. And lastly that as touching the religion
and worship of God professed in this land, they who accounte us no Church (by
whom we affirming their opinion to be such, as might easily be showed out of
the word of God to be erroneous have been vehemently charged in the name of
God to publish somewhat of the true nature and constitution of a Church for the
manifesting of the truth in that behalf) may be moved to think and
acknowledge that God i^ truly served, his word preached, his sacraments
administered and his name called upon in all the public assemblies throughout
this land, especially by considering the doctrine, nature and state of a
public Church, the which kind of Churches not being in use in the days of
the Apostles, and therefore not mentioned in their writi^gs, seems strange to
many. This we confess that we intend in this action, and are persuaded that we
may lawfully, yea in some respects ought necessarely to do: but we trust that
God will never so give us up to a senseless mind, as to do any thing for the
procuring of the favor of men contrary to the truth of Gods word and the
good of his Church. He makes an evil bargain, that throws himself into
the bottomless sea or rather into the burning furnace of Gods wrath in
adventure of man's favor, which is uncertain and momentani^ sooner lost then
gott^n, and in respect of true happiness altogether unprofitable. But we trust
good reader, that this apology might have been spared and that thou will take
these simple treatises in good part, as thou have done the like heretofore.
Thus I commend thee as I earnestly desire to be commended by thee to the word
and spirit of God to be led into all truth, and preserved without blame till
the day of Christ.

T. M.

The Arguments of these treatises.
THE former treatise declares the state of the kingdom of Israel, the which
we have endeavored to learn and set down in plain manner out of the
scripture, wherein there is nothing but truth, especially out of the books of
Samuel, the Kings and Chronicles, wherein the first original, continuance and
end, yea the whole nature and condition of this government is at large
declared. Where by the kingdom of Israel we do not mean that apostaticall,
rebellious and idolatrous kingdom of the ten tribes usually called the
kingdom of Israel, or the kingdom of Samaria, but the kingdom of Judah: the
which we call by the first, ancient, and right name of Israel because our
purpose is to entreat of the state of it, as it was at the first instituted by
Samuel, and as it continued under Saul, David and Solomon, in whose time it
was called the kingdom of Israel. But in the beginning of the reign of
R^boam it lost ten of the tribes, and together the right name which usually
follows the greater part. For the which cause in the time following it was
called the kingdom of Judah, for that the tribe of Judah, did not only make the
greatest part of it, but also had the prerogative of the kingdom annexed unto
it. The causes by the which we are moved to think the state of this kingdom
most worthy to be carefully sought out and truly known, are these: because of
all the kingdoms in the world, this only was instituted by God himself, or
at the least approved by him, and also registered and fully described in the
books of the scripture, yea and first practiced in the Church of God. In the
which respects we cannot doubt, but that the true and perfect knowledge of it
does greatly belong to the Church and to all the members of it. And yet we do
not speak of it, as of the only lawful form of government and that which
ought to be used of the Church in all places. For there is no kind of
government which may not lawfully be established among Christians, and as
lawfully used amongst them as this. Neither as if all kingdoms should be
squared according to this rule: from the which they may far differ without
any blame: for the judicial laws of the commonwealth or of the kingdom of
Israel do not belong to the Church. Neither yet do we affirm this kingdom
to be the most excellent and convenient state, and that which christians
according to the example of this people should earnestly desire and seek
after: wishing rather that every one be content with that government which is
already established in the place where he lives, not thinking of any
alteration which is very dangerous and brings with it, as always great
troubles, so often a final overthrow to the people. But we leave it to them
who profess knowledge and experience in these matters to determine what kind
of government is either most excellent in the own nature and in contemplation,
or most convenient to be put in practice. Only we purpose to make a bare and
historical narration of the state of this kingdom, the which we trust is not
unprofitable but will serve for the good of the reader in diverse respects
especially in those which have been already mentioned.

The former treatise has these Sections.
SEction. 1. Of the occasion, meaning, and division of the words of the text.
Page 1 Sect. 2. Of magistracy in general. Page 4 Sect. 3. Of the state of
this kingdom in general. Page 9 Sect. 4. That the authority of the land was
wholly in the hands of the king, all other being private persons in respect
of him. Page 12 Sect. 5. That it was not lawful to use any violence against
the persons or the proceedinges, no not of the wicked kings. Page 17 Sect. 6.
Of the objections which are made against the former position. Page 22 Sect. 7.
What was the behauio^r of the subjects in regard of injuries offered by their
kings. Page 28 Sect. 8. Whether the setting up of this monarchical estate
were commodious or hurtful to the people. Page 30 Sect. 9. That no person
whatsoever, was exempted from this power. Page 34 Sect. 10. What was the power
of this kingdom in ecclesiastical causes. Page 39 Sect. 11. That the power of
this kingdom was free from positive laws and a peremptory power. Page 46
Sect. 12. Of the causes of the great majesty of this kingdom. Page 50 Sect.
13. Of the particulars in the said Majesty. Page 54 Sect. 14. That this
kingdom was a lawful kind of government, and how it was subject to God.
Page 61 Sect. 15. Of the actions of Samuel. Page 67
The Argument of the latter treatise is the Church militant: considered in
general: in the first chapter of the catholiick Church sections. 8. particular:
in the members of the catholic Church dispersed abroad: in the second chap.
sections. 3. joined together in a particular Church: whereof we are to entreat
severally: declaring in general the definition of a particular Chapter in. the
attributes chapter. 3. Sections. 3. the building of it, to wit the laying the
foundation. Chapter 4. Sect. 4. the setting up the frame by establishing laws
ecclesiastical divine. Chapter 5. Sect. 2. humane. C. 6. of ecclesiastical
constitutions. sect. 5.


of the diverse states of it. Chapter 7. Sect. 11
In particular: the diverse kinds of a Church which is either private. Chapter 8.
Sect. 3. or public. Chap. 9. Sections. 9.

Jointly in the conjunction of some particular Churches. Chap. 10. Sect. 4.
all: the which make the visible Church. Chap. 11.





The Argument.
Chapter. 1. Of the catholic Church. SEction. 1. Of the name and definition
of the catholic Church. page 1 Sect. 2. Of the place of the catholic
Church. page 3 Sect. 3. That hypocrites are members of the catholic Church.
page 4 Sect. 4. That heretics are members of the catholic Church. page 8
Sect. 5. Of those who dissemble their profession. page 16 Sect. 6. Who are
without the catholic Church. page 17 Sect. 7. Of the attributes of the
catholic Church. page 18 Sect. 8. Of the distribution of the catholic
Church. page 21
Chapter. 2. Of the dispersed members of the Church. Sect. 1. For what cause
men are separated from the Church. page 22 Sect. 2. How they serve God. page 25
Sect. 3. What to think of their salvation. page 26
Chapter. 3. Of a particular church. Sect. 1. Of the original of it. page 29
Sect. 2. Of the definition of it. page 30 Se^^. 3. Of the number of i^. page 32
Chapter. 4. Of the planting of a particular church. Sect. 1. Of what people a
Church may consist. page 35 Sect. 2. By whom a church ought to be planted. page
37 Sect. 3. How the word should be preached to infidels. page 39 Sect. 4. How
men converted ought to be ordered. page 44
Chapter. 5. Of ecclesiastical government. Sect. 1. Of church government in
general. page 48 Sect. 2. Of the diverse kinds of church government: page 53
Chapter. 6. Of ecclesiastical humane laws. Sect. 1. How these laws diff^r
from the laws of God. page 57 Sect. 2.3. Of the matter of these laws. page 58
Sect. 4. After what rules they are to be made. page 62 Sect. 5. Of the number
of them. psg. 66
Chapter. 7. Of the diverse states of a particular church. Sect. 1. Of a state
vnestablished. page 67 Sect. 2. Of a pure and perfect state of a church. page
70 Sect. 3. Of a flourishing state. page 71 Sect. 4. Of that state wherein the
building of the chapter is hindered. page 74 Sect. 5. Of professed hinderers. page
78 Sect. 6. Of the chapter hindered* by the civil ruler being a professed enemy.
pa. 79 Sect. 7. Of the church hindered by the civil ruler being a member of it.
p. 83 Sect. 8. Of the church hindered by the ministers of the word. page 87
Sect. 9. Of an imperfect state of a church. page 88 Sect. 10. Of a currupt
state of a church namely of idolatry. page 90 Sect. 11. Of a church corrupt in
doctrine. page 93
Chapter. 8 Of a private Church. Sect. 1. What a private Church is. Page 95
Sect. 2. Of the specials in planting a private Church. page 120 Sect. 3. Of the
state of it being planted. page 99
Chapter. 9. Of a public or national Church. Sect. 1. Of the objections
which are made against public Chapter page 102 Sect. 2. Of the conjunction of the
church and the commonwealth. p. 106 Sect. 3. That a public Church with the
commonwealth make but one body under one head. page 107 Sect. 4. That civil
and ecclesiastical functions may be together in the same persons. page 114
Sect. 5. Of the chaunges which happen either ^o the Church or common wealth by
this conjunction. page 116 Sect. 6. Of the first mouer in the planting of a
public Church. page 118 Sect. 7. Of the special manner of planting a public
Church. pa. 120 Sect 8. Of the establishing of it. page 123 Sect. 9. To whom
the authorizing and aduising of ecclesiastical laws belongs in a public
Church. page 125
Chapter. 10. Of the conjunction of particular Churches. Sect. 1. Of the
voluntary conjunction of particular Churches under the government of councels.
page 131 Sect. 2. Of whom counsels may and ought to consist. page 133 Sect. 3.
Of the necessary conjunction of particular Churches under the government of
the same civil power. page 134 Sect. 4. How the several provinces of a
national church are to be governed. page 141
Chapter. 11 Of the visible church. page 143
We pray thee good reader to turn hither when thou meetest with any stay: and
to read those places as they are here set down. Our desire was that thou
should be eased of this trouble as thou may perceive: but now we must
desire thee to take it in good part. Farewell.
Jn the former treatise.
Page 14. li. 4. who answers page 18.9. necessity, the glory page 19.1. in
his Church page 39.2. against whom and when he page 59.2. duetifully obeide
page 65.13. that he spoke page 70.26. contempt and
Jn the latter tre^tise.
Pa. 2.17. Of a particular. Ch p. 18.6. Arians did: therefore p. 28.4. Baalam,
all of them p. 33.15* of multitude p. 38.32. him, call p. 24.23. into those
infinite p. 40.34 in that the p. 54.23. the sun^e of p. 39.25. an
extraordinary p. 45.23. of the receauers and 27. the other gave p. 49.32. at
the same time p. 50.34. perfectly set down p. 59.35. the Chapter was bound p.
62.23. the direction p. 79.28. as their gift p. 82.2. Church, then in p. 89.15.
so perfect a state p. 90 30. affectation p. 94.22. Churches of Aria^s p. 95.22.
which in all p. 103.25. which is p. 104.10. in number p. 129.25. all means p.
56.5. yea far above p. 86.19. professing the faith p. 130.26. of the spirit
p. 131.29. national and gene. p. 134.13. bind that one p. 138.1. for in
public p. 142.7, and orderi^g p. 10.13. to be aliantes p. 24.23. into those
infinite p. 40.34. first, which will p. ^2 13. in his Apology p. 66.36. of
judicial p. 65.16, of less moment p. 82.2. Church, then in p. 97.1. a private
Church p. 98.24. more then one. p. 106.6. the favor p. 112.23. they had an
The ground of this treatise, we take out of the first book of Samuel the 10.
Chapter the 25. verse, where it is thus written:
And Samuel spoke unto the people the judgment of the kingdom: and wrote in a
book: and laid it before the face of the Lord: etc. IT pleased God in mercy,
to choose out of all the nations of the world, the people of Israel to be a
peculiar people unto him self, on whom he would set his whole affection and
pour forth the full treasures of his blessings, both spiritual, to wit, his
covenant and his promises, his word and his Church, his worship and his
visible presence, yea which is all in all, his own only son the savior of
the world and with him eternal salvation: and also temporal, as namely
continual deliverance from all dangers, in Egypt, in the wilderness and in
the land of Chanaan: a fruitful land to dwell in, wise and puisant judges to
govern them and to save them out of the hands of all enemies, from Moses to
Samuel. But this people was an unfaithful, that is to say, an ungracious
people, and did neither worthily esteem nor carefully keep the blessings
bestowed upon them: but as they were in nature and conditions, Why the people
desired an alteration of the state.
so they did affect to be in all other respects like unto the profane nations
of the earth: and therefore they changed both the civil and also the
ecclesiastical state appointed by God, insomuch that for the true worship of
God they did often take unto themselves the idolatry of the heathen, and in
steed of the judges by whom they had been governed now 400. years, they
would needs have a king set over them as other nations had. The which desire
although it were greatly displeasing in the eyes of God and of Samuel, yet by
the importunity of the people, it was obtained: insomuch that in steed of the
sons of Samuel, who governed the land in their fathers age, Saul in son
of Cis was anointed king of Israel. This change of the civil magistrate
being made, it did of necessity follow, that there should be a change of
the laws also, by the which the people were governed, according to that which
is commonly said, new Lords must have new laws. For although they took
the occasion of this alteration, The occasion of this alteration.
at the personal faults of the sons of Samuel, yet they changed not only
the governor but also the government it self, and brought in an other kind
of government far different from that which was before in force, and
therefore requiring new laws, whereupon to stand. Yea the process of this
treatise will in part declare, that the difference betwixt these two
gouernmentes, the one of the Judges and the other of the Kings was so great
that the laws of the one estate could no more agree to the other, then the
furniture of a mighty giant will serve a child or the base apparel of a
mean man, beseem a stately prince. In consideration whereof Samuel or
rather GOD by the ministry of Samuel, as he had given to the people a king,
so in the next place he gives unto them the state of a kingdom, and that by
establishing those orders and laws according to the which both the king
should rule and the people obey. Not that he did prescribe unto them any new
judicial laws, but only he made the fundamental laws of the kingdom, the
which are here called the judgment of the kingdom, that is, the very
nature, condition and manner of this new government, the proper laws of it,
and as it were, the very marks by the which it may be judged, that is,
known in it self, and distinguished from all other kinds of government. For
so the word here used does signify in many places of the scripture, as
namely, 2. Kings. 1.7. where Achasia asks his messengers, what is the
judgment of the man, whom they said to be Elias, that is, what was his
behavior, his apparel, his countenance, and as we do usually say, what
manner of man is he: so here the judgment of the kingdom is to be
understood. Likewise by the face of GOD here is meant the place of the
presence of God, to wit the tabernacle wherein God was worshipped, or more
specially the Arc with the propitiatory, which was a visible sign of the
presence of God. Thus much of the occasion, and meaning of these words, which
we may handle in this order; That first we speak of that which is here
called the judgment of the kingdom which is the doctrine of it, and in the
second place consider the actions of Samuel mentioned in the text: the which
are three in number. The first is, that he spoke this doctrine of the kingdom
to the people, the second, that he wrote it in a book, the third is, that he
laid the book before the Lord: of these in order.

Sect. II.
But before we come to the special doctrine of this kingdom, it will not be
either unprofitable or impertinent if we do briefly consider the genenerall
doctrine of magistracy. The which as it is worthy diligently to be handled
and commended to the Church of GOD; so it will give great light to this whole
treatise following. Magistracy therefore is not a mere devise of man, as they
who contemn and labor to overthrow all authority, speaking evil of those
things which they know not, have imagined: but an ordinance of God Romans 13.12.
There is no power but of GOD, he therefore that resists the power resists
the ordinance of God. But it may be thought that it is not gods ordinance
seeing it cannot be showed that ever it was established by God throughout the
world, Magistracy Gods ordinance.
but rather invented and continued by men excelling others in strength and in
ambition, whereby they were both moved to desire superiority and also enabled
to accomplish their desire, and so have by violence, bloodshed outrage tyranny
and al manner of impiety against God, and injustice in regard of men both
gotten and usurped the places of rulers. So that seeing this has been the
original of the authority almost of all rulers, we cannot make it the
institution of God, especially seeing that it does not appear that God did
ever command that there should be magistrates set up over the people
throughout the whole world, only amongst the Jews magistracy was set up by
his commandment but not in any place beside. Whereunto we answer, that the
abuses of magistracy, although many and grievous, cannot take away the lawful
use of it. And further that the cause why there is no express commandment in
the word of God enioyning that magistracy should be set up in all places, is,
for that the word of God does not belong to the whole world but only to the
Church which is in all times, and especially was in the first ages of the
world, the least part, yea sometimes as nothing in comparison of the huge
number of infidels. But in the Church, God has from time to time both
commanded and established the use of magistracy and severely punished the
contempt of it: The church has never been without magistracy.
as might be showed by examples in all ages. For although there could be no
public magistracy in the Church till the days of Moses, because until that
time the Church was contained within the compass of one or a few families,
yet there was private government which had no less force and authority then
when the number of the Church increasing to a whole nation, public magistracy
was erected. For the first borne of the family was the ruler, and as it were a
Lord to the rest, as Jacob does call Esau, Genesis. 33.13.14. But although
magistracy has been by the express commandment of GOD established only
in the Church, yet it belongs as much to infidels. For it is instituted by
God, not ^s he is the Savior of his Church, but as he is the creator and
preserver of all men. Therefore howsoever God does not vouchsafe his love and
eternal life coming thereof to any of those who are not* of his Church, yet
as the Apostle witnesses, Romans. 3.29. He is the GOD not only of the
Jews, who only were then his Church, but also of the Gentiles. In this
respect as also in regard of his faithful people with whom they live, and
for other causes, he does bestow upon them many temporal blessings,
letting the rain to fall down and the sun to shine upon them, and also in
making them partakers of this ordinance of magistracy by the which they may
live in order and peace, safely and quietly enjoying all the temporal
commodities of this present life. The means by the which God does set up
this his ordinance amongst infidels, who are destitute of his word, is the
light of nature remaining in the minds of men, How God erecteth magistracy
among infidels.
by the which they do easelie both see the manifold commodities which come by
magistracy and also desire to be made partakers thereof. For although by
reason of the corruption of our nature, few can live in due subjection unto
authority, with a contented mind, yet almost all men when they are without
magistrates, do of themselves desire to have some to govern, and no marvel:
seeing that the deformity and inconveniences which the want of magistrates
brings, are euidente to all men, for that a people in such a state is like a
to body without a head to move it. The experience hereof we have even in
this people of the Jews who did voluntarily without any compulsion desire a
king, and that in a most earnest manner. Thus we see that magistracy is the
ordinance of God, whereof this does necessarily ensue, that it is not as an
unholy, profane and impure state, or to be vilely esteemed of, as many do
affirm and account it to be, who do falsely think that the beauty of the
Church cannot appear, neither her authority be sufficiently extolled and
established, but by deforming and treading under foot this divine ordinance of
civil magistracy, the which as it is most acceptable to God so it ought to be
had in great honor by all men. Why God appointed magistracy.
Lastly the ends why magistracy was ^ppointed by God are two; The first is
the representing of his glory here on earth. The second is the procuring of the
good of man. For the first; The magistrate is Gods deputy and vice gerent here
on earth to govern men and to keep the world in order without confusion: even
as we see that great monarchs have many legates and deputies, by whom they
rule their several provinces: and therefore God does communicate to them as his
office so also his name, and calls them Gods, in the which respect the
magistrate is a lively, In what respect the magistrate bears the image of God.
yea a living Image of God; first of his excellency, in that he is taken from
the common sort and condition of men, and set aloft: therefore he is to be
honored. Secondly of the wisdom of God in that he is able to foresee imminent
dangers, to make fit laws and orders, to judge of right and wrong, and to
keep his people in peace and mutual concord, and therefore he is to be
reverenced, and to be obeyed in his laws and edictes. Thirdly of the justice
of God, in that he does severely punish the great misdemeanour of malefactors,
and therefore he is to be feared. Fourthly of the mercy of God, in that he
does graciously with favor pass by and wink at small offenses, and therefore
he is to be praised. And lastly he carries the image of the goodness of God in
that by his means foreseeing, preventing and repelling all dangers and
troubles, we do enjoy all manner of blessings both temporal and eternal even
life and liberty, plenty of all things and prosperity, houses and lands,
wives and children, friends and acquaintance, and that which is much more to
be esteemed, the true service and worship of God, his holy word, and in one
word, all things needful in regard either of body or soul, and therefore
the magistrate is unfeignedly to be loved and praised. The second end why
magistracy was appointed is the good of man, that by this means, they might
live in peace, safety, and order. But of the several commodities, which
magistracy brings, we do not purpose to entreat, because they are commonly
known although more enjoyed then considered: as also for that they may in part
be gathered of that which has been spoken.

Sect. III.
THus we have by the general doctrine of magistracy an entrance made to the
special doctrine of the kingdom of Israel; wherein we have many several
points to consider, which for order and memory sake may be reduced to two
heads: whereof the first contains the state of this kingdom in respect of
n^en or of the people of Israel, the second, the state of it in respect of God.
The first head has the greatest part of the difference of this kingdom from
the former government of Judges, consisting especially in two things, the
special power which it had over the people, and the special majesty of it,
both which were exceeding great in this state, yea so great, that in these
respects the government of the judges may seem not only a mean but almost a
private estate. Hence it is that this kingdom of Israel is by Jacob
prophesying of it, Genesis 49.9. compared to a Lion the which does in strength and
especially in a maiesticall stateliness so far exceed all other beasts,
that it is usually called the king of them. If we desire to know how it came
to pass that there was so great power and majesty given to this kingdom, we
must have recourse to the original of it. The causes of the setting up of
this estate were two: The first is that which may be said to be the cause of
all things in the world, to wit, the eternal counsel and decree of God by
the which it was before al ages appointed, that the king of Israel should be
a type of Christ, The kingdom of Israel a type of Christ's kingdom.
and his temporary government a type of the spiritual and eternal kingdom
of Christ as is afterward to be declared. Now that this kingdom might be a
fit and lively type, it was needful that it should be endued with a great
measure of power and majesty, that so it might the more lively represente the
infinite power and authority which the Messiah was to have over all creatures
in heaven and in earth, and likewise his unspeakable and incomprehensible
majesty and glory filling the heaven of heavens: The second cause of the
great power and majesty of this kingdom was the desire or rather the will of
the people who did so earnestly, yea so eagerly and importunately call for this
stately government that they would take no denial, nor hear any thing which
could be alleged to be contrary. For that the people did always desire this
state, we may see, Deutro. 17.14. where God foretells this; that when they
were once possessed of the land they would have a King, and Judge. 8.22. where
they offer to make Gedeon king: and more plainly, Judges. 9. where they like
Abimeleches opinion saying, that it was better for them to have one then many
to reign over them. Neither did they desire to have one set over them with
the bare name and title of a king or with any mean authority, but that he
should have power and majesty in the highest degree. For howsoever it might
seem that this their desire was in some respect incommodious to themselves,
for that the greater power they gave to the king, the less liberty they left
to themselves, and the greater that his pomp and majesty was, the more heavy
tributes must be imposed on them for the maintayning of it, yet they did so
vehemently desire to be like to other nations in a stately monarchy, that
they thought no price too great for it, thinking belike, as it is commonly
said, that it was greater honor for them to make a mighty and a glorious
King, then to be kings themselves as every one was in the time of the Judges
wherein every man did that which was good in his own eyes, because they had no
king to order them, Judge. 18.1.19.1. And yet we do not deny, but that in
ordaining so mighty and maiestical an authority they thought it would be for
their own good howsoever it might seem to derogate from their liberty and
profitte, and that the commodities would be more and more weighty then the
inconveniences of it: wherein whether they did judge right or no let others
determine.

Sect. IIII.
NOW we are to come to the particular declaration of these things: First of the
power of this kingdom, and secondly of the majesty of it: The doctrine of the
power has in it these four questions: The first is, whether the power of the
king were whole or divided: The second, whether it were general over all
persons and causes or restrained: The third, whether it were absolute, or tied
to laws: The last whether it were a mild or a peremptory power. The power
whereof we do entreat, is the full, supreme and universal authority (for
of any inferior power we do not speak) of governing the people and of
ordering all their public affairs: the which before that this kingdom was
set up, was not wholly in any one hand, but divided amongst many. For it was
partly in the hands of God, partly in the hands of the judge which was for
the time, partly in the hands of the elders or senate, and partly in the hands
of the body of the people. For the first where we say that God had a part of
this authority, we do not consider him simply as God, for in that respect,
not a part only but the whole supreme power not of that country only, but of
all the nations in the world, yea of heaven and earth was and is in his hands:
but we consider him as he was after a special manner the king and ruler of
this people, How God was the king of Israel.
so as he never was or will be to any other nation. The actions of God, which
did proceed from this his regal authority were these. First that he gave to
this people judicial laws and constitutions which is part of the office not
of God, for then these judicial laws should belong to the whole world, seeing
GOD is the God, not of the Jews only but also of the gentiles. But other
nations are not tied to these laws but only to the moral law, and to these
Judicials so far as they are moral, to wit, to the grounds and equity of
them, but not to the laws themselves. The second thing which God did by virtue
of this authority was the supreme administration of their battles in cases
of great extremity. For as great princes send captains to fight in their
stead, yet according to their direction and appointment, so God did
immediately either by his word or spirit stir up some man to fight the
battles of the people and did direct them in such actions. And this Gedeon
acknowledges, Judges. 7.20. Where he says, the sword of the Lord and of
Gedeon. In these respects GOD was the king of this nation as Gedeon does
confess, Judges. 8.23. who so answers the people going about to make him
king, that neither he nor any of his posterity should reign over them,
but God should still be their king. But after that they had made a king,
neither did the judicial laws retain their full force, neither did GOD
himself appoynte Captains over the Armies, The judicial law in part abrogated
by the erecting of this kingdom.
but all was done according to the will and commandment of the kings: who
although they did keep the judicial law in part, and for the great
extremities in war asked counsel of God, yet they were free in both these
respects, as we are afterward to declare more at large. So that by the
coming in of these kings, God himself (if we may so basely speak of his
glorious majesty) was put out of his office, God put from his kingdom.
as he himself does confess. 1. Sam. 8.7. where he speaks to Samuel not
to be grieved, for that the people had cast off his and his sons government,
for indeed, says God, they have not despised or cast away thee, but me, and
have refused that I should reign over them, In the second place, the judges
had part of this supreme authority, who although in the greatest matters
they were ouer-ruled by the word of God, yet in the ordinary administration
especially of warelike affairs, they were the chief. And therefore the state
of the common wealth from Moses to Saul the first king is called the
government of the Judges: the which did wholly cease after that Saul was
created king: for the Captains of the war were either the kings themselves
or whom it pleased them to appointe. So we ^eade that David placed and
displaced Ioab, at his pleasure. Thirdly the body of the people joining
together in a general assembly had a part, yea the greatest part of this
authority, and likewise the elders (who were a compendious body of the
people) had their part especially in civil administration in the time of
peace, Judge. 20. The children of Israel came together as one man to the Lord in
Maspha, to whom the leuite makes his complaint as unto them who had
authority to revenge the villainy done unto him, desiring them to determine of
that cause: as they did with great severity. The causes why the people and
the elders had part of this supreme authority, were these; First for that
they did never give the whole power over themselves into the hands of any of
the Judges, but only did as it were use them to be their Captains and leaders
in the time of war: the which being ended, What authority the people had
before the time of the Kings.
usually the judge returned to his own house and private estate till the like
necessity called him abroad again: but during the time of peace they did not
meddle much with civil jurisdiction but only heard those causes which were
brought unto them as to fit arbiters, because they were men renoumed either
for their valor, or because they were prophets, as were Debora and Samuel,
or had the office of the high priest as had Ely. Hence it is that in this
book of judges there is no mention made of their civil judgments or that they
did call together the Senate or the people, unless it were to war, or of any
edictes which they made or of faults which they did redress or punish. Only of
Samuel it is written that he went about the land to judge the people, and of
Debora that the people brought their controversies to her. The second cause of
the authority of the elders and people, was the want a Judge: for whenas the
Judge died, they did not streightway put another in his place until they had
occasion given by war: during which time of vacation, the elders and people
in every city did judge their own causes, and meeting together in a common
asse^bly did order public matters although seldom and negligently as the
people use to govern. So that they wanted a Judge as often as they had one.
But when once they had a king created, there did no more any supreme
authority remain either in elders or people, all being given unto the hands
of the king, who had no man which did participat with him in his authority:
For we are not to think that in this state the king was the chief governor
and the elders, No authority in Israel but in the hands of the king.
senators and inferior officers, fellow governors and as it were his mates.
For all within the land of Israel were to the king mere private men, so that
if any had authority in respect of the people, they had it all from him, as
from the fountain: all the officers of the kingdom, all the Judges of civil
causes and the captains of the armies were appointted by him. Yea they were so
far from having any authority in respect of the king, that all the people
with their magistrates and officers of what kind soever, are usually called
the kings servants: so 2. Chro. 10.6. The counselors of Solomon are said to
have stood before his face, to wit, waiting and attending his pleasure, so Esa.
37.5. Officers of the king and elder^ of the priests are called the kings
servants. For the state of this kingdom was not such a government as both
has been and is at this day in use in many places, where the people to avoid
confusion, and for the administration of justice, and of other public
affairs, do for one over them, yea and give unto him although improperly the
name of a king, reserving to themselves authority either to displace him at
their pleasure or at the least to control his doings, which they think to be
wrong, to call him to account of his administration, yea if need be, to rise up
in arms against him and to lay violent hands upon him: This was no such
government, but a kingdom both in name and in truth: wherein none had any jot
of supreme authority save the king only.

Sect. V.
BUT if it be granted that there was no authority in the land which could
associate it self with the authority of the king or any way intermeddle with
his lawful administration as long as he did rule with religion and justice for
the glory of God and the good of the people, yet it may seem that there was
some authority to restrain him if at any time he should be imperious or
unjust in his government: whereby he should be, either brought to a lawful
manner of ruling, or else if he were incorrigible, deposed from his kingdom.
For otherwise the people might be miserably oppressed, religion defaced, yea
all things turned vpside down and in the end the commonwealth utterly
overthrown: and therefore that both wisdom, reason and necessity, i^ the
glory of God and the good of men do require that there should be in Israel
some other authority either in the people, or in the priests, in the senate,
or in the inferior magistrates, the which should never be either used or once
mentioned, but against those kings which did degenerate into violent and
bloody tyrants, even as men use a false and under rain to pull in strong
headed horses which otherwise would run into some pit and so destroy both
themselves and the riders. This reason taken from the safety of the people of
states and commonwealthes, the ground, square, and end of all good policy
carries with it such a fair show of equity and necessity that like unto a
violent stream it has carried many headlong in heat to condemn and reject
utterly these absolute Monarchies as tyrannical and barbarous kinds of
government pernicious to men, yea altogether unlawful and unmeet for the
Church of God. But we ought not to suffer our selves to be deceived by any
appearance or pretense whatsoever or in respect of any inconveniences, although
never so great to judge that to be unlawful and profane, which God by
establishing it in his Church has showed to be holy and lawful. But for the
further resolving of this question, it is requisite that we again put you in
mind, that we do not here speak, either what ought to be the state of al
kingdoms in this behalf, or that this is the best kind of government, but
only do show what was the state of this kingdom of Israel. In the which it
seems that the whole power of ruling the land was given by God and by the
people into the hands of the king, without any exception whatsoever: insomuch
that the people did not reserve to themselves any power whereby they might
lawfully resist his authority or oppose themselves to his proceedings although
unlawful and unjust much less take from him the kingdom, or to offer any
manner of violence unto his person. For the authority of this king over his
people was no less then is the authority of a father in his family in
respect of his children, The king to his subjects as a father to his children.
who if he do injuriously entreat any of them or not carefully keep his own
goods or live any way disorderly, it is the duty of his children, if not with
silence to suffer it, yet with great modesty to admonish him of it. But if they
should join themselves together, and offer any violence unto him especially if
they should throw him out of his house, all men would count them rebellious
and ungracious children. But if they should take his life from him, they were
to be esteemed notoriously wicked, ye rather as monsters, worthy to be abhorred
of all men. So, it seems that the state of this kingdom was such as that no
subject of what place soever, no not the whole people jointly could lawfully use
any violence against the kings person or proceedinges: and that the king might
although not lawfully in respect of the law of God, of men, or of nature, yet
safely and freely in respect of his subjects do whatsoever pleased him:
according as Jacob foretells, Genesis 49.9. that Judah the king of his brethren
should be as the great Lion who when he lays himself down, who shall raise
him up or disquiet him? The truth hereof appears in the whole course of
the story of the kings who praesuming upon this whole and undivided authority,
did never fear or doubt to do whatsoever they listed without asking leave
either at nobles, elders, or people. Hence came that foolish, and tyrannical
answer which Rehoboa^ made to the people threatening them, 1. King. 12.12. in
this manner, My least part shall be heavier then my fathers loins, whereby he
meant that he would increase those heavy burdens of tributes, which his father
had laid upon them. For but that he knew very well the state of his kingdom
to be such, as that he might both say and do what he listed without
controlement, he had been more then mad to make such an answer. And hence it
came that the idolatrous kings did never stick by their sole authority to
set up open idolatry not once minding who would be offended therewith: and
likewise the continual practice of the people does declare that they did not
violently oppose themselves to the doings either of the good or of the wicked
kings, but suffered religion to stand and fall according to their pleasure.
Yea the dealing of God himself does prove the same, who when he purposed to
preserve David against the fury of Saul, would never suffer him to oppose
Ceila or any other of Saules cit^es against him but made him fly first into the
mountains and deserts, and afterward out of the land to the Philistines. Yea
David although he were appointed by the express word of God to s^cceede Saul
in the kingdom, yet he was so far from laying violent hands upon him, that
as we read. 1. Sam. 24.6. his heart smote him, that is, his conscience did
accuse him that he had behaved himself disloyally against the king, in that he
had offered violence to the kings garment, because that was as a threatening of
death unto him and a great disgrace. Yea further we do not read, that God
did ever by any of his prophets stir up the people to maintain his true
wo^shippe by violence against the kings, The prophets never reprove the people
for not resisting the idolatrous kings.
or ever reprove them because they had suffered them to set up idolatry,
which is an evident proof of this point. For if it had been lawful to resist
in any case, then surely in the maintenance of the true worship of God and of
his glory. But hereof there is a great question made: for although this king
had power in civil matters to do not only right and justice without the
help of any other power, but also wrong without resistance, shall we therefore
give unto him this power in the cause of religion that he may deface the
worship of God at his pleasure? It may seem much better that not only kings
should be thrown down from their thrones, but also that heaven and earth
should go together, then that God should be dishonored and detestable
idolatry erected. We confess that it is a most fearful thing that the king
of Israel who has his authority from God, should use the same to dishonor God
and thrust not only men out of their houses and lands, but also the great God
of heaven and earth out of his temple and Church, yea in truth (in some sort)
out of the world: for God had tied his visible Church to this land. And
therefore we answer that as it is usually said, Si ius violandum, regni causa
violandum, so Si ius regni sit violandum, religionis causa est violandum, that
if it be lawful for the people of Israel for any cause to resist their
lawful king, Unlawful to use violee^e against the king in the maintenance of
religion.
it is lawful in the defense of the true religion and Gods glory. But as has
been said, it seems that the state of this kingdom would not bear any
resistance no not in this case, much less in any other. No man, yea no company
of men could for any offense committed by the king, either against God or man,
the first or second table, call him to account, summon him to appear in
judgment, or use any manner of violence either in word or deed against him.
Now we are to answer those things which may be objected against this
assertion.

Sect. VI.
FIrst it may seem agreeable to reason that the people should have power to
depose their king as well as they had to set him up. Whereunto we answer
that although it were at the first free unto the people whether they would have
permitted themselves wholly to the power of the king or no, The people could
not resume their liberty given into the hands of the kings
yet when as they had once refigned up their liberty and authority, it was not
in their power to call that their voluntary grant back again: Secondly we
answer that the people never had this power in their hands to make whom they
would king they did indeed voluntarily choose this kind of government, but
God gave them a king whom they could neither refuse at the first nor
afterward depose, to wit, Saul with his posterity, and they being by God
rejected, David with his seed: for God kept in his hand the power of
nominating the king as the express words of the scripture do witness, It
belonged not to the people but to God to nominate the king.
Deutro. 17.15. Only thou shall make him king over them whom the Lord thy God
shall give unto thee. Again it may be objected, for so much as not only kings
but also all other magistrates are set up for the glory of God, and the good
of the people that if they do not, not only not further but also hinder these
respects, they do break the condition of the bargain betwixt them and the
people, and so do forfait their kingdoms into their hands as Saul did forfait
his, and Solomon by his idolatry the government of the ten tribes: we answer
confessing this to be true that the kings of Israel had the kingdom upon the
foresaid condition, but yet neither the kingdom was given nor the condition
imposed to them by man but by God: and therefore they could not forfait their
kingdom to man but only to God: neither could any man exact this forfaiture at
their hands without an extraordinary and special commission from God. So
that until such time as God did either immediately by his own hand or by the
means of some man made the executioner of his will by extraordinary
revelation, deprive them of their kingdom, even the wicked and idolatrous
kings did remain to the people in the full estate and right of the kingdom.
So after that both Saul had by his disobedience forfeited his kingdom of God,
and also David was now both appointed by God and anointed by Samuel, Saul
remained the lawful king of Israel after that David was anointed and
appointed to the kingdom.
king in his stead, yet Saul remained to the people the only lawful king of
Israel: yea no less lawful then he was before or any other afterward,
until such time as God did take from him both his life and kingdom together.
This does David ingenuously confess, 1. Sam. 26.10.11, saying, that it was not
lawful for himself or any other to touch Saul being Gods anointed, for
that he could be dispossessed by none but by God only: wherein he rested, not
doubting but that God would take him away, either by natural death, or by the
force of the enemy or immediately by his own hand. 1. Sam. 26.10. The
rebellion of Jeroboam and of the ten tribes unlawful.
Likewise Solomon did forfaite his kingdom to God, but yet the ten tribes with all their kings made of themselves, did unlawfully and impiouslie rebel against
Rehoboam; for so speaks Abiam, 2. Chro. 13^6.7. You ought to have
acknowledged that God gave the kingdom of Israel to David and his sons for
ever, but Jeroboam the son of Nebat rose up and rebelled against his Lord and
naughty men gathered themselves to him and strengthened themselves against
Rehoboam. So that although the defection came from the Lord as appears, 2.
Chro. 11.4. and was good in that respect being a just punishment of idolatry,
yet the action of the people rebelling against their lawful and natural king,
was altogether unlawful. If it be objected that Jeroboam was called to be king
of the ten tribes by the word of God sent by the ministry of the prophet
Achijah, King. 11.31. where God says to Jeroboam by the prophet, that he had
^iuen to him ten tribes of Israel: to this we make two answers; First that
although this defection, as it came from God, was good, yet as it was practiced
by Jeroboam and the people, it was unlawful rebellion. For there is in God a
secret will the which (when it is contrary to his reue^led will and word)
cannot be executed by man without sin (unless it be by an extraordinary
dispensation) and therefore although God did make this his secret will known
to Jeroboam, to make his unthankfulness in erecting idolatry the more
inexcusable, yet he did not bid him rebel against Solomon, neither did he
annointe him king, as he did Iehu. 2. King. 9.6.7. who had the express
commandment of God to root out king Achabs house. Thus God foretold Hazael
that he should be king of Syria. 2. King. 8.13. yet he did not approve his
detestable murdering of the king his master. So did Zimri, Hazaels rebellion
foretold by God but not permitted.
1. King. 16.12. although he also did execute the sentence which God had
pronounced against the house of Bahasa king of the ten tribes, yet because he
was not appointed by God so to do, his action was unlawful. Secondly we
answer that if that foretelling of Jeroboam were an extraordinary
dispensation, yet his example does not justify the rebellion of the people or
of any other who have not this warrant for their actions. But David did
lawfully rebel against the posterity of Saul, and so did Iehu against Ioram,
2. King. 9. because they had the express word of God so to do. But here this
is to be noted that although this kingdom were at the first so instituted that
all the kings should by their disobedience forfait their kingdom to God, and
so be deposed when he thought good, God would not take the kingdom from David's
posterity. The kingdom so annexed to the house of David, that it could not be
taken from it.
yet David and his posterity were in a manner freede from this condition and
from forfaiting their kingdom to God. For David a man according to the heart
of God, found such favor in his sight that he made this solemn law, oath,
and promise, that although his children did forsake him, yet he would not take
the kingdom from them as he did from Saul but only chastise them for their
sins. And therefore the seed of David kept the crown (yea tho many of them
were open idolatours) til the whole nation of the Jews was destroyed and
carried away captive into Babel for their idolatry and other sins. Therefore
God is said, 2. Chro. 13.5. to have given this kingdom to David by a covenant
of salt, that is, by a perpetual and inviolable covenant, for so it was
needful that the promises of the Messiah should be annexed to some stock or
lineage, that out of it he might continually be expected. But to return to the
matter in hand, if it be here asked how God did punish the notorius sins and
mis^emenors of these kings; we answer that he did it either immediately by his
own hand as he did smite Ozias with leprosy for his intolerable presumption,
2. Chr. 26, 19. or else by some foreign nation or king as by the Philistines,
Egyptians, Chaldaeaens, Assyriaens, or some other nation and prince who^ he
used as scourges for the misdemeanor of these kings: whereof more hereafter. Now
we are to answer to the examples which may seem to be contrary to this rule,
the which if they be indeed contrary to it, yet they do not take away this
truth: for a few wrong actions cannot preiu^ice a law, yea a long practice and
custom of right. But let us see what they are: First the people do seem to
have resisted Saul in that they saved Jonathan from death, whereunto he was even
devoted by the kings solemn oath and promise: we answer that they did persuade
the king by reason, not resist him by force as does appear by their words, 1.
Sa^. 14.45. but the example of Libna is more plain, the which rebelled against
Iehora^ because he did forsake the Lord. 2. Chr. 21.10. but this one example is
not sufficient, for it is not approved but only barely mentioned by the writer
of the story: yea many actions in the scripture are commended as proceeding from
a godly mind which in straight examination would be found unlawful. Thirdly the
deposing of Athalia, 2. Chro. 23. makes not against us. For we do here speak
of a lawful king but she was a mere usurper: because she was not of David's
seed. Lastly as touching the co^spiracies made against Ioas for killing
Zacharias the son of Iehoida, God never approved any conspiracy made against
any of the kings
2. Chr. 24.25. and against Amasia for forsaking the lord, 2. Chr. 25.27. the
writer of the story does not mean that the conspirators were moved by those
reasons or had any purpose of revenging those offenses moved by other sinister
respects not mentioned but that God brought those fearful judgments upon these
kings for the foresaid sins.

Sect. VII.
IT may here be asked what should then be the issue of the violence and
tyranny which any of these kings might perhaps use, what ord^^ was taken, and
what was the behavior of loyal subjects in such cases: we answer that the
weapons which God gave unto his people wherewith to defend themselves against
the tyranny of their lawf^ll kings were these. The first is wisdom
carefully to avoid all occasions of the kings anger and injury: With what
weapons this people might fight against their kings.
and because that they who are disposed to be injurious to their subjects,
never want occasions which they take where none is offered, therefore the next
remedy is to avoid and decline from the violence or injury it self. Thus did
David by flying into dens, caves and mountains, keep himself from the rage
of Saul. The third remedy where the second is wanting, is patience to suffer
with a quiet mind, the violence or injustice of the king which could not be by
wisdom either prevented or avoided. The last remedy is to appeal from the
unjust sentence of the king not to any man or to any court here on earth but
to the king of kings even to God himself whose ears are always open to
hear those who are oppressed: this remedy is the last, and therefore not to be
used but in cases of greatest extremity when as the violence is too too
grievous, shameful and to man's infirmity altogether intolerable. This means
did Samuel commend unto the people, whereby they should ease themselves of
those intolerable burdens of tributes which their king would lay upon them, 1.
Sam. 8.18. saying, then you being thus oppressed by your king, shall not
rebel against him, but shall cry unto the Lord. Where it is added that God will
not hear them when they c^y, this is m^nt that they could not afterward put
down their kings, neither be freed from their tyranny which by their own
wilfulnes they had brought upon themselves: otherwise God does hear those who
being intollerably injured by their kings do appeal unto him. So we read, 2.
Chro. 4.22. that when as Zacharias was stoned by the commandment of king Ioas
he appealed to God and commended his cause to him. Where the spirit of God
has carefully noted that God received his appeal, so that within one year he
sent the Armies of the Syrians who destroyed his princes and spoiled Jerusalem.
Yea the servants of the king by the just judgment of God, although unlawfully,
co^spired against him and killed him for the death of Zacharias. Yea this was
the usual means whereby God did punish the sin and repress the rage of
idolatrous kings, even the power of foreign princes into whose hands he did
often give these kings of Judah with their people and kingdom but did never by
his word arm any of their subjects against them: therein as in all other his
actions observing decorum which is the rule of seemlines or civil order and
honesty, unto the which it is agreeable that kings should be chastened and
controlled not by their subjects and inferiors, but by other kings which are
their equals.

Sect. VIII.
LAstly it may be objected that it is a very unlike matter that this people
with their wise elders and senators, were or could be so far ouerseen^s that
living under a moderate government in the which either they never had any injury
offered unto them by their rulers, or if they had, might easily have it
redressed by some other lawful authority, would permit themselves, their wives
and children, lands and liberty to any such authority under the which they
were subject to injury, yea in such sort as that they had no refuge to fly unto
in any extremity, no superior authority to appeal unto, no stronger power to
oppose, and finally which both might easily be come tyrannical, and being so,
could not by any means which they could use, be either ended or amended.
Whereunto we answer, first as before, that here we do only make a bare
narration, what was done, leaving it to those who profess skill in these
matters, to judge whether it were wisely done or no. Secondly that we may give
some reason hereof, that this was done according to the simplicity of the
first ages of the world, Why absolute monarchies were more in use in the first
ages of the world.
wherein men were much more innocent then they are in these days, and did not
so easily infer injury to others, and therefore not fear to receive hurt from
others. Whereby it came to pass that men did both safely and securely permi^
^hemselues into the hands of others, ey^her kings, Lords or masters, or any
other rulers, without making couenantes with them and taking caution of them
for their security. But the state of the world is much altered, for now men
are grown to that hight and ripenes of craft, deceit, dissimulation, violence
and all other kinds of wickedness, that almost every man fears and
suspecteth each other, neither will have any dealinges with any other without
great pledges of security. Hereof it has come to pass that these great
monarchies endued with absolute power, were far more used in the first ages
of the world then in the times following: wherein we see that although a
monarchical state be thought more excellent and commodious then any other
kind of government, yet men dare not give unto it this ample and absolute
power, thinking that as that wine is most wholesome which is taken not in the
full vigor and natural strength but tempered and delayed with some cold
liquor; so that manarchie is most safe and acceptable, the power whereof is
moderated and yoked with some other power of positive laws or of parliamentes,
of the nobility or of the people whereby it may be restrained from injury,
injustice and tyranny when it is needful. Thirdlye we answer that if we may
as unskillful and ignorante men use to do, judge of the causes by the
effects, and of counsels by the event, it should seem that this people did
not loose much by this bargain: for that the state of their commonwealth, was
much better under the government of the kings then before, when as the
administration of civil affairs was very dissolute and remiss, yea often
times wholly wanting: for that the public authority, being as has been
declared, divided amongst many, to wit, the judge, the high priest, the
elders, the princes of the tribes, and the people, was either wholly or in p^rt
neglected of all, so that as it is written, Judge. 21.25. every man did what him
listed both in committing and also in redressing injuries, because there was no
king in Israel: but after that there was once a king made, they never wanted
government, yea they had it more strict and severe then perhaps they desired.
Likewise for the other part of the government which is in warlike affairs, it
is without question that their state was much bettered by this change. Before,
they were a common preie to the nations near unto them, and so often subdued
and captiuated eight years to Chusan King of Syria Judge. 3.7. to the King of
Moab. 18. to Iabin. 20, years, Judge. 4.3. to the Madianites 7. years, Judge.
6.1. to the Ammonites. 18. years, Judge. 10.8.9. to the Philistines 40. years,
Judge. 13.2. that it might seem true which many ages afterward was spoken of
them, that they were a nation borne to slavery: but by their kings they were
not only freed from being so often subdued, but also made conquerers and
rulers of other nations. The Judges delivered them from their enemies, but
their kings delivered their enemies to them making them tributaries to the
people: before they were not pinched with heavy tributs so as afterward by
their kings, but they were much more often spoiled and their land clean
wasted by foreign invasion: before in the time of peace the common people did
more abound with wealth, because they were free from public burdens, but the
public estate was very mean, when as it was at the best, and for the most
part very beggarly and miserable: under the kings the commonalty was somewhat
impouerished and yet they had as we say, some thing for their money, as namely
a stately and glorious Monarchy which they did vehemently desire, and whereof
they were not a little proud: sumptuous palaces for their kings to dwell in, and
many fair buildinges for their princes and nobles, especially in Jerusalem
with all manner of provision correspondent thereunto: secondly they had a
costly and famous temple wherein to worship God renowned throughout the whole
world for beauty and magnificencie. Thirdly they had horses and chariots,
troops of horsemen, armies of common soldiers kept at the kings or rather at
the common expenses: yea they had fensed and walled Cities and all such like
force whereby to resist and subdue their enemies. So we read, 2. Chro. 1. that
Solomon had a thousand, and four hundred chariots, and twelve thousand
horsemen, yea he made silver as plentiful as stones in Jerusalem, and great
sums of money were given to him for tribute of the kings of Egypt, Syria
and others there about: and in one word they had a public estate far passing
in glory any country of kingdom near unto them. The government of the kings
compared with the former.
So that if it be, as wise men do think, better to have a hard government
then an anarchie and confusion, to have public liberty from foreign power
then popular license from obedience of laws, to be pinched in their purses,
then to be slain and captiuated in their bodies, wives and children, to suffer
injury at home, then slavery abroad, to maintain their own natural kings,
then to enrich foreign nations, to be privately poor, then publicly base, to
have their Cities fenced then their houses t^immed and furnished. Then this
people was not so notoriously foolish in choosing this government, as diverse
wise men have thought: Neither had they a very evil pennywoorth tho they
bought it with the price of their own liberty. But we do not take upon us to
define any thing but leave it to those who are seen and exercised in these
matters. Only we say that the chief commodity which they looked for by their
king, was safety from their enemies abroad and execution of justice at home,
as appears, 1. Sam. 8.20. wherein they were not frustrate of their
expectation.

Sect. IX.
THus we see that the power of the kingdom of Israel, was wholly in the kings
own hands: no other having part thereof. In the next place we are to see how
far this power did stretch it self abroad. The answer to this question is
this, that the power of this king did stretch it self as far as the
limittes of his kingdom, or land did: so that there was not any person or
cause within the compass of his dominions exempte from it. For the persons of
men, there was no pre-eminence of office, no nobility or royalty of blood,
no holiness of calling or function, neither any other prerogative whatsoever,
that could give unto any man this privilege, that he should not be subject
to the jurisdiction and power of the king. So Ioab was the grand-captayne in
Israel, placed in the highest office in the land; yea in such an office as
does usually laugh at and contemn the power of the greatest princes (such
unruly spirits does military license breed in many men) and so great a man
as that David durst not in the beginning of his reign call him to account for
murdering Abner, but acknowledges, that the sons of Seruiah were too hard
for him, as we may read, 2. Sam. 3.29. yet we know that Solomon a peaceable
king made him stoop to his authority, and lay down his life at his feet.
Likewise Adonia was a man more noble in blood then King Solomon, for he was
his elder brother, yet this royal prerogative could not save his life: and
therefore he was put to death by the sentence of Solomon, for aspyring, nay for
looking at, or almost for thinking on the kingdom: for the king perceived by
his asking of Abisage King David's concubine, that he still kept his first
mind. But although both great and noble men, and all generally, which have
any place, office, or calling in the commonwealth, be subject to this
authority, yet it may seem unmeet that they who are endued with holy
functions, especially they who are placed in the highest authority in the
Church, should be at the call and commandment of the secular power, whereby
they might be either wholly dispossessed of their places, or continually
troubled and interrupted in ordering the affairs of the Church and the matters
of God, and finally injuriously and contumeliously handled: which thing the
holiness of their places and persons will in no wise suffer. For the answer of
this doubt it is plain in the word of God that all ecclesiastical persons
whatsoever, yea the chief priests and in them the high priest himself, the
prince and head of the priests who was the type of Christ, Ecclesiastical
persons subject to the authority and jurisdiction of the king.
the Oracle of God, and on whom the whole glory and majesty of the priesthood
was bestowed, was no less subject to the jurisdiction of the king then he
which had the basest place and calling in the commonwealth. The truth hereof
appears by the lamentable tragedy of Abimelech, 1. Sam. 2. who being
summoned by Saul to appear, came with all the priests that were with him,
and being come, acknowledged Saul^ to be his Lord, Verse. 12. and did not
appeal from his unjust sentence of death to any other power. The same end
befell his son Abiather who for that he took part with Adonia was by Solomon
put out of his office and condemned to die. 1. King. 2.26. And likewise
Zachariah the son of Ieh^ida, 2. Chro. 24.21. Now although two of these kings
did impiously and tyrannically abuse their authority, yet it does appear that
they had authority over them: yea not only these examples but the course of
the whole scripture and equity it self does show that it ought to be so. We
know that even Christ himself, more holy in person and office then all the
priests, men or angels in the world, did throughout the whole course of his
life, submit himself to the civil power and at the end of it, did suffer
himself to be violently apprehended, contu^eliously entreated, yea unjustly
condemned by the deputy of a heathen Emperor. Likewise the Apostle Paul did
appeal and subject himself to the authority of Caesar. Neither is there any
cause or reason why it should be otherwise. For howsoever the Romish prelates
have not only drawn out their necks from the subjection of princes, but also
have invaded their thrones and subdued them under their feet, and the whole
clergy say to the civil power, come not near nor yet once touch me, because
I am holier then thou, and think themselves too good to be judged by any, but
by their own ordinary, yet the truth is that all persons as well civil as
ecclesiastical, are and ought to be by the word of God, equally subject to the
civil power. For shall Christ himself and in him God himself, stand before
the judgment seat of princes, and shall sinful men, nay shall wretched worms
think them too profane to be competent judges in their causes? no no: the
servant is not above the master, nor the creature above the creator, and
therefore we say with the Apostle that al souls, that is, every man that has
a soul (that none should think himself exempted) ought to be subject to the
higher powers, Romans 13.1. The ground of the contrary error, is an arrogant
opinion, which presumptuous men bearing function in the Church have of their
own holin^sse in respect of others, whereas in the Church of God, men who have
civil callings are no less holy then they who have ecclesiastica^, yea
sometimes much more holy: they who have ecclesiastical and holy callings, being
otherwise wicked and profane: for it is truly said, althoug^ impiously applied
by the rebellious company of Corah, Numb. 16.3. That not only Moses and Aaron
but even the whole multitude of the common people, much more the Lords
anointed is holy. In the next place, we are to search whether that as al
persons, so likewise al causes belonged to the authority of the King of
Israel. First of civil then of ecclesiastical causes: in the first kind it
is not needful that we should insist, for so much as all men even they who are
most sparing and wary in giving power to these kings, do acknowledge that all
civil causes did properly belong to their jurisdiction: And so it was indeed.
For the king had authority to appointe all the public officers of his
kingdom, who should be his counselors at home, or his Captains abroad, who
should be the judges of the people, and who of the chief senate in Jerusalem:
and good reason it was that he should have this power in these causes. For
seeing that his office was especially to judge the causes of the people, and to
fight their battles, for the which purpose the people desired a king, it
could not be denied unto him to appointe those to be his deputies whom he
thought most able to discharge these duties. Yea further it belonged to him to
call all public assemblies and to order them, to make peace with whom he
would, and to go to battle against whom ^e when (...) thought good. The
truth of this point does (...) plainly appear throughout the whole story,
that we need not insist in it.

Sect. X.
Now we are to enquire what was the authority of the king in the matters of
the Church, to wit, in ordering the state of religion and of the service of
God. Whereof there is great question made whilst some do wholly exclude him
out of the Church, not permitting him to intermeddle with any affairs
belonging unto it: others suffer him to deal in these causes, yet not to bear
any great sway or to ouerrule in them: and the third sort gives unto him the
greatest part of that ecclesiastical authority which belongs to man. The
which distinction is necessarely to be considered: for God has not given to
any man such full and absolute authority in the Church as in the commonwealth,
for he has made Christ the soueraign Lord and King of the Church, to rule it
by his own laws and word. Yet one part of ecclesiastical jurisdiction
belongs to men who are to establish the divine laws of the worship of God,
and to make ecclesiastical constitutions for that purpose. But who has
authority to do this, there is all the controversy: In the first opinion or
rather gross and palpable error are the Bishops of Rome with their adherentes
who that they might through the Church, enter into the commonwealth, invade
the riches, preferments and pleasures of kings, and usurp their states and
crowns; have thrust out of the Church this king of Israel least that by his
example other magistrates should challenge to themselves ^uthoritie in causes
ecclesiastical. In the second opinion are men otherwise sincere in judgment,
who in a good meaning and affection to the Church think it not safe or
convenient to permit her wholly to the civil power, and in a reverent
opinion of her judge it unmeet that civil rulers should order divine matters,
and so make the Church say unto the magistrate, touch me not for I am more holy
then thou. But we follow the third opinion thinking that the ecclesiastical
authority of this land was chiefly, yea in a manner wholly in the hands of
the king, and that by his authority the state of religion in general was
wholly set up, maintained, repaired and ordered, yea ecclesiastical laws for
this purpose established howsoever in making them the advice and consent of
others were for diverse necessary causes to be required. The truth hereof
will easily appear if we mark that God did defer the building of his
Temple, the enlarging and beautifying of his worship until the time of the
kings, God deferred the building of the Temple till that the kingdom were
erected
of whom David and Solomon (which are in this respect to be counted the first,
Saul being rejected) did make the state of religion most glorious, established
new orders and laws and that by their own authority, although they had the
word of God both in themselves and from other prophets for their direction.
Yea the general practice of all the kings of Israel of whom every one by his
sole authority, did either set up or pull down religion, does declare how much
they had to do in the governing of the Church and to pass over with silence
the rest of the kings, let us only see how far Ezechia did meddle with Church
affairs, of whom we read, 2. Chro. 29.3. That he opened the doors of the
temple, brought the priests into it, made a solemn oration unto them,
teaching them their duties and stirring them up to the careful perfourmance
thereof: then when the priests had according to his direction, cleansed the
temple before they do any service in it, they return to the king to know what
he would have further done, Verse. 18. Then the king with the nobles came and
brought a sinne-offering which the priest offered at the commandment of the
king verse. 24. then verse. 27. the king commands that the whole
burnt-offering should be offered: Again verse. 31. he commands that the
peoples offeringes should be brought in. Further in the 30. chapter, he held a
council and sent his posts for the keeping of a passover: yea, which is
worthy to be noted, when as the people being unclean did receive the passover,
Ezechias himself did publicly pray for them and so made them clean, verse.
20. likewise chap,. 31. verse. 2. Ezechia appointed sundry companies of the
priests and levites after the diversity of the ministrations to serve in the
temple, and commanded the people to make provision of all things needful for
them. and verse 8. and 9. he came and viewed their provision, and questioned
with the priests about it, And verse. 11 He bad prepare the chambers in the
Temple for store, yea it is added verse. 20. that according to this manner, he
did throughout all Judah, and that all the works about the service of God, were
begun and prosperously ended by him. The same manner of ordering the state of
the Church appears in the story of Josias and other Kings, wherein this may
plainly be seen that whatsoever was done in Church matters, was done by the
commandment and authority of the king. The occasions of the contrary
opinions, whereby the authority of this kingdom in this behalf is abridged
and cut short, either in whole or in part, are these: First for that it is
thought, that as civil and divine, temporal and eternal matters, do not
only greatly differ, but also are opposite to each oother, so that the
commonwealth and the Church are two distinct, yea contrary bodies governed and
ordered by their several heads, as in this state they make the king to be the
chief governor of the commonwealth, and the high priest of the Church. But
it is far otherwise, for the Church is not here a perfect body by it self
but makes the civil body more excellent and happy. The Church with the commonwealth make but one body.
For even as when any people, being rude and barbarous, are brought to learning
and all kind of humanity, there is not a new state or body added unto them
but the former estate becomes better, so it is, whenas any nation of infidels
becomes religious, they have not one head in respect of their religion, and
another in civil matters, but one and the same for both. But hereof more at
large in the treatise of the public Church. Neither ought we to think that
either the office, authority, or person of this King was any way profane or
unholy, or in any respect unfit to intermeddle with divine matters: for he
was and that by the institution of God more holy then others. As for the hurt
which came to the Church by being permitted to wicked kings to be ordered at
their pleasure, we confess that it was very great: for many of them did
clean overthrow the true worship of God. Yet there was no remedy for it in
the hands of any save only of God, who is and was able to turn the hearts of
kings, as the rivers of waters, yea to shorten their days if they continued
obstinate in their wickedness, and to raise up in their places good and
godly kings zealous of his glory, who abolishing all idolatry and
establishing the true religion by their sovereign and absolute authority in
ecclesiastical causes, did recompense the loss, and comfort the grief which
the Church had by the wicked Kings: for if the peoele had resisted the wicked
and idolatrous kings in their proceedinges, they should have diminished the
authority of godly kings, Resisting of wicked kings weakeneth the authority
of good kings
and by using violence against the wickedness of the one, should have bound
the hands and hindered the godly endeavors of the other. And this is the cause
why men unto whom the good estate of the Church has been dear and precious
have been loath to permit the ordering of Churche-causes to civil rulers,
because many of them have been open enemies to all religion and godliness, and
authors of all disorders. Yea Emperors. Kings, and Princes have so horribly
stained themselves, and been drunk with the blood of the servants of God
which they ought to have cherished and preserved, and have so often ouerthowen
the Church, which they should have built and maintained, that many are afraid
to commit the Church to their hands who have oftener showed themselves cruel
wolves then careful sheepherds. And therefore it has been said by many, that
princes should look to their palaces, and leave the whole care of the Church
to the ministers of the word, but we see the contrary in this example. And
therefore we ought not to speak untruths no not in the cause of God, or to
maintain the state of religion in Israel by spoiling the king of that power
which god has given unto him. Lastly as touching ecclesiastical laws, which
were to be made by men for the putting in practice of the worship of God, it
may seem that although the setting up and pulling down, the reforming and
deforming of religion were in the hands of the king, yet to be very unmeet,
that he should meddle in the making of them: whereunto we answer that if the
whole ordering of the general state of religion be permitted unto him, we
cannot exclude him from the making of laws, whereby the laws of God are to be
executed. The humane laws of this Church were very few, because almost all
the circumstances of the service of God were prescribed by the ceremonial
law: yet there was always necessary occasion of making some, Ecclesiastical
constitutions made by the authority of the kings.
in the which work the king had the chief stroke. Thus did David and Solomon
make many ecclesiastical laws which continued long after in the Church, and
are mentioned by Josias saying 2. Chro. 35.4. Prepare your selves ye Levites by
your companies according to the writing of David, and the writing of Solomon,
yet these laws were made by the advice of others, to wit, either of the
prophets as we may see, 2. Chro. 33.15. or of the Church and people. Thus did
Ezechias hold a council, 2. Chro, 30.2. wherein by the advice of the whole
Church, the passover was held in the second month: likewise verse. 13, the
whole assembly took counsel to keep the feast other seven days: so that
although these ecclesiastical constitutions were established by the sole
authority of the king, yet they were advised by others, that nothing should be
done in the Church peremptorely by the absolute authority of the king or any
other, but rather by the counsel of others, and so with the good liking of al
men. Yea an error committed in the ordering of the church is more grievous and
dangerous, and therefore was to be avoided as by all other means, so especially
by taking the advice of others in making laws for this purpose. Yet it did not
belong to the king to take upon him the office of the high priest as we may
see in the example of Ozias, 2. Chro. 26. or to meddle with the proper duties
of any other ecclesiastical person, or yet to change the ceremonial law, but
only to order the public state of religion, to make by the advice of others,
and to establishe by his own authority those laws which served for that
purpose,

Sect. XI.
THere remain two other properties of this regal power, to wit, that it was
absolute and peremptory, the which we will propounde very briefly. For the
first, we do not mean that this power was so loosed from laws that the king
might do what him listed, for he was tied to some laws as namely, first to
the keeping of the moral law, yea upon pain of forfaiting and loosing his
kingdom if he did wickedly transgress the same: and if at any time he did
command contrary to this law, he was not to be obeyed, 1. King. 18.13. 1.
Sam. 22.17. and secondly the fundamental laws of the kingdom, the state
whereof it was not in his power to alter. Yea also he was tied to the
ceremonial law containing the outward manner of the worship of God. But he
was loosed first from the Judicial law of God, and secondly from all
possitiue laws made by men. By the Judicial laws are usually meant all those
laws of Moses which belong unto the practice of the second table, and of such
duties as we owe to our neighbor. And it is, as it were, an addition to the
second Table, as the ceremonial law is to the first. But here we mean
more specially only so many of them as did belong to the public
administration of the commonwealth which may properly be called political,
judicial, or forensicall, concerning the manner of administering justice and
judgment, as namely in what order judgment ought to begin and proceed,
what punishmente ought to be inflicted for every several offense, and also
how they should behave themselves in battle: in all which the Judges,
Elders and people had a prescript form which they did follow, and were bound
by the commandment of God so to do. But the kings were freed from these
laws, The kings exempted from the Judicial laws.
so that if they did execute justice and judgment, it was free for them to do
it in what form and manner they thought best: as for example, the judicial
law required that when any had committed any heinous trespass there should
be two or three witnesses solemnly produced and that they should begin the
execution, and first throw stones at the offendour. But the kings namely
Saul, David and Solomon did put diverse to death without observation of any of
these circumstances. Neither herein did they sin against God and his law,
because they were freed from it. Yea it belonged to the king to make these
positive laws of the circumstances of executing judgment, and therefore to be
a judge, a lawgiuer, a king and a defender from foreign enemies are all
joined together. Isa. 23.22. the Lord is our judge, our lawgiver, our king
and he shall save us. Yea the power of this kingdom was such in this behalf
that the king might of himself, without calling any to consultation, make,
publishe, establishe and execute laws and edictes, whereof there are many
examples: yet it was more usual, yea and convenient in regard both of king and
people, that the advice of the priests, prophets, rulers and elders of the
people should be taken. Lastly this power of this kingdom, herein differs
from the power of the Judges, Elders and of the people in that it was not so
gentle and mild but after a sort, a fierce and peremptory power as may
easelie be gathered by that which has been spoken of it: for where there is a
great, general and absolute power wholly in any one hand, it must needs be of
this nature. Hence it was that the people stood in far greater awe of this
authority, then of any other, insomuch that the laws, edictes and
commandments of the kings were like unto the roaring of a Lion, whereat all
the beasts in the forest do tremble and quake for fear. Yea their whole
behavior was much more reverent to the kings then to their other rulers. So
we read, Judge. 8.1. and 12. that whenas Gedeon and Iephta had gotten notable
victories of the enemy, the Ephramites came upon them very presumptuously to
quarrel with them because for sooth they had not taken them with the^ to the
battle: but they did not use to ask their kings any such questions, or to
require any reason of their doings, but did readelie come when they called, go
when they sent, and do whatsoever thing was inioined by them. Yea we may well
think that the cause why Rehoboam gave the people such a strange answer, was
not for that he meant to increase their tributes, for there was no cause why he
should so do, the temple and the kings palaces being builte, and the king
being furnished with all things requisite either for majesty at home, or
strength abroad, for the which purpose those great tributes were imposed, but
rather because he and his young counsel were highly offended and inflamed with
anger against the people, for that they did offer to make him a conditional
king, who should not reign, but upon those conditions which they propounded.
To take one example of many and so to conclude this point, and specially the
first edict which the first king made, and that by the immediate motion of the
spirit of God, because this is most for the purpose of the matter in hand. We
read. 1. Sam. 11.17. that whenas Saul was to call the people together to
battle, he gave forth such a peremptory commandment as never any of the
Judges or Elders did. For taking a couple of oxen, and dividing them into
pieces, he sent them to all parts of the land with this message that whosoever
did not follow him to battle, so should it be done to his oxen. Whereupon
the people came roundly as one man, for that, as the text notes, the fear of
the Lord, that is of this great power which the Lord had given to the king,
fell upon them. Saul might have said with David I am yet a tender and new
king and have many enemies: wherefore it is not meet that I should exasperate
the people by threarning them: but it was the will of God, that the people
should see in the beginning to what a kind of power they had ^^^mitted
themselves.

Sect. XII.
THus much of the power or authority of this kingdom, the second part of the
doctrine of it is the majesty of it; and the fundamental laws of the kingdom
belonging thereunto. The majesty of the kingdom is the great glory and
excellency, wherein it far passes other kinds of government, and for the
which it is much more highly esteemed. It was procured by these means; First
by that exceeding great power whereof we have spoken: for whereas the whole
administration of all things is in the hands of one, there the good estate of
all men publicly and of every one particularly does depend on him, Great power
brings with it great majesty.
whereby it comes to pass that all men's eyes are set on him, yea all men do
honor, praise and admire him in whom they see great authority and riches, and
whose wisdom is more conspicuous then any others besides. Secondly this
kingdom was maiesticall by the first original of it, which it had not from
man but from God. This law is written, Deuteronomy. 17.14. When thou have possessed
the land and say, I will have a king to reign over me, thou shall make him
king whom the Lord thy God shall choose: and so the event proved, for the
state of this kingdom in general came from the people, to whom also it
belonged solemnly to acknowledge him whom God did appoint: but the nomination
of the particular man on whom this honor should be bestowed came from God who
appointed first Saul with his posterity and afterward ( Saul being rejected)
David and his seed. By the which means God did choose all the kings in
Israel, although he did immediately by his own voice only appoint the first
three, to wit, Saul, The divine original of this kingdom made it maiesticall.
David and Solomon. For even as the fire wherewith the sacrifices were burnt,
although it were nourished every day by the priest putting fresh wood unto it,
and so preserved by the same means; whereby other fire is kept, yet be cause at
the first it came down from heaven miraculously, was therefore counted holy and
wonderful; even so was this kingdom because at the first it came from God
although afterward it were continued by natural and ordinary propagation.
Hence it is that this kingdom is called the kingdom of Iehoua 2. Chro. 13.8.
The badge and seal of this divine original of this kingdom was that holy
unction, whereby these kings were by the prophets of God solemnly in the name
of God inaugurated: and therefore the sign, being put for the thing signified,
this anointing betokens the holiness of it: The anointing of these kings
signified the holiness of their persons and functions.
insomuch that when the king of Israel is as it were to be painted forth in
the native colors of his majesty, he is called the anointed of the Lord.
Thus 1. Sam. 24.7. God forbid says David, that I should lay my hands on Saul
seeing he is the anointed one of GOD. And 2. Samuel. 1.14. he says to him
who had helped king Saul to kill himself, How was it that thou did not
fear to put out thy hand to kill the Lords anointed. The third law tending
to the majesty of this kingdom was that it was not any uncertain and
moveable state but constant and fixed in one place: it was tied first to one
tribe, namely to the tribe of Judah and that by God speaking by the mouth of
Jacob the first founder of this nation: for in his sons it began to be
divided into many tribes and families and so came into the form of a people:
the prophecy i^ written, Genesis 49. The rod shall not depart from Judah nor a law
giver, etc. Secondly it was tied to one and the same family, to wit, to the
house of David for ever and went by hereditarie right and succession in lineall
descent, so that continually the son succeeded the father. The which law
although it was established in the like gouernementes in other places, yet it
could seldom take place for any long time by reason of the want of right
successors. But it was here kept in continual force and that by the
marvelous providence of God, who as he promised did always give to David his
servant a son of his own loins to sit upon his throne. The which
providence of GOD may especially be noted in the strange preservation of Ioas
from the cruel hands of that monster Athalia, 2. King. 11.3. By this means
it came to pass that this kingdom was both natural, and in process of time
ancient, yea after a sort immortal. For the first, we need not doubt but that
there was an exceeding great love and reverence of this king wrought in the
minds of the people, whenas they saw that he had not obtained that place by
ambition, faction, force of arms, or any other sinister or violent means, but
was even borne unto them and by nature, or rather by God the ruler and desposer
of all natural causes, appointed and distinated to that calling. Yea also in
time by this hereditarie succession, the kingdom became of great antiquity,
which adds much to the majesty of mean things, much more to those which in
many other respects are excellent. Even as men do ascribe a kind no^ only
of reverence, but even of religion to oaks and other trees, which have a long
time kept their standing, for so in continuance of time they take so deep
root and gather such strength as that they cannot be moved, whereas at the
first they may easily be shaken down: so kingdoms continuing long in the same
stock become firm and maiesticall, whereas being often transplanted, Long
continuance of hereditarie succession made this kingdom strong and maiesticall.
they are weak and contemptible and do often fall even in the beginning. Thus
fell Abimelech his kingdom and even this kingdom was sore shaken in the
defection of the ten tribes, because the memory of Ierobaal grandfather to
Abimelech a private and base man: and of Isai the father of David was not
clean worn away, and therefore they said of the one, Judge. 28. Who is
Abimelech that we should serve him, is not he the son of Ierobaal: and of the
other in like manner, what part have we with David the son of Isai, 2. Chro.
10.16. 2. Sam. 20.1. yea thus the kingdom is made after a sort immortal, when
as the father does rise again in the son and so continues for ever. What
made the government of the Judges to be contemned,
For hence it was that the government of the judges was so contemned of the
people, because it was a new vp-start government, the judge being lately taken
from a base estate. As Gedeon and Saul confess of themselves, that their
kindred, family and birth was of the meanest of the people, and that therefore
they were the unfittest to bear rule, Judge. 6.15. 1. Sam. 9.21. The last and
the greatest cause of the majesty of these kings was this, that they were the
progenitors yea and the predecessors of that great Messiah which was to come of
the lineage of David, and to govern not that land only but the whole world,
Luke. 1.32.33. the very expectation of whom made this kingdom glorious above
measure, for that they according to the ignorance of the times and the infancy
of the Church dreaming of a temporal king thought that in him all the power,
riches, renown and glory of the world should be brought to their kingdom.

Sect. XIII.
THus we see the causes of the majesty of this kingdom: now we are to consider
the means whereby this majesty did show forth it self. It appeared in the
glorious and stately pomp and magnificence of the whole life and behavior,
yea of all the actions of the king, and generally of all things appertaining to
the kingdom. For the apparel of the king it was such as might not only
distinguish him from his subjects but also serve to express the majesty of
his state: Likewise for his whole house, the stateliness of his palaces, the
daintiness of his fare, the number of his servants and retinue that all were
correspondent, even in the time of David we may gather, 2. Sam. 19.35. where
old Barzelli refuses the kings offer, who would have kept him in his house,
because he could not taste the dainty meats, nor be delighted with the
voyce^ of singing men and women which were used in the king^ palace. Hitherto
also is to be referred the whole story of Solomon (in whose time this glory
of the kingdom was even in the full) the infinite provision of his house, the
glorious houses which he built for GOD and for himself with incredible
magnificence: all which it shall not be irksome to rehearse as they are
described in the story, for so we read, 1. King. 4. verse. 20.22.23.26. and
Chapter. 10. ver. 11.12. etc. And Salomons bread for one day was thirty
quarters of manchette flower, and threescore quarters of meal, ten stalled
oxen, and twenty out of the pastures and a hundred sheep beside hearts,
buckes, wild goats and capons, and he had forty stalles of horses for
chariotes and twelve thousand horsemen. The weight of gold that came to him
in one year was six hundred threescore and six talentes of gold, The
stateliness of this kingdom in the days of Solomon.
beside that he had of marchantes and of the merchandise of the spices and of
all the kings of Arabia and of the Lords of the country. Also he made two
hundred targets of beaten goulde, six hundred sicles of goulde went to a
target. And he made three hundred shieldes of beaten gold: the pound weight
of gold went to one shield, and the king put them in the house of the wood
of Libanon, and the king made a great seat of Iuory and covered it with the
best gold and the seat had six steps, and the top of the seat was round
behind and there were pummels on either side of the seat: and two Lions
stood beside the pummels: and there stood twelve Lions on the steps six on
one side. There was no like work seen in any kingdom, and all king Salomons
drinking vessels were of gold, and likewise all the vessels of the house of
the wood of Libanon were of pure gold. As for silver it was nothing worth in
the days of Solomon: for the kings navy of ships went on the sea unto
Tharsis with the navy of Hirams ships, even once in three years went the
navy to Tharsis and brought gold and silver, Elephantes teeth, Apes and
Peacockes. And so king Solomon exceeded all the kings of the earth both in
riches and wisdom thus far the text. After the time of Salomo^ together
with the sincerity of religion this majesty of the kingdom did decrease, for
in the reign of Rehoboam both the ten tribes fell away from this kingdom, and
Jerusalem was spoiled by the king of Egypt, so that the targets of gold were
turned into brass: but under Iehosophat both religion and the kingdom
recovered part of the ancient glory, The majesty of this kingdom increase and
decrease as did the sincerity of religion.
for it is said, 2. Par. 18.1. that Iehophat had great riches and glory. And
likewise in the reign of Ezechi^ we read. 2. Chro. 32.27. that he had
exceeding much riches and honor, and he gat himself treasures of silver and
gold, precious stones and spices, shieldes and all manner of pleasant jewels.
Likewise this majesty required that the kings whole behavior should have in
it that stately gravity which beseems so high a place: that he should take no
mean or base action in hand but such as the perfourmance whereof might be for
his glory and renown. By this argument David disswadeth Saul from persecuting
him any further, saying, 1. Sam. 26.20. To whom is the king of Israel come
forth and what is this that he does? Does he not behave himself as one who
chaseth a Partridge up and down in the mountains? And for the behavior of
the kings person Michol Saules daughter requiteth David with the like, noting
in him such lightness which was as she thought, unbeseeming the majesty of the
king: for when she had seen David dance for joy before the Arc; she said, O
how glorious was the king of Israel this day, whenas he uncovered himself
before the maidens of his servants, as foolish or mad men use to do! 2. Sam.
6.20. An finally this part of the judgment of the kingdom and of the book
which Samuel wrote of this matter is extant. 1. Sam. 8. verse. 11. etc. where it
is said, that the king will have horsemen and chariots, yea Eunuchs and women
bakers, and cooks, and of his magnificence in giving vineyardes and lands to
his servants, the which place is not to be understood of a tyranny but of the
natural state of this kingdom as may appear, 1. Sam. 9.20. where when Saul
was careful for his fathers asses, which were lost, Samuel tells him that he
need not mind them seeing whatsoever was good, precious, and to be desired in
all Israel, it did belong in some sort to him and to all his fathers house.
The which words are not so to be understood as if the property of men's goods
did belong to the king, or to any but to the right owners and possessours, but
that it was now the part of all the people to contribute even of their best
things to the kings uses, and the setting forth of his majesty. Yea and that
the king might lawfully exact of them things needful for these purposes. This
account the people did make that this government would be very chargeable
unto them, The king might lawfully exact of the people not only for necessary
uses, but for pomp and pleasure.
but yet they did not stick at the cost so they might have their minds
fulfilled. Neither could it be otherwise: for even as a man may dwell in a
base and simple house or cottage without any great cost, but if he will needs
have a great and stately palace over his head, he cannot but think that both
the building and also the maintaining of it will be chargeable unto him: so it is
in this case: the judges were destitute of this majesty, without chariots,
horses, armies, An absolute Monarchy is a chargeable and costly government.
palaces, great retinue, costly diet and never put the people to any charges:
but seeing they will have a maiesticall and stately kingdom, they cannot but
consider that it must be both set up, and also preserved at their charges. Yea
this opinion of the stateliness of this kind of government was generally and
as it were naturally held of all men: and therefore Adoniah when he did affect
the kingome, said thus with himself, now I will reign and get chariots and
horsemen, and fifty men to run before my face, 1. King. 1.5. Thus we see the
majesty of this kingdom: the which was so great as that it made the king to
be not only highly accounted of and had in great honor and estimation of the
people, The people had this government in great reverence and estimation.
but also very duetifull and after a sort religiously obeyed, yea in truth
too much obeyed, as their often falling to idolatry, by the commandment and
example of their kings does declare. There was before this time a kingdom in
Israel set up by the men of Sechem in the hands of Abimelech. Judge, 9.6.
but it was soon overthrown and trodden under foot because it wanted these
laws to uphold it. For it was not of God, but of man, not natural, but
founded upon bloodshed and violence, not ancient, but a new vpstart and
destitute of all the rest of the privileges and proppes wherewith this kingdom
was endued and vpholden. But this kingdom did continue till the utter
desolation of the land when as the whole nation was carried captive to Babel.
Yea we may well think that if the subject of this kingdom which is the people
it self, had not been so taken away, that it would have continued in the
first institution, and according to the right order of it, even till the
coming of Christ, the which was appointed by God to be the last period of it,
or rather of the outward and worldly show of it: This kingdom stands yet in
Christ.
for in truth it stands yet in Christ and shall stand, til that Christ give up
all his power of government into the hands of the father. For if we set aside
the defectio^ of the ten tribes which was near to the beginning of this
kingdom and was done by the special work of God, we shall find that this
kingdom was so firmly established, that the people never offered to make any
alteration of the estate: for in that they went about to make Absalon king,
they were persuaded that they did right in setting up the son in stead of
his father being now stricken in years: yea the people did not only
continually obey this authority, but also had the person of the king in such
estimation, that they did make more account of him, then of many thousands of
themselves. So they spoke to David that he should not go any more to the
battle in his own person, least he should put out the light, that is, all
the glory and majesty of Israel: adding further that it were much better that
ten thousand of themselves should perish, The people account the kings better
then ten thousand of themselves.
then that any evil should befall him, 2. Sam. 21.17. And now to conclude
this whole matter, we see the greatness both of the power and also of the
majesty of this kind of government: of both which Jacob did prophecy in the
49. of Genesis. 8. verse saying, Judah thy brethren shall praise thee, that is,
they shall magnify and honor thee for the glory and majesty of thy kingdom.
Thy hand in the neck of thy enemies, that is, thou shall subdue all thy
enemies unto thee: the sons of thy father shall bow themselves unto thee,
that is, they shall reverence, honor, and obey thy authority: Judah is the
Lions whelpe, he has bowed himself and laid him down, that is, all his
actions and behavior shall be full of majesty, the which is to be seen in the
Lion more then in any other beast: and who shall raise him, that is, who shall
control his doings and call him to account. He shall wash his clothes in wine,
that is, he shall have abundance yea superfluity of the best and most precious
things which are to be had. This government does more resemble the authority of
God then any other kind does.
Thus we see both the power and also the majesty of this kingdom: in respect of
both which, we may say as it is, Act. 14.11. that Gods are come down unto us in
the likeness of men, that is, such a pourefull and glorious magistracy as
does after a sort resemble the infinite po^er and majesty of God.

Sect. XIIII.
HItherto we have spoken of the judgment or doctrine of this kingdom, as it
was in respect of the people: it follows that we declare the state of it in
respect of God, and that by considering first how this state as it has been
described did please God: secondly whether it were a lawful government or not,
and lastly how far the power of this kingdom was subject to God. For the
first, it may seem that God did not like this kind of government but suffered
it to be established not as making for the good of the people, but rather as a
punishment for their sin: for that he was so highly offended with the people
for asking a king as he himself does witness by his prophet, Ose. 13.11. I
gave them a king in my wrath: but the truth is that this was always most
pleasing and acceptable in the sight of God, yet the action of the people in
making this alteration did justly offend him and that for diverse causes, to
wit, for that by desiring a king they showed themselves unthankful, diffident,
proud and disoobedient. For the first, it was their duty not only to be
content with what government soever GOD did appointe for them, Why God was
offended with the people asking a king.
but also to think themselves the happiest people in the world, for that they
had the glorious God of heaven and earth to be their king and ruler in a
special manner. Secondly, they trusted more in a king then in God, thinking
that the cause of all their disorders and miseries was in their government: and
that their king would certainly deliver them from all wrong at home and
bondage abroad. Whereas the cause of all their evils was in their own
wickedness and idolatry, in that they did forsake the true worship of God,
and therefore God did forsake them, and took from them their judges, in whose
days they lived in religious order and peaceable estate. And so the people
according to that which is written, Judge. 9.13.14.15. forsook the vine, the
figtree, and the olive tree, even God the fountain of all blessings, and
said to the brier come and reign over us and we will trust in thy shadow.
For to have a king and to trust in his power do usually go together, Romans
15.12. He shall reign over them and they shall trust in him. Thirdly the people
in the pride of their hearts did despise the government of the judges as base
and contemptible: for that howsoever it was mighty in the power of the
spiritte of GOD, yet it had not that outward show of glory and majesty which
the stately Monarchies of other nations did carry with them. The last sin
which they committed in this action we call by the general name of
disobedience: for that contrary to the express commandment of God they had
a crooked and perverse desire to be transformed into all the fashions of the
profane nations amongst whom they dwelt, as in all other respects, so also
in their government, and therefore they ^id affect a kingdom which was the
most usual kind of government. Thus we see why God was offended with this
alteration of the state; as for the government it self he did never mislike
it, for although he suffered it to be brought in by this cooked means, yet he
did always purpose, that it should be established, as may plainly appear by
these reasons. First for that he promised Abraham. Genesis 17.6. That of his seed
should come kings and nations: the which is to be understood chiefly of this
faithful nation of the Jews, although beside them others came of Abraham.
Secondly Moses did foretell this, Deuteronomy. 17. God did always like this
government, and purpose to establish it.
That as soon as the people were quietly possessed of the land of Chanaan,
they would have a king to reign over them. But this does most evidently
apppeare by the prophecy of Jacob who says, Genesis. 49. That the rod shall
not depart from Judah nor a Lawe-giuer cease to be of his ofspringe till Silo
come: and unto him shall be the obedience of the people. Now this cannot be
understood of the judges, for of them all only Othoniell was of the tribe of
Judah. Yea GOD did always purpose that Christ should succeed the kings of
Israel in the kingdom: for the words are plain, and the euente has showed
it to be true, that of the tribe of Judah should come the Lion and the Lions
whelpe, that is the stately kingdom of Israel and the continual descent
thereof: yea the great lion, and the little lion that is, the Messiah the great
and eterna^l king of glory, and the temporal and earthly kings of Israel. For
this cause the most plain and evident promises which God made of the messiah
were deferred until the time of the kings and were made to David who in this
respect is to be counted the first king, and therefore is called, Math. 16.
David the King, that is, the first king of the forefathers of Christ, as has
been already touched. And lastly this government may seem in some sort to be
the more acceptable to God, because it does most liuelely represent the power
and majesty of God: for although all magistrates do bear the image of God,
yet they chiefly do it, whose authority being absolute and their glory
great, come nearest to the infinite power and glory of God. As touching the
lawfulnes of this kind of government, although it be inferred of the former
point (for whatsoever is acceptable to God, ought to be accounted lawful for
us) yet it may briefly be considered by these reasons, for that this government
was set up by the appointment of God, and that by Samuel a faithful prophet,
and so accounted of al Israel, yea for that it was practiced by David a man
according to Gods own heart, by Solomon the glory of the world, by Asa,
Iehosophat and other religious kings, by good Ezechias and by zealous Josias
who would never have born this office if the kind of government had been in
any respect unlawful: the exception which is usually taken against this kind
of Monarchy, is as touching the greatness of the power and majesty of it in
this manner: that howsoever the profane nations of the world do suffer
tyrants to spoil them of their liberty and whatsoever they have, yea and do
foolishly in the pride of their hearts desire such a lofty government, yet
that in the Church of God, it is a thing both intolerable and altogether
unlawful that one should so have all the power in his own hands, that he may
at his pleasure overthrow all, or that a great part of the substance of the
land should be employed (to maintain him in his iolitie) upon sumptuous
buildings, costly attire, dainty fare, great rewards and other things of the
same kind, which would serve for many necessary uses both of the Church and
of the commonwealth. For answer hereof, we are far from going about to
persuade any people which live under a moderate government by this wicked
example of this people to affect or desire this estate, yea we leave it to
others to determine whether it be the most convenient kind of government in
respect of the Church of God, and the safe, constance and good estate of it:
yet we do not doubt to affirm that it was a lawful kind of government among
the Jews, and may lawfully be practiced amongst Christians at this day. For
howsoever some kinds of government and magistracy are convenient or
inconvenient, safe or dangerous, yet this and all other kinds are to be
accounted lawful. For there is no power but from God and all the powers which
are, have been instituted by God. Romans 13.2. and especially of this government
now in question we may see, Daniel. 5.18.19. that God does profess himself to
be the author and giver of it, God the author of kingdoms, and the setter up
of kings.
for there it is said, O King God gave Nabuchadnezzer thy father a kingdom:
then follows a description of the nature of a kingdom: even majesty, honor
and glory: he slew w^ome he would and smote whom he would: he advanced and
debased whom he pleased. Now that we see that this kind of government was
acceptable unto God, we are in the second place to consider how far it was
subject unto him. For the which point it shall be sufficient that we know that as
al other powers, authorities, principalities and dominions whatsoever they be,
whether in heaven or in earth, so also this kingdom was wholly and absolutely
subject to God and to his power, and bound to obey his will and
commandments, and to set forth his glory in all things as it is written in
the 17. of Deutronomie, that the king whenever he were made, should take an
excript of the law of God from the priest, and meditate thereon day and night
that he may keep it without declining to the right hand or to the left. Yea
the state of this kingdom did depend wholly upon God, and was held by
condition of obeying him: so that as a tenant or vassal does hold his lands
and living of his liege Lord or King upon this condition, The king held his
kingdom as from God, and was subject to his will and word.
that he shall do him service and homage and to be at his command the which
if he do not, he does forthwith forfaite his title and dispossess himself of
all: in like manner this kingdom did hold of God by condition of obeying him.
This law of the kingdom Samuel does diligently teach- 1. Sam. 12.23. if ye
do wickedly then shall you perish both you and your king. The which punishment
was executed upon Saul, Solomon and the whole race of Idolatrous kings in the
destruction of the kingdom and nation.

Sect. XV.
HItherto we have declared the doctrine of the kingdom of Israel, the which
was the first thing we took to speak of. Now we come to the actions of
Samuel mentioned in the words of the text. Whereof the first is, that he
speak this doctrine of the people, and that, no doubt, for this end that they
might know the state of that government, This example of Samuel teaching the
people the state of the kingdom, is to be followed by the ministers of Gods
word.
what duties they were to perform to their kings and in what manner they
were to be subject, and to obey him. In whose example all the ministers of the
word may mark their duty that they ought with all care and diligence to
teach the people to obey the civil power, to honor, love and fear it, to be
ready to impart that which God has bestowed upon the^, on the maintenance of
it, and finally to perform al those duties which the law of God, or of man
does require at their hands. Thus Paul writes to Titus, Nothing better
beseeming Christians then due subjection to magistates.
Chap. 3.2. Warn and put al Christians in mind that they be subject to rule,
to obey the magistrates and to be ready to every good work: for there is nothing
that does better beseem a Christian man or people then hearty love and ready
obedience to the magistrate, coming not of constraint, and fear of
punishment, but of conscience: neither is there any thing that does more
disgrace the profession of Christ and lay it open to the reproaches of infidels
and wicked men then disloyal behavior to magistrates, especially to kings
and great princes to whom all laws both divine and humane require that a
g^^at measure of honor, obedience and maintenance be performed. The second
action of Samuel is, that he wrote this doctrine of the kingdom in a book,
and that for perpetuity that it might be preserved safe in time to come, and so
serve for the instruction of the ages following. As touching this book it
perished with many others written by the prophets and holy men of God, and that
by the negligence of the priests and people, yet there is a sum or
compendious abstract of it, saved from the injury of the times and the public
calamities which befalling this nation did bury many notable monumentes. The
which we have recorded, 1. Sam. 8. verse. 10. and so forth to the 19. out of
the which place, this doctrine which has been delivered in this short
treatise of the power and majesty of the kingdom may be gathered: the words are
these. Now therefore hearken unto their voice: howbeit yet testify unto them
and show them, A compendious abstract of the state of the kingdom of Israel.
the manner of the king that shall reign over them. He will take your sons,
and put them to his chariots, and make them Captains over thousands, and over
fifties, and will set them to care his ground and to gather in his harvest, and
to make instruments of war and things that serve for his chariots. And he
will take your daughters, and make them apoticaries, cooks, and bakers, and he
shall take your fields and your vineyardes, and your best olive trees, and
give them to his servants, and he shall tak^ the tenth of your seed, and of
your vineyardes, and give to his Eunuchs, and to his servants, and he shall
take your men-seruantes, and maid-seruantes, and the chief of your young men,
and your asses, and put them to his work, he will take the tenth of you^
sheep and ye shall be his servants. The second action gives us this
instruction, that according to the example of Samuel, a^l Christians ought to
desire, and they to whom God has given gifts fit for this purpose, Care to
be had of posterity.
by all means to endeavor, that they may profit the Church not only whilst
they l^^e, but also after their death: by leaving behind them those things
which may further the edification of it. Thus have the p^ophets, Apostles and
holy men of God done from time to time, whose writings do testify their
care, diligence, and pains taken in this behalf. The which as we do now
enjoy to our unspeakable profit and comfort, so ought we to be stirred up by
their example to perform the like duty to others: even as we commend the
careful foresight of those men, who as they eat the fruit of the trees which
their forefathers did plant, so they plant other trees which may serve for the
use of their posterity. For although no man can hope, that his labors should
be in any me^sure so profitable to the Church as the books of the Prophets and
Apostles are, who had the extraordinary gifts of prophecy and revelation,
and were directed by the continual assistance of Gods spirit, yet the
ordinary gifts of knowledge and wisdom which God has given to be perpetual
in his Church, will help forward the building of it, chiefly in the ministry
of the word, and also by the means of writing, whereof there will be a
necessary use, as long as the Church endures not only for the interpretation
of the word of God but also for the scanning of controversies, the confuting of
heresies* the reproouing of vices the which will continually be new and fresh
in the Church. The last action of Samuel is that he laid this book before the
face of the Lord, that is, in the place of Gods worship, where he was so
present that he might as it were be known and discerned there, even as one man
is known from an other by his face. This Samuel did for this end, that God
might be both a witness of* his faithfulness in teaching the people their
due^ie in this behalf, and also a maintainer of that ^state, the which was
established by the will of God: yea a revenger of all disorders and of all
disloyalty which should be any way committed against the state. And so we need
not doubt but that God does watch with the eye of his providence over kings and
princes after a special manner, vouchsafing to them who are faithful and
Godly a great measure of wisdom and of all graces of the spirit meet for so
high a calling, yea and does severely punish the resistance, c^ntempt and
disgrace offered to those princes which are so careful to serve him, to set
forth his glory and to build his Church as they ought to be. Lastly to conclude
this whole treatise, we learn by these two last actions that as Samuel
howsoever he did greatly mislike the alteration of the former state and the
setting up of this new government, yet whenas it was once by the permission of
God and the importunity of the people established, he did labor that it
should continue for ever, for the which purpose he did both write the doctrine
of it in a book and also laid the said book before the Lord: so we do
labor to continue that government which is in force in that place or country
where we live, although we do perhaps imagine yea and persuade our selves that
we could find out a better form of government, Alteration of government in
any common wealth troublesome and dangerous.
and which should be void of those in conueniences which we see in the present
state. For as the wise men of this world teach us, there is nothing more
troublesome, dangerous, yea pernicious to any people then the alteration of the
form of government which is in force, and as the wisdom of God speaks in the
scripture, no^^ing is more heinous and odious in the sight of God and man then
to seek the subversion of magistrates, states and kingdoms.

FINIS.
Printed at London for Robert Dexter. 1596.

CHAP. I. Of the Catholic Church.
Sect. 1. Of the name and definition of the Catholic Church.
THE Church whereof we are now to entreat, in greek and latin is called
Ecclesia, the which word is diuersely taken in the scripture: for in the
natural acception it does generally signify any assembly of men met about
any matter as we may see, Act. 19.39. But for so much as the scripture does
only by occasion make mention of civil meetinges, therefore it does for the
most part signify a holy assembly of men met about holy and divine
matters, whereof the book of God does wholly and of set purpose entreat. Yea
in this second sense it is diuersely used: first for the triumphant Church: of
the state whereof we do not speak any thing in this treatise, because it is
neither needful nor yet possible for us to know it, and therefore not lawful
to labor in the curious searching of it, it being not revealed in the word of
God. Secondly the word Ecclesia, is used to signify the Church militant,
wherein we are now conversant: and therefore it does greatly belong unto us to
know the state of it, because God has appointed it to be the way whereby we
must pass to the triumphant Church. In this sense we do here entreat of the
Church. And lastly even in this third sense, the name of the Church is diversely
used, to wit, first for the whole Church here on earth, as it is in all those
places where it is put for all the faithful people in the world, as namely,
1. Cor. 10.32. Give no offense neither to the Jew or Gentile nor to the Church
of God, that is, to none that believes. Secondly for the whole vi^ible Church,
as we read, 1. Cor. 12.28. God has put in his Church, Apostles, Prophets,
Pastors, Doctors. For although neither the catholic, nor yet the visible
Church does come together in one place, yet because all the members of them
both are joined together in the bond of the spirit and in the unity of faith,
the word Ecclesia is properly given unto them. Lastly it signifies a
particular Church which is a member of the whole, as the Church at Corinth, or
any other mentioned in the writings of the Apostles. But in the first place we
are to speak not of the particular Church, but of the whole Church here on
earth, which is usually called the Church militant, because it fights against
the enemies of our salvation, to wit, this present world, sin, satan, and
his manifold temptations. It is also called, although not in the scripture,
the catholic Church: The word Catholic not used in the scripture
the word Catholic is most commonly opposed to heretical, and attributed to
that man or Church which does hold the sincere doctrine of religion, without
any great error, especially by them who do falsely imagine and teach, that
the greater part is always the sounder, and more sincere in doctrine. But
here we use it in the proper and natural sense, to signify the whole
universal Church, which is thus defined. The catholic Church is the whole
number of those men, who in any part of the world, serve the true God in Jesus
Christ. In this definition we are to consider and explane diverse points.

Sect. 2. Of the place of the Catholic Church.
AND first of the place of the catholic Church, it is not any one town,
city, province, nation or kingdom whatsoever, but the whole world. 1. Cor.
1* 1. in every part whereof, God has some that serve him, because he will
have no part, wholly either shut out from the participation of his mercy, or
left without excuse or yet destitute of his presence, as if he were thrust
clean out from the possession of it. The truth whereof appears in the
scripture, which shows that howsoever the visible Church, and the open
profession of religion, was till the time of the gospel shut up within one
family, kindred, or country, yet that God was both known and served by some
in other places, even in all the parts of the world. So we read, Acts. 2.
That there were men of all the nations under heaven, which feared God: and
there a particular enumeration is made of them. Parthians, Medes, Elamites, the
inhabitante^ of Mesopotamia, of Judea, Cappadocia, Pontus, Asia, Phrygia and
Pamphilia, Egypt, Lybia, Cyrene, Rome, Creta and Arabia. So Christ gives
commission to his Apostles, Mark. 16.15. to preach to all nations in the
world: and accordingly Paul witnesses, that the gospel was spread into the
whole world, and did daily fructify and increase. Coll. 1.6. Likewise Peter
does observe this point of the universality of the Church. Act. 10.34.35. in
Cornelius, saying, I perceive of a truth that God does not regard persons,
that is, that he does not tie himself to the nation of the Jews or to any
other, but that in every nation, he that fears God, is accepted of him. So
Act. 13.17. yet this is to be noted that whenas all the people of the world are
brought within the compass of one place, then the catholic Church also is
contained in the same place, and so it becomes a particular Church: So in the
beginning whenas there was no man living out of Adams family, the catholic
Church was contained within the limits thereof. The catholic Church was
twice contained in one family.
Likewise in the general destruction of the world, both all the people of the
world and the whole Church were shut up in Noah's Arc. This exception being
made, this doctrine stands true; That no particular place, house, city,
country, or nation whatsoever, but even the whole world is the subject and
place of the Catholic Church.

Sect. 3.. That hypocrites are members of the Catholic Church.
ALthough the catholic Church be despersed over the whole world, yet not all
nor many in comparison of the infidels, but a very few belong unto it. And
therefore we are in the next place to see who are the members of it, and of
whom it does consist. The answer to this point we have in the definition,
which says, that all who serve God in any part of the world, are of the
catholic Church. For as a king may divide the whole world into his own
subjects, who live within his dominions, know, obey and honor him, and into
forrenners who are without the compass of his jurisdiction, do him no
service, make no account of him; and in brief have no kind of dealing with
him: so all men living in the world are either Gods subjects and servants,
living within the compass of the catholic Church, and as it is written,
Ephesians. 2.12.19. Citizens with the faintes and of the household of God, or else
they are aliantes from the common wealth of Israel, without the promise,
covenant or hope of salvation, yea without God in the world.

But for so much as God is served many ways, in deed or in show only,
sincerely or hypocritically, purely or corruptly, fully or after an imperfect
manner, in knowledge or in ignorance, and after many other differences,
therefore we are to search out, what manner of serving God, does make a man to
be a member of the catholic Church: whereunto we answer, The profession of
the true religion makes one a member of the catholic Church
that the outward profession of the true service of God although ioy^ed with
impotencie of performing any actual service, yea with hypocrisy, corruption,
imperfection, error and heresy will serve for this purpose, and does make a
man a true member of the catholic Church. For the first difference, some
serve God actually, by praying to God or praising him, by hearing his word and
obeying it, or which is all in all, by trusting, fearing and loving God in
heart, namely so many of the Church as have comne to years of discretion: but
there are some who cannot serve God by any of these means or any other of the
same kind, to wit, infantes, who by reason of the infirmity of their age
cannot hear or understand, and therefore can neither know nor believe God or
serve him in any actual manner. Yet they may and do by the help of others
take upon them, and bear the true profession of the service of God, by
receiving the sacrament of initiation or first entrance into the Church:
Infantes are members of the catholic Church.
by the which means they become true members of the catholic Church, as well
as men of ripe age. The truth hereof appears, 1. Corin. 7.14. where the
Apostle says that the children of the Christians are holy, meaning even the
youngest infantes as they are borne of faithful parents, not that the faith of
the parents, or the sacrament of the Church does add any inward and real
holiness unto them: but only gives unto them a holy profession, or an
outward profession of holiness and of faith, and also imputed righteousness
and supposed holiness, if they belong to Gods election. In like manner under
the law all the young children of the Jews, especially after they had
received the sacrament of circumcision, were counted members of the Church, and
in the number of the holy people of God. And therefore God complains of the
Jews offering their young ones in sacrifice to idols, that they gave his
children to Moloch. Ezec. 16.21. Thus much of those who become members of the
Church by mere profession: now we come to the actual serving of God, the
which where it is in sincerity of heart and life performed, it makes one a
member of Christ^s mystical body, much more the^ of his Church here on earth.
But all the controversy is of them in whom this actual service is imperfect,
as it is, first in hypocrites who want the inward service of the heart, as also
heretics do some part of the sincerity of doctrine, and dissolute men the
service of outward life, and ignorant idiotes the service of the mind, and
lastly as the dispersed members of the Church want the public worship of
God. The answer in general is this, that howsoever the imperfect service of
hypocrites, wicked men, heretics and idiotes be not acceptable in the sight of
God, yet it is sufficient to make them true members of the militant Church: but
we will come to the several consideration of them.

And first of hypocrites, by the which name we call those men, in whom the
outward service is perfect, in that they both hold and profess the whole
truth of christian religion, and also express the same in their lives, both
in word and deed, and yet do not serve GOD in spiritte and truth, but are
destitute of true faith, and of all the rest of the effectual graces of the
sanctifying spiritte springing thereof. This manner of serving GOD is not
pleasing, but rather odious, and abominable to him, Esaias. 1.14. and therefore
it is not auailable for the salvation of any, Hypocritical professors are
members of the catholic Church.
but rather makes men's damnation the more just: yet it gives unto them the
name of the members of the Church. For it is confessed of all, that hypocrites
may be true ministers in a particular Church as Judas was a true Apostle:
whereof it does necessarelie follow that they are true members of the Church:
for the teachers and rulers of a Church are the chief members of it. So that
as in a commonwealth or kingdom, they who have freedom and interest in such
bodies either by nature or favor, are counted true subjects as long as they
live in outward obedience to laws, yea though they be known to bear in
their hearts an unnatural and disloyal affection to their country or prince:
so it is in the Church with hypocrites destitute of the true faith and love of
God. But how can hypocrites be made true members of the Church, which is the
body of Christ, seeing that they have no conjunction with Christ, who is the
head of the Church? For the resolving of this doubt, we must consider both
Christ the head, and the Church his body, two diverse ways: for Christ as he
is a savior, is a head to the mystical body of the elect only, unto whom
he gives by his spirit effectual grace, spiritual motion, and eternal
life. In this respect hypocrites have no more to do with Christ or his Church,
then darkness has with light: but here we do not meddle with the mystical
body of the Church. Secondly, Christ is the king, Lord, and ruler of his
Church militant here on earth: in the which respect he is a head not only
to the faithful but also to hypocrites, to whom he gives spiritual graces,
ministerial gifts and ecclesiastical functions, even as he makes the sun
to shine upon the just and the unjust: first he communicates to them the
gifts of knowledge, wisdom, doctrine and exhortation: of tongues, of
miracles, and prophecy. Ephesians. 4.8. Where he like a victorious king,
triumphing over his enemies; ascended into heaven and gave gifts to men, some
to be Apostles, some Evangelists etc. Secondly he imparteth to them graces
tending to their own salvation as a kind of faith, of repentance, of
spiritual joy, love: and in general whatsoever grace is in the true believers
the like may be found in an hypocrite, and that not only in show, and
appearance, but also in truth, Mark. 4.16. hypocrites receive the word with
joy. Yet there is this difference: in the faithful these graces are sincere;
evident, effectual, constant and perpetual, but in hypocrites they are
obscure, in small measure, unprofitable, and temporary, yea mixed with much
hypocrisy. So that both faithful and hypocritical men, are joined to Christ,
and to the Church, by the bond of the spirit, (for where there is one spirit
there is also one body) but the one to Christ as to their savior, the other to
him as to their Lord: the one to the Church in heaven, the other to the Church
on earth; the one by a mighty work of the spirit, the other after a light
manner: the one for a time, the other for ever.

Sect. 4. That heretics are members of the catholic Church.
BUT although it were granted, that hypocrites are members of the Church, so
many of them as both holding the whole truth of Christian religion, and also
leading a life in outward appearance correspondent thereunto, do fully
profess the service of God, yet it might be doubted, what we should think of
them in whom this profession is in a great part wanting, as it is in all those
who either lead a life, or maintain some heresy contrary to their own
profession and to the word of God: The answer for both kinds seems to be
this: That they who profess Jesus Christ to be the savior of the world, and
themselves to be his servants, ready to obey his will and word, although
they do indirectly by wickedness of life, or heresy in doctrine deny their
own profession, yet are to be accounted Christians, and true members of the
Church here on earth. It is true indeed that no man can be saved, who is not
justified by faith, nor yet have faith, who is not sanctified from a wicked
life, yet men of dissolute lives, yea tho they be by excommunication cut off
from the body of the visible Church, that is, from all particular Churches,
Excommunication does not separate from the catholic, but only from the
visible Church.
yet they remain members of the catholic Church, from the which no censure
can separate save only death. Likewise as touching ignorant men who live in
the Church, and yet know scarce any one point of the doctrine of Christ,
although they be in an evil estate in regard of their salvation, yet they are
to be accounted Christians, because of their profession. But there is greater
question made of heretics, who do maintain some grievous heresy, and that
about the foundation of religion, as they who think erroniously of the
^rinitie, of the person or natures of Christ, of the manner of our
justification, of the nature of the sacramente^, or of any other such weighty
point of doctrine, whether these are to be accounted christians, and members of
the Church. We answer that such are (as it seems) to be accounted
christians, although their heresies be both many and grievous, yea such as if
they were thoroughly urged, would by necessary consequence of argument
overthrow faith and all religion. And to make instance in the grossest, and
most blasphemous heresy, that ever was invented, to wit, the heresy of Arius
who denied by divinity of Christ, this does almost directly overthrow
christianity: for if Christ be not God he is not a sufficie^^ mediator, and
then our faith is in vain. This would follow plainly of that heresy, and yet
such was their blindness that maintained it, that they did together maintain
and profess zealously the whole doctrine of the gospel beside, and did
believe, obey and honor Christ, as the only savior of the world. Heretics,
as Arians and papists are to be counted members of the catholic Church
The which dot^ appear by that confession of faith, which Ariu^ the chief
maintaine^ of that heresy did exhibit to Constantine. Wherein although he
does dissemble his heresy, yet it shows, what he and his followers held in
the test of the doctrine of the gospel, (...) 4. page 13.42. yea this heresy
was common in the Church of the I^wes* before the coming of Christ* for it is
evident tha^ very ^ewe of them did think that the Messiah should be God. For
what was thought of Christ, even of many of his disciples, we may gather by the
words of Cleophas, L^ke. 24. Have thou not heard of Jesus of Nazareth, who was
a prophet, etc. Yea it might be plainly showed, that many of the Church both
before the coming of Christ, and also after, did not think that the Messiah
should be God. And not to ouerpasse in ^^lence popery, the most common heresy
of our times, wherewith the Church both is now most annoied and has in times
past been lame^tably oppressed, and almost clean ourthrowen, it does consist
of so many grievous errors, that most men do think it not to be an heresy,
but a false religion, and the maintainers and professors of it, to be
alienates from ^he commonwealth of Israel, which is the Church of God: as
namely of those great heresies of idolatry, transsubstan^iation, the sacrifice
of the Mass, meant, justification by works, freewill and invocation of saints,
yea of many other great errors, insomuch that we may say of them the words of
the prophet, from the top of the (...) to the sole of the foot, there is no
whole part, but all full of loath some and dangerous ^ore^. And therefore it is
no marvel that they seem^ to many to have in them no life of christian faith,
but to be dead and rotten stoc^s, yea to have no outward profession of
christianity. But yet if due consideration be had how far ^he nature and name
of a Church, and of christians does stretch it self, it will appear, that we
may truly account the^ christians, and so consequently members of the Church:
and that because they do still profess, hold and maintain the chief
fundamental points of religion, The papist holds the foundation of Christian
religion.
of God, of Christ, of hi^ death and passion, of the resurrection and all the
rest contained in that sum of religion called the Apostles Creed, so that
although by (...) they do wound, and in a manner kill themselves, yet in
regard of the truth which they keep, there rema^neth (...) them some life of
Christianity and so are fitly compared to a man who although he both lack many
parts of his body, and also have the rest corrupted with pestilent diseases,
yet draws breath, and therefore is not a dead (...), but a living man. The
reason by the which we are persuaded to think that papists and other
heretics do still retain the name of christians, is this: for that faith and
especially a general and historical faith (the profession whereof is
sufficient to make a man be accounted a christian) may be lodged in a man's
mind together with such errors, as being urged by a cunning disputer, would
wholly overthrow faith. For the denial of faith is brought in about indirectly,
and by many consequents inferred one of another: but the man corrupted with
error does not consider any such thing, but believes directly and resolutely
in Jesus Christ as in the savior of the world. Yea although he were convinced
by arguments grounded upon his own assertions and errors to deny the faith,
yet he would still hold it, and rather deny the conclusion then renounce his
faith. Even as a man being in temptation may have true faith although he be not
able to answer those objections, which Satan and his own conscience do make
against his faith. But it is seldom seen, that an heretic is brought to see
that his opinion and the foundation of religion cannot both stand together: for
he will have some shift or other to keep himself from granting, that the
error which he maintains, brings with it any such absurdity. It is
written, Act. 13.3. that there did some believe, which were of the heresy of
the pharisees and did still hold the ceremonies of the law. It were long to
rehearse the errors which have been maintained by many, not only particular
men, Whole Churches have held grievous errors
but also whole Churches about weighty points: of whom we may well think that
a true faith has been in many living in as great and as many errors as these
heretics before mentioned. For if we do consider the state of the Church
before the time of the gospel, we shall find, that howsoever God did
extraordinarely reveal the doctrine of the Messiah to some, yet that not only
the common and ignorant people living in the Church, but even many of the
learned were ignorant of many fundamental points of christianity which Christ
himself does plainly testify. The state of the Church before the coming of
Christ.
Mat. 13.16. saying, Blessed are the eyes which see the things which you see:
for I say unto you, that ^any prophets and righteous men have desired to see
them, and yet have not: the which words are necessarily to be understood of
the fundamental and most weighty points of faith, for those did Christ teach
in his ministry. They had in deed a constant faith in the Messiah to come,
but no particular distinct and clear knowledge of his person, natures,
offices, and manner of salvation which he should bring. In the 11. chapter to
the Heb. ver. 13. it is said that Rahab the harlot had faith, but that she knew
distinctly the fundamental doctrine of Christ, we cannot think: and the like
is to be said of many others of those who are there mentioned, Faith and
fundamental errors together.
and in other places of the old Testament. Yet even the disciples of Christ
were ignorant of many of these things and were in most grievous errors after
that they did believe, Philip knew not the doctrine of ^he first person i^ the
Trinity. John. 14.9. As they at Ephesus knew no^ wheth^r* there were a holy
ghost or no. Act. 19.2. yea they did think that Christ should be a worldly
king. Math. 20.21. Acts. 1.6. and Peter did not hold the doctrine of Christ's
passion, for he dissuaded him from it, Math 16.22. and yet they did believe
before that time, as Christ the searcher of the hearts of men does testify.
Neither did the Jews for the most part before the coming of Christ once
imagine, that their Messiah should be put to a shameful death, as may be
gathered. John. 12.34. We confess that the difference of the time makes these
errors to be more grievous under the gospel then they were before, as he is
more blind that cannot see at noone day, then he who cannot distinguish things
rarely in the morning, before the sin do rise: yet if these errors may be
joined with faith in one time, we may suppose the same at another time also.
But still we must note the great difference of times: For we are not to
think, that men may in the time of the gospel, be commonly saved living in
these errour^ as they were before. For then men were blind in darkness, now
they shut their eyes against the light: in them these errors were simple, The
same error more pernicious at one time the^ at another.
and mere ignorances, but i^ our heretics they are wilful and obstinate
heresies: before, God did ouer-see those errors, but now he bidde^h every one
in pain of eternal damnation, to seek, understand and embrace the truth.
Act. 17.30. before, they could not, but now men will not see the truth:
before, they were the errors of the time, but now they are the errors of men.
Yet we are not to think the less reverently of those holy men of that time
for these errors: neither to make any question of their salvation but now we
are to learn of the Apostle, Tit. 3.10. to avoid and abhor an heretic
after one or two admonitions, knowing that such an one is subverted, and
sins, being condemned by himself. As we may well think, that the first
authors of popery did not of ignorance, but of set purpose forge these
opinions for their own advantage: and that many of those which since that time
are endued with any measure of learning and judgment, do in their consciences
condemn themselves and those errors which they hold. Yet we are not
peremptorelie to judge them to be in the state of damnation: for the common and
unlearned people living in popery, Greater hope of the salvation of an
ignorant then of a learned heretic.
did so wholly rely themselves upon the faith of the Church that they were for
the most part ignorant even of the very errors of popery: wherein the more
simple and unlearned that a man is, the greater hope we may have of his
salvation. Yea many learned men amongst them have been carried headlong with
the blindness of the time, and in a kind of modesty, or rather gross and
sottish negligence, have not inquired into those points which the whole Church
did maintain. And yet some of th^se men living in these heresies have been so
sound and constant in the foundation of religion, Heretics have given their
lives for the gospel
that we read that diverse of them have given their lives in defense of it: so
that we cannot without injury deny unto them the name of Christians, which
they have bought with the price of their own blood. But as for those who do
still hold these heresies since the time wherein it has pleased God to let
the sun of truth to shine clearly in the world, their case is very
fearful: and especially those, who have had the truth taught and offered
unto them: for as Christ says, John. 10.3. all his sheep know his voice, and
can distinguish it from the voice of false sheepheardes, when it sounds in
their ears, howsoever before they did not know it. And the Apostle writes,
1. Cor. 14.37. if any be spiritual, let him acknowledge these things to be
the word of God: but if any be ignorant, let him be ignorant still. In this
sense Paul writes to the Gal. 5.2. That if they were circumcised, Christ
should profit them nothing. And yet, Act. 21.20. there were many thousand
Jews, who did believe, all of them zealous of the law: yea Paul by the
counsel of the Church at Jerusalem did go about to make the Jews believe
that he also did live according to the law of Moses, Act. 21.26. and therefore
we must think that he warns the Galathians that if now in so great light of
the gospel which teaches the abrogation of the ceremonial law and after so
much teaching, and so many admonitions, they did still remain blind and
obstinate, yea and did turn back again to the or^ers of the law, that then
it was an evident sign that they were as yet destitute of the true knowledge
and obedience of the gospel. For if this had been the first time, wherein
they had been taught Christ, he would easelie have winked at this great
error of joining the law and the gospel together. Likewise as concerning
that detestable heresy of Arianism^ we may well think the authors,
spreaders, beginners, furtherers and maintainers of it, to have been men
destitute of the spirit of God: and that this heresy is (especially in these
ages) a fearful sign of eternalll reprobation. Yet we are not to think so
hardly of those, Difference to be put betwixt the simple professors of
errors and the obstinate maintainers of them.
who were corrupted with it after that it had ouerspred the greatest part of
the world, and so were carried away with the multitude to evil although it
were in that time also a fearful token of a reprobate mind, for as in a
common infection of the air, we cannot judge of the state of men's bodies by
popular diseases and deaths, whenas both strong and weak men are in the same
case, so neither in the common reigning of any heresy, can we perfectly
discern the state of men's minds and souls by that token, for so much as God
does sauesome, even by pulling them out of the fire. And therefore we are
charitably to hope the best of them, who live in grievous errors, not of
wilful blindness, but of simple ignorance: and not to doubt, but that
ignorant heretics being religious and zealous seruers of God are in far
bett^r state as touching their salvation, then they who professing the sincere
doctrine of the gospel do in their profane lives deny the power thereof.
But that heretics are to be accounted members of the Church, we shall have
occasion to declare, when we come to the corrupt state of a Church. So that to
conclude this point, we do (and that as we trust and are persuaded by the
word of GOD,) give the name of members of the Church, and of christians to all
that do in outward profession hold the foundation of religion. The which
although in effect it be the same both before and since the time of the
Gospel, yet it has some difference in respect of the diversity of the times.
For before Christ was exhibited in the flesh, this was the foundation of
religion, I put my whole trust and confidence for my happiness, in the Messiah
whom God has promised to send for the redemption and salvation of the
people, of the seed of David. This foundation did the Church of the Jews
profess when Christ came, and therefore every one of that people was a member
of the Church, howsoever they did together hold grosser heresies, What is the
foundation of reliligion before and since the coming of Christ.
then the papists do at this day. But since the coming of Christ this is to
hold the foundation of religion, I believe Jesus the son of Mary to be the
son of God, the promised Messiah, the Lord and Savior of the world, and
that in him only, salvation is to be had: as it is more briefly set down by
the Apostle, 1. Cor. 3.11. Another foundation can no man lay, but that which is
laid, to wit, that Jesus is Christ. To the which doctrine all opinions and
assertions which are contrary are pernicious heresies, and such as bring
certain damnation, 2. Peter. 2.1. There were many false prophe^s among the
people, as there are fals^ teachers among^ you, which bring in damnable
heresi^s, to wit, these, denying the Lord Jesus who bought them: these bring
upon themselves swift damnation, that is, may certainly be accounted for
damned. As for the heresies of those who do confess the lord Jesus, as they
are more weighty, and do nearer approach to the grand heresy of those who do
not confess the Lord Jesus, so they are more dangerous: yet of themselves not
being joined with obstinate and wilful blindness, not so desperate.

Sect. 5. Of those who dissemble their profession.
BUT before we leave this point, this question may me moved, whether as the
outward profession of faith without the truth thereof in heart, so the inward
faith of the heart, without out ward profession be sufficient to make a man a
true member of the catholic Church. We answer, that where true faith is,
there necessarely is also some outward service of God, and some confession of
the mouth by prayer, or some other means: which be it never so little, is
sufficient to make a man a member of the catholic Church: But as for open and
public profession of our faith before men, true faith being weak may be
destitute thereof: so we read, John. 12.40. that many of the chief rulers
believed in Christ, but neither did nor durst profess him before men: these
are members of the catholic Church which is in visible, but not of any
particular Church, unless they do profess their faith before others beside
themselves. So that outward profession of the faith although it be secret and
private, makes a man a member of the catholic Church, and open profession
makes us members of the visible Church. But it may be objected against this
whole doctrine:, that if the outward profession of the gospel be sufficient to
make a true member of the Church, then the devils which confessed Jesus to be
the son of God^, are truly christians. We answer that this confession was
extorted from them by the power of God, and sometimes came from the malice of
their nature, that so they might procure danger to Christ: The devil has
knowledge, but neither faith nor the profession of faith.
but they do not by faith rely themselves on God in Christ for happiness,
neither do they profess themselves to be his servants and that they are to
love him, and labor to glorify him, as all christians do. So then as many
are members of the mystical body of Christ and of his Church, which are not
as yet members of his visible body, which is the visible Church militant here
on earth, they not being as yet called to the knowledge of the gospel; so
many are called to be members of the Church, who are not chosen.

Sect. 6. Who are without the catholic Church.
AND thus we see what manner of serving God is meant in the definition: the
other words which follow have their use: for in that we require the service of
the true God, we exclude all heathenish and pagan people from being members of
the Church: because as it is, Romans 1.23. they passing by the creator worship
creatures as Gods. And lastly we add these words (in Jesus Christ) because
there is no true serving of God the father but in the son, in whom only he
is well pleased. And therefore the nation of the Jews having rejected Christ,
is by that means rejected of God from being his people: neither are they to be
accounted members of the Church, although they serve God with never so great
zeal Romans 11. The same account we are to make of the Turks, Saracens, Moors,
and all those nations which profess the religion of Mahomet the which we
confess, does retain diverse points of christianity, yea and that if it be
well marked, it will be sound a close or mystical Arianisme, Mahometisme a
mystical Ariaanisme.
covering and glosing over many weighty points of faith with judicial types,
and poetical fictions, that it being by this means made dark and
aenigmaticall, might be more highly esteemed by blind and ignorant men.
Whereas if it had been set down in a plain and simple manner, it would have
been easily vndestood, disputed of, and in the end altogether contemned. Yet
for so much as this religion does not worship and honor Jesus Christ as the
only son of God, and savior of the world as the first Arians therefore
(...), the professors of it cannot be accounted members of the Church, but
mere infidels separated from Christ, and void of the hope of eternal
salvation.

Sect. 7. Of the attributes of the catholic Church.
THus we having the definition of the catholic Church, are further to
consider the nature and state of it in certain properties, which are
attributed unto it. Of the which this may be the first that out of the
catholic Church there is no salvation: No salvation
and therefore all the heathen, all unbelieving Jews, Turks, and generally
all Infidels whatsoever, do live and die to the judgment and sight of man in
the state of eternal damnation. This the scripture witnesses in many places
as namely, 2. These. 2.8. God in the last judgment shall render vengeance to all that know not God and obey not the gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ: and yet
this sentence of damnation which the scripture pronounces on infidels is so to
be understood as that we do always except the infinite power and mercy of
God, who both can and as has been before touched, does in all parts of the
world save some, and that by extraordinary means unknown to us, where the
ordinary way is wanting. The second attribute of the catholic Church is
this, The ca^holicke Church cannot err in the foundation of religion.
that it can never err in the foundation of religion, which is all one, as if
we did say, the catholic Church never cease to be: or with this; there is
continually in the world a number of men which serve the true God in Jesus
Christ. The truth of this appears by the story of the Church in the holy
scripture and in other books, which show by whom and in what places God has
been truly worshipped in every several age. And no marvel: for if the
Church should cease to be in the world, then the world it self should have
an end, which was created and does continue chiefly for this end, to wit, to
be an habitation for the Church. As we read, 1. Cor. 2.16. All things are
yours even the very world, that is, all things do serve as means for your
good, and for the working of your salvation. In this sense the Apostle says,
1. Tim. 3.13. That the Church is the pillar and firmament, that is, a most
firm and sure pillar of truth, to wit, of the true religion and worship of
God. And yet the catholic Church may err in matters of religion, yea even in
those points which are weighty, and are near about the foundation it self,
although it always remain sure and steadfast. The catholic Church has often
been in most grievous errors
So it is manifest that the ignorances and errors of the Church which were
from the beginning until the coming of Christ, were both many and great as
has been noted before. And how great errors have prevailed throughout the
whole Church in most of the ages since that time, we who live in this light of
the gospel do easelie and plainly see. Yea we know that which the Apostle
says, 1. Cor. 13. that while the faithful are in this world, they see,
know, and prophecy but in part, and cannot be wholly freed from error till
they see the Lord perfectly, and in him all things. So we read, Leuit. 4.13.
that there was a sacrifice appointed for the expiation of the general error
of the whole people of the Jews, who then were the whole visible Church of
God. The catholic Church does continually increase in number and in knowledge.
Thirdly the catholic Church does continually increase in number and does
consist of more in the latter ages of the world, then in the former. For before
the time of the law, the Lord was known and worshipped only of a few
families or kindreds, but afterward of a great populous nation: but since the
coming of Christ, the Church ^oth enlarge her tents, and receives all the
nations of the earth. Likewise in the first ages of the gospel, there was no
nation, country, or city, no not any one town or village, which did generally
receive it, but only a few here and there, the rest remaining in
infidelity, but in the ages following great nations generally, yea infinite
multitudes of people became christians. Yea this number shall continually
increase until the fullness of the gentiles be come into the Church, whereof
the Apostle speaks, Romans 11. and then shall the nation of the Jews make a
notable addition to this number.

The cause of this increase is, for that God does not reveal himself and his
word, all at once to the world, but by degrees, by little and little. Where
this may also profitably be noted that as the number of believers, so also
their knowledge does increase, the word of God being much more plentifully
revealed in the latter times (they being generally considered) then it was in
the former. As touching the number, we know that the visible Church (by the
which we may certainly gather the state of the catholic Church) was until
the time of Moses, contained within the compass of one kindred, and till the
coming of Christ, in one nation, but afterward it spread it self, over the
whole world. Yea the latter times of the gospel shall daily more and more
exceed the first in number of believers, because now both the full number of
the gentiles, and also of the Jewish nation, is to come into the Church: And in
like manner the latter times do exceed the former in knowledge. Fourthly the
catholic Church has no head or ruler here on earth, The catholic Church
has no head o^ outward government.
neither any external government, but is ordered by the spiritual government
of Christ, who is the only head of it. For the government and rules
prescribed by God to his Church, have place and are put in practice only in
particular Churches which are the members of the catholic Church. Fifthly the
catholic Church is invisible, The catholic Church in^isible.
for that it consists not only of particular Churches which are visible, but
also of particular men which serve God, yet so, as that they are not known by
others so to do. Sixthly the catholic Church, is never pure here on earth, no
more then the goldlying in the bowels of the earth, but has hypocrites mixed
with true believers. Yea the number of hypocrites is far greater, then of the
other, for many are called but few are chosen.

Sect. 8. Of the distribution of the Catholic Church.
THus we see in general the nature and condition of the catholic Church: Now
we are to descend into a more particular consideration of it, in the members:
the which are either scattered abroad (of the which we are to entreat in the
first place, because they are in nature most simple) or else being joined
together make a particular Church. The conjunction of all particular Churches
does make the visible Church, the which with the dispersed members, makes the
catholic Church. The which we divide in the first place into dispersed
members, Dispersed Christians with the Churches professing the gospel, make the
Catholic Church
and particular Churches, even as the people of any kingdom or country may be
brought to these two heads, the one of those who do wander hither and
thither, not belonging to any society, company, or corporation, the other of
those who dwell together in some town or city under laws, government and in
due order.

CHAP. II. Of the dispersed members of the catholic Church.
Sect. 1. For what cause men are separated from the Church.
ALthough the members of the Church do ordinarely, and for the most part live
together by the institution and commandment of God for their mutual
edification, yet it comes often to pass that some are severed from the
company of the Church, and that upon diverse occasions. Of all which in general
this is to be held that they are either necessary, constraining men against
their wills or else unlawful and condemned by the word of God: for as touching
that voluntary or rather wilful separation of the Eremites in times past, who
forsaking the company of men, did choose to live in desert places, Eremeticall
separation from the Church vnawfull.
it is in no case to be imitated, for that it is contrary to the word of God,
who in great wisdom has appointed as civil societies for the greater
comodity of our temporal lives, so also the spiritual, and holy assemblies of
his servants, that by this means they might be helped each by other in
matters pertaining to their eternal salvation. For in the Church we have the
ministry of the word, of the sacraments, of the censures of the Church: we
have private exhortation and admonition of one to another, yea the examples of
a godly life in our brethren: and finally all the means of edification,
whereof these Eremites made themselves destitute. And therefore in so doing as
they did sin against their own bodies, in that, leaving those places, where
all the creatures of God, needful for the maintenance of this pesent life
might conveniently be had, did by suffering hunger, thirst, cold, and
nakedness, make themselves altogether unfit for the perfourming of any
christian duty, so they did much more sin against their own souls, which
they suffered to pine away through want of the word of God, and which they did
lay open to the manifold temptations and delusions of satan. Yea they did
inflict upon themselves (and that not unworthily in regard of their pride, and
wilful contempt of the ordinance of God) that most fearful punishment which
the scripture. 1. Cor. 3. calls giving up to satan, in that they did deprive
themselves of the inestimable benefit and comfort of the Church of God. If they
object for their own defense the example of the prophet Jeremy. 9.2. who
wishes that he had a cottage in the wilderness that so he might not see the
wickedness of the people, we answer first that the prophet did speak diverse
things in the zeal of the spirit, in a hyperbolicall manner of speech, yea
sometime also in humane impatience, which he did never put in practice, as it
does not appear that he did this desire. Secondly that they did it in no such
mind, but in a vain presumption, pretending the contempt of the world, and
their own sufficiency to work their salvation without the help of others,
and of those means which God has appointed. We confess indeed that so many
of them as lived in those times wherein popery did corrupt the worship of
God, had just cause of separation, and that they might more commodiously and
lawfully serve God in the vastest desert then in the most populous Church being
in that case. But most of these Eremites were more foolishly superstitious,
then they were whom they left, and few or none of them had that knowledge and
grace vouchsafed to them of God, to see and abhor those palpable corruptions.
As for those, who although they lived in desert places, yet they had the
company of others who joined with them in that kind of life, their doing was
more probable, because they seemed by this means to live in the form of a
Church: yet not justifiable by the word of God, if this their separation were
made from a Church serving God aright in any measure. But it comes often to
pass that some are constrained by urgent and necessary causes to live out of
the assembly of the Church as in the time of persecution, whenas the servants
of God cannot without evident danger meet together. So we read, Act. 8.1. that
the whole Church which was at Jerusalem, was dispersed abroad save the
Apostles. Likewise, whenas any of them are taken captives, and by violence
carried into those countries where there is no Church and there detained, as if
a christian were constrained to abide among the Turks, Jews, or any other
infidels. Yea many have in all times served God, who never were of any
particular Church, but being called to the knowledge of God by extraordinary
means, have continually lived amongst infidels. These although they ought to
make repair to those places, where they understand the Church to be, and to
make their abode there, yet often they abide in their native countries upon
diverse occasions, as namely, for that they being endued with a small measure
of knowledge and of faith cannot easily overcome the frailty of the flesh,
which counsels them, that in no case they forsake their country, kindred,
friends, houses, and lands, and cast themselves into infinite dangers,
troubles and miseries, which for the most part do accompany them who live in
strange places. Yea it may be that they know not either what or where the
Church is, and so cannot endeavor to come to it. And lastly even men living in
the Church, may have necessary causes constraining them to live from the
society of the same, as contagious diseases, as the leprosy was amongst the
Israelites, for the which we read that king Ozias was separated a long time
from the Church. Yea men which are excommunicated and do so continue, are
still to be accounted members of the catholic Church, so long as they
continue in the profession of the faith, howsoever they be not members of any
particular Church. And therefore they are to serve God in the time of their
excommunication.

Sect. 2. How the dispersed members of the catholic Church serve God.
THus much of the causes, why some of the members of the Church are dispersed
abroad from the company of the Church. Now we are to consider what manner of
service they perform to God, in regard whereof they are accounted members of
the Church. The which title belongs only to those who do serve God as has
been declared. The only means whereby they serve God, is prayer, or
invocation of the name of God, because this service may be performed by one
alone, but the ministry the word, of the sacraments, and other parts of the
service of God, require acompany joining together for that purpose. So that
prayer is that part of the actual service of God, which only belongs
generally to all the members of the Church, which are come to years of
discretion, as well to those who are dispersed, as to those who live together
in the Church. Hence it is that the Apostle Paul when he speaks of all
christians without exception of any, calls them, those who call upon the name
of the Lord, as namely, 1. Cor. 1.1. Thus did Daniell serve God in Babel. Dan.
6.10. thrice a day he made his petition to God, and praised him. Here order
requires that we should entreat of prayer the most general and perpetual
part of the service of God, yea that which is the very badge of all christians,
and declare the whole nature, manner, kinds, fruit and all the points of
doctrine belonging to this head. But we will rather pass it over with
silence, for that the matter is both large, and requiring a several treatise,
and also is sufficiently handled by diverse godly and learned men. Here also
this question is to be answered, whether that the dispersed members of the
Church may not use some other part of the service of God, as the sacrmentes
for the confirmation of their faith. As touching this point, it seems that
whilst any one member of the Church is wholly severed from the society of
others, that he cannot use them, neither any other part, but only prayer as
has been said. Yet if there be any number of them, although but two, that
then they may lawfully use both the sacraments of baptism, and of the Lords
supper. For the further declaration whereof, we may put this case. A christian
man and his wife being taken captives live amongst infidels, where to their
knowledge there is not any christian beside themselves. There they beget
children, whom they would have by baptism consecrated and initiated into the
profession of Christianity. In this case it is lawful, yea needful for the
parents both of them, How the sacraments may be privately received.
or either of them, to administer baptism to their children. This appears,
Exodus 4.25. where Moses and Zippora his wife circumcise their son, by the
commandment or rather by the threatening of God. And so did all the Jews being
scattered abroad into all the parts of the world, circumcise their male
children in their own houses. Likewise for the other sacrament of the Lords
supper, it is lawful for christians in the aforesaid case to receive it at
their own hands, as this one example does sufficiently prove. If it be
objected that the sacraments being a part of the ministry of the Church,
ought not to be administered but by a public person, and in a public place:
we answer that where there is no Church, there a private man's house is in
steed of it, and he himself in place of a minister.

Sect. 3. By what means the dispersed members of the Church are called.
THus much of that service wherewith the dispersed members of the Church serve
God: the which although it be imperfect, yet it is acceptable to God, where the
rest cannot be had, and is a sufficient means to work their salvation. So we
read. Ezech. 11.16. the Lord says that He will be to his people dispersed
abroad in the captivity a little sanctuary, that is, howsoever they were
absent from the holy temple at Jerusalem, in which place only it was lawful
to offer sacrifice, and to serve God in full and ample manner, God accepts
the imperfect service of those who cannot be in the visible Church
yet that God would accept that imperfect and maimed service which they should
perform unto him in their captivity by prayer and circumcision. For as
touching the passover it was a sacrifice, and therefore could not be used in
any place but only at Jerusalem. But although this imperfect service be
accepted of God, yet they themselves do not so rest in it, but that they do
and ought above all things in the world to desire to be in the society of
the Church, Dispersed christians ought to labor by all means to join
themselves to some Church.
that so they may enjoy the full means of working their own salvation and of
glorifying God. So that although they be absent in body, yet in mind and
affection they are joined with it. In witness whereof as also to increase this
desire, they did, being in a strange land amongst the infidels, pray toward
the place of the Church and worship of God, 1. King. 8.48. Dan. 6.11. Psalm. 84.
Lastly it may be asked how those dispersed members of the Church which never
were in the society of other christians, were called and became members of it:
whereunto we answer that in the ordinary working of God, there is no faith
and true knowledge of God to be gotten but in the visible Church and in the
company of believers: yet that God does by extraordinary means save some, who
never were joined to the society of the Church. The means which God uses are
known to him only, yet some of them may be gathered out of the scripture. As
first, the relics of the true worship of God, the which takes such deep root
in those places where it is planted, that although the visible Church be clean
overthrown, yet there will some root of knowledge remain hidden in the ground:
By what means God calls those who are with out the visible Church.
even as we see that where a garden replenished with great store of herbs has
been, there will be long after that it is defaced, some sprouting up. So that the
word of God, as it is in the gospel compared to a grain of mustard seed, Ma.
13.31. in respect of the speedy and great groth of it upwards, so it may be
compared to it, in that they both take so deep root that where they are once
sown there they remain for many ages. Thus there was a glimmering of the true
worship of God, dispersed abroad by the sons of Noah: by the which means it
came to pass that diverse did in some sort know God among the infidels. As
Melihezadec, Job, with his friends, Lot, Baal^m, of all them knowing the true
God. Yea in the idolatry of Mahomet there remains something of christian
religion: hereof they hold many points although covered over with profane
fable. Moreover some living out of the Church are brought to the knowledge of
God by the means and private teaching of some who have been of the Church.
Yea even by the fame of the true religion some have been converted: so was
Rahab living in Jericho, of whom it is said, Heb. 11. that she believed, or
by reading books containing the doctrine of religion. Lastly it may please God
to use for this purpose that knowledge which remains in the minds of men
since the fall of Adam, and which is stirred up by the contemplation of the
creatures, and all those means which natural men have for the attaining of
knowledge. These or any other means God may use extraordinarily, yea he may
do it without any means, but in his ordinary working none of these aforesaid
means are auailable: for faith is gotten ordinarely only by hearing the word
preached, and therefore we are to esteem and judge of them who have not the
ministry of the word, that they want the ordinary means of attaining a
true and saving faith: always excepting the power and extraordinary work of
God, the which is not tied to any means.

CHAP. III. Of a particular Church.
Sect. 1. Of the original of particular Churches.
THus much of the dispersed members of the catholic Church: the which state
God does accept where it cannot be amended: but so that he will have al his
servants to endeavor by all means possible to come and live together for their
mutual edification, and therefore as for the more commodious maintaining of
our temporal lives, he has appointed civil societies, so for the beginning
and maintaining of spiritual strength and life in us he has appointed holy
assemblies, which are particular Churches: out of the which a christian may
live this spiritual life, but yet in great weakness and danger, even as a
man may preserve his natural life in a desert place, but he cannot have
perfect strength and health, unless he live in some place frequented by men
and replenished with things needful for that purpose. And therefore we are
now to declare what a particular Church is.

Sect. 2. Of the definition of a parlicular Church.
A Particular Church is a company of men separated from the infidels of the
world to serve God under all the same divine and humane laws, or under the same
ecclesiastical government both divine and humane. This definition does in some
sort comprehend in it the whole nature and essence of a particular Church, and
therefore a great part of this treatise is to be spent in the explication of
it, wherein (that we may proceed in some distinct and plain order) we have
these three heads to observe. First the separating of those of whom the Church
is to consist from the infidels of the world. Secondly the divine laws by the
which they thus brought together, are to be ordered. And lastly the humane
laws which are added to the laws of God. For even as it is in the
establishing of a common wealth or kingdom, first men must be brought
together, who are to be the inhabitants of that city or country. Secondly
there must certain general and fundamental laws be made containing the very
state and form of government and of subjection which must stand in force
continually without any alteration: Three things required to the constitution
of a Church.
and lastly there must be added some special positive laws which are often to
be changed as present occasion shall require: so is it in the establishing of a
Church: First men are called from infidelity to faith, as from barbarism to
ciuility: then they have given unto them the laws, which God in (...) word
has made for the government of his Church till the end of the world, and
lastly the changeable ecclesiastical laws of men. Again as we see men do in
the building of a house, first they prepare stones, then they join them
together in some form of a house, till by little and little they set up the
whole frame of it, and lastly they add doors, windows, fenses, and
whatsoever may serve for the use of the dweller: in like manner the calling of
men to the knowledge of Christ, is the preparing of the matter of a Church:
secondly the establishing of the government of the Church and the manner of
serving God is a setting up of the frame of it, an lastly the making of
ecclesiastical constitutions is the applying of this government to the
special use of those men whom we would bring unto the form of a Church
that it may be a fit dwelling place for them. This latter similitude we desire
the reader to mark, the rather for that we are to use it throughout this whole
treatise. And that because it has pleased the spiritte of GOD to teach us so
to do, who in the scripture does for the most part compare the Church to a
house and to the buylding of it as we may see, 1. Cor. 3.11.12. 1. Tim. 3.15.
1. Pet. 4.17. In this definition the last words only (the rest being of
themselves plain enough) need this explication: that by humane laws, we do
not mean civil laws, but ecclesiastical constitutions added to the laws of
GOD appointed in the word: by the which humane laws, being always in some
point or other differing from the laws of other Churches, particular Churches
have their difference and distinct limittes appointed to them. A diverse
government makes a distinct Church.
For therefore we have inserted this partickle (all) in the definition, because
many, yea all the Churches in the world may agree in some ecclesiastical
constitutions but not in all. So that the same government makes one and the
same Church, yea although they be distinguished into diverse congregations, and
have many distinct places of serving God. As if the laws of any town do
stretch to the suburbs and villages about, there is but one corporation or
civil body. And to use our accustomed similitude as that is one family which
has the same governor over it, the same orders in it, although they be in
diverse rooms; so it is in this behalf, a distinct government makes a
distinct Church. The government is then distinct when either the humane Church
laws are diverse or at the least, the rulers and governors of the company
have in their hands authority to make diverse laws in that manner which we
are afterward to declare. So that where we see many distinct and diverse
assemblies or congregations of christians all to depend upon one company having
in their hands the said authority and from thence to fetch all their
constitutions and determinations of causes, they are to be accounted not many
but one only particular Church: which notwithstanding if they did no way
depend upon any other, were to be accounted so many distinct Churches. So the
Church of Israel although it did consist of many distinct towns and cities,
the which had their proper levites and governors, yet because for government
they did all depend upon the high priest, and the other priests which did
offer sacrifice in the temple at Jerusalem, The whole nation of the Jews made
but one particular Church.
they all made but one Church. So that those christians are to be accounted a
particular Church, which are joined together, not only in the same faith as
the whole catholic Church is, or in the same divine government as the whole
visible Church is, but also in the same humane government, to wit, in the same
humane ecclesiastical laws, and the same governors.

Sect. 3. Of how many a particular Church may consist.
AS touching the number whereof a particular Church does consist, the least may
be given but not the greatest: the least is the least number of one private
family within the compass whereof a particular Church has often been
contained. A particular Church often contained in one family.
So in the beginning there was a particular Church in the family of Adam, for
they did jointly together and in common offer sacrifice and serve God. This
Church consisted of four persons at what time there was a public service of
God, namely, Adam, Eua, Cain, and Abel. Likewise in the time of the general
deluge the Church consisted of those few persons only which were within the
Arc. If it be objected that in so small a number as are three or four persons,
there cannot be all the officers, much less the body of a Church, we confess
that they cannot make a perfect Church, yet a true Church. But more hereof
when we come to show what an imperfect state of a Church is. The greatest
number cannot be defined, for a whole nation, whereof there is no certain
number, may be one particular Church as was the nation of the Jews, as has
been showed in the former section. Yet the greatest number of a Church rightly
established, may thus generally be determined, to wit, that the Church consist
of no more then can without confusion or any manifest inconvenience meet
together at one time, and in one place to serve God, so that none be, by reason
of the multitude excluded, hindered or troubled in the service of God: for God
is not the author neither any approuer of any kind of confusion: which as in
all other actions, so especially in these holy assemblies ought carefully to be
avoided. If it be here answered that this confusion which does arise of too
great a number, may be avoided by dividing one and the same particular Church
into diverse assemblies, and by appointing to each part of the Church several
and distinct places of meeting, we confess that this may be done upon
necessity and for the avoiding of a greater inconueniencie, but otherwise it
ought not, neither can conveniently be done, for besides that it is indecent to
see one body of a Church so distracted and pulled asunder into many parts, it
is also in many respects inconvenient. For first so great a multitude as must
of necessity be divided into diverse assemblies, can hardly be so well
ordered, and so diligently looked unto, as the Church ought to be. Secondly by
this means both the labor of the teachers will be increased, and also the
profit of the people much diminished, who neither can go on in knowledge
altogether, nor yet be always made partakers of the best and most excellent
ministry as they ought to be. As for the Church of the Jews which did consist
of a far greater number then could conveniently serve God together; we
answer first that it was necessary that this nation should be made one Church,
because it was needful in diverse respects, that there should be but one
place of the presence of God, one high priest, one temple and place of offering
sacrifice. Secondly that the whole nation of the Jews might more conveniently
meet together in the public service of God, Why it was needful that the
whole nation of the Jews should be one particular church
then the hundred part of them could do in the time of the gospel: for then
the public service wherein all were bound to meet, was but seldom to be
performed, to wit, thrice in the year, at the three solemn feasts. And then
they did not give themselves so much to the hearing of the word, and to
public prayer, as to the offering of the sacrifices commanded in the law.
So that, that service did require only presence at Jerusalem or about the
temple, but our service requires particular and diligent attention. On the
other side in the gathering of a particular Church this is carefully to be
avoided, that it do not consist of too few. For we are not to think that any
small number of believers do make a competent congregation, but rather to desire
that it may consist, even of so many as may conveniently come together into one
place, and there without confusion be made partakers of all those means
whereby they are to be edified in the obedience of faith. For the more there be
in the congregation, there will be a greater abundance of spiritual graces,
whereby the public functions of the Church, yea all other wants whatsoever,
Better for a Church to consist of many christians then of a few.
may be more easily and abundantly supplied: there will also be found more
pregnant examples of special virtues and graces in the lives of men, and the
ministry of the word will have many diverse, strange, and singular effects
in men which cannot be had in a Church consisting of a small number.

CHAP. IIII. Of the planting of a particular church.
Sect. 1. Of what people the Church may be planted.
THE planting of a Church consists in two things, first and principally in
bringing a competent number of men to believe and embrace the gospel: even as
in the building of an house the first part of the work is to dig stones out
of the ground for that purpose: secondly in giving unto them being thus called,
the sacrament of baptism as the badge of their profession: this is to hew and
make them fit for our purpose. In the first part we have these points to
consider first what kind of men are fit to be the matter whereof the Church
should consist. Secondly by whom they ought to be converted from infidelity to
christianity, and lastly after what manner. Of the first point, the word of
God does plainly teach us, that there is no people or nation in the world, no
state or condition of men whatsoever excluded, but that the Church may consist
of them. Math. 28.19. Go ye and preach the gospel to al nations, No kind of
men excluded from being the Church of God.
baptizing them in the name of the father and the son and of the holy ghost.
So that there is no people in the world either so dull and blockish but that
they may be taught, or so savage, fierce and barbarous, but that they may be
subdued to the obedience of the gospel. As the prophet Esaias foretold. Esaias.
11. that the power of the kingdom of Christ should be so great that men who
of themselves were even as Tigers, Lions, Leopardes, and as most savage beasts
should be made tame and gentle. Yea this prophecy is ratified by the event of
things, The most barbarous may become Christians.
whereby we see that even the most barbarous nations, and generally all kinds
of people have submitted themselves to the gospel of Christ. And yet some
kind of people are more fit for this purpose then others, and do more
easelie, yea more usually submit themselves to the gospel. Even as we see
that there is difference in stones, whereof some are hard and dry that they can
hardly be hewn, squared or made fit for building as flint, adamant and many
other kinds, which as it were, repel the tool of the mason not suffering it
to enter or take any hold of them, but other kinds do more easily take any
fashion whatsoever it pleases the worke-man to give unto them, so it is in
this case. Some men are much more unfit and untoward for the making of a Church
then others; as namely those who live in extreme barbarism, without that
natural knowledge of God, civil honesty and good literature, the which it
pleases God to use as means in the conversion of men from infidelity to
faith. As for that natural knowledge, we know that the Apostles and others who
have labored in converting infidels which had no written word, did always
go about to convince them of their erroneous worship of God and to establish
the true worship by arguments taken from the grounds of reason, which the
infidels themselves did confess to be true. Likewise, 1. Pet. 3.1. the Apostle
exhorts that the Christian women should be in subjection to their husbands,
that the infidels seeing their chaste, honest and orderly life, might be
converted by this means. Not that this is an ordinary means of converting
men, but only as it were a preparatiue, whereby men may be made more tractable
and affected with a general love of the gospel, although they do not as yet
know it. Likewise the Apostle notes, 1. Cor. 1. that the contrary to this
extreme barbarism, to wit, abundance of knowledge, wisdom, yea nobility,
riches and al other such outward prerogatives were hindrances in the first
time of the gospel. And therefore he says, brethren you see your calling,
that not many wise, many mighty or noble do become christians. And since that
time we read that in the conversion of diverse countries to the gospel, after
that the common people were won, the nobility did generally for the space of
many years remain obstinate in idolatry, the which also may be observed at
this day in diverse places. The reason whereof is plain, to wit, for that
outward excellency in any kind ^oth puff up the heart of man with pride,
whereby he is hindered from submitting himself to the service of Christ.

Sect. 2. To whom it belongs to plant Churches.
IN the second place we are to enquire to whom it belongs to plant Churches.
The agentes in this work are of two sorts, the one is of the beginner or
first moouer in it, the other is of those who are properly called the workmen,
and are as it were the instruments in this action. For as in the building of a
material house there is one who is the chief cause of the work and others who
are by him set a work and employed in this buisines, even so it is in the
building of the Church: one begins, an other does perform and accomplish
it. The first kind is diverse according as the Church which is to be planted,
is either public or private, and therefore we are not to entreat of them till
we come to the diverse kinds of a Church. But the workmen are the same in
both kinds, and therefore here to be considered. These are the ministers of
the word of God, unto whom God has committed the dispensation of his word, by
the which as by a most sharp and fit instrumen^ they convert men from
infidelity to believe the gospel. Romans 10.14. How shall they believe of whom
they have not heard? how shall they hear without a preacher? But yet not
every true minister of the word can perform or ought to take in hand the
first part of this work, for so much as it is of greater difficulty, then the
rest. For even as in the building of a house every one of the builders cannot
lay the foundation, but only he who does far excel the common workmen in
skill, so it is in the planting of a church as the Apostle does plainly
testify. 1. Cor. 3.10. where he says that he himself as a most wise and
cunning master builder, had laid the foundation of the Church of Corinth, and
left the rest of the work for others to do. This is agreeable to reason and
common experience which teaches us that it is much easier to continue any
work then to begi^ it. Yea even in natural bodies it is an easy matter to
preserve and maintain life where it is present, but to begin life, or to put
life into a body destitute of it, is a thing to man's strength altogether
impossible: so it is in the life of our souls. For to continue and increase
faith where it is already begun, is not so hard a matter, but that by the
blessing of God it may be done by ordinary gifts and means: but to begin it
in an infidel there is required an extraordinary work of God, and most rare
and singular gifts in the minister by whom God works. And therefore it
pleased God for the planting of the first Churches, to institute an
extraordinary ministry of apostles, Prophets and Evangelists, who^ he endued
with gifts correspo^dent to their extraordinary callings, that they might be as
his most strong champions armed to stand in the fore front of the great
battle, for the overthrowing of infidelity, idolatry, ignorance, sin,
atheism, and whatsoever power did resist the kingdom of Christ. Thus did God
plant his Church in the first age of the gospel: but these extraordinary
callings and gifts did cease in the time following. The planting of Churches
belongs to the^ who have either extraordinary callings, or the most
excellent gifes
To whom then does it belong, now to plant churches? We answer that God does
never leave his Church destitute in this behalf: but does continually endue
some with a rare and special measure of gifts, whereby they may be able in
some measure to perform this great work. Yea since the time of the Apostles
God has called and may when it pleases him to call and also furnish men
extraordinarely to this work. But when this is wanting (as we are not now to
look for immediate callings) the pla^ting of churches is to be committed to
those, who among the ordinary ministers of the church are endued with best
gifts and do excel the rest in godliness, zeal, wisdom, knowledge and all other
spiritual graces needful for this purpose.

Sect. 3. How the word is to be preached to infidels.
Now that we have the workmen to whom it belongs to lay the foundation of
the Church, we are in the next place to consider how they ought to b^ginne this
weighty work, and also after what manner they are to proceed in the same. In
both which there is great care and circumspection to be used, both because the
first planting of a Church is a matter of great difficulty, Great care to be
had in planting a Church.
as also for that the whole state of it will be according to the beginning, in so
much as if this place be by negligence or any other means out of order, there
is no hope that the rest of the building should go on right. As we see, that
whenas there is a fault committed in the laying of the foundation of a house,
the whole building will for ever be the worse for it. The first thing therefore
to be done in planting a Church, is to convert infidels to the faith: which is
done ordinarily by the ministry of the word of God delivered plainly,
sincerely, and effectually as God has appointed. Notwithstanding which
powerful means, the subduing of men to the Gospel is a hard matter, yea it is
much harder in these times then it was in the days of the Apostles, wherein
the gospel was first preached. For then the ministry of the Apostles,
Evangelists and other preachers of the gospel was much more powerful and
effectual then any ministry of the word is in these days. For they had not
only extraordinary measure of those gifts which do yet remain in the Church
for the building thereof, as are the gifts of prophecy, knowledge, wisdom,
zeal and all other of that kind, but they had also other most wonderful gifts
bestowed upon them as the gifts of speaking in strange languages, the gifts of
discerning spirits, healing the sick, working of miracles, and such other
which served only for this end, to bring infidels to the profession of the
faith. 1. Cor. 14.22. not that true faith was (ordinarely) wrought by these
means in men but only a general, historical and temporary faith whereby
they did believe the doctrine of the gospel to be the word of God: which
belief being professed was then and is at all times suffici^nt to make one a
member of the visible Church here upon earth. The which the Apostles did
labor by their ministry to bring to pass, and did rejoice in it being
effected, although there did appear in those believers few or no signs of
saving faith, which is a firm confidence in the ^ercy and love of God in
Christ, effect^ally wrought in the hear^ by the spirit of God, arising of a
certain persuasion of the truth of Gods word, whereof this general faith is
only a resemblance, shadow and appearance. And further for this purpose the
gifts of miracles, and such other did greatly avail: for they did so astonish
and amaze men that they did even wring out of them an approbation of the
doctrine preached, that it came from God, and therefore was to be received.
John. 1.15. Act. 13.11. Thus did the Apostles plant Churches: but they who
since that time labor in this work, are destitute of this help, yea also of
another far more effectual, to wit, of the wonderful and extraordinary
blessing of God upon his Church, who did then pour forth his spirit so
straungely, and so plentifully upon men in converting their hearts to the
obedience of the gospel as the like was not before, has not been since,
neither shall be at any time in the Church. So that these helps being wanting
in these days, we cannot look for the like success in this work, to wit,
that the Church should have such a sudden and strange increase as it had in
the beginning whenas many thousands were at once added unto it. The ministry
of the word was more effectual in the primitive Church then it has been at
any time since.
Act. 2.41. yet we are not to despair of good success, for so much as the Lord
has not left his ministry destitute of sufficient power to convert many men
to the faith, even those who never heard of Christ before. For although the
extraordinary callinges and gifts of the Apostles and Evangelists be not now
in the Church neither to be looked for, yet the force of them does remain
still, in that the very declaration of those wonderful miracles whereby the
truth of the gospel was confirmed at the first, will to the end of the
world add authority and give success to the preaching of the Gospel,
although they were much more effectual in those who did behold them with
their eyes. Yea we have some helps which were not in the primitive Church and
for the supply whereof those other were given, to wit, the consent of all ages
since the first publishing of the Gospel, wherein many have not only professed
the faith, but also sealed that their profession with their blood: and that not
any small number but even whole nations have professed and do confess the
gospel. The which no doubt is a forcible argument and even as a cloud of
witnesses, whereby he who is obstinate in infidelity may be either converted or
confounded and put to silence. Yea this general embracing of the gospel by so
many countries and nations is that fullness of the Gentiles, the which the Lord
has appointed as a means, whereby that obstinate and hardehearted nation of
the Jews shall at the appointed time be converted. And therefore it cannot but
be effectual with the rest of the Gentiles who are not so obstinate in
infidelity as the Jews are. The Jews are to be converted by the general
consent of the Gentiles in receiving the gospel.
But we are especially to rely upon that force which the word of God being
plainly and sincerely delivered has in turning men's hearts unto God: which
will never return empty, but in some measure perform the thing for which it
was sent.

Thus much in general of the means of converting infidels, now of the same in
particular. The ministry of the word which is here to be used has two
parts, the first is a preparatiue whereby infidels being of themselves
altogether unfit to hear, and unlike to believe the word, are in some measure
prepared for this purpose, the second is to teach them the doctrine of the
gospel: The preparing ministry consists in two things; The first is to
purge their minds from that false worship whereunto they are given. How
infidels ought to be prepared for the doctrine of the gospel.
The second is to convince their consciences of sin. For the first: we cannot
hope that men being fully persuaded of the truth of their own religion and of
the deity, power and goodness of those false Gods which they worship, will
embrace any new and strange religion. Thus did Elias, 1. King. 18.24. bring the
people from idolatry to the true worship of God. And likewise Paul deals
with the idolatrous men of Athens, Act. 17.29. and with them of Lystra, Act.
14.13. and yet there is great moderation and wisdom to be used in this
point, so that we do not at the first speak so vilely and baselie of their
religion as it does deserve, but rather tolerate them in their corruptions and
withal instruct them in the truth that ^o the other false worship may slip
out of their minds as it were without violence, they leaving it of their own
accord. For otherwise if they see their Gods and religion wherein they have
been brought up, and which they have received from their ancestors, to be
blasphemed, and evil spoken off, there is great danger least at the first we
so alienate their minds, that they will not hear the word preached, but
become utter enemies unto it. So the town clarke in the Apology for Paul,
Acts. 19.37. witnesses that he in preaching the gospel, had not blasphemed
their goddess Diana. Secondly they must be prepared by the ministry of the
law, of sin, and of the judgments of God, that by this means they may be
driven to Christ, and even compelled to embrace the doctrine of the gospel.
For as the iron must first be made hot in the fire, before it will receive any
new fo^me, so must the hard heart be mollified in the furnace of the wrath of
God before it will receive the doctrine of faith, and therefore it is needful
that there should by this means a way be made for the doctrine of the gospel:
for men must first be made to see their sins and the punishment of eternal
death due unto them, before they can learn the use and necessity of Christ
and of his righteousness. For the physician comes not to whole men, neither
does the surgeon lay his plasters but upon wounded and bruised members. Thus
did John go before Christ in the spirit of Elias to prepare the people for the
Lord, Luke 1.17. and thus Christ prepared the young man, Math. 19.21. and Peter
the Jews. Acts. 2.37. who when they were pricked in their hearts by hearing
their sins, they came to the Apostles saying, men and brethren what shall we
do? And Paul the men of Athens Act. 17.31. and lastly thus did God himself by
a fearful earthquake prepare the iaylor, Acts. 16.30. and according to these
exmples all other unbelievers are to be converted, by bringing them to a sight
of their sins and a sense of the anger of GOD: and that especially by
mentioning and urging those sins which are most heinous in their own eyes,
and by the confession of all men, which they can least excuse and whereof they
are most ashamed. Yea the doctrine of the law ought to go before, because it
will more easelie be received and believed, for so much as it is natural to men,
being ingrafted in every man's mind since the first creation of man. For
although it were by the fall of Adam greatly diminished, obscured and
perverted, yet there remains a confused and dark knowledge of good and
evil, of right and wrong: and also of the reward belonging to obedience, and
the punishment of death due to sin, Romans 1.32. the Gentiles know the law of
God that they who commit sin are worthy of death. Yea of this knowledge
comes a conscience in infidels, sometimes excusing them altho^gh falsely, but
for the most part accusing them for their sin before God. So that this their
knowledge of the law and conscience of sin may easily be enlightened and
stirred up by the preaching of the law, whereas the doctrine of faith is
contrary to natural reason, and therefore hard to be persuaded. Thus we see
the first part of the ministry of the word, to wit, that whereby infidels
are to be prepared for the gospel. This being done, then the doctrine of
christian religion is briefly and summarelie to be propunded, even as the
Apostles did use to preach Christ. How the doctrine of the gospel is to be
propounded to infidels.
The sum of whose sermons was this, that salvation is to be had by faith in
Jesus Christ the son of God, and the redeemer of the world. The truth of
this doctrine is to be proved by such testimonies as are of most force: as the
law and prophets are with the Jews: out of the which we see that Christ and
his Apostles do continually prove that which they speak. Likewise as touching
the gentiles although the maine points of the gospel be contrary to humane
reason, and therefore not to be grounded thereon, yet we are not destitute of
many helps and evident arguments drawn out of their own poets,
philosophers, prophetisses and oracles, whereby the probability, truth and
necessity of the gospel, may be declared even to the heathen. The which who
so desires to know, may see them in those books which are written for the
demonstration of the truth of christian religion, both in the first ages of
the Church as also in these latter times. Especially the vanity of that false
and idolatrous worship is to be laid open unto them, that so they being as it
were driven from that, may be constrained to seek the true religion as has
been declared.

Sect. 4. How men converted to the faith ought to be ordered.
SO many of them as can be won by this means to believe the truth of the
doctrine delivered, are upon confession of their faith to have baptism
administered unto them to be a seal of their faith to themselves and a badge of
their profession to others, and so to be separated from the rest as those of
whom the Church is to consist. Yea although they do not at the first express
the power of religion in true repentance and a christian life, yet if they do
believe that to be the true religion of GOD and be content to profess the
same, then are they to be accounted members of the Church. So we read, Acts,
8.16. that many of the Samaritanes were baptized and so received into the
Church whenas none of them had received the holy ghost, but only believed in
the name of Jesus as they were taught. So the Eunuch was baptized, Acts. 8.
upon this confession, I believe that Jesus Christ is the son of God. For even
as they who labor in digging metals out of the earth do at the first ^ake
for gold whatsoever does glister and afterward purge the pure gold from the
corrupt dross and from all base metal: and as fishers take for fish
whatsoever comes to the net, but afterward separate the good from the bad.
Math. 13.47.48. so at the first, the ministry receaueth all that seem to
believe, but in process of time, it separateth the hypocrite from the believer
and the wicked from the godly although not perfitly. But before the
administration of baptism the summarie doctrine of it must be taught, that so
it may be received with greater fruit, to wit, that this sacrament was
appointed by God himself as John the first minister of it does testify. John.
2.33. to be in his church a badge and common liueray of all his servants,
whereby they are to profess his name, Baptism is the badge or liueray of
christians.
and to be known from unbelievers, and also for their own edification that by
baptism they may be confirmed in believing the doctrine both of the law and of
the gospel: and further that it belongs chiefly to the doctrine of the law
in that by drowning us in water it puts us in remembrance of that eternal
death whereunto we were subject before, as the Apostle teaches Romans 6.4. and
that it is of the same nature and use with circumcision, the which did under
the law both distinguishe the Jews as gods people from all other nations as
profane, Baptism and circumcision sacraments of the law and of death,
and also set before the eyes of the receauers eternal death as the other
ordinary sacrament of the passover did eternal life: for the one sacrament
was of a bloody signification wounding the body and so threatening death, but
the other grave the comfortable nourishment of life, and so do baptism and
the Lords supper differ. Lastly that both baptism and circumcision although
they do chiefly teach the doctrine of the law, yet that they do also
represent to our eyes and seal up to our consciences forgiveness of sins
in that both of them do take from us the filthiness of the flesh. Thus much
of the doctrine of Baptism: the which is to be given so as that the body being
dipped into the water the signification of it may be more evident and the force
the greater in the eyes of those who see or receive it. Thus did John baptist,
and therefore he chose our such places where there was much water. John. 3.23.
and this use did remain in some places in the ages following. Those who are
after this manner converted and baptized, are with all diligence to be
strengthened in the profession of the faith and to be edified therein as being
most forcible witnesses of the truth, by whom they who remain incredulous may
be convinced. They are also in most earnest manner to be exhorted to constancy
in their profession: because their falling away would greatly hinder the
building of the Church, yea as soon as they have attained unto any measure of
knowledge, they are in like manner to be exhorted to lead a life which may be
without scandal unto those who do not as yet believe, and so without reproach
unto the gospel which they profess. For the procuring whereof there is in the
first planting of the Church great severity used, both by God himself and
also by his ministers against all such offenses where by this work may be
hindered. For whilst the Church is as it were in motion, because at the first
the truth of that profession is called into question, the falling back of one
or any notorious offense does wonderfully hinder the whole work. Therefore
although many infirmities in knowledge and also in private conversation were
yea and ought to be gently delte withal till riper years, Great severity in
punishing open offenses to be used in the planting of Churches.
yet those open offenses whereby the building of the Church is hindered in
respect either of those who are without, or of those who are in the Church, are
severely to be punished. Hither we are to refer those strange judgments
which the Lord executed upon the wicked in establishing the l^gall government
by Moses, as upon Corath, Dathan, and Abiram, Numbers. 16.32. yea that
severity in putting to death him that gathered sticks on the Saboath: Numbers.
15.36. yea also those fatherly corrections which the Lord most severely laid
upon his own servants, even on Moses himself for doubting of his word, yea
upon the whole Church for murmuring and even for the least offense. So was
Vzzath smitten. 2. Sam. 6.7. that David and the whole Church who then went
about the repairing, the enlarging and adorning of the worship of GOD, might
fear the Lord. So in building the temple at Jerusalem the least negligence of
any of the people in furthering this work had a fearful curse annexed unto
it. Nehem. 10.29. So were Ananias and Sapphira smitten with sudden death.
Acts. 5. in so much that all both within and without the Church did fear the
Lord. So Paul rejected Mark, Acts. 15 38. for leaving them in that long
^ourney which they made for the spreading of the gospel.

In this beginning it pleases GOD to give great increase unto his Church, so
that the preaching of the gospel is more effectual in this infancy of the
Church in converting many to the obedience of the faith then it is afterward.
Yea it is a great sign, that they who do not yield obedience at the first,
will be afterward more and more hardened as the Apostle writes, 2. Cor. 4.3. If
our gospel be yet hid, it is hid to them that perish. Yet the calling of the
Lord is not tied to any time, and therefore we are still to use all good
means, that those who do not at the first believe, may be won at some other
time. 2. Timothy. 2.25. for the eff^cting whereof, there may more forcible
means be used now when as ^he truth has gotten some footing among them and
is received of many: the vanity of their corrupt worship, whatsoever it be,
is plainly to be declared and also their miserable and fearful condition
living in the same, which at the first could not conveniently have been done.
Yea further they are carefully by all means possible to be allured to love the
truth by the good behavior and honest conversation of those who are called,
seeing them to be so woonderfully changed from ignorance to wisdom and
understanding: from a corrupt and vicious course to a virtuous and godly life:
by their courteous and loving behavior toward them: and generally by
avoiding the offending them in all things as far as may be. The which means
being diligently used we are not to doubt but that God will give some good
success and blessing in the conversion of many.

CHAP. V. Of ecclesiastical government so far forth as it is determined in the
word of God.
Sect. 1. Of the laws appointed by God for the governing of the church in
general.
Seeing that we have declared in some sort what it is to prepare the matter for
the building of a particular church, we are now to go on with the building of
it, and by joining these stones together in the foundation, walls and other
principal parts, to give unto it the denomination and form of a house: for
whenas a company of men are converted to the faith, and baptized, there is the
beginning or first foundation of a church, but not a church, until they join
together in some public profession of the faith and the service of God. For
even as when a great multitude of men are together in any place, if they live
privately every one in his own house not having any thing common, or to do
one with another, there is no common wealth: because there want magistrates,
laws, and orders to join them together: Again as where there are many stones
dug out of the ground (whereunto we resemble the conversion of men to the
faith) and also hewed and wrought, so that they have lost their natural
rudeness, and now have the form of stones fit to be laid in a building,
(which we may not unfitly call the baptizing of those which do believe) if
they lie asunder here and there, there is no house till such time, as they be
laid, and fastened together ^n the just compass and form of a house; so it is
in this case. Men converted and baptized are indeed christians, and members of
the catholic Church, The establishing of ecclesiastical laws among
believers makes a Church.
yet not of the visible Church, neither do they make a particular Church,
until they join together in some public service of God according to those
laws and orders which he has appointed, the which make these stones cleave
together. Ephesians. 2.11. in Christ all the building being coupled together,
grows to be a holy temple in the Lord. Yea for the most part there was some
space of time given to those who were converted, to learn the orders and
condition of a Church before they were brought into the form of it: so we
read, Act. 14.23. after that they had believed now a good space of time, they
had elders appointed, and so became a Church: for most commonly men converted
are a few at the first, and therefore must stay till they be a competent
number, yea when a sufficient number does believe, there must be a time to
consider the state of the people, to provide fit teachers and rulers, and to
make humane constitutions for the ordering of them, and for the practizing of
the laws of God. The laws and orders, the establishing and practizing whereof
makes a company of Christians to become a Church, are of two sorts.
Ecclesiastical laws, or ecclesiastical government is partly divine and
partly huma^^.
The first are the laws of God appointed for the governing of the Church:
these do contain the substance of the government of the Church and are the
same at that same time to all the Churches in the world: the other sort is of
humane constitutions made for the establishing of the former in some particular
place, and do define the circumstances of the former laws, and therefore are
diverse in every Church, and to be changed as the circumstance of place, time,
persons, and the condition of the Church, does require. First of the laws of
God, then of the laws of men. The laws commonly called Church-gouernment, or
from the latter part Church Discipline are that part of the word of God,
which prescribes how particular Churches severally and jointly ought to be
ordered in using the public means of the service of God. The first word of
this definition gives us this to understand that God himself is the only
lawgiver in his Church as touching the substance of the government, which is
not any devise of man but a holy institution of God. Yea we must of necessity
grant this royal prerogative to God, None but God can appoint the substance of
Church-gouernment.
that he be the author of the laws by the which his Church is ordered: and
that because he only, and no creature can show after what manner he will be
worshipped. So that if there be any other form of government devised by man,
it is wil-worshippe, and not only not acceptable, but even abominable in his
sight. Yea the Church is the house of God wherein he dwells and whereof he is
the author and owner. And therefore it is good reason that he only should
bear rule in it: he rules civil societies by the laws of Kings and
Princes, but his Church by the laws of Christ his son, whom he has
anointed the only king of his Church. Hence it follows that these laws
are not chaungeable but perpetual and made to continue as long as the Church
remains in this world. So. 1. Tim. 6.14. after that the Apostle had set down
the sum of this doctrine, he charge Timothy to keep those things which
he had enjoined until the coming of Christ, that is, that he endeavor by
teaching them to others that they might continue for ever. For that these words
are to be understood of these laws, it appears. Verse. 21. o^ the 5. chapter
where the same obtestation is used in the same matter. The doctrine of this
government is fully, plainly, and perfectly set set down in the word of God,
yea every part of it: and therefore whatsoever part of the substance of the
go^^rnment of the Church, cannot be authorized by the word, it is to be
rejected: for all the offices, gifts, functions, parts and manner of the
service of God, are taught us both by precept and by example. But it is
otherwise with the circumstances of this government: for they are not, neither
could possibly be defined in the word, and therefore are to be changed as the
Church shall think good. But the substance of this government is perpetual,
even as is the word of God, which shall never be augmented, and as is the
worship of God, which shall not be altered, yea as permanent as is the
doctrine of faith, and as general. For as there is but one faith and one GOD,
so there is but one means of faith and of serving God: not many as if there
were ten thousand Gods to be worshipped: and as if the Church of GOD were a
bird of diverse colors, one being not like or conformable to another. And
therefore as princes which bear rule over many cities, do make them all live
under the same form of laws, and as children of the same parents, are like
in countenance and suitable in their apparel, so all the particular Churches
in the world have one and the same government appointed for them. The chief
cause whereby many are induced to think that no certain form of government
of the Church is commanded by God, is, for that it is not handled at large and
of set purpose in the scripture, but only briefly touched and mentioned by
occasion. Whereunto we answer that so are many weighty points of religion not
once in plain terms to be found in any part of scripture, and many brought
in only upon some occasion the which to call in question, were great impiety:
but there is no part of the substance of this government which is not plainly
set down in the word. Yea in these laws the wisdom of God does so clearly
shine, that the Angel^ do rejoice in beholding that heavenly order by the
which the Church is governed. So did the Apostle, Collossians. 2.5. with joy
think^ upon the orders of that Church. Although the government of the Church
be one and the same at the same time, and even as the word of God belongs a
like to all, there being one uniform order appointed for all, yet the same is
changed by God himself as it does most fitly agree to the present state of
the Church: wherein does appear that manifold wisdom of God, Ephesians. 3.10.
But the foundation and groundworke of this government does always remain the
same, as we see the laws of kingdoms and commonwealths to be often changed,
but yet the fundamental laws whereon the state stands, do always remain
firm and unchanged. This government is always changed unto a better, and
more perfect state, even as the Church does continually grow to perfection.
The government of the Church always changed to a better estate.
For if we compare the latter ages of the Church generally with the former, we
shall find that as there is in particular men a growth in their bodies and
souls, so also in the Church. For the latter times do excel the former, not
only in number of professors but also in knowledge, and in abundance of all
spiritual graces. The cause whereof is, for that it pleases God to reveal
himself to the world not all at once, but by little and little; Heb. 1.1. even
as his word has been in these last ages more fully declared to the Church
then before. Thus shall the Church grow till we all meet in the measure of
the stature of the fullness of Christ. And herein we cannot resemble the
dealing of God more fitly then to that usual manner which parents use in
bringing up their children: who do not at the first lay upon them that
straight and perfect kind of discipline which afterward they use, whenas by
reason of their riperyares, they are more capable of it. Yea this continual
growth of the Church was showed by Ezech. 4.1. verse. 3.4.5. by the rising of
the waters to his anckles, knees, loins and head.

Sect. 2. Of the diverse state^ of ecclesiastical government.
WE find in the word of God three kinds of Church-gouernment, the first of
these was in force before the giving of the law, the second in the time of the
law, the third in the time of the gospel. The first we may fitly resemble unto
the first infancy of a child being newly borne: in the which although there be
all the faculties of the soul, and body, yet they cannot as yet do their
functions, and therefore can hardly be discerned, or distinguished. So in this
first state there are all the parts of Chuch-gouernment, although they do not
so plainly appear as in the other following; What was the state of the Church
before the law.
there was a ministry of the word although joined or rather confounded with
the civil government, for both the offices lay upon the first borne in the
family. The word of God was in small measure and seldom revealed, the same
was confirmed by diverse sacraments and also strengthened by censures against
the disobedient. But all these things were little practiced, as also the number
of professors was very small. For this time was the first infancy of the
Church, from which it was continually to grow on to perfection. Next unto
this, succeeds the manner of government under the law instituted by God by
the ministry of Moses, What was the state of the Church under the law.
being much more perfect then the former, even as is the childhoode to the
infancy: so that now all the faculties do their several functions, and may
easily be perceived in themselves, and distinguished from the other. The
worship of God greatly enlarged, and the number of those that serve God,
increased to many millions: the will of God so plentifully and largely revealed
that it was of necessity committed to writing, least that it should be
forgotten, many sacraments to confirm the truth of it against unbelief:
sharp and severe censures appointed for offenders: and yet this is but the
childhoode of the Church. ^al. 4.1. and is so far yea much more exceeded in
perfection of the third, as it does exceed the former. The third is in the
time of the gospel, wherein the Lord does as it were put the last hand to the
government of his Church: bringing it to that perfecton which should continue
to the end of the world. Now is the number of those who serve God increased
above measure, in so much that the Church must enlarge her tents and receive
all the nations of the earth coming to dwell with her, Esa. 54.1.2.3. and
accordingly there is ^ most perfect government appointed by Christ, the true
nature whereof will the more easily appear if we compare it with the former
from the which it does differ as does the ripe age of a man from his
childhoode, so that now the church may truly say; When I was a child, I
understood, spoke and did as a child but now I have put away childish things.

The ground of this difference is the coming of Christ, in whom all the
treasures of the will and wisdom of God were both hid and revealed to the
Church. The shadows and ceremonies used before, were made of no use and
insteede of them the truth it self came in place. Now are all the mysteries
of our salvation uncovered, the shadows being driven away by the appearing of
the son of righteousness. The graces of the spirit are now as it were with
a full hand poured on those which believe, which God kept in store till this
time, that by the plentiful pouring of them out, he might celebrate the
glorious marriage of Christ with his Church. The state of the Church in the time
of the gospel.
Hereof does the whole difference arise: we know that the worship of God is
either outward consisting in bodily actions, or inward in the obedience of the
heart: this does the Lord require, the other is not acceptable unto him, but as
it proceeds from this fountain. The outward worship will easily be
performed, although it have most straight conditions annexed unto it, as we
read Mica. 6.6. where withal shall I come before the Lord? will he acc^pt
th^usands of rams. etc. but inward and spiritual worship is not only hard,
but also impossible to be performed without the grace of God, as being clean
contrary to our nature. And therefore it pleased God in a tender regard which
he had to his Church under the law in respect of the weakness of it, to appoint
unto them more of that outward worship, and to accept their spiritual
service although it were in small measure: but contrarily now under the
gospel he re^uireth a great measure of spiritual worship and enioyneth
little of the other. This distinction is made by Christ, John. 4.21.23. the
time comes when neither at Jerusalem nor on this mount you shall worship my
father, but in spirit and truth. This is also that new covenant whereof Joel
speaks, whenas God shall pour his spirit upon all flesh, not but that the
faithful under the law, both had the spirit of God and also performed unto
him spiritual worship, without the which the other is but abominable unto
him, but yet not in so great measure as now in the time of the gospel. Hence
it is that the whole worship of God under the law was very glorious in
outward appearance for this end, to purchase obedience and reverence at the
hands of the people. Which is contrary to the simplicity of the gospel: for
now the whole worship of God is base and contemptible in outward appearance
but mighty in the power of the spirit as we read. 1. Cor. 14. if all
prophecy, and there come in one that believes not, or one unlearned, he is
rebuked of all men, and is judged of all, and so are the secrets of his heart
made manifest, and so he will fall down on his face and worship God, The
Church in the time of the Gospel has more of inward grace and less in outward
shows and ceremonies.
and say plainly that God is in you indeed: the which appears by the great
abundance of spiritual grace in the time of the gospel: but under the law
the priests were not so endued which that measure of spiritual graces, but in
steed of them they had outward helps to purchase reverence to the word of
GOD and to themselves amongst the people: the temple for outward magnificence
most glorious, the holy places had in high accounte of all men, the priests
separated from the rest of the people in many respects: and for the same end
the high priest was adorned with glorious robes, that so he might the more
excel. But now none of these means are in use: only the powerful
simplicity of the gospel is instead far above all. The Church then had but
a small measure of knowledge in comparison of these times and accordingly were
they taught: but now the Lord looks for another measure of knowledge and
therefore other means of attaining it are necessarily to be used. Lastly this
is to be noted that this Church-gouernment was never altered, but by the
express commaundemen^ of God, as it was ordained by him only: The government
of the Church never altered but by men sent immediately from God.
the changing of it being confirmed by miracles to be from God, as we may see
in the instituting of the legal government by Moses, and this under the
gospel by the Apostles, and that change. 2. Chron. 8.26. and 35.15. was by
special direction from God. Yea the government of the Church both typical
before the gospel, and real in the time of it, was instituted by extraordinary
prophets, to wit, Adam, Moses, and Christ's apostles, and so left to ordinary
ministers, name, ly to the first borne, then to the Leuits, and lastly to the
ministers of the word in the time of the gospel. Thus much in general of
Church-gouernment and of the three diverse states of it, whereof order requires
that we should here entreat in particular. But we cannot in this short
treatise enter into this wide and large field: and therefore supposing for
orders sake this argument to be here handled, we go on to that which follows.

CHAP. VI. Of ecclesiastical humane laws.
Sect. 1. How they differ from the laws of God.
THus much of the laws which God has appointed for the ordering of his
church. Now we are to come to the humane laws of the Church, the which we will
consider, first by comparing them with the aforesaid laws of God, and secondly
as they are in themselves. For the first, both kinds agree in name being both
called ecclesiastical and in the end which is the good order of the Church,
and also in the general subject, which is the public service of God,
together with those actions which belong unto it. Yet they differ in many
respects; First and especially in the author or efficient, the former kind
being made by God himself, the other by men: whereof it comes that the first
kind is far more excellent then the other, the one consisting wholly, and
merely of the wisdom of God, the other having in them much weakness and
ignorance: the one absolute and perfect, the other continually having wantes
and imperfections. And therefore the one kind is temporary and mutable, The
difference betwixt divine and humane ecclesiastical laws.
the other perpetual and constant, although when the appointed time of them is
expired they are changed by God, but they admit no alteration from man.
Further, the laws of God belong to the whole visible Church and to every
particular Church, but the other only to some one or a few of them. For as a
king who has dominion over many cities does use himself to make the chief
laws by ^he which al and each one of those cities are to be governed, yet he
leaves to them this power to take up and retain customs, fashions, and
orders proper to themselves, yea to make particular laws of matters of less
moment as may best agree to their several states and conditions: so has
Christ the king of his Church himself made the chief orders but left the rest
for the Church to make. Lastly the first kind is about the substance and very
form of the service of God, the other about the circumstances of it. And
therefore the adding of this latter kind to the former, does not add any
thing to the substance of Church-gouernment but only does establish it, and
makes that it may conveniently be used. Even as we do often see that the
whole and perfect frame of a house in the full proportion of it, is set up not
wanting either foundation, walls, or roof, but afterward there are added to
it nails and pinnes to keep the frame fast together, yea dore^, windows, and
whatsoever is requisite to make the said frame a commodious dwelling place for
the builder of it: even so the government of the Church as it is appointed by
God, and has in some part been described, is the perfect frame of the house
of God, the laws of men are the other implementes which are added thereunto.

Sect. 2. Of the matter of ecclesiastical humane lawe^, and how they ought to
be taken out of the word of God.
THus much bri^fly of these laws by way of comparison with the other, Humane
ecclesiastical laws are made of the circumstances of Gods worship.
now we are to consider the nature of them more plainly and distinctly. First
for the matter of these laws we see that they are of the circumstances of the
government of the Church, to wit, at what time, in what place, yea and how
often it ought to be used: all which are usually called rites or ceremonies,
and are as it were, the fashions of the Church. As for example, the law^ of God
is, that there should be ministers in the Church to teach the people: but how
often they should teach, at what special times, where and with what gesture,
these things are not determined in the word of God, but left to the
ecclesiastical laws of men. If it be asked why it has pleased God to deck
and beautify his Church under the law, not only with the substance of
government, but also with so many ceremonial laws that scarce any
circumstance of any action was left vnappointed by himself, and to suffer his
Church now in the time of the gospel to be naked and destitute almost of all
ceremonial laws, but such as are made by men, we answer rendering three
causes thereof. The first is, for that the Church under the law was without
that ripeness of knowledge whereunto she has come in the time of the gospel,
and therefore had need to have all the particulars of every action
prescribed. But now the Church being endued with more knowledge has these
things left to her discretion, even as we see men use to deal, who if they
commit any buisinesse to one whom they think to be endued with wisdom and
experience, they do not tell him the particular manner of doing, but only
thus much in general that they would have such a thing done: otherwise if he
want this knowledge, then they leave nothing arbitrarie to him but set down
every point and the special circumstances thereof. The second cause is this,
in the making of these Church-lawes there must be great regard had, (as we
afterward, are to show) of the nature, manners, behavior, and state of that
people for whom they are to be made. Now under the law the visible Church did
consist of one nation only, to wit, of the Jews, but under the gospel all
the nations of the world are at one time or other of the Church. So that laws
agreeable to each people would have been so infinite, that they could not
have been written: neither does the word of God now belong in any part to
any one nation, but generally and equally to all. Thirdly the Church being
bound in regard of her infancy to the observation of the legal ceremonies,
now the Church is set in full liberty by the coming of Christ and no further
tied to such outward rites then she lists her self: so that these
ecclesiastical laws made by the authority of the Church, do not stretch
themselves unto the substance of the government of the Church, as to the
institution of any office beside those which are ^xpresly mentioned in the
word. If it be objected that David did add unto the ceremonial law the
office of singers. 1. Chro. 6.31. The answer is, that he did this by himself
and others, as by prophets, not by any ordinary authority. In the second
place we are to see, after what manner and by what rule these laws are to be
made. We answer: according to the word of God, the square of all christian and
spiritual actions, not only in the ordering of the Church, but also throughout
the whole course of a christian man's life. But seeing that they are not
expressly mentioned in the word, how does it appear that they ought to be
framed according to this rule? The answer is, that the word does show, what
ought to be done in these things. First by giving general rules to guide us,
as these; That there ought to be nothing in these laws unlawful or contrary
to the moral law of God, nothing inconvenient, offensive or hurtful to the
Church, How humane ecclesiastical laws are set down in the word of God.
nothing needless and superfluous: yea that they ought to be so made as they
may most tend to the glory of God and the edification of the Church. But
these rules do belong as well to the particular actions of private men as to
the public consultations of the Church, so that they cannot be any certain
direction in this behalf. And therefore we must come to the second help which
the scripture does afforde us for the making of these laws, to wit, particular
examples of the like cases which give a great light in these actions, and are
a sufficient warrant for us to imitate, the difference betwixt those cases and
those which we have in hand, being wisely observed. But neither this second
means is sufficient, for so much as particular cases are so infinite, and
diverse that there cannot always be found like examples: yea the differences
of the examples being found do easily breed great controversy, doubt and
error. And therefore we must have recourse to the third and last means which
is, that those humane laws be made agreeable to the laws of God, and the
ceremonies to the substance of Church-gouernment, so as they may most fitly
express and resemble the nature of the action. But neither this third way does
always serve for the finding out of the truth, because it is hard to see the
true nature o^ the action, where unto the ceremony is to be made conformable,
especially since the time wherein the government of the Church has been
perverted, altered and almost wholly corrupted: as also because that it is not
always easy to judge a right of the general rules and of the examples of the
scripture, and of those other points which we are now ^o consider. Yet these
are the means which God has appointed for this purpose, and which being
diligently used will by the blessing of God lead us to the truth. Thus we see
that the devising of these laws ought to be according to the word of God, and
yet so, that they are left arbitrarie to the Church: not ^s if it were lawful
for them to do what they lift in the least action of their private lives much
less in the public ordering of the Church. For the word of God must be our
rule according to the which all actions and laws are to be squared and tried.
For even those things which are in their own nature indifferent, and left to
our own choice to do, or not to do being generally considered, yet whenas
they come to be practiced and weighed with special circumstances so that the
truth does appear unto us, then they are no more indifferent as before but
either good or evil, to be done or not to be done. As in the foresaid
instance, at what time the word of God should be publicly preached, is a
thing indifferent, whereof there is no commandment in the word, and therefore
it is left to the Church to determine. Yet if they appoint those times at which
the people cannot conveniently come together, then they do even in this
indifferent thing offend against the word of God, which commands that in all
our actions both private and much more public we do that which may make most
for the glory of God and the edi^^cation of our brethren: and yet these laws
which are so made that they are only inconvenient to the Church not simply
unlawful, although they cannot lawfully be made, yet they may lawfully be
obeyde. For although it be not lawful for any man to bring grief or
inconvenience to his brother, In convenient laws may lawfully be obeyed.
yet it is lawful to take and bear that inconvenience, whenas it cannot
conveniently be avoided.

Sect. 4. According to what rules ecclesiastical humane lawe^ ought to be made.
THus we see that the scripture is the chief rule of these laws: in aduising
whereof there must consideration be had of all circumstances whatsoever, that
as far as may be, they may agree withal, and fight with none, and especially
of these. First of the age or condition of the time wherein the Church is:
Secondly of the nature, disposition and fashions of the people. Thirdly of the
state of that Church for which the laws are to be made. Fourthly of the
condition of the civil estate of the kingdom or commonwealth, wherein the
Church is built. And lastly of the laws of other Churches. We say that in
making Church laws besides the direction of the word, diverse other rules are
necessarely to be observed. First the state of the time wherein we live,
whether it be a time of knowledge wherein men do commonly know the will of
GOD, or a time of ignorance and blindness, wherein the word of GOD is rare as
it was in the days of Eli. 1. Samuel. 3.1. Hereof due regard is to be had,
that neither less nor more be exacted of the people by the laws then the time
present can afforde: for private ignoraunces may be suddenly taken away, but
public blindness cannot be fully amended but in progress of time. For some
times the truth of GOD shines clearly, even as the sun at noone day, which
at other times is ouercast with clouds, and mistes of blindness, In making
ecclesiastical laws regard must be had of the knowledge or ignornance of the
time.
and shines more darkely even as the sun in the beginning of the day. This
has been the state of the Church now these many ages, wherein blindness and
palpable darkness brought in by antichrist has ouershadowed the face of the
whole earth: but now by the mercy of GOD the truth has these many years,
and does daily more and more appear unto us, insomuch that if we do compare
this present time with those days wherein it pleased God not many years past
to reveal his will unto us, we shall find a great difference of knowledge in
the Church, yea so great ^s that the knowledge which men had at the beginning
may seem to have been great ignorance and darkness in respect of the light
which now does appear. So that according to the differences of times, we must
also make a diversity of ecclesia^tcall laws, and that in respect not only
of the people but even of them also who do in the name of the whole Church
advise and appoint th^se laws* who although they do excel all others in
knowledge, yet they are partakers of the ignoraunces, and errors of the time,
wherein they live, from the which no man can be wholly freed: as might be
declared at large if it were needful to be stood upon, by the which means
it comes to pass that they do: see much more in process of time, then they
did at the first, insomuch that they will acknowledge many imperfections in
those laws, wherein before there seemed nothing to be wanting. Thus we see,
that the liberty, or rather the necessity of preaching the Gospel to the
gentiles was in time revealed unto the Church whereof at the first they never
dreamed. Acts. 11.18. Secondly if this be granted that they to whom the
aduising of laws for the Church is commmited, do see the whole truth of those
matters whereof they do consult, yet there must be regard had of the state of
the Church, and of the people, for whom these laws are to be made, as the
Apostle witnesses, that he could not speak to the Corinthians, 1, Cor. 3.1.
as unto spiritual, but as unto carnal men, and that in consideration of this
their estate he gave them milk and not strong meat. And in like manner he
writes to the Romans that their salvation was now much nearer then when they
did first believe. Romans 13. where he shows that the night of ignorance and
atheism wherein they had lived, had gone on and passed away by little and
little: and in like manner, the day had approached. For the Apostle did see that
the gentiles which had embraced the gospel, could not at the first let go their
whole course of life, whereunto they had been continually accustomed: and did
in that respect, no doubt, tolerate many things amongst them by reason of the
time, which afterward were not to be suffered. In regard of the diverse naturs
of the people, we may consider that some need more sharp and straight laws to
keep them in order then others do: The which consideration the Apostle did
commend to Titus. Sharper laws to be made for one people then for another.
Tit. 1.13. That forasmuch as the Gratians were allwaies liars, evil beasts
and slow bellies, therefore he should reprove them sharply. And specially we
are here to note the sins whereunto the people are generally and after a
sort, naturally given, that they may be repressed by many laws and sharp
censures and punishments appointed for them who do offend, and by cutting off
the usual occasions of those sinne^. Yea the manners and behauiours of men
commonly received are often times to be marked in appointing the outward
orders and ceremonies of the Church. For many things are decent and orderly in
one country which would be strange and unseemly in another. Thirdly for the
present state of that Church, which we do go about to put in good order by
these laws, we are to have a special regard unto it: the which as it is
diverse and subject to many alterations; so ought the laws to be changed, so
as they may best fit the present state. For as the Church is either in
planting, or else in growing to a ripe age, either in great motion or else
fully established and settled, pure or corrupt, perfect or imperfect, so all the
laws of the Church are to be altered and framed accordingly: of all which
estates we are hereafter to entreat. Fourthly the laws of the Church are so
to be made as that they do not cross the laws of the commonwealth wherein
the Church is, by hindering the Church from perfourming any civil duty,
which is lawful to be done; and to omit many other respects which herein are
to be had, this is diligently to be regarded, that we do labor to conform
our laws to the laws of those Churches, which are most pure and sincere in
the government of the Church: that as we have the same faith and substance of
government, so also we may have the same ceremonies and ecclesiastical orders
although not all (for that cannot be) yet in the greater part: for besides that
this full agreement of Churches in all matters both of lesser and greater
importance without any iarring, is as a sweet harmony in the ears of God, and
most decent in the eyes of all men even of those who are strangers from the
faith: it does also bring great estimation, authority and obedience to the
laws of several Churches. For that hardly any Christian will be found so
perverse and wilful, as to contemn, or reject those orders which are approved
and pr^ctised by many Churches. This argument the Apostle does often use to
establish and keep in force the good orders of the Churches as we may see, 1.
Cor. 11.16. and 14.36. and 1. Th^ss. 2.14.

Sect. 5 Of the number of ecclesiastical laws.
THE number of these laws ought to be defined by the necessity of the Church,
that they be so many as are needful for the preservation of the good estate
and order thereof, so that if any were taken away, there would a manifest
inconvenience follow. Neither ought the number to exceed the necessity of the
Church, and that for these causes. First because the multitude of laws is
contrary to christian liberty in that it does both restrain men from doing
things which otherwise were very commodious for them to do, and also impose
duties, the performance whereof being otherwise needless is a burden and
trouble to the Church. For what causes the multitude of ecclesiastical laws
ought to be avoided.
This reason ought to be of great force for this purpose, especially in this
time of the gospel, wherein it has pleased God, in great mercy and wisdom
to take from his Church that heavy yoke of ceremonial laws wherewith she was
grievously clogged before, and to endue her being now more nearely joined to
Christ her husband, with this notable privilege and benefit of Christian
liberty: the which being given by God, man cannot without great injury both
to God and man take away. And here by the way we may see what an impious and
intolerable tyranny the Church of Rome has exercised in and over the Church
of God, imposing such an infinite number of vain and ridiculous ceremonies as
does far exceed the number both of judicial and also of heathenish
ceremonies. And therefore herin we are to follow the example of the Apostles,
Act. 15.28. It seems good to the spirit of God and to us, not to lay any
burden of observations upon the Church more then is needful. Secondly the
multitude of ecclesiastical laws does bring with it a multitude of
ceremonies, which in no case is to be admitted: for that it does derogate from
the simplicity of the worship of God: and for an hearty and spiritual serving
of God does institute a dead worship not piercing into the heart. Thirdly where
there are many laws there are also necessarely many transgressions of laws:
and so the necessary breaking of some makes the rest to be less obeyed and
esteemed. It remains that we should show to whom the making of
ecclesiastical laws does belong: but as before we did defer to speak of
the first mouer in the planting of a Church till we come to the distinct kinds
of a Church: so this question must be referred to the same place.

CHAP. VII. Of the diverse states of a particular Church.
Sect. 1. Of an vnstablished state of a Church.
THus we have declared (as it has pleased God to give unto us the knowledge
hereof) the whole frame of a particular Church: the matter whereof it
consists being a company of christians called together by the ministry of
the word the form likewise being first and chiefly the laws of God, and
secondly the positive laws or constitutions of the Church. The which two
kinds of laws divine and humane, whenas they are joined together and put in
practice among a believing people, then is the whole frame of the house of God
set up. The which although it be in it self one and the same, and according to
the word of God ought to be fully and purely established in all places, yet (by
reason of man's infirmity not being able to perform the will of God in
perfect manner and of the malice of Satan, laboring by all means to hinder
this work) when it is put in practice, it receaueth many alterations, whereof
come the diverse states of a Church. In all which this is generally to be
noted, that they have many aber^ations from the form of government prescribed
in the word of God, the which may lawfully be tolerated, where by reason of
the present state of the Church, they cannot be amended, yet so as that we do
always aim at that which ought to be. The lettes whereby this work is
hindered that it cannot come to perfection at the first are of two kinds,
natural and violent; The first kind we call natural, because they arise of no
outward cause but even of the very hardness of the work it self, as these for
example. It comes often to pass, that men although converted from
infidelity to faith yet cannot at the first be brought to submit themselves
wholly to the government of the Church: The difficulty of planting a Church
makes an vn^stablished state.
yea there can hardly be gotten at the first a sufficient number of teachers
endued with sufficient gifts for this great work. Besides it is not to be
hoped that the laws whereby the Church is governed should be soon brought to
perfection. For neither the laws of God will be thoroughly known, till they
have been some time practiced, neither the humane constitutions of the Church
made fit to the people and agreeable to all circumstances, till use do show
them to be convenient in all or else inconuenint in some respects what is
wanting in them and what is superfluous. By these means and many other of the
same kind it comes to pass that the Church is for some space of time,
although both founded an^ built, yet not strongly fastened together, nor in any
firm, constant and settled estate. Yet this is not an imperfect state of a
Church wherein some part of the government is wanting, but a state
vnestablished. Even as we see that although the parts of the body of a child
are not as ye^ so firm and compact, neither his whole body has attained to
that strength and firm constitution whereunto it grows, yet he is not
therefore maimed or imperfect: so it is in the Church the which grows from
one age, state and strength to another even as a man's body does. In this
estate all Churches are at the first, and so do continue, either a longer or a
shorter time as the hindrances of the building of the^ are many or few, great
or little. Thus were the Churches in the days of the Apostles: yea many of
them did continue so a long time, because it was a matter of great difficulty
to build the^ and to bring them to any good estate: for then all the orders of
the Church were strange unto them for that they were lately ordained and had
not been practiced before. Hence it was that after they were planted and fully
builte by the Apostles, they did still require their continual care, as P^ule
says of himself, 2. Corin. 11.28. that the care of all the Churches lay upon
himself. For although he being present with them or by the means of others,
did set all things in due order, yet they did not continue long in that estate,
but fell into many abuses and disorders in life, doctrine and government, the
which may be seen as in other so especially in the Church at Corinth the which
whilst it was in this vnestablished state was even over grown with disorders.
And so it is with other Churc^es being not fully settled: for as a ^ouse may be
easily shaken a sunder before the parts of it be firmly joined together, and
as children in their young age are subject to many dangers and are easily
hurt: so the government of Churches is most commonly confounded and ^roden
under foot, before it be confimed by use and practice. In the which respect
they to whom the care of such Churches is committed, ought to be so much more
diligent and watchful as the danger is greater then at other times yea in
regard of the infancy or weak estate of the Church they may and ought to remit
somewhat of the strict form of government and especially of discipline, whenas
the good of the people shall so require. Thus, as was before noted, dealt Paul
with the Corinthians, unto whom he gave milk as to infants not strong meat,
1. Cor. 3.2. And likewise with the Thessalonians 1 Thessalonians. 2.7.8. tho we might
have been burdensome to you as the Apostles of Christ yet we were tender among
you, even as a nourse cherishes her own children.

Sect. 2. Of a pure and perfect state of a Church.
WHen the government of the Church with those other laws appertaining unto it,
is fully established and practiced, then the Church has a pure and perfect
estate: both which in regard of outward government, may be attained unto,
howsoever no christian man's life severally considered can possibly be without
diverse corruptions, and imperfections in this world. A pure estate is that
wherein God is served according to his own will and ordinance only the whole
order and government of the Church being free from all spots of idolatry,
superstition and all traditions or devises of men swaruing from the truth of
the word of God. The examples of this exact purity are very few, beside the
first Churches built by Moses among the Israelites, and by the Aposteles among
the christians in Jerusalem. For immediately after their days crept in
corruption, the stain whereof is hardly removed. Yet the Church had this
purity in some measure in the days of the religious kings of Israel who did
cast out of the Church all relics monumentes and shadows of corruption. And
likewise in diverse places since the time of the Gospel, especially in these
last days wherein it has pleased God to bring his Church out of that sink of
Antichristianisme; and to reveal the right way and manner of his service. Yea
churches as they have a small beginning from the which they rise, and a state
vnestablished wherein they continue for some space of time so also they may at
lengh attain to a perfect state whereunto they do daily grow and whereat
they ought continually to aim. It is then attained unto whenas all those
ordinances which Christ has appointed for the governing of his Church, are
fully established* all the ecclesiastical functions and all those means
whereby the Church is to be edified in the obedience of the faith, being used
so far forth as humane infirmity does permit. For although we both
prophecy, govern, teach, exhortobey and practice only in part in this life.
1. Cor. 13. yet the wants that are in the particular actions of men, do not
make an imperfection in the church. So that when there is no office of the
Church wanting, none negligently executed, but that he that exhorts labors
in exhortation, the teacher in doctrine, he that distributeth in simplicity,
and he that rules, in diligence, he that shows mercy in cheerfulness, and
whenas the people do by these means lead a godly and a christian life
agreeable to their profession, then is there a perfect state of a Church. The
which although as has been heretofore noted, it can hardly be attained
especially of Churches consisting of great multitudes of professors, yet we
are to do our endeavor, committing the success of our labors to the
blessing of God, to whom nothing is hard or impossible: yea who does so bless
and prosper them that labor in the building of his church far above their
own expectation that they shall see such fruit of their labors, which would
seem impossible to be brought to pass by the means of any man.

Sect. 3. Of the flourishing estate of a Church.
THe Lord in mercy is yet more gracious to his Church, and grants that in
many places it should have not only a perfect but also a flourishing estate,
the which is to be considered in these things. First when as the Church does
consist not of a small company of believers, The number of Christians is to
increase daily.
but of great multitudes professing the name of Christ, praising him, calling
upon him and serving him: the which no doubt is a happy thing and most
earnestly to be wished. In this respect the Churches in these days do flourish
as it is to be hoped that they will do more and more. For this is the time
wherein the Lord has appointed that the fullness of the gentiles shall come
in and not only a few here and there, but even whole countries, kingdoms and
nations submit themselves to the obedience of the gospel. Of the great number
of believers it comes that there are in the Church many notable examples of
godliness and of all spiritual graces, yea greater variety of them then is
to be found in small congregations, although usually it comes to pass by the
malice of Satan and the corruption of men, that multitude makes confusion in
the Church, and can hardly be brought to the due order of a Church as we are to
consider hereafter. Secondly the flourishing estate of a Church consists in
the ab^nd^^ce of the graces of Gods spirit, whenas knowledge, wisdom, the
gifts of teaching and all other which make for the building of the Church, are
plentifully poured upon it, when as that comes to pass, which the prophets
foretold of the times of the Gospel, that the spirit of God should be poured
upon all flesh: the which as it was accomplished in the primitive Church on the
which the Lord did immediately and extraordinarely pourefoorth all the graces
of his spirit in such plentiful manner, as was never in the Church before, not
shall be till the Church be perfected at the appearing of Christ: So now the
hand of the Lord is not shortened, but he does still continue this mercy to
his Church, although after a diverse manner for now we are not to look for the
extraordinary gifts of prophecy, The primitive Church did most flourish in
spiritual gifts.
speaking in strange tongues, working miracles, and such like, by the which the
primitive Church was most glorious and did flourish in most wonderful manner
(for these served only for the first planting of the Church) neither are we to
look either for the like measure of gifts, ^r for (...) graces of knowledge,
wisdom, the gifts of interpretation, teaching, exhorting, or any other
immediately from God as they had. For this also was proper to those times, in
the which because it was not meet that the building of the Church should not
go forward till men had attained these gifts by ordinary means, therefore it
pleased God immediately to supply their wantes. But now these are not attained
but by ordinary means, and yet the Lord does oftentimes grant them to his
Church in such abundance and in so great measure as that they do make a
flourishing estate of a Church. A special note whereof in this behalf is when
there are many endued with those excellent gifts of knowledge and wisdom
whereby the whole Church may be furnished with wise and learned teachers. This
is to be looked for in those places and countries which God has blessed with a
long and continual peace. So it is, Act. 9.31. The Churches had peace
throughout Galatia, Jury, and Samaria, and were edified and did go on in the
consolation of the holy spirit. For even as for the building of that glorious
temple, the Lord did give a long time of peace in the days of Solomon, so does
he also when it pleases him to have a flourishing Church in any place. Yea for
a flourishing estate in the gifts of his spirit, there is in these days
required abundance of learning and of men endued with singular gifts, both of
nature and ind^stry. For God does sanctify these for the edifying and
beautifying of his Church. Hereof it was that the Churches of Corinth and
Alexandria changed their subtle and learned P^ilosophers into most excellent
divines. But especially they of Corinth did flourish notably in a wonderful
abundance of all graces above al other Churches: whereof we read that they had
the gifts of prophecy, tongues, interpretations, yea and all other as the
Apostle witnesses, 1. Cor. 1.6. and that in great measure. In regard whereof
the Apostle sait^, 1. Cor. 4.8. That they were enriched and did reign as
kings without him. Neither are these graces bestowed only upon the teachers
and rulers in the Church but in this flourishing estate they are even as that
precious ointment which being poured upon Arons head did run down to the
skirtes of his garments. So that in the flourishing time of the Church, many
of the people do attain to a great measure of knowledge and all other
graces. And therefore those kingdoms and nations which it has pleased GOD to
bless with peace, learning, abundance of excellent men and such other
blessings, are to think that all this is done for this end, that God may have
not only a perfect but even a flourishing Church among them. Therefore whenas
the commonwealth of the Jews was most flourishing in the days of the kings
of Judah, then was the temple, the worship of God and the whole Church in a most
glorious estate. Yea although we have a Church, yet we are to desire this
estate of it and to be sorry for the lack of it. So Esr. 3.12. we read that
many of the priests, levites and heads of the fathers and elders who had seen
that most glorious temple of Solomon, did lament the mean estate of the second
temple. And no doubt but it is a thing which would wring tears out of any
christian heart to behold the mean, corrupt and imperfect estate of Churches
in those kingdoms and countries which abounding with learning, men of
wisdom, knowledge, zeal, and of all spiritual graces which are needful for
this purpose, might have their Churches in most flourishing estate, if the Lord
would once put into their hearts to employ those blessings which they have,
to beautify and adorn his Church.

Sect. 4. Of that estate of the Church wherein the building of it is hindered.
HItherto we have declared how the frame of this spiritual house of God is to
be set up: the beginning, progress and perfection of it, and how it is to be
continued and ordered in the several states. The which happy and joyful
success of this work, although they who labor in it both ought earnestly do
desire as making greatly for the glory of God, and also may lawfully hope for,
for that it pleases God to grant it often to the Church, yet they are not so
confidently to look for it, but that withal, they do consider that the
building of the Church is also often, yea usually and for the most part
hindered and stopped by one means or other. So that it cannot be begun, or
at the least not perfected and continued in any good estate. The building of
the Church being hindered by some violent means, (for of the natural
hindrances we have already spoken) becomes hard, troublesome and dangerous.
Whereby it comes to pass that many who did before labor diligently and
painefully in this work, do now faint and give it over: so we read, 2. Tim.
4.15. that although the Apostle had many fellow laborers at other times, yet
when persecution came, all did forsake him, as also the disciples did forsake
Christ at his apprehension. God makes the building of the Church troublesom^
and dangerous for the trial of those who build it.
Whereas they ought to be encouraged to go on so much the more cheerefulie in
this work, considering that the Lord does suffer it to be hindered, that he
might by this means try their faithfulness and synceritie of love toward
his glory, if for the procuring and aduauncing of it, they will not refuse
any trouble, danger, or loss of temporal things. And further also that he
might work and increase in them patience, whereby they may quietly expect the
time wherein he will give a prosperous success to their labors. Yea by this
means they learn to rely themselves wholly upon him, whenas they see that
by reason of the strength of the adversaries they cannot possibly bring to
pass that which they do desire. The hindering of this work is to be ascribed
to the malice of satan, who seeing that there is nothing which makes so much
for the glory of GOD and the salvation of men, (unto both which he is a
professed enemy) as does the building of the Church of GOD, does labor by all
means that this work should either not be taken in hand, or at the least
not go forward and continue as it ought. And as he is strong and m^ghtie both
to have the C^^rch with a pe^fe^t and deadly m^lice, and also to (...) the ^ame
effe^t^ally (the L^rde ^o perm^tting) (...) so great as that no m^n ^a^
di^cou^^ those infinite sl^^ghtes and ways by the (...) he does hinder the
edifying both of the Church and also of every particular member of it. The
which although they may in some measure be perceived of those who are exercised
in thi^ spiritual warfare as the Apostle witnesses, 2. Corin. 2.11. saying,
We are not ignorant of the devises of Satan, yet they a^e fully and perfectly
known unto the Lord only: who also does so frustrate and disanull them, as
that they shall never finally pr^uaile against any of his elect. But of those
hindrances which Satan caste^h before particular men in the way of their
salvation, we are not here to speak, but only of those whereby he hinders
the setting up or continuing of the frame of the Church in any place, wherein
how wonderfully he has prevailed from time to time, it may ^aselie appear to
him that does consider in how few places of the world the Church has at any
time had any dwelling place, or at the least any good, pure, perfect, and
p^^manent ^state. And to let pass the first ages of the world which were
before the coming of Christ, wherein the Church was either shut up in one
family, or contained within the compass of one small country, the whole
world besides remaining in ignorance, idolatry, and atheism: if we come to
the time of the gospel, wherein the Church should be in the best and most
flourishing estate, we shall s^e how strangely satan hindered the building of
those Churches which the Apostles did plant in many places of the world:
insomuch that many of them were soon dispersed and most of those which did
continue for some space of time, did not grow on to any pure and perfect
estate, The Church vtt^r^y ^uer thrown to man's judgment.
but did daily decline from that purity wherein they were at the first
established, till such time as they were either clean overthrown and rooted
out, as we^ see the Churches throughout Asia, Africa, and a great part of
Europe to have been, or (...) least so defaced and corrupted in respect of
the (...) God, the purity of doctrine and the order and government of them, as
that till of late we could scarce have acknowledged the visible Church in any
place. Yet the Lord does never suffer satan to prevail so far against the
Church as that he should be able to take the name of it from off the earth and
wholly to ^uerthrow it, but does always reserve some place for his Church to
remain in: where he will have his name called upon and his elect enjoy the
means of their salvation. The building of the Church is hindered by the malice
of satan yet by the ministry of men whom he uses as instruments for the
^ffecting of his purpose. Yet not all after the same manner: for some do
indeed hinder this work, which notwithstanding in desire, affection and
endeavor do help it forward, as they who do build out of order, or not in
due time and season. But there is another k^^d of hin^erers who a^e t^uly and
properly so called, and these do of set purpose ^^nder the building of it. The
which no doubt is not only a strange thing (although it be most usual in the
world) that any man should be given up to such a reprobate and senseless mind,
as to labor by all means to overthrow and deface that, wherein his chief
felicity does consist: but also a most fearful case, for as the Apostle
witnesses. 1. Cor. 3.17. Who so destroys the temple of God which is holy,
him shall GOD destroy. And Philip* 1.28. to be an adversary to the Church, is
a sign of perdition, howsoever the Lord may change the heart of the most
fierce enemy which his Church has, and make him become a favorer of it, as
we see in the example of Paul.

Sect. 5. How the Church is to be built against professed hinderers.
THey who do of set purpose hinder the building of the Church are of two
sorts, to wit professed or hypocritical. Of both these kinds the Apostle
fore-warneth the elders of the Church which was at Ephesus, Act. 20.29. saying,
I know that after my departure fierce wolves shall come in upon you not
sparing the flock. The other kind follows: And of your selves there shall
arise men speaking perverse things to draw disciples after them. And so does
Christ his disciples Math. 24.9.10. open persecutors shall kill you and ye
shall be hated of all men, yea many that believe shall be offended, and one shall
betray an other, and many false prophets shall arise and deceive many. These
hinderers as they are diverse, so they are diversely to be dealt withal: yet
this belongs unto them all, that whenas they are obstinately and desperately
malicious in hindering the building of the Church they are subject to the
imprecations of the said Church. Neh. 6.14, and 2. Timo. 4.14. professed
hinderers are such as are not members of the Church: for no man can profess
himself to be both a servant to Christ and a hinderer and defacer of his
glory, which shines only in the Church and is obscured by hindering the
building of it, more then by any other means: but they who hating Christian
religion do by all means labor to hinder the propagation of it, and that
most commonly by open violence. These may lawfully be resisted by violence as
they do oppugn the truth, as we read, that the people of the Jews did, who
did build with the one hand, and hold their weapons with the other. Neh. 4.17.
therefore these are called the Lords battails. And hereof we need not doubt,
but that the force of open enemies laboring to overthrow the Church may and
ought to be resisted by force. There is no cause of war so just, as is the
defense of the Church: neither any wherein we may be more bold to look even
for the extraordinary help and blessing of God in fighting for us: for the
good and safety whereof, all the creatures in heaven and in earth do serve.
Thus Ioah incourageth his brother. 2. Sam. 10.12. quite thee like a man and let
us be valiant for our people, and for the cities of our God.

Sect. 6. How the Church is to be built, whenas the civil magistrate is a
professed enemy to the Gospel.
IT comes often to pass, that the building of the Church is hindered by the
civil rulers who ought to be the chief furtherers of it, being placed by God
in authority for this end, that by their means the people might live a quiet
life in all godliness and honesty. 1. Timo. 2.2. But the people by their sins
do often pull upon themselves as diverse other judgments, so also profane and
Godless rulers, so much abhorring from the true worship of God that they do
not only not embrace it themselves, but also hinder their subjects from using
it. The which is a lamentable case and even a horrible co^fusio^ of all things,
whenas the sword of the magistrate is stretched out against the Church, the
members and builders of it, which was appointed chiefly for the maintaining of
it, yet we have many examples hereof in all ages, of kings, princes, Emperors
and all kinds of rulers who have opposed their whole power and authority to
the building of the church. This was the state of the church, for the space of
diverse hundred years in the first time of the Gospel, the which did
miserably labor under the cross of persecuting Emperors, and the like may be
seen in every age. And therefore it belongs to all Christians to know,
how far they may go in building the Church in this state of things and
whether that it be lawful, as before to build the Church and to maintain the
same being built by force against the violence of the civil power. The answer
to this question is diverse, according to the diversity of rule and of
subjection, for some magistrates do so rule, Two ki^des of civil authority
and (...).
a^ that they themselves are in some sort to be ouerruled by others, yea they
are subject to laws as other men are, so as if they do transgress either in
their private life or in public administration, they are to be called to
account, and to be brought into order by the people or by the ch^ife and
noblest of them, in the name of the rest. These may lawfully by the aforesaid
power of ^he people, (but not by any private man or company of men) be
compelled to suffer the building of the Church to go forward. But this is no
answer to the question: for here subjects do not resist a higher power but
the civil power being divided betwixt the people and the rulers, one part of
it resists the other, in the which combat the lower power ought to give place
to the higher, and therefore the magistrates to the whole body of the people,
by the which they were put in office to rule them severally and jointly in the
name and by the authority of all. For this kind of magistrates is to be
accounpted as deputies or substitutes to the people and may lawfully be deposed
by them, when the common good does so require. Yea if any people have submitted
themselves to any authority with condition of having the true worship of God
and the free use of it they are not bound to obey if the said condition be
broken. What magistrates may be resisted in the cause of the Church.
But there is another kind of government wherein the ruler (for usually he is
but one) has greater authority and a more sure standing in his place, in that
he is not chosen or appointed by the people to rule, neither does take his
authority at their hands as their gifts, but has it from God, from his
predecessors, and from himself. These rulers are for the most part great
kings and Monarchs who do obtain kingdoms by hereditarie succession from
their ancestors, The original of absolute autho^itie
having either by force conquered the dominion of those places or by the favor
and consent of the people obtained that great authotitie for themselves and
their posterity: Yea often a temperate and mean power being granted, does
incre^se to this immoderate and absolute authority whereof we speak* The
which although it were at the first conquered by violence and unjust dealing,
Unjust conquest and usurpation may become a lawful dominion.
yet if afterward it be by the general and continual consent of the people
admitted, acknowledged and obeyed, it is to be accounted a lawful authority.
Now in many of those kingdoms the rulers are not tied to any covenants or
conditions by the which they should rule, but only so far forth as they do
voluntarily submit themselves, for the more quiet obtaining and enjoying of
their kingdoms. Yea they have the full and absolute authority of the land in
their own hands, and inhere^t in their own persons, insomuch that al others
within their dominions jointly and severally considered, are in respect of them
private men. Of this kind was the kingdom of Israel, as has been showed in
the former treatise, and many other in the which (that we may apply this to our
purpose) it was not lawful for any of the people to resist the civil
authority by open force, no not in the cause of setting up or maintaining the
Church, as appears by the history and examples of the said kings. Yea this
is agreeable to the word of God, which teaches that we ought not to do that
which is good, but by good, lawful and ordinary means: but to resist the
civil power, is evil, and greatly displeasing in the eyes of God. Yet we
ought to use all lawful means, for the setting forward of this work, when it
is hindered by these magistrates: as first, to solicit the cause of the
Church, at their hands, yea even with our own danger as did Hester, Est.
4.14.16. and Nehemias. Neh. ^.4. and to labor to bring them to the knowledge
of the truth. Yea further if it be so needful to redeem the freedom of
religion with our goods by paying to our rulers great tributes that the Church
may be established. Also by showing our faithful obedience, loyal submission
and duetifull service even to the unbelieving rulers as did Daniel, Nehemias,
and many other godly men. By the which means and such like the Lord working
together, in whose hands the hearts of kings are to turn at his pleasure,
it may happily come to pass, that they will become lovers and furtherers, yea
members of the Church, or at the least not haters and hinderers of it, but if
they do continue obstinate, and as it usually comes to pass, become
persecutours of the Church. Then in the first kind of government the people
may use either that secret authority which as yet remains in their own
hands, or else the liberty and benefit of conditional obedience, and so
notwithstanding the civil ruler build the Church as they ought to do. But in
the other kind of gouerme^t we may not build with the one hand and hold our
weapons with the other against that great, absolute and maiesticall authority:
for here God gives no other weapons where withal to fight save only patience
to suffer their ungodly dealing, and if they become malicious and bloody
persecutours of the Church, wings to fly. For that in time of persecution
moved either by our own magistrates, or by any other power, we may fly for our
safety, we are taught even by the light of nature, which moves every one to
preserve his life by all good means. But nature is an evil counselor in
cases of religion, and therefore we have a more sure ground whereon to rest in
this behalf, even the word of God, whereunto we are to hearken, giving us
this liberty, yea this counsel, that when we are persecuted in one place we
should fly to another as the primitive Church was dispersed except the
Apostles. Act. 8.1. yea this is good not only for our selves but also for the
Church: for by this means we preserve the Church, which otherwise would be
destroyed in us. Besides, those who are weak, and doubt of their constancy
ought not to tempt God by undergoing extreme danger. Fli^ht i^ time of
persecution, always lawful and often good for the Church.
Yea the Lord uses thi^ means for the enlarging of his Church. Act. 8.4. yet
sometimes God does not grant unto us this liberty of flying, but gives the
persecutour power over us that by this means he may try our soundness and
constancy in the profession of his truth. Yea sometimes it is also expedient
for the Church that we do not use this liberty though we may: as if our
suffering be like to bring many to the profession of the truth or to confirm
the weak, or to avoid the slander of the enemy, obiecting to us
fearfulness, hypocrisy, want of faith, and of the hope of eternal life,

Sect. 7. Of the building of the Church hindered by the civil ruler being a
christian.
THus much of professed hinderers being open enemies to the Church. Now we
come to those who although they profess themselves members of the Church, and
such as do by all means labor to build it, yet in truth they do hinder the
same, yea often more then the open enemy does. And to let others pass, the
greatest hurt is done by those who are public in the Church, unto whom the
building and furthering of this work does belong, as namely the civil ruler
being a member of the Church, and the ecclesiastical governor, or the
minister of the word. For as when the light of the body is darkness, how
great is that darkness? so when the builders of the Church are the hinderers
of it, how great is that hurt? For the first, the civil ruler (for so we
speak as of one because that kind of government is most usual, may greatly
hinder the building of the Church, although he do in part further the same: as
namely if together with the profession of the true worship of God, he do
retain some part of some false worship or the relics and memorials of it,
whereby many are offended and hindered. Secondly if he hinder the establishing
of any part of the government of the Church, commanded in the word, or else
the function of any office: and finally if he do by any means hinder the
course of the gospel and the building of Gods Church in that place. Here we
have other means to use, the civil ruler being a member of the Church. For
first we may be more bold in moving him to regard the building of the Church,
the which does as much concern his own good and salvation as the good of any
other. We may also have great hope that he will be moved by the advice of
them, who are godly, wise and learned in his realm. Yea those that are the
ministers of the word of GOD, by whose means the Church is built, may deal
more plainly with him and exhort, yea charge him in the name of God, who will
one day take an accounte of him how he has discharged his duty to the
Church of God, that he do by all means labor to advance the Gospel of Christ
and to beautify his Church. If nothing prevail, then we ar^ to commend the
cause to the Lord, who can easily mouethe hearts of rulers, the which he does
sometimes by some judgment or plague laid upon them, or their land: as we
read that Elias made Achab put away idolatry by bringing an extreme famine
upon his whole land. But what is to be done in this case, if that none of
these means, having been discreetly, faithfully and importunatelie used can
prevail; that there ought not any outward force to be used against the will of
the ruler, unless it be in such a government, wherein the rulers may after a
sort be ruled, it has been declared. There remains nothing to be done,
unless the Church use her censure of excommunication against her disobedient
son, thus obstinately hindering this work. But herein there are many
things to be considered; And first, whether this censure may lawfully be used
against the rulers, or rather exercised upon them. For the answer whereof we
are to consider, that as there is but one salvation, and one glory both for
rulers and subjects, so also there is but one means appointed by God in his
Church to attain thereunto, belonging equally to all that be within the Church
of what state or condition soever they be. And therefore as the preaching of
the word, the administration of the sacraments; so likewise ecclesiastical
censures tending to the same end, The Censures of the Church belong as well to
christian rulers as to ^he people.
do belong to all that be of the Church. Yea it is a thing most commendable in
a prince, that (whenas no man can compel him to it) of his own accord he
submits himself unto all the ordinances of God, and by this means gives
example unto the people of obedience. But although it may lawfully be done, yet
there are so many inco^modities which would follow the use of it, that it will
be found seldom or never convenient to be done. For first by this means the
civil ruler who does profess himself to be a favorer of the Church,
although he be not a sound friend may be alienated quite from it, and so cast
away all care of furth^ring the building of it. By the which means the Church
may come utterly to ruin being destitute of his help who is the builder of
it, it being a public church as most commonly it is where the civil ruler is
a member of it. Secondly, it is greatly to be feared, least that by this
means, the civil authority receive some disgrace, the authority, dignity and
majesty whereof if it be of that kind ought by all means to be maintained. In
regard of the first inconvenience we are to consider the disposition of the
prince and the present state of the Church, and not to do it, till that by
mature deliberation it be found to be for the good, both of the one and of the
other. For otherwise if the whole state of the Church shall be ^azarded by this
means, we ought not to do it. It is better to have an imperfect or corrupt
state of a Church with the favor of the ruler then none at all by his
displeasure. Yea also in this respect it is needful that he do first
acknowledge himself subi^ct to the censures of his Church, before they can be
used on him: that so by his own confession, at least in his conscience, he may
approve their doing to be both agreeable to the word of God and also not
repugnant to that loyalty which they owe unto him. Which if he do not, then
this censure cannot be used, because all laws and constitutions take hold of
them who are under the same, not of those who are not. In regard of the second
inconvenience these cautions are to be used. First that it be not done but upon
a great urgent, and evident cause as whenas his hindering of the building of
the church is not so much of ignorance as of malice, pride, and some such
corruption in him. Secondly that it be not suddenly done but that first, What
cautions are to be observed in excommunicating the c^uill ruler.
all patience be used by forebeareing and expecting the changing of his mind
to acknowledge the truth. Thirdly, that (unless it be needful to be
otherwise) it be done by the secret opinion and estimation of men, accounting
him not worthy the name of a Godly and Christian prince or of a faithful
brother, rather then by the open and public promulgation of the sentence of
excommunication. So we read. 1. Sam. 15.30.31. that when as Samuel, did after
a sort excommunicate Saul the first king of the Jews by declaring him to be
foresaken of God and cast out of his fauou^, yet he had care to keep the
dignity or rather the majesty of his person and calling before the people:
and therefore he did at his request go with him, and honor him with his
company in the sight of the w^ole people. And lastly that if it be needful
that the sentence of excommunication should be openly pronounced yet that there
be added a declaration of the nature of this censure, to wit, that it does not
touch his civil gouernmen^, or derogate any jot from the majesty of his
person, the authority of his place and calling, the obedience which his
subjects owe unto him (save only that a Christian, godly, virtuous and
religious prince who is zealous in advancing the glory of God and procuring the
good of his Church, ought more highly to be esteemed, more cheerfully obeyed
and more entirely loved, then an infiddel or then a wicked and obstinate ruler,
proffessing faith. For whenas we make it lawful to excommunicate the the
civil ruler, we do not mean any popish kind of excommunication whereby the
pope does curse, and depose all those princes which shake off the yoke of his
corrupt and profane worship: for the nature of excommunication is far from
the nature of a curse, it being only a mere separation from the outward
society of the church, Excommunication is no curse, neither touches the
authority of the magistrate.
which does not in any respect touch or diminish his authority, as has been
said, otherwise it were not lawful to excommunicate the civil ruler: for so
much as we are flatly forbidden by the word of God to curse the ruler of the
people. Therefore did Paul call back that speech uttered against the high
priest maliciously hindering the building of the Church. Act. 23.5.

Sect. 8. Of the Church hindered by the ministers of the word.
AS the ministers of the word of God, are the proper builders of the Church; so
they are often used by satan as a means to hinder the same. And no doubt but
that they are most fit instruments for this purpose, and whenas they are so
set, most dangerous and pernicious hinderers of this work. As if the woolfe
can have the shepherd to put the sheep into his mouth, what need he any more
for the utter destroying of the whole flock? and yet this kind of hinderers is
very ordinary as we may see throughout the whole scripture. For so the
building of the material temple was hindered by false prophets. Nehe. 6. Yea
none did so importunatly hinder or so spitefully entreat the true prophets of
God, as did the false prophets, and the whole company of worldly and carnal
minded priests. Thus we se. 2. Chro. 18.23. that Zedekia did to Micha and
Iere. 20.1. Pashur to Jeremy, the priests, Scribes and pharisees to our
savior Christ: the false Apostles to Paul. Such were those foolish and
vainglorious preachers at Corinth, who swelling in a fond opinion, and a
foolish use of humane wisdom did build upon the good foundation of the
sincere, plain and simple doctrine of the truth, hay, stuble, wood and such
things, as would be afterward consumed with the fire, that is, would be found
in examination to have no substance of true religion. These did seem to build
as well, yea much more then the apostle, but they were deceitful workers, and
by this working did greatly hinder the true building of the church. For if
there were no builders, all men that do profess the faith, would seek for
some, but these deceitful builders persuade men that they are the true
ministers of Christ (and no maruail, when as Satan himself that foul and
loathsome spirit, does transform himself into an Angel of light) and so they
hinder them of faithful and painful teachers. Lastly these hinderers may be
known by their fruits as Christ teaches us Math. 7.15.16. even by their
dissolute lives the which they spend in seeking not the salvation of men and
Gods glory but their own pleasure, ease, commodity, yea riches and
preferment. Yea this their hypocrisy is to be detected (least otherwise their
purpose of hindering the Church do prevail) and that both by word, when
occasion serves, and also by the contrary sincerity of the true builders.
Thus Christ deals with the Scribes and Pharisees. Math. 23. and in many other
places.

Sect. 9. Of an imperfect state of a Church.
WHenas the building of the Church is hindered by any means, it comes to
pass that the state of it is imperfect, corrupt, or both. For although in
Christ the Church be perfect and pure, yet she being in this world, is often
otherwise. An imperfect state of a church is when as some part of the
government of the church is wanting, as if the ministry of the word be
wanting or if the ministers do seldom and negligently preach the word of GOD
unto the people. Yet not the wantes that are in any few men, but those which
are general and tolerated by the public laws, or the common consent of the
church, make an imperfect state. The imperfection is so much the more grievous
as the offices or functions of the offices which are wanting, are more needful
in the church. And therefore whenas there is no preaching ministry in the
Church, the want is great and the case most lamentable: because God has
ordained that his church should be built, and his servants saved by preaching,
the which being wanting, the ordinary means of faith and of salvation is also
wanting. The want of any office is to be supplied by that which is nearest unto
it: Public^e wants are to be privately s^^plied.
so did the levites supply the want of the priests, being by reason of their
legal uncleanness not meet to sacrifice. 2. Ch^o. 29.34. Yea that which is
publicly wanting is privately to be supplied, what part of Gods worship or any
thing belonging to it, soever it be. Yet we must not rest herein, but carefully
labor for a full and perfect form of government, whereof how much is wanting, so
much of the means of our salvation is wanting. And therefore we are here to
consider how we may live in an imperfect Church and how we ought to forsake
it. For the first, we need not doubt, but that we may lawfully remain in a
Church, the which wants some office or function appointed by God: yea that
our service will be in some measure accepted of God, How we may lawfully remain
in an imperfect Church.
who winketh at the infirmities and imperfections of his faithful servants,
whether private or public. Even as he did at the passover offered by Ezechias
and the people wherein many things required by the law were wanting, yea the
Church seldom attaineth and keeps so absolute and perfect as that nothing is
wanting in it. Thus many of the Churches in the days of the Apostles wanted
some offices which were afterward supplied. And in the ages following the
troubles and persecutions of the Church made many wantes in it, the which may
be borne with these conditions. First when as they are not so great, but that
notwithstanding them, we have the means of salvation and edificarion. Secondly
if that the want be not wilful but constrained and necessary, as when the
Jews intermitted the use of circumcision in the wilderness. Lastly if that we
do still aim at a perfect state, considering that the other is neither so
auailable for the glory of God (unto whom we should not offer any lame, blind
or maimed sacrifice or any imperfect service) or yet so effectual for our
salvation. For although a man may preserve his natural life with bread and
water, yet he ought to desire the use of other creatures serving for his
purpose, that he may live in strength and vigor of body and mind.

Sect. 10. Of a corrupt state of a Church specially of idolatrous worship.
A Cor^upt state is, whenas in steed of the true and sincere government
appointed by God, a false government contrary to the word of God and hinde^^ng
the edification of the Church is publicly established or used, or whenas some
part of the government is corrupted. The causes of this estate are these, first
an imperfect state: for the want of any part of the government breeds
corruption. For where there is no teaching, there must needs be general
ignorance and many errors in judgment: where powerful exhortation is not
used, there the graces of the spirit belonging to the practice of christianity
are wanting: and where the censures of the Church are not in force, there
dissoluteness in the lives of men must needs prevail. The second cause is,
the relics of the former false worship being not wholly abolished, the which
are like unto a root left in the earth, and to a wound or sore the which being
not well cleansed, will fester and send forth much corruption. Hence came that
corruption of popery, to wit, from the relics of Iudaisme and heathenisme:
and so that leaven having once infected the whole lump of the Church, we know
that although the substance of it be taken out, yet the taste and sowernesse of
it does remain in many places. The kinds of a corrupt state are many as are
the parts of the sincere government. For the first the ministry of the Church
may be many ways out of order, as if it be sufficient, and destitute of giltes
needful, or if the manner of execution of it be corrupt, as when it is turned
into vain ostentation and to an unprofitable affection of learning, reading,
wit, memory and other common gifts. Then follows a corrupt worship
consisting in outward rites and ceremonies, in vain babbling, in suffering
hunger or in other bodily exercises. Further, if in steed of true doctrine
errors be publickely taught and generally received, or if in steed of a
christian life, sin do abound: by these means and many other, which it is
not needful to rehearse, comes a corrupt state of a Church. But here we
are briefly to touch a question which has been in part handled alone. Chap.
1. Sect. 4. to wit, how far a Church may be corrupt before it cease to be a
true Church, that is, a Church truly and indeed. For answer whereof, it
seems that wheresoever a company of men do jointly and publickely by
worshipping the true God in Christ profess the substance of Christian
religion, which is faith in Jesus Christ the son of God and Savior of the
world, that there is a true Church, notwithstanding any corruption whatsoever:
yea although it be of that nature that it might be made by consequent of
argument to fight with the very foundation of christian religion, and so
heinous as that in respect thereof, No corruption makes them who hold the
foundation of religion to be no Church.
the people stained with this corruption are worthy to be abhorred of all men,
and unworthy to be called the Church of God. We will take an instance of a
people which together with the profession of the faith do m^intaine and use
idolatry, not worshipping a false God, for then they were without all question
to be counted infidels, but the true God after a false and devised manner.
These seem to be a Church, although they do profane the worship of God after
a most horrible and grievous m^nner: thus as it may seem some christans did in
the first time of the gospel who did both believe in some sort, and yet could
not of a sudden shake off that idolatry, wherein they had lived so many
years. For so Paul writes, 1. Cor. 5.11. If any that is called a brother,
that is a christian, be a fornicatour, or covetous or a worshipper of Images.
This kind of w^rship is in use in the Church of Rome the which seems to be a
Church, although in the lowest degree that can be imagined, The ten tribes in
their defection were the Church of God.
unless (as it seems that we may do) we will admit into the church, the people
of the ten tribs who were idolaters, and yet by circumcision and some
otherways did profess the name of Iehoua, as we may note out of many
testimonies of scripture. And first out of those places where they are called
the people of god as we read, To. 10.25.26. where the people of God, the beloved
of God, and the children of the living God, The ten tribes in their defect^ on
were the Church of G^d.
do all signify a true Church. In the 1. King. 16.2. they are twice so called
where God says, that he made Bahasa, the captain of his people Israel.
Secondly God is called the God of the ten tribes, and said to be among them. 1.
King. 20.28. because the Syrians (speaking of the God of the ten tribes of
whom they were overcome) said that Iehoua was God of the hills only and 1.
King. 18.35. thou art the God of Israel. Thirdly for that they always had the
true prophets of God, and by them did ask and receive counsel of God in their
weighty affairs. Thus 1. King. 22.5.6.7.11. Achab asked counsel of God, 2.
King. 2.16. Ahazia is reproved by God, for that He sent to ask counsel at
Baalsebub, as though there were not a GOD in Is^ael, whose word he might have
sought after. Likewise 1. King. 5.8. Eliseus says this is a most certain
thing that Israel is not at any time without a prophet. The truth hereof may
be gathered also 1. King. 18.21. where Elias says that the people did halt
betwixt God and Baal, that is, did serve them both together. And lastly by that
which is often said that the kings of Israel did evil in the eyes of God, that
is in that place whereupon God did as yet look with the eyes of his mercy, as
upon his Church. So that although they did want almost the whole public
worship, and therefore are said, 2. Chro. 15.3. to be without God, without
priests and the law, yet because the name of God was generally by circumcision
professed of them, they seem to retain the name of a Church and o^ the people
of God. Even as the Church of Rome serves God and Christ by baptism and by
professing his name otherways, although they have no part of the worship of
God vncorrupt^d. And so the ten tribes, Idolat^ie and the worship of the true
God joined g^th^r.
some christians in the primitive church, the papists, and as we may think
king Solomon, with many others, joined idolatry and the worship of the true God
together, as it is said of the Samaritanes that they feared the Lord and
worshipped idols, 2. Kings. 17.41. yet these Samaritanes were not a Church,
for they did only in their minds slauishly fear God, but all their outward
worship was done unto idols.

Sect. 11. Of a Church corrupt in doctrine.
Now we are to enquire how far a people may be corrupt in doctrine and yet
remain a Church. Whereunto we answer as before, that all they who hold the
foundation of religion* are to be counted a Church although together they be
infected with many grievous errors. By the foundation of religion we do not
mean any one particular point, no not the waightiest points, or those which
come nearest to the foundation it self, but the general and maine doctrine of
Christianity the which was before the coming of Christ, this; I believe in
the Messiah who is to come of the seed of David: and since his coming, it is
this; I believe that Jesus is Christ, as the foundation of religion is defined
by the Apostle. 1. Cor. 3.11. The truth hereof may evidently appear by
considering the state of the visible Church before the coming of Christ,
especially as it was at the time of his coming: in the which although God did
reveal his will more clearly to some of his prophets and people, The errors
of the I^wes before the coming of Christ.
yet the church generally was altogether ignorant of the waightiest points of
the Gospel as of Christ, the trinity, two distinct natures, the union of
them, of his offices, death, and resurrection. Now although simple ignorance
be not so grievous a sin as wilful heresy, neither an heresy before the
coming of Christ as one since his coming, yet in this respect they are all
one: for a man does err in that point which he does not know, holding the
error contrary to the said truth. Even as the Jews not knowing the heads of
doctrine before named did always in all ages, and do to this day (so many as
continue in vnb^leife) deny the doctrine of the trinity, for they make but one
person, to wit, God the father and the doctrine of the deity of Christ
thinking that the Messiah should be a mere man, they deny his offices, thinking
that he should be a temporal king only, and therefore they knew not the
doctrine of regeneration, as we see in Necodemus a master in Israel. Iho.
3.10. Neither did they look so much for forgiveness of sins and eternal
life, by the Messiah (thinking to be justified by keeping the law) as for
temporal commodities. And lastly they denied the doctrine of the death of
Christ, for they held that the Messiah should not die John. 12.34. That these
and other such errors were popular and common in the Church of the Jews, we
may both gather out of their saying recorded by the evangelists as also by
their continual silence in these matters, the which we do not read that any
of them do mention upon any occasion. And lastly by the open confession of
the Jews in all ages since the coming of Christ. For it is plain that they
hold even to this day those opinions which they received from their
ancestors and were commonly held of that nation. Notwithstanding all which
errors, we think as it is generally thought that the people of the Jews
professing generally faith in the Messiah to come, were then the true Church
and the people of God but this confession will not serve now in the time of the
Gospel to make them a Church: because they do reject Christ himself in his
very person. As for the heretical Churches, since the time of the gospel as
the Church of Arians, papists or any other maintaining grievous errors
contrary to the word of God, it seems that they are to be accounted the
Churches of God because they do all hold the foundation of the Gospel which
is faith in Jesus Christ the son of God and the savior of the world.

CHAP. VIII. Of a Private Church.
Sect. 1. What a private Church is.
HItherto we have entreated in general of a particular church, now we are to
speak of the kinds of it, which are two in number, to wit, private and
public. A private Church is a company of Christians serving God together in
the midst of infidels, or there where the whole multitude or the whole body of
the people generally and publicly considered abides in infidelity. Of this
kind of churches we have many examples. First from the beginning, until the
days of Moses, in all which time the Churches were private. Secondly after the
nation of the Jews did cease from b^ing a Church (for from their coming out
of Egypt until the time wherein they rejected christ and the gospel, No
public Church sau^ the people of the Jews til the days of Constantine.
they were a public church) til the days of Constantine the great, all the
chu^ches of the christans were private. For we do not read of any one city or
country within all that time being about.300. years did publicly embrace the
gospel, but a few in respect of the infidels in this and that city, as in
Jerusalem, Antioch, Corinth, Rome, and the rest. So that all the churches
planted by the Apostles, Evangelists or any other in the first ages of the
gospel were private. Thirdly of this kind are those churches at this day (if
there be any such) which are amongst the Turks or any other kind of infidels.
The causes of a private Church.
Out of the which examples we may gather that the cause of this private estate
of the church, was in the first ages of the world the small number of the true
worshippers of God, and is in these latter ages the infidelity of magistrates,
who being themselves infidels do not go about to bring their subjects to the
faith, but are perhaps content to tolerate the same within their dominions, and
that for some civil respect, as namely to make their cities and countries more
resorted unto, for increase of the tribute due unto them, for the preservation
of peace or for some other such consideration. Lastly the chief cause of these
private Churches is to be taken from the very nature of the Gospel, the which
being contrary to man's reason is hardly believed, and therefore it is usually
received only of a few. As it is written, Romans 10.16. who has believed our
report, that is, very few in respect of the infidels do believe the doctrine
of the Gospel. For howsoever the force of civil authority, and other outward
respects make the gospel to be generally received in many places, yet this
general profession is contrary to the nature of the gospel, the which hardly
and seldom is truly received as has been said. But here it may easily be
objected that no Church can be called private, seeing that we have here before
defined a church in general, by the public service of God. We answer
confessing, that every church is public in respect of the several members of
it, yea although it be in a private house or family or in the most secret
corner that can be. And yet a church contained within a private place, and
consisting of a small company may truly and fitly be called private in respect
of that Church, which consisting of the whole body of the people does not lurk
in a corner, but is openly established, amongst all and in every place. Yet
the ministry of the word and al other actions of such a church are to be
counted public and not private. So that this kind of Churches is called
private from the subject because they are in private places, but the subject of
the other kinds is a public city or country.

Sect. 2. Of the the specials in planting a public Church.
NOW that we see what a private Church is, we are in the next place to come to
the specials in the planting of it. And first we are to declare by whom this
kind of Church ought to be founded* as for the secondarie workers, to wit, the
ministers of the word, we have spoken of them in the general treatise of
planting a Church. So that here we are to search out ^he first workers in this
action, who are the chief, in that they begin the work and procure the
ministry of the word. The answer is that every man may be the chief and
first builder of a Church so far forth as his calling, power and authority
does stretch. So that in this case private men may be lawfully and are usually
the first and chief builders. Yea it is not only lawful but that whereunto
the duty which we owe both to God to seek his glory and to men to seek
their salvation, does necessarelie bind us, that if God give us occasion, the
Church standing in need of our help, we be not wanting in this behalf. For
so we are to understand that this is to be done, whenas the Church is
destitu^e of christian magistrates, and likewise of other gou^rnours and
teachers. As it is in those places where either there is no C^^rch a^ all, or
else so decayed, that there rem^in^th nothing but the professi^n of religion
amongst some few. In the which case it is lawful for any christian whom God
has endued with the zeal of his glory and the salvation of his brethren, and
also wit^ some measure of knowledge how this thing ought to be done, to labor
both in bringing t^ose who are infidels to the profession of the faith, Private
men may plant private Churches.
and also to b^ a means to continue them together in the same: so it is
recorded. Act. 8.4. That the Church which was at Jerusalem being dispe^sed,
they did preach the word, every man laboring as he had occasion offered. So
we read that Prisci^la and Aquila had a Church in their own house, which we
may well think to have been gathered and constituted by them, for that they
are said to have preached the gospel diligently and to have converted many.
Romans 16.4. 1. Cor. 16.19. So Colossians. 4.15. the Apostle saluteth Nympha and
the Church which was in his house, and although it be not mentioned, that these
men were the founders of these Churches within their own houses, yet this
doctrine may be proved by that general rule of the word the which lays this
charge upon every man, that he build the Church and establish the true worship
of God so far as his authority does stretch. By this rule, as every man is to
make himself the temple of the holy ghost, so masters of families, Every one
ought to build the Church so far as his authority stretches.
and rulers of cities and countries are bound to be the first founders of the
Church in those places where they have to do, yea they may lawfully preach the
word to any other when occasion is offered. Yet whenas they have won any to
the profession of Christ, who are not of their own families or gathered them
together being dispersed abroad, to serve God together, then they are to
commit the further building of it to those who shall be appointed and chosen to
teach and order the said congregation. And if they themselves be thought
meetest for that purpose, then are they no more private men but ecclesiastical
rulers. Also this is to be considered that whenas it pleases God to put into
any man's heart this desire and purpose to go about the building of any such
private Church, he or they if they be more then one) are to communicate their
purpose to those who do already believe and profess the faith near to that
place, that their consent and approbation of their doings may be unto them a
kind of calling and also confirm and encourage them in the said work. And in
this manner it is not unlawful for private men to be the first builders and
founders of a private Church, consisting not only of their own families, but
also of any other whose hearts it shall please God to move to believe the
gospel and to join with them in the profession of it. But in converting
others, there is great wisdom to be used, forasmuch as civil rulers who are
not themselves of the Church, although they do give a toleration for a private
Church within their dominions, yet they will hardly suffer their subjects to be
turned to any new religion: so that they who do take in hand this work are
to consider, that they have not such liberty as were to be wished, and
therefore they ought with peace and quietness to use that liberty which God
has granted unto them, rather then by passing the limits of their calling, to
venture the loss of that which they have. So that they are to build chiefly
by gathering together those who do already profess the faith, and that by
private teaching as occasion is offered: and as for others, to use all lawful
means to allure them to the liking of their profession, as is an honest and
unblameable life, whereby they may get the favor of all men as the Church had,
Act. 2.47. Then to be ready to receive all that come unto them and lovingly
and mildly to confer with them of those points whereof they doubt. Thus did
the apostle Paul at Rome for the space of two years remaining in an hired
house privately receive all that came unto him and did preach the G^spell with
all bold^esse without any hindrance: the which he could never have done in that
place if he had gone about openly and publicly to change the state of
religion and to bring the people of Rom^ to the profe^sion of the Gospel.

Sect. 3. Of the state of it being planted.
AS great care is to be used in the gathering of a private Church, so likewise
continuing it, this always is to be observed, that they live in obedience to
all civil laws and constitutions so that they be no cause of disturb^nce to
the public state of the place where they live. For to this end are all those
exhortations which are made concerning obeying magistrates and rulers whether
high or lo^. R^m. 13.1. Peter. 2.17. and in many other places, for the Churches
were then in those places where heathen magistrates ruled. Yea christians
living in this estate although they ought to desire the company of their
brethren professing the faith rather then of infidels which are strangers from
God, and also as much as they can, to have their continual conversation with
them, yet they ought not to abhor or fly the company of those who are not of
the Church, whenas by just occasion it is offered. For so we see the Apostle
writes to the Co^inthians. 1.7.12. that the believing husband should not put
away the unbelieving wife being content to remain with him. So also we may
observe that the christians were often invited by infidels to their banquets,
Christians in private Churches ought not to abhor the company of infidels.
1. Cor. 10.27. And as for the sins and corruptions which we shall see in
them, we may and ought to use greater patience toward them then toward
those that do profess the gospel. So Paul writes. 1. Cor. 5.12. what have
I to do to judge them that are without, do not ye judge those who are within?
and therefore we may lawfully leave their faults and sins unreproved. Yet in
all our dealinges with them we must aim at their conversion, and then it will
be for the glory of God, and our own comfort, which if it be only for our
temporal commodity, cannot be without the offense of our brethren, whereunto a
special regard is to be had, and also to our own hinderance in regard of
comfort and edification in the knowledge and obedience of Christ. Furthe^ in
these private Churches this is to be observed, that they most usually consist
of the most sincere and faithful christians. For in them none are compelled to
profess the faith, but all are such as do willingly of their own accord
embrace the gospel. Act. 2.41. So many as willingly received the word,
Private Chu^ches consist of the most swee^e Chris^ians.
were baptized. Yea this also may be an argument of their sounden^sse in the
profession of the truth, for that living amongst infidels, they cannot but
incur the hatred of many, yea oft^ntimes even of the civil rulers
themselves, by taking upon them the profession of the gospel: and so sustain
many iniu^ies and hurtes in regard of things belonging to this temporal
life, and manifold molestations, scoffs, yea reproaches in regard of the
se^uice of God. Again this is to be noted that these private Churches are for
the most part more pure, perfect, orderly and free, then publi^ke Churches are.
For with the multitude there comes in confusion and corruption. And the
civil power being in the person of the magistrate joined to the church, does
often too much abridge the use of christian liberty, taking to it self, as it
may lawfully do, full power in making those ecclesiastical laws which belong
generally to all the churches within the compass of it. But in these churches
the whole authority of establishing laws, orders and the appointing of rites
and ceremonies is in the Church it self. Lastly it is usually objected against
these private Churches that they are the causes of tumults and civil dissensio^
and so consequently do bre^d the ruin of those commonwealths and kingdoms
wher^in they a^e toll^rated: and therefore that it is the part of wise rulers
who tender the good and peaceable estate of the people not to suffer them
within their dominions: to this we answer confessing that through the
perverseness of our corrupt natures the which are (...) inflamed with bitter
enmity against God and all goo^nesse, it comes often to pass that
^^uersitie of religion does stir up great debate in kingdoms, cities and
families: for this cause the Church desired to be separated in place from the
idolatours, least they should exasperate their minds against them Genesis 46.34.
Exodus 8.26. yea Christ does profess that this would follow the Gospel that
the father should be at deadly variaunce with the son, and the mother with
the daughter, and that a man's nearest friend should for this cause become his
cruel enemy. Yea the bloody and tragica^l tumults, which have of late times
risen and continued upon this occasion in diverse places, do testify the truth
here of. But yet we ought not therefore to banish the Church out of our
dominions. For it is better to have the true worship of god with war,
trouble and dissension, then idolatry with quietness. So that we ought to say
with Christ, that seeing the Gospel is even as a fierbrand in the world, what
should be our desire, but that it be preached: for although for a time it
breed trouble, yet in the end it will be found the only means of true
quietness.

CHAP. VIIII. Of a public Church.
Sect. 1. Of the objections which are made against public churches.
THus much of a private Church. Besides the which there is another kind of a
church, namely, when any whole city, country or nation does generally
profess the faith, and so becomes a Church consisting not of any small or
mean number but of great multitudes of people even of whole nations. As we see
at this day that diue^s great kingdoms and commonwealths have received the
gospel of Christ: so that in them the church does not lurk in any family or
private corner or is in some few places but is openly, publicly and generally
set up in all places by the authority of the civil rulers, and the common
consent of all men. This we call a public Church such as we see at this day
most of all the cities, commonwealthes, What a public Church is.
countries and kingdoms in Eu^ope to be. Of the which one is distinguished
from another, by having a proper government of the own, being ruled by the
same humane laws both civil and also ecclesiastical. But it may be here
thought, that these countries are no true churches, but that there are churches
in them, and that not all the people generally but only some few of them
separated from the rest, are to be accounted the true churches of God, and that
for these reasons: first because there was no such churches established by the
apostles or recorded to have been in the first ages of the gospel. Secondly
for that although it be not impossible to God to convert the hearts of all men
to embrace the gospel, yet it is not agreeable to his usual dealing so to
bless any nation, as that all of them without exception should believe and
become faithful men. Thirdly because of the great confusion and many fould
corruptions, which are usually found in such Churches, the which seldom or
never can be brought to the right order of the Church of Christ. Lastly because
they are not called to the profession of the faith by the ministry of the
word of God, but are in a manner forced thereunto by the laws and edictes of
princes and other rulers. Wh^reunto we answer, that these things do not
hinder these whole cities or nations from being the true churches of God. As
touching the first, we do confess that there we^e no such public and general
churches in the days of the apostles, neither in the ages following: the cause
whereof we may plainly see to be this. That then was the ^ime of the infancy
of the gospel in respect of the number of believers, it having been but lately
published to the world: but this is the time wherein the lord has appointed
that the fulness of the gentiles should come in, Why there were no public Chapter
in the days of the Apostles.
which is the conversion of whole nations and many countries. Yea the apostle
witnesses that the fulness of the Jews shall be then whenas that whole nation
shall generally embrace christ as the savior of the world. Romans 11.26. To the
second doubt we answer, that all the people of any country may have a general
faith whereby they do know and profess that Jesus Christ is the savior of
the world: and that their prof^ssion hereof although it be not effectual to
their salvation, yea although it be merely hypocritical, they thinking no such
thing, yet it is sufficient to make them members of the visible church. As
touching the corruptions which are in such churches we do confess that it is
greater then either it is to be wished it were, or then is in private churches,
where the number of believers is less, and that they cannot so easily be
brought to and kept in that holy order, which christ has appointed for his
church: Why public churches can not be so perfect as priua^e
and further that these public churches so seldom attain to any pure or
perfect estate, because in them the church and the commonwealth are so joined
and linked together the whole affai^es and state of the Church depending on the
civil estate, that the manifold alterations, wheru^to al kingdoms and
co^mon-wealthes are subject, do make many chaunges in the church. Yet this does
not take from them either the being or the name of the church. For it is no
strange thing that there should be greater confusion and more corruptions in
great multitudes of people, then in small congregations. For so we see even in
the first congregation of C^ristians which the Apostles themselves did govern
that when the number of disciples did increase, then there was murmuring among
them: and so even this private Church did tend to some confusion. Act. 6.1. yea
this thing has long ago been observed to have been con^inually the state of
the Church, the which as long as it was in persecution, did flourish not in the
number so much as in the time of peace but yet it was far better ordered:
godliness, love and virtue did more flourish, the Lord was more fervently and
heartily served and called upon, all faults and corruptions in life or doctrine
were severely censured, yea rather sharply punished: but whenas it pleased God
to give peace and prosperity to his Church by the means of Christian
Emperors and kings, then did the number of believers mightily increase, and
the Church did in that respect flourish, but together with the number, loosenes
in life and in the service of God, scismes, heresies and all manner of
corruptions did come in and increase more and more. So that these multitudes of
professors are not in regard of these inconveniences to be rejected, but
rather we are to rejoice at this as the apostle did, Philip. 1.18. For that
Christ was preached although for vain glory: and to praise God for that
according as he promised by his prophets, Esa 54.2. The Church has enlarged
her tents, so that all the nations of the earth do come into her bosom. Yea
even this that the name of Christ is not blasphemed as among infidels, but
honored, worshipped and called upon, although it be in great confusion, yet it
makes for the glory of God, How public Churches are called to the faith.
and therefore all good Christians ought to rejoice herein, although they do
wholly mist^ke all corruptions and the confusion which is usually in these
public Churches. Lastly concerning their calling we are not to think that it
is so strange a thing that they are called to the profession of the faith, who
were borne Christans and do even as it were suck the profession of
christianity from their mothers breasts, of whom the Apostle says that they
are holy. 1. Cor. 7. or yet they who being professors of the gospel; and
holding the foundation of christian religion, as it seems that papists and
such other heretics do, as we have declared more at large heretofore, are
brought by the authority of the magistrate from a corrupt manner of serving
God, or from grievous heresies to a more sincere worship and profession, as it
was in the primative Church, whenas men were converted from heathenisme to
christianity. And therefore all those who have been by baptism ingraffed into
the profession of Christ in their young years and have afterward been
continually brought up in the same profession of the faith, declaring unto all
men in the whole course of their lives that they do like, love, and embrace
that profession which they took upon them, and do serve and worship God in
the name of Jesus Christ, are to be counted members of the Church, although
they have no effectual calling to the unfeigned and true obedience of the
gospel. To conclude this point, the example of the Church of the Jews will
evidently declare the true nature and whole estate of this kind of Churches,
and also resolve all doubts which can be moved. For in it all that received
circumcision were counted members of the Church. Yea the Apostle witnesses
that at the time which the Lord has appointed, that whole nations shall again
become the Church of God. So that in what place soever whether town, city,
commonwealth, province or kingdom the people do generally profess the faith,
or thus; wheresoever the laws ecclesiastical do stretch themselves as wide
and do belong to as many as the civil or common laws made for the
administration of the commonwealth there is a true public Church set up.

Sect. 2. Of the conjunction of the Church and commonwealth.
BY setting up a public Church in any place, it comes to pass that the
Church and commonwealth are joined together: the which in a private state of a
Church have nothing to deal the one with the other. For there the Chapter either
lurketh in secret, if she have not he favor of the civil ruler, or at the
least, dwells as in a private house if she have a toleration. But now whenas
any people gen^rally together with their magistrates do profess the faith, the
church may be compared to Esther who was taken from her private state, wherein
she lived and being brought forth into open and public place, was married to
the king, so is the conjunction of the Church and the commonwealth. Wherein we
have these points consider, first what is the bond of this conjunction,
secondly the manner of it, thirdly whether state is the superior, fourthly how
they meddle with each other, and lastly the commodities, and discommodities
which either the Church or the commonwealth reapeth by this means or the
changes and alterations, which happen to either of them. For the first, the
bond of this conjunction is the civil power, which is the very fountain and
head from the which both these estates do flow and by the which it is brought
to pass, that there is a public Church in any place: for howsoever great
multitude of people may be converted only by the ministry of the word, yet we
do not see, that al generally do profess the faith, but only where the power of
the magistrate joined to the word, does make the gospel to be publicly
received, in that it makes all that are members of the civil body to be members
of the Church also. Hence it is that as soon as the civil power cease to
maintain religion, Public Churches stand no longer then they are vpheld by
the civil magistrate.
these public Churches fall to the ground, the bond being broken whereby they
were tied to the commonwealth. So we read Iud. 2.7.19. That the people of
Israel served God as long as Joshua, the elders or their judges lived, but as
soon as they died, they fell away to idolatry. Likewise in the first time of
the gospel, there were no public Churches for diverse hundred years: and al
for want of this bond of christian rulers: but as soon as the Roman Emperors
did embrace the gospel, then were public Churches set up in many places.

Sect. 3. That a public Church with the civil estate makes one body under
one head.
IN the second place we are to see what manner of conjunction this is, to wit,
whether that the Church and commonwealth thus joined together, make one body or
state ruled by one and the same head or else are still two diverse bodies,
absolute and perfect each in it self without the other, and ordered by the
own proper head in all matters belonging unto it. For answer hereof, it has
been thought that in this conjunction there are two bodies not only diverse,
but even clean opposite, and contrary the one to the other every respect, that
they are ordered by two diverse supreme heads, and that all the functions of
these bodies are of so contrary natures, that they cannot lawfully meet
together in the same subject. This opinion which seems not to be agreeable to
the truth, has risen of a reverend, religious, yea as it proved at length, a
superstitious opinion of the ecclesiastical estate, with too base and vile an
opinion of the civil state, the which has seemed so profane and unholy, as
that it could not in any respect be joined with the other, without defiling
and profaning it. But the word of God teaches us that the civil power is a
holy ordinance of God instituted by God chiefly for this end, to intermeddle
with ecclesiastical matters and not only to suffer and tolerate religion as
it does in a private Church, but also to set up and maintain it, yea wholly to
effect it (although by the means and ministry of others) in all places
whither the said power does stretch it self. As for the distinction of the
civil and ecclesiastical state, although it may be used to put a difference
betwixt civil and ecclesiastical matters, yet if thereby we mean that in a
public Church there is added to the civil state another full and perfect
body endued with full authority to begin and effect all matters belonging to
it self, and not relying upon the other, but only using the help of it against
outward violence, as when two distinct nations do join themselves in league
together for their greater safety, then we think far otherwise of these
things, then the word of God does permit: according to the which the
political body together with a public Church are but one body moved and
ordered by one and the same head. For as when any people being barbarous, rude,
inexpert in feats of war, and altogether destitute of humane knowledge and
all good litterature, become civil, courteous, warlicke, wise, and learned,
there are not so many new estates or bodies added to the commonwealth, but
only the first state of it is made so many ways better, so it is whenas a
people of pagans and infidels become the worshippers of the true God. For there
is not a new body or state, but only the quality of religion is added to
the civil body or rather idolatry is changed into the true worship of
God. The which does no more make a distinct body then idolatry does in a
heathenish commonwealth. As for the people they can no more be said to be
another body, because they are religious then for that they are a learned and
warlicke people, but for the ministers and rulers of the Church, it may seem
necessary to be granted that they do either make a distinct and perfect
body, or that the ministry is a member of the civil body. Whereunto we
answer that the ministry is not a body in it self, The ministry is a
member of the civil body.
neither is it the head of the body of the Church, but only is a member of the
body of the commonwealth, distinguished from the rest in nature, use and
obiecte, and excelling the other by a divine holiness which it has more then
any other part or function of this body. The truth hereof is to be laid open
by declaring first that this whole state consisting of a political body, and
of a public Church has but one head whereby the whole body is ordered and
every member of it moved in their several functions. And secondly the offices
of these two states may agree together in the same subject. The head is the
civil power: whereof we speak rather then of the civil magistrate, for that
in many places, the power is not wholly in the hands of the magistrate but
divided among the senate, the nobility, and the people. But here we speak of
the whole power the which we call the hand of this body by ^ usual metaphore
taken from the natural bodies, wherein we see that the whole motion comes
from the head without the which none of the members can move it self, or do
any function. Thus all men do grant that the civil power is the head of this
body, in regard of civil and worldly affairs, but that it may be so called in
respect of the Church and of ecclesiastical matters, many do doubt or rather
flatly deny without any doubting, thinking that neither the civil power does
stretch it self to Church affairs, neither if it do in some respect, that it
ought therefore, or may lawfully be called the head of the Church. As touching
this point we are to consider, how both the function, and also the name of a
head agrees to the civil power: for the first in the building of the Church
it pleases God to use the help and the ministry of men, and that two
diverse ways according to the two diverse kinds of building his Church,
whereof the one is inward, secret and spiritual, whenas by the ministry of
the word and the sacremenes the Church is edified in knowledge, faith, love,
obedience and in all manner of spiritual graces: in this part of the
building, Christ is the first and chief mouer, yea the head of his Church,
unto the which he gives spiritual motion by his ministers as by instruments
unto whom he gives spiritual graces fit for this purpose. Ephe. 4.11. He gave
some to be Apostles, some Evangelists, some Pastors, and doctors, for the
gathering of his saints, and for the building of the body of Christ. Thus
Christ only is the head of the whole visible church, for no creature can
either appoint ecclesiastical functions or give spiritual graces, either to
the ministers or to the people. But whenas the Church comes to be built in
any particular place, there must be added an other part of this building more
outward, apparent and sensible then the other, to wit, whenas this spiritual
building, together with the ministry of the word, which is the means of it
is not only received when as it is offered, but also diligently sought after,
when it is wan^^ng, and carefully preserved after that it is gotten. This kind
of building also is to be performed by the ministry of man but yet it does
not come from the same head or fountain. For that spiritual building comes
from Christ as he is Lord and king of his Church, but this comes from God the
father, the maker and preserver of mankind, who in great mercy and wisdom
has not left men in utter confusion but has given unto them the means of
having a Church and his true worship. This means is his own power and
authority communicated to certain men for the good of the rest to whom he
has given this charge that they do as by all other means, so chiefly by
building his church in those places which are within the compass of their
authority, procure the good of men: so that all whosoever have the rule of any
place whether it be kingdom or country, province or city, town or family,
are bound by the word of God and namely by the general laws of magistracy to
build the Church in the said places: the which thing if they do neglect (as
most of all the magistats in the world in all ages have done) then they do
sin against God no less then the minister being lawfully called to the
function, who does neglect the inward and spiritual edifying of the Church.
This the prophet foretold saing that kings and Queens should be nourse
fathers and nurse mothers to the Chapter Not that they should be the ministers of
the word and of the spiritual nourishment unto them, but only that they
should build after this inward manner. This second kind of building is in
order and nature the first, yea that which moves the external action of the
spiritual building and prepares the way for the ministry of the word, by
the means whereof a Church cannot be set up in any place whither country,
ci^ie, or family till that the power, whe^e^y the said place is ruled, do
either procure or at the least suffer it. For the kingdom of Christ is not of
this world, neither does it take a way the general ordinance of magistracy
and order, whereby God rules the world, but is in respect of outward action
subject unto it, and to be established and miantained by it, for as God
himself was the head and first mouer in the building of the Church when as at
the first he sent his Apostles immediately by his own authority to do it; so
also it is his will that they who do supply his place, and are after a sort,
Gods on earth, should afterward be the first agents in this work. For we are
not to think that rulers (by the which name we call all that have authority,
whethe^ in countries, towns or private houses) have the charge only of the
bodies of their subjects committed unto them, but rather that their chief care
ought to be to provide for their souls, Magistrates have charge of the souls
their subjects.
the true worship of GOD wherein the last end and chief happiness of man
consists and whereunto all temporal benefits are to be referred: as the
Apostle writes.1. Timo. 2.2. the end of a quiet and peaceable life procured by
magistrates is the right worship of GOD. For this cause civil rulers are
called by GOD in the scripture the pastors or feeders of the people not as if
they were to feed their bodies only as sheep heardes do flocks of sheep, but
chiefly in regard of their souls, as we may see evidently, 1. Chro 17.6.
which way soever I walked with Israel, have I spoken of building a Church or
temple to any of the judges of Israel whom I commanded to feed my people? In
the which place we may see at whose hands GOD looks for the building of his
Church. But it may be here asked, what if this civil power do not move in
this work, whether that there should be no Church or ministry of the word in
that place, or rather if that the king, prince, magistrate or the master of
the family he negligent in his duty, if not then the subject, son or servant
in a private house may lawfully take this work in hand or yet the ministers of
the word may begin and go on in their work, yea although they be neither set
on work nor yet tolerated but even flatly forbidden and peremptorelie
hindered by the said power: for otherwise it might come to pass by the
obstinacy of rulers being enemies to the Gospel that there should be no Church
either public or private in any part of the world, whereas it is the will of
God that his church and true worship should be established in all places. And
therefore it may seem that in this case the council and practtise of the
apostles is to be followed who being forbidden by the rulers to preach the
Gospel, answered that it is better to obey God then man. The answer is as
before Chapter. 7. Sect. 6. that as touching ordinary callings, a church
cannot lawfully be built in any place by resisting the authority of the said
place. For no man may against the will of any man rushe into his house, to
instruct his family or into a city to abolishe idolatry and to set up
publicly the true worship of God, because howsoever every one ought to
endeavor to build the Church yet we ought to keep our selves within the
compass of our own calling and not to take upon us by violence, the
performance of other men's duties. For none are crowned either with due praise,
or with happy success of their labors, but they who strive lawfully, No man
ought to pass the limits of his calling in building the Church.
howsoever it pleases God some times to accept and prosper the endeavors of
those who labor in advancing his worship and glory more in fervent zeal
then imperfect knowledge, and so go further in this behalf then the secret
rule of the word of God does requier or permit. As the apostles, they have an
extraordinary calling and dispensation immediately from God himself needful
for the first publishing of the gospel: the which they were to obey, yea
though it were contrary to his revealed will. But ordinary ministers have no
callinges but from men, and must square their actions according to the written
word. And yet we are not to think that it is in the power of man, or of any
creature to forbid the service of God: for although all the rulers in the
world should make that edict of Dariu^ that none should pray unto God, yet
we ought nor to obey it, as we see in the example of Daniel, Da^. 6.10. but we
speak of building a Church in any place: the which work is never so generally
hindered, but that God inclines the hearts of some to set it forward. And
whenas no public magistrate does build the Church, yet private men give it
entertainment in their houses. As touching other particulars wherein this
civil power medleth with the Church, we are to consider them hereafter; only
we ^re here to note how this power may be called the head of the Church, to
wit, for that it is the first mouer in the building of it. In the which respect
not only kings and princes but even private men who set up and maintain the
Church within their houses, may in regard of their own families be so called,
Christ is the head of the Church after another manner then men are
and yet we do not by this means give that to man which is proper to Christ:
for first Christ is the head of the catholic Church but man of some
particular Church only. Secondly Christ is the head not only to the whole
Church, but also to the several members of it, to whom he gives motion by
bestowing on them the graces of his spirit either permanent or temporary: but
man is the head only in respect of the builders, namely of the teachers and
rulers of the Church, and in respect of the whole body of the people, as they
give themselves to be made a Church. And lastly Christ is the head of the
internal and spiritual working but man of the external building: Christ
gives gifts fit for the ministry which make an inward calling, but man
gives the outward calling: Christ has appointed the offices of the ministry
generally in the whole visible Church, but man procures the execution of the
said offices in this or that particular place, by this or that person. So that
whatsoever civil power it be whether of princes in kingdoms or of the people
or senate in commonwealthes or of private men in their families, that builds
the Church, it may very fitly be called the head in that work. As we may see,
Number. 1.15. and 7.2. that in regard of civil affairs, the princes of the
families, tribes, and of the people of Israel, are called the heads of them,
because they did first move in all public actions, and yet the person of the
civil ruler whether of the king, of senators, or of any other in particular,
is to be counted a member of the Church as other men are. Thus we see that the
Church together with the civil state make not t^o but one body under one and
the same head.

Sect. 4. Civil and ecclesiastical callinges may be in the same subject.
NOW we are to see how these two states may also agree in subject, that is, be
ordered by the same persons. For this false distinction of the body of the
Church, from the body of the common wealth, as it has sprung from a false
opinion of two distinct supreme heads, the one over the Church, the other
over the civil state, so it has been confirmed by a false difference which
has been put betwixt civil and eclesiasticall persons: as if the having of
any function in the one state did quite cut a man off from meddling with the
other, and that by reason of the contrary natures of these two states, and of
the functions belonging unto them. But according to the word of God these
civil and ecclesiastical callinges do not so fight, but that they may meet
together in one man without iarring. For it is not unlawful for one who
bears some public function or is in any degree or place of honor in the
commonwealth to meddle with the ordering of the Church if he have gifts from
God, and a lawful calling from men, or yet for him who is already an
ecclesiastical person, to have, retain or take upon him any civil calling.
The truth of this doctrine may be plainly seen in the scripture which
shows that both civil and ecclesiastical callings may lawfully concur in
the same person, when the state of the Church does so require. For if we do
consider the Church before the law, we shall find that the first borne of the
family, was to the rest both a magistrate and a minister: so that although the
examples of the Church being in her infancy and imperfect estate, ought not
wholly to be applied to the Church in the time of the gospel, yet we may
hereby know that there is no such contrariety in the natures of these callings
but that they may be in the same person. Likewise we read that in the time of
the law many who were appointed by God to his service did bear civil
callings. Thus did Samuel, Eli, and the rest of the priests and elders who
were unto the people as judges and lawiers, and did govern them even in the
civil affairs. Lastly if it be objected that these functions ought to be laid
upon diverse men, forasmuch as one man cannot be able to attend upon many
callinges, we answer confessing this to be true that for the better
discharging of these callings they ought ordinarily to be committed to diverse
men, yet that it is no more unlawful for one man to have a civil and an
ecclesiastical calling, then to have two civil callinges: and that some men
are endued with so great a measure of knowledge, wisdom, diligence, and
other gifts that they may be employed in both these kinds of callinges. By
that which has been said of this second point, we may easily gather the
resolution of the third question, to wit, that in this conjunction the Church
has not the upper hand, neither can command and ouerrule, but is subject to
the civil power as to her superior, by whose leave she came into the
commonwealth, and by the which she is maintained, vpholden, yea in great part
ordered, as hereafter will appear. Yea further we may know in part by the same
conclusion what to think of the fourth point, to wit, how these states do
meddle the one with the other, and namely that the civil power does many ways
intermeddle with the Church even as the head does with the body: for it does
not only suffer or procure the building of it but also effect it, not only
plant it but also establish and maintain, yea repair it being fallen, purge
it being corrupt and order it by ecclesiastical laws, as the process of this
treatise will declare in particular. As for the Church it does not meddle with
the civil state or government of the commonwealth, but ought to leave it wholly
to the civil magistrate:

Sect. 5. Of the chaunges happening either to the Church or the commonwealth by
their conjunction.
LAstly we are to consider what chaunges, commodities, or discommodities do
arise either to the Church or to the commonwealth by this conjunction of them
in one body. And first that form or kind of civil government whether it were the
rule of one, of a few, or of many, whether the authority were absolute and
great, or conditional, moderate and limited, which was in use amongst any
people before they did believe, is not by this means alter^d but remains in
full force as before. For a public Church may stand with any form of
government and be subject unto it without making any alteration. The setting up
of a public Church does not alter the form of civil government.
Yet it cutteth off whatsoever is in the civil state in the laws, customs or
offices of it, unlawful and repugnant to the word of God: for the Church
cannot possibly agree and be joined with that which does not agree with the
word. Other change it makes none, save only that the civil state becomes
by this means more happy, sure and firm, yea more glorious and flourishing:
for besides the secret blessing, which God does many ways pour upon those
countries the which do honor him by professing the name of his son Christ,
and so do give not only a poor harbor but even public and sol^mne
entertainment to his Church, as he did bless the house of Obed Edome, 2. Sam.
6.11. for that the Arc remained there for a season, there are evident and
necessary reasons why it should so be. For there is no humane law^s, no fear
of punishment, or hope of reward whatsoeu^r that can bind men so sure to the
perfourmance both of faithful and loyal obedience to their rulers as also of
all duties to their neighbors as does religion and the fear of God in the
hearts of men. And although it ^e not to be hoped especially in these public
Churches, that the hearts of all men generally should be truly possessed
with the fear GOD, yet the word of God being preached leaves even in the
consciences of hypocrites, a fear of committing heinous crimes, the which for
the most part civil laws do forbid: yea in the Church the ministry of the
word reproves and also corrects the least faults, which are incident into
the life of man, whereby it comes to pass, that theft, mur^her and al other
such gross crimes are not once named. Lastly there is nothing so honorable and
glorious for any people as to have the true religion established amongst them:
and nothing more shameful and ignominious by the general consent of all men,
then for any people to be blockish in divine matters, and not able to discern
which is the right worship of the true God. Now let us see what the Church
gains by this bargain and covenant made with the civil state. First by this
means she becomes safe from outward dangers and from the violence of
malicious persecutours, by whom private Churches are continually troubled and
often quite overthrown, being neither willing to resist by force of arms
their own magistrates, laboring to deface the true worship of God, neith^r
for the most part, able to with-stand foreign invasion. And therefore they may
fitly be compared to a vinyard which wants a hedge or fence, so that all the
wild beasts of the forest do enter in and root it up; but a public Church
is guarded by the civil power against all dangers not only outward, but also
inward arising of the stubburn wilfulness of those who will not submit
themselves to the orders of the Church. Hence it is that those civil states,
which are well ordered, are far more fit harbors for the Church, Civil
states well ordered are more fit harbors for the Chapter then disordered states.
then confused commonwealths are. For whenas men are not taught to yield
obedience to civil government, which forbidding only heinous offenses is more
gentle and remiss, how shall they bear the yoke of ecclesiastical
government which looks more narrowly into the lives of men, and is far more
streite and severe. So that a people subdued to civil obedience are as horses
broken, and wild beasts tamed: and may more easily be brought into the form^
of a Church. We do confess that the power of the word of God preached is of
sufficient force and power to make the most lawless and barbarous men, good
Christians and as tame as lambs, and that without the help of this civil
power, as we see in private Churches: yet for the preservation of the outward
order of these public Churches, this means is of great force. Lastly the
increase of number which comes by this means is to be counted no small
commodity, being simply considered, howsoever usually it brings with it,
confusion and imperfect state and sundry such discommodities.

Sect. 6. Of the first mouer in the planting of a public Church.
Now we are to come to the specials which are in planting of a public Church:
and first to the beginner or first mouer in this work. For the declaring of
the truth hereof, we are to consider the very original and first planting of
churches the which were founded by the Apostles and Evangelists in many places:
yea they also committed the care of continuing those Churches unto faithful
men, that they might provide for the time to come. But neither the Apostles
could bring to pass that all the world should be brought to the profession of
the faith, neither the care of those ordinary ministers to whom the
preservation of the said Churches was committed, could so prevail but that
even in those places where the Apostles planted Churches, religion afterward
was by the malice of Satan not only defaced but even so rooted out as in most
of those places there remaneth not any shadow of a church. The Apostles and
other extraordinary ministers being dead, their offices and calling which were
to plant Churches in all places, did cease: after whom there remained in the
Church ordinary ministers to accomplish that work which they had begun, namely
to build out those Churches which they had planted. Yet they had no calling to
build churches in all countries, but in some one place where unto they were
appointed: for if ordinary ministers, which are now in those places where the
Church is, had this calling to preach in diverse countries and to diverse
nations, then they should have gifts needful for this work, as the gifts of
discerning spirits, the gifts of tongues without the which none can preach to a
strange people. But these gifts are ceased as also these callings, neither
has any ordinary minister by his calling any charge of any other people and
countries to bring them to be a Church. And as for extraordinary men, although
God may raise up such when he will yet we are not to look for any such in
these days. As for the bishope of Rome who challenges unto himself the care
of the whole world, as being christ's vicar general we know that his authority
in the Chapter is but usurped, and his allegations frivolous: he has destroyed the
Church, and therefore we are not to look that he should be the chief doer in
the building and planting of Churches: whom then shall we make to be the first
mouer in the planting or repairing of a public Church in a city,
commonwealth or kingdom? even the chief rulers and magistrates of those
places as has been declared in the second section of this chapter. So then the
first thing in the planting of a public Church in any country is this, that
we suppose the civil ruler willing and desirous to take this work in hand, and
that by the means of some of his subjects making humble supplication to him in
this behalf, or by some neighbor Churches stirring him up by their example
to erect the church within his dominions, and commending this work unto him as
the most excellent and happy thing as it is indeed.

Sect. 7. Of the special manner of planting a public Church.
THe next thing to be considered is, how the civil ruler being willing to plant
the Ch^ should know the manner of this work, and the right frame of it,
whereof at the first we must suppose both him and his people to be ignorant.
The means which God has appointed for this end, is this. Although at the
first he did not send his apostles to all countries to plant Churches neither
does since that time send any other as Apostles, yet in that he did by them at
the first preach the gospel and plant Churches in most parts of the world and
does continually preserve the fame in one place or other, he gives sufficient
means of having the knowleege of his true worship to those that will embrace
it, and leaves the rest inexcusable. The first building of Churches in so many
places was so conspicuous, even as a city set on the top of an hill, that it
might easily be seen of all men. So that even as the gentiles which dwelt
far off from jerusalem, hearing of the fame of it, were moved many of them
to repair thither to learn the knowledge of the true God, so all they now
even the Jews also when God shall turn their hearts and open their eyes to
see some glimmering of the Gospel, ought to resort to those places where the
Church is, there to get the word of God, the manner of his true worship and
all other means which may further their purpose. And this is to be done by
procuring men of knowledge and wisdom to come and instruct both rulers and
people how these things ought to be performed. These are to be had from those
places where the Church is already built, as one of the priests which were
translated out of Samaria, was sent back again to teach the new inhabitants
of the country how to fear and worshipped the God of Israel. And first they
are to call the people to the profession of the faith by preaching unto them
the doctrine of the law and of the gospel in that manner which has already
been declared, for civil rulers do not themselves ordinarily build the
Church, but they, as it were, hyre worke-men to do it, and take order that the
people whom they would bring into the form of a Church, be taught and
instructed in the ways of God. Thus to the ministry of the word, whereby
alone private Churches are builded, the power and authority of the magistrate
is added, or rather the ministry of the word is added to the civil
authority (which has the first place in order, although not in efficacy)
that as the one does labor to bring the bodies and outward actions of the
people into the due order of a Church, and to conform themselves to the right
worship of God, so the preaching of the word may move their minds to
know, and their hearts to obey the will of God. The which work of the
magistrate and minister consists in two things, the first is to take away
the false religion, the other to establish that which is agreeable to the will
of God. In both which there are diverse things to be considered and specially
in the first, for so much as it is a hard and dangerous matter to abolish that
corrupt worship which they have always used, and which they have received
from their ancestors. For men are very zealous of the traditions of their
forefathers, wherein they themselves also have been brought up. To abrogate
all at once, and insteede thereof to plant the true religion being altogether
strange and unknown unto them, In the first planting of a public Church,
the false worship is to b^ abrogated by little and little
were both dangerous to the civil estate as that which were very like to
breed sedition and vprores among the people, and also contrary to the right
manner of laying a sure foundation of a Church. For they being forced by
authority to renounce their own religion would rather hate that in their
hearts, whereunto there were forced, then truly love and embrace it. Yea
upon every occasion they would be ready to fall a way from the profession of
it, and so be further off then they were at the first: and therefore the
corrupt worship is to be tolerated for a while, till such time as by the
preaching of the word some good number be converted. Which being done, then
both the minister in reproving and the magistrate in abrogating their false
kind of worship may be more bold. Yet not all at once, but at the first
that which is most gross and corrupt, the vanity and falsehood whereof is most
palpable and may most easily be showed. Then as touching the true religion,
they who as yet do not embrace it, may be compelled by the authority of the
magistrate, first not to speak evil of it, nor to injury or molest either by
word or deed the professors of it. This we may learn of Nabuchadnezzer,
Daniel. 3.18. who made a decree that whosoever should blaspheame or speak
amiss of the God of Sidrach, Misach and Abednego, he should be put to death.
Secondly they are also to be urged to hear reverently the word of God
preached unto them: by the which means we n^ed not doubt but that the truth
will daily more and more prevail, so that great multitudes of people will
either in truth and from their hearts, love and embrace it or at the least
make outward profession: the which as it is not to be rejected for that it
cannot cert^inely be discerned to be hypocritical (we being bound to think
the best of all men which do profess Christ, and not to judge them of
hypocrisy) so it is good in this respect, for that they submitting themselves
to the outward profession, will diligently and willingly hear the word, use
religious exercises and all such means: the which we may hope will be
effectual at one time or other to their unfeigned conversion. They who do not
yield to be professors of the gospel, are still to be compelled to hear the
word which must be preach^d to them in a distinct assembly, and of set
purpose: for that the ordinary ministry which edifieth those who are
already converted, cannot be so effectual and serve so fitly for this end. If
it be here asked whether that the civil magistrate may not compel them by
inflicting some punishment on them, to submit and conform themselves wholly to
the orders of the Church, and to become members of it; the answer is, that
this may be done to those who did once profess the true religion and
afterward did fall away: but men who never did conceive in their minds the
doctrine of the gospel, cannot by force be made members of a Church, Obstinate
infidels may be compelled to hear the word, but not to be of the Church.
but being debarred from the use of their false worship, and also compelled
to hear the word preached, are to be left for their conversion to the Lord.
Yet if they continue professors of that worship which the civil ruler does
abhor, they are if not subject to banishment, loss of goods, imprisonment,
or some less danger, trouble or punishment, yet clean shut out of his favor
and so debarred from all preferment, honor or dignity, yea from any good
condition of life. For the avoiding wereof, many will become professors of the
tru^th, who in their hearts do not embrace it.

Sect. 8. How a public Church being planted, is to be established.
THus when the number of believers is so increased that (as for the most part
it is in public Churches) either for number or for distance of place they
cannot conveniently ordinarily come together, then they are to be divided in
diverse asse^blies, and so to be brought into the form of a Church by
appointing fit men to teach and lead them in the way of everlasting life, that
so they may serve God and live in that holy order of a Church, which he has
appointed; And for so much as it may be asked where there can in this first
planting of a Church be had such a number of ministers as may be sufficient, In
case of necessity men of mean gifts may be admitted to the ministry of the
word.
therefore we are herein to follow the example of the Apostles, who whenas a
competent number were won to the profession of the faith, they did after some
space of time choose out of that number, those who were endued with best
gifts. Yea although they were not learned in any other knowledge, yet if they
had attained the sound knowledge of the principles of christian religion, so
that they were able to teach the some to others, if they were m^n of an
unblameable life, so that they might boldly and effectualie exhort others to
the same, then were they judged meet to be set over the rest, to teach and
govern them. Yea this course did Esra take in a like case by the counsel and
commandment of king Artaxarxes as we read in the seventh of that book,
Verse. 25. And thou Ezra according to the wisdom of thy God which is in thee,
appoint Judges even all that know the laws of thy God. And if it were
objected, but there a^e not a sufficient number of men which k^ow how to judge,
instruct, and order the people, therefore he adds, and those that know not,
make them to know, how they ought to do these things. So that by the good
direction and counsel of those who are the chief worke-men in this planting
of a Church; men otherwise ignorant and inexpert may become able to teach and
govern others. Neither ought this to seem strange unto us, considering the
weak and simple state of the people at the first is such, as that, although in
some respect they had need of most expert master builders, yet they may be
helped and taught by those, who do themselves need to be instructed. And
according to the mean estate both of the teachers and also of the people we
must be content (as no doubt the Lord in mercy does accept it) with a small
measure both of knowledge and also of obedience in the ways of God: and if it
here be objected that which the Apostle forbids Timothy, to wit, that none
newly converted from paganism should be a Bishop or elder, we answer that if
that be his meaning, yet this commandment must give place to the necessity of
the Church: yea many such may be known to be very sound in the faith, so that
we need not fear any apostasy in them. And forasmuch as it may be well
thought that these men cannot so soon be endued with such a measure of
knowledge in the government of the Church, and in the teaching and ordering of
the people, but that they will be wanting in many things, and oftentimes err
in administration, it being of it self so hard and difficult, as that even
they who have all their life time labored in this work and been teachers and
governors in the Church, shall find themselves in many respects insufficient,
yea ignorant and inexpert in many cases, which do often fall out among the
people, therefore they by whose means and ministry the Church was first
founded even as by most wise maister-builders must still have an eye to the
several congregations and set those things in order which are amiss, resolve
the doubts which are risen among them, strengthen, confirm and encourage both
the people in their profession and obedience which they perform both to God
and to his ministers, which are set over them, and especially they are to
str^ngthen the teachers themselves, least they faint under the weight of this
most painful and troublesome calling wherein they find so many offenses in
the people, so many infirmities and wantes in themselves, yea so many l^ts and
hindrances of their minis^ery laid by the malice of satan and the means of
wicked men. Thus did the Apostle Paul exhort, confirm and encourage the
elders of the Church at Ephesus Act. 20. whose example is to be followed of all
in this case, who are endued with more excellent gifts of knowledge and wisdom
in governing the Church of God then these are, to whom in the want of men fully
sufficient, the congregations of the people are committed.

Sect. 9. To whom the enacting of ecclesiastical laws in a public Church
does belong.
IT remains that we consider to whom it belongs to make ecclesiastical
laws in a public Church. In private Churches this ought to be done, as has
been said, by the whole body of the Church consisting of the rulers and the
people: for these churches are, as it were, free cities exempted in regard of
divine matters from the jurisdiction of all superior power save only of
Christ, howsoever they be subject to magistrates as touching civil obedience.
But it is far otherwise in public Churc^es the which coming into the
commonwealth, come within the dominion and jurisdiction of the civil
magistrate, not to spoil him of his power either in whole as when the civil
state is ruled by any in the name of the Church or in part, as when the Church
takes to her self full and supreme authority in the ordering of her own
matters, and so exempting her self from the civil power does restrain it
from meddling with all matters within that dominion. But the Church becoming
public does subject her self to the said power, as to a superior or he^d,
and suffers her self to be ordered by it in great part. For even as a man,
as long as he lives in a desert place or keeps himself within his own
house, may live according to his own will: but as soon as he joins himself
to a commonwealth and comes into a public place, he must square his actions
according to the commandment of the magistrate, so stands the case with the
Church. The which is free, as long as she is private, but being public, is
ouerruled by the civil power: yea even in making ecclesiastical laws this
civil power has place. where by ecclesiastical laws we do not mean those
which prescribe the manner of the worship of God and the substance of
Church-gouernment* for these are appointed by God in the word and cannot be
changed by any creature: but we mean laws made only of the circumstances of
Gods worship being things indifferent neither commanded, forbidden nor
expressed in the scripture. There is an other kind of laws which also may be
called ecclesiastical, for that they concern the Church, made to allow,
command and authorize the public building of it: such were the edictes of
Cyrus, Darius and Artaxerxes for the reedifying of the temple at Jerusalem, and
likewise the laws of the good kings of Judah for the overthrowing of idolatry
and the public establishing of the true worship of God. These laws are to
be made by the sole authority of the civil ruler, or at the least by that
authority whereby civil laws are made: neither can there any question be made
hereof. For it is plain that no man can make the building of a public Church
either peaceable or lawful but they. who have the ruling of that place wherein
it is to be built. But as touching the giver or maker of the other laws, there
is great question, for it seems to many very unmeet that the civil power
should enter so far into the Church, as to have to do with the making of the
laws whereby it is to be ordered. Yea that it is without the compass of the
magistrates calling to meddle with these matters. But it seems that we ought
to be so far from excluding the civil ruler from the making of these laws
(which were in some sort to take the scepter out of his hand, forasmuch as
where there is a Church publicly set up in any realm, there the state of
the Church and the commonwealth do very much depend of each other and their
general affairs are so lincked together, as that neither can be well ordered
without respect had to the other) as that we rather take it agreeable to the
word of GOD that the chief stroke in this action be given unto him. For the
further declaration hereof, the making of laws has two parts, the first is
the counselling or aduising of them; the second is the establishing or enacting
of them, both which as it seems belong to the civil ruler, the first in
part, the second wholly. The enacting of the laws is the making of them, and
therefore in the first place we will endeavor to show that those things
which are advised for the ordering of a public Church, have both the name and
the force of laws from the civil power: for first this must of necessititie
be granted to it in the first founding of the Church, wherein we are to
suppose that there are neither ministers nor any believing people: only the
magistrate having the knowledge of the true God goes about to bring the
people thereunto. The which thing he cannot do without making and establishing
laws for that purpose. So that, as we see it to be in other matters, in that
the civil ruler is the first and sole founder of these public Churches, he
has the power of enacting those laws whereby the whole work is both begun,
continued and preserved: thus the Apostles being the first founders of the
Churches did make laws and constitutions for the ordering of them as we may
see 1. Cor. 4.17. Where Paul witnesses of himself that he did make the same
co^stitutions in all Churches. In like manner the chief rulers although they
have not Apostolical callings, offices and gifts, yet for that in planting
public Churches they do supply their places, we are to grant unto them
authority in this behalf. And as this po^er cannot be denied to the magistrate
in the first founding of a Church, so whenas the Church is built, his
authority is not diminished or abated or given to any other, but remains
still in his own hands. The truth whereof may be declared in this manner: to
make a lawgiuer there must these things concur. First a public calling whereby
he has care and c^arge of the people to procure their good as by all other
means, so especially by giving them good and righteous laws by the which they
may be ordered: Secondly authority to command and also power to compel those
who are rebellious to yield obedience unto the said laws. The which things
for so much as they are wanting in all others save in the chief ruler, hereof
it comes to pass that the giving of laws cannot belong to any save to him
only. For the greater evidence of this point, we are to consider to whom this
making of ecclesiastical laws is given being denied to the civil ruler,
namely to the whole ministry of the Church established, who as they have the
ordering and ruling of the Church and the greatest measu^e of knowledge in
these affairs, so it may seem most meet that the making of laws be
permitted unto them. For the answering whereof this is to be marked that we do
not here enquire who a^e most meet to advise ecclesiastical laws and to be
admitted into consultation of them: for we cannot doubt, but that the ministers
of the word are usually most fit for this purpose, but who has this calling,
office and authority to make these laws. All which seem to be wanting in the
minister^ whose calling and office is to be in particular Churches the
ministers of the word, of prayer, of the sacraments and of discipline, but not
to be lawgiuers in the Church. For so they should rule over it as Lords which
is forbidden. 1. Pet. 5.3. yea they have no power to make and authorize laws,
no not in a private Church, which is free from the civil power. For although
they bear the chiefest sway in this and in all other actions yet the laws
take their authority, not from the ministers but from the whole body of the
Church consisting of ministers and people. But in a public Church this
authority goes from the people to the civil ruler, The state of a private
Church is popular, but the state of a public Church is according to the form
of the civil government.
by whose authority it is planted, built and preferred: the word lawfully
preached in great assemblies of the people, the which otherwise were tumultes:
yea the positive laws of the Church authorized and put in force. So that in a
private Church the state i^ popular, but in a public Church, it is according
to the civil state, as namely monarchical in the rule of one. If any do here
object, that definition of the office and duty of a ruler which the people of
Israel make, 1. Sam. 8.20. saying, We will have a king, who shall judge us and
fight our battles for us, and thereof gather that he being otherwise busied,
cannot use the means of attayning a sufficient measure of knowledge in
ordering of the Church: we answer that this people had no care but of worldly
matters. And further that there is no ruler in his own person so continually
employed in civil or warlike affairs, but that he may and ought to give
himself to the study of the word of GOD and to the use of all men whereby he
may be made able for the discharging of this duty to the Church. The truth of
this point appears in the example of Joshua who had a more weighty and
troublesome charge laid upon him, namely to bring the people of Israel into
the land of Chanaan, and to give them quiet possession of it, then any ruler
has in the ordinary government of his realm: and yet the Lord gave him this
commandment in the first place, Ios. 1.8. That the book of the law should
never depart from him, but that he should meditate on it day and night. If it
be further asked why the Apostles never make mention of any such authority that
princes should have in the church the answer is plain, to wit, that there
were no public Churches in their days: And therefore the civil ruler had no
further to deal with them, then to tolerate them within their dominions, and
to see that they lived in civil peace and order. As touching the aduising of
laws: although the civil ruler have the authority of enacting them, Why the
authority of the civil ruler over the Church is not mentioned by the Apostles
in their writings.
yet he ought to be very sparing and moderate in using it. The which thing as
it is necessarelie to be observed in the civil government of all rulers, who
desire to have a quiet and peaceable estate, so it is much more requisite in
ordering the Churrch, which ought to be ruled after a most gentle and mild
manner even as the prophet Esaias does teach us, saying that in the time of the
gospel, Kings and Queens shall be nourse-fathers and nourse-mothers to the
Church, that is, they shall rule and order it not tyrannically by force and
violence, but in a loving and tender sort, even as we see nourses deal with
young children. The which affection a christian ruler ought to have, use, and
show in all his dealings with the Church, and especially in giving laws for
the ordering of it. For although in other matters his will may in some sort
stand for a law, yet in this case he ought not to be so peremptory or wilful,
but that he do willingly suffer himself to be ruled by the word of God, to
do that which is most agreeable unto it. And forasmuch as in indifferent
things whereof these laws are to be made, it is not always easy to see what
is most right and meet to be done, and for that civil rulers have not the
extraordinary assistance and the spirit of God to direct them in these
actions, therefore it is needful that they consult with others, and take their
advise in making laws for the Church: and so much the rather as an oversight
in governing the Church, is more hurtful then it is in civil mattes. If it be
here asked who ought to be admitted to this weighty consultation, and what is
the whole order of this action, we referr^ ^he answer hereof to the next
chapter.

CHAP. X. Of the conjunction of particular Churches.
Sect. 1. Of the voluntary conjunction of particular Churches under the
government of councels.
THVS much of a particuiar Church severally considered, and being distinguished
from all others by the propriety of humane ecclesiastical laws or more
plainly by a distinct government, even as we see one city, country or
kingdom to be separated from another by the own limits whether hills, rivers,
seas, or any other: thus the Church which was planted at Corinth by the Apostle
was free from all other Churches, being not bound to their laws and orders.
Yet often it comes to pass, that they are joined together and that even in
this bond of humane government by the which they are usually severed one from
another. Of this conjunction we are briefly to entreat: the which we find to
be of two sorts, the one voluntary, the other necessary; voluntary
conjunction is that whereby particular Churches, which otherwise are free from
all humane authority and jurisdiction, do submit themselves to a
common-guernment for their common good, as we see that free cities enter into a
league and a common-gouernment, that so they may be the better ordered. The
subject of this authority are councels provincial, natural and general:
which are assemblies of certain men sent from particular Churches, with
authority to judge and determine of the weighty causes of those Churches. In
these councels we are to consider, first their original, and authority, and
secondly of whom they do consist. For the first, although the government which
God has appointed for the ordering of Churches in particular, be in it self
sufficient for that purpose, yet there is many ways great use of this
common-gouernment of counsels. For there is not so great force and authority
for the repressing of the stubborn and disobedient, for the resolving of
doubts, the deciding of weighty controversies, the confirming of the truth
of doctrine, the resuting of pernicious heresies, The use of councels.
the making of ecclesiastical constitutions of rites and ceremonies, and
finally for the ordering of great and weighty matters, in the ministry of
any one Church, as there is in a great number, whose godliness, wisdom, and
learning are famously known to all men. Yea there is among many excellent men,
great variety of knowledge, wisdom and all spiritual graces, the which
being joined together, are more auailable for the edifying of the Church, then
if they were only severally used in particular Churches; For these causes was
this common government of councels instituted in the Church at the first, and
has continued in all the ages of it. The first example of a council in the
time of the gospel is, Act. 15.6. where all the Apostles and the whole Church
which was at Jerusalem come together for the deciding of a great controversy,
moved about the keeping of the cer^moniall law. But this counsel although in
force and authority it was occumenical or general in that the constitutions
made then by the Apostles did belong to all the Churches in the world, yet in
act, and in deed it was a particular assembly of that one Church which was at
Jerusalem consisting of the Apostles, Elders and of the whole people, as
appears, Verse. 22. so that this example serves not for our purpose, neither
proves the divine institution of prouincial councels. Yea as it seems we
have not any example or precept of this conjunction of particular Churches
mentioned in the acts, and writings of the Apostles or elsewhere in the holy
scripture. Whe^eof some have gathered that these councels are unlawful and
their authority usurped, being not of God but from man,, and that there is no
other gou^rnment appointed for the Church but that which may be had within the
compass of every particular Church. For answer whereof, we know that of
lawful things some are necessary, being commanded by God, so that the
omitting of them is sin in his sight: but other things are so lawful as that
they may la^fully be left undone: being not commanded but permitted to us to
do when we shall think them convenient. Of this latter kind are these common
councels and this voluntary conjunction of diverse Churches under one
government. For we have no flat commandment in the word as touching it:
neither can any Church, be compelled to join in this manner, yet one Church
may lawfully use the help of an other for their mutual good. If it be here
objected that it is not in the power of man to appointe any other form of
Church-gouernment, then God himself has prescribed in his word, we answer
that these common councels do not take away the government of particular
churches but rather do establishe it, yea make it more effectual and forcible
and supplieth the wantes the which by reason of the infirmity, and wants of
men are often found in it. The reason why these councels are not mentioned in
the scripture is, for that in the days of the Apostles the Churches could not
join themselves together in this manner, not only because they were not fully
settled within themselves but cheifely because they were few in number and so
far distante one from another, that they could not with any conuenience
communicate ordinarely together. Why there is no mention made of councils in
the writings of the Apostles.
Yea the Apostles were to them in steed of the most general councels, for they
referred all their doubts, controversies and matters of importance to their
determination, wherein the rested as in the word of God. Whereby it appears,
that although these councels have not their original and authority immediately
and directly from God, as the ministry of a particular Church has, yet that
they have been instituted and used by the Church for just and necessary caus^s
according to the word and will of God. Likewise the authority of these
councelles is the full authority of those Churches from the which the several
commissioners or delegates were sent. And therefore it ought to be reverenced
and obeyed: yet this is to be noted, that this authority does not stretch it
self to any Churches save only to those which join themselves together in
this kind of government or rather in this subjection. And therefore a council
which is gathered out of all the Churches of some country, or part of the
world, cannot impose laws upon the Churches of other countries: yea if in an
oecumenicall council any one Church should refuse to join it self with the
rest, the laws of that council should not build that one Church: for
councels have no authority but over those Churches from the which they have
authority.

Sect. 2. Of whom councels may and ought to consist.
SEcondly we are to see of whom these councels ought to consist: the answer
is, of men whom the common consent of the Churches joined together under this
common government does in respect of the excellency of their gifts to wit, of
zeal, godliness, wisdom, learning, experience, faithfulness, boldness,
diligence, and such other graces requisite in this behalf, judge fit for this
purpose. Here we have two questions to answer. The first is whether that any
besides the ministers of the word ought to be of these councels, the second is,
whether that a council may conveniently consist wholly of those who are not
ministers of the word. For answer of both these questions, we confess that
the ministers ought to be accounted most fit to be admitted into consultation
of these weighty matters: for that they ought not only to know the state and
condition of the particular churches better the any other, it being their
calling and office to look unto them, but also to be endued with more
excellent gifts then are to be expected usually in others, yet these councels
may lawfully according to the word of god, consist of others. Yea the
constitutions or decrees of such councels are no less to have the force,
reverence and obedience of ecclesiastical laws then if they had been made by
a council consisting wholly of ministers. For it is in the power of the
Churches which do consociat^ themselves in this manner, to delegate their
authority to whom they will, of what calling or condition soever he be. For
although the knowledge and care of the state of the Church and all other graces
have in corrupt times been appropriated to the ministers, the people being
accounted ignorant and profane idols neither able nor worthy to deal with
ecclesiastical matters much less to judge, deter^ine and advise of matt^rs of
great importance, yet we learn out of the word, and see it ratified by
experience that the spirit of GOD and all spiritual graces, do as well belong
and are as often, as plentifully, yea some times in greater measure granted to
other Christians then to the ministers of the word. So that the ministers of
the word cannot challenge to themselves authority and ability to be the only
doers in this action, but must admit into their company and consultation
those of the people that are judged fit for this purpose, yea although there
be a sufficient number of ministers able to perform whatsoever is required in
this behalf, yet it is diverse ways inconvenient that councels should consist
wholly of them. For first we know that a great part of these laws do
concern the ministers themselves and the performance of their duties and
functions, wherein if there be any general negligence, want or oversight and
error, which is no strange thing, (as they know who are acquainted with the
histories and state of the Church, who shall lay open the fault and make laws
for the redressing of it. For although it may be supposed that they will do it
of their own accord, yet it stands not with their wisdom who have the
choosing of fit men for these councels, to commit the matter wholly to them,
especially whenas the amending of the error is against the credit, For what
causes others besides the ministers of the word are to be admitted to
ecclesiastical co^sultations.
commodity or ease of the ministers: yea it is not agreeable to any reason
that they should appoint to themselves the duties and work which they ought to
do and correct whatsoever is amiss therein: for we know that most of all
those corruptions, wherewith the Church has been polluted and defaced these
many ages, have been both broug^t in and continued by the means of these
councels consisting of ministers only. Besides, this rejecting of the whole
Church as unfit to advise any thing for their own good, is both injurious to
God who especially in this time of the Gospel, pours forth his spirit with
a full and indifferent hand on all his servants that call upon him, so that his
graces bestowed on the Church are as the ointment which being poured upon
Aarons head ran down even to the skirtes of his garments, and also,
reproachful to the Church as being destitute of all spiritual wisdom and
understanding. Lastly the excluding of all the people from councels, makes the
laws enacted by them to be unwillingly received: for that the ministers taking
all the authority into their own hands do easily incur the suspicion of
tirannizing over the Church, whereas the laws would be readely obeyed without
murmuring or repining if that some of the people had a hand in the making of
them. As touching the second question, although a council gathered about
ecclesiastical matters might lawfully consist wholly of those who are not
ministers of the word, yet it is seldom convenient, that this should be put
in practice: for first the ordinary authority wherewith the ministers are
endued in that they are the teachers and gouerners of the people, although it
be not sufficient to make laws, yet it requires that they should usually
bear the greatest sway in making those humane laws whereby the Church should
be governed: yea by this means it comes to pass that the laws have greater
force and authority among the people then when they come from men otherwise
merely private. Yea the state of many Churches is so that few men of other
callings besides the ministers of the word give themselves to the study of the
word of God, or have sufficient knowledge for this purpose: thinking that it
does belong to ministers only to know the manner of the worship of God and
of the government of his Church. And if we do suppose a flourishing state of a
Church wherein knowledge does abound not only in the ministers but also among
the people, so as they are able to give a sound judgment and good advise in
these weighty matters, yet the ministers ought not to be excluded: for if the
people do abound with knowledge, it is like, yea necessary that the ministers
be much more filled with all spiritual understanding and wisdom, yea it is
seldom seen that others know the state of the Church and of the people, which
in making these laws is chiefly to be regarded, so well as the ministers do,
who are continually exercised in looking unto the^.

Sect. 3. Of the necessary conjunction of particular Churches under the
government of the same civil power.
THus much of the voluntary conjunction of particular Churches under the
government of councels: now follows the necessary conjunction of them, so
called, because it is not in their power to shake off that common authority
whereunto they are subject. This necessary conjunction has place then, whenas
diverse particular Churches are tied together in obedience to the same civil
authority, by the which they are ruled as has been declared in the former
chapter. Yea it may be seen almost in all public Churches the which usually
consist of so great a number of professors as cannot possibly be contained
within the compass of one Church: for if any one populous city do generally
profess the gospel, it must of necessity be divided into diverse particular
Churches: much more a christian country, nation, or kingdom cannot but
contain in it many particular Churches. All which although they have their
proper rulers or teachers and orders as free Churches have, yet they have also
a common government, and laws proceeding from the civil power, to the
obedience whereof they are all bound. For in public Churches the civil power
has the greatest sway in governing: by the which being one, the whole Church
and every particular assembly, is brought to a conformity, both in doctrine as
also in government, yea it is requisite, and needful that it should be so: for
otherwise if every particular Church did differ from the rest in government,
the whole Church could not be ordered without great trouble and confusion. But
yet this common government of the magis^^ate does not take away the grouernment
of particular Churches no more then the councels whereof we have spoken, do
from free Churches: This is to be done by the authority of the civil ruler,
yet by the advice of others. In the choice of whom as it is lawful, for the
prince to call or pass over whom he thinks meet or unmeet, so it will be
convenient for the good of the Church (the which it is not lawful for him
either wholly to neglect or lightly to regard) to call of all sorts of men
those who are endued with best gifts: yet so that some be had out of every
particular Church as if they were free Churches. And especially the ministers
of the word are to be called, for the reasons declared in the former section:
when they by his authority are gathered together, he is to take unto himself
the ruling of the whole action (unless it be needful that he delegate his
authority to some other) and by praying for the blessing of God upon their
consultations, and declaring the cause of their meeting to begin it. Then he is
to propound in the first place those wants, faults and corruptions of the Chapter
which he himself has observed, and would have supplied and taken away: to
show the manner how he thinks it most meet to be done: which being done he
is to give liberty to every one present to speak their minds freely of those
things which he has propounded, as also of any other thing which they think
good for the Church: that which is agreed upon and does appear to al, or to
the most of them right and meet to be decreed, he is to establish giving unto
it the virtue of an ecclesiastical law, the which the whole Chapter ought to obey.
That which cannot be agreed upon, is to be deferred to another time of meeting
(which ought to be so much the sooner as the matters controuersed are of greater
importance) for more mature deliberation with themselves and others will make
that clear and evident which before was doubtful. If there be any thing which
neither can be agreed upon by the consent of the greater part, neither yet
deferred without great hurt to the Church the chief ruler may with the consent
of some of the council decree, and enact that which they think needful to be
done. Yet he is not to use this authority in this manner, but upon urgent
necessity, for many inconveniences do follow the enacting of ecclesiastical
lawe^ without the full consent of the council, yea the suspision of
tyrannizing over the Chapter of God is by all means to be avoided. In regard whereof
many christian Emperors and rulers did resign their authority, which they had
in governing the chapter to these councels, No ecclesiastical law can be made made
in a public Chapter without the consent of the civil ruler.
insomuch that they had the full power not only of aduising laws, but also of
enacting or the giving unto them the force of laws: But as has been showed,
this may easily turn to the hurt of the Chapter and therefore it ought not wholly
to b^ followed yet it shows how great regard civil rulers ought to have of
the judgment and advise of those who are godly, wise and learned in the
ordering of the Churches subject unto them. And therefore that which the
council thinks good to be done or the greater part of them ought to be
greatly regarded. Yet if the chief ruler cannot be brought to give his assent
unto it, it cannot have the force of an ecclesiastical law: or be imposed upon
the whole Chapter in that name. As touching the number whereof any national council
does consist, there cannot any be defined but it must be left to the
appointment of the chief ruler to whom the deposing and authorizing of this
whole action does belong. Yet it ought to be proportionable to the quantity of
the Chapter and to the number of the particular Churches, so that if some be had
out of every one of the^, it will make the laws enacted to be much more
willingly received and obeyed, whenas it shall be known, that some of the^
selves did in the name of the rest consent unto them. And especially this is
requisite, in respect of the chief end and use of these councels both in free
and public churches, whereof we will briefly speak. The which is to bring
the whole Church to a conformity of doctrine: this is needful and good to be
done, and that for these causes, first for the repressing of heresies which do
continually arise in the Church. For the which purpose the general consent of
the Church is very forcible: for either the consent and judgment of the whole
Church will be of great weight to take the said heresies out of the minds of
those who do maintain them, or else the authority by which the truth
oppugned is publicly established, will be able to remove the maintainers of
them out of the Church. Secondly this form of doctrine agreed upon by many
will be effectual to strengthen and confirm those who are weak in the faith
and not fully grounded in some points of christian religion. Yea it may be a
means to help forward those who have not as yet taken upon them the
profession of the gospel. Not that we ought to build our faith upon the
authority of men, The general consent of the Church confirms faith.
but for that we ought to take from the Church a confirmation of our faith,
seeing we may be greatly helped and strengthened by this means. And lastly this
form of doctrine ought to be esteemed the public confession of the whole
Church, whereby they do make known not only to other Churches but also to the
whole world, that they do profess and maintain the truth of christian
religion, and of every part thereof, and do detest and abhor all the false
worship of the Jews, Turks, and all other infidels whatsoever: and also that
they are free from all false and erroneous opinions, all gross and blasphemous
heresies of men professing the faith, wherewith the Church has been at al
times, and is troubled at this day. This public profession of the faith being
with great care and diligence made and approved by the general consent of the
whole council, is by the authority of the chief ruler to be enioined to the
whole Chapter so as it be not lawful for any man to deny or refute any point of
it. Yet it ought not to contain in it the determination of al controversies,
but only a declaration of the chief points of religion, in the profession
whereof the life, and as it were the very essence or being of the Church does
consist. For as touching matters of less moment in the which men may err
without any danger to their own salvation or hurt to the Church, it is
impossible that all men should be brought to think and profess the same thing:
but there will be continually diversity of opinions in these points in every
Church. Yet it does belong to this public council to consider and to determine
even of other doubts and controversies, which do troble the Church that by this
means contention may be taken away, and as the Apostle writes. 1. Cor. 1.10.
all may say the same things and be knit together in one mind and in one
judgment. Yet the determination of the council of these lighter points ought
not to be imposed upon any man to think or to profess, but every man left to
think as it shall please God to give him to understand the word of God in
that behalf either keeping his opinion dissenting from the Church to himself,
or else imparting it to others in that moderate, wise and christian manner, as
that no man be justly offended by him or the public peace of the Church
disquieted, but rather all in some measure edified.

Sect. 4. of the governing of the several provinces of a national Church.
THus much of a public or national council gathered, ordered and established
by the authority of the chief ruler for this end, to bring the whole Church to
a conformity, both in outward rites and orders and also in the truth of
doctrine. Wherein this is especially to be considered and therefore not unfit
to be repeated, that there be regard had unto the liberty of inferior Synodes.
For as it is impossible to make all men think the same thing in all points,
so also it is unmeet yea impossible that the general council should so define
of al things which are incident into the governing of churches, as that nothing
be left to the discretion, and disposition of inferior assemblies. And
therefore the decrees and laws made by the general council ought to be as
rules to direct them in their actions, although all particular cases and
circumstances yea matters of less importance be neither determined nor yet
mentioned in them. Now we are to come to provincial councels; for so much as
there do daily many doubts and controversies arise, yea great and weighty
affairs do offer themselves amongst the Churches, which neither for the
greatness can sufficiently be determined and ordered by a few ministers,
neither yet conveniently be deferred to a general meeting which cannot be had
without great trouble to the Church. Therefore provincial sinodes have a
necessary use. They are of the same nature with general councels, save only
that they belong not to the whole Chapter but only to some part of it, as it is
distinguished. They are to be called, ordered and established by the authority
of the civil ruler, and do deal in the same matters and in the manner
aforesaid: for the care and ordering not only of a whole national Chapter
general, but also of the several provinces of it does belong to the civil
ruler: so that although it does not belong to his office to enter into
particular congregations and there to perform the duty of an ordinary
governor or teacher, yet he ought to see and procure that they be in good
order, that the ministers of the word do their duties diligently and sincerly,
that the people live in obedience to the gospel of Christ. But in great
nations and kingdoms, it is not often seen that the chief ruler can keep in
his own hands, and discharge in his own person this duty of ouerseeing the
several provinces of the Chapter and therefore it is as always lawful so often
needful that he delegate and commit this part of his duty to some other,
even to whomsoever he thinks meetest for this purpose. Neither are we to
exclude those who are ministers of the word from this calling, as if they only
were unmeet, whenas they are in some respects fitter then others, having been
many years exercised in the affairs of some particular Church. And therefore
if it please the civil ruler to call any who does perform some ordinary
ministry in some particular Church to this office of ouerseeing many
Churches, he does nothing but that which is agreeable to reason and warrantable
by the word of GOD. For men having taken upon them any ministry are not so
tied unto it, but that they may leave it when as they shall be called by the
chief ruler to perform any other more weighty, and public duty, yea
although it be in some civil office, and much more to have the care of many
churches. Yet it is not meet that any man having this office should withal
have any function in a particular Church as does necessarely require his
presence. For besides other inconveniences, it will be to him an occasion of
negligence in the performance of his duty, and an evil example to others.
Which as it is a grievous thing in any man to do the work of God negligently,
so it is much more offensive in him whose office and calling it is to see that
the Church be well ordered. Thus much of the common government of diverse
Churches whether they be free or subject to the same civil power. From this
common government whole nations and kingdoms consisting of many Churches are
often called one particular church, because they al have the same humane laws,
although if we speak properly, they are diverse Churches because they have not
all the same laws, but only some public, common and general laws pertaining
to all.

CHAP. XI.
THus much of a particular Church both severally and also jointly considered.
In the next and last place we are to come to the visible Church: which is
nothing else but a collection of all the particular Churches in the world into
one body or sum which is called the visible Church by relation had to the
catholic Church the which by reason of the dispersed members of it, is
invisible, as has been declared, whenas every particular Church, yea even
private Churches and so consequently the visible Church consisting thereof,
does make a public profession of the faith. This visible Church does
continually existe in the world, for so much as GOD has appointed that his name
should continually as long as the world endures, be called upon and
worshipped in one place or other, as the story of the Chapter does witness. We
confess that it has often lurcked in secret places, and often been so
ouer-shadowed with errors, superstition and idolatry that it could hardly be
discerned, and so has been even as the sun is in the eclipse, yet never
wholly taken away: for whenas there was but one particular Chapter in the world,
yea this particular church was not public, but private within one man's family,
and secret lurking in a corner, so that they who lived at that time or in the
ages following, could not define where the Church was at such a time, yet that
Church made the visible Church. For their profession was visible and open among
themselves, and also to others, although it were not seen at that instant: for
a thing which is not actually seen may be visible. Secondly this is to be
noted, that in the first ages of the world before the time of the Gospel, the
visible Chapter did often consist of one only particular church, there being no more
in the world: but since the publishing of the gospel it has hitherto, and
shall always consist of many. Lastly as touching the place of this visible Chapter
although it be not tied to any certain place, yet it has always been chiefly
in some one part of the world. So we know that first it was wholly in the
east parts in the countries of Mesopotania, Syria, Jury and others adjoining
unto these. Afterward in the first time of the gospel it was chiefly in Asia.
And in these last ages, How the visible Church has changed the dwelling place.
we see that it has been almost wholly in Europe: and whether God will change
the dwelling place of it again or no, and even transporte it to the fourth
part of the world, lately found out or to any other place, it is known to
himself only. Diverse ^ther points should be added for the full declaration of
^he nature and state of the visible Church. But many of them a^^ common with
the catholic Church, and therefore are handled in the first Chapter, where
they may be considered. The rest we cut off for breuities sake, because this
treatise is already grown beyond our purpose, and expectation. So then to
conclude, if to this visible Church we do add the dispersed members of the
catholic Church, we have the catholic Church. And so the end of this treatise
is brought to the beginning.

FINIS.

