IVSTIFYING AND SAVING FAITH DISTINGVISHED from the faith of the Devils.

IN A Sermon preached at Paul's cross in London, May 9. 1613.

BY MILES MOSS PASTOR OF the Church of God at Combs in Suffolk, and Doctor
of Divinity.

The Text. IAM. 2. 19.

The Devils believe, and tremble.

August. Ser. 27. de verb. Apost. c. 1. Fides est credere quod nondum vides,
cuius fidei merces ^st, videre quod credis. PRINTED BY CANTRELL L^GG^, Printer
to the University of CAMBRIDGE. 1614.

And are to be sold by MATTHEW LAW in Paul's Churchyard at the sign of the
Fox.

TO MY VERY HONORABLE LORD, SIR EDWARD COOK Knight, Lord chief Justice of
England, and one of his Majesty's most Honorable privy Counsel: Salvation by
Christ Jesus.
IT is a divine truth (Worthy Lord) though crossing humane sense, spoken by the
Father of truth, to him that was Justin. Mart. qu. and resp. 119.
(...), the father of all our fathers in the truth: ^. Cor. 12. 9.
Virtus mea in infirmitate per^icitur: My power is perfited in weakness: That
is to say, Calv. Com. in 2. Cor. 12 9.
The assisting hand of God is then most lightsomly discerned, when the weakness
of man has most evidently appeared. As the great Antesignanus of all the
Interpreters most pithily does expound it. As for example: Gods divine Spirit,
did then most sensibly show it self in Jacob, when Genesis 49.
he prophesied so powerfully lying sick upon his death bed. In David, when
Psalm. 6. and 51. and alibi.
he prayed so seruently, almost overwhelmed with troubles. In Paul, when Act.
16. ^4, 25.
he sang so cheerfully, fastened in the stocks. In S. Laurence, when Ambr
Oshe. lib. 1.
he spoke so courageously, broyling on the gridi^on. In a word, through the
helping-hand of God, it comes to pass, that 2. Cor. 1^. 10.
when men are weak, then they are strong: weak in the flesh, strong in the
spirit, weak in themselves, strong in the grace of God.

All humane infirmities are in nature destructive: They arise from sin:
(...). 4.
Expec^ati ^^mo ortae sun^ lachrymae: and they tend to death, which Rom ^. 23.
is the wages of sin. For these are all (...)
praenuncij mortis, ^arbengers of death, and (...). in Genesis 2. 17.
quodda^ mortis atrium, a door that leads into the house of death: every one
weakeneth and furthereth dissolution. But now the^ough grace, they are made
preservative against pride, against security, against worldliness, against
profaneness, against a thousand sins: Hugo de (...). lib. ^.
vtilius est frangi languoribus ad salutem, qu^m remanere incolumes ad
damnationem.

And as it is with bodily infirmities, so is it generally with all afflictions.
They are like Quicksilver and Henbane, and such other creatures, which though
they be poisonable in nature, yet they are made medicinable by art. The
Scripture compares them sometimes to fire: Peter calls them 1. Pet. 4 12.
the firery trial. Sometimes to water, Psalm. 59. 1.
The waters are entered even into my soul. In one of the Psalms they are both
conjoined: Psalm. 66. 12.
trans^^imus per ignem and aquam: we passed through fire and water. The
resemblance is many ways significant: For fire warmeth, and fire consumes;
water refreshes, and water choaketh. And this they do, either as they serve
under men, or domineer over men: for, They are cruel masters, but profitable
servants, says our English Proverb. So it is with men, and their afflictions.
Where they master (as they d^ in the wicked) there they choke and consume
them: but where they serve (as they do in the saints) there they warm and
refr^sh them. In so much as David professed, Psalm. 119. 71.
Bonum est, It is good for me that I have been afflicted. And one of the
Fathers very notably, (...)
Inuenies non ali^er regnare in nobis Iesum, nisi per afflictionem: A Christian
man shall find by experience, that the Lord Jesus does not otherwise or more
effectually reign in his heart, but even by affliction.

I prosecute the Scriptures comparison yet a little farther. Pliny writes,
that there are some creatures, Plin. l. 11. c. 36.
which li^e in the fire, and some that lib. 10. c 67.
quench the fire. This has been true of men: and even in the letter. Da^. 3.
25.
The three young nobles walked up and down in the (...): and the Apostle
says, that some Heb. 11. 34.
by faith quenched the violence of the fire. But it is daily true in the
Metaphor. The children of God live, and like, and thrive in the fire of
affliction: as the children of Israel Exodus 1. ^.
increased under the bondage of Egypt, which Moses calls Deuteronomy. 4. ^0.
the iron furnace. Their Romans 5. 3. 4.
tribulation bringing forth patience, and patience experience, and experience
hope, and hope making that they are not confounded. The same Author reports
of diverse waters in diverse places, in which nothing will sink. As of Pli^. l.
5. c. 16.
Asphaltides in Jury, of lib. 6. c. 17.
Arethusa in Armenia, of lib. 31. c. 1.
Apuscidamus in Africa. Now of that kind, are all the waters of trouble to the
children of God. They sink not in them, they ever float above, as safe as in
Noah's Arc upon the face of the waters. 2. Cor. 4. 8.
We are afflicted (says S. Paul) yet are we not in distress: in poverty, but
not overcome of poverty. We are persecuted, but not forsaken: cast down, but
we perish not. The reason is, Psalm. 37. 24.
The Lord puts under his hand, to hold them up as it were by the chinne,
that they sink not in those waters. Yea further, the Spirit of God is Matthew.
3. 11.
fire, and Ioh. 3. 5.
water it self: with which Spirit they being baptized, their troubles are all
so spiritually sanctified, that they consume them not, nor choke them not: but
they serve like fire to warm their zeal, and like water to cool the heat of
flesh: and so many ways to fit them better to the works of their callings.

But whereunto now tends this doleful treaty of Afflictions? I write not
this so much for you (mine honorable Lord) whose paths are on every side so
prosperous: though I doubt not but you have also your Crosses to bear, and
which Crosses thorough the grace of God, do more sanctify you and your
actions. But I take up this Argument, ere nata (as the natural course is of
Epistles) to show how in the studying and acting of this Sermon, The power of
God has appeared in my weakness.

Immediately after that the right reverend Lord, the good Bishop of London, had
by his m^ndatorie letters called were to the Cross: it pleased the high Bishop
of my soul to cross me deeply with infirmity of body: which much (...) my
study and meditations. This infirmity continuing many weeks, and increasing,
I wrote to London to my most especial friend D. Gardener.
(a man of mine own degree, and of far better means to perform it) to make
supply of my place. When (...) his unwillingness thereunto, I had resolved to
(...), and to adventure my body, I found my iorneying all the way so
teadiously painful, as that those about me were much discomfited, and my
self almost desp^^^ed of ability. Which caused me when I came there, no^
only to be (...) again with that friend of mine, to have relieved (...): but
also at the beginning of my Sermon to make a certain Apology for my self: a^
fearing that I should have been compelled to be more then ordinarily short.
But behold, ^ Chr. 15. 2.
The Lord is with us, while we are with him. The more mine infirmity humbled
me, and caused me to cast (...) whole hope upon the help of God: the more
ready (...) his power to support my weakness, For, to my best remembrance, I
never preached with more strength of body, with more audible voice, with more
freedom of spirit, nor (as it n^w appears) with more acceptance of the
hearers. And that not only of the Common people, whom notwithstanding a man
must not neglect, Plutere. de gerend^
auribus ducere, to lead them along after him by the cares: but also of the
better, wiser, and learneder sort: which Isidore said, were called (...).
Sapiemes a sapore, as most sa^orie in themselves, and least tasting the relish
of others. A thing far beyond mine expectation: and farther (well I wo^e)
beyond my desert: and of which I can give no other reason but this: that God
would show his power in my weakness. To him only be the glory of all his
gifts.

Now, among the best, and best indicious sort of those mine Hearers, I have
many reasons to seat and rank your Lordship. And that not only for your
eminency of place in the Common Wealth, which notwithstanding is of right high
and worthy respect: but also for that God has given you so many means of
knowledge, so long practice in the heart of the State, so deep insight into
your own professed Laws, and so careful a desire, to look into our
discourses of Divinity. All which are evidences that against the malicious
Calumnies of that Romish Catholic Divine; that your fingers are often turning
over books of all sorts, P. R.
to the increase of all kind of knowledge. It is true that your place has many
years called you to deal about Capital matters: and the more business have
you had that way a great deal by the treasonable practices of Romish and
Antichristian Divines. But what says S. Hierome? Hier. in let. l 4. ad c. 22.
Homicidas, sacrilegos, venerarios punire; non est effusio sanguinis, sed Legis
ministerium: To punish murderous, sacrilegious, and adulterous persons, is not
that effusion of blood, which God has forbidden; but the administering of
necessary Laws, which God has commanded. For my part I would that even their
Catholic Divines themselves, would In Scorpiaco.
gladium stylo mutare, (as Tertullian speaks of S. Paul) would they did leave
fingering of blood, even of the sacred blood of Princes, and fall more to the
fingering of the books of holy Scripture; and not suffer themselves therein to
be outgone of our Secular Judges and temporal Magistrates, who besides matters
of Justice, apply themselves also to the knowledge of Religion.

Sed illine vnde abij redeo. To your Lordship first, who pleased so honorably
to comfort me over this labor, and then to all others of like knowledge and
moderation, it contenteth me well to submit the censure of this Treatise: for,
to all men's judgments, I willingly submit it not. Some are ignorant, and
cannot judge. Now, Sen. Proverb.
Grave iudicium est eius, qui iudicare non potest: The ignoranter man, the
seuerer Judge. Anacharsis misliked it in Greece, and so do I here with us.
Lae^^ in vit^ Anachars.
Artifices certant, iudicant qui non sunt artifices: Divines stand and preach
in the pulpit; artizans sit and judge in the alehouse. Others are too rash and
hasty in judgment: whereas Naz cyg (...) indefini^.
Iudicium est firmitas stabilitasque deliberationum mentis: Judgment is a
firm and stable verdict, given of that upon which the mind has often
deliberated. Others like mad dogs s^atch here and there on both sides as
they go; reading by starts, and judging by parcels. But Plutarch well advises
those that will (...) 2 Epicurium.
sift other men's doings, or confute other men's writings, non obiter percurrere,
nec voces hinc inde avulsas adori^i: not hastily to run them over, nor to
snatch here and there a word and away: but totally and advisedly to examine the
whole. Others are malicious, poisoning with their eyes (like Witches) every
thing they look on, maligning other men's credits, and deprauing other men's
labors: Bernard. ser. 39. in Ca^tica.
Habe^ malitia currum suum (says S. Bernard) rotis quatuor consistentem:
saeuitia, impatientia, audacia, impudentia. Malice is at her chariot or caroch,
for she is a lofty minded dame. This chariot is drawn along on four
wheels: cruelty, impatiencie, boldness, and impudency. Cruel she is, she
will spare no man's name, no not his life. Impatient she is, she will bear no
man's infirmity, no not an error, though to err be most humane. Bold she is,
she blurteth out all whatsoever she knows. And Impudent she is, no check
nor rebuke will snibbe her, to make her hang the head. To stand therefore to
such Judges, were half beforehand to condemn my self. But to learned men,
to temperate men, to studious men, to courteous men, to your Lordship, and to
your like, is this poor labor in all devotion most reverently submitted.

Now some things there are, in which I humbly crave favorable interpretation.

1. As first that I do not put upon this Treatise in the penning, that vigor
and viuacitie which it carried in the preaching. For there is even in nature a
great difference between the tongue, and the quill, between speaking and
writing. The very sound and t^ne of the voice is melody to the ear: it being
the proper Object of that Sense. And thereof it is, that the special part of
Cie de or at 3.
Oratorie, is said to be Pronuntiation. And besides that, Plutarch. de Socratis
Genio. Et de placitis Philosop. l. 4. cap. 1^.
Vox est ictus animi: passing through the ear, and brain, and blood, it
smites (as it were) and gives a stroke upon the very soul, and so with a
kind of violence does deeply affect it. Therefore it is called Viua vox, as
that which has in it a special kind of liveliness. Hierome being absent,
turns over Macclinus to Austen that was present: Aug. ^om. 2. epist. 27.
qui viua (vt aiunt) voce docere te poterit: who (says S. Hierome) may teach
thee thereby the lively voice, better then I can by an Epistle. But yet
further, besides all the work of Nature, there is in Preaching a special gift
of grace: which enableth a man to speak with such evidence of the Spirit, and
with such power to the Conscience, as no pen of man by writing can express:
whereof Preaching is the most lively and effectual instrument of salvation,
and so to be respected.

2. Secondly, I must crave pardon, that all things are not here exactly set
down, in that order and form in which they were delivered. Writing nothing at
large, nor carrying with me any help of my notes into the pulpit; some things
might easily be forgotten, which I premeditated, some things might be added,
which I premeditated not: some things might miss their due place, and some
things their due poize: some things might be enlarged, Plat^
some things might be contracted more then I purposed: (...): It is not
possible Ad Di^nis.
but things written will slip out of memory. I did that in my years, which
an other said he had done in his vigor,

D. ^rante.
Orabam meditata loquens, tres tractus in horas. To do it without set form of
words, and to miss nothing either of matter or manner, must be the act of a
man of greater gifts then my self. But new when I returned home, and after so
many requests, had resolved to commit that which I had said to writing; I had
no safer rule to walk by, then the method by which I had in short notes
digested my meditations. And therefore in that form, they come forth into the
world.

3. Thirdly, if any take offense at the multitude and multiplicitie of mine
allegations: I would have them to know, that as it is not mine usual manner
of preaching in the country; so here are many more Ouotations added, and some
a great deal more enlarged, then as they were at that time delivered. Tullie
said of youth, Pro. M. Caelio.
Dandum est aliquid aetati: So say I in this case: something must be given to
this learned age, something to the solemnity of that place, and something to
the expectation of the hearers. Sure I am, that much was to be given to this
Argument, where the Position was to be ouerswaied by Antiquity, for that the
Doctrine is on all sides challenged of Novelty. It is hard I confess, to hold
The golden mean. But there is a worse extremity grown up in preaching, which
for reverence of mine own coat, I will thus tax from S. Augustine in an
allegory: De sermon. Domin in monte. lib. 1.
Aduertendum est, non sol^m rerum corporearum nitore and pompa, sed eriam in
ipsis sordibus lutuosis esse posse iactantiam: and eo periculofiorem, quo sub
specie seruitutis Dei decipit.

I have said, if not all that I would, yet all that I could, the time so
straightening me in the penning hereof, as I have scarce found leisure to read
it over. My prayer is now to Almighty God, that he would be pleased in mercy
to accept of these my poor endeauours, and to bless them to the good of his
Church, for which they have been undertaken. And for your Lordship, my
supplication shall ever be, that God would vouchsafe to continue in you, that
lively, justifying* and saving faith, treated upon in this Sermon, which may
keep you from trembling here, and in the day of judgment. So I take my leave.
From Combs in Suffolk. Maij. 29. 1613.

Your Lordships in all Christian devotion, MILES MOSS.

IVSTIFYING AND SAVING FAITH distinguished from The faith of the Devils.
The Text.
Iam. 2. 19. The Devils believe, and tremble.
THe Inscription of this Epistle is somewhat diverse, Prolegome^^. The
inscription.
not only in the Latin, but even in the Greek editions also; but the best
and the most complete, is that which Stephanus, and Beza follow; (...): The
Catholic Epistle of James the Apostle. It notes four points worthy of
observation.

1. It is an Epistle. And that not only in a metaphorical sense, as Paul
calls the Corinthians, his 2. Cor. 3. ^
commendatorie Epistle, or as P. Berchorius in dictionario.
Christ may be called an Epistle sent to us from his Father: or as S. Augustine
calls all the Scriptures, August. in Psalm. 90. con^. ^.
Letters or Epistles, which have come to us hither, de illa ci^^itate vnde
peregrin^^ur, from that heavenly e^tie from whence we are yet pilgrims: but
also in a more proper and usual meaning. For it is a Letter sent of one friend
absent from an other; even from James the Apostle, to Iam. 1. 1.
the twelve Tribes scattered abroad. And so is by this Tale distinguished from
the historical, Prophetical, and Poetical books of the holy Scriptures.

2. It is a Catholic; Epistle, Catholic; not only because the Doctrine,
contained in it is orthodoxall (in which sense the word Catholic is often
used of the Tertull de Tri^it. Chrysostom in eredo in deum, etc. Athan in symb.
Fathers:) no^ only because the use of it is Catholic August. contr. C^escon
grammat. lib. 1. cap. 9.
as well to us as to those to whom it was written at the first: but also (and
rather) because it is not directed to any one man, as those of Paul to
Timothy, Titus, and Philemon: and those of John to the Elect Lady and Gaim;
no not only to some one particular Church or place, as those to the Romans,
Corinthians, Galatian^, and the rest: but to all the Jews dispersed in all
countries of the world Gr^^. scholiast Occu^en.
: as has been before our time well observed. Therefore we translate it, The
general Epistle: not as Test. Rhem. in (...) epist. laco^i.
fearing or abhorring the word Catholic, as the Rhemists object unto us: but
as desirous to express best the meaning of the word, as our learned Fulke the
(...) of his time, has answered in that behalf.

3. It is the Epistle of S. (...). The name of the Author fitly answers the
Argument, James, or Jacob, signifies Genesis (...). 36.
a S^ppla^ter. And it was given at the first, as other names commonly were
Ambros. com. in Romans 1.
^ratiane, from a special occasion. Cyril. in Esa. 49.
Nec taemen absurdum est (says S. Cyril) vt Jacob (...) supplaentator, id est,
qui Supplantat Sathanam yet may every supplanter or underminer be called a
Jacob: even he that supplanteth and undermines Satan. Now, this James the
Author of this Epistle, is a notable Supplanter of all profane Esaus: which
brag of the Spirit, and walk in the (...): which profess Faith, and neglect
works: and so is therein a very pi^ner to undermine the kingdom of the Devil.

4. It is the Epistle of James the Apostle. So the best Greek copies have it.
And those which (...) the Gospels and Epistles into the Syrian language,
immediately after the Apostles times, Aretius in arg in Epist. Iac.
Iacobum Apostolum agnoscunt, acknowledge this James for an Apostle. And so
Tremellius translateth it from the Syriake; Epistola Iaakub. Apostoli. The
Argument which Illirieus alleges to the contrary, viz. that this James In
Epist. Iac.
intituleth himself the servant of Christ, and not an Apostle; which he would
not have omitted (if he had been an Apostle,) maioris authoritatis gratia, for
the adding of authority to his writing; is (as a number of his positions are)
more subtle then judicious. For Paul omitteth his title of Apostleship to
Philemon. So does the Author of the Epistle to the Hebrews: and both John and
Jude. in their Epistles. And besides, that is not nothing which Lyranus
alleges to this purpose, that Lyra. in epist. Iacobi.
James writing to the bragging Jews, who carried themselves so high above the
Gentiles; to induce them by his example to humility, non nominat se Apostolum,
quod nomen est dignitutis: sed servum quod nomen est subiectionis: he
intituleth not himself an Apostle, which is a name of dignity, but the
servant of Christ, which is a name of subjection.

Now, this is here worth the noting, that this Epistle being written by James
and Apostle, it was not written by that James that was syrnamed Oblias, whom
the Apostles Peter, James, and John, are said to have Eusebius. hist l. 2. cap.
1. ex Clement. lib 6. (...).
ordained Bishop of Jerusalem: though I am not ignorant that Eusebius. hist. 2.
cap. 11. Niceph. l. 2. c. 38. Erasmus, Gualter. Test. Rhem.
Eusebius, and those that follow him, do so conceive it, For that James,
though he were an holy and worthy disciple (as out of Egesippys and Ios^phus
is related) yet was he but a disciple, and none of the twelve that were named
Apostles. And besides that, it is to me a great reason, which one of the late
writers has alleged in this case; Piscator.
that to write a Catholic Epistle, that is, an Epistle common to many
churches, and not peculiar to any one, vi^^tur Apostolic^ (...) seems to be
an office peculiar to an Apostle.

Being an Apostle that wrote this Epistle, it must needs be that James which
is called Mat. 10. 3.
the son of Alpheus, as the new Hemingi^s Arcrius Pisca^.
Interpreters do conceive it: and not James the son of Zebede, who was put
to death by Act 12. 2.
Herod anon after the ascension of Christ. For this Epistle was written after
the Gentiles had received the faith; as appears by the dispersion of the
Jews among them. Therefore was the Syrian Interpreter much deceived, who
ascribes this Epistle to that James, before whom our Savior was transfigured
in the mount. For he was the brother of Mat. 17. 1.
John, and so the son of Zebede, as it is manifest from the Scriptures.

The Authority, The Authority.
and Authentitie of this Epistle has bin much questioned in the Church. Eusebius
hist. lib. 6 cap. 19.
Origin mentions it not in the Catalogue. Hist. l. 2. c. 12. and lib. 3. c.
19.
Eusebius and In Catalog. Script.
Hierome affirm, that many in ancient time did not receive it. Nicephorus
following them, Lib. ^. cap 38. and cap. 46.
agrees with them all* Caiet a^e, Erasmus, Luther, Musculi^, and some others;
have hardly approved it; and have witnessed their distrust of it, and added
reasons thereunto. But that worthy Zanchius has quite broken the neck of the
controversy; by showing, that although De sacra scriptura these. 5
many doubted of it in the ancient Churches, yet it was never questioned of
all; nor utterly rejected of any. For indeed De doct. christ. lib. ^. c. 8.
Augustine. Exposi^ an symbol
Cyprian, or Ruffin^^ rather, De scripture libe^s genninis.
Nazianze^e, and others, do by name recite it among the Canonical Scriptures.
And the reformed Churches at this day do receive it. Among the rest we of the
Church of England do not only appro^ue it by Art. 6.
Subscription, but also ascribe it Art. 37.
to James an Apostle. Therefore do both Rat 1.
Campian, and Epitom. cont.
Bell^rmine unjustly challenge us, and the Protestants in this behalf, To them
I say with our learned Whitakers, De saer. scripturae cont. 1. qu. 1. Art. 16.
Alios lacessant, nobis posthac ne molesti sint: Let them challenge others, and
trouble us no more. For we without scr^ple, and exception, do generally
receive this Epistle for a part of the holy word of God.

The Occasion that moved the Apostle to write, The Occasion.
was not the Test. Rhem. arg. in epist lae.
error of only faith unto justification, as the Rhemists would implie out of
S. Augustine. For Fulke Ibid.
The error of only faith, against which S. Augustine writes, De fide, and
operibus.
was of them that thought the profession of Christian religion (how wickedly
soever a man lived) was sufficient to salvation. Against which this Epistle,
and others were written.

Indeed there seem to have been Hemin gius.
two principal occasions, that procured this Epistle. The one, the fiery
persecution of the Church, which causes the Apostle Iam. 1. 2. Iam. 5. 9.
more then once to inculcate exhortation unto patience. The other, that
hypocrisy which reigned in many: Aretius.
For there were many that professed religion, which in word were Christians;
but not in life and manners. Such as Paul prophesied of, 2. Tim. 3. 5.
having a show of godliness, but denying the power thereof: like the Church of
Sardi, Apoc. 3. 1.
who had a name that she lived, but was dead. For the reformation of which,
this Epistle is thrapped full of exhortations unto all good works.

The State The state.
of this Epistle is almost wholly Doctrinall. Athan.
Scripsit eam more and genere docendi: and teaches in the manner of Common
places. The fifth common place (following that memorable B^za, who has so well
deserved of the new Testament) is begun at the 14. verse of this second
Chapter. There the Apostle enters into discourse what manner of faith that is,
by which a man is saved, and shows that it is neither an hypocritical
profession, and ostentation of faith, where it is not in truth; no nor every
kind of true faith, which is says indeed, that is able to justify a man
before God: but only such a kind of true faith, as is fruitful in good
works. This doctrine the Apostle first proposes by way of Question, Iam 2. 14.
What avails it, my brethr^n, if a man say he has faith, when he has no
works, can the faith save him? that is, can such a kind of faith save him? As
if he should say; No: such a faith as has no works, cannot save a man,
Secondly, he opens and illustrateth the truth of this proposition, by a
familiar similitude. 15.
For if a brother or sister be naked and destitute of daily food, 16.
And one of you say unto them, depart in peace, warm your selves, and fill
your bellies, notwithstanding you give not them those things which are
needful to the body: what helps it? 17.
Even so the faith, if it have no works, is dead of it self. The meaning is:
Even as good and charitable words profit not a poor man, if we do not indeed
releive him; so speaking of faith, and professing of faith, will not save a
man, unless his deeds declare that he has says indeed. Thirdly, he
brings in a true believer, whose faith is fruitful, chalenging as it were an
hypocritical professor of faith to declare it by his works; Show me thy
faith by thy works, 18.
and I will show thee my faith by my works. As if he should say; I have faith,
and I declare it by my deeds: if thou have faith (as thou braggest) show it by
thy deeds also. Fourthly, he shows by instance and example, that not the
show of faith, no nor every kind of true faith is able to save and justify
before God: As to believe that there is a God, that there is but one God, that
this God is merciful, just, etc. no, not to believe all that to be true which
is written of God in the Scriptures, is sufficient to salvation. For so much
the very Devils of hell believe, and yet are in no comfort, nor hope of
favor. And this he lays down in the 19. verse: Thou beleeuest that there
is one God, 19.
thou do well: the Devils also believe, it, and tremble. As if he should
say; In believing so much thou do well: for that is true, and ought to be
believed: but this is not enough, nor sufficient. If it were, then the Devils
might be saved; for they believe so much as well as thou. But they believe
that, and yet tremble, so thou m^iest believe as much, and yet be damned. And
thus I am come to the words of my Text, The Devils believe, and tremble.

The words are a plain and full proposition, consisting (as every proposition
does) ex subiecto: The devils. Et ex praedicato duplici; believe, and tremble.
Of the Subject I mean not to speak at large, though it offers just occasion
to entreat of the names, of the nature, of the quaelities, and of the number of
Devils: of which points also I have had many meditations: But by discoursing
of them, I should not attain to the principal end of my thoughts. I will
therefore deliver only so much of them, as makes to the opening of the Text,
and that even in three words; and so proceed to that which follows.

(...)) It is necessary that we understand what kind of persons or creatures
the Apostle intends in this word: 1. Subiectum.
and the more, because the word is (...), and has been used in diverse
significations. Therefore thus I unfold it:

(...) is a (...) of (...). Tertullian, Apol. c. 32.
Nescitis geni^s daemonas dici, and inde diminutina voce, daemonia. Now (...),
or demon, signifies properly, Deus, diuinus, sapi^ns, sciens, fortunatus,
faelix: as every mean Scholar that has read either Greek Lexicons, or Greek
Authors easily understands. And therefore in old time, and among the Heathen,
Demon was a word of good intendment, and used to the better part. For who
knows not this distinction between Plato and Aristotle, that the one was
called (...), the other, (...); yea Plutarch calls Plato, De liberis, educ,
(...); which yet X^lander translateth Diuinus. Homer was called (...), for the
superexcellenci^ of his wit and knowledge. Homer himself calls all his gods,
(...). Plato called vniuersi modereatorem, (...). Hesi^^ calls the Worthies
of the golden age, (...). Lib^nius extolleth (...) after his death, Socrates
hist. Eccles. l. 3. c. 19.
o (...) The Athenians say of Paul, that he was (...), which Beza transl^^eth,
Acts. 17. 18.
Asette^ forth, (...) of new gods. Thus has the word been used. But now, L.
Vi^es in August de ci^ De^. l. 9. c. 19.
Post Christum n^tum, nomen d^m^^is suspectum fuit, and ^di^sum tanquam rei
maleficae atque impr^bae: Ever since Christ's time, the name of Demon has
been suspicious, and odious, as the title, or note of some evil and wicked
thing. Augustine says, that De (...). dei lib. 9. c. 19.
in the Scriptures, we have Angels good and bad: ^^^quam vero bon^s d^mones
legimus; but never any good Devils: Sed vbicunque ill^rum literarum hoc nomen
posit^^ reperitur, ^i^e d^mones, ^i^e d^monia dicuntur, non niss maligni
significa^ntur spiritus. But Daemones ever signify the wicked Spirits. Of that
I might give infinite instances. Read Matthew. 7. 22. Matthew. 8. 28. 31. Matthew. 9.
33. and other places, too long to recite. Therefore must Johannes Eud^mon
lately come from Rome fly to the Popes omnipotency for the Canonizing of his
name. For nor Scriptures, nor Fathers allow any good Devils, now to be named
in the Church of God. No: wicked men ever take it in the worse part. The Jews
object it to Christ in disgrace, (...). 1. 48.
daemonium habes, thou have a devil: Apol. cap. (...).
etiam vulgus indoctum in vs^^ maled^ctis frequentat, says Tertullian. The
ignorant people use it only to cursing and banning: The Devil is on thee, the
Devil take thee, etc. No, Aug. vbi supr.
there is none so learned, and in learning so well understanding what
signification Demon has in it self, and has borne in former times, which
dares now say by way of commendation to his servant, Daemonem habes, Thou have
a devil; Sed ^^ilibet hoc voluerit dicere, non se aliter accipi, quam
maledice^e voluisse dubitare non possit: But when soever he uses it, he can
not doubt but to be conceived as one that meant to revile him to whom he
speaks. So then, gather from hence, of what kind of persons James intends
his (...); not of the Heathen gods, not of the wise Philosophers, not of the
valiant Worthies; to whom former ages ascribed that name: but of the wicked
Angels, which Io^. ^. 44.
stood not in the truth, Iad^. 6.
which kept ^ot their beginning: those same Aposta^a angeli, which (as Cyprian
speaks) Cyprian de habitu virgin.
ad terrena contagia de^oluti, e coelesti vigore recesserunt, which turning
themselves to earthly corruption, lost that heavenly excellency, wherein they
were created. Of these S. James h^re speaks, and says, that They believe,
and tremble.

Of these Devils or wicked Angels, the Apostle here auerreth two things; the
first, that They believe* the second, that they tremble.

1. They believe* (...). 2. Praedi^atum.
The verb used in the Original has diverse significations, 2. Tim. 1. 12.
(...), I know to whom I have trusted. Phocilides.
(...), R^lie not upon the people. Ioh. 2. 24.
(...), He committed not himself to them. Arist. analyt. prior. l. 2.
(...), We prove or confirm all things*

But most commonly (...)* signifies in the Scriptures, to believe, to assent
unto, to be persuaded of As, Romans 10 ^.
(...)* with the heart we believe unto righteousness* Gal. 3. 6.
(...)* Abraham believed God* 1. (...)
(...)* In part I believe it to be true. And so m^st it of necessity be taken
in this place, the whole drift of the Apostle being here to entreat of true
and false faith and belief. So the meaning shortly is (...)* the Devils; that
is to say, the evil Angels and damned Spirits, do believe, that is, are
persuaded, and in their pers^asion, do assent to many things to be true. And
this may ^ppeare by diverse reasons.

1. lib. (...). ^n Luke ^.
Omnia quae credimus, vel visu credimus; vel auditu, says Saint Ambros^^ All
our belief arises either from sight, or hearing. Now the Devils can not
(...) see much, partly by that eminency of place, Ephesians. 2. (...). Ephesians. 6. 12.
being seated in the air, from whence as from a watch tower they look down
round about them: partly by their Job 17. 1. Pet. 5. 8.
wand^ing up and down the world (...) so great (...), Aug. de diuinat daem
cap. 3.
as no man* no beast, no (...) Apol. c. 2^.
(...) ^les est, says T^rt^^lian. Hoc Angeli and dae^^^e^. All Spirits both
Angels and devils are like a flying bird. Igit^r momento vbique sunt. Totus
orbis illis locus vnus est. They are here and there and every where in a
moment, all the world is unto them as one certain place. Not by vbiquitie,
filling all places at once, but by Cel^riti^, moving to a thousand places in
the turning of a hand. And therefore if that be true of Augustine, (...) Johan.
14.
Dicuntur credi qu^^ videntur: sicut dicit vn^^quisque aculis suis se cr^dere.
Things that are seen are said to be believed: as every man says, he will
believe his (...) eyes: then the Devils seeing so much, ^^ust needs also
believe much, and be persuaded of the truth of much: according to this here of
S. James, The Devils do believe.

2. As the Devils see much, so also they ^eare exceeding much. Now Muscul.
^oe. co^^de fide.
Fides est assenti^i (...), to approve for truth what we ^eare another man
speak, this is belief. The Devils then hear God himself speak much, when
they stand Io^. 1. ^.
before him. And all that they cannot but believe to be true, because they know
that. Tit^^.
God^ (...) li^. Psalm. 12. 6.
Dicta Iehoue* dicta p^^a. They he^^e the good Angels speak much, when they
come among them, and all tha^ also they, cannot but believe to be true. For
they know that the holy Angels are established in the state of grace: Isidor de
s^m. bo^ l. 1. c. 1^
Angeli (...) sun^ (...) grati^: and so cannot fall by lying, and that they
were even from the beginning August. de (...). c. 9.
supported of the holy Ghost, ne a veritat^ (...); that their will should never
decline from the truth. Again, they h^are much spoken from the (...) of God,
and all that also they (...) but believe to ^e true. For they know that the
(...) of God, is 2. Tim. 2. 15.
(...) veritatis, the word of (...). Te^tul. de spectac^l.
(...) God is the teacher of truth: and ^hereis (...), because the Devils have
beheld in the doing, therefore they cannot but believe them to be true in the
relating. The Devils therefore do most certainly believe.

3. From seeing much, and hearing much, and observing much, arises their
abundant, and in a manner their in^inite knowledge. And that not only about
all kind of creatures and secrets of nature: but also concerning God himself,
and his divine mysteries. For; first, They know there is a God: August de (...)
vi^. cap. 37.
Dae^o^es Deum, and Pagani credunt: Devils and Infidels acknowledge so much. 2.
They know there is but one God. Orpheus apud Just. Mart. cohort. ad Graec.
(...): One God of himself: One God in all. 3. They know this God, to be such
a one as he is: for they call him Mar. ^. 7. Act. 16 17.
(...), The most high, or almighty God. 4. They know that in this one God,
there are three distinct persons. Serapl^^d Thulem. Sel^e^cer. lib. ^.
(...)
(...)
5. They know Christ; Act. 19. 14.
Jesus I know. 6. They know Mat^. 8. ^^.
Christ to be the Son of God. 7. Yea, to be God himself. (...)
O lign^^m f^^lix in quo Deus ipse pependi^. A verse ascribed to one of the
Sybills by the Gen^iles of whom S. Augustine said, they were Expo^. in Rom
prophet^^ non ^psius, none of Gods Prophets. 8. They know the Scriptures, for
Mat. 4. 7.
they allege them to Christ: and Anthony the Eremite Athan in vi^^ A^ton.
often heard them sing, and impuro o^e sacrae scriptu^a^ rum eloquiae meditari;
and with their v^cleane mouths* talk and confer of the holy Scripture^. 9.
They know the Gospel, and the nature thereof: for they call it Act. 1^. 7.
(...), the way to salvation. 10. They know many things to come, either as they
are revealed unto them of God: or as they foresee the effects in their causes.
For they foretold the 1. Sam. ^8. 17.
death of Saul: and the overthrow of the Aug. de divine. d^em* c. 1. Aug. de
(...). D^^ l 8. c 23.
Idols temples in Egypt and Alexandria. 11. Yea many times they discern the
secret motions, thoughts, and affections in the heart: Th. Aq^in. q^.
obscurio^e d^ d^^non qu. 16. art. 8.
ex signis in corpore illos sequentibus: so far as they make impressions in
the body, and bewraied by ^he passions thereof. And therefore of their
abundant knowledge is it that they take this name, Plato in ^rat. Lactan. l. ^.
August de eiv. dei l. 9. ^. 20. Martian. capel* Chalcidius in Trinaeum
Platonis, etc.
(...), quasi (...), that is, full of skill, full of learning, full of
knowledge. Now then the Devils knowing so much of God, of Christ, of the
Scriptures, of the Gospel, of things pre^ent, of things passed, of things to
come, of open actions, of private thoughts, and so forth; how can it be but
they must also believe exceeding much? For, Za^ch. de not. dei. l. 3. c. 2.
quest. 1.
Fides est cognitio eademque certi^^ima: faith is knowledge, and a most
certain kind of knowledge: yea and that even in the judgment of the great
Schoolman, Th. Aq. (...). par 1. q. 12. a^* 13
in quantum intellectu^ determinatur per fidem ad aliquod cognoscibile.
Therefore Peter Martyr expounds these words of S. James, of the Devils
knowledge, Pet. Mart. in Rom (...) deo.
Credere posuit* pr^^^sse: The devils believe; that is, the devils do know,
that there is one God, etc. But the Conclusion is* if believing ^e here put for
knowing, yea if beleef^ it self be knowledge, and then the devils know so
much* as has been before declared; it must needs be out of question unto us,
that S. James speaks truly, The Devils (...).

(...) the Doctrine is clear: descend (...) to Use and Application. Now the
vser of this Doctrine are manifold.

1. S. James here in the word of an Apostle, affirms plainly and directly,
that The devils believe: (...), and that is sufficien^ (...) needless, and
frivolous for School^^^^ so long after to enquire, Th. Aq. secun. secund. q. 5.
(...).
vtr^^s in (...) ^it fides, whither the Devils have faith or no? And yet a
thousand and a thousand such Questions they move: of which a man may say, with
the Disciples in the Gospel, Mat. ^6. 8.
Ad quid hae^perdi^io? To what end serves such want of time and labor? A
right learned, grave, and godly Divine, and a man of famous memory, gave this
censure of them in my hearing. He said, D. Whi^a^ers.
they had plus argutiarum, quam doctrinae, plus doctrinae, quam vsus: a goodly
kind of learning forsooth; that whetteth the wit with quaint devises, and
fills the head with nice distinctions: with which when a man has stuffed his
note books, they are like the Staphylodendron Plin (...). lib. 16. cap. 16.
that Pliny writes of, whose wood is fair and white like the maple, whose
leaves are broad and beutifull, whose fruit is coddes with nu^ts sweet as the
filberd: and yet Dodoneus says of it, that it is good for nothing. I would
therefore entreat and persuade all young Divines, to begin their race with
traversing the worthy writings of Luther, Melancthon, Calvin, Beza, Zanchius,
Musculus, and the like, (books some thirty or forty years ago in the
only request) and of them to take their chief repast: using only the other
like sweet meats after a feast, rather to close the stomach, and to delight
with variety, then to satisfy the appetite, or to support nature. For my
part, I refuse not wholly to use them, as will appear by this Treatise: but in
many cases, (as namely in this of the Devils believing,) I hold both their
Objections and Solutions so needeles and frivolous, as I do not vouchsafe them
so much as a bare relation. This may suffice the body of this Auditorie; that
the Apostle here affirms, and reason from the Scriptures confirms the same,
that there is faith and belief, even in the Devils.

Secondly, this shows that the very Devils of hell have some thing in them
that is good. For they believe. Now true and right belief, is of it self the
good gift of God. Indeed the Devils as bad as they are, have in them many good
parts, For 1. their natural substance is good: it is the creature of God, and
Genesis 1. 31*
all that God made, was exceeding good. 2. Their natural qualities are good,
their knowledge, their understanding, their wisdom, their immortality, their
inuisibilitie, their agilitie, and the like, are all good properties in
themselves. 3. They often speak that which is good. As when they professed
Matthew. 8. ^9.
Christ to be the Son of God, and Paul and Barnabas Act. 16. 17.
to be the servants of God. For all truth has correspondencie to God, the
fountain and rule of truth. 4. Many times they do that which is good in it
self. As when by Coniurers they fetch home stolen goods to the right owners;
or by Witches do cure and heal desperate diseases. My self did once know
Ioane Wells of Stow market in Su^f.
an aged and impotent woman, so silly as she was not able to give any
reasonable account of her faith, and therefore no likelihood that she should be
endued with a miraculous faith: who notwithstanding only with a clean linen
cloth, and a short prayer in the form of a ^iming spell, by blessing the sore
part, cured manifold diseases, creeples, lazers, ulcers, fistulaes, nu^^es,
lamene^, and what not? The whole country sought to her as a petty God: but I
verily believe, that though the cures were temporarily good to those that
enjoyed the^, yet they were all wrought by the power of the Devil. Neither may
that seem strange to any that reads in the Scriptures, that Exodus ^. 11. 22.
Pharao^s Inchanters imitated Moses: that Matt. 7. 1^.
wicked men do many great works: that Tert. depraese. Sozo^. l. 1. c. 14^
Socrat. l. 7. c. 17.
Heretics to confirm their doctrine, have raised the dead, healed the sick,
foretold things to come: that Iosep. antiq. l. 8. c. 2.
men by enchantments have cast out devils: yea, that unbelieving Jews Iren. l.
2. c. 5.
by calling upon the name of our Lord, have cha^ed away Devils: that the Apoc.
13. 13.
second beast which came out of the earth (the lively image of Papacy,) did
great wonders, so that he made fire to come down from heaven: and a thousand
such instances in divine, and humane Writers. But to return to my purpose.
Among other good parts in the Devils, this their belief is good. For lib. 3.
^^istin. 23
faith in the wicked, donum Dei dici potest; says the great Master of the
Sentences. And Bellarmine himself confesses, that De just f. l. 1. cap. 15.
both the faith of the wicked, and of the Devils, est recta and vera fides
exparte obiecti, ^s true and right faith in respect of the object, which it
apprehends. Yea S. Augustine comparing Peter's confession in the 16. of
Matthew, Mat. ^6. 16.
Thou art the Christ, the Son of the living God, with the confession of the
Devil in the 1. of Mark, Mar. 1 24.
I know thee what thou art, even that holy one of God: says, that Aug. de
vnico bap^is. cont. Pe^il. c. 10.
though Peter was commended, and the Devil cast out speaking the same thing,
and so the same confession was beneficial to the one, and destruction to the
other; In vtrisque tamen non falsa, sed vera; non neganda, sed agnoseend^^; non
detestanda, sed approband^ est: that is, yet in both of them it was not false,
but true; not to be denied, but to be acknowledged; not to be detested, but
approved. Yea, and lastly, the very drift of S. James in this place implies
that the faith in the Devils is good, and right, and true. For he will prove
that an imaginary, titularie, and pretensed faith, cannot save; by an argument
a maiori: for so much as there is some kind of faith, which is true, and right
in it self, and yet that will not bring to salvation; which he instanceth
presently by that faith which is in the Devils, as has been before declared.

Now that we may apply all this to our use. As it is with the Devils, so is it
in this case with all Deuillish men. No man so wicked, nor so very a Devil
incarnate, but that besides the common gifts of nature, as strength, shape,
limbs, sense, reason, and such like, (which all are good parts in themselves)
he has also many times, Insti^. l. 2. cap. 3. sect. 4
speciales dei gratias, (as M. Ca^vin da^eth to call them) some special graces
of God; quas vary and adcertum modum prophanis alioqui hominibus dispe^sat;
which in diverse sorts, and certain measure, he dispenses to men otherwise
merely profane, and void of all goodness, and religion. As for example: Gen
25 27
Esau had a certain extraordinary cunning and dexterity in his game. Numb 23
24
Balaam had a mighty gift of prophecy. 1 Samuel 10 9
Saul had another heart given him fit for government, and to go in and out
wisely, and courageously before the people. (...)
Achit^phel counsell^ as an Oracle in his time. Mat. 10. 4.
Judas had power to preach, and to do miracles. And yet Esau was a Heb. 12. 16.
profane person. 2. Pet. 2. 15.
Balaam loved the wages of iniquity. 1. Sam. 16 14.
Saul was deprived of the spirit of God. 2. Sam. 17. 23.
Achitophel hanged himself. And Ioh. 6. 17.
Judas was a Devil. Aug. in frag. number. 7. ex sermon. de miraculo 5. Panum.
Baptism (says S. Augustine) is the gift of God: But, habent illam boni, and
mali: Evil men are baptized also* for so was Act. 8. 13.
Simon Magus. Prophecy is a 1. Cor. 5. 10.
gift of the Spirit: yet, Propheta^^t Saul iniqu^s, says S. Augustine in the
same place; 1. Sam. 10. 11.
Saul also was among the Prophets. At length he adds, Numquid dicuntur
credere soli boni? And as touching faith: Are only good said in the Scriptures
to believe? and demones credunt, and contr^miscu^t. No: wicked men are said to
Act. 8. 13.
believe also: yea, The devils believe and tremble. So far S. Augustine. Now
to come home to our selves. He that will cast his eyes up and down in the
world, shall he not see a good Statesman, and yet a mere Atheist? A deep
Divine; and worldly minded? An expert Lawyer, and yet a corrupt Judge? An
experienced Physician; and yet a daily Tobacconist? A fair Merchant, and yet a
very merchant? A Believer, and yet a devil? Chrysostom in one of his Sermons,
which he intituleth in the commendation of David's Psalms, has this notable,
but fearful speeck: Chrysostom. ser^. Da^dica cantica, etc. tom. 1.
Qui volens delinquit, vel sponte furit, demon est: He that willingly
sins, (that is to say with greediness: for I dare not understand him of
every voluntary trespass) and furiously rush^^h into it, (like a bard ^orse
into the battle) he is no better then a devil in the shape of a man, or no
better then a man, in the nature of a Devil. A terrible censure, given upon all
our carnal Liberti^es, Atheists, blasphemers, common drunkards, daily
whoremasters, continual ^surers, and oppressors, and their like* which were
created to the image of God, but live in the likeness of the Devil: which
profess to believe as the righteous, but go no further then the wicked: good
parts they may have, so has the Devil, yet good men they are not, nor in more
assurance of salvation then are the damned devils of hell. And all this must
teach us, not to content our selves with ordinary gifts of nature, which are
common with us, to the devils; no nor with some extraordinary grace, by which
even wicked men are sometimes fitted to particular works, or special
callings. But let us labor to turn truly unto God by repentance, which the
devils can not do: to be engrafted into Christ by faith, which the devils
cannot be: and to possess the spirit of sanctification, which the devils
cannot have. So shall we resemble the blessed Angels in goodness, and be
partakers of their glory in the heavens.

3. The Devils believe. What? that there is one God. So S. James says in this
place: and much more they believe, as has been before declared. A notable
Item for Atheists, which neither believe there is a God, nor a Christ, nor a
Devil, nor an hell, nor an heaven, nor any thing else belonging to devout
religion. Psalm. 14. 1.
The fool has said in his heart, there is no God. O damned crew of cursed
men; worse in this behalf then the very Devils of hell: Tract. 10. in epist.
Johan.
Qui non credunt pei^res sunt, quam daemones, and tardiores quam daemones,
says Augustine: They that believe not these things, are worser and duller then
the Devils, even in natural sense and understanding. And yet we may say of
our times, as Ar^obius spoke of his: Amob. cont. ge^tes. l. ^.
Audiuimus quosdam Philosophandi studi^ deditos, par^im vllam negare esse vim
diuinam, partim an sit quotidi^ quaerere: We have heard it reported, (and I
would it were not true) that some, if not scholars, given to the study of
Philosophy, yea Knights, Gentlemen, and others leaning too much to wit, and
reason; have partly denied statly that there is any divine power, and partly
are yet sifting, and disputing whether there be or no. Some have not feared to
make report of Schools of Atheism among us, and I will report an example
sounding shreudly thereunto. A reverend and ancient Preacher, who lived, and
died not long since in this honorable City, a man whose goodness, and
conscience I well knew to be such, as he would commit willingly no fable unto
writing, reports this history of an Atheist in England: M. Greenham (...)
his Cou^s* ^ap of (...).
A young man a Papist not satisfied with the course of life which he found
among men of that religion; declined from them to the Protestants. Not
contented with their conversation neither, he diuerted from them to the
Familists. There he rested himself, and found satisfaction. The first
principle which they taught him, was this, that there was no God. As indeed the
villainies and abominations of the Familists being such, as are reported, they
had need fear up their consciences, before they attempt them, and da^me up
their natural light, persuading themselves that there is no God to see them,
nor Justice in God to be avenged of them: well: this youth upon this
persuasion, fell to a loose life, and at length stole an horse, for which he
was apprehended, convicted, condemned, and led to execution: when he was
ready to be turned off, he desired the ladder to be stayed, and uttered these
words: Well, say all what they will, surely there is a God: and this God is
loving to his friends, and terrible to his enemies. Now turn me off. O
invincible testimony of conscience, and o the mighty hand of the highest God!
that is able to draw forth testimony to himself from his most professed
enemies. When Seneca dissuaded Nero from his villainy, and exhorted him so to
deal, and so to carry himself, (...) 2.
vt facta superi semper comprobent sua; that the Gods above might approve and
accept his doings: Nero answered like a dogged Atheist; stulte, verebor esse
cum faciam Deos? doting Philosopher, (quoth he) when I go about mine odious
designs (the polluting of my self, the defiling of my kindred, the ripping of
my mother, the murdering of my nobles, the fiering of my imperial City, etc.)
shall I then stand fearing or imagining that there are any Gods? And what shall
we say to heinous malefactors, that attempt, and effect robberies, slaughters,
poisonings, murdering of Kings, blowing up of Parliaments, supplanting of
Christian states, (in which kinds our bloody Papists of late years have
excelled:) do they not say for the time with Nero, verebor esse cum faciam
Deos? If they did not: a man would wonder that the very remembrance of the name
of God should not terrify them from so heighnous impiety. I conclude this
point with that of Augustine, (...)
Vinam sicut daemones iudicem, sic homines agnoscerent saluatorem: My prayer
shall be for this godless crew, that as the Devils acknowledge Christ for
their Judge, so God would vouchsafe to turn their hearts, that they may
acknowledge him, and embrace him for their Savior.

Hitherto I have spoken of the Devils faith, now it follows to speak of
their fear. The Apostle here says, that They tremble.

The old Latin translateth it, Steph. S^apul.
contremiscunt. Beza, horrescunt. Castalio, horrent. Hemingius, exhorrescunt.
All in effect to one purpose. The Greek is, (...): which they that have
travailed in the Greek tongue, ascribe most properly to the roaring of the
sea. For Hom. Iliad ^.
(...), is maris agitatio. From thence it is translated Eus^ath. in Hom. ^. ^
and ^.
to the hideous clashing of armor in the battle; and some other things too
long, and not very needful to rehearse. The word seems to implie an
extreme fear, which causes not only trembling, but also a roating, or
shriking out. As those are wont to do that are in extremity of this
affection. Act. 16. 29.
The Iaylor came trembling into Paul and Sylas, when the earth was shaken, and
the prison doors were opened. And the Mark. 6. 49.
Disciples cried out for fear, when they had thought they had seen a spirit
walking on the waters. And lib. de Home^.
Plutarch shows the reason why in nature men in their fear do tremere, and
horrere. The one, because the spirits gathered and stirred together, do smite
the body, and so make it to shake, and tremble. The other, because hu^^ore
dens^to pills pressi eriguntur: the hai^es being thrust forward with the
thickened humors of the body, they stand right up with fear. As the wild
boar is said, (...), setis horreseere. So the word implies, that fear in the
Devils is so extreme, as it makes them to quake, yea to roar ou^ in
passion. And indeed it can not be but the Devils must fear exceedingly. For,

1. The best men, yea the best Angels can not but fear, when God draws near
to them, or they draw near to God. Act. 6. 32.
Moses trembled, ((...)) and dur^t not behold when God Exodus 3. 6.
appeared unto him in the fie^ie bush; yea he hid his face, for he was afraid
to look upon God. And the Seraphims Esaias 6. 2.
cover their faces with two of their wings^ Calu. ibid.
not being able to bear the brightness of the glory of God, no more then we
are able to look upon the sun. Now if godly men, and holy Angels, appear
not before the presence of the glorious God, without fear, and abashment; how
much less then the Devil, who is Mat. 13. 19. 1. Ioh. 2. 14.
(...), that evil one? So called Chrysostom. in Matthew. 6.
(...), because he is apex iniquitatis, the height, depth, the sum, the
fulness, the beginner, the finisher of all iniquity.

2. The conscience of sin alone is able to make any creature to tremble. It
is De tranq. an.
(...), (as Plutarch speaks) like and ulcer or wound in the flesh, leaving
behind it sorrow or grief, (...), ever goaring, and ever pricking the mind.
Et caeco verbere plectit. Genesis 3. 10.
Adam feared so soon as ever he had sinned. How much more then must the Devil
needs fear, that besides his first fall, has heaped up sin to sin, I^h 8
44. 1. Io^. 3. 8.
(...), from the beginning of the world? yea, and that in an high degree:
(...), being a murderer from the beginning, yea and that not of bodies only,
but of souls also: how much more, I say, must the touch of his sin make him
to tremble before the presence of God.

3. A malefactor condemned, and adjudged to death, can not but live in
continual fear, expecting hourly his shameful and painful execution. For
Arist. (...). 3.
death is, (...), as the Philosopher speaks, of all things the most
fearful. And then, Decad ^. 4 17.
Nulla more inquietior est, quam quae statim tota est, says Quintilian: The
heauiest death is that, which comes with all his weight at once: such as is
the execution of the malefactor. Now this is the present estate of the
Devils. They are already 2. P^t. 2. 4.
cast down to hell: (...) that is, they are Luther.
iudicio deputati, adjudged and deputed to hell, and torments; and unto that
execution they are reserved in chains of darkness; or as Jude says, Jude. 6.
(...), in everlasting chains under darkness. And so like condemned prisoners,
Cal^. (...) 4.
carceris atrocitatem dimidium ponae sustinent, donec as vl^imum (...)
trahantur; they bear the torture of the (...) chains, and fetters, and
manicles, the one half of their punishment, until they be drawn forth to the
utmost execution: which shall fall upon them sod^^ly, and all at once.
Therefore how can the Devils but tremble continually?

An example of this trembling and fear in the devils, the H. Ghost has
recorded unto us in the Scriptures. Matt. (...).
Christ coming into the country of the Gergasens, there met him two possessed
with devils. And what an horrible fear express they in their demeanor?
First, they cried out: 1. Sam. 28* 1^.
as the witch did when she discovered the King so near her, who had put
Sorcerers and Soothsayers out of the land: and as the Disciples Mat. 14. 26.
cried out for fear thinking they had seen a Spirit, when Christ came walking
toward them on the waters. N. ^orra^. in Ma^e. 5.
Clamor exprimit a^gustiam animi desperantis: This crying out of the devils
when they saw Christ, bewraieth the straightnes of a desperate mind. As Apoc.
18 10.
Woe, Woe, in the Revelation. And, Soph. A^^x.
(...), in Sophocles and Euripedes. E^^ip Hee^ba.
Secondly, they would fai^^ turn him off hand: Matthew. 8. 29.
Quid nobis and tibi? What have we to do with thee? As if they should say,
Come not near us, we have no desire to meddle with thee. Thirdly, they fear
present execution: Art thou come hither to torment us before the time? The word
in the Original is very significant; (...), to cast us into the torments of
hell. For so the same word is expressly used by S. Luke: The rich man in hell,
Luke 16. 23.
(...), being in torments. And hell it self is there called, Luke 16. 28.
(...), the place of torments. And so in mine opinion the Greek Church used the
word in their Liturgy, as it is excellently, and to special purpose alleged
by our Se^m. in Lament. 1. 12.
learned Bishop of Elie, (...): By thy unknown sufferings, and ^ellish
torments, Good Lord deliver us. And thus every (...) they showed, that Di.
Stella in Luc. 8.
the presence of Christ was a (...) unto them, sicut reo praesentia Iudicis,
and seruo fugiti^o praesentia Domini sui: as the presence of the Judge is
terrible to the guilty fell^n, and the presence of the master is fearful to
a fugitive servant.

And if any man will object against this, that the devils bewaried no such
extremity of fear; because an other Evangelist says, Muk. 56.
they ran to him, as willing to draw near him, and worshipped him, as
cheerfully doing their homage; Let that man take for answer, that the devils
ran to Christ, N. Gorra^. in Marc. 5.
a spiritis malo voluntary exequente, sed a spiritu bono voluntary
compellente: the evil spirit executing that, which the good Spirit of God
enforced them unto. The man must needs run, (faith our Proverb) whom the
devil drives; and the devil must needs run, when God his master whippeth
him forwards. And as for the devils worshipping of Christ; far enough was
that from any devout homage: for he did that which he did, D. Stella in Luc 8.
non humilitate sed necessitate compulsus: not induced with due reverence, but
compelled by extreme necessity. Non ^more boni, sed ^imore grauioris
supplicij: not for any love of goodness, but for fear of greater punishment.
As a false hearted Papist may crouch, and creep, and doppe like a Friar,
before the Worthy King of great Britain, not of any love to his person, or
honor to his estate, but for fear of his sword, and the justice of his Laws:
The devils therefore notwithstanding all this, quaked like Aspen leaves at the
presence of Christ.

From hence arise many lessons of instruction. As.

1. The Devils are ever trembling before God: it follows by necessary
consequence, that they can carry no loiall affections, not loving devotions
toward God. For, Quem metuunt, oderunt. And as Tertullian spoke the very same,
Te^. Apol. c, ^7
Odium timor spirat: fear breaths out hatred. The scholar that daily
fears the rod, the servant that hourly fears the whippe, neither of them
can bear true or hearty love unto their master. Therefore is the Devil
rightly called Matthew. 13. 28.
(...), because he bears ever terms of hostility against God, and all his
servants. S. John in the Revelation shows, that Apoc. 1^ 7.
the Devil fought against Michael himself, whom Daniel calls Dan. 12. 1.
the great Prince. And rightly, for the word implies, Wigan. l ^om. 1. col 38^.
Quis sicut Deus? who is like the Lord? And so it is by the Protestants justly
ascribed to the Seluec. ins^it. 1 Call. inst. 2 10. (...) Fulk in test. (...)
Apoc. 12 sect. 31
Son of God: who, as Daniel speaks, stands for the sons of his people.
Being foiled of him, Apoc. 12. 13
he persecuted the woman. She being delivered, Apoc. 12. 17.
he went and made war with the remnant of her seed. So God, the Son of
God, the Church, the members of the Church, are continually opposed of the
devil, and his ministers. Hereof he is called Io^ 1. 6 Mat. (...) 10
Satan, that is to say, an Adversary; being ever ad oppositum, resisting
where he can; obeying unwillingly where he cannot resist. A notable pattern
of all unsanctified men; (such Father, such children,) who having not received
the spirit of Adoption, and therefore continually in fear of the wrath of God;
serve God, but unwillingly; stoop to God, but traitorously; no loyal nor
so^n-like affection ruling in their hearts. A good note for a man to know what
manner of spirit reigns in him: A wicked man led by the spirit of Satan,
would do more harm if he durst, to satisfy his corrupt affections; a good
man led by the spirit of God, would do more good if he could, to please and
honor his heavenly Father: But fear restrains the one, and love inciteth
the other.

2. This shows the miserable estate of the devils: they live in continual
fear, and so in continual torture; Te^tul. de (...).
Timor supplicamentum habet: It is Tertullians speech, and almost his peculiar
word: He puts supplicamentum for supplici^m, and so his meaning is, that
fear is a punishment of it self. The same with the Greek Proverb, (...),
Fear excludes all happiness, yea, though a man be for the present in the
height of prosperity, if he do but then fear a fall, Pli^. (...) hist. lib.
7 cap. 40.
solida foelicitas esse non potest: his prosperity cannot be complete or
perfect. How much more then the devils, which by continuance have wrought
fear into an habit; and being cast from the height of their happiness,
half way to the depth of their damnation, are not only out of all hope ever
to be better, but live in continual expectation to be worse: how much more (I
say) are they secl^ded from the least dram or mite of a cheerful, or
blessed estate? Fear in a man is a cold affection, Orat. 7.
quafi gelu astringit, ^aith Nazianzene. As joy does warm, and by warming does
open all the veins and arteries of the body, and so enlarge the heart: so
fear does cool, and by cooling does bind like a deep frost all the powers
and members of the body, and so indeed straigteneth the heart. Hereof the
Grecia^s call it, Plut. l. de sup.
(...), quasi ligamentu^^: for fear is like a band or chain unto a prisoner:
Greg. moral. lib. 25. c. 6.
Conscientia accusat, ratio indicat, timor ligat, dolor excruciat, says
Gregory: Conscience is the witness to accuse, reason is the judge to
condemn, fear is the cord to pin^on, and grief is the gallow tree to execute
a sinner. And this no doubt is one of the strong chains or fetters wherewith
the Scriptures affirm the devils to be manacled, even the fear of the wrath
of God, of which they have already so sensible experience, and to the full
measure whereof they are in this fear reserved,

Now as it is with the Devils, so is it with all wicked and ungodly men, who
have only that same 2. Tim. 1. 7.
(...), as Paul speaks, the spirit of fear, and not of courage and love:
they are ever in fear, and so ever in torment. For, Isa. 48. ^1.
There is no peace to the wicked, says the Lord. And this as it is true of all
kind of sinners, Tert. cont. Mark. 4.
Nullum maleficium sine formidine est, quia nec sine conscientia sui: No sin
escapes without fear, because it can never shake off conscience: so is it
principally verified of them, that sin like the Devils, that is, which are
Cypr. de hab. virgin.
Apostatae Angeli, Apostates like the Devils, falling from God, and from his
sincere religion. Woeful is the story of written by M. Cal^.
Francis Spira, who after he had subscribed to Popery, could never free
himself from the terror of hell, but died in desperation: whom
notwithstanding I can not judge to have sinned against the holy Ghost, as he
complained of himself. For, Peccatum in spiritum sanctum est semper
malitiosum, as I have sometime defended publicly in the Schools. And For Act.
(...) in Q. Marie an. 1555.
lamentable is the history of Justice Hales, who cond^scending but to some
point of superstition, would first have murdered himself with his penknife,
and after drowned himself in a shallow water. But what is to be said to those
settled pillars of Papacy? Iacobus Latomus, Pa^lus liber. orat Wi^eberg
who died in desperation, crying out that he was damned for resisting the
known truth? And to Stephen Gardener, that could not be comforted with the
sight of Peter's fall and rising again, but professed (sealing up as it were
his own damnation) that he had sinned with Peter, but had not repented with
Peter: and a thousand others too long to repeat. Act. Mon. Gods judgments
upon persecutors.
M. Fox reports of one John Apowell, who scoffed at his fellow, as he was
reading of a religious book. The very next day the said John fell out of his
wits, and as he lay almost day and night his tongue never ceased, but he cried
out of the Devil of hell, and his words were ever still: O the devil of hell;
now the devil of hell: thou shall see the devil of hell, there he was, there
he goes, etc. O the miserable estate of deuilish men, who like the Devil,
Ioh 8. 44.
abide not in the truth: but are ever wasting from one religion to another, and
falling away some to Atheism, some to Papisme, some to Gentilisme, a number to
Libertinisme; from whence can arise nothing but a terrified conscience, and a
trembling heart. It must teach every man to sue out his Quietus est: and to
strive to make his peace with God, repenting of his sins, and seeking
reconciliation in the blood of Christ: in whom, and by whom only, Mat. 11* 19.
We shall find rest for our souls. While Christ is apprehended, and by him
our peace attained, fear and trembling must be our portion, as it is
continually to the damned Devils of hell.

3. The Devils fear and tremble. Well, and even so the best children of God
always fear, and sometimes tremble also. Our Savior Christ exhorts us to
fear God principally, because he Matthew. 10 28.
is able to destroy both body and soul in hell. And Paul exhorts us to
Phil. 2. 12.
make an end of our salvation with fear and trembling. And Solomon says, that
he is the Pro^^. 2^. 14.
blessed man, that fears always. What difference then in this behalf,
between the holy Saints of God, and the damned fiends of hell? The answer
shall be short, because it is known and common: B^da in prou 1
Duo sunt timores Domini, seruilis, and amicalis: There are two sorts or kinds
of the fear or the Lord. The one, a servile fear; as when the slave or
bondsman fears the masters whippe. The other, a freindlike, or filial fear,
as when a dutiful son fears to grieve and offend a loving father. The
Devils fear and tremble: but how? Lyra. in Iac. 1.
contremiscunt timore paenorum: They tremble only for fear of punishment, that
God will plague them for their sins. The children of God fear also, but how?
M. Sent. l. 3. distinct. 34.
ne offendamus quem diligimus, and ne ab eo separemur: least they offend him
whom they love, and so he depart from them. S. Augustine shows this
difference by the similitude of two married wives, the one a chaste spouse, the
other a common strumpet. Both of them fear their husbands, but in a diverse
manner, and in a sundry respect. August. tract 9 in epist. Io^an. and epist.
121 ad Honorat.
The harlot she says, timeo virum ne veniat: I fear my husband least he
come, and take me in my naughtiness. The chaste Matrone, she says; timeo virum
ne discedat: I fear my husband, least for my misdemeanour, he should depart
from me. The harlot she says, timeo virum ne damnet: I fear my husband least
he punish me for mine adultery. The chaste matrone she says, timeo virum ne
deserat: I fear my husband least he forsake me for mine undutifulness. Both
do fear: but the one with a hatred of her husband, from whom she expects
punishment: the other with a love of her husband, of whom she is loath to be
forsaken. So stands the case between the Devils, and the Saints: They fear
God so, as that withal they hate him in their hearts, knowing that he will be
and shall be their confounder. These fear God so, as withal they love him in
their hearts, as feeling that he is, and believing that he will be their
careful preserver. And if at any time mistrustfull, or carnal fear do take
hold upon the Saints, yet it is neither total, nor final, as it is in the
Devils. For the regenerate party will ever cleave to Gods mercy by faith;
and the spirit of adoption will at length get the victory, and make them Romans
12. 15.
cry with comfort, Abba, Father: whereas the Devils fear ever totally,
without one drop of faith, and finally without one moment of comfort.
Therefore as it is no comfort to the Devils, to know that the Saints do fear
as well as they: so it need be no discomfort to the Saints, to see that they
fear as well as the devils. M^dus agendi actum distinguit. They fear
punishment, these fear loss, they fear and ^ate; these fear and love; they
fear and despair, these fear and hope; they fear and sin still; these
fear and amend; they fear and are damned, these fear and are saved. For
there is H^b. 12. 2^.
a fear and reverence with which we please God; the fruit whereof is
everlasting salvation.

Hitherto I have spoken of the Devils belief and trembling severally and
asunder: and derived uses from either necessary to our instruction. Now
consider we of them jointly and together. They believe, and yet they tremble.
They tremble, and yet they believe. What? Pugnantia loqueris Iacobe? Good S.
James, do thou not speak contraries? How will these two stand together,
believing and trembling? If they believe, why do they tremble? If they
tremble, how do they believe? for on the one side, Basil. in Psalm. 33.
timor hostilis infidelitatis filius: hostile fear is the offspring of
infidelity. Why were the Apostles (...), because they were (...): Matthew 8. 26.
Why are ye fearful, O ye of little faith? If therefore the devils
tremble, it is a sign that they believe not. On the other side, if they
believe, then what need they tremble? For first: Faith makes attonment with
God: Romans 5. 1.
Being justified by faith, we have peace toward God. If they be at peace with
God, what cause have they to fear? For, Rom 8. 31.
If God be on our side, who can be against us? Secondly, Act 15 9.
Faith purifieth the heart. Now if the Devils be mundi cord: then Matt. 5. 8.
they are blessed, and see God with comfort. What then need they fear?
Thirdly, faith gives boldness and confidence: Ephesians. 3. 12.
By whom we have boldness and entrance with confidence by says in him.
Boldness and Confidence are plain opposites to fear and trembling. Fourthly,
faith Gal. 5. 6.
works by love. Now 1. Io^. 4. 18.
love casts out fear. Ergo. If they believe, they love; if they love, they
fear not. One of the Fathers expounding that place in the Song of Solomon, G.
Nissen. Orat. 3. in Ca^tica.
Thy cheeks are comely with rows of stones, and thy neck with chains:
makes one of those chains wherewith the Churches neck is adorned, to be
religiosa sanaque fides, a sound and religious ^aith: facta de puro diuinae
cognitionis auro, beaten and composed of pure gold of the divine knowledge. And
to this pure and golden chain of faith, he applies that of Solomon in the
Proverbs, Pro. 1. 9.
Coronam gratiarum accipies vertice tuo, and ^umellam aur^am circa caput tuum:
Thou shall receive a crown of grace, or a graceful crown, upon thy head* and
a chain of gold about thy neck. Now then if the Devils have such a crown of
grace upon their heads, and such a rich collar of Sss about their neck as
faith is; a man would think they were adorned and bewtified sufficiently, to
appear with iolli^ie in the most royal presence, even of the glorious God
himself. How then, says S. James here, that they believe, and yet they
tremble. The answer is this: The devils believe much and many things, as has
bin before declared, but yet they believe not that which should keep them from
trembling. What is that? M. Bucer sets down in three words: Comment. in
^phe^ 1.
Reconciliationem non credunt: They believe no atonement or reconciliation,
made or to be made between them and Almighty God. Therefore all that which
they believe, will not keep them from trembling. Take for an example of them
in this case, a malefactor, a felon, a murderer or traitor convicted and
condemned to death. This malefactor knows the King, who he is: he knows his
prerogative royal, that he can, and is able to pardon him; he knows and
believes further, that the King of his natural disposition is mild, kind,
bounteous, piti^ull, merciful, (as thanked be God, our King James is at this
day.) The same malefactor knows yet further, that the King out of his royal
bounty and grace, has pardoned many, yea some capital offenders. But now
withal, he has no means, nor friend to make to the King to obtain his
pardon: he has neither word, not writing from the King, to warrant his pardon:
nay he has no hope, that if he sought for it, the King would grant his
pardon; nay his heart is so besotted, as that he can not think of seeking a
pardon. Here all the knowledge of the King, of the Kings mercy, of the Kings
merciful dealing with others, will not put him out of fear of death; but he
trembles daily and hourly expecting his execution. So is it with the Devil.
He knows God, be knows the omnipotent power of God, that God can forgive
him, and he can say with the leper, Mat. 8. ^.
Master if thou will, thou can make me clean. He knows the infinite mercy
of God, that he is Exodus 34. 6.
merciful, gracious, flow to anger, and abundent in goodness and truth: that
the whole earth Psalm. 33. 5.
is full of the goodness of the Lord: that Psalm. 36. 5.
his mercy reaches to the heavens, and his truth unto the clouds: yea that
Psalm. 14 5. 9.
the Lord is good to all, and his mercies are over all his works. He knows
further, that God has extended his merciful pardon toward haino^s offenders.
As to David for 1. Sam. 1^ 13.
adultery and murder. To Solomon for 1. Chro. 17. 13.
idolatry. To Peter for Ioh. 2^ 15.
Apostacy. To Paul for 1. Tim. 1. 13.
persecution, and to thousand thousands whose names are not recorded. All this
the Devil knows well, and believes all that he knows, as has been
before declared. But now the wretched fiend has neither means to make for his
pardon (for Christ is but 1. Tim. 2. 5.
Mediator dei and hominum, a Mediator between God and man, not between God
and the devils; and the goodness of God, which appeared in Christ, was Tit. 3.
4.
(...), not (...), a love of men, not a love of devils) neither has he one
title or iotte of a promise from God, that he shall be pardoned, neither has
he the hope that if he beg it, God will give him pardon, neither has he an
affection to desire pardon, but is shut up (as are Romans 2. 3.
all reprobates) (...), unto a heart that knows not how to repent. Therefore
for all his belief, he trembles for fear, in the expectation of eternal
torments. Again, take another example of this: A man is deeply indebted, and
non est solvendo, he has not to pay: he hears, he knows, he believes,
that his Creditour is a very honest and merciful man; that he has dealt very
honestly and mercifully with others, giving day to some, remitting to others a
third part, a half part, yea to some the whole debt. But he has neither
promise from his creditor, nor persuasion in himself, that he will deal so
patiently and bountifully with him. In this case all the knowledge that he has
of his creditors gentleness toward others, will no whit satisfy his mind,
but he will fear daily to be under arrest, and to kiss the goal. Now thus
stands the case betwixt God and the Devil: He is run deeply into debt by
his sins, (for sins are (...), Matt 6. 12.
debts; Ter. de Ora^
Debitum quod perinde iudicio debeatur, and ab eo exigatur, for which we are
subject to conuention, and conviction, and exaction, as Tertullian speaks,
even as one man is for debt unto another:) He knows that God many times
deals with men, as the kind householder with his beggarly servant, Mat. 18.
27.
who when he had nothing to pay, his Master forgave him all. But now he has
neither promise from God, not belief in himself that those debts shall be
remitted unto him, therefore he lives daily under fear to be cast into
prison, even into hell fire, from which he shall not be delivered till he has
paid the utmost farthing. And hence it is that not believing mercy from God,
though he believe a great deal more then hundred thousands do; yet he is not
at peace with himself in his own heart, but (as S. James says here) does
believe, and tremble.

And here now comes fitly to be examined and discussed the true and
essential difference between the dead unprofitable faith of the devils, which
will not keep them from trembling: and the lively saving faith of the Elect
(as the Tit. 1. ^.
Apostle calls it) which causes their salvation.

Some conceive the difference to be this: that Alia est vera, alia ficta fides:
The faith of the Saints they say is, a true faith; the faith of the devils a
false, or feigned faith. Absurd; for we have heard before out of S. Augustine,
that De vnic. baptism. c. 10.
the devils faith was as true a faith as Peter's. And certain it is, that if
they have any faith, that must needs be true: For, quicquid est, vere est. And
that feigned faith which they gather out of the Apostle, 1. Tim 4. 5. 2. Tim 1.
5.
fide non ficta, is none otherwise to be called faith, then (...), by way of
likelihood or similitude, because it bears some resemblance of faith: As a
king in a play is called a king, and the image of a man, is called a man, when
indeed and truth, they are neither so, nor so. Therefore when Harding
affirms, that Defense of the Apolog. part. 2. cap. 20. (...). 1.
A true faith may be idle, and utterly without good works: this is certainly
true of some kind of faith, which notwithstanding is faith indeed, as we see
in the Reprobate, yea and in the devils. And when the reverend Bishop the
peerless Jewel of his time, replieth that, The faith of the devils indeed
and verily is no faith: this is evidently false, if it be spoken generally of
the nature thereof. But as the intention of controversy is there between them
(for they speak of a profitable and lively faith:) So Harding lies in his
throat, (for a true faith can not be idle) and Bishop Jewels position is most
undoubtedly true, The faith of Devils (in this sense) is no faith at all, that
is, no saving or justifying faith, as after shall appear. And this I thought
good to note, least either any School-Papist should think to find advantage
in that worthy man's doctrine, or that I in this opinion do dissent from so
Reverend a Divine. But to return to the purpose.

Others make this the difference between the faith of the Devils, and the
faith of the Elect: that the one is informis, and the other formata. They say,
that the faith of the devils is without form, because it wants love: the
faith of the Saints is perfected and formed, for it works by love. A common
distinction among the Schoolmen; and a common opinion, to say that Th. Aq ^. ^
quaest. 5 art. 4. Caie^ ibid. Ferus in Mat. 8.
charitas est forma fidei: charity is the form of faith. Against which idle
and unlearned opinion (of which the Schoolmen are full) Peter Martyr disputes
fully and learnedly in his Commentaries P. Mart. in 1. Cor. 13. 3.
upon the Corinthians, whither I send them that will be satisfied in that
Question. I hold my self to my purpose; and I say that the School-distinction
is absurd of faith formed, and unformed: for who can imagine any thing to be
without a form, when as this is our principal in nature, forma dat esse? Ioh.
Ferus. (...). in Matthew. lib. 2. cap. 8.
Qualis est illa fides: (says one of their own) quae mortua est, formaque sua
caret? what manner of faith is that which wants both life and form? And if
that be true of Aquinas, that Th. Aq. 2. ^. qu. 4. art. 4.
fides informis and formata, are not diuersi sed ijdem habitus, (in which
notwithstanding the witty man was grossly deceived) then either the faith of
the Devils has the same form, that has the faith of the Elect, or some
other form at least it must have to make it Habitual, and without a form it
cannot exist.

There be others yet, that make this the difference between them. They say,
that the one is Extorta, or Coacta: the other is Voluntaria. The devils faith
(say they) is Bell. de iusti^. lib. 1. cap. 15.
extorted from them, ab ipsa rerum euidentia, from the very evidence of that
which they see and understand. But the faith of men (even of evil men) is free
and voluntary. N. Gorran in 2. These. 3.
Nos enim non credimus contremiscentes id est, inuiti and coacti, sed sponte
and libenter: For we believe not trembling (says Bellarmine) that is, against
our wills, and by compulsion, as do the Devils; but willingly, and of our
own accord. Mark by the way, how learnedly the great Clarke expounds S.
James: The Devils believe trembling, that is, (says blind Bellarmine) by
compulsion. But let him go. This distinction of faith voluntary, and
compelled, has (I confess) somewhat more in it then the former. For it may
be, that is true of Thomas Aquines, T^. Aq 2. 2. quest 5. art. 2.
Hoc ipsum daemonibus displicet, quod signa fidei sunt tam euidentis, vt per ea
credere compellantur: The Devils are grieved at this, that the signs of faith
are so evident, as they are compelled to believe whither they will or no. But
if I may be bold to interpose my opinion herein (reserving the judgment thereof
unto the learned) I hold, that the faith of the Elect is as much compelled, as
the faith of the Devils, and the faith of the Devils is as voluntary (for
that which they do believe) as is the faith of the Elect. For, as they are
compelled to believe, euidentia signorum, by the evidence of things; so are we
compelled to believe, euidentia Spiritus, by the evidence of the Spirit: the
holy Ghost urging, pressing, opening, and altering our unbelieving heart, and
drawing us even against nature (as it were against the hair) to the obedience
of faith: yea no man can obey the Spirit herein, but he offers violence (as
it were) to himself, and to his own carnal and unbelieving soul. On the
other side, when they or we do come to believe, whither they by sense, or we
by instinct, certainly the faith it self must needs be voluntary. For, D^
spirit. and lit. cap. 32.
Fides in potestate est, (says S. Augustine,) Faith (when we have it) is a
thing in our power. Cum vult quisque credit: and qui credit volens credit:
Every man believes, when he wills to believe, and not before, and he that
believes, believes willingly; the finger of God altering our unwillingness
thereunto. The same S. Augustine says in another place, that De praedest.
^uctor.
faith consists in voluntate credentium, in the will of the believers. And
rightly; for no man, howsoever induced to believe, believes, when he does
believe, Part. 6. c. 32. ex (...). Bartho. tit. de fide.
against his will. ^^des est voluntaria certitudo absentium, says that same
Destructorium vitiorum, which is ascribed to our learned countriman Alexander
Alensis: Faith is a voluntary certentie, or a certentie consisting in the
will. This without all question is true among men, and how the Devils should
believe against their will, (though it be against their liking) my reason does
not conceive.

But of these false distinctions and differences between the faith of the
Devils, and the faith of the Elect, enough, if not too much. Yet ye know that
error must be removed out of the way, if we will make clear passage for
truth: as weeds must be pulled up, that the corn may growful. Naz sent. lambi^.
Omnis error in vitio est, says Nazianzene: Every error is a fault, and so
would be corrected.

Now come we to describe the true differences of these two faiths: and so in a
few words lightsomely to open all that Saint James speaks in this Chapter of
a dead faith without works, which can not save a man; and yet no whit therein
crossing S. Paul, who in his two worthy Epistles to the Romans and
Galathians, teaches and proves, that Only faith suffices to salvation. Thus
therefore I proceed.

The Faith of the Elect apprehends (as many other things) so namely and
particularly, The mercy and love of God the Father, per Deum mediatorem, by
Christ the Mediator. Finding, and feeling that God loves him, he in natural
affection turns to God to love him again. For, gratia gratiam parit: Loving
God again, he labors to serve, and honor that God, who has loved him
first: and that by doing his will and commandments. Hereof he brings forth
good works, to the glory of God, and the benefit of his Church. And thus Gal.
5. 6.
faith works by love: that is, of love, it is fruitful in good works. Greg.
hom 12. lib. 3. in Ezech. 40. 47.
Quantum credimus, tantum amamus, and quantum amamus, tantum de spe
praesumimus. Quisque enim fidelis, tantum credit, quantum sperat and amat, and
tantum operatur quantum credit, and sperat, and amat. And this is that which we
call fides viua, a living, or a lively faith; because it shows the power and
life of it self by operation, as a tree shows it self to live by the
leaves, blossoms, and fruit which it brings forth. And of this faith is all
S. Paul's treaty, when he makes it the hand or instrument of our Salvation. On
the otherside, the faith of devils apprehends many things, as has been
before declared; but among all, it apprehends not, nor can apprehend no
mercy, favor, love, or pardon from God, as from a Father: but all Justice and
severity, as from an angry and offended judge. Not believing that God loves
them, they have no inclination to love God again. Loving him not, they have no
care to honor him: not seeking his honor, they are not careful to please him
by performing any duty to him, or his people. And this is that same fides
mortua, of which Iam. 2. 17.
S. James entreats in this chapter, and is so called, because it brings
forth no more fruit, then a dead block or rotten tree, nor will it save a man,
no more then it will the devils. Of whom the Apostle notwithstanding all that
their faith, professes here that they tremble in the presence of God. This I
take to be the true, natural, and essential difference between the faith of
the Devils, and the faith of the Saints.

And here now my ship must pass between two dangerous rocks; the bodies
whereof though they be cliuen asunder, yet the feet and foundation join both
together. The good breath of the Spirit of God blow upon my sails, and the
holy wisdom of God set steersman at my helm, that I may discover both, and
avoid both, and sail even between both: and so arrive happily in the haven of
truth, with the safety of my self, and of my hearers.

There are at this day two dangerous opinions about our Saving faith. The one,
is the doctrine of our English Libertines, which of my knowledge are neither
few in number, nor small in account. And these men do not only profess
themselves, but also teach to others, that to believe the starie of Christ, and
what the Scripture has written of Christ, is all-sufficient to Salvation. God
(they say) requires no further faith at our hands. And these I call my bare
Historians. The other is, the doctrine of them of the Church of Rome, who
seclude confidence in the mercy of God, from the nature of Justifying faith.
Lindane says, Epih. doct. cuangel.
Fides illa, qua quis firmiter credit, and cerio statuit propter Christum sibi
remissa peccata, seque possessurum vitam aternam, non fides est, sed temeritas:
That says, by which a man assuredly believes, and certainly concludes, that
his sins are forgiven for Christ's sake, and that he shall inherit everlasting
life; Bella Arma Minae
is indeed not faith, but rashness. Bellarmine, whose very name breaths out
nothing but wrath, can not abide in this ca^e to hear of mereie. He has many
chapters to prove De just l. 1. c. 6, 8, 9, 10, 11.
by the Scriptures, by the tradition of the Church, by reason, etc. that
Justifying faith has not for his object, the special mercy of God: yea, and
he says plainly, that The Catholics do affirm, Ibid. c. 4.
certam promissionem specialis misericordiae, non tam ad fidem, quam ad
praesumptionem pertinere; that a certain promise of special mercy, belongs
not so much to faith, as to presumption. Thus, for a Christian to profess by
faith assurance of his own salvation, is among our Pseudo-Catholiques, no
better then headie rashness, and haughty presumption.

As for that same Ioh. Sleidon l. 23. art. 1551.
private Covent (as the French Kings Ambassador called it openly) of the Patres
Minores in the Council of Trent, which the Preachers of the Augustine
confession rightly termed, Protest. coa^. conc. Trid. p 75.
stercus Romani Pontificis, the very base excrements of the Bishop of Rome:
they have with their deep wisdom wholly missed the cushion, and little has
their Anathema maranatha hurt us, or our Churches (as they intended) in the
chief point of controversy now in hand. For when they determine thus, De
fid^an. 12.
Si qui, dixerit fidem iustificantem nihil aliud esse quam fiduciam diuinae
misericordiae, peccata remittentis propter Christum, vel eam fiduciam solam
esse qua iustificamur, anathema fit. That is, If any man shall say, that
justifying faith is nothing else, but a confidence in the mercy of God,
forgiving sins for Christ's sake, or that this confidence, or assurance, is
alone that faith by which we are justified, let him be accursed. In this
determination (I say) they hit not the bird in the eye, nor cross not the
Doctrine taught by the Protestants. We are not in the heresy of Apelles, which
said, Eushist l. 5. c. 13
a man might hold what faith he would otherwise: eos enim, qui in Christum
crucifixum spem coniecissent, saluos fore, etc. so as they reposed their hope
in Christ crucified: for then they should be saved. We do not say, as they
suppose; that a justifying faith is nothing else but an assurance of mercy: or,
that this assurance alone, joined with nothing else does justify. No: we say
that Bucan. loc. 19. de fide c. 5.
Obiectum fidei adaequatum, The general object of faith, which is as large as
the extent of faith it self, est omne verbum Dei in genere, is universally the
whole word of God. We say that, it is Calv. instit. l. 3. c. 2. sect 7.
officium fidei, veritati Dei subscribere, quoties, and quicquid, and quocunque
modo loquitur: to subscribe to all the truth of God, how often soever,
whatsoever, and in what manner soever he deliver it. But we say, that Chemnie.
ex 2. Conc. Trid. de fide.
proprium and principale, primum and proximum obiectum fidei iustificantis, the
proper and principal, the chief and nearest object of justifying faith, is
(among all other things which it apprehends) Christ crucified, with all his
benefits, as he is offered unto us in the Word and Sacraments; and in Christ
and through Christ the mercy of God the Father. We say further, for the
opening of this matter, that whereas there are Musc. lo. com de fide.
tres parts fidei, (as Musculus calls them) three parts, or three degrees,
or three saculties, or three acts of a true faith, Credere Deum, Deo, In Deum:
The one, to believe there is a God: the second, to believe all that God says
to be true: the third, to believe in God with confidence: this same tertius
fidei gradus, to trust in God with confidence of mercy, does Mus. ibid.
ex duobus prioribus emergere, arise from the two former, and as Chemnitius
speaks, Chem. vbi sup.
praesupp^nit and includit, presupposes and includes the former. For no man
can by faith assure himself of the mercy of God, who does not first believe
that there is a God, and that all is true which proceeds from him. Therefore
do not we imagine such a justifying faith, as believes nothing but mercy to
himself: or that belief of mercy alone (that is joined with no belief else)
is sufficient to justification. But we say, that a Justifying faith, has for
his Object, all that God would have to be believed: and among all other things
principally, the mercy of God. I make this plain by a similitude. The
vegetative soul, is the soul of plants, and is a true soul in his kind,
though it has neither sense nor reason. The sensitive soul, is the soul of
beasts, and souls, and fishes, and it is a distinct kind of soul by it self;
including vegetation, but void of reason. The reasonable soul, is the soul of
men, and is a distinct kind of soul by it self; yet such a one as includes
both vegetation, and sense. Apply this to the three kinds, or degrees of
faith. Credere Deum, to believe there is a God, is the faith of Infidels and
Pagans, and is a true faith, though it neither believe the Word of God, nor
mercy from God. Credere Deo, that is, to believe all that God says to be
true, is the faith of Devils and Reprobates, and includes in it the faith of
Infidels, and is a true faith in the kind, though it apprehend no mercy.
Credere i^ Deum; that is, by faith to rely upon the mercy of God, is the
faith of the Elect, and comprehends both the faith of the Infidels, and the
faith of the devils: and is a distinct kind of faith in it self. And this
complete faith, consisting of all these three, we Protestants say, to be that
only faith that justifies in the presence of God.

Against therefore both Historians and Papists, I make these four conclusions.
1. True Christian saving faith, does not only believe God and Christ, the word
of God, and the Word of Christ, the story of God, and the story of Christ:
but also it does believe and apprehend the mercy of this God, per
de^mmediatorem, by Christ the Mediator. 2. True Christian saving faith,
differs from the faith of the Devils, only in this (and the consequences
thereof) that the Elect apprehend the mercy of God to them in Christ, which
the Devils can not do. 3. To believe only the Word of God, and the Story of
Christ: is to believe no more then the Devils. 4. To believe all that the
Devils do believe, and not by faith to apply the mercy of God to thy self
in Christ, will ^o more keep thy soul and conscience from despair, then it
does the Devils from trembling; of which S. James says here, that though they
believe, yet they tremble.

Now, that the word of God is clear in this case, and that God requires in
the Scriptures, not only the faith of the story; but also, by faith, an
application of mercy to a man's own soul; I will make manifest unto you by
four principal Gospel, which is the foundation of truth; and is called in
the Scriptures, Romans 10. 8.
verbum fidei, the word of Romans 4. 11.
sigilla fidei, the seals of faith. Aug^st Te^^. ^19. de temp.
regula fidei, the rule of faith. The fourth from the definition, or Th. Aquin.
1. 2. q 4. art. 1.
though some affirm that it is no perfect definition, because it shows not
the quidditie or essence thereof, Metaphis. 7.
as the Philosopher speaks: yet if a man rightly consider of it, Omnia ex
quibus fides potest definiri in praedicta definitione tanguntur, licet verba
non ordinentur sub forma definitionis: that is, All things required to the
definition of faith are touched therein, though the words be not placed in a
logical form of a definition. Therefore that definition we will examine in his
place. But first of the doctrine of the Gospel.

1. No man can doubt, but faith is built upon Doctrine: for Romans 10. 17.
faith is by hearing: viz. of the doctrine which is taught unto us. Now upon
what doctrine has faith his foundation? upon the doctrine of the Law? By no
means: for, Gal. 3. 11.
The Law is not of faith. It neither describes the faith, nor requires the
faith, by which we are justified; but Calv coir. in Gal. 3. 12.
rationem iustificandi hominis a fide prorsus alienam habel: it prescribes a
means of justification clean contrary to faith: that is, obedience and
works of the Law. It is therefore built upon the doctrine of the Gospel: faith
must apprehend the Gospel: Marc. 1. 15.
Repent, and believe the Gospel. Again, Marc. 15 15. 16.
Go preach the Gospel to every creature. Then it follows; He that believes
(the Gospel) shall be saved: he that believes not (the Gospel) shall be
damned. The matter therefore to be believed, is the Gospel. Now, what is the
Gospel? A bare History only? or a bare historical narration of things done
and passed? By no means. De spir. sand cap. 15.
Euangelium est forma vitae ex resurrectione, says S. Basile; The Gospel is a
doctrine of a new form of life, following upon our regeneration, or spiritual
resurrection. And S. Augustine, speaking of Philips preaching to the Eunuch,
Act 8. 35.
(...): De fide and oper. cap. 9.
Hoe est euangelizaro Christum, non tantum dieere quae sunt eredenda de
Christo, sed etiam quae obseruanda ei qui accedit ad compagem corporis Christi:
This is to preach the Gospel of Christ, or Christ in the Gospel, not only to
teach what things are to be believed concerning Christ, but also what things he
must observe and practice, which comes to join himself to the body of
Christ. The Gospel therefore is a Doctrine of admonition, of exhortation, of
practice, of reformation: not a narration only. A note which I would not omit,
because if you mark them, either Protestants or Papists which content
themselves with the faith of the history; ye shall find little of spiritual
death, or resurrection in them; that is, little mortification of the flesh, or
vivification of the Spirit, by the power of the death and resurrection of
Christ; wherein notwithstanding confifleth the very vigor and marrow of the
doctrine of the Gospel. But I come nearer to the purpose. What may we call the
Gospel? G. (...). car. n^iu definit.
Euangelium est raedicatio salutis (...), ^aith Nazianzene; The Gospel is the
preaching of a new kind or means of salvation: viz. brought into the world by
Jesus Christ, and differing from that old of Moses: Leuit. 18 5.
which who so does, shall live in them* The Gospel then preaches a new
salvation: and to whom preaches it? to us. And must we believe the Gospel?
Then must we believe this new salvation. Theophylact shows a reason why that
which we call the gospel, is called in the Greek, (...): (...) Matthew. 1.
Evangelium dicitur, eo quod nunciet nobis res prosperas and been se habentes,
id est, bona: It is called the Gospel, (as we would say a Gods spell, or a
good spell) or (as the Greek etimologie gives) a message of good news,
because it tells us of things going well on our sides, and prosperously with
us; that is, of things good and commodious unto us. What are those? Nemp^
remissionem peccatorum, iustitiam, reditum in coelos, adoptionem in filios Dei:
The gospel relates unto us, the remission of sins, righteousness, or
justification, our restoring unto heaven, our adoption to be the sons of God.
All this the Gospel tells unto us; and this I trow is a great deal more
then the narration of the history of Christ. But let me add a little more out
of that Father against our meritorious workemungers; Nunciat autem, quam facile
ac gratis haec accepimus: neque nostro labor assecuti sumus haec bona, neque
ea ex nostris acceperimus bonis operibus, sed gratia and misericordia Dei,
talia bona consecuti sumus: that is to say, The Gospel tells us withal, how
easily and freely we have received these things, (that is, remission of sins,
justification, restitution to heaven, adoption to be the sons of God.) For it
tells us, that we have not obtained these things, either by our own
industry, or by our own good works, but by the grace and mercy of God. O
comfortable Gospel: here is a very Gods spell indeed, here are glad tidings
indeed, here is a doctrine that passes all joy comprehensible with the
deepest understanding. But now gather we this together. Does the Gospel bring
good tidings to us of good things that have betided us? Are these good things,
remission of sins, justification, and the rest? Does the Gospel tell us that
we have received these benefits without our labor, and without our merit
freely of the grace of God? And must we believe the gospel? Why then we must
believe, that these glad tidings are sent to us, that remission of sins, and
salvation is given to us, that we are saved by mercy without our own deserts.
Is not this to believe more then the story? Nay, is not this to take home the
Gospel to our selves? Is not this by faith to believe that the salvation which
Christ wrought for man mentioned in the Gospel, no^ accepimus, we have
received: No doubt it is, and so without doubt it must be. For, if faith be
built upon the doctrine of the Gospel; then, Qualis causa, talis effectus: such
doctrine, such faith. But the doctrine of the Gospel is a doctrine of
remission of sins, of iustification^ of adoption, of salvation by Christ unto
us. Faith therefore must be a faith of remission of sins, of justification,
of adoption, of salvation by Christ to us: which I trow is an applying of Gods
mercy, and Christ's merits unto our selves.

And here let none object unto me, that a man may believe there are glad
tidings in the Gospel; that a man may believe that the Gospel preaches
remission of sins and salvation by Christ, and yet not to apply them to
himself, as do the devils and thousands of Reprobats: for this indeed (say
I) is to believe the story of the Gospel; but this is not to believe the
Gospel. For the Gospel is a doctrine, (...) Scrip. in vcibo (...).
animant, ac offerens ingentiabona, and ad ea accipienda blandissime i^^itans:
a doctrine that hearteneth us on; Isi. 30. 1.
Comfort ye, comfort ye my people. A doctrine that offers unto us infinite
good; Ier. 31. 33. 34.
I will be their God, and they shall be my people: I will forgive their
iniquity, and I will remember their (...) no more. A doctrine that kindly
inuiteth and allureth us to entertain the goodness offered therein Isa. 35. 1.
H^, every one that thirsts, come to the waters. And again, Matthew. 11. 28.
Come unto me all ye that are weary. Yea, that which is most of all the
Gospel preaches mercy unto me^ app^^catiue, as it were thrusting it into
their bosoms, and pinning it upon the hearets sleeves: Matthew. 9. 2.
Thy sins are forgiven thee: Luc. 19. 9.
Salvation is come to this house: Act 2 39.
The promise is made to you and your children: Rom 4. ^5.
who was delivered to death for our sins, and raze again to our
justification* Ephesians. 1. 4. 3.
As he has chosen us in him, who has predestined us to be adopted: Apoc.
1. 5. ^.
To him that loved us, and washed us from our sins in his blood, and made us
Kings and Priests unto God: and a thousand like. So that the Gospel does not
only preach remission of sins, and salvation unto men; but it preaches it
with application unto the hearers. And therefore to believe the Gospel, is to
believe it with application, and so to apply and appropriate the benefits
contained in it, unto thine own self that hear it. This say I is to believe
the Gospel. And so much for the Gospel, which is, The word of faith.

2. Now, as touching the Sacraments, which are The seals of faith. What manner
of faith do they seal up, and confirm in our hearts? Do they seal up unto
us the truth of the story? Are they confirmations unto us, that Luc. 3^^.
Christ was about 30. years old when he was baptized? that he (...).
was tempted in the wilderness? that he Matthew. 3 25.
raised Iairus daughter, that he Luc. 4 16.
preached in the Synagogue, that he Ioh. 13 4.
washed his disciples feet, or such like? No^ but they seal up that which is
a great deal more consequent to us: and that is, The mercy of God, and the
benefits of Christ to belong unto us. As for example; In the Sacrament of
baptism, there is first water; which Pindarus said was, Pind initio Oly^p
Plut. An aqua vel ig^is si (...).
reruns optima, the best creature that is: a worthy representation of the blood
of Christ; which Peter calls, 1. Pet. 1. 19.
(...), precious blood: for the inestimable effects. Secondly, there is the
inseperable propriety of water, which is to wash and cleanse: a representatio^
of the power and virtue of the blood of Christ, which 1. Ioh. 17.
cleanses from all sin. Yea, and thirdly, there is the applying of this
water, unto the body of the person baptized: a sign of the appropriating of
the blood of Christ, and the virtue thereof unto him that does receive it. And
so baptism carries with it, not only a representation of Christ's blood, and
the power thereof in general: but also a particularizing of them both unto the
person, which is made partaker of that holy Sacrament. Hereof S. Paul calls
Baptism, Gal 3. 27.
a putting on of Christ: All ye that are baptized into Christ, (...), have put
on Christ. They have put him on as their own garment upon their own backs to
cover their nakedness, to shroud them from the parching heat, and from the
pinching cold. Hereof again it is that Peter says, 1. Pet. 3. 2 1. Be^a.
baptism saves us: that is, shadoweth to us the power of Christ, by which we
are saved. Hereof Tertullian said, De baptism.
In baptismo tingimur passione Christi: In baptism we are dipped in the
passion of Christ. Hereof said Nazaanzen^, Nazian (...) 6
spiritus sanctus me deisicat per baptismum: The holy Ghost deifieth me by
baptism: that is, by holiness makes us 2. Pet. 1 4.
partakers of the godly nature, as Peter speaks. Yea hereof is that high
commendation which S. Basil gives to the Sacrament: Basil. ex^^^e. ad baptism.
Baptismus est captiuorum and aeris alient remissio, pecca^^tmors, animae
regeneratio, amictus splendens, character indiprensibilis, coeli iter, regni
coelestis conciliatio, adoptionis gratia: Baptism is goaldeliuerie to the
prisoners, discharge to them that are in debt, the death of sin, the
regeneration of the soul, the gorgeous ar^y, the indeprehensible badge, the
passage to heaven, the obtaining of the kingdom of heaven, the grace of
adoption. And such a thing is Baptism, not ex opere operato, (which the
Fathers never dreamed of, that knew that wicked men also were baptized, as we
have heard before out of Augustine) but by representing, yea exhibiting, yea
applying Christ and his graces unto us, and sealing up to our faith, the
exhibition, and the application, and so the propriety and benefit thereof.
Baptism therefore applies to the receiver the mercy of God in Christ Jesus,
and the virtue of his blood to remission of sins.

Then to proceed to the Sacrament of the Lords supper: there is first Bread and
Wine, a representation of the body, and blood of Christ. There are secondly
with them, the natural qualities of bread and wine: which are Psalm 104. 15.
to strengthen and make glad the heart, Plutarch. synops. lib 6. c. 8.
Apprime panis refic^^: Bread is a special nourisher. And wine is, Plin. l. 14
c. 5.
sanguis terrae, the blood of the earth, as Androcides wrote to Alexander. Genesis
49. 11.
Sanguis vnae, the blood of the grape. A lively image of the vigor of the body
and blood of Christ: of which himself affirms, Ioh. 6. 55.
My flesh is meat indeed, and my blood is drink indeed. Yea: and that, such
meat and such drink, 54.
that whosoever eats this flesh, and drinks this blood has eternal life.
But all this is Historical. There is therefore yet farther in this Sacrament,
a giving of bread, a taking, and eating of this bread: there is also a giving
of this wine, a taking, and a drinking of this wine by the communicants. This
Action as it is most lively, so it is most significant: it represents the
giving of the body and blood of Christ to the receiver; the taking of the
body and blood of Christ by the receiver; the eating on the body of Christ,
the drinking on the blood of Christ by the receiver. And so assures our faith,
not only that Christ's body was broken, and Christ's blood was shed, but that
it was also broken, and f^^ed for us, to whom the sacramental signs thereof
are there tendered and reached out; and so seals up unto us our spiritual
nourishment by him unto everlasting salvation. Gregory Nissene speaking of
those words in the Gospel of John, Ioh. 10. 34.
There came out of his side blood and water, makes them two images of the two
Sacraments: G. N^s. in exp. eorum verb.
Quoniam tum per diuinum baptisma, tum per sancti sanguinis participationem and
vsum, consecrari nos, ac diuinitatem induore credimus: For both by divine
baptism, and by the participation and use of his holy blood, we believe that
we are consecrated to God, and do put on upon us the divinity, that is, the
divine qualities of God. And he alleges there Chrysostomes monition upon the
Exposition of those words: Cum ad horrendum poculum accsdis, tanquam ab ipso
dominico latere bibiturus accedas: When thou come to drink of this
fearful cup in the Sacrament, come as if thou should there drink blood,
running out of the very side of the Lord. So applicatiue should be our faith,
in communicating these holy mysteries. And indeed in such an applying manner did
our Lord Jesus institute this Sacrament: Luc. 22 19.
Take ye, eat ye: this is my body, which is given (not for others only) but
for you. 20.
And again, This cup is the new Testament in my blood, which is shead (not
for others only) but for you. Every man therefore that takes these mysteries,
must believe that Christ's body was broken, and that Christ's blood was shead
for him: which I trow is a great deal more then to believe the story. S.
Bernard has a notable saying, express to this purpose: Barna^^l (...). ^.
super. Qua h^bitat.
and hoc designat illibatum illud altaris sacrificium, vbi dominicum corpus
accipimus: And this does that holy and undefiled sacrifice of the altar
signify unto us, where we receive the Lords body; vt ficut videtur illa forma
panis in nos intrare, sic nouerimus per eam, quam in terris habuit
conuersationem, ipsum intrarein nos, ad habitandum in cordibus nostris per
fidem: that even as in that Sacrament, the form of bread is seen and sensibly
discerned, to enter into us and our bodies, so we might know that Christ
himself does enter into us, according to that flate which he had here amongst
us, to dwell in us and in our hearts by faith. The name of the Sacrifice of the
Altar, I refuse not. Our right reverend and right learned Bishop of Winchester
has abundantly showed D Bilson, The difference of Christian subjection, etc.
pat. 3. page 506. etc.
how that term was used of the Fathers, and how it may be received of us. The
carnal eating of Christ (if S. Bernard any such) is also notably confuted by
the same man in the same treatise. But this is that I would prove, and that
pregnantly, from the words of the Father; that, the Sacrament of the Lords
supper, which he there calls, the sacrifice of the Altar, is not only a bare
sign and representation of Christ's body and blood broken and shead upon the
Altar of the Cross: but also that the receiving in of the bread and wine into
our selves, do seal up unto us that do receive them, Christ's own entering
into us, and dwelling within us, even in our hearts by a lively faith. And
hereof it is that we call the Sacraments, signa exhibitina, signs that do
exhibit, reach forth, and tender the things which they figure and represent.
And our Church rightly profeffeth of the Sacraments, Art. in synod. London.
1562. De sacram.
that they are, non tantum notae p^^fessionis Christianorum, not only marks or
badges of Christian profession, sed certa quaedam potius testimonia and
efficacia signa gratiae atque bonae in nos voluntatis Dei, but rather also and
much rather certain assured testimonies, and effectual signs of the grace and
good will of God toward us. In so much that when I come to the Lords table,
and there the Minister reaches forth the holy mysteries to me, and I receive
them at his hand, Calv. Instit. l. 4. c. 17. sect 32.
Nihil dubito, quin ipse vere porrigat, and ego recipiam, says Calvin: I
nothing doubt but that Christ does verily reach out unto me, and I do verily
receive his body and blood to become the food and nourishment of my soul.
Such a faith therefore do the Sacraments seal up unto us, as does not only
acknowledge all that Christ has done to be true; but also does apply the
merits of Christ, and thorough them the mercy of God unto every worthy
receiver thereof. And so much of the Sacraments, which are the seals of faith.

3. It follows to speak of our common form of Creed, which is not amiss
called, regula fidei, the rule, or square of our faith. Because it contains
the most principal points of our Christian religion, to the proportion whereof
other particulars must be reduced. Blind Bellarmine, (for who so blind as he
that will not see?) uses this for the first, and as it were principal reason;
that justifying faith is not confidence of mercy, because that Bellar. de
iu^^^f. lib. 1. c. 9.
In symbol fidei, in the common rule of our faith, many things are contained
which are necessary to be believed, if a man will be justified by faith: of
the unity, of the Trinity, of the incarnation, passion, and resurrection of
Christ, etc. De speciali autem misericordia ne verbum quidem, but in all the
Creed, or Creedes, (for he joins the four known Creeds together) there is
not one word of special mercy. And therefore he there strives to confute
Luther and Melancthon, that would include the apprehension of special mercy
in the Creed: the one, under that Article, I believe the holy Catholic
Church: the other, under that Article, I believe the remission of sins. Well:
let the controversy stand between them as it does: for I will not meddle with
the latter part of the Creed; I will use a new argument out of the former part,
which concerns God, and our belief in him. And touching that I say, that not
only particular words, but the whole tenure of our faith, as we profess it in
the Creed* does implie apprehension of special mercy to the professor. Mark
how the form of the Creed runs; (...), I believe in God the Father. And, I
believe in Jesus Christ. And again, I believe in the holy Ghost: which if we
could properly express in our English tongue, and join the preposition to the
Accusative case, should signify thus much; I believe toward God, or into God
the Father: I believe toward or into Jesus Christ, and so forth. For, Credo in
Deum, is more essential and effectual, then our language will fully express.
And this is no small matter in the eye of the Papists: for Master Harding
holds this form, Credo in Deum, so authentike and material; as that he
deeply challenges the Church of England for professing their faith in another
form, Apolog Eccl. Anglicanae.
Credimus vnam quandam naturam, etc. Credimus Iesum Christum, etc. And he
alleges against this, that See defense of the Apolog. part. ^. cap. 1.
di^^^^.
the utterance of our faith is strange to Christian ears, who have been
accustomed to hear, Credo in Deum, etc. He says that, That other form of
words which we use, sounds not so Christian like: I believe there is a God: I
believe that Jesus Christ is the son of the Father: I believe that the holy
Ghost is God. He renders this reason of his rebuke; Although this form of
words (I believe there is a God, etc.) do express a right faith, yet being
such as may be uttered by the Devils, and has always been uttered by
Heretics their ministers; the ancient and holy Fathers have liked better the
old form and manner, after which every Christian man says; I believe in God,
I believe in Jesus Christ, I believe in the holy Ghost: for this imports a
signification of faith, with hope and charity; that other, of faith only which
the Devils have and tremble, as S. James says. Very well then; Omen accipio:
let M. Hardings speech for this time go for current (which notwithstanding the
good Bishop fully answered in that place) let the most ancient and most
authentic form of professing our Creed be thus; Credo in Deum, etc. I
believe in God; I believe in Jesus Christ, etc. The Question is now, what it
is, Credere in Deum, to believe in God? Let the Fathers answer. S. Augustine
says, August. tract. 20. in Ioh.
De Apostolis ips^s dicere possumus: credimus Paulo, sed non credimus in
Paulum; Credimus Petro, sed non credimus in Petrum: We may say of the Apostles
themselves, I believe Paul, but I believe not in Paul: I believe Peter, but I
believe not in Peter. But of God we say both, I believe God, and, I believe in
God. Then belike, to believe God, is one thing, and to believe in God, another
thing. What is then to believe in God? S. Augustine shows it in the same
place, opening those words, Ioh. 6. ^9.
This is the work of God, that you should believe in him whom he has sent.
Thus he says; Quid est ergo credere in eum? what is it therefore to believe
in him? He answers. Credendo amare, credendo in eum ire, and eius membris
incorporari: By or in believing to love Christ, by or in believing to go to
Christ, by or in believing to be incorporated into the members of Christ: this
is to believe in Christ. I demand then; Can any man heartely and soundly love
Christ, who has not some persuasion that Christ loves him? Can any man with
comfort go toward Christ, who is not aforehand persuaded, that Christ will
look comfortably toward him? Can any man be incorporated into the members of
Christ, that does not by faith entertain Christ for his head? If not: then it
follows, that to believe in Christ, implies an affiance and persuasion of
his love and mercy. Cyprian has a treatise, which is censured I confess, by
P. Martyr. cont. Gardener, part. 1. object. 89.
Peter Martyr to be none of his: and his reasons are somewhat in that behalf;
yet is that Authority good against the Papists; for Constantius there
alleges it* yea and it is not nothing to me that our judicious Fulke Fulke
in Test. Rhem. in Romans 10. ^ect 4.
quoteth it for Cyprians. But howsoever: ancient it is, and none of ours it
is, and thus he speaks; Cypr. de dupl. Martyrio.
Non credit in deum, qui non in eo solo collocat totius faelicitatis suae
fiduciam: He does not believe in God, who does not repose upon God alone, the
affiance, or assurance, of his whole felicity. Now, who can by faith repose
upon God the confidence of his happiness, which is not by the same faith
assured of his mercy? Hear another; S. Bernard very notably, Bernard. ser. de
sanct. Andr.
Credere Deo, est verbis eius fidem adhibere: To believe God, is to believe his
words to be true. Credere Deum, est confif^^eri vbique esse: To believe a God,
is to believe him to be every where. Credere in Deum, est onmen^ spem suam in
illum dirigere: To believe in God, is to cast all our hope upon him: which no
man can do, nor will do, which has no persuasion of his favor. He adds
further, (which makes much to my present Text, and this cause,) Deum, and Deo
credunt daemones; sed in illum non credunt, in quem qui credit, non
confundetur: quiae spem suam non ponunt in illum: The Devils believe there is
a God, and that God is true, but they believe not in God, in whom whosoever
believes shall not be confounded, because they put not their hope or trust in
him. This S. Bernard expounds to believe in God, and thus he disseuereth it
from the belief of the Devils. I add the fourth to make up the mess:
Eusebius Emissenus; De symbol. (...) 2.
Aliud est credere Deo, aliud in Deum credere: It is one thing to believe God,
an other thing, to believe in God. And again, it is one thing, Credere Deum,
to believe there is a God; another thing, to believe in God. For the Devil is
found to believe that there is a God; but to believe in God none is proved,
but he which has devoutly trusted in him. I conclude then: Is to believe in
God, to believe and love him? Is to believe in God, to repose upon him the
confidence of our happiness? Is to believe in God, to cast our hope upon him?
Lastly, is to believe in God, devoutly to trust in him? And does our creed
teach us to profess our faith thus; I believe in God, I believe in Jesus
Christ, I believe in the holy Ghost? then let Bellarmine go and reconcile
himself to Mr. Harding his Ancient; who says, that to believe in God,
imports a signification of faith, with hope, and charity, and let him
confess that the creed intends such a faith, as apprehends special mercy.

I am not ignorant, that this distinction of Credere Deum, Deo, in Deum, is
somewhat disputed against. Peter Martyr says, that P. Ma^t. com. in ^. Cor. 10.
The holy Scriptures do not always, and exactly observe it, and he alleges
these examples: Exodus 14. 31.
The people feared the Lord, and believed the Lord, and his servant Moses,
Credebant in Dominum, and in Mosen: and again, Exodus 19. 9.
that, The people may believe thee for ever, In te credant: And in the new
Testament, Ioh. 2. ^3.
many believed in his name, (...): which notwithstanding is spoken of an
imperfect faith. And Salmeron the great Jesuit challenges S. Augustine by
name, for using the distinction of Credere Deo, and Credere in Deum, showing
that they are used alike in the Scriptures, yea and then he brings an
instance from the form of our Creed, Sal^er. ^om. 6. tract. 8. De ^^ectione
vendentium etc.
Omnes fideles sieve iusti sieve peccatores instituuntur per symbolum apostolicum
dicere, Credo in Deum, etc. Et tamen non omnes qui dicunt, Credo in vnum Deum,
charitatem habent: All the faithful, says he, whether righteous men, or
sinners, are taught by the Apostles Creed to say, I believe in God, etc. And
yet not all that sing or say, I believe in one God, have charity. But now
observe we; first that, Mus. loc. co^. d^ side.
The servile letter in the Hebrewe, or Fulke in Test. (...). Romans 10. sect 4.
the Hebrews phrase in those places of the old Testament, and the like, ought
not in Greek or Latin to be translated with the preposition that rules an
accusative or ablative case, but with a Dative case. And so Tremelius and
Iunius translate it, Exodus 14 31.
Crediderunt Iehovae, and Mosi seruo eius. And Exodus 19 9.
vt tibi fidant in seculum; yea and the old translation reads in the 14. of
Exodus, Crediderunt Domino and Mosi seruo^ius. And so in the Chronicles, 2.
C^r. 20. ^0.
credit Prophetis eius: They believed his servant Moses: Believe the Prophets:
as M. Fulke has also well alleged against the Papists. Yea, in that place of
John, the old translation reads, Ioh. ^ 13.
Crediderunt in nomine eius, joining the preposition not with an Accusative
case, but with an Ablative. Secondly, though in the new Testament, Credere in
Christo, is often taken for the same that Creder^ in Christum, as we know that
Gal. 2 16.
A man is not justified by the works of the Law, (...), but by the faith of
Jesus Christ: we also have believed in Jesus Christ, (...): yet often also they
are taken differently, and so do minister just occasion of distinction in the
delivery of doctrine fit for the several places. As for example; In the 14.
of John, within the compass of three verses, there is a manifest difference of
these three titles: Credere Christum, Credere Christo, Credere in Christum: As
thus; Ioh. 14. 10.
Do thou not believe that I am in the Father, and the Father in me? He
speaks of a belief what Christ is. Then in the next v. Believe me that I am
in the Father, 11.
and the father in me: that is, Believe that I speak truth therein. It
follows immediately, 12.
(...): He that believes in me, (that is, with confidence) the works that I
do, he shall do, and greater also. He therefore that will rightly expound
these 3. verses, must of necessity intertaine this threefold distinction.
Thirdly, the Jesuits Argument is like the Logique, and other Popish learning
of their Schools. Is not the distinction good between Credere Deo, and
Credere in Deum, because that many profess in the Creed, I believe in God,
which have no charity? Why? The Creed gives no^ faith: that is Ioh. 6. ^9.
the work of God. But the Creed teaches what true faith is, and how we
should profess it. And if any man will in the Creed profess that he does
believe in God, when as he does only believe a God, or believe God to say true:
this is but the hypocrisy or unbelief of the professor, not a defect of the
profession. For the saving profession of faith is belief in God, with hope of
mercy. And that the very lesuite himself confesses in the self same place;
Salmeron vbi supra. tom. 6. tract. 8.
Credere in deum est fidei per spem, and dilectionem operantis: to believe in
God, is such a faith (or the fruit of such a faith) as works by hope and
love, which is as much as all that I have spoken of faith about the Creed.
Fourthly, and lastly, say that S. Augustine, and others, had erred in this
distinction (as the Jesuit will) and so I had not soundly built upon them; yet
let no Papist that braggeth of the Fathers, bark against the argument: for
besides those which I have alleged, I can also bring forth In Gal. ^.
Hierome, In Symbol.
Ruffine, In Ioh. 12.
Theophilact, In Gal. ^.
Primasius, lib. 3. did. ^.
The M. of Sentences, 2. 2. q 2. art. 2.
Thomas Aquinas, in Romans 10. and in G^l 2.
Nicolas Gorran, Granat. conc. 20 post Pent^^.
Granatensis, and a number of others of their own side, more or less
alleging, admitting, expounding, these three degrees or kinds of faith, and
ever exalting the latter as the most high, perfect, and chief of them all.
Therefore does the Creed profess an exact and complete faith, which far
exceeds the faith of the Devils, which is the purpose that I propound in
this place. So much therefore of our Creed.

4. It remains now that I discuss, that definition or description of faith,
which the Apostle gives in the Epistle to the Hebrews: and that I do from
thence prove also, that Justifying and saving faith applies to the believer
the favor of God in Jesus Christ. The definition is this: Heb. 11 1.
(...): Faith is the ground of things that are hoped for. The word (...), (as
Scholars know) is derived of (...), persuadeor, and so of the praeter perfect
tense (...), persuasus sum, I am persuaded. And fitly: for as Peter Martyr
says well, P Martyr ^n (...).
non solemus credere, nisi quod habemus persuas^ssimum: we are not wont to
believe any thing, but that whereof we are most fully persuaded. A good note
(by the way) against the Scholemens doubting, or wavering faith: whereof
Musculus rightly calls them, Muse Co^^ Coloss. 2.
Doctores dubitationis, not dowtie Doctors, but Doctors of doubting: For as
they move doubts of every thing, so they teach men always to doubt of their
salvation: whereas S. Paul using the same verb whereof (...) is derived,
protests without doubting in the same case; Rom ^ ^8.
(...), I am persuaded, that neither death, nor life, nor Angels, nor
principallities, nor powers, nor things present, nor things to come, shall be
able to separate us from the love of God, which is in Jesus Christ our Lord.
Yea, and our Alexander of England, one of the learnedest among them, to whom is
ascribed that Destructorium vitiorum, of which I have spoken before, faith,
that Destr. vitio^. part. 6. cap. 32.
Faith is a kind of thing, infra scientiam, and supra opinionem, less then
science, more then opinion: Scientia enim habet cognitionem, and opinio
dubitationem: and inter h^c d^^ est fide^ media, quoniam fides non habet
cognitionem nec dubitationem: For (says he) Science has knowledge, and
opinion has doubting, and between these two faith is the mean, because it
neither has demonstratiue knowledge, nor uncertain doubting. Let them go now
and brag of their doubting faith. God give me that which carries with it
assured persuasion. But ^^^turne to the purpose. This perswasiue, or persuaded
faith, i^ there of the Apostle called (...): now this (...) is somewhat
diversely translated. But the old translation, which they must not refuse,
terms it, substantia, Faith is the substance of things which we hope for.
The Substance: how is that? How is faith the substance of those things? Hear
one of their own, who is no small man among them. For Abbote Tritenhemius
writes of him that he was, nobiliter eruditus, a noble or notable learned
man: It is Nicolaus de Gorran, and what says he? N. Gorr. in Heb. 11.
Faith is the substance, id est causa, subsistendi in nobis res sperandas
scilicet bona futura: that is, it is the cause, or means, or instrument, that
the things which we hope for, that is to say, the good things to come, have an
essence, or being, or subsistence in us. But how that? Et hoc vel in futuro,
quod faciet in nobis subsistere res sperandas in patria per apertam visionem:
vel in praesenti, quod iam facit eas in nobis subsistere per spem and
expectationem: that is to say, Faith gives a being or subsistence in us of
those things which we hope for, either in this life, or in the life to come.
In the life to come, it will give us existence of them, per ap^am visi^nem,
then we shall openly see them, yea really possess them by the benefit of this
faith. In this present life, it gives an existence of them also: for even now
faith causes a subsistence of them in us by hope and expectation. Is it so?
does faith even while we live here give a certain kind of being to those things
in our hearts, the fruition whereof we afterward expect? And what are those
things, which hereafter we expect? A joyful resurrection, discharge in the day
of judgment, the comfortable beholding of God, the fruition of his glorious
and everlasting kingdom. Why then faith gives a present existence of these
things unto us: which it cannot give without the assurance of the mercy of God.

But look we a little from this old to some new translation. Hemingius turns
it thus; Heb. 11. 1.
Fides est fiducia rerum sperandarum: faith is the confidence of things that
are hoped for. And in his Commentaries upon this text, he alleges places out
of very approved Authors, Polybius and Herodotus; where the word hypostasis is
so taken: yea in the same Epistle is an other place which gives much light to
this interpretation: Heb. 3 14.
For we are made partakers of Christ, (...), if we keep to the end, initium
fiduciae, (so Calvin reads it) the beginning of our confidence, that is, of
our faith, which is yet but begun in us. Now then, if faith be turned into
fiducia: do but ask Thomas Aquinas, what kind of thing fiducia is. He will
answer, Th. Aquin. 2. 2 q 129. art 6.
Fiducia est spes futuri auxilij concepta ex dictis aliorum, vel ex his quae
sunt in se vel in alio: Confidence is the hope of future help or aid,
conceived either from other men's words, or from some thing else which a man
has in himself, or he knows in another. Is Confidence such a thing, and is
faith confidence? why then Faith is a hope of future aid, or help, or good,
conceived from the words or promises of God; and from somewhat else, which is
(not in himself, for in a man's self there is no hope of help in time to
come, but) in God: as his mercy, his truth, his love, his free grace; upon
which indeed our faith is builded, and grows up to full confidence in Jesus
Christ. Faith therefore apprehends special r^ercie.

Thus I have finished the four reasons, which I propounded to you; fourescoare
more might be added, if it were necessaire. But I stay here, and say with the
Poet, Horat. Sat. 1.
Iam satis est: ne me Crispini scrinia Lipp^
Compil^sse putes.


Now for so much as Bellarmine makes this doctrine of faith apprehending
special mercy, De iusti^. lib. 1. cap 4.
to be an opinion of Heretics, wherein they differ from the Catholics; and
our homebredde Historians have not shamed to avouch that it is, The new
villainous doctrine of Calvin and Beza, (a villainous term to be given to so
holy, reverend, and learned men) therefore omitting what the Protestant Authors
write in this case, I will now show what my poor reading has found about this
point in the Ancienter Fathers of the Church, yea and in such Popish writers,
as having not their affections distempered with the heat of contention, and
disputation, have in a mild and open sort delivered their mind herein, as
particular occurrances have occasioned.

And first to begin with the Fathers. Irenaeus speaks thus of faith; (...)
l. 2. c. 47.
Semper fides quae est ad magistrum nostrum permanet firma, asseuerans nobis,
quoniam solus vere Deus, and vt diligamus Deum vere semper, quoniam ipse solus
Pater: and speremus subinde plus aliquid accipere, and discere a Deo, quiae
bonus est, and diuitias habens indeterminabiles, and regnum sine fine, and
disciplinans immensam. In effect thus in English: Our faith which we bear
toward our Lord and Master ever abides steadfast, telling us that he is the
only true God, and that we must always heartily love him, because he is our
only Father: and that we must hope ever and anon to receive more from God, and
to learn more of God, because he is good, and has riches innumerable, and an
endless kingdom, and learning unmeasurable. I note from hence 3. things. 1.
First, faith holds us to the only true God. 2. Secondly, it holds us to
him with love, as to a loving Father. 3. Thirdly, it teaches us daily to
expect from him, as from a loving father the good which we need both for life
and knowledge. Now if my faith teach me, that God is my Father, and makes me
to love him as a Father, and to expect continually favors from his hand, as
from a good God and loving Father: tell me if it does assure my heart of his
love and mercy?

Origin thus: Orig hom. 17. in Genesis 49.
Fides quae in Christo est, and praesentis vitae regulam tenet, and futura spei
fiduciam praestat: Faith in Christ both gives direction for this life, and
yields assurance of that which we hope for to be hereafter in the life to
come. Faith therefore assures us of that which we hope for.

Chrysostom thus: Chrysostom. hom. 36. in Genesis 15.
Hoc verae fidei est, quando promissiones non iuxta solitum morem, and
hominibus cognitum fiunt, nos promissionis virtute fidimus: This is the
property of true faith, when God makes promises after an unusual manner, and
such as men are not acquainted with (as he did to Abraham, Genesis 15. for of that
he speaks in that place) and we believe depending upon the promise. Faith
therefore takes hold on Gods merciful (though extraordinary) promises.
Again, the same Father: Chrysostom. hom. 8. in Romans 4.
Gloriatur fidelis, non solum quod Deum amet germane: sed and quod ab illo
magnum honorem assecutus est, magnam item dilectionem: The faithful man
boasts or rejoices, not only that he truly loves God; but also for that
he has received much honor and love from God. Faith therefore persuades our
hearts that God loves us.

Epiphanius thus, Epiphan. in Anchor.
Ego debilis eram per carnem: demissus est autem mihi Saluator in similitudine
carnis peccati, talem dispensationem perficiens, qua me a seruitute redimeret,
a corruptione, a mor^e: I was weak in the flesh, or by the flesh: but there
was a Savior sent down for me in the similitude of sinful flesh, to redeem
me from bondage, corruption, and death. Did Paul ever speak more applicatiuely
of Christ to himself? No not even then when he said, Gal. 2. 20.
who has loved me, and given himself for me: for Epiphanius says of
himself, There was a Savior sent down for me, to redeem me from bondage.
But shall I, nay, may I dare to smoother the words that there follow? Epiph.
^^id.
Et factus est mihi iusticia, sanctificatio, and redemptio: and this Savior
thus sent down, was made to me righteousness, sanctification, and redemption:
Iusticia quidem, quoniam per fidem ipsius, peccata dissoluit: Sanctificatio
vero, quia per aquam, and spiritum, and verbum suum me liberauit: Redemptio
autem est sanguis ipsius, dum pretium redemptionis agni veripro me seipsum
tradidit: This Savior was made unto me righteousness, because by my faith he
dissolved my sins: He was made unto me sanctification, because he has freed
me by water, and his spirit, and his word: And my redemption is his blood,
whilst he gave himself for me as the true lamb the price of my redemption.
What did Paul affirm more of the Church in general, then this man of himself
in particular? 1. Cor 1 30.
He is of God made unto us wisdom, and righteousness, and sanctification,
and redemption: A lively president of faith laying hold upon special mercy.

Greg. Nation. ^ign. C^^n.
Mortalitas ipsius, meae mortalitatis est abolitio: Resuscitatio de mortuis, ab
Orco nostri liberatio: Ascensus in coelum me quoque sursum transfert, says
Nazivizer: His death is the abolishing of my death: his raising from the dead,
is a delivery of us from hell: his ascending into heaven will carry me up
thither also. What can be spoken in words more patheticall, in sense more
applicatiue, in faith more apprehensiue?

Thus spoke the Greek Fathers: now turn we to the Latin. Cyprian dissuading
from the fear of death, and rebuking in men their unwillingness to die:
Cyprian. de mortalit.
If (says he) some grave man of good report promised thee any thing, thou
would surely believe his promise, nor would thou doubt that he would
deceive thee, knowing him to be a man that will be as good as his word, or will
stand to his promise: well then; Nunc deus tecum loquitur, and i^ mente
incredula perfidus fluctuas? Now does God speak to thee, and give thee his
promise, and do thou with an unbelieving heart doubt of performance? Deus
tibi de hoc mundo recedenti immortalitatem pollicetur atque aeternitatem, and
tu dubitas? God promises to thee when thou departest out of the world
immortality, and eternity, and do thou doubt of possession? Hoc est Deum
omnino non nosse: hoc est Christum credentium Magistrum, peccato incredulitatis
offendere: hoc est in Ecclesia constitutum, fidem in domo fidei non habere:
This is not to know God ^t all: this is by unbelief to offend Christ the
master of the believers: this is for one to be in the Church, and to have no
faith in the house of faith. I gather from hence these conclusions. 1. First,
Gods promises made to us, must be believed: now they are promises of mercy. 2.
Secondly, God promises to us immortality and eternity: they therefore by
faith must be assuredly expected. 3. Thirdly, to doubt of the performance of
these, is not to know God, yea, it is to have no faith at all.

The same Father in the same place: I^dem.
Qui spe viuin^u, and in Deum credimus, and in Christum passum esse pro nobis,
and resurrexisse confidimus, in Christo manentes, and per ipsum atque in ipso
resurgentes: quid aut ipsi recedere istin^ de seculo nolu^^us, aut nostros
recedentes quasi perdit^s plangimus? We which live in hope, and believe in
God, and put our trust in Christ, that he suffered, and rose again for us,
abiding in Christ, and by him, and in him rising again: why are we our selves
so loath to depart hence, or why do we lament our friends departed, as if they
were utterly lost? Here is belief in God: here is trust in Christ: here is
beleeefe that he died for us, and rose again for us: here is an exhortation
built upon this belief to die comfortably, and to take the death of our
friends patiently: does not this manifestly infer a faith apprehending mercy?

Arnobius upon the Psalms, (if that book be his:) Ar^ob in Psalm. 129.
The meanest Christian (says he) and the vilest sinner, shall be preferred
before that servant that bears himself aloft and neglects his masters
honor: qui se credit per fidem ad misericordiam peruenire eius qui regnat in
secula seculorum, even that sinful Christian, who believes by faith, to
attain to his mercy who lives for evermore. Mark, that sinner shall be
saved, who believes to find mercy. Belief of mercy therefore brings to
salvation.

Tertullian; Tertull. cont. Ma^c. l. 5.
Vt certum esset, nos esse filios Dei, misit Spiritum suum in corda nostra,
clamantem Abba, Pater: That we might be certain that we are the sons of God,
he has sent his spirit into our hearts, crying, Abba, Father. Here observe: 1.
It is certain that we are the Sons of God. How is it certain? Not by
revelation: ergo by faith. 2. To be the Son of God, is special mercy: ergo,
to believe that, is to believe mercy. 3. The Spirit teaches us in assurance
hereof to call God our Father: the name of a Father is a name of ^ercie: The
Spirit therefore teaches us to believe mercy.

S. Ambrose by his faith thus applies Christ unto himself: A^ bros. de ^a^nbo
and vita b^at^.
Non gloriabor quia iustus sum, etc. I will not glory (says he) that I am
righteous; but I will glory that I am redeemed from mine unrighteousness: I
will not glory that I am free from sin, but I will glory that the sins
which I have, are forgiven me. Then he adds, Non gloriabor quia profui, neque
quia profuit mihi quispiam, sed quia pro me Advocatus apud Patrem Christus est,
sed quia pro me Christi sanguis effusu^ est: that is, I will not glory that I
have profited any man, nor that any man has profited me: but I will glory of
this, that Christ is an Advocate for me with the Father: and that Christ's blood
was shed for me. Mark Bellarmine, here is a notable presumptuous Heretic; I
am redeemed, my sins are forgiven, Christ is mine Advocate, Christ's blood was
shed for me. What Protestant ever applied Christ's benefits nearer to his own
use? verily not Luther himself, when he professed a little before his death,
(...) Melanct. (...) L^t^.
I have taught him, I have known him, I have loved him as my life, my health,
my redemption.

But I return to the Fathers: for neither Luther, nor any of Luthers side are
old enough (though learned enough) to stop the Adversaries mouths.

S. Augustine says thus; August. in ^sal 130.
The devils believed Christ, but they did not love Christ. And therefore
though they believed, yet they said, what have we to do with thee Jesus thou
Son of God? But let us believe so, as we may believe in him, and love him:
Et non dicamus, Quid nobis and tibi est? Sed dica^^us potius, Ad te pertinemus,
Tu nos redemisti: And let us not say as the devils said, what have we to do
with thee? as desirous not to come near him; But let us say rather, We are
thine, we pertain to thee, thou have redeemed us, as drawing him and his
merits home unto our selves. Now let a Papist tell me, how a man shall
cheerfully go to Christ, and say unto him, I belong to thee, thou have
redeemed me, without a faith laying hold of special mercy.

Bernard has a notable and comfortable saying, Bernard se^. ^^in ann^^c.
Mariae.
Si credis peccata tua non posse deleri, nisi ab eo cui soli pecc^sti and in
quem peccatum non cadit, been facis: If (says he) thou beleeuest that thy
sins cannot be wiped away, but only of him, against whom only thou have
sinned, and into whom no sin falls, therein thou do well: Sed add adhuc
vt and hoc credas, quia per ipsum tibi pecata donantur: But yet go on further,
and believe this also, that thy sins are forgiven to thee: Hoc est enim
testimonium quod perhibet in cord nostro spiritus sanctus, dicens: demissa
sunt tibi peccata tua: For this is the testimony or record which the holy
Ghost bears in every one of our hearts; Thy sins are forgiven to thee. A
golden sentence; To believe that God only can forgive sin is well, but not
sufficient: To believe further, that God has forgiven thy sin to thee; this
is necessary. This is the testimony of the holy ghost in thee, which cannot
deceive thee, Thy sins are forgiven thee. He therefore which has received
true faith, which is the gift of the holy Ghost, and by which the holy ghost
testifies to the conscience: he by this faith believes forgiveness to
himself, which is a special application of mercy.

Sedulius shall make up the just dozen: Sedul. in Romans 3.
Disposuit Deus propitium se futurum humano generi, si credant in sanguine eius
se esse liberandos: God has determined to be merciful to mankind, if they
believe that they shall be delivered by his blood. Short and sweet: Hope well,
and have well: Believe deliverance, and take deliverance. But without belief
of that, there is no delivery.

It is therefore no new Doctrine (as say our right Worshipful Masters of the
History) no nor rashness, and presumption, (as say Lindane, and Bellarmine,
and other Papists) by faith to apply in particular mercy to thy self. No:
hear S. Augustine challenging such presumption from novelty: Aug de verb.
(...). 28.
Praesume non de operatione tua, sed de gratia Christi: gratia enim saluati est
is, inquit Apostolus. Non ergo hic arrogantia est, sed fides: Praedicare quod
acceperi^, non superbia est sed deuotio: Could any thing be spoken more
contrary to the doting Papists? They dubbe applying faith, with the name of
Presumption: and under that name condemn it for a sin. But what says S.
Augustine? Presume, so it be not of thine own works, but of the grace of
Christ. For by grace are ye saved, says the Apostle. Herein (thus to presume)
is no arrogancy, but faith. To profess or acknowledge what thou have
received, is not pride, but devotion. So then there is an holy presumption or
confidence in the grace and mercy of God, the profession whereof is the fruit
of faith.

We see then what note the old Fathers song. Now if I show that a number even
of Popish Writers have taught this applying faith, and apprehending by faith of
special mercy, I shall not only cut the combs of our audacious Englishmen,
who of gross ignorance (if not of secret malice) ascribe the fountain of this
Doctrine to Geneua: but I shall also turn the edge of the Papists swords upon
themselves, and cause them first to answer their own, before they proceed so
peremptorily against strangers. Thus therefore I go on in that course, and
will summon also an Inquest of them.

Arnoldus de noua villa, was M Fox Act. Mon. in Hen. 3.
a Spaniard, a man famously learned. He lived about the year of our Lord 1250.
two hundred years before Luther and Calvin were borne. He wrote against many
errors of the Romish Church. Among the rest, he said, That the faith which
then Christian men were commonly taught, was such a faith as the Devils had.
Meaning belike (says M. Fox, the reporter hereof) as we now affirm that the
Papists do teach only the historical faith, which is the faith histori^, non
fiduciae. A shreud more in a Papists dish: but the Author himself were right
worthy the seeing, which my poor library affords not.

Gerson was a great man in his time, both for learning and place: Chancellor of
the University of Paris. He making the distinction of fides mortua, fides
ficta, and fides vi^ae: says, that Ioh. Gerson. sermon* in Dom. d^ passion^.
fides vi^a est credere Dei veritatem, and ^bin hoc ^um amare and timere per
affectionem: A lively faith, is to believe the truth of God. But that is not
all: Besides believing of Gods truth, to be truth, a lively faith does also
love God, and fear God, in affection: as a natural and loving child loves
and fears his natural and loving father: for of a servile fear, I trow no
Papist is so simple as to expound him. Now, how shall he affectionately love
and reverence God, as a Father: which is not by faith persuaded that God
carries a fatherly affection toward him?

The same Gerson preaching to the French King, and directing his speech to the
King by name: exhorts him against all the temptations of the Devil, to arm
himself with the shield of faith: Ioh Gerson. sermale Sp^^. sancto.
and in te ipso per bonam dicas credulitatem: and (says he) say thus to the
Devil in thy self, or in thine own heart by a steadfast faith: O humani
generis inimice, hoc non me vinces pacto, nec me falls. O Satan, thou enemy
of mankind, thou shall not thus overcome me, nor deceive me. Quia cum credam
Deum esse, and illum Deum meum esse, Patrem meum, Dominum meum, etc. Thou shall
not overcome me: for why? Because I believe there is a God, and that this God
is my God, my Father, my Lord, and all good things to me. Mark how he teaches
the King the art of application: and by a faith applying the goodness of God
unto himself, to resist the Devil. Now, no man can say, God is my God, my
Father, my Lord, etc. but by a special confidence in his mercy. And for the
manifestation thereof, let me here insert a saying of S. Augustine (though he
be none of that band which now I am mustering) to show what manner of faith
that is, which makes a man to cry with S. Thomas, Ioh 20. 28.
, My Lord, and my God. So shall we see with what kind of faith Gerson persuaded
his Sovereign to resist the Devil. S. Augustine speaking of that in the
Psalm, Be^tus vir cuius Dominus Deus ipsius, Blessed is the man whose Lord is
his God, says thus: August. lib. De ovibus.
Super omnes est Deus: tamen nescio quo modo, non facile quisque audet dicere,
Deu^ meus: nisi qui in eum credit, and qui illum diligit, ipse dicit, Deus
meus. God (says he) is God over all men: and yet I cannot tell how it is, that
not every man dares redily say, My God: only he that believes in him ( in
eum) and loves him, he says boldly, My God. Tuum tibi fecisti, cuius es: hoc
ipse amat. Thou have made God thine own, whose thou art by faith and love: and
this God himself loves. Then he adds: Prorsus dulcedine affectus tibi, and
secura, and praesidenti dilectione, dic, Deus meus: Being affected in thy
self with the sweetness of God, and with a secure and very confident love
toward God: say, My God. It was objected to the Protestants in Queen Mary's
days, as a note of an Heretic, to say, my God, my Father, my Savior, etc.
Indeed S. Augustine says, Every man cannot say so: and no marvel if those
bloody persecutors durst not speak so. For a man to say with a good
conscience, God is my God, or God is my Lord: he must have by faith, feeling
of Gods mercy, and as a fruit of this faith, love toward God for his mercy:
and then he may comfortably apply God, and as it were, appropriate God unto
himself, as his peculiar own, and with this faith resist all temptations of
the Devil, as Gerson well advised that his Royal Auditorie.

Granatensis is another of good note among them. He dedicated his books to
Sixtus Quintus: and is of him greatly commended for a teacher of Sanctimonie.
Let us here what he writes of faith. In one place he says, Ludo^ Granat. ser
do^^n. 18. post Pente^.
Fides proponit nobis beneficia diuina: Faith propounds or tendereth unto us
(as it were to be fed upon) the benefits or mercies of God. It is therefore
exercised about mercy, and tendreth mercy to the heart. In an other place:
Idem ser domin. 23. post Pentecost.
Fidei atque spei sinum qua^ntum poterimus expandamus, certi de immensa Domini
benignitate, nunquam frustra nos in eo spem colloc^turos: Let us set open the
bosom of our faith, and hope, as wide as possibly we can, being assured of
the infinite goodness of God, that we shall never repose our trust in bim in
vain. Here is an assurance of Gods goodness, which the Papists call
presumption: and here is a persuasion, that God will never fail us, which can
arise of nothing but from faith in his mercy.

The same Author in another place: Idem ser. (...).
Omnes qui a peccato ad gratiam vocantur, propter illius gratiam and merita
vocantur: All that are called from sin to mercy, are called thereto for the
grace and merits of Christ: for of him there he speaks. A notable speech
against Opera prae^isa. But it follows: In cuius rei signum, inter ea quae ad
imp^^ iustificationem requiruntur, fides in Christum cum pr^mis numeratur. Qua
profi^emur atque testamur nos ob eius merita a Deo Patre vocari and
iustificari: In testimony whereof (namely that those which are called, are
called for the grace and merits of Christ) among those things which are
required to the justifying of a sinner, faith in Christ is reckoned with the
chief. By which faith we profess and protest, that we are called, and
justified of God the Father, for his merits, and favor. Did ever Protestant
affirm more of faith, then this, that it makes a man in the assurance of his
heart to protest that he is called, and justified of God the Father, for the
merits of Jesus Christ^ What greater mercy can faith seal up unto us? For my
part I shall never beg better faith then this of the Lord.

S^^lla writing upon that in the Gospel of Luke, (...). 5. 20.
When he saw their faith, etc. says, that D^^acus S^^l in Luc. 5.
There is duplex fides, a double kind of faith: Altera, qua ^reditur* and haec
est virtus Theologica: One kind of faith, is that by which we believe: and this
is a Theological virtue. Altera est fides quae confidentia quaedam est:
scilicet qua credimus quod donabit Deus id quod ab eo petimus: There is an
other kind of faith, which is a certain confidence or assurance, by which we
believe that God will give to us what we beg of him. Viraque autem requiritur
ab eo cui peccata dimittenda sunt: And both these kinds of faith are required
of him, whose sins are forgiven. Of the first kind of faith he says, that he
which believes not the things that belong to God, cannot be forgiven: yet
therein excepteth the case of infants, which cannot know them, and so not
believe them. De alterae autem ^ide, id est, de confidentia dicendum est, quod
sine illa non possunt peccata dimitti: Of the other kind of faith, which is
confidence or assurance, it is absolutely to be said, that without it, sins
cannot be forgiven. But mark well what follows; Nam quamvis aliquis credat
omnia quae in sacra Scriptura continentur, and quae Ecclesia credit: si non
confidit Dominum ei remissurum si ipse doluerit: non v^ ique dimittentur: For
although a man do believe all that is contained in the holy Scriptures, and
all that which the Church believes, (there is iumpe Bellarmines faith,) yet if
he do not believe that the Lord will forgive him, if he sorrow for his sin
(there is apprehension of mercy,) they shall never be forgiven him. Imo
etiamsi peteret illa dimitti, si non confideret, and certissime crederet illa
sibi dimittenda, nunquam dimittentur: yea though a man do pray that his sins
may be forgiven, if he trust not, and most certainly believe (mark that
against doubting) that they shall be forgiven him, they shall never be
forgiven him. The words are long, but need no long gloss. There is a faith,
which is confidence or assurance of Gods mercy toward us. And without this
faith of obtaining mercy, it is not possible to find mercy at the hand of
God. Well fate (say I then) that kind of faith, which ^aieth hold of Gods
mercy, and believes it to belong unto himself: for that shall find mercy,
and none but that.

Guilliandus Bellij^^n^is commenteth upon the Gospel of S. John: his book
printed at Paris, dedicated to the Cardinal of Guise, approved by the
faculty of Divinity there. Writing upon those words of Christ, Ioh. 6. 23.
This is the work of God that ye believe in him whom he has sent: speaks
in this manner, Cla^d. G^ill. in Ioh. 6.
Opus Dei vacauit sidem, qu^^ est cert^ de boni^ate Dei persuasio, confidensque
sa^utis ab eo expectat^o: Christ calls faith the work of God: which is a
certain persuasion of the goodness of God, and a confident expectation of
salvation from him. What can be more plain^e?

The same man speaking of those words of our Savior, Ioh. 12. ^6.
Whilst you have the light, belief in the light: (...) ibid.
Obserua, non ait, Credit in b^ce, sed credit in luce^: Mark (says he)
that Christ says not, believe in the light, with an ab^^tiue case; but believe
in the light, with an accusative case. So it is in the Greek, (...), as if we
would say, Believe into the light: what that phrase means, has been before
declared. But hear his inference from Christ's speaking in that manner: V^
disting^at Christus inter fidem vt simplicem histori^ de Christo notitiam, and
inter fidem vi^nas se^ salutarem. Quae est certa fiducia qua quis sine
dubitatio^e stat^it apud se Christum esse sibi lumen adsalutem: Christ (says
he) spoke in that manner, that he might distinguish and put a difference
between that faith which is a simple, or bare knowledge of the history of
Christ, and between a lively and saving faith, which lively and saving faith
is an assured confidence, by which a man without doubting (mark how very
Papists seclude uncertainty from Faith) resolves with himself, that Christ
is unto him light unto salvation. Me thinks I see Bellarmine here fretting and
fuming with the Divines of Paris for autorizing this book. But poor old man,
what can he do, where the Pope himself d^^eth not stir the coals? It is
best that they suffer France still to approve our applying faith.

I shall dispatch some others more shor^ly: Go^ran cites out of the gloss, N
Gorran. in (...). 1.
seven manner^ of ways how there is made transi^^s a ^ide ad fidem, a passage
from faith to faith, of which Romans 1. 1^.
S. Paul speaks in his Epistle to the Romans: The fourth of them he names
to be, ex side promissionis, in fidem completionis, from the belief of the
promise, to the belief of the performance of the promise. He seems to say,
that there is one s^eppe of faith to believe the making of the promise, and a
further step of faith, to believe the performance of the promise. Howsoever
he mean, this I collect certainly from him, that faith is occupied about the
promises of God, and the performance of them: which cutteth the throats of our
bare Historians.

I^ an other place, the same Author shows, that the name of faith is Gorran
in Heb. 11.
taken diverse manner of ways: and among the rest, sometimes it signifies,
cert^^udo comprehensionis. And in that acception he expounds the forenamed
place of S. Paul, Romans 1. 1^.
By it the righteousness of God is re^eated from faith to faith. Now S. Paul
speaks there of that faith, which is preached in the Gospel, and by which The
just does live. And therefore if that faith be certitudo comprehensionis, then
it certainly comprehends, what the Gospel offers, and those are the
promises of mercy.

Wekelius says, Georg. Wek. (...). 9. post Ti^^it.
Fide Christum ^angis, sentis meritum pasfionis and inca^^ationis, sine omni
prae^io mertio gratis tibi da^um: By faith thou touchest or ^aiest hand on
Christ: by faith thou feel the merit of his passion, and incarnation, freely
given to thee without any desert of thine going before to purchase it. Faith
therefore gives a sense and feeling to a man's heart, that the benefits of
Christ do belong to him. And again, Fide (^^quam) hu^t De^ergate maximam
charitatem, qua cum adhue i^imic^s esses, proprium ^^um Filium prote dedit,
sentis ^angistque Christum: By ^aith, (I say) thou ^eelest that great love of
God toward thee: of which love, he gave his own Son for thee, when as yet
thou were his enemy: thou feel and touchest Christ. Sed non nisi^ charitate
possides: yet thou do not possess him but by love.

Guadal^^^nfis writing upon Hose^, and expounding that place, ^^os. 2. 20.
Desponsab^ te ^ihi in ^ide: which we translate, I will marry thee to me in
faithfulness, but he expounds there of our faith toward God; G^adalup. Co.
n^n Ho^. 2.
Fide anima desponsa^^r De^: By faith the soul is betrothed to God. And
again. Fides est arrha desponsationis anime cum De^: Faith is the earnest, or
paun^, or pledge, or gage of our espousing unto God. For the high and righteous
God to take us base and sinful men, as it were in marriage so near, and so
dear unto himself: this is a special, yea and an unspeakable mercy. Now,
faith is as it were the marriage ring, by which this merciful contract is
assured to our hearts.

Espensaeus says, that S. Paul in his discourse of Faith, Claud. Espen. Com.
in Tit. 3.
non quamlibet fidem qua Deo creditur, sed ^am salubrem pl^neque enangelicam
definiuit: He does not define or entreat of every kind of faith, by which we
believe God, but a saving faith, and altogether Evangelical, or Gospel-like.
So then in his opinion, there is a faith more per^it and exquisite, then that
which believes the truth of God, and which more fully answers the scope and
drift of the Doctrine of the Gospel. Now, what the pith and vigor of the
Gospel is, has been already declared^ even Christ and all that is Christ's,
given for our sal^^tion.

But among all the rest, give me leave largely to make report of that same
honest Friar Fer^s: the honestest Papist (I think) that ever wrote. He
speaks so like a Calvinist in this case, that it is a wonder his books are
not condemned for Heretical. He discoursing of the Centurio^s faith, which
Christ so commends in the Gospel, Matthew. 8. (...).
I have not found so great faith, no not in Israel^ ^^iteth in this manner:
Ioh. ^eru^. in Matthew. 8. lib. 2^.
Non semper ^ides est, quod nos fidem dicimus: That (says he) is not always
faith, which we call faith: How so? Fidem nos dicimus assent^^i ijs, quae
diuinis historijs produntur, and quae Ecclesia credendo proponit: we commonly
call this faith, to assent to those things which are recorded in the divine
histories, and which the Church propounds to be believed. This the Schoolmen
call an unformed faith, or faith wanting a form, and S. James a dead faith:
(mark well then of what faith Ferus expounds the discourse of S. James, and
which is without works: even plainly of that which does only Credere Deo.)
But to the point; he adds, Secundum Scripturam fides non est absque fiducia
misericordiae diuinae promiss^ in Christo: According to the Scriptures, faith
is not without confidence of the mercy of God promised in Christ. A gross
Lutheran; yet he proves this by diverse examples out of the holy Scripture.
It is said of Abraham, Genesis 15. 6.
Abraham believed God, and that was i^puted unto him for righteousness. What
believed he? No more then that there was a God? Yes, he believed the promise of
God, when God said to him, Genesis 15. 1.
Fear not Abraham, I am thy buckler and reward. Abraham relying upon this
promise went out of his own land, etc. and he trusted in the mercy and
goodness of God, nothing doubting, but wheresoever he lived, he should find
God his Protector. Credunt ergo qui pro Protectore, pro Patre, Deum habent,
non pro Iudice: O worthy speech: They believe which account God for their
Protector, and for their Father, not for their Judge. But he proceeds, and
of this kind of faith he expounds these places: Deuteronomy. 1. 32.
Yet you did not so believe the Lord. And that of Moses and Aaron, Exodus 10. 12.
because you believed me not. And that in the Gospel, Ioh. 3. 18.
He that believes in him, shall not be condemned: Non hic loquitur de
historica aut informi fide: sed de fiducia misercordi^ per Christum
praestaudae: He speaks not there (says Ferus) of an historical or unformed
faith: but of a confidence in the mercy of God to be yielded by Christ. Many
other instances he there gives, but at length concludes thus: Summa: fides
quam Scriptura commendat, non aliud est quam fidere gra^uita miserecordia Dei.
H^c vera fides est, qua iustus viuit: hanc vnam a nobis Deus requ^^it: and ad
^anc confirmandam etiam Filium ded^^, (...) de bona voluntate sua erga nos
dubitemus, sed vt ponamus in Deo spem nostram. In English thus: The sum or
conclusion of all, is this, The faith which the Scripture commends, is
nothing else then to trust in the free mercy of God; This is that true faith,
by which the just man lives: this faith only does God require of us: and for
the confirmation of this faith, he has also given his Son, that we should
not doubt of his good will toward us, but that we should repose our trust in
God. Thus sarre Friar Ferus, directly against Friar Bella^mine: Fratrum
concordia (...): a rare kind of agreement among Friars.

Now to an other: What if Father Campian the glory of the Philistims, the
challenging Goliath of (...) time: what if he be taken suspicious of this
heretical doctrine of applying faith? Read the conference had with him in the
tower of London. When D. Walker had said, (...) day.
To know God mereating to be Almighty, in governing wise, etc. this to
apprehend is sufficient to salvation: Campian replieth, as correcting that
speech, To apprehend these things effectually, so that we also obey his
Commandments, and not only to grant the^ to be true, but also to apply these
things to our selves through the passion of Christ: this is salvation, and
sufficient. So then belike, by this man's opinion, the power, wisdom, etc. of
God must be applied to our selves (for our own benefit) thorough the passion
of Christ: which how a man can do, and not draw home therewith, and therein,
Gods mercy to himself, I can not disce^ne.

D. Redm^^ seems to have been a man of great note for gravity, wisdom, and
learning. In the days of Henry the eigh^, a great defender of Pope^^e. But
lying upon his death bed, about the end of the reign of Edward the sixth, M.
Fox Act. Mon in Edv. 6. Ann. 1551. in edi^. 1596.
he greatly lamented, that he had too seriously and earnestly withstood this
Proposition, Only faith justifies. And then delivers his present opinion
about it: which is this; That, So faith do signify, veram, viuam, and
acquiescentem in Christo fidem, id est amplexum Christ^: that is, So as by the
name of faith we understand a true and lively faith, a faith resting in
Christ, that is, an embracing of Christ as it were in our arms, as those do
which have long de^ited to ^ee and enjoy one another, and are glad of the
possessing one another: it is a true, godly, sweet, and comfortable doctrine:
viz, that only faith justifies. The justifying faith then is a resting upon
Christ with comfort, and an embracing of him with joy: which no man can do,
which is not persuaded by and in Christ to find mercy of God.

Thus have you an whole Jury impanaled of either sort: Fathers of the one
side, Popish writers on the other: all speaking for such a faith as
apprehends mercy, and applies it to the believer: which does abundantly
show, that so to teach, is neither Calvinian novelty, as say our lo^tie
Historians; nor rash presumption, as say our ignorant Papists.

Now for that I hold it my duty, to honor the Church in which I live, by
giving testimony unto it in all righteousness: which Church has also received
honorable testimony from abroad, Beza epist. ad Elisab Angliae Reg ante novum
Test.
to hold and teach soundly all points of Doctrine, necessary to Salvation: and
for that I have heard with mine ^ares some that have been, and some that now
are great members in our Church, challenged by name to be defenders of a sole
historical ^aith: I will here in open place declare what the received
judgment of our Church is in this case. Not caring in the mean time to know,
nor knowing to regard, what every particular Divine holds in this Argument.
Tullie said, Cie. de not. Deo^. l. 1.
Id ratum habent homines, quod (...) quemprobant (...) vident: I will therefore
believe (till I know the contrary) that all the Bishops and other Prelates
which now live in our Church, do ratify that in this case, which their
predecessou^s have determined: especially since those their predecessors were
men for life and learning so greatly approved. Thus therefore understand the
Veredict of our Church. The Articles of Religion agreed upon by that
Convocation, Anno. 1562. and again confirmed by the Subscription of the said
Convocation, Anno. 157^. speak thus of Justification. (...) 11.
We are accounted righteous before God, only for the merits of our Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ, thorough faith. They therefore ^each such a faith, as
persuades a man that he is justified before God, and that thorough the merits
of Jesus Christ applied to him. For else, how can any man be made righteous by
the merits of Christ, if those merits of Christ belong not to him? And how
shall any man be assured of his Justification, until he do believe that
those merits do in particular, and in special belong to himself? Again, the
Apology of the Church of England professes, (...)
That there is no mortal creature which can be justified by his own deserts
in Gods sight: and therefore that our only succor and refuge is, to fly to
the mercy of our Father by Jesus Christ, and assuredly to persuade our minds,
that he is the obteiner of ^orgiuenesse for our sins, and that by his blood
all our spots of sin be washed clean. Now, he that is persuaded that Christ
obteineth pardon for his sins, and again, that all his sins are washed
away in Christ^, blood; that man, I (...), applies Gods mercy by Christ to
himself. Lastly, the good old Deane of Paul's, who in the beginning of the late
Qu^enes reign, published a Catechism authorized publicly to be ^aught in
this land: thus defines in it a True Christian-sauing faith. (...) in
Catechism. d^fide.
Fides est certa cognitio pater^^ Deierganos per Christum beneuolentia,
fiduciaque (...) eadem, fi^^t in Enangelio testa^^m est: Faith is a certain
knowledge of Gods fatherly good will toward us thorough Christ, and a
confidence in the same good will of God: as it is testified in the Gospel. This
is the Doctrine of our Church concerning justifying faith. Those therefore
which secretly whisper otherwise, do greatly wrong our Church, and
Church-gouernours: yea, indeed they greatly wrong themselves, to resort with us
to the Word, where such a faith is preached, to communicate with us in the
Sacraments, where such a faith is s^aled up, yea to live in the bosom of our
Church, where such a faith is maintained: and in the mean time to iumpe close
with the Papists against us, in so essential a point of Salvation.

I will now conclude this Doctrine with her example, of whom I am persuaded all
true hearted Englishmen will be glad to hear: that same old Mother and
Nurse of this Church of England: that same glorious Defender of this true,
ancient, Catholic and Apostolic faith, so many years: that same raiser up,
and protector of all those Bishops, and other learned men, that have taught and
confirmed this Doctrine of apprehensiue, and applying faith among us: I mean
the late Queen Elizabeth, a woman of most famous: and most renowned memory.
She ^eared up the preaching of this faith, she maintained this faith, she lived
in this faith: yea she died in this faith, applying the mercies of God, by the
merits of Christ to her own soul. As appears in a Sermon put forth in
print, preached in this very place, the next Sabbath day after her decease, by
a Preacher of reverend respect in this City, and familiarly known to me to be
both wise, and learned, and religious, and so one that would not gloze, nor
dissemble in the matter. It was spoken here now ten years ago: let the
perform those same decennalia to that peerless Q^eene, who is worthy to
have her vicenalia, yea her centenalia in this and all other our greatest
assemblies. I find it in that Sermon reported, that M. John Hayward, upon Psalm.
24^. March 17. 1603.
Queen Elizabeth lying upon her death bed, M. Watson then Bishop of
Chichester, and her Almoner, rehearsed to her the grounds of Christian faith,
requiring some testimony of her assenting to them: which she readily gave both
with hand and eye. And when he proceeded to tell her, that it was not enough
generally to believe that those things were true, but every Christian man must
believe, that they were true to them, that they were members of the true
Church, truly redeemed by Jesus Christ, that their sins were forgiven, etc.
she did with great show of faith, lift up her eyes, and hands to heaven, and
stayed them long, as in testimony of her assent thereunto. O bessed Queen
that lived so gloriously, that died so Christianly; that was Alanus Copus dial.
5. cap. 11.
optima i^dole, in her prosperity, by the judgment of the Papists her
enemies: that was optima fide, in her deepest distress, in the hea^ing of the
Protestants her ^oiall Subjects: that maintained this applying faith while she
lived, to the good of so many thousands: that professed this applying faith
when she died, to the honor of the Gospel, and the saving of her self.
Thanks be to God for his unspeakable grace.

The Truth being thus taught, and prooued^ good order of proceeding would,
that the contrary Error, and the Arguments which tend to the establishing
thereof, should be confuted. And there is furniture enough in the word of God,
to dispatch that also: for the Scripture (...) 36.
is a^ able to improoue, as to Teach. But this must be some other man's labor,
or mine a^ some more leisure: for this were a web that would ask three
hours weauing more. Bellarmin^ has made us a world of do, if a man would
stand upon every Objection. He has so^re several Chapters Bell. de (...).
lib. ^. c. 8, 9. 10.
fra^ght with Scriptures, and Reasons, and Fathers alleged after his manner,
against faith of special mercy. To name many, were enough to confute them:
but they are vncooth, and let them be vnkissed: to use old Chaucers phrase.
Two places of Scripture there are, which two English Knights, once when it was,
pressed upon me at the table: and that so eagerly, as they gave me no space to
eat: they being two to one, sounded out their own triumph, as if their
Arguments were invincible. Them I will now endeavor charitably to satisfy, by
these presents.

Object. 1. It is written, Ioh. 17. 3. This is life eternal, that they may
know thee ((...)) to be the only very God, and whom thou have sent Jesus
Christ: From hence they would conclude, that The sole knowledge of God, and of
Christ, is sufficient to eteranall life.

Resp. The Answer must consist of many branches: which I will first severally
display, and then conioyne all together.

1. First, August in Ioh. 17^ 11.
Aliquand^ cognoscere, pro eo quod est credere, p^nitur: Sometimes to know, is
put for to believe, says S. Augustine, speaking of those words, That the world
may know that thou have sent me. And there he alleges an other like place
out of the same Chapter, Ioh. 17. 8.
They know that I came out from thee, and they have believed that I was sent of
thee: (...) and crediderunt. Hot dixit posterius crediderunt, quod prius
dixerat, cognouerunt: The latter expounds the for^mer: they know, that is,
they believe. So may it be taken also in the third verse: and well may knowing
be taken for believing, and contra Aug^st (...) 112. (...)
quia and illud no^imus quicquid fide non ficta, etiamsi nondum per speciem
contuendo, iam tamen inconcusse credendo retinemus: because we know all that
which now we hold without wa^ering, by faith unfeigned, though yet we do not
sensibly behold it. Take that first, though this (well I wore) does not fully
satifie the purpose.

2. Secondly, Gr. (...) homie^^^ op^^icio. cap 20.
To know^, does not ever signify bare understanding: sed quand^m animi adid
quod gratu^^ nobis est affectione^. But to know, signifies sometimes a
certain affection, or inclination of the mind with love and liking to that
which is acceptable unto us. There is in man, as there is in God, D^plex
notitia, a double kind of knowledge: one is, N. Gorran in Luc. 13.
simplicis speculationis, of simple understanding; so God knows all things
both good and evil. The other is, notitia approbationis, that is, to know with
approouing: So God knows Psalm. 1. 4.
the way of the righteous: that is; he knows it with liking and approbation.
And on the other side, Matthew. 7. 23.
he never knew th^^icked: that is, to love the^ and their doings: Theoph. in
Matthew. 7.
Hoc enim loco charitas cognitio dicitur, says Theophilact: In that place love
is called knowledge. Read more for this distinction, if it seem strange to
any, August in Psalm. 118. Teth. Elias Cretensis in Nazian. ^rat. 11. Sotto
Mayor in 2. Tim. 2. I apply it thus to this matter. To know God, and Christ,
with a b^re and simple understanding, what they are, what they have done, etc.
this is not, nor cannot be eternal life; as has been before declared. But to
know God and Christ, with approbation, affected with them, loving them, taking
delight and joy in them, for being such as they are, and for doing that which
they have done: this is, and this must needs be eternal life. For why? This
affectionate and approouing knowledge, is ever joined with confidence in the
mercy of God, and of Christ: and in truth is a comfortable Effect of the same.
The Devils and the Reprobates know God and Christ, what they are, and what
they have done for man's salvation, as well as we: but they affect not with
liking tha^ which they know, because they are not persuaded of any love,
mercy, or kindness in God toward themselves. But the true believer, as he
knows them, so he likes to know them, and is affected to them in love: as
persuaded that all the goodness, love, mercy, and favor which is in God and
in Christ, do belong unto him: and thus to know God, and Christ^^ eternal
life.

Thirdly, P. Mart. Com. in Romans 1. 19.
Sciendum duplicem esse Deinotitiam, says Peter Martyr: we must know, that
there is in a man a double kind of the knowledge of God. Vnam efficacem, qua
immutamur, ita vt quae nouimus, opere conemur exprimere: alteram frigidam, qua
nihilo reddimur meliores: There is one an effectual kind of knowledge, by
which we are so changed in heart and affection, as we strive to express in our
deeds, that which we know. Of which kind, I take that to be spoken of S. Paul
to the Colossians: Coloss. ^. 10.
Ye have put on the new man, which is renewed in knowledge, after the image of
him that created him. Now this is such a knowledge, as Gualth hom. 149. in Ioh.
17.
arises of faith, and by faith joins us to God, and being united to him,
transformeth us into his image. There is an other kind of knowledge
ineffectual; which makes a man never the better. Such a one as S. Paul says
was in the Gentiles: Romans 1. ^1.
When they knew God, they glorified him not as God. 28.
Again, As they regarded not to know God, etc. This the Devils and reprobates
have, and are never the better. But to know God effectually, so as we are by
faith united to him whom we know, and by our union with him do communicate his
Spirit, and by that Spirit are renewed unto his image in holiness; this is a
knowledge which necessarily draws after it eternal life.

Fourthly, I would have this well marked, as material, Muse. Com^. in Phil. 3.
10.
Duplex est cognoscendi Christi modus: There is a double manner or sort of
knowing Christ. Primus est annexus fid^i, etc. The one, is an appendix to
faith: the other, consists in a lively, or experimental feeling. Faith
carries with it that knowledge, by which he that believes in Christ, knows
him to be the true Son of God, sent into the world, crucified, put to death
for our sins, etc. This faith, and this knowledge, are both historical.
There is an other kind of knowing Christ, by which we feel and have experience
of his power in us, which feeling is by the operation of the holy Ghost working
in our hearts. And this S. Paul desires yet more and more Philip. ^ ^0.
to know Christ, and the power of his resurrection. He knew Christ, and all
things belonging to the History of Christ in an abundant manner: but he
desired to know him more in his own sense and experience, by feeling in
himself the virtue of Christ's resurrection: that is, synechdochice, Calv. in
Phil. ^. 10.
redemptionis complementum, the accomplishment of his redemption, purchased by
Christ. For indeed, Ibidem.
Tun^ rite cognoscitur Christus, dum sentimus quid valeat more eius and
resurrectio, and qualiter in nobis ^it afficax: Then only is Christ rightly
known, when we feel what Christ's death and resurrection can do, and how it
is operative, or effectual in us. To have this feeling knowledge of Christ, is
an invincible argument that Christ dwells in us by his Spirit, and so is an
assurance unto us of eternal life. Now, to conioyne all these together. So to
know God and Christ, as to believe: to know and believe them with affectionate
liking, with effectual working, with sensible feeling: this knowledge
certainly is eternal life, as our Savior Christ speaks in that place of
the Gospel. But on the otherside, to make our s^^uation to depend upon a bare
inaffectionated, ineffectuall, and unfeeling knowledge: this is to expose the
apprehension of it, to the devils and reprobates: and indeed to deceive our
selves. ^ustia Mart. c^ntn (...).
Vos vosmet ipsos seducit is, (says Iustine Martyr to Tripho the Jew:) you
Jews deceive your selves, and others, which say, that God will not lay their
sins to their Charges, (...), (...), though they be grievous sinners, so that
they know God. For let a man know never so much, if he be not renewed in
knowledge, and purged from his sinfulness; there is no remission belonging to
him. But as the same Father elsewhere speaks; Justin Mart. exposit ^idei.
(...), the form^ of divine doctrine is gathered into two heads, (...), into
divine knowledge, and divine worship. Know therefore, and worship, and live:
know, and worship not, and perish: L^^ l. ^. c. 5.
Scientia est Deum noscere, virtus colere, (says Lact:) In illo sapientia, in
hoc iustitia continetur. To know God, is learning, but to worship God, is
virtue: In that is contained wisdom, but in this, righteousness. First
therefore learn to know God, and Christ: and then worship them aright by faith
and obedience, as thou art prescribed in the Law and Gospel: and this
effectual knowledge will be unto thee eternal life.

Object. 2. There is a second argument used, drawn from the example of the
heathen Eununch converted and baptized. Act. 8. 36.
After that Philip had preached Christ unto him, and he had desired baptism;
17.
Philip tells him, If thou beleeuest with all thy heart, 38.
thou may. The Eununch replieth; I believe that Jesus Christ is the Son of
God. A confession (say they) merely historical; yet upon this is he
engraffed into the Church.

Resp^ 1. I might here answer with Gualter, that this confession of the Eunuch,
though it be short, yet by implyment, Gualth. ho^^ 62. in Ac^. ^.
omnes symboli Apostolici articulos contine^: it comprehends all the articles
of the Apostles Creed. He shows it there in particulars, read him that list.

2. But I turn me to S. Augustine, and will shortly frame mine answer from
him. It was one of the Objections which those made in his time, that held Only
faith without works to be sufficient to salvation. Aug. de fide^ and oper.
cap ^.
Spado (inquiunt) ille quem Philippus baptizauit, nihil plus dixit, quam, Credo
Filium Dei esse lesum Christum, and in hac professione continuo baptizatus est:
The Eunuch (say they) whom Philip baptized, said nothing but this, I believe
that Jesus Christ is the Son of God, and by and by he was baptized upon this
confession. What then (says S. Augustine^) Number igitur placet* etc. Will you
therefore that men coming to baptism shall answer nothing else, and presently
be baptized? Shall they profess nothing of the holy Ghost, of remission of
^^nes? etc. yes, no doubt Philip taught him more then that: for he preached
Christ to him, which Aust^n shows there comprehended a great deal more then
the Eu^uches confession expresses. And beginning at that place of Esaias, he
could not but preach much of Christ's sufferings, yea and apply them to the
E^^uch, Efai 53 4.
as the Prophet does to us; He has borne our infir^ities, he has carried our
sorrows, he was wounded for our ^ransgressions, etc. But now, Siautem
Script^ra tacuict, atque intelligend^ admisit cae^^ra quae cum illo Spadon^
baptizando Philippus egit, etc. The words are many: the sum is, that both
Philip and the Eunuch did more, and said more, then the Scripture has
expressed: and that the scripture has omitted many things therein, breuitatis
gratia: and therefore that is no good argument to prove that the Eunuch made
none other profession, because there is no more recorded. The Scriptures are
delighted Laconica breuitate. How shortly are the Sermons of Io^ah 3. 4.
Jonah, of Matthew. 3. 2.
John the Baptist, yea of Mark. 1. (...).
Christ himself reported? setting down as it were letters for words, and
words for sentences: yea one sentence for the effect of a long Oration. This is
manifest that S. Augustine does else where ascribe to the Eunuch, fidem in
Christum: Aug h^n. 23. cap. 11. (...). 10.
Admonitus Philippus, accessit ad currum, exposuit lectionem, instru^it fidem,
e^^ngelizauit Christum: Credidit Eu^uchus in Chr^stium, and aijt, Ecce aqu^,
etc. Philip being admonished of the Angel, ^anne to the chariot, expounded
that which he read, taught the faith, preached Christ, the Eunuch believed in
Christ, and said, L^e, here is water, etc. Now it has been showed before, that
Creder^ in Christum, to believe in Christ, is a great deal more, then to
profess him to be the Son of God. Therefore that example carries no weight
of argument.

I am putting now my ship into the haven: only this I must add, that after
this confirmation of the truth, and confutation of falsehood; this doctrine of
faith apprehending and applying the mercy of God, would be seriously and
effectually driven home by Exhortation to the hearts and consciences of the
hearers. The Papists would be adjured by the high and saving name of the Lord
Jesus, no longer to feed themselves and the people, with the courser morsels
of faith alone, neglecting that which is the flower and marrowe of faith; and
which while they neglect, they omit the very life and substance of the whole
Gospel. Our Historians would be exhorted, not to deceive themselves with a
broader, nigher, and easier way to heaven, then God himself has chalked out;
least they fall into that which leads to destruction. And lastly, all we
present should be carefully admonished, to use all holy means by which this
saving and justifying faith, might be kindled, increased, and continued in our
hearts. Therefore had we need diligently and conscionably to read the
Scriptures, to hear the word preached, to frequent the Sacraments. yea, we had
need to pray much to God, to meditate much with our selves, to confer much
with others, for the strengthening of our consciences in the same. But this
place being by use almost wholly appropriated unto Doctrine, hardly admits
any length of Exhortation. This therefore only I will add: I preach these
things to you, Ph^l. 3. 12.
not as if I had already attained to them, or were already perfect: my self
well see and know my weakness therein. But I say on still with the Apostle, I
follow, if that I may comprehend that, for whose sake also I am comprehended
of Christ Jesus. Which that I may attain unto, I desire all that either heard
my Sermon, or ^ead this discourse, to help me with their prayers. And that
you may apprehend the like, my prayers shall be for you all to God the father
in the mediation of Jesus Christ. Amen.

Bernard. sermon. 61 in Cantica. Meritum meum, miseratio Domini.
M. M.

FINIS.

