TWO TREATISES CONCERNING REGENERATION, 1. Of Repentance, 2. Of the Diet of the
Soul,
Showing,

The one, how it ought to be sought after, and may be attained unto.

The other, how it being gotten, i^ to be preserved and continued.

Math. 7.7. Knock and it shall be opened.

LONDON. Printed by Thomas Creed, for Robert Dexter, and Raph Iackson. 1597.

The occasion and argument of of the Treatise following.
IT is a certain truth, confirmed by experience, and also by the word of God
(the which are two (being both one in effect) so sure witnesses that no
exception can be taken against either of the^) that the number of true
believers is very small (especially in this last and most corrupt age of the
world, wherein as we have it foretold in Scripture, faith is not to be found,
but iniquity does abound) and that most of those, who profess themselves to be
Christians, deceive both themselves with a false conceit, and also others with
an hypocritical show of religion, when as in truth they know not what it
means. For many are so far from having religion in their hearts, that they
are altogether ignorant of the doctrine of regeneration, wherein the substance
of religion does consist, and without the which it is as impossible to attain
to eternal salvation, as it is for the clear sunshine, and palpable
darkness to be together in the same place. For although according to the rule
of Christian love, ^ee judge the best of the least appearance of grace, taking
for pure gold whatsoever does glister, yet most men are so estranged from God,
having no sense of religion in t^eir minds, nor any savor of it in their
words and deeds, being in their whole behavior so far from the practice of
godliness, making no conscience of any duty belonging either to God or man,
that we may be bold (having sufficient warrant from the word of God) to think
and say of them, that they are carnal and unregenerate men, not as yet called
to the knowledge and obedience of the truth, howsoever they may be, according
to Gods secret counsel in the number of his elect.

Thus men live, and thus they die in the most fearful state of eternal
death: the which thing being duly weighed, would work grief even in the
hardest heart, and stir it up to a pitiful desire of amending it. For if we
be justly moved to pity by beholding the moment any miseries of men, and the
distressed state of t^eir bodies being consumed with sores and sickness, and
even at deaths door, how much more ought we to be grieved for the eternal
misery of their souls, not dying, but being already clean dead in sin, and
yet living in that state which leads to unspeakable torment, and the
hot-burning furnace of the wrath of God? But helpless pity encreas^th the
evil, communicating it to those who before were free from it: and therefore
we are not here to rest, but rather to put to our helping hands, and so both
with hand and heart to endeavor the releeuing of this woeful and wretched
estate. But it there any help for this spiritual misery in the hands of any
man? can men work this regeneration in themselves, or in others, and so
change a carnal and sinful man into a holy and new creature? No surely:
regeneration is the proper work of the omnipo^ent God, impossible to be
brought to pass by man, angel, or any creature: for although many creatures
have life in them selves, yet none can give natural, much less spiritual
life to another. So then belike, there is not any duty looked for at man's
hands in this behalf, but only that he pity and bewail his o^ne, and other
men's desperate estate: and the blame of men's sinfulness and damnation, is not
to be laid on men, ^ho cannot help though they would, but on God, who keeping
this faculty of regenerating men in his o^ne hands, neither him self helps
man, neither yet makes it possible for man to help him self. This may seem
to follow of the aforesaid ground, but it is not in any case to be admitted:
for God does both himself rene^ men by his spirit to eternal life and also
has appointed the meaanes by the which man is to work his own salvation. The
which if he will not try and use, who can either deny or doubt, but that the
blame is in him self, and not in God: the which if he using cannot prevail,
yet the fault is in his own corrupt nature, the which is so dead in sin,
that it cannot be recovered, no not by good and sufficient means. For as
touching the corruption of nature, the which, we confess makes it impossible
for a man to renew himfelf, God is not in any wise to be thought the author of
it: for he created man in perfect holiness, but man did carelessly and wilfully
loose that holiness, which God gave unto him. But as for the neglect and
contempt of the means, which God has appointed for the recovering of holiness,
man can not but take that wholly to himself, who although he cannot renew
himself though he would, yet if he will he may use the means appointed for that
purpose, as will more plainly appear in the particulars. But man, who (for ye
most part) is careless of eternal salvation, yea altogether unwilling to take
that pains in seeking it, which is required of all those, who desire to find
it, will allege in defense of this his wilful contempt of Gods word, that it
were folly for him to seek regeneration, the which it is not in his power to
effect. Whereunto we answer, that no man ought to despair of the truth,
goodness, mercy or power of God, and make his sinfulness the greater, and
his damnation the more just and grievous: but rather do his endeavor in the
careful and continual use of the means, as God has commanded, and so leave
both the success of his labor, and ^is own salvation, to the will and good
pleasure of God. The which that we may do, it is needful that we kno^ and
consider, the means whereby regeneration may be attained unto, or at the least
ought to be sought after.

It is not gold or silver, (although Simon Magus supposed, that spiritual
graces might be bought with money, as worldly commodities are) that can
purchase regeneration, not favor, friendship, or any desert of holiness, but
only the using of the means which God has appointed.

The means of Regeneration, is the way leading unto it, called in Scripture
Repentance, in the Greek tongue Metanoia, that is, an after mind, or a right
mind after a wrong mind: for as in other matters it comes daily to pass,
that men being in process of time brought by experience to see their own
errors wherein they have done amiss, are displeased with themselves for so
doing, with that they had done otherwise, and so are said to repent of this or
that action: so a carnal man ^auing all ^is life time lived in vain and
sinful pleasures, altogether careless of the service of God, and of his own
salvation, at length sees the vanity of his life past, is grieved for it, and
wishes (although too late) that he had taken an other course. Yea, together
with his mind he changes ^is ^ill, affections, and his whole life, utterly
renouncing and disclaiming all those vices and sins, wherein before he
delighted and lived, and laboring to frame and inure him self to a virtuous
and christian disposition of mind and life. This state we have plainly set
do^ne unto us, in the parable of that prodigal young man, who having wasted
his money, time and strength in riot, comes at length to his right wits, and
to a sober kind of life.

This is that state of man, which is betwixt senseless security, or open
profaneness, wherein he seldom or never thinks of God (whom perhaps he
thinks neither to exist in him self, nor to work any way in the world): or
of his own salvation, he never dreaming of any other world, then this which
he does presently enjoy, and wherein he places his whole happiness. In this
first estate (which may truly be called Atheism) man is most wretched as in
all other respects, so chiefly, in that he accounting him self happy (as all
carnal men do who are free from outward crosses) is for the present without
any kno^ledge, desire, hope, or likelihood of any better estate. In the second
estate also (the which in this Treatise we call the state of Repentance) man
is as yet not happy but miserable: yet happy in this one respect, for that he
knowing himself to be wretched, does earnestly desire, carefully endeavor, and
may well hope to become happy. But in the third estate, to wit, in
regeneration, he knows him self to be both happy and holy, and laboreth for
the perfection of it, and by virtue of that holiness which he has received
from God, to overcome that sinfulness which he has by nature. The second
state, is the way leading from the first to the third, from sin to holiness,
from death to life, the conversion of a sinner, not to God (for he is as yet as
far from him, as hell, or rather as the earth is from Heaven) but only
toward God, and the preparation for grace and regeneration, commanded unto
us by the name of Repentance. Thus the ministry of John was the ministry of
Repentance, being appointed by God, not so much to teach Christ and the
doctrine of the Gospel, or to work faith, as by preaching the doctrine of the
Law, to bring men to a sight and sense of sin, that so they might be stirred
up to Christ the pardoner of sin. Thus he defines his office and
ministry, Math. 3.3. The voice of a Crier in the wilderness, prepare the way
of the Lord, and make his paths straight. And this was the sum of all his
Sermons, Repent, for the kingdom of Heaven is at hand. Likewise, in other
places of Scripture, the word Repentance is thus taken: alt^ough sometimes put
for Regeneration or sanctification it self, yet usually distinguished from it,
as being but a preparatiue unto it. As Math. 21.32. You did not repent to
believe. Or, that so you might have believed: and Act. 2.38. Repent and be
baptized for remission of sin, and ye shall receive the gift of the holy
Ghost, and Act. 8.22. Peter says to Simon Magus, Repent, and pray to God, if
perhaps the thought of thy heart may be forgiven thee. And thus we take it in
this Treatise for the natural conversion of a man to God, wrought in a man
unregenerate, (as it seems Nicodemus was, John 3.4. although he did seek
salvation) yet being the means of regeneration.

This way or this ladder, whereby we are to clime up to regeneration, has
four steps, for so we will make a homely and familiar division of it, that it
being set down in many several parts, may the more easily be understood and
known. The first step which is to be made by this carnal man now repenting, is
to get the true knowledge of his o^ne estate, to wit, how sinful and wretched
he is in him self by nature, and at t^is present. The second step is
humiliation or contrition, wrought in him by the due consideration of his own
estate. The third, is a full purpose or resolution of mind to seek for grace
and regeneration. The fourth and last part, is the diligent using of the means
appointed by God, for the obtaining of grace: the which means are three in
number. The first is amendment of life: the second, the hearing of Gods word:
the third is prayer, or invocation of the name of God.

Read in the former Treatise.
Page 80. line. 17. praise for practice. page. 64.3. done but his duty. pa.
61. lin. 24. faints, for faintly* page ^3. lin. 24. rejected, for received.
pa. 43. lin. 8. great, for grace. page 40. lin. 5. words for works. page 31.
lin. 14. of absolute, for absolute. page 26. lin. ^0. humbled for humble. Page
86. Line. 10. liker for better, page. 88. lin. 12. tempted to, for tempted by.
page. 90.26. sinfulness for sinful life. page 94.9. in al^ the ages. page
104.20. required, for requi^ed.

Read in the latter Treatise, page ^2. lin. 23. thus they die. pa. 88. lin. 1^.
lying idle, pa. 65. lin. 18. should not, pa. 110. lin. 7. other men's, page 112
lin. 27. is not, pa. 113. lin. ^. in a dark, 116.1. blessing like.

OF THE FIRST part of Repentance, called Repentance, by the name of the whole.
CHAP. 1.
Sect. 1.
THe first thing to be done in Repentance is this, that the carnal man labor
to have the true knowledge of his own estate, the which (as it is in all other
things) neither could be continued, if it were good, nor can be amended, being
now amiss, unless it be fully and thoroughly known. And therefore we must
endeavor in the first place to bring this our Nicodemus to know himself, to
wit, how he stands in respect of God and his favor, whereon his good estate
does wholly depend. For as the good estate of a subject or servant consists in
this, that he living in the favor and good liking of his king, or master,
procured by his loial obedience and faithful service, is free from al evils and
injuries, and enioieth all things either needful, or pleasant: so the state of
man being pure from sin, is good and happy: otherwise, if by sinning, and
rebelling against god, he incur his displeasure, most wretched and miserable.
But what? does not man know himself? how ca^ we suppose yt he who knows all
things, is ignorant of his own estate, especially seeing this knowledge is most
proper and pertinent unto him, For, none knows the things of man, but the
spirit of man which is in him. Surely, as the eye of the body, although it
behold all other things, yet it can not see either it self, or some other
parts of the body, even those which are nearest unto it: so it fares with
the mind of man, the eye of the soul, it raungeth over the whole world,
above the highest heavens, and beneath the bottom of the earth, and yet it is
a stranger at home, most ignorant of the own estate, as the manifold doubts,
controversies, and co^tentions, which have from time to time troubled the
heads, schools, and books, not only of Philosophers, but also of learned
Divines, about the original creation, substance, infusion, infection or
corruption, and separation of the soul, do plainly testify. Yea, in the
soul of man, nothing is so unknown to man himself, as that which both of it
self, and to all others is most apparent, and conspicuous, as are the spots in
a man's face, to wit, the wants, infirmities, and enormities of it. This comes
to pass; by reason of that self love* engraven by nature in man, and in all
other things, by the which it comes to pass, that as he is better affected
toward himself, the^ to any other thing: so, (the judgment following
affection) he thinks better of himself then he ought to do, being unwilling
to hear, and unable to conceive any thing, tending to the disgrace of
himself, especially of his soul, wherein his excellency does consist. And
therefore, as Philosophers, knowing that men are altogether ignorant of their
own faults and vices, set this preceptand Nosce seipsum, in the beginning of
their moral institutions: so the first lesson, which a divine is to teach, and
a Christian to learn is this, know, and acknowledge the sinfulness of thy
soul, whereof, of thy self thou art altogether ignorant. And surely so it is:
for although the soul of man be so wholly infected with the leprosy of sin,
that there is no clean part or piece from the top to the toe of it, yet it
seems to it self most pure, beautiful and glorious, as by the received
opinions of perfect inhere^t righteousness, justification by works, merit, of
pure naturals and free will, does plainly appear. Revel. 3.17. Thou say I
am rich, and am enriched, (the one by nature, the other by freewil and
industry) and have need of nothing, and know not that thou art wretched,
miserable, poor, blind and naked. These are the opinions, and conceits which
al me^ have of themselves, thinking far better of themselves in every respect
the^ they should do: yea, the errors before named, as they are natural to man,
so they have place commonly in most, if not generally in all carnal men, who,
howsoever perhaps for company and fashions sake they make profession of the
contrary truth, yet in their minds they hold the purity of man's nature,
thinking it no more corrupt, then it was created by god, and then it was in
Adam, during the time of his innoce^cie: yea, that it is impossible to show how
possibly, either his nature should be corrupted, or his corruption derived to
his posterity. Yea, thinking it to be the most excellent nature, or little
inferior or different from it: whereof it comes that they do so usually
resemble the divine nature unto it: honoring, fearing, worshipping, trusting
and inuocating it as god, yea, ascribing to it what soever is glorious in god,
making saints of sinful men, and gods of saints, whereas in truth it is not only
not most excellent, but even very base and mean: not only corrupt in
sinfulness, but even filthy and loathsome, not weak or sick, but dead and
rotten, not happy, but of all natures (if we except the the devil and his
angels) the most wretched and woeful. Likewise for outward actio^, he thinks
yt those works which have any show of goodness, although they be never so
imperfit, corrupt and hipocriticall, are meritorious before god, yea, to be a
sufficient price of eternal salvation, both for himself, and also for others.
For mean and ordinary sins, he thinks them venial, and light offenses, not
to be accounted, or avoided: his good meaning is as good as perfect holiness,
his own righteousness perfect and absolute: yea, this blindness and ignorance of
their own estate appears, even in the natural gifts of men, who usually judge
themselves of all other the wittiest, most wise, and most worthy of honor,
although there be no such cause: yea, although they be most simple, and
unlearned, yet they are as stiffly addicted to their own opinions and fashions,
as they who have the surest ground for their actions, and course of life. In
these and other like respects, our natural blindness is to be considered, and
so to be applied to our spiritual estates, in respect whereof, this blindness
is greatest and most hurtful.

Sect. 2,
But how shall we bring the natural man to see his own sinfulnes? Surely,
(...) by setting before his eyes the glass of the moral law, wherein if he
will open his eyes (for of himself by nature he has some knowledge of good and
evil remaining in his mind) he may see himself to be a most ugly and filthy
leaper, defiled in nature, soul and body, in mind, will and affections, in
word, deed, and in all his actions, with all manner of sin. The which exercise
of comparing the purity of the law of god, to wit, the obedience commanded in
it, with the sinfulness of their own souls, and the sins of their lives, we
do earnestly commend unto all those who desire to walk aright in this way of
repentance, leading to regeneration, and salvation. And not only to consider
the bare words of the ten commandments, the whch being of set purpose made
short and co^pendious, for memories sake, do only mention the principal
duties, and forbid gross and capital sins: but also to learn the meaning of
them, by reading, marking, and remembering those manifold expositions which are
made of the said commandments, both by Christ himself, the head doctor of
the Church. Matthew. 6. and also by his Ministers, in their wrytings, according
to the measure of grace received from him. In the which thou (who soever thou
art, that take in hand this happy work of Repentance) shall see the great
variety and multitude of thy sins, thy original sin (which is the total
corruption of thy nature, prone to all evil, and abhorring from all goodness)
and thy actual sins, thy inward sins, to wit, the wicked, unjust, and
filthy motions of thy mind, will, and affections: and thy outward sins, to
wit, thy vain, foolish, and filthy talk, thy lewd behavior, dishonorable
to God, and injurious to thy brethren, thy sins of ignorance, and thy wilful
and rebellious sins committed with a high hand and obstinate purpose, and a
shameless face against God and man. The sins of thy youth, and the sins of thy
ripe age, thy small sins (although the least may be counted great, in that it
brings with it the endless wrath of God) and thy heinous and horrible sins,
as are atheism, idolatry, perjury* murder, incest, and adultery: all these
and many other sorts of sins, thou shall find in every one of the ten
co^maundemts, and in every part of thy body and soul, if it please thee to
take the pains (for it will be a painful and grievous piece of work, painful
indeed for the present, but joyful in the end) to ransacke the secret
corners of thy sinful soul, and to search even to the bottom the festered
sores thereof: yea, to lay open before God and thy own conscience the story,
chronicle, and day book of thy life past, by calling to mind the course of
life which thou have followed, and to examine it without flattery or
partiality, by the straight line of the law and word of God. In the which
examination there must great care be had, that we be not blinded by any
means, and so made corrupt judges, as namely by an opinion and conceit of our
own good parts, of nature, our virtues gotten by good education and industry,
our good works which we have done to God, and to our brethren, how many ways,
and with how great charges we have maintained learning, set forward religion,
served God, and relieved the poor. These conceits, if they run in our
heads, they will blind our eyes, and so ouershadow all our sins, that we
shall judge and pronounce our selves not sinful, but holy, just, and innocent.
And then especially this comes to pass, when as we compare our selves with
those who are more sinful, and in some respect notoriously wicked: then the
opinion of our own holiness, which before was doubtful, is put out of all
controversy, and we not only exempted from the rank and state of sinful
men, but even canonized Saints in our own conceits. This delusion of the
devil and vanity of our minds, we have notably painted out unto us in the
example of the Pharisee Luke. 18.11. The Pharisee stood and prayed thus: O God
I thank thee, that I am not as other men are, extortioners, unjust,
adulterers, or as this Publican. There is the second delusion, now follows
the first, of good works: I fast twice in the week, I give tithe of all that
I possess. But this mischievous error, by the which many men's repentance is
nipt in the head and broken off in the beginning, must be removed, by knowing
and considering, that other men's sins will condemn themselves, but cannot
justify us, that in sinfulnes we are as far and further beyond others, then we
are short of them, and that our good deeds though never so many and glorious,
coming from the corrupt fountain of an irrepentant and unbelieving heart, are
accounted sins before God, as the scripture teaches us, Romans 14.23. yea, as
defiled and filthy clouts, loathsome and abominable in his sight. And
further, that they coming (as our own consciences knowfull well, and as
others have sufficient ground to suspect) not from any manner of love, either
to God or man, but from self-love, pride, and vain glory, we intending and
desiring nothing but only to purchase unto our selves credit and commendation
in the world, deserve not to be commended, but to be abhorred even of men.

This fight of sin consists in knowing two things. First our selves to be so
sinful as we are indeed, secondly, that in regard of our sin we are
unrighteous in the sight of God. Man's sinfulnes is this, that whereas he ought
by the law of God to be holy and pure in nature, soul and body, he is in
all these respects wholly corrupted and defiled with sin. His natural sinfulnes
consists in this, that he is of himself by nature, without any outward
tentation, allurement, or persuasion, inclined to evil, and altogether unable
to do good. The inward sinfulness of the soul is, in that all the secret
motions of it, which should be only toward God, and the doing of that which is
agreeable to his law, are altogether from Godward, and toward sin and
disobedience. These (howsoever some think and teach them to be no sins) yet
God does account otherwise of them, and so must this our repentant do. For why?
as god is a spirit, so he will be worshipped and served not only outwardly in
bodily actions, but also inwardly in the spirit and soul: and abhors the
secret filthiness of the soul, as much as the outward and apparent
filthiness of the body, the one being as apparent and manifest to him as the
other. Thus we must esteem the corrupt thoughts, lusts and concupiscences of
the soul as sins, that so we may see and acknowledge the multitude of our sins
to be greater the^ the hairs of our heads. And lastly, for our outward
actions, yt we be not deceived with any opinion of our good works the
perfitnesse, number, excellency, and merit of them, but rather think and
know that as sauory water cannot come from a stinking puddle, or sweet fruit
from a sower root, no more can any one good work come from an unregenerate
man, from a corrupt and sinful soul, who although he give his body to the
fire for the profession and maintenance of the truth, and all his goods to the
poor, in a tender compassion of their misery, yet he being destitute of
faith, love, and the rest of the parts of regeneration, does not by these
works please God, or fulfill his law. For that, where they are few and
seldom performed, they should be continual, where they should be done only
for Gods glory, they are done only in vain glory, and in desire of the
applause of men, or which is worse, in a presumpteous opinion of meriting
salvation at the hands of God, if not in hypocrisy or in some evil and wicked
intent. How much less then can we think that our unlawful actions forbidden
and condemned by the law and word of God, are any way venial or justifiable.
The other part of the sight of sin, is to know, that by it we are made unjust
and unrighteous, not only by a sinful and wicked life, but even by one
sinful action: not only by great and grievous crimes, but even by the least
offenses which we commit: not only by outward sinful actions, but even by the
most secret motions of our corrupt mind and will: not only by these actual
sins, but even by our natural inclination and pronenesse to sin, which the
youngest infant has, and brings out of his mothers womb. For he that
breaks any one of the commandments by any means, breaks the whole law,
and is as guilty of sin, as he who breaks all the commandments. So that, to
conclude this point, this our Nicodemus, desiring to repent, and so to be
sanctified and saved, must in the first place learn what sin is, how many
kinds, differences, and degrees are of it, yea, all the doctrine belonging to
this head, and secondly so apply it to himself and his own estate, as that
he make it as a glass wherein to see and know himself to be sinful.

Sect. 3.
Thus we having brought this repentant to the sight of his sin, which is the
first part of the knowledge of his estate, we are in the next place to bring
him to the sense of sin, which is the second part of it. By the sense of
sin, we mean the knowledge of that punishment, which is due unto him for
his sin: For most men make so little account of sin, that although they know
in their own consciences, and will not stick to confess to others,
themselves to be both sinful by nature, and sinners in the whole course of
their lives: yet their sins are not a heavy burden or a clog unto their
consciences, not as sharp pricks wounding and galling their hearts, but as
small and light matters whereof they have no sense or feeling: they think that
as they themselves, so also God himself makes small reckoning of it, and
though he have commanded men to live in obedience to his law, and to abstain
from committing of sin, yet he is not by the committing of it provoked to
anger, or to inflict any punishment upon the offendant, as plainly appears
by that great patience which he uses toward men, who although generally they
go on in all manner of disobedience and wilful breaking of his commandments,
adding one grievous sin to another, and open contempt of him, and of hi^ word
to al, yet they escape unpunished, and live as merrily in the world as the
holiest man does, who dare not suffer an evil thought to enter into his mind.
Thus (that we may answer this profane and pernicious error with the words of
the apostle, Romans 2.2) men contemn and abuse the patience and long suffering of
God and are by it kept back from repentance, the which they should know and
think to lead them to repentance, in that God does not confound them in their
sins, as he might justly do, but suffering them to live, gives time of
repenting: yet they, according to the obstinacy and hardness of their hearts,
which cannot, or rather which will not rep^nt heap up to themselves wrath
against the day of wrath, and the declaration of the just judgment of God.
Thus God speaks to the wicked person, Psa. 50.21. These sins thou have
committed, and I have held my peace, that is: I did not punish thee as thy sins
did deserve, whereupon thou thoughtest that I was like unto thee, that is, that
I liked and approved sin, and was as little offended with it as thou thy
self: But I will reprove and punish thee for thy sin, and so I will take
this error out of thy mind. For so we are to interpret this patience of GOD,
esteeming impunitie to be the greatest punishment of all other, and that as
the water is deepest, where it is the stillest: so where God is most silent in
threatening, and patient in sparing, there he is most inflamed with anger, and
purpose of revenge: and lastly, that the fewer judgments are poured forth upon
the wicked in this life, the mo are reserved in store for them in the life to
come. And yet the anger of God, and the punishments of sin, are not so deferred
to the world to come, but that they are even in this life felt of the wicked,
and may be acknowledged by all men. For beside spiritual plagues, as
blindness of mind, hardness of heart, impenitencie, the adding of one heinous
sin unto another, a reprobate sense, and a desperate outrage in sin (the which
howsoever they be lightly esteemed of, yea, not at all perceived by carnal
eyes, yet they are of all others most fearful, and grievous) the curses of
God do evidently fall and seize upon the bodies, goods, upon the wives,
children, and friends, upon the name, memory, and posterity of wicked and
ungodly men, as they are at large rehearsed, and most fearfully threatened,
Deuter. 28. He shall be curs^d in the town, and in the field, in his basket,
and in his dough, in the fruit both of his body, and of his land, in his kine,
and in his fl^cks of sheep, in his going out, and in his coming in. And, (for
brevity sake, referring the reader to the place it self) the heavy hand of
God shall be upon all his actions, endeavors, and enterprises, upon all things
whatsoever do any way belong unto him: yea, all the creatures both small and
great, weak and strong, good and evil, in heaven and on the earth, shall
band themselves together in huge armies against him for his confusion, as
executioners of the wrath of God due unto him for his sin. Yea, whilst they
are deferred, the expectation of them is more fearful (if more may be) then
the suffering of them is grievous, and if (the conscience being seared and
benumbed) there be no fear, that state is of all other desperate and
fearful.

This part of repentance (as also all the rest) is usually wanting in carnal
men, who pass on their day in mirth, pleasure, and security, and so blessing
themselves in their prosperous estate, put far from themselves the evil day:
yet sometimes it may be found in them, upon occasion either of some heinous
sin committed, or some great cross or misery sustained. For the first,
less sins do not trouble men's consciences, or work in them these agonies of
horror and desperation: for men seeing them to be committed daily, both by the^
selves, and also by others, without any punishment, make no reckoning of them.
But as for heinous and extraordinary sins, as murder, incest, adultery,
oppression, and such others, which all men condemn, and few commit, these are
not so easily swalowed over, but do often leave behind them a prick in the
conscience, and fear of punishment. But especially this comes to pass, when
as together with any such sin, some outward misery does concur, the which will
easily put a man in mind of his sin, and in fear of further punishment:
hereof it comes that this sense of Gods wrath due to sin, is oftnest seen
in the time of some dangerous sickness threatening death, in the which many
are brought to see and acknowledge, both their sin, and the desert of it, who
as long as they enjoyed their health, lived in senseless security, and
Atheism. This use we are to make of all those miseries and euilles which
befall us, gathering by the smart of them, what the anger of God due unto sin
is, which brings with it, not that only, but all other plagues and torments.
And ghessing by that sorrow, and those evils and injuries, which we sustain
at the hands of men, how fearful a thing it is to fall into the hands of
God, and by that pain of body, and grief of mind, wherewith we are
afflicted for a short time, what it is to live for ever in pain and grief.

Sect. 4.
THe last thing, which this repentant is to learn, and know, as touching his
own estate, is this, how unable he is of himself, or by any means which
he can use, to free himself, either from his sin, or from the anger of GOD
due unto it For there is no condition so miserable, but that the hope of
amending it (if there be any) will assuage the pain and grief of it. But in
this case, there is no hope, and therefore no comfort left to man, to whom it
is altogether impossible, if he respect himself, or any thing that any
creature can do in his behalf, either to shake off his natural sinfulness,
or to escape the punishment of eternal death belonging unto it. For the former
of these two, a carnal man may foster in his mind what conceytes he will of
his own excellency and natural strength, supposing himself to be, although
perhaps for the present, both outwardly wicked, and inwardly sinful, outwardly
filthy, and inwardly unclean, yet able at his own pleasure to purge himself
both from the natural corruption and from the outward act of sin: but the
truth of Gods word teaches the contrary, to wit, that sin being by the fall
of Adam made natural to man, cleaves unto him as unseparably, as the skin
does to his body, and as the spots to the skin of the leopard, which having
their original in the bones, marrow and most secret parts, cannot by any force
or devise be gotten out. He may indeed by his natural strength repress the
rage of it: he may prune and loppe it, cutting off the superfluous boughs and
branches of it, yet the root, yea, the whole body of it will remain
immovable in the secret parts of his soul, and send forth plentiful fruit in
all the parts and members of his body at one time or other, as occasion is
offered, as has been declared more at large else where. Likewise, for the
punishment due unto sin, that can no way be avoided, not by hiding our
selves in some secret place from God, for whether shall we go from his
presence who is every where? he is in heaven, and in hell, in the town, and in
the desert, he sees as well at midnight, as at noon day. Psa. 139. If we say
to the hugest mountains, fall upon us, and cover us from the presence of him
that sits on the throne, and from the wrath of the Lamb. Reave. 6.16. yet
the eyes and hands of God will pierce through the highest hills and the hardest
rocks, for they laid the foundations of them. But we hope perhaps to escape
punishment, yea, though we cannot eschew his presence, and that by means of
the great mercy and indulgencie of God, who delights not in the misery,
anguish, and confusion of men, but in their salvation and happy estate, and
therefore will no doubt be easily entreated by the humble suit and pitiful
moan of men, to pardon their sins, and if not to bestow upon them the
crown of eternal glory, they having not deserved it, yet to remitte the
punishment due unto their sins. Thus do many men imagine of God, and thus
they imagine him not to be God, who as he is merciful, so also he is just:
yea, he is as just as he is merciful, being in both respects infinite, and
therefore equal. And therefore it is no less impossible that GGD should
remitte the punishment due unto sin, then that he should do that which is
contrary to his own nature. If it be here asked, how then does God show
mercy on the elect: we answer, that he does it not by remitting the punishment
of their sin, but by taking it upon himself, even by punishing their sin in
his own person: and therefore there is no hope of impunitie left for the
carnal man, but a fearful expectation of wrath, the which although perhaps it
be in part deferred for a time, yet assuredly the day of judgment, and of
vengeance will come at length. Thus we have brought this unregenerate man to
the sight or true knowledge of himself, and of his own estate, to wit, the
knowledge first of his sinfulness: secondly, of the punishment due unto his
sin: and thirdly, of his impotencie, or inabilitie, of mending this his evil
estate. This is the first part of Repentance, and may fitly be called by the
name of the whole, to wit, Repenting, forethinking, or rather after thinking,
and an after mind. For, in stead of that fond conceate, which he had of his
own purity, righteousness, and happiness, he now sees himself to be
sinful, guilty of eternal death, and subject to all manner of plagues,
miseries, and curses, both in this life, and for ever in the life to come. So
that now he is in the same case with the Jews, Act. 2.37. who being pricked in
their consciences by a sight and sense of sin: asked Peter what they should
do: the answer follows in the next verse, Amend your lives, and be
baptized for the remission of sin, and ye shall receive the holy Ghost.

CHAP. II. Of the second part of Repentance, called Humiliation.
THe second lesson, which a penitent person is to learn and practice, is
Humiliation, the which will even of it self follow the former: for that the
affections following the temperature of the mind, it can not be, but that as
the conceate of holiness, and happiness, does puff up a man in pride,
presumption, joy, and confidence: so the sight of his sinful and wretched
estate, should cast him down in shame, sorrow, and fear: of the which three
the first respects sin it self, the other two ye punishment of it. The
first, the time past: the second, the time present: the third, the time to
come. The first arises of the due consideration of the filthy and loathsome
nature of sin: for as Adam by coming out of the state of holiness, into the
state of sin had his eyes opened to see the filthiness of sin. and his own
nakedness, whereupon he being ashamed, desired to hide and cover himself: so a
carnal man coming out of the state of senseless security, wherein he
neither knows nor considers what sin is, into this state of repentance,
wherein he conceiueth of sin, as it is in deed, judges himself in regard
of it, the most abject man of all other, unworthy of their company, or to come
in their sight: and therefore he declineth it, wherein this shame does consist.
Yea, when as this humiliation is vehement, he judges himself the most vile
creature on the earth, the most grievous sinner that ever lived, although there
be no such cause, he having lived as orderly, and honestly, as usually men do.
For now he has his eyes fully bent upon his own sins, he has fresh
remembrance of them, and of all the circumstances aggravating the heinousness
of them, and knows the particulars of them, the which he does not in other
men's sins. This shame is not so proper and necessary a part of humiliation,
as are the other affections of sorrow and fear, for that it has place in
those only, who before their repentance were given to great and notorious
sins, such as are not usually found in the lives of men, and therefore are
reproved and condemned by all: as for ordinary sins, which may be daily
seen in men, and from the which few are free, they do not work this shame:
for men are ashamed in regard of them only, who are less sinful, and
therefore more excellent then themselves: yea, they are ashamed more in respect
of men, then of God, because the presence of men is sensible, whereas they
ought to be so much the more ashamed in respect of God, and of his holy angels,
as they are more excellent, pure, and more abhorring the filthiness of sin,
then any man is or can be: as we know that Adam and Eua were ashamed of their
nakedness, (or rather of their sin, which made their nakedness shameful,
which of it self was glorious) when as there were not any other men to see it.
And therefore, howsoever the Atheism of men be so great, that they are not
persuaded, and therefore not ashamed of the presence of God, yet all they who
have any dealing with God, or do any way seek unto him, must be more ashamed
of their sins in respect of god then men: and yet to nourish this shamefastnes
in regard of their brethren, as being good and profitable, for the more that
they are humble toward men, the greater will their humiliation be in respect of
God.

The second part of inward humiliation is sorrow, which is a grievous sense of
some present evil, as fear is of some evil to come: both which affections
cannot but be great and vehement in this repentant, for that his eyes being now
at length opened, he sees and feels himself to be in a most miserable
estate, to be for the present in slavery to sin and Satan, altogether
destitute of grace and of all the means of attaining it, beside many temporal
crosses wherewith he is afflicted, and for the time to come in the very gnawes
of the devil, and in the unquenchable furnace of the wrath of God.

It is not needful that we should insiste in declaring how great and just
cause he has of sorrow and fear: yea, rather it is not possible for us to
declare it in any measure. If we suppose a man living in health, wealth, and
all manner of pleasure, to have this of a sudden made known unto him, that he
is condemned of treason committed against his Prince and country, and that
therefore he is forthwith to be deprived of life, and al those pleasures which
he does enjoy, there being no hope of pardon which can not possibly be procured
by himself or any other, it depending wholly in the gracious favor and free
inclination of the prince, who uses to be greatly inflamed with anger against
al such offenders, and not to spare one of a thousand of them: can we fully
conceive in mind or express in word, the greatness of his grief, sorrow, and
fear? How much more grievous and fearful a thing shall we then think it,
to incur the displeasure of God, the loss of eternal joy and happiness,
together with those endless pains, which are prepared for the wicked. And
therefore when as we see men labor and groan under this burden of their
sins and the anger of GOD, we are not (as usually men do who have no sense
of these things) to judge them as men subject to foolish and melancholy
passions, but rather to think and confess that there is good cause why they
should be thus affected. Yea, this repentant is to give himself to the daily
and serious consideration of these things, that so this humiliation which is of
great use, and very needful in regard of his salvation, may be procured.
For, as it is often needful for the preservation of the bodily life, that the
patient be by detraction of blood brought to a swowne, and so even to deaths
door, so it is needful for the procuring of this spiritual life of the
soul, that the repentant be by sorrow and fear cast down, eue^ to the gates
of hell, as one forlorn, and being in a most wretched estate. Thus the apostle
writes 2. Cor. 7.8. I do not repent me that I made you sorrowful by an
Epistle, yea, I am glad, not that ye were sorry, but that ye sorowed to
repentance, not to be repented of: for worldly sorrow brings death. But as
this humiliation is carefully to be procured, in regard of the great
commodities which it brings, which are afterward to be declared: so it is to
be moderated, least that it drive to desperation, as in the place before named
he warns the Corinthians, that they do not use too great severity toward
the incestuous person, least that he be swalowed up of excessive sorrow. For it
may easily come to pass, that men entering into a serious consideration of
their sins, and of the judgments of god denounced and executed against sinners,
do plunge the^ selves into the gulf of horror and desperation, out of the
which they are hardly recovered: so fearful a thing is the wrath of God, that
even one blencke of it is able to drive a sinner out of his wits, and utterly
to astonish him. And what marvel is it, that a sinful man, who in respect of
the anger of God, is even as hay, stubble, or flax, meeting with fire, be
soon overcome, and faint under this heavy burden lying on his conscience,
when as even Christ himself, who in himself was free from sin, and whose
humane nature was vpheld by the Godhead, to bear the burden of Gods wrath,
due unto the sin of man, was by the sense of it so amazed, and confounded,
that all the faculties, both of his body and soul, were shaken and loosed:
as, for the one, those drops of blood which he swet, and for the other, those
words uttered in humane weakness and fear, My God, my God, why have thou
forsaken me? do plainly witness. So that if a short consideration and
apprehension of the wrath of god could work such a strange effect in him, who
knew no sin, what marvel is it if in sinful men, it stir up the very flame of
hell fire: as to let all other examples pass, we read of one Francis Spira,
in whom we may behold the very picture of that spiritual torment of a
gnawing and terrifying conscience, which is prepared for the wicked in the
world to come. But it must be prevented by having in the midst of the view of
our wretched estate, the other eye set on the merciful promises of God, made
as touching the pardon of sin, whereof although this penitent cannot have any
assurance that they belong unto him, in that he feels not as yet grace
wrought in his heart, which is the only earnest penny and pledge of salvation,
and of the love of GOD, yet he may hope for it in time to come, it being like
enough that GOD, who has begun this repentance in him, will also work
regeneration in his good time. And therefore there must in this case a mean be
kept, so as we be neither secure and senseless in regard of our sins and
the wrath of GOD (much less puffed up in pride and vain confidence, supposing
our state to be good and happy, whenas it is woeful and miserable) nor yet
swallowed up of excessive sorrow and fear, as if there were no hope of help
left unto us, as many have been to whom the burden of this sorrow and fear
has been so intolerable, that despairing of any other remedy, they have by
murdering themselves sought for ease in death and in hell it self, thinking
that no state could be so evil, and therefore that any change would be good.

Sect. 2.
NOw further in this humiliation of a sinner, we are to declare these two
points: first whether it be a work of grace or of nature, and secondly
whether it be absolute necessity for regeneration and salvation, or no. For
the first, although it may seem a work of Gods spirit to have a broken and a
contrite heart, contrary to that obstinacy, atheism, and hardness of heart,
which is in the wicked, yet it is a work of nature, coming of that knowledge
of good and evil, and that conscience of sin, which remains in man since
his creation. For we are not to think that this humiliation is that true
contrition and softness of heart, which has place in those who are
regenerate, and whereby they do easily without any resistance or delay, yield
to the word and will of God, being at the first moved by his promises and
blessings to love him, by his threatenings and judgments to fear him, and by
both to obey him: only it is a servile fear of punishment and of the anger of
GOD, wherewith obstinacy in sin may easily and does often concur. But why,
will some man say, if this humiliation be natural, is it not, if not in all,
yet in most men, as nature is the same in all? yea, why is it in so few as we
see, that it is not to be found in one of a thousand, and that almost al
generally live in pleasure and in senseless security, without any conscience
of sin or fear of punishment? We answer, that the ground of this
humiliation is, the light of nature, not being neglected and suffered either to
lie dead, or to decrease daily, as it does in most men (for then it is not able
to send forth this fruit, but is at length clean extinguished and turned into
mere Atheism) but augmented by the written law and word of God, and stirred
up by the judgments of God. Otherwise this light of nature cannot work this
sorrow and fear in respect of sin and the anger of God: for how can they
have a troubled conscience, who have no conscience: or fear of God, whom they
do not know to exist, at least not to do either good or evil? Hence it comes
that this humiliation is so seldom found even among those who profess the
faith, for that they have no sound knowledge and settled persuasion of God, but
a slight and wavering opinion, and therefore no great or vehement humiliation,
but only are sometimes disquieted in their minds, in their miseries, and in
the committing of noto^ious sins, as even the very Heathen are sometimes, of
whom we read, that they have been strangely stung in their consciences by
heinous sins, and driven by a fearful sense and expectation of Gods revenging
hand, into madness, horror, and desperation. And yet we are so to esteem
this humiliation, as that which although it be not a proper work of Gods
sanctifying spirit, nor any part of regeneration, yet it is a step toward it,
and far to be preferred before the contrary, Atheism and contempt of God.

In the next place we are to enquire of the necessity of this humiliatio^,
whether it may be spared, or be so absolutely needful, as that without it no
rege^eration or salvation may be hoped for. We answer^, that it is needful:
for that no man can seek to be eased of the burden of his sins by Christ,
unless he feel the weight of them, or to be healed by him, unless he know
himself to be wounded and bruised: yet it is not in the same measure, and
alike vehement and manifest in all: neither is it needful that it should so
be. It is sufficient that the repentant have a sight and sense of his sins, and
so be, as he cannot but be, affected with sorrow and fear in respect of them,
although there be not those horrible pang^ of horror, which are in the
repentance of some. The degrees of humiliation arise of these three causes:
first, of the diversity of sinfulness in the repentant: for as the heavier
the burden is, the more it presses down so, the mo, and the more heinous that
the sins of the repentant be, the greater is his humiliation: whereof it
comes that those fearful agonies of sorrow and desperation are not usually
seen, but where many heinous sins have gone before. Secondly, it arises of
the diversity of those outward afflictions and iugdements, wherewith the
repentant is punished: the which being of themselves grievous unto him, and
some times such as can not be borne by flesh and blood, without great
perturbatio^ and anguish of soul, and so being added to the inward burden of
his sins, and of a troubled spirit (whereof the wise man asks who is able
to bear it) makes this humiliation very great. Thirdly, it aryseth of the
delay of grace, the which the Lord vouchsafes to some far sooner then he does
to others, who being kept a long ^ime in suspense, and not feeling that work of
grace in their hearts, which they desine and expect, have less hope of
obtaining pardon of their sins, and so consequently greater fear in respect
of the anger of god due to sin: whereas otherwise being soon (some
suddenly without any sensible humiliation, or time of repentance given unto
them) received into favor, have not the like cause of this excessive sorrow
and fear. Lastly, the degrees of humiliation arise of diverse apprehensions of
the nature of sin, and of the anger of God, For as the repentant thinks the
one more or less heinous, the other more or less intolerable: so is his
humiliation less or greater: yet always (as it has bin said) it must be in
some measure, otherwise we have just cause to suspect our selves, that we are
not yet in the state of grace, and regeneration, into the which there is
entrance but through this narrow gate, of shame, sorrow, fear, and anguish of
soul: and therefore he that cannot remember himself to have been in this
low estate of humiliation, cannot think that he is as yet exalted by the
remission of his sins, to the favor of God: but must now at length labor to
be thus humbled under the hand of God: not putting far out of his mind the
evil day, and all things whatsoever may any way vex or trouble him, as
usually and naturally men do, but rather laying this corsiue of the wrath of
god, and his sins committed, to his conscience, and suffering it, there even
to eat and fret away his heart and soul, till God in mercy take it away.
Thus we leaving this poor distressed soul out of conceit with himself,
esteeming himself the most vile and and forlorn caitife in the world, and
saying with himself: O miserable man that I am, who shall deliver me from this
body of sin, and of death? we go on to that which follows.

Sect. 3.
THus much of the inward humiliation of the soul required in repentance: unto
the which the outward behauior must be correspondent, as we see that the
apparel of men is agreeable to their condition, degree, and kind of life: and
therefore we must now put on this repentant a black mourning weed, that so his
outward behavior may be suitable to the inward disposition of his mind: that as
he is in soul and conscience cast down by the sight of his sin, and the sense
of the wrath of god: so he may behave himself accordingly, and express his
inward humiliation in all his words, deeds, and in the whole course of his
life. But what needs this, will some man say, considering that God regards
not the outward, but the inward man, and will accept a broken and contrite heart
without these outward shows and ceremonies? Yea, we are flatly forbidden by
Christ: Mat. 6.16. to wear this hipocrites weed, of outward humility and
holiness. When thou fastest, look not sour as hipocrites do, for they
disfigure their faces, that they may seem to men to fast. But when thou
fastest, anoint thy head, and wash thy face, that thou seem not to men to
fast, b^^ to thy father in secret. We answer, confessing that outward
humiliation being destitute of the inward contrition of the heart, is not
acceptable, but abominable to god. Yea that sometimes it may be omitted: as
namely, when by using it, we shall incur the suspicion of hypocrisy, and a
desire of vainglorie, in the which sense this prohibition of it, which Christ
makes, is to be understood, yet it is a thing which God both lyketh and
requires, yea, which is many ways profitable for him that uses it. For God
will be served, both by the soul, and by the body, and will have the inward
holiness of the one expressed and professed by the outward obedience of the
other: yea it is a thing pleasing and acceptable in his sight, that there be an
agreement and conformity in all things belonging unto us: and therefore he did
in the judicial law forbid the Jews, from sowing diverse seeds in the same
field, or from making their garments half linen, and half woollen: from
mourning in a festival time. Nehe. 8.9. or from ioying and feasting in a time
of mourning. Joel 2.16. How much more indecent then will he think this
repugnancie betwixt the soul and the body, that when the one weepeth, the
other should laugh: when the soul is humbled with sorrow and fear, the body
should he puffed up, and swell in joy and pleasure: yea, this outward
humiliation is very needful and profitable in respect of the repentant
himself: for as it is in all other parts of holiness, the more they are
practiced by the body in life and action, the more they are confirmed and
increased inwardly in the soul: so the more that a man gives himself to the
use of all the outward exercises of humiliation before men, the more does he
humble him self in the sight of God. Beside, this outward humiliation will be
a great furtherance to another part of repentance, to wit, amendment of life,
and a very effectual means of mortifying the flesh, with all the corrupt
lusts thereof. For it requires an abstinence from the use of worldly
pleasures, by the which we know, that the flesh being hartned, is made to
rebel, yea, to prevail against the spirit of God in the regenerate, and in all
motions tending to holiness, which can be in a carnal man.

Sect. 4
THis outward humiliation must stretch it self over the whole behavior and
life of this repentant, and must have place in all his works and deeds, for so
we make it of two sorts, verbal and real: verbal humiliation is commonly
called confession, which is a ready and voluntary acknowledgement of sin,
and of deserved wretchedness, to God, and to man. It is a notable effect and
sign of the true and unfeigned humiliation of the heart. For every man by
nature, is charie of his own credit and estimation, very unwilling to hear or
admit from another, any thing tending to the impairing of it, but nothing goes
more against his stomach, then that he himself should utter any thing any way
tending to his own disgrace, and so as it were throw mire on his own face.
Whereof it comes, that men do by all means cover and co^ceale their own
faults and infirmities, and although they cannot stop other men's mouths, yet
they will be sure to keep their own counsel: so that whenever a man is
brought to a true, plain and voluntary confession of his sins, it is
infallible argument of great humiliation: and therefore god threatening Leui.
26.40. extreme misery (in which the greatest humiliation has place) unto the
people, says, that the remnant of the people shall pine away in the land of
their enemies, and shall confess their sins.

In this respect confession is required, and has always been performed in
true repentance, Pro. 28.13. He that hides his sin shall not prosper, but he
that confesses and forsakes it. Thus Nehem. 9.2. in that public repentance,
the people were assembled togith^r in fasting, sackcloath, and earth upon
them, and they stood and confessed their sins, and the sins of their
forefafathers. And likewise in the ministry of John, which was the ministry
of the law and of repentance, more then of the Gospel and regeneration, the
people that were baptized, confessed their sins, Math. 3.6, This confession is
to be made first and cheefely unto God, against whom all sins are committed,
and that for the illustration of his glory: for by the sin of man the
purity and holiness of his nature is illustrated. Thus the Prophet David
confesses Psalm, 51. I know my iniquity and my sin is ever before me.
Against thee O Lord, I have sinned and done evil in thy sight, that thou
may be justified in thy sayings, and found pure when thou iudgest: behold
I was borne in sin, and in iniquity has my mother conceived me. Yea, this
confession must be made simply, plainly, and fully, all excuses, pretenses,
and shifts being laid aside, without concealing either any sin, although
never so great and heinous, or any circumstance whereby the heinousness of it
may be aggrauated. Secondly, this confession of sin must be made to men,
whereunto our repentant will much more unwillingly yield, who although he
should be much more afraid and ashamed to confess his sin in the presence
of God, who is purity it self, incapable of any manner of pollution, yet he
is more ashamed of his sin in the sight of men, because he is not so fully
persuaded of the presence of GOD, which is not sensible. But how unwilling
soever he be, it must be done, and that even for that end cheefely, in
regard whereof he is so unwilling to do it. For GOD knowing that nothing is
more against the mind of a carnal man, then by laying open his grievous sins
and offenses before the eyes of men, to incur shame and ignominy with them,
with whom he has daily conversation, and to abject himself, his credit and
estimation (which is dearer to him then his life) at their feet, with whom he
has continual emulation for credit, does (to bring down his lofty stomach,
and to have an infallible testimony of his grace and unfeigned humiliation)
enjoin this confession of sin to men.

Besides, this confession is profitable and often needful in respect of his
good that does repent: for so by imparting to others the particulars of his
state, and of those sins whereunto he is most subject, he may receive at the
hands of his brethren a greater measure of comfort, edification, and strength
to resist the said sins, then otherwise he could do, and be freed from many
doubts and errors which do greatly trouble and hinder him. And yet in making
this confession to men, diverse things are to be considered. First it must be
private, unless the repentance be public, that is, enjoined by the public
authority of the church, for the removing of some public offense. Secondly,
there is no necessity imposed by the word of God of confessing sin to any one
man, more then to another, it being left free unto the repentant to make choice
of him, or the^ who^ he thinks fittest for that purpose, of what calling or
profession soever they be. For if men have this worldly wisdom, that they
will not commit their bodies, and the curing of their bodily diseases, to any
but unto those, who are known to be learned, expert, faithful, diligent,
loving, and secret (knowing that otherwise they should hazard their health,
life goods, and (in some case) their credit, how much more circumspect ought
they to be in choosing this spiritual Phisician of the soul. And therefore
choice must be made of such as have knowledge and experience in these
spiritual cases, and chiefly of those that have themselves been most humbled
and cast down by the sight of their sins, and have drunk deepest of the cup
of Gods wrath: as we know that Phisician^ have happiest success in thos^
cases, wherein they have oftnest dealt, and most of all, if that they themselves
have had experience of them in their own bodies. Thus the Apos^le writes, 2.
Cor. 1.4. God d^ot^ comfort us in all tribulations, that we may be able to
comfort others with the same comfort wherewith we are comforted of him. Again,
this spiritual Phisician, must be gentle, tender, and indulgent toward his
patient, least that by unneedful, and unseasonable severity, he break quite
in sunder the broken reed. And lastly he must in any case be endued with
such wisdom and moderation, as that he be able to co^ceale, yea, to cover
from the eyes of men, the secret infirmities which he spieth in his patient,
wherein if he be wanting, he adds one grief and cross to another, and is
to be accounted a miserable comforter. To such men sin is to be confessed:
otherwise no man is bound to disclose his secret faults and sins to any: yea
rather to be careful in covering them, as all men are and ought to be, in
covering the shame and nakedness of their bodies. Lastly, this confession made
to man, need not be so exact, but that many things may be concealed, even
whatsoever may be any way hurtful, either to the confessor himself, or to any
other.

Sect. 5.
AS in word, so in deed, and in the whole life and all the actions of it, this
outward humiliation has place: the which having once overcome the soul, will
easily bring under the body and all the members and faculties of it, as the
King being once taken, the subjects yield without making any resistance. This
real humiliation consists in abstaining from the use of all earthly
pleasures, the which do any way cherish the body, or refresh the mind. As
namely gay, gorgious, and soft apparel, in steed whereof we know, that the
Church and children of God in their public and private humiliations, did use
to put on rough sackcloath, a garment very unpleasant either for the wearer to
feel, or for others to behold: not that a Christian ought to use any strange
or insolent attire, and so to make himself the common by word of of the
people, and his private repentance public, but only that as much as may be,
without any public note, he abstain from brave and costly garments, by the
which his mind might be p^ffed up with pride, and tickled with vain and
foolish pleasures, and rather use that grave and mean garment, which may put
him in mind of that woeful estate wherein he stands. Secondly, he ought to
abstain from the ordinary use of merry and joyful company, yea, to be more
sparing, and to take less pleasure in the company of his dearest friends,
the which all men do account great pleasure, and some the greatest of all
others. So we read Joel 2.16. that in public humiliation (unto the which
private must be answerable, though not alike in all respects) GOD commands
the bride and the bridegroom to come out of their marriage Chamber, and to
break off that society, which of all other is the nearest, and most pleasant:
As also the Apostle counsels us, 1. Corinthians 7.5. But especially this
abstinence must have place in meat and drink, the which coming nearest the
body, or rather piercing into the midst, yea into the most secret parts of it,
do most affect the soul, putting it beside al moderation and due regard of
that estate wherein it is, yea, driving it as a mighty tempest does a silly ship
hither and thither, from one extreme to another. For so we know that a dainty
and full diet, as at the first entrance, by heating the body, it inflameth the
soul stirring up in it excessive joy, pleasure, boldness, confidence, and
presumption, so soon after it puts it into a new temper, lulling it asleep
in senseless security, and even drowning it in a drousie forgetfulness both of
God and of it self: as Christ ^orewarneth, Luke 21.34. Take heed that ye be
not overcome with s^rfetting and drunkenness, and so that day come upon you
unawares. And therefore, as all other Christians, so especially this repentant
ought to beware o^ filling the belly, and pampering the flesh, of being too
diligent in nourishing it within, and cherishing it without: otherwise it
cannot be that this his humiliation should be effectual, and either
acceptable to God, or profitable to himself.

Thus much of outward humiliation, the which although it will follow even of
it self inward humiliation being vehement (for as the fountain so are the
streams: yea, the greatest joys and sweetest pleasures, even life it self is
bitter to the distressed soul) yet for so much as it is seldom vehement in
carnal men, th^rfore it is carefully to be preserved by these outward means,
as by continual watch and ward, least otherwise it escape away from us. Yea,
it is of great force (coming from a broken and contrite heart) to move the
Lord to pity, and to procure a blessing at his hands: for if the
hypocritical humiliation of Achab did prevail, how much more forcible will
it be, when it is joined with the inward contrition, whereunto god has made
this promise, I will resist the proud, and give grace unto the humble.

CHAP. III. Of resolution to repent, and the hindrances thereof.
Sect. 1.
Whosoever desires to have that spiritual regeneration (without the which
there can be no hope of salvation) wrought in his soul by the spirit of God,
must in the first place set himself to seek it with all care and diligence,
by all means possible. For so it has pleased god to save men, not as dead and
senseless creatures, unable to move, or to do any thing for themselves, but
rather to make them the workers of their own salvation, by enioyning them this
task, to use what means they can of renewing and saving their own souls.
Wherein God has not dealt hardly, but most reasonably and lovingly with man*
for if the lest commodity in the world be worth the seeking, and he altogether
unworthy of it who scorneth or irketh to take pains in seeking it: what is
more meet then that spiritual regeneration, and eternal salvation be sought
for, before they be had. Again, we know, that God and man being now separated
by sin, and as far distant the one f^o^ the other, as the heaven is from the
earth, it is impossible for them to meet, unless the one move toward the
other. And therefore, as it is meet and needful that the inferior seek to
the superior, the beggar to him who is rich and liberal, the sick man to the
Phisician, the offendant to the merciful Prince: so it is the duty of man to
seek for remission of sin, for spiritual life, health, and wealth at the
hands of GOD, the only giver of all good things. To this duty the Scripture
does every where exhort us. Amos 5.6. Seek the Lord and live. Matthew. 6.5.
Seek the kingdom of God, and the righteousness thereof. Matthew. 11.28. Come
unto me all ye that are weary, and laden, and I will ease you. And yet it is
generally neglected of men, who contemning this counsel and commandment of
God, and being altogether careless of their own salvation, spend all their
time, strength, and wit, in seeking and enjoying worldly pleasures: but as for
this spiritual life of their souls, they never think or dream of any such
matter, as Christ witnesses of the Jews. John. 6.26 That they sought him not
for his miracles or doctrine, but because he had filled their bellies with
bread. But that we may be stirred up to the performance of this so needful a
duty, which we owe both to god and to our own souls, we will first set down
briefly a few motives or reasons persuading thereunto, and in the second place,
remove hose hindrances by the which men are usually kept back from this
seeking of regeneration and salvation at the hands of God. For the first, we
shall not need to go far for arguments, if that we would but consider our
present estate in this world, the which for the most part is so full of
troubles, griefs, crosses and miseries, that it makes men weary both of it,
and also of themselves, yea, to desire at one time or other to be rid of it at
al aduenturs, although they know not of any better, or of any other estate*
Yea, a little pain of body, or sorrow of mind (from the which no condition can
be free) marreth a great feast of pleasure and happiness, making us forget it
quite, yea, making it bitter and unpleasant unto us. And if we should suppose
an earthly paradise, having in it the perfection of worldly pleasures, yet we
must needs acknowledge the vanity of them, in that we are not sure to enjoy
them for the space of one hour, not knowing how near our bodies and lives
draw to their end: and if they continue long, they will of themselves wax
loathsome unto us. And therefore, as we account that man very improvident and
foolish, who having things needful for one or two days, therein rests
altogether careless of the time to come: so we may well judge all carnal men
more then mad, who having no certain state of life in this world, no not for
one quarter of an hour, do not seek for it at the hands of god (yea, they
reject it being offered) an everlasting and unchangeable state of life, joy,
glory and happiness in the world to come. Let us therefore give ear to that good
counsel which Christ himself gives unto us John. 6.23. Labor not so much
for the meat which perishes, as for that meat which endures unto everlasting
life. And Mat. 6.19. Lay up f^r your selves treasures, ^ot on earth, where the
moth and canker will corrupt, yea, where the worms will consume your selves,
but lay up treasure in heaven, where there is no corruption to be feared,

Sect. 2.
NOw we come to the hindrances, by the which men are staid from seeking for
regeneration, and salvation: the which although they be many and diverse, as
men do diversely conceive amiss of the truth, yet the most usual of the^ are
errors or false conceits about this doctrine of regeneration. To this head we
are to refer, first the ignorance of spiritual regeneration: secondly, despair
of attaining it, as being a supernatural, and an impossible thing. For the
first. The doctrine of this supernatural, and miraculous regeneration, has
been in all ages, and is at this day received by many living in the church,
who confess indeed that man is sinful, and must be holy and righteous before
that he can please God, and attain to salvation: yet they think that this
sinfulness is not so deeply imprinted into the nature of man* as are the
spots into the skin of the leopard, as the scripture speaks: but rather that
it may be easily shaken off, and laid aside as a loose upper garment, a^ man's
pleasure: that it comes rather by imitation of those with whom we live, then
by propagation from the fall of Adam, by the particular default and wilfulnes of
several men, who might be holy and pure if they would, then from any general
corruption of the nature of mankind: and lastly, that it is not a total
spreading it self over all the faculties of man's soul and body, but only in
this, or that part, as men are by nature or custom given to this or that vice,
some to one, others to another, and as they think of ma^s sinfulnes: so they
do, and must of necessity think of the contrary holiness, to wit, that man has
it in part by nature, and may have it wholly at his pleasure by good education,
moderation, and such other means as he may use, without any supernatural work
of God. Hence comes, or rather follows of necessity that grievous error of
justification by works, inherent holiness, and man's own righteousness,
wherewith the church has bin hitherto, and will be always hereafter infected,
as with a common plague and popular disease. For that it was a received opinion
among the Jews before the time of the gospel, it appears plainly both by
that co^futation of it which ye apostle makes. Ro^. 2. and by the open
profession of that nation in all ages since the time of the Gospel Likewise,
that it is maintained of infinite multitudes of christians at this day, it is so
manifest that it needs no proof. The common belief and confession of
^earned and ignorant me^ is this, that they hope to be saved by their good
meaning, and good works, but they never think or speak of any such
regeneration as the scripture teaches: and many of those who do according to
the word of God ascribe man's sanctification and regeneration to the grace of
god, mean the natural operation of man's will enclining it self to good, the
which in some sense they do truly think and call the grace and gift of god. Of
this opinion was Nicodemus a great Rabbi in Israel, who was amassed; when he
heard Christ teach this doctrine of regeneration as having never heard of any
such matter before And therefore when Christ taught that unless a man were born
again, he could not possibly enter into the kingdom of heaven, he makes this
carnal reply: must me^ return into their mothers wombes, and so be borne
again. This ignorance of regeneration is the most common hinderance, why men
do not seek after it: for how can they desire (much less seek) that which
they do not know? neither is it any great marvel that so many are ignorant of
it, considering first that the self-love which is in man by nature, makes him
to think far better of himself, of his own nature, strength, and
faculties, then he should do. And secondly, that the natural reason of man will
hardly admit any supernatural or miraculous work, resting it self in it
self, that is, in the inherent virtue, and ordinary course of natural causes.
But we are to think far otherwise of these things, and renouncing these
grievous and damnable errors, to learn and hold out of the word of God, that
it is no less impossible to make the corrupt nature and natural faculties of
man clean and pure, his sinful life and actions good and holy, or his person
being guilty of sin and eternal death, just and righteous, by any means
which either man or any creature can use, then it is to make an Ethiopian white
by washing him with water. Yea further, that no service of God, though never so
solemn and devout, no good works, though never so many and excellent, no good
meaning, though never so simple and innocent, no uprightness and integrity of
life and conversation, though never so great; no worldly prerogative
whatsoever, can make a man acceptable to God, much less partaker of eternal
glory, both which belong only to those, whose natures, minds, wills, and
affections, it pleases him according to his eternal will and counsel to change
and renew by the mighty power and miraculous operation of his spirit. To
conclude, we are to look for salvation by no other means, but only by
regeneration, and to seek for regeneration, not in our selves (for that were
to seek heaven in earth, or rather in hell) or by any virtue, power, or
quality in our selves, but only at the hands of God, to whom only the glory
both of the first and of the second creation is to be given, and to beware
least that we be deceived with this common error, esteeming sin and holiness
to be nothing but as moral virtues and vices, spiritual regeneration nothing
but good education or philosophical institution, godliness nothing but honest
behavior, christianity nothing but civility, the which differ as much, as do
the shadow and the substance of any thing. Otherwise we shall seek God where he
is not to be found, and so without all question loose our labor.

Sect. 3.
THe second hinderance, whereby men may be, and are kept back from seeking for
regeneration is another false opinion, and conceit of it, whereby men despair
of attayning unto it, considering either themselves to be so wholly dead and
rotten in sin, that they cannot imagine how they should ever be restored to
the spiritual life of holiness, or else this doctrine of the
supernaturalnesse of regeneration, as being a divine and a miraculous work.
This hinderance is contrary to the former: in the one, man thinks better, but
in the other he thinks worse of his n^turall estate then it is indeed: in the
one he presumes of his own strength, in the other he despaireth of the
goodness and power of God. in the one he thinks regeneration more easy, in
the other he thinks it a more difficult matter then it is. This hinderance
is not so common as the other, for there are very few that do either know or
acknowledge the doctrine of supernatural regeneration. Yet it will easily
follow of that doctrine for men will soon be put back from seeking and
despair of attayning to that which they hear to be miraculous and contrary to
nature. For so we read Ioh. 6 66. that whereas Christ taught That no man could
come unto him, and be i^ truth his Disciple, unless it were given unto him of
the father: And as he says v. 44. except the Father draw him, that many of his
disciples went back and walked no more with him. But the truth of this whole
doctrine we have plainly set down Math. 19.23.24.25.26. Where Christ having
said that it is hard, ^ea impossible for a rich man (and so for all sorts of
men, although the rich, who abound in worldly pleasures are further off) to
enter into the kingdom of heaven, drives his Disciples to this desperate
conclusion, who then can be saved? or to what purpose then should any man go
about to be saved: whereunto Christ makes this answer. Indeed with man it is
impossible, but not with God. That is, although it be impossible for any man to
regenerate either himself, or any other, yet to God it is not only possible,
but also easy: and therefore no man ought to be discoraged from seeeking or
despair of attaining it, but account it an easy thing) as the Apostle does
Romans 10. where he prefers the Gospel before the Law, in this respect, for
that it teaches a most ready and easy way of attaining to salvation, namely
the belief of the heart, and the confession of the mouth, whereas the Law
requires perfect obedience, which no man living is able to perform. The which
dissimilitude is not in the conditions themselves, (for they are both alike
hard, both being altogether impossible, it being as easy a thing for a carnal
man to fulfill the moral law, as it is for him to work in himself true
faith and confession, the which two are all one in effect) but in this, that
God accompanies and asisteth the ministry of the Gospel with the miraculous
operation of his spirit, whereof the ministry of the Law being destitute, is
but a dead letter, unable to save the hearer. So then, regeneration, which in
respect of the strength of man is altogether impossible, is easy in respect of
GOD, who is no less able to restore the souls of men to their first purity,
then he was in the beginning to create both body and soul: But all the doubt
is in the will of God, whether that, as he is able, so he be willing to work
regeneration in every one that seeks it. If he be willing, then surely
either every one may attain to regeneration: which is undoubtedly false, or
else very few do seek after it: the which may be greatly wondered at, that
most men should be so careless of their own salvation, as not to think it
worthy the seeking. If he be not willing to grant it to all that seek it, then
regeneration remains as impossible a thing for man to attain, as if it were
impossible to God to work it in man: and men have cause to abstain from that,
which neither themselves are able, nor God willing to bring to pass. We
answer, first that it is not so easy and ordinary a matter as it may be
supposed, for a carnal man to seek for regeneration and grace, the which is
contrary to his nature. Secondly, if (as it comes sometimes to pass) he do
in some sort desire it, and set himself to seek it, yet he does not persevere
in this mind and desire as he ought, but faintly in well doing, and so
returning to his old bias, cease from seeking, and loses his labor. But
let us suppose that, which although it be very rare, and scarce to be found
in a whole age, yet it is not impossible, to wit, that a carnal man does set
him self with a resolute purpose of heart to seek for regeneration, and that
in the careful and painful using of all the means of attayning it, he spend
and end his days: whither is he sure to obtain his desire, or may happily
loose all his labor? we answer, that although God have appointed, that the
careful seeking of regeneration, should be the ordinary means of obtaining
it: yet he has not so tied him self to the means, that it should always,
and of necessity bring forth the effect, but has left it free to him self,
whither to give good success and a happy issue or no. Whereby it may come to
pass, that a man may desire and seek for regeneration, and yet die a carnal
man, out of the state of grace and life. Yet we are both in our selves, and
also in others to hope the best. And in that hope both to begin without
despair, and to continue without faynting in the careful seeking of grace,
leaving the event to the will and good pleasure of the almighty God. Yea
further, we are to take heed, that no wrong opinion arise hereof in our
minds, as it comes usually to pass in men carnally minded, who in this case
will not stick to say, that God deals both unfaithfully in withholding
grace, having made this solemn promise in his word: Whosoever seeks, shall
find, and whosoever knocks, shall have the door of grace set open unto him:
and also, unjustly both in punishing him for the want of it, whom he knows
to have done what so ever is in the power of man for the a^tayning of it, and
also in not recompencing his painful endeavors, by granting his requests,
and giving grace. We answer, that God in withholding his regenerating spirit,
the worker of grace from men, does them no manner of wrong: for his graces
being his own, it is lawful for him to do with them what he list. He was not
bound in the beginning to create man in natural life and holiness, how much
less then is he now bound to restore those blessings unto him, having so
vntha^kfully, wilfully, and rebelliously deprived him self of them. As for
Gods promise (the which we confess is to be performed to those who are
unworthy of favor, for otherwise man's unthankfulness should make God
unfaithful) howsoever they are propounded in general terms, yet they be^o^g to
the elect only to who^ God does perform the^ to the full. As for the reward due
unto the painful seeking of grace, man when he has taken the greatest pains
in this behalf, has done but duty, nay he has not in any measure done his
duty: for one regenerate (much less a carnal man) cannot seek for grace, so
as he ought, and therefore when he has done all that he can, he is but an
unprofitable servant. But besides all this (so endless is the mercy, goodness,
and equity of God, yea, so great is his desire to make him self manifest to
all men in these respects) that it pittieth him to see any thing made frustrate
of the expectation in any good endeavors, that rather then he will not do good,
he will do it to those who are evil, and that rather then he will seem
unjust in not rewarding that which men do falsely think to be good, and to
deserve good, he will (in some sort, not in truth, for it is lawful for him to
bestow his blessings on who^ he will, even on the wicked) be unjust in
rewarding men for that which he knows to be sinful.

Thus this carnal man in seeking grace, does not either loose his labor, or
lack his reward: for by this means, he does not only purchase unto himself
temporal blessings at the hand of God: but also escapes those fearful
plagues, which are powered on wilful and obstinate sinners in this life; as we
read. 1. King. 21.28.29. that Achab. did by his hypocritical humilation, yea,
that grievous damnation, which abides them in the life to come. As for the
guilt of eternal death, it is madness to imagine, that it should by this means
be avoided, seeing it is procured by these, and the best actions of a carnal
man, the which coming from a corrupt fountain, cannot but be sinful and
impure.

Sect. 4.
ANother hinderance of seeking regenetion is another erroneous opinion
conceived of it, to wit, presumption of the power and goodness of God. It is to
be seen in all those, who think that God will in his good time work grace in
the^, although they themselves take neither care nor pains about any such
matter, yea, although they go a clean contrary way, living in all manner of
sin, and altogether careless of the means of their regeneration and
salvation. To this we answer: first, confessing that god, as he always can, so
sometimes does, work ^^^e^eration without any means, even in ^l^^se wh^neuer
think nor dream of any such matter, and have not so much as either the
knowledge, or yet a desire, either of grace, or of salvation, being, as we
read, R^. 10.20. found of those who did not seek him, and made manifest unto
those, who did not so much as once ask for him, as we may see plainly in the
said Apostle, who found God, and grace, when as he did not only not seek or
follow them, but also fly as far off from them as he could. Thus
regeneration is compared to a treasure, lying hid in the field, and being
found by him who looked for no such thing in that place. And thus we need
not doubt, but that many coming to hear Gods word, for fashions sake, or in
a wicked desire of hindering it, and hurting the professors of it, have been
of a sudden wonderfully converted, and effectually renewed. Thus it pleases
God sometimes to work regeneration without any means, that it may be seen
to come, not from any virtue inherent in the means, but from the powerful
operation of his spirit: yet this is not his ordinary, and usual manner of
working, according to the which he does nothing without some kind of means,
no not in miraculous and supernatural actions, wherein the means does not
help forward the matter any jot, but only is used for a show or color, to
hide the immediate working of God, whose glory it is to ke^pe himself, his
counsels, judgments, and manner of working, secret and hid from the eyes of
men, as we read. Pro. 25.25. Thus he healed N^aman by washing him in Jordan,
and the sick in the primitive church, by anointing them with oil. And thus he
raised the widows son, 2. King. 4, 35. from death, by laying the warm body
of Elizeus upon his dead and cold body: and thus he heals the sickenesses
of the soul, yea, restores it from death to life, by the preaching of the
word: in all which miraculous actions, the means are not in any respectable to
bring forth the effect, yet they have in them a virtue tending to that end,
whereto the effect may easily be ascribed by carnal and ignorant men. So that
although GOD can always, and does at some times work regeneration without
means: yet ordinarilye he uses means, the neglect or contempt whereof, is
an impious tempting of God, and presuming of his goodness. Henc^ it is that
regeneration has place, and is to be found, not among the Jews, Turks,
Moors, and other Infidelles, but only in the Church of God, wherein his word
is preached, his Sacraments administered, and all other means of beginning, and
continuing grace daily used: yea, of Churches professing the name of Christ, as
some are more pure and sound in doctrine, more diligent and zealous in serving
God, and in using all Christian exercises: so they have oftener experience of
this miraculous work of God, putting his helping hand to the godly endeavors
of his servants. Yea, of Christians, those who are careful and painful in
seeking and serving God, are far lyker to attain to grace, then they who are
otherwise: even as they are liker to retain and recover their health, who are
careful in using a competent diet of meat and medicine, then they who do
carelessly distemper themselves in sickness, and in health, nor regarding what
things are wholesome or hurtful for them.

Sect. 5.
THus much of the fals^ conceats, or errors conceived of regeneration, by ^he
which men are hindered from seeking it: the first, being the ignorance of
spiri^^ all regeneration: the second, despair of obtaining it by any means:
the third presumption, or a persuasion of getting it without means. Now we
come to the other hindrances, whereof (to let the rest pass) these three are
most usual: the first is infidelity, and Atheism: the second, worldly cares
and pleasures: the third, is offense taken at those who profess this
regeneration. For the first, although it may seem a thing not to be named in
the Church of God, yet many of those who profess themselves to be Christians,
have in their hearts and minds no other religion then Atheism, no God, but
their own bellies, no hope of any other world, then this which they presently
enjoy. They say in their hearts, that there is no God nor devil, no heaven nor
hell, no reward for the godly, nor punishment appointed for the wicked, no
truth in the scripture, and that it is but folly to serve God: or at the least,
they do so doubt of the truth of these things, that they are not by the
consideration of them, either moved to any good, or restrained from any evil:
as the apostle writes to the Corinthians, among whom the doctrine of the
resurrection from death was called in question, that some of them were ignorant
of god, that is, were mere Atheists. That this is the religion of many
christians, it appears both by their lives and dealings, which are altogether
void of conscience, and the fear of God, and also by the plain and voluntary
confession of the simpler sort, being by sickness, fear, hope, love, or any
other means, made to declare their conscience in this behalf. These men
cannot possibly seek for regeneration, seeing that they make no account of
eternal salvation, whereunto it leads. And therefore this hinderance cannot
be taken away, but by proouing that there is a God, who has promised (and will
certainly perform it) eternal salvation unto all those that seek for it, as
they ought to do. But we are not here to take in hand the demonstration of
the principles of religion, the which requires many several tractates. Yet
as touching this ignorance of GOD (the which contains in it all errors
whatsoever) it may be refuted by as many arguments, as there are creatures in
the world, all which jointly and severally do preach and make manifest the
Deity, power, wisdom, and goodness of GOD, to all those who are not
wilfully blind, and do not put out their own eyes: not only to Christians
living in the Church, as in the clear light of the word of God: by even to
Infidelles remaining in darkness, and in their natural blindness, as we
read Roman. 2.20. The Godheade, that is, the eternity, and power of God, may
be beheld in the creatures. For we must of necessity suppose some infinite
power by the which they were made, and are continually ordered and preserved:
and some great king and monarch having authority over the whole world, and who
will one day call all his subjects to account, and give unto every one
according to their works.

The greatest objection which the mind of man makes against the Godheade, and
the most forcible motive to this infidelity, is the inuisibilitie, and
insensible secrecy of GOD, and of his actions, in that he does not
continually show forth his omnipotency in new and strange miracles, his
justice in punishing sin, and rewarding good deeds, his presence in hearing
those that pray unto him, but suffers all things to go according to the
ordinary course of Nature, yea, (as if he had laid aside the administration
of the world) the wicked to prospe^, and the godly to be afflicted. A^ for the
creation of the world, although in it self it be the greatest miracle that
can be, yet it being daily and continualle behold, cease to drive men to
admiration, or to acknowledge the power of God, as the common prouet be says,
that a wonder lasts but nine days. Yea, this secrecy of God is greater now
in the time of the Gospel, and in these last ages of the world, then it was in
former times, as God has revealed himself in his word far more clearly then
he did at any time before, and as the last judgment does more and more
approach: whereas before he did reveal himself by many means, as namely by
visions, dreams, apparitions, miracles, te^porall blessings and punishments:
but now in these last ages of the world, god does not show himself to men in
any such manner, but does hide himself from their eyes: whereby it comes to
pass, that many carnal men believing nothing, but that which is sensible and
palpable, come to this extreme blindness of mind, as to think that there is
not a God in the world, or at the least to doubt whether there be one or no:
and no marvel that this secrecy of God move the carnal man to atheism,
when as the godly themselves have often their faith shaken with this (...). But
both carnal and regenerate are to take heed that this root of infidelity do^
not spring up in their hearts, and make them depart from the living Lord: and
that by considering that God does of set purpose in great wisdom keep him
self secret, as in diverse other respects, so especially for the trial of
men both elect and reprobate. For as a wise master of a family desiring to
know the disposition of his servants, hides himself in a corner, or behind a
cloth, and there both beholds the unruliness and misdemeanour of some, and
also perceives the virtues of others of them, the which they would never have
showed in his presence: so God does in a manner absent him self from the
world, that both the faith of his servant, and the outrage of sin in the
wicked ones, may be made manifest.

Sect. 6.
ANother hinderance, by the which men are withheld from seeking regeneration,
are the cares and pleasures of this present world, by the which they are so
entangled and even wholly possessed, that they have not leisure so much as once
to think on their salvation, or any means of attayning unto it. The cares of
the world hinder those, who have not attained to so good and settled estate as
they desire, who think that they may lawfully defer to provide for their
souls, until they have provided sufficiently for their bodies, about the
which they are so continually busied, and employed, that they cannot afford any
time to think (at the least not seriously as they ought to do) on God and
godliness.

Thu^ men excuse them selves for not coming to Christ Luc. 15.17. One cannot
come because he has bought a farm, the which he must of necessity go and
see. Another, because he has married a wife. The third, because he has bought
Oxen: but these men take a wrong course, and as we say, set the Cart before
the horse: For they should First seek the kingdom of GOD and the
righteousness thereof, and then all these things would be easy unto them:
that is, gotten with great facility and in great abundance, Math. 6.33. and
that by the secret and wonderful blessing of GOD, who gives temporal
blessings also to those that seek for spiritual graces at his hands, as he
gave to Solomon not only wisdom and knowledge, which he asked, but also
great riches, honor, and worldly glory, as amends, yea as a reward, because
he had in his cho^se preferred wisdom before earthly blessings. We do not
deny but that men may lawfully, yea must of necessity, have care of their
temporal estate, yea so much the greater, as it is worse and more unsettled:
For if the body perish for want of things needful for it, how shall the soul
be endued with the life of holiness? seeing that as the tree falls, so it
lies, and he that dies a carnal man, cannot rise spiritual. But this is our
meaning, that we do not (as usually men do) so suffer our selves to be
overwhelmed with the cares of the world, that we neglect and forget to seek
after God, but that in all wants, miseries, and troubles, in all conditions
whatsoever, our chief care, study, desire, and endeavor be set upon those
things which concern our eternal salvation. For if we be in good estate, in
respect of temporal things, we may the more freely serve God, if distressed we
have the more need to seek to him. Yea we are to suffer rather our bodies to
pine away for want of food, then our souls to continue in the state of
sinfulnes and of death. For what profits it a man to win the whole world,
if he leese his own soul. But if the soul be once endued with the life of
holiness, the body may well sleep for a season, but it cannot possibly die
for ever. And therefore let us always remember those heavenly sayings uttered
by Christ Luke 10.14. Martha, Martha, thou carest and art troubled about many
things but one thing is needful: Marie has chosen the better part, which
shall not be taken from her. Likewise for worldly pleasures, as the seeking so
also the enjoying of them being now got, is a hinderance to the seeking of
regeneration: For although in all likelihood, men having the world at will, and
being even glutted with the abundance of worldly pleasures, should learn by
experience that which reason could not teach them, to wit, the vanity,
uncertainty, and loathsomeness of them, and so be driven to seek for some pure
and permanent happiness, yet they make no such use of prosperity, but the more
they have, the more they desire, enlarging their appetite, and inuenting daily
new and fresh pleasures, as the Prophet describes them. Amos 3. They put
far from them selves the evil day, and approach to the pl^ce of iniquity,
they lie and stretch them selves upon Iuorie b^ds, eating Lambs from the
fl^cke; and Calves out of the stall: They sing to the sound of the Viole, and
invent to themselves instruments of music, like David: they drink wine in
bowls, and anoint them selves with the best ointment, but never think on the
affliction of Joseph, or yet on their own salvation: Thus does adversity and
prosperity, want and and abundance hinder men from seeking after God, whereas
miseries and crosses should drive men to God, the only giver of all good
things: and temporal happiness, should put them in mind of true and eternal
happiness in heaven.

Sect. 7.
THe last let, by the which men are hindered from seeking regeneration, is
offense taken at those, who do profess them selves to have attained unto it,
and to be those in whom this supernatural and miraculous work of grace is
wrought by the power and finger of God. These men do often incur the
mislike, anger, and hatred of others, insomuch that not only their persons, but
also their profession becomes odious unto them. The causes of this offense
are these. First, the diversity in judgment, affection, disposition, in words,
deeds, behavior, and whose cours^ of life, whereby they differ from others,
sometimes of necessity as in matters of conscience and impo^tance, sometimes in
light and indifferent matters, wherein they might much better agree and join
with them. Another cause is the contempt either true or supposed of unregenerate
men, as of those who are in a most wretched estate. For often they who profess
this regeneration, do either think too hardly, and uncharitably, or else
utter unseasonably and indiscreetely, what they truly think of others. Yea
although they do not offend in these respects, yet men of lewd behavior, and
dissolute lives will (and not without cause) think that those who live justly
and uprightly, have a base opinion of the^: by the which means, it cannot be
but that their affection should be alienated from them. Lastly, even those who
have received grace from God (much more they who make profession of that grace,
which they have not) have in them many wants and infirmities, yea sometimes
great vices and sins, by the which they do justly incur the offense of men. By
these and such other means, it comes often to pass, tha^ carnal men
conceive such a mislike of those that profess regeneration, that they cannot
abide to hear of it, or of any means tending unto it. For the removing of this
hindera^ce it is the part of al those, who have received this great favor at
the hands of God, to be renewed by his spirit, to use all diligence in not
giving offense either to Jew or Gentile, to Christian or Infidel, to one or
other, and so not to make so excellent a thing as regeneration is (it being the
only miraculous work of God which has continual place in the Church) to be
evil spoken off. But for so much as when they have done all that they can,
offense will be taken where it is not given, and for that we have not to deal
in this treatise with me^ already regenerat, that we should show how they may
live without giving offense: therefore leaving them, we will come to the
unregenerate man, who is offended by the^, and by this offense hindered from
seeking regeneration. To whom we are to commend that wisdom, which staieth
men from being carried headlong in affection, against any person or cause
whatsoever but especially against those things which have in them any
likelihood of religion, as Gamaliel appeased the Jews. Act. 5, 38.39. yea, that
wisdom which techeth us to (...) a difference betwixt the persons and ^he
causes of men, and not suffer our judgments (...) weighing the goodness of
the one, to (...) blinded and forestalled by anger, love, hatred, or any other
affection, which we bear unto the other. Yea, we are to consider that men
whilst they live here on earth, are subject to many infirmities, vices, and
grievous sins, yea, even they whom GOD has made partakers of his grace and
spirit. And therefore we are not in these respects to condemn or reject that
religion which any man does profess, but to give to men that gentle reproof
which their sins do deserve, and to give to the grace of God in men that
reverence and practice which belonget^ unto it.

Sect. 8.
THus we have in some sort removed the hindera^ces of regeneration, which
keep men in their natural sinfulness and security wherein they were before:
and made this our carnal Nicodemus desirous of grace, whereof before he was
altogether ignorant and careless. It remains that he put this his desire in
execution, and that without delay, not deferring it from one day or time of his
life to another, knowi^^ that there is an appointed season as for all other
actions so also for this: the which if he let slip, he shall either not desire
to have it, or not have it, although he do desire it. But men will here object
and say, may we not at any time both seek and find grace? has not God said ^n
his word, that At what time soever a sinner repents of his sins, he will put
them all out of his remembrance: We answer, that God indeed may always be
found, if he be sought as he ought to be, but he cannot always be sought, and
therefore not found. For first we know that this our purpose of seeking God,
may be prevented and made frustrat by death, the which is the full and last
period of all the desires, and endeavors of men. God indeed is in the lowest
hell, as much as in the highest heavens, but in the grave there is no remission
of sin, yea no hope, or desire of grace.

Besides, let us suppose that this carnal man that deferreth his repentance
in this sort (as he makes his account, although sometimes he come short of
his reckoning) does by the long suffering of God, prolo^g his days, how
knows he that he shall always have the word of God, and the means of
regeneration, without the which God does not use to work it. Yea if he have
life and all other things needful for this purpose, is he so foolish and
ignorant of his natural disposition, as to imagine that this desire of grace
and resolution of seeking God, will continue for ever, or for any time if it be
not put in practice? This is in no wise to be supposed: for this is an
undoubted truth, that men generally and naturally as they grow in strength,
wit, and worldly wisdom, so they grow in sinfulness, atheism, infidelity,
and hardness of heart, being every day further and further off from seeking
God. For as drunkards do by drinking not quench their thirst, and satisfy
their appetite, but increase the burning thirst of their bodies, and the
insatiable intemperance of their minds, so all other worldly pleasures, the
longer they are enjoyed, the more greedily they are desired, and more
obstinatly preferred before God, and spiritual graces, as the Prophet says,
Iere. 13.23. That it is as easy for an Ethiopian to change the color of his
skin, or for a Libard to shake off the spots of his skin, as for those to do
good, who are by a long custom taught the ways and wiles of sinning.

Yea, there is far less hope of their repentance and regeneration, who having
sometime this purpose of turning to God, do neglect and loose it, then of
theirs who never once thought of any such matter. For it is a very unlike
matter, that a man will in his age set his affection on spiritual things,
which he rejected and condemned before, when as he was less addicted to the
world and to sin. We do not deny but that in any age (except infancy) both God
may work regeneration in man, and man repentance in himself: yet as the bough
of a tree being by the groth of many years become stiff and strong, is now far
more easily broken then bowed, so for the most part, men of age, experience,
and worldly wisdom do sooner loose their lives then leave their carnal
desires, which they have so carefully nourished, and strengthened all their
life time. And therefore we are to know and consider, that as all other things
under the sun, so also this repentance has an appointed season, which is in
no case to be neglected of him, who desires and intends to walk in this
way, leading to spiritual regeneration and eternal salvation.

CHAP. IIII. Of the means of attayning regeneration.
NOw that we have brought this repentaunt to an unfeigned desire of
regeneration, and a resolute purpose of seeking it, we are to show the means
by the which it is to be sought and may be attained, the which he is to use,
not as putting any confidence in them, or thinking him self able by them to
bring his purpose to pass without all fail, but relying himself wholly on
the goodness, power, and promise of God, who has promised that he will be
found of those that seek him, and draw near to them, that draw near to him.
The means of seeking regeneration are three. The first is, that reformation
which may be in a natural man. The second is, the hearing of Gods word. The
third is, prayer or invocation. Natural reformation is a show, shadow, and
resemblance of true regeneration, the which an unregenerate man may work in
himself by the natural strength of his free will, without any supernatural and
extraordinary operation of Gods spirit. It is that natural decrease of
sinfulnes, when as a carnal man by virtue of such means as are in his own
power to use, does not only repress the outward act of sin in his life, but
also changes in some sort the inward disposition of his mind, and of his
will, from ignorance to knowledge, and from vice to virtue, as we know that
many both Christians and Heathen, especially those who were called
Philosophers, have done. This reformation is the first means of attayning to
true regeneration: not that by it (or by any other means whatsoever) a man can
merit grace at the hand of God, or yet make him self more capable of grace,
for his nature remains corrupt, as it was before, because God has appointed
and commanded, that men should do what they can in renewing themselves, and
should approach as near unto grace as they can, although they cannot by any
endeavor or labor, without the work of Gods spirit attain unto it. The whole
matter may be made plain by this similitude: A certain King makes this
proclamation, that of a company of rebels or malefactors, those, who coming
into his presence have his scepter reached out unto them, shall live, the rest
shall have the law to pass on them. Yet he keeps himself within a strong
castle, the gates being fast shut. Hereupon many of these malefactors casting
off their old and filthy apparel, address themselves in the best manner they
can to come before the king. When they come to the place of his abode they
find no entrance (save only a few of them) yet they that stand excluded, are
better to be admitted, then they who contemning the Kings offer, never look
toward him, and yet in truth, they that stand nearest to the gates, do no
more deserve life, neither are any more capable of it, or any nearer unto it,
for ought that they themselves can do, then they who be a hundred miles off. So
God bids all cast off their sins, their corrupt dispositions and lives, and
to come and seek to him for grace: yet they do not by this means deserve, nor
can by any means compel God to admit the^ into his favor, and to touch their
hearts with his spirit. All should use this means and hope to obtain grace:
yea none can hope to obtain grace, who do not use this means, yet some use the
means, and do not obtain, and others obtain not using the means: yet the
means is carefully to be used, necessary to be known, and therefore now to be
declared.

Sect. 2.
THe first step in this reformation, is the amendment of outward life, at the
which this repentant must begin. For although the nearest and the surest way
were to begin at the soul, in changing the vicious disposition of it, as at
the fountain or root, whereunto the streams and the fruit will easily conform
themselves, yet as men deal with children and young scholars whom they teach
that in the first place which is most easy to be conceived, although it be not
most needful or profitable to be known, so we must propound to our repentant
in the first place, reformation of life, as being far more easy then the
changing of his inward disposition, least that otherwise he being discoraged
by the hardness of the work, faint and give all over. For the which cause he
must in the first place labor to purge him self from those sins whereunto he
is given, and then inure himself to the performance of all the contrary
christian duties: he must lay aside his old filthy rags, before he put on new
and fresh apparel, and first cease from doing evil, before he can do good.
First therefore he having considered what sins he is given unto, must make this
resolution with him self, utterly to forsake them for ever, although they be
(as no doubt they are) most sweet unto him, whither they be fornication and
adultery, or drunkenness and gluttony, or theft, oppression, and deceit, or
lying, swearing, and perjury, or any other whatsoever. For the which purpose he
must carefully avoid all manner of occasions, and prouocations leading to these
sins, by the which he is either put in mind of them, or tempted by the
committing of them: by the which means the weakest man that is most subject to
any sin, may get the mastery over it, even as he that is furthest from that
sin, may easily be overtaken, if he be ^arelesse in avoiding the occasions of
it. I^ the sweetness which he feels in it, make him loath to part with it,
let him set against that, (to let pass the shame of the world, the obloquy,
infamy, and dishonor, which he incurreth, being not able to lead^ his life in
civil honesty as others do* (...) also the particular hurts and
discommodities following of several sins, (...) let these arguments pass,
as being of little force in respect of that which follows) that sense of the
wrath of GOD, that fearful expectation of all manner o^ plagues. both bodily
and spiritual, both temporal and eternal, that torment of a terrifying and
gnawing conscience, wherewith he is at this present distressed and cast down,
and then perhaps he will account the sweetest sin to be bitter and
unpleasant.

Thus he having gotten the victory over hi^ sin: insomuch as he is now
able to abst^ine from it, must in the next place set himself to do those good
works and Christian duties, which are contrary to his sin, that he may
have the full conquest over it. This counsel Daniell gives to Nebuchadnesar,
in the fourth Chapter of Daniel the four and twentieth verse, that he should
break off his sins by righteousness, and by showing mercy to the poor:
that is, that he should not only abstain from evil, but also do good, as
before he did, not only abstain from doing good, but also do evil: not that
we can pay the debts of our sins to god by good works (for a thousand good
works will not counteruaile the least sin before Gods judgment seat) but
that as by our sins heretofore committed, we have disobeyed and dishonored
God, so now we are to obey and glorify him by our good works, and Christian
lives: yet in regard of our brethren, we may and must, to the uttermost of
our power, make full recompense.

Thus does Zacheus in his repentance. Luke. 19.8. promise Christ, that he
will first give half his goods to the poor, in a testification of his
obedience, thankfulness, and faith which he had toward god, and then for
satisfaction of men, restore four fold to every one from whom he had
injuriously taken any thing. Thus we see the first part of this renouation, to
wit, amendment of life, to the which John exhorts the Jews in his
ministry of repentance, saying, Matthew. 3.8. Bring forth fruits worthy
repentance, or such as beseems them who profess themselves to have changed
their course of life, and to be conuer^ed from sin to God. But our repentant
must not stay here, for then he plaieth the hypocritical Pharisie, making the
outside of the cup clean, but leaving it foul and filthy within: and
therefore we must desire him to try what he can do in mending the corrupt and
sinful life of his soul, and of all the faculties thereof. This is, no doubt,
a hard piece of work, passing the cunning of any creature, and belonging to
God only, yet man may in some sort change his soul, although not from
sinfulness to holiness, yet from vice to virtue, and from ignorance to
knowledge. Wherein our repentant is to labor, using all good means of getting
knowledge and virtue. He is to give himself carefully to the reading and
studying of the Scripture, and of all other books containing sound and true
doctrine, gathered out of the word of GOD. Yea, although he meet with many
points of doctrine, which he cannot possibly understand, conceive, or
believe, yet he is not to give over, but rather to ascribe the hardness of
them to his own dullness, and the impossibility of others of them, to his
own incredulity, not considering the power of God. Likewise he is to labor
in changing the inward disposition of his will and affections, framing and
bending the^ from evil to good, by reasons and persuasions taken both out of
the scripture, and also out of profane writers, in whom we may find notable
pattern, of al virtues, by the examples of Christians, and also of Infidels, of
whom many have so profited in these exercises, that they may seem to have
attained to the perfection of virtue. Yea, he is to use great severity toward
himself, in repressing the perverseness and rebellion of these headstrong
faculties, and that by denying unto them the lawfvll use of things, that so
they may be far from unlawful desires. To be short, he who does desire and
seek for regeneration must by all means endeavor not only to purge himself
from all open and gross sins, by leading a life unblameable before men, but
also from small and secret sins, by keeping a good conscience in all his
ways, in the sight of God: yea, not only to abstain from evil, but also to
perform all Christian and honest duties, both to God and man. Yea, he must
purge not only his life and actions from sin, but also his mind from
ignorance, using all good means to be instructed in Religion: yea, his will
and affections from all vices, lusts, and corrupt desires, and so, as much as
lies in his power, to renew himself. And yet when he has done all that he
can, he is but where he was, to wit, a carnal man, as dead in sin, as any
man is in his grave. Yet he has used the first means of obtaining grace, and
eternal glory, and has done that whereby that grievous condemnation which is
appointed for the wicked, is avoided, and the favor of God procured, at least
for temporal blessiings.

Sect. 3.
THe second means of attaining to regeneration, is the ministry of the
word, the which is the ordinary means by the which God works regeneration
in his elect. We say ordinary, be^^use some time it pleases God to work
without it by other means, as namely by private reading, instruction, and
exhortation, by miracles, by crosses, and great humiliations, yea, sometimes by
temporal blessings, plentifully and straungely bestowed on men: yet the usual
and appointed means is the public ministry of his holy word, performed
in a plain and simple manner, as we read. 1. Pet. 1.23. Being borne again,
not of mortal seed, but of immortal, by the word of God enduring for ever.
If it be asked, what needs any means in regeneration, it being an immediate
work of God? why this means more then some other? why the public ministry
of the word, rather then the same doctrine privately taught? We answer, to
the first question, that as in all others miracles, so also in this, God uses
some show of natural causes, that so he may conceal his own extraordinary
working, as it is, Prou^rb. 25.1. It is a glory to God to conceal his doings:
So in regeneration (as great a miracle as any other, yea, the only miracle in
this time of the Gospel, continuing in all ages of it) GOD uses ordinarily
the means of his word preached, in which respect it is a mediate work of
GOD: yet because this means has not this power inherent in it self, in truth
it is an immediate work.

To the second question we answer, that God for the end mentioned, to wit,
the concealing of his myraculous working, uses to use a means, having in it a
virtue, although not able to bring forth the effect, yet helping toward it,
and of some force for that purpose, even in the judgment of a natural man.
And so in regeneration, it is plain, that the ministry of the word seems
to have (for most men think that it has indeed) the power of renewing men
inherent in it self. For thus they reason: men being endued with reason, may
by teaching be brought to knowledge, by force of argument they may be
persuaded to virtue and moderation, whereof a virtuous and honest life will
easily follow: yea, there is no doubt, but that God does ordinarily prepare
men after a sort for grace, drawing them nearer to himself then other carnal
men are: and therefore the ministry of the word is a fit means of
regeneration.

The third point may very well be made a question among those who think that
the ministry of the word, has the faculty of regenerating inherent in it
self: for why should not a man learn and be persuaded, as well by himself,
as with others, as well at home as in the Church? Otherwise it is no question,
neither is there any other answer to be made unto it, but only this, that so
it pleases God to work by public, and not by private means. And yet no man
can deny, but that it is more meet, that regeneration being so wonderful
and glorious a work of God, should be wrought rather in the public body of
the Church, in the assemblye of those who are already sanctified, then in
hugger mugger, in this or that corner. So that the second means of attaining
to regeneration, is the word of God, publikly and purely preached: not as it
does by a natural faculty inherent in it self, work in men knowledge,
obedience, and that reformation and amendment of life mentioned in the former
Chapter, to the which it is to be referred in this respect, but as it does by
the supernatural power of GOD work true regeneration in the elect. And
therefore it stands every one in hand, who has any care and desire to
attain to eternal life, to be diligent in hearing the word of God, whenever
occasion serves. As the wise man exhorts the good husband to be sowing his
seed at all hours, times, and seasons, because he knows not whether this or
that will prosper: so must this repentant take al occasions of hearing gods
word, for that he knows not but that God will even at that time which he
would bestow on worldly profits or pleasures, bestow this unspeakable
blessing of regeneration upon him. God may indeed call him wheresoever he
strayeth: but (that we may use ye similitude above mentioned) as that offendant
is liker to obtain mercy at the hands of his prince, who stands at his
very gates in his presence, attending when he will becken or call unto him,
then he who having addressed himself to come before the king, keeps himself
aloof of, far out of his sight, so it is liker that God will behold him with
the eye of mercy, who is in his presence, hearkneth to his voice, and attends
his pleasure, then him who is out of his sight, and employed about other
matters.

Sect. 4.
THe third and last means to be used in seeking regeneration, is prayer or
invocation of the name of God, whereby this repentant seeing himself to be as
yet but carnal and hard hearted, as he was before, and that no means, either
devised by himself; or appointed by God will prevail, renounceth himself, as
being most desperately miserable, and all means in the world, as being unable
to effect that which he desires, and so flies to the only mercy and
goodness of God, desiring him for his mercies sake, and for Christ's sake, in
whom all the mercy and goodness of God, as the great Ocean ouerflowing the
earth, does show forth it self, to vouchsafe unto him, the most wretched and
unworthy creature in the world, one drop of his grace, to mollify his stony
heart, and to quicken his soul, being now clean dead in sin. This must be
done, not seldom, coldly, negligently, and for fashions sake, as men use to
pray, for so men ask those things which are of no account, and which they care
not greatly whether they obtain or no, but in all vehemency of spirit and
affection, yea, with all importunity, we giving no rest, night nor day,
either to our selves, or to God, till we obtain our desires. This prayer will
be of great force, as we are taught by the Parable of the importunate
widdowe. Luke 18.5. and therefore we are not to be weary, or faint in
perfourming this duty to GOD, and to our own souls, but rather to prepare
our selves by all means (as by abstayning from the superfluous and
unnecessary use of meats, drink, sleep, worldly affairs, and whatsoever
may hinder us in this behalf, and by considering the incomparable excellency
of the thing we labor to attain for the right perfourmance of it. The which
if we do, we shall see and find, that prayer is the most wonderful thing in
the world, able to work miracles, yea, stronger then the strongest that is,
then God himself, who (as the scripture teaches, or rather speaks) is by
prayer forced and compelled to do that which otherwise he would not do. No man
can by force wring any thing out of the hands of God, whose weakness is
stronger then men: yet, prayer in that it renounceth all force of means,
relying it self wholly on the goodness of God, is of greatest force, and that
by the which if we wrestle with God, we need not doubt of ouercomming of
him. If men of great and lofty spirits (who to God are as fillie worms,
creeping on the earth) stand so much upon their reputation, that (as it is
recorded of the Senators of Rome in old time) they think it a great disgrace
unto them, that any man should say that he had in vain asked help at their
hands, shall not God the great King of Heaven and earth, who is as able as the
richest, and as willing to give as the frankest, yea, and has as great care,
(and not without cause) of his glory, as any man has of his worldly worship
and renown, think scorn that any man should say, there is no help for me in
GOD, I have in vain afflicted my soul, humbled my self at his footstool,
cleansed my ways in his sight, repaired to the place of his presence, and
called upon him: there is nothing to be hoped for or gotten at his hands.

Yea further, as this exercise of prayer is the most ready and effectual
means to procure this, or any other blessing at the hands of God:, so often it
pleases God to grant grace to men, even whilst they are asking it, to touch
men's hearts by his spirit in the very instant wherein the heart and the soul
of man is in vehement and earnest prayer in a manner separated from the body and
lifted up into heaven. For even as the smith strikes the iron while it is
hot, and and fit to receive any form or impression: so God, although he
could imprint his grace in the coldest, hardest and flintiest disposition of
the heart, yet he rather does it, when as the affections of men are stirred up,
and enflamed either by the ministry of the word, and public prayer (during
the which regeneration is ordinarily wrought in men) or else by some private
Christian exercise, as reading the scripture and serious meditation, but
especially by praying and singing Psalms to god, in the time of the which
actions, it pleases God sometimes to send his spirit into the hearts of his
elect. But it may be here objected, that we suppose an impossible thing, to
wit, that an unregenerate man should pray, especially with that vehemency, and
perseverance, which we require, as appears by those words of the Apostle.
Romans 10.14. How shall they call on him, on whom they have not believed? We
answer, that this is to be understood of Infidels, who know not the Gospel:
not of Christians, who may be endued with knowledge, yea, who may pray,
although not as they ought, and as the faithful do.

Thus we have commended to this repentant the means of attaining to
regeneration, whereof the first is that reformation and amendment of life,
which may be in one as not yet regenerate. The second is, the diligent hearing
of Gods word. The third, earnest and continual prayer. By the first, he
addresseth himself to come to God, casting off his filthy sins, and putting
on the new garment of a religious, just, upright and honest life: by the
second, he stands waiting at the gate of Gods mercy, where usually men are
received into favor: by the third, he becomes a little more bold,
presumes to knock and rappe at Gods gate, where we leave him prepared,
waiting and knocking till it please God to open and let him in.

Sect. 5.
ANd yet there remains one point to be briefly declared, to wit, how this
repenta^t being now (as we are to hope, judge, and suppose) of a carnal, made
a spiritual man, may know himself to be, in the state of grace. For although
regeneration being so great, and a total change be usually so evident,
especially to him in whom it has place, that he can not doubt of it, yet it
comes often to pass by the temptation of Satan, and that natural
infidelity which remains in them, that even the faithful are brought to
this pass, that they know not what to make of themselves: but either think
or at the least suspect themselves to be in the midst of a troublesome and
tempestuous Sea, when as in truth they are arrived in the Haven.

This controversy must be taken away by comparing our present estate with our
former, and by considering that change which we feel to be of a sudden
wrought in our selves, in the earnest perfourmance of some Christian exercise
tending to regeneration. For we are not to look for it in our banquets,
pastimes, sleep, recreations, or while we are busied about worldly affairs,
but while we hear the word of GOD, while we pray unto him publicly, or
(perhaps) privately alone, or with others, while we humble our selves in
fasting, and unfeigned sorrow for our sins. In the perfourmance of the which
Christian duties, GOD is by his mighty power able to turn the hearts of men
which way he lifts, to change the natural disposition of his soul, whom
he then calls, making it look toward himself, which before did frowardlie
abhor from all good, and up to heaven, which before had the eyes fixed in
earthly things. Whereupon this repentaunt (for we will yet give him his old
name, because he doubts himself to be still, not a new, but the old man)
feels all the facultyes of his soul, his mind, will, and affections
straungely changed. For whereas before he felt himself so hard hearted, that
although he saw his sins, yet he was not grieved for them, unless it were
for the punishment of them, now he powers out of his eyes Ryuers of tears,
in respect of the dishonor, which he has by his sins b^ought to the name of
God. Whereas before he doubted of Gods favor, and the pardon of his sin, now
he is undoubtedly persuaded of both: and so he is now replenished with
unspeakable joy, and hears the spirit (not of bondage, and fear, wherewith
he was possessed) but of adoption crying in his heart, Abba father. He now
feels himself able to withstand those sins whereunto before he yielded
continually at the first: to have a delight in praying to God, and in all
Christian exercises whereunto before he was drawn by fear of the displeasure
either of men, or perhaps in some conscience of sin in fear of the wrath of
God, and a desire to avoid it. And to conclude, he feels all those parts of
holiness wrought in some measure in his soul, which are requited in the
faithful.

FINIS.
The Argument of the Treatise following.
AS it is not sufficient for the good estate of man's body that it be brought
into the world, in the natural perfe^^^on of it, which consists in the
equal temperature and just proportion of the several parts of it, for that it
being left here, would soon perish and come to noug^t: and therefore it must
of necessity be continually both nourished with meat and drink, and also
preserved from all hurtful things, yea carefully restored to the former state
of health, if by any inward or outward means it fall into sickness, or be
any way hurt, wounded, or distempered: no more will it serve for the good
estate of the soul, that it be both prepared by repentance for regeneration,
yea actually regenerated by the spirit of God: but it likewise must
continually be tended, fed, and cherished, yea healed of all those maladies
which by any means happen unto it. This we call the right dieting of the
soul, resembling the soul to the body, that both the doctrine may be plain
and easy, being illustrated and declared by sensible and familiar similitudes,
and also, that the continual care and pains which we take about our bodies,
the ordering and dieting of them, may always be putting us (...) mind of
perfourming the same duty unto our souls, for the which we oght to be so much
the more careful, as eternal happiness is better the^ this short and
miserable life.

This spiritual diet has two parts, conseruatiue, and restoratiue, the
former continues and keeps in the soul that measure of grace and of
holiness, which it has received from God, the other restores it when it is
lost, and repaireth it being decayed. Again, conseruatiue diet has two parts,
nutritive and preservative: consisting, the one in the right use of those
things, by the which the soul is nourished, the other in the careful avoiding
of all things, which are hurtful unto it: spiritual nourishment consists in
two t^ings, food and exercise, whereof the one is the matter, the other the
means, manner or form of nutrition.

Further, we are to consider how the soul has resemblance to the state of the
body, and how it being of it self simple and spiritual, can be subject to
alterations, distempers, and diseases, which have place in the body, by reason
of the contrariety of qualities prevailing, or yielding one to another: to
wit, that as in the body heat and moisture, so in the soul, holiness and
sinfulness do continually fight together, the one laboring to consume and
expel the other, the sinfulness of the flesh laboring to quench all the good
motions of the spirit, and the spirit striving to crucify the flesh, with all
the corrupt lusts thereof: Gal. 5.17. The flesh lusts against the spirit, and
the spirit against the flesh: and these are contrary the one to the other.
This is the composition and temperature of the soul, having place only in the
state of regeneration, wherein the soul has in it self both holiness and
sinfulness: but not in the state of innocence, or yet since the fall of Adam
in carnal men: when as the soul being altogether either holy or sinful,
cannot be said to have this composition or temperature.

These points of doctrine may profitably be considered. But first we are to
know, that the pains and care taken in dieting and ordering the soul, ought
to be continual without any intermission, for that as the body being
neglected for a small time, becomes weak and distempered, yea soon falls
into sickness and does perish, so is it with the soul, the which being
neglected but a little, there will a decrease of holiness be plainly felt, yea
perhaps seen by others. The reason whereof is manifest: to wit, because both
outward occasions and temptations, and also the inward corruption of sin, never
cease from oppugning this holiness: and therefore as the body must
continually be repaired with nouris^ment, because it is continually consumed by
our natural heat, so must the soul by a good diet daily used, be preserved.
Thus the scripture does every where exhort us to a continual use of all
spiritual exercises, as namely of prayer, Ephesians. 6.18. Pray always with all
manner of prayer and supplication in the spirit. And 1 Thessalonians. 5.16. Rejoice
evermore, pray continually: not as if (as some have fondly imagined) we ought
to give our selves so wholly to spiritual exercises, as that we neglect our
bodies and this present life, as most men bestow all their time, care and
labor, about their bodies, without any regard had to their souls. For as God
has given unto us both bodies and souls, so it is his will that both be
carefully preserved, and that both for the maintenance of this present life, we
labor daily and diligently in some lawful calling, and for the preserving of
the life of our souls we use that spiritual diet which we are about to declare.
Yet as heavenly, spiritual, and eternal things are far more excellent and
more to be desired then earthly things, so we ought to have greater care of the
one then of the other, and so to frame the course of our life, that we entangle
our selves in no mo worldly duties then are needful. Thus the Apostle
counsels, 1. Cor. 7. that the servant should not neglect any duty which his
master enioyneth him, under pretense of serving God but yet desire a free
life, because in it he may have greater opportunity and leisure to serve God:
and like wise, that we should prefer a single life before marriage, which
(usually) brings with it many cares and troubles. According to this rule they
who^ God has blessed with riches and abundance of ^orldly things, ought to
give more time, care and labor to the service of God, the^ they who are in
poverty, and want things needful: and to say with themselves, soul thou have
goods laid up for many years, and therefore (not take thy ease and make thy
self drunk with the superfluity of ^orldly pleasures) but, take time as much
as thou will to serve God, and to cleanse thy self from the filthiness of sin,
which makes the abominable to God. But usually men, as it were adding thirst
to drunkenness, the more they have, the more they desire to have, and are more
careful in seeking worldly things, then they who are in greatest want.

Besides, it is needful for the right dieting of the soul, that w^ know and
consider the present state or constitution of it, ^hether it be in infa^cie, or
in ripe age, in the increase or decrease of holiness, in strength or in
faintness, in temptation or not: that so we may use that diet which is most
convenient, in regard of the present state of it. Otherwise we cannot but err
in dieting it, yea even in the careful use of the most wholesome meats and
sovereign remedies. For as it is impossible to order the body aright, either
in sickness or in health, without the certain knowledge of our complexion,
age and strength, and unless we mark in what parts it is most weak or
strong, that accordingly choice may be made both of meats in health, and of
remedies in sickness, so the foundation of the right ordering of the soul
consists in this, that we know our age and strength in Christ, whether we be
ripe and strong men, able to digest solid meats, or but babes and weaklings,
who must be fed with milk: and also our infirmities, what sins we are most
subject unto, that so we may avoid all occasions of them.

THE DIET of the Soul: Or A Treatise, showing how the Soul of man being
renewed, or endued with holiness, is to be ordered and preserved in that estate.
CHAP. 1.
Section. 1.
THe first part of the Diet of the Soul, is that whereby the spiritual life
of holiness, and that measure of grace wherewith God does endue it in
regeneration, is maintained and continued, as we know that Physicians
prescribe a diet for continuance of health, as well as for the remoouing of
sickness. For whereas Christ says, Mar. 2.17. The whole have no need of the
Physician, but the sick, and that therefore he came to call, not just men but
sinners to repentance: he means not, that any man is so holy, as that he
needs not both his own continual care in watching over his soul, as also
the continual assistance, of Gods spirit: but that they who are sick, or
rather dead in sin and impenitencie, have more need of help, then they who
are already endued with the life of holiness. For, as it is truly said in
other things, Non minor est virtus, qua^ quaerere parta tueri: so is it true in
respect of spiritual health, the which cannot possibly be kept without
continual care, although in exact comparison it be easier to continue either
bodily, or spiritual health, where it is already, then to procure it where it
is as yet wanting. Here it may be asked, what this spiritual health is, and
how any man can be said to have it, when as all are sinful: we answer, that
although no absolute perfection of holiness, yet a state of spiritual health
may be attained unto, even in this sinful life, and is then attained, when as
a faithful man leads a holy and vnblam^ble life, performing (although in
weakness and imperfection, yea in some corruption of sin) all duties belonging
either to God or man, and being irreprouable in regard of any great sin. For
as most men living are truly said to have their health, howsoever that exact
temperature, ad pondus, whereof Physicians dispute, cannot be found in any man,
or in any age: so, absolute perfection of holiness is not required to
spiritual health. But, as it is sufficient for bodily health, that the
distemperature be not so great and manifest, as that it hinder any of the
natural faculties from their functions: so if the corruption of sin be so
brideled, a^ that it hinder not the performance of any christian duty, there
is spiritual health: yea, although this corruption of sin be so strong, that
it does sometimes bring forth some sin, and hinder in part the performance of
some Christian duty, yet if for the general course of life the grace of gods
spirit do prevail, so that it represseth that sin, and performs all duties,
sometimes faintly, and imperfectly,, at other times fully, and courageously,
yet here is health. For so as in the body: so also in the soul we are to
distinguish betwixt health and strength, betwixt sickness and infirmity: many
have their health who are not strong, and many whole men have many infirmities.
For example. Many are thick of hearing and sight, yet they can both hear and
see, and therefore are to be accounted whole, not maimed, or sick, as we are
to declare more at large hereafter. Yet it is the part of every faithful man
to preserve himself not only in health, but ^lso in spiritual strength and
vigor of holiness, yea, to increase his strength from one degree to another:
the which three effects come of this first part of spiritual Diet. For first
it preserves the life of holiness, gotten by the first act of regeneration:
secondly, it continues that strength or measure of grace whereunto we have
attained in the progress of it: and lastly it increases strength and grace.
The which diverse effects or degrees of holiness, a^ise of the diverse use of
this spiritu^ll di^t, as it is more or less carefully and diligently used. For
as the natural life of man may (if no outward violence come) be preserved
with the least care, cost, and pains that can be: but if a man desire to keep
his body in strength and vigor, there must choice of diet be made, and care
used, and most of all, if he go about to augment either his stature in his
young years, or afterward his strength or flesh, he must be yet more
careful, yea curious in his diet, bestowing all his time, yea great care and
cost in it: So it is in spiritual life, the which being once put into the
soul of man by the hand of God, will continue there ever by it self, although
(as it comes often to pass) the owner of it be negligent in maintaining it,
yea in a manner careless of it. Whereas he that desires to continue a whole
and strong man in Christ without any sickness or decrease of grace, must make
account to bestow great care in this work, and far greater, if (as he
ought) he desire to increase in grace.

Sect. 2.
THis preservative Diet consists in two things: the first i^, to avoid what
soever is any way hurtful to the soul in respect of holiness: the other is,
to use aright whatsoever is good and agreeable to the nature of it. In the
first kind, we are to avoid first and chiefly, the committing of actual
sin, especially of those which are great and heinous. These are to be
accounted as very poison to the soul, many ways impairing the holiness of
it: first, in that they seldom come alone, but accompanied with some other
sin, as Lots drunkenness brought forth incest, and David's adultery,
horrible murder. This comes to pass diverse ways: for as he who takes a
taste of honey, is easily drawn on by the sweetness of it, to eat of it to his
great hurt: so the pleasure of sin being once felt and enjoyed, will not
afterward be easily rejected, and contemned: yea, as the Merchant venturer
having received a great loss by sea, or the soldier a great wound in
battle, often become desperate, and careless of their own estate: so,
oftentimes a Christian by committing some grievous sin is brought to this
pass, that he lays aside the care and study of holiness, and lets all
go at six and seven. Thus one sin drawing on another, and two, twenty, the
soul is at length wholly possessed and overcome by sin, and, even as a city or
castle being taken by the enemy, yeldeth without resistance. And if by the
grace of God supporting him in this temptation, he be not brought to this
desperate pass, yet the committing of any one sin takes from him, or does
greatly diminish diverse particular graces, especially affiance, hope,
spiritual joy, and the peace of conscience: and in stead of these, brings a
fearful expectation of the wrath of God, and of those judgments which he
usually pours upon sinners. Yea, it hinders him from calling on god by
prayer, with that confidence and alacrity which is meet, for that now he cannot
come to him as an obedient son to a loving father, but as a rebel or
fugitive to an angry master: yea, sometimes the committing of sin works the
contrary effect, taking away or diminishing the fear of God, who although
sildome, for that this most fearful punishment of impunitie belongs to the
reprobate ones, yet sometimes suffers the sins of men to go unpunished for a
time: so as it were letting the reins loose unto them, that he may see, or
rather, let themselves, and the whole world see, whither they would go, and
what corruption is in the heart, and what infirmity in the nature, even of
regenerate men. In these and many other respects the committing of sin is
hurtful to the soul, and therefore with all care to be avoided, by him, who
desires and endeavors to diet his soul aright. Sin is to be avoided,
first, by considering the loathsome nature, the horrible parentage, being come
from Satan that foul spirit, the ugly and monstrous shape being clean
contrary to the image of God in man, yea, to the nature of GOD himself, the
fearful fruits which it brings forth, the anger of the great GOD of
Heaven, and earth, which being kindled but a little, makes the hard stony
Mountains to melt away like wax: the dishonor of the glorious name of God,
the unthankful and ungracious disobeying of so gracious and good a Father,
the slander of the Gospel, and name of Christ, the grieuing and snubbing of
the holy Spirit of God, by whom we are sealed up to the day of redemption,
the horror of an accusing conscience, and that which the Apostle, Ram. 6.
makes the only fruit of it in respect of men, shame and ignominy. These
things being duly considered, cannot but stay the most violent and raging
motions of sin: yea they are of such weight, that if they be put in the
balance wi^h all worldly pleasures whatsoever, (the which are the only
proctors of sin, pleading vehemently for it before the judgment seat of man's
free will) they will, unless the balance be strangely false, and the judge
palpably blinded and perverted, wey the^ down as a mountain would do a
molhill, without any controversy or comparison. Sin is indeed as pleasant
in the mouth as is the honey comb, but it is vain and momentanie, yea, it
rotteth the bowels, body and soul. Secondly, sin is to be avoided by
avoiding all occasions, and prouocations of it: for as he who would not have
his house set on fire, will not willingly bring fire into any rowme where there
is powder, flax or any other thing, which will readily take fire, so he that
would not have the lusts of firm kindled in his heart, must carefully avoid
all outward objects, which stir them up, and do in a manner intise men, and
even lead them by the hand to the committing of them. The places of Scripture,
which give this good and wholesome counsel are well known, Job. 3.1. I have
made a covenant with mine eyes, and why then should I regard a maiden? And
Prou. 23.31. Look not on the wine when it is red, when it shows his color
in the cup: for in the end it will bite as a Serpent: thy eyes shall look on
strange women, and thy heart shall speak froward things. By keeping this rule,
a weak Christian shall go on with a straight foot in the way of a Christian
life, when as one endued with a far greater measure of grace, neglecting it, in
confidence of his own strength, shall stumble and fall into grievous sins.
Yea, as one having a weak constitution of body, being in safety, and as we
say out of gunshot, is liker to live, then the strongest man being in battle
in the midst of his enemies: so a weak man being out of temptation, and
avoiding occasions of sin, is liker to stand then he who rashly rusheth upon
the pikes, and has many occasions of sinning, although in his mind,
affection, and purpose, he do more abhor from sin, and so have a greater
measure of the contrary grace, then the other. Lastly, this care in avoiding
sin, by considering the nature and effects of it, and by eschewing the
occasions of it, ought to be exercised chiefly in regard of those sins: and
the occasions of the^ whereunto we know our selves naturally inclined, to the
which we are oftenest tempted, and have oftnest yielded: even as men do most
fortify by art, those places of their towns and cities which are weakest by
nature, and flock thither apace to defend, where they see the enemy most busy
in assaulting.

Sect. 3.
TO this head, of the occasions of sin, we are to refer the company of wicked
and godles me^, who of al other are the most forcible tentation and allurement
to sin. Other occasions are dum, and cannot plead for their selves, but by our
own tongues, and therefore no further then we our selves think good, but these
will be importunate suitors, yea, if they have any power over us, insolent and
tirannical compellers and commanders, for so we are to know that those
tempters have diverse means by the which to draw us from the obedience of God,
to the committing of sin. First, their bare example, the which although it
ought not to be regarded, (but only as a spectacle of the filthiness of sin, as
we see in drunken me^, the beastliness of that sin, more plainly then we can
have it any way described unto us) yet it does often prevail with those who
are weak, especially when as the persons of those wicked men are honorable
and to be had in account, for their wisdom, learning, riches, dignity,
authority, or in any other worldly respect. But we are to be forewarned, and
to take heed of this, knowing that not the actions of sinful men, but the word
of God is the rule according to the which all our actions are to be squared:
and that of men, for the most part not the wisest and mightiest, but the
simplest and basest are chosen by God to be partakers of his spirit, and
presidents of godliness unto others. Neither do these tempters stay here, being
content with those who are moved by their example to tread in their steps,
but (as every one thinking best of himself and his own ways, desires to
have all other like to himself) they add to example persuasion, entreating,
importu^ity, yea, if it be in their power, by force and violence. But al these
temptations may and must be resisted by the power of Gods spirit, that so we
may preserve our souls without spot till the day of Christ. Yea though we be
compassed in on every side with examp^es of sin and wickedness, having no
step free from grievous offenses and stumbling blocks, a^ it comes often to
pass, that the godly man lives in the midst of a wicked and perverse
generation, as Lot lived in Sodom, yet we must not suffer our selves to be
carried away with these streams of wickedness, from the obedience of the will of
God, nor follow the multitude to evil but rather manfully strive against al, in
the profession and practice of a godly life: and as the Apostle Peter exhorts
us, Act. 2*40. Save our selves from that froward generation. Wherein (no
question) we shall find great difficulty* yea, when we have done all that we
can great hindrances, and even an impossibility of attaining that high degree
of holiness, which otherwise were not impossible, for that the full practice of
godliness cannot be had, but would be unseasonable and inconvenient. This
Christ teaches Math. 24.1^. Because iniquity shall abound, the love of many
will wax cold: and 2. Tim. 3.1. The Apostle says, that the abundance of
sin there mentioned, will make Perilous times, in the which it shall be hard
for Gods children to keep faith and a good conscience, and themselves free
from the sins reigning euerywhere. For as in a general distemperature and
corruption of the air, it is hard even for him that has a healthful and
strong constitution of body, to avoid sickness, so it is in corrupt ages and
places, very hand to live unspotted of the world. But there is nothing hard or
impossible to god, who by his grace is able to preserve us from being
overwhelmed with these floods of wickedness, as he did Lot in Sodom, and has
done many others of his servants in the midst of infidels and open idolatours.

Sect. 4.
ANother thing hurtful to the soul, and the holiness of it, and therefore
carefully to be avoided in this spiritual Diet, is licentiousnes, which is the
unnecessary use of worldly pleasures, when we are not content with meat,
drink, and apparel, and other things needful: but lust after superfluous
things, as the people of Israel being filled with ma^na, did after the flesh
pots of Egypt: the which although they may be sometimes lawfully used, for that
the creatures of God serve and are created not only for necessity, for then
infinite things are in vain, for a few are needful, but also for the pleasure
and solace and delight of the faithful. Yet the daily and ordinary use of them
is hurtful and not to be granted or taken. First, in that it takes away our
time and care, which should be given to the service of God, to the study and
practice of godliness, and all Christian duties from these things, and
bestows them on vain and momentanie pleasures. For although we may after a
sort do both, to wit, sometimes with Mary sit at Christ's feet hearing his
word, and anon with Martha give our selves to worldly matters: yet we shall
find, that this superfluous use of worldly pleasures, will be a great
hinderance to those other duties, and make us altogether unfit for the
performance of the^. We do not deny, but that a Christian may have in some
measure, that care for his soul which is meet, and withal not only perform
all the necessary duties belonging to his calling and the good estate of his
body, yea, and sometimes walk forth and make a vagarie into the gardens of
pleasure, thereby both to satisfy the infirmity of his flesh and frail
nature, and also to make himself more joyful and cheerful in serving,
thanking, and praising God: but if he have his daily conversation, and make
his continual abode in them, he may indeed serve God there in some sort, but
he shall find it dangerous in respect of spiritual life and health: yea, as
unwholesome for the soul as it is pleasant for the body. The mind and
affections of a man may indeed be set on diverse things, on earthly and
heavenly pleasures: but that which is given to the one, is taken from the
other: and the more we are affected to the one, the less delight we shall have
in the other: for that there is a kind of contrariety between the flesh and
the spirit, between fleshly and spiritual pleasures, studies, and exercises,
arising not of their own nature: according to which the sense of worldly
pleasure is even as bellows to strire up in man, love, obedience and
thankfulness to God: as we know that God placed Adam in his creation in
Paradise, a place of pleasure, but by reason of the corruption of ma^s nature,
which cannot use them moderately and in due times, it cannot taste of them, but
it will drink of them, it cannot drink of them, but it will be drunk with
them: yea, it will add thirst unto drunkenness, even an insatiable appetite,
to the greatest, surfeit, yea, when it having ouercharged it self is constrained
to unload it self, and abstain for a season, it will afterward more greedily
then ever it did return to the vomit, and so wallow continually in all sensual
pleasure. By this means have many of the servants of God been overtaken: yea,
it is the usual means, by the which satan works in the^ a decrease of
holiness, making them to drink so deep of this cup of worldly pleasures, that
straitghway they fall into sleep or slumber, and so forgetting themselves,
neglect their souls. Besides, this licentiousnes is the next neighbor, and
cousin germain to sin it self, which for the most part consists in the use of
forbidden and unlawful pleasures: and therefore to be avoided as very
dangerous, as it is the part of a wise man not to walk too near the brink of a
deep river, where into if he chance to slip, there is danger of drowning, but
rather to keep a loofe off, and so to be in safety. So that in these respects
a good dietarie of the soul must carefully avoid this licentiousnes and too
free use of worldly pleasures, as we are in many places of the Scripture
counseled and comanded. Luc. 21.24. Take heed least at any time your hearts
be oppressed with surfeiting and drunkenness, and the cares of this life, and
so that day come upon you unawares: and the Apostle writes to the
Corinthians. 1.6 That howsoever all things are lawful, yet al things are not
expedient, in respect of spiritual edification. Yea, he propounds unto them
himself as an example to follow, in ab^taining from the use of all unnecessary
pleasures, saying. 1. Cor. 9.27. I beat down my body, and bring it into
subjection, least that otherwise I my self, who preach salvation to others,
should be rejected. So that we are to hold as a most plain and certain truth,
that as for the body, so also for the soul, a strict and sparing diet is most
safe and wholesome, and therefore to inioine it to our selves, as necessary for
our salvation, and that which may not be broken without offense both to god and
to our own souls. For, howsoever many do flatter themselves in the doctrine
and knowledge of christianity, and so give themselves over to the use of
worldly pleasures, yet we are to know, that it is no less displeasing in ye
eyes of god, to use those lawful things, which we know to be hindrances to our
salvation, then to do that which is simply and in nature unlawful. For as we
read, 1. Sam. 15.23 Rebellion (in what thing soever it be) is as the sin of
witchcraft, and transgression as idolatry.

CHAP. II.
Section. 1.
THe second part of conseruatiue diet, is in the use of those good things,
which are agreeable to the soul, and appointed by God for the preservation of
it: they are two in number, food and exercise, by the which two, as the body,
so also the soul is nourished. As for sleep and natural rest, the which is
needful for the norishing and preserving of the body, it has no place in this
spiritual diet: for the flesh is frail, and would soon be consumed with
labor, if it had not some rest and intermission in the time of sleep: but the
soul cannot be wearied by doing good, but contrarily gets strength by
continual labor, and is made faint and weak by rest, as the body is refreshed
by it. Only it requires these two things, food and exercise, of the which two,
the one is the matter, the other is the form of nutrition: or thus, spiritual
food, is that whereof holiness is made: spiritual exercise turns the said food
into holiness, first of the food, then of the exercise of the soul. But why is
food more needful for the soul, then rest or sleep? and why can it not
continue as well without the one as without the other? It needs no rest,
because it cannot be wearied, but it must be norished, both because it is
imperfite in regard of holiness, and therefore must be increased, till it come
to the full stature and perfection: and also because it is daily diminished by
the corruption of sin, and therefore must be daily repaired by convenient food.
Even as we do daily feed our bodies, for these two ends, first, to augment
them as long as they are in growth, then after that they have come to their
pitch and natural bigness, to restore so much of the substance of them, as is
daily wasted away by the force of natural heat. But what shall we make to be
the food of the soul? Surely, no bodily meat, though never so fine and
dainty: for if we eat we do not therefore abound in grace: and if we eat
not, we are not diminished: neither any earthly thing: for the food of the
soul is that whereof holiness is made, the which has the original, not from
earth, but from heaven, whither we must lift up our eyes, and thence look
for this spiritual and heavenly Manna: not from any creature that is in
heaven, the which although it may be holy in it self as are the angels, yet
they are not the fountain from the which holiness is to be derived to others,
and therefore we must seek for this food at the hands of God, not in his
nature, whereof the soul is not capable, but in some thing proceeding from
him, even in the word of God, by the which as this spiritual life of
holiness is begotten, so it is nourished, and continued, as it is in natural
things, the which, Ex quibus oriu^tur, ex i^sdem nutriuntur. 1. Peter. 1.23.
Being borne not of corruptible, but of incoruptible seed, to wit, by the
word of the everliving God, which indureth for ever: and this is the word
which is preached among you, and therefore a^ new borne babes desire the
sincere milk of the word (as it may be translated) that you may grow
thereby. The word of GOD is the revealed will of God: for as men do by speech
make known to others their mind, counsels, and intents: so GOD has many
ways made known unto man, what he would have done: so that as the soul of
man does more or less conform if self to the will of God: so does it more
or less increase in holiness. This word or revealed will of God, is
contained and declared, first, in the creatures: secondly, in the books of
holy Scripture: thirdly, in the actions of God, or his continual
administration of the world, out of all which this spiritual food must be
gathered and gotten. But especially out of the Scripture, wherein God has
fully and plainly revealed his will, and which makes the other two fields,
the one of the creatures, the other of the actions of God, to yield plentiful
fruit for the nourishing of our souls, whereas without it they are altogether
barren and fruitless. For it is impossible that he who has not the eyes of
his soul opened and enlightened by the word and spirit of God, should pick
out any matter of spiritual edification, either out of the creatures, or the
actions of God.

Sect. 2.
THe will of God, as it is contained in the Scripture, creatures, and actions
of god, is as meare undressed, and therefore it must be prepared and made fit
for our use, as we daily see meats to be dressed infinite ways. This
preparation is made by searching and finding it out, which of it self lies
hidden, and it is prepared, either by our selves, or else by others, as namely
by the Ministers of the word, who in the Church (which is the house of God)
are both as Stewardes to provide, and as Cooks to prepare meat for the
children and servant of GOD: the which they do, when as they gather out of
the word of God sound and wholesome doctrine, and apply it to the several
conditions of the hearers. This public food, which the public ministry
of the word yields, is that wherewith chiefly God has appointed that our
souls should be nourished, and therefore we are carefully to consider how it
ought to be received. For we are not here to declare how this public
preparation should be made, for that belongs not to this Treatise: yet as
all men know, that the good estate of the body does chiefly consist herein,
that the meat wherewith it is nourished be well dressed, and made fit for
the receyuer, not raw, offensive, or mingled with any hurtful thing: so,
without question, the health of the soul does chiefly depend on the
ministry of the word, that it offer to the Church nothing but that which is
both in it self good and sound, and also made fit for the present estate of
the hearers. And surely it is to be wished (and the contrary greatly to be
wondered at) that men were as careful in providing for themselves, wise and
cunning Cooks, able to prepare a right the sacred word of the euerlyuing GOD,
wherewith their souls are, or ought to be fed to eternal life, as they are
curious about the dressing of their bodily meat, which is soon turned into
fylth, and so cast away, as a most loathsome thing: yea, which together with
the bellye, for the which it is prepared, shall be abolished: as in the first
to the Corinthians the sixth Chapter and thirteenth verse. But men spend their
whole care, time, and substance about the one: to wit, the filling of their
bellies, and the feeding of their bodies, and are altogether careless of the
other, thinking no cost sufficient for the one, and every penny that is
bestowed on the other, clean lost. But to leave these godless epicures,
serving their bellies which are their God, it is the part of every Christian
that has care of the health of his soul, after that he has done his endeavor
in providing a cunning and faithful Cook, for the preparing of meat for his
soul, to prepare himself for the receiving of it, by procuring in himself an
appetite to this spiritual food, that so, as it comes to pass in feeding
the body, it being earnestly desired, may be happily digested. This is done
first by unloading our stomachs from all sinful cares, cogitations and
desires, the which being of nature contrary to the pure and heavenly word
of God, will not suffer it to have enteraunce: for it is impossible that a man
should both earnestly desire the word, and cherish sin: and therefore he
must resolve himself to yield hearty obedience unto it, by casting away
whatsoever is in his mind, heart or life, contrary unto it. This counsel we
have given us. 1. Pet. 2.1. Wherefore laying aside all maliciousness and
guile, all dissimulation, envy, and evil speaking, as new borne babes desire
the sincere milk of the word, that ye may grow thereby, And likewise:
James. 1.21. Wherefore laying aside all filthiness, and superfluity of
maliciousness, receive with meekness the word engrafted in you, which is
able to save your souls. Secondly, this appetite of the word, is to be
procured by a due consideration of the necessity, of the profitablenesse and
excellency thereof: for who will not desire that which he sees to be both
most needful and profitable for himself, and most excellent in it self, it
being the only matter of spiritual nourishment, and so the means of
attaining eternal life. Psalm. 19.7. The law of the Lord is perfect converting
the soul, the testimonies of the Lord are sure, and give wisdom to the
simple, the statutes of the Lord are right and rejoice the heart, and therefore
they are more to be desired then gold, yea then much fine gold, sweeter also
then the honey and the honey comb: Moreover by them thy servant is made
circumspect, and in keeping them there is great reward. Again, the excellency
of the word is so great as connot be expressed: It is indeed contemned by
carnal men, as base and simple, and as having in it no matter of importance,
but a bare story of Christ crucified, as we read 1. Cor. 1. The Grecians and
other wise men of the world reject the Gospel, as being destitute of that deep
wisdom wherewith they know themselves to be endued. But what marvel is it,
that he who is blind think it to be dark when the sun shines most
clearly, or that a natural man, who in regard of heavenly things, is as blind
as a buzard, can see no wisdom in the word of God, in the which all the
treasures of the endless wisdom of God are contained. The Queen of Saba
thought it worth her labor to travail into a strange country to hear the
wisdom of Solomon, and counted his servants happy in that they lived in his
company and presence, where they did daily see and behold his wisdom how much
more shall we account our selves happy, when as we are in the company, house,
and presence of God, beholding the wonderful mysteries of his wisdom laid
open before our eyes, the which passes the wisdom of Solomon, and of all the
men in the world, further then the great Ocean does a drop of water. And surely
whosoever can, and does by the grace of God, seriously consider the dealing of
God with his Church from time to time, the tragical end of the reprobate,
living here for a time in all iollity and pleasure, the happy estate abiding
the godly, who in this world are miserably afflicted, the fall of man coming
of his own wilfulness, the salvation and regeneration of the elect proceeding
from the mercy and love of God: He that compares the law with the gospel, the
babish estate of the Church of the Jews with the Churches under the Gospel,
being come to ripeness and perfection, the agreement of the tipes with the
bodies, the wisdom contained in the judicial laws of Moses. And lastly, he
that co^sidereth the incarnation, death and resurrection of Christ, with the
^est of points of christian religion, shall undoubtedly see, and will confess
that all the wisest laws, the deepest devises, and counsels of the greatest and
most subtle politicians that ever lived, the learnedest works of the wittiest
philosophers and schoolmen, are but mere foolery and seely shifts: yea, he
shall be compelled to cry out and say with the Apostle, Romans 11. O the riches
of depth of the wisdom and knowledge of God, how unsearchable are his
judgments and his ways past finding? And 1. Tim. 3.16. Without controversy
great is the mystery of godliness. God manifested in the flesh, justified in
the spirit, seen of angels, preached unto the gentiles, believed in the world,
and received up in glory Neither can any man answer and say, I confess indeed
that there are notable points of wisdom to be seen in the word of God, in
the hearing and considering whereof I have taken great delight: but I have heard
the^ so often reiterated, that now it is irksome to me to hear the word
preached: for as the wise man says, even the honey comb, the sweetest thing in
the world is loathsome to the full stomach. But we cannot be thus affected
toward the word of God and the wisdom of God therein contained the which is
so infinite, that it can never be sounded to the bottom, and fully comprehended
by the mind: and therefore it comes forth every day new and fresh, not
cloying the hea^er, but inflaming him more and more with a desire of hearing
and learning. Of other things it is truly said, that a wonder lasts but nine
days, for that nothing happens so strange, but that the cause of it at length
will be found out: but the wonderful things of the law of God do more amaze
him that has spent al his time in the se^ious contempl^tion of them, then him
who i^ a nouice in the school of Christ. Thus we are to think of the word of
God, and thus we ought to stir up in our selves a greedy and vnsati^ble
appetite of it: yea, great care and attention in hearing it, yea, they wh^m God
has endued with most excellent spiritual gifts, and the greatest measure of
knowledge, ought not to think themselves exempted from this duty of continual
and attentive hearing of gods word: as no man is so strong in body, that he
may abstain from meat, because he is by the word of God, both to restore
that spiritual strength, which is daily weakened by the corruption of sin, and
also to increase his strength til he come to some ripeness in Christ. But
contrarily, he is with great care, joy, and pleasure, to give himself to the
hearing of Gods word, when soever just occasion is given.

Sect. 3.
FVrther as it is not sufficient for the feeding of the body, that meat be
received into the stom^cke: for that if by any infirmity thereof it be
straightway voyded, it does not any jot nourish the body: no more will it
serve for the feeding of our souls, that we hear the word with great joy and
delight, yea, with care and attention, unless also we remember, and so keep
it in our souls. This point of spiritual Diet is necessarily to be regarded,
for that many fail in it, who do in some measure hear aright, as many have an
insatiable appetite in devouring meat, who cannot keep it for any space of
time. This we see both in the parable of the seed, Luke 8.13. and also in daily
experience, whereof the one says, that many hear the word with joy, but it
takes no root in them, the other shows us by the unfruitful and barren
professions of many Christians, that be daily and attentive hearers of the
word, that they let it soon slip out of their minds, for that otherwise it
could not possibly but bring forth some fruit in their lives. The means of
remembering the word preached are these: first, careful attention, for nothing
ca^ be remembered which is not first minded and marked: secondly, to repeat
with others, either with our friends in way of con^erence, discussing every
point severally, to see what is doubtful or manifest, what singular, and
excellent, or usual (for as in the word of God, so in the sayings of men, some
are more notable then others) or with those, who are any way committed to our
charge in way of examination, as our wives, children, servants, scholars, and
such others. But of all other, the surest way to remember the word, is
application, when as both in and after the hearing of it, we consider how it
concerns our selves or any other, what experiments we have had of the truth
of it, and how it will make for our spiritual edification: whereunto if
practice be joined, then we make it our own for ever. Thus we being carcful in
receiving the food of the word of God preached, and as Christ warns us,
taking heed how we hear, it cannot be but that by the blessing of God we
shall continue and increase the spiritual health of our souls.

Sect. 4.
IN this public banquet which God makes in his church, for the refreshing,
strengthening, and feeding of the souls of his children, besides the ministry
of the word, which has the first and the chief place, there is a second
service, to wit, the sacraments appointed for the same end, and being ye word
of God, as the other, although in another form, and is as it were prepared
after another manner. They nourish the soul in that they increase in us
knowledge, faith, mortification of sin, and all the parts of new obedience,
when as the true use, end, and signification of the^ is duly weighed, as namely
in Baptism, which is the sacrament of the law, and of death, the
mortification both of our souls for the guilt of sin, and also of the
corruption of sin inherent in our souls, signified by dipping and drowning
the body in water. For when as we receiving the sacrament in our own bodies,
or else beholding it administered unto others, feel a sense of the guilt of
eternal death due unto us for sin, and a mortificatio^ of thinherent corruption
of sin coming from thence, the^ do we feed our souls by this Sacrament, and
that no less when we see it administered to others, then when we feel it in
our own bodies: and therefore the custom which has prevailed in most places,
of neglecting and contemning this part of the food of our souls, is to be
condemned and sharply reproved. Likewise in the other Sacrament of the Lords
Supper, the bread and the wine received in it, feed both our bodies and
souls: the one by their natural virtue, the other by their mystical and
sacramental signification, working in us a fresh remembrance, and a lively
sense of the death of Christ, represented unto us by the breaking of the bread
in pieces, and the pou^ing forth of the wine.

Sect. 5.
THus much of the public food of the soul: besides the which we have other
means appointed by God to be used privately. For Christians must not be as
babes, unable to feed themselves or to take any nourishment unless it be put
into their mouths by others, but must, as they receive the meat prepared by
others, so also dress some for themselves, and that by gathering the word of
God, the only food of the soul where it is to be had, even there where the
public food is had, to wit, in the Scripture, in the creatures, and in the
actions of God. In these fields the word of God grows, and therefore a
Christian is to be continually conversant in them, and so to make his soul
strong, fat, and lusty. First therefore he is to give himself to the reading,
studying, understanding, and meditating of the scripture. For the profitable
reading of the word of God, diverse things are to be considered: first that we
read it with this intent and purpose, to edify our selves in the knowledge
and obedience of Christ, making our spiritual edification the end of our
reading. Otherwise we may spend all our days, yea, although they were as many
as the days of Methuselah, and yet receive no more increase of holiness, then
they who never heard tell of the word of God. For why? it is impossible that
any man should find this spiritual food, but he who does hunger after it, and
seeks it with all care and diligence. Indeed God sometimes is found of those
who do not seek, nor yet so much as ask after him, and does by his spirit
renew those, who do not once think of regeneration or salvation: but here we
do not speak of the extraordinary and immediate working of God in regenerating
men, but of that ordinary continuance and increase of holiness which every
faithful man may and ought to work in himself by such means as God has
appointed. This he that seeks finds, he that seeks it not, shall never
find it. Hence it is that many have been very painful readers of the
scripture, who never found in them any spiritual fruit or comfort, because they
read them not to that end, but for some sinister respect. The Jews took great
pains in reading, or rather in learning without book the books of the old
testament: yea, so great as may make Christians (who cannot find in their
hearts to bestow so much time and pains in seeking or keeping Christ, pardon of
sin, and eternal glory, as they do in seeking an earthly king and earthly
glory, the which only they look for by their Messiah) and yet they find not
Christ nor any spiritual grace, because they seek not for such things. So,
many other have read the scriptures for other sinister ends, some to get the
knowledge of curious and unprofitable questions and controversies of endless
genealogies, yea, some for confirmation of their erroneous and heretical
opinions, some for mere knowledge and vain ostentation. But he who desires
to be a good physician of his own soul, must, laying aside these and all such
respects, propound to himself the confirmation and increase of his faith,
love, patience, temperance and of all other spiritual graces. These things
must be continually in his mind, yea, he must apply to these purposes, all the
precepts, examples and doctrines, wherewith he meets, minding only points of
spiritual edification, and especially those whereof he most doubts, and
would be resolved, and which belong most to his present use. This rule and
counsel we have given by Eliphas. Job. 5.27. who after that he has declared
at large both the justice of God in punishing the wicked, and his goodness in
sparing, saving and blessing the godly, he adds this notable conclusion.
Lo, thus we have inquired of it, and so it is: hear it and know it for thy
self, that is, do not content thy self with the general knowledge of this
doctrine, but apply it to thy own special state. Not as if it were unlawful
for a Christian, in reading the Scripture, to observe and study those things
which do not directlye tend to spiritual edification, for it is good and
commendable, if he can give so much time to the study of the word, as that he
know all the circumstaunces of the story, al questions which can be moved
about any place: but that when as all cannot be had, (as it is seldom seen,
that any gives or can give himself so wholly to this study who has any
other calling) choice be made of that which is most needful, profitable, and
excellent. In the which respect, he is also to make choice of those books of
Scripture, for his daily reading, studying and meditating, in the which this
spiritual food does most plentifully grow, and may most easily be had. For
although whatsoever is written, be written for our comfort and edification,
and that no part of the Scripture ought to be accounted barren and
unprofitable, yet some parts are more excellent, and more effectual for
spiritual edification then others are, in that they handle those points
wherein the good estate of the soul consists, more fully and plainly then
others do. Thus the writings of the Prophets are to be preferred, before the
books of Moses, to the which they are as Commentaries: and the writings of the
Apostles before the writings of the Prophets, for that all the mysteries of our
salvation are now in the time of the Gospel plainly revealed, which before
were covered with types and ceremonies. Yea, of the books of the new
Testament, the Epistles written by the Apostle Paul, and others, do more
didirectly aim at this mark, then the story of the lives and acts of Christ
and his Apostles. But of all the books of Scripture, it seems that the book
of the Psalms does most excel in this behalf, the which consists wholly of
spiritual meditations, observations, precepts and experiments, insomuch that
it may truly be called the Christian man's Garden, wherein all manner of
wholesome herbs, and sovereign medicines may be had. And therefore a
Christian, although he ought not to be a stranger in any part of the book of
God, yet he ought to be most conversant in this, and such other, as that he
scarce ever lay them out of his hands. Yea, in these books some sayings and
sentences are more excellent then others, and therefore more specially to be
regarded and remembered.

Sec. VI.
THus our Christian is to read the scripture: but what avails it to read
that, that is not understood? or how can we suppose that every Christian can
understand the scripture which is so hard, that even they who give themselves
wholly unto the study of it, cannot with any pains or means which can be
used, sound the depth of it?

We answer, that as it is not possible, so it is not needful for any man to
attain the true sense of the scripture in every place: and again, that it is
both possible and easy for any Christian to understand so much of it as will
serve for his spiritual edification in all respects. Yea, it has pleased God
in great mercy and wisdom so to provide for the salvation of his elect, as to
make those things which are most effectual to edification, most easy to be
understood, and so to meet with the carnal curiosity of men, as to make
unnecessary questions and quiddities most intricate, and even as labyrinthes,
into the which it is easy to enter, but impossible to get forth. And
therefore no man ought to be kept back from reading the scripture, by
considering the difficulty of the^, but rather to be persuaded, that by prayer
to God who can open the eyes of the blind to behold the wonderful things of his
law, by acquainting himself with the phrase and manner of speech which the holy
Ghost uses, by conferring one place with another: and lastly, by using the
help of those who have labored painfully and faithfully in searching out the
true meaning of the scripture, he shall understand so much of it, as shall be
abundantly sufficient for his edification and salvation. Thus the scripture
being painefully read and truly understood, will yield unto us plentiful
food for the confirmation of our knowledge, faith, love, patience, temperance,
and of all spiritual graces. We shall enter into these fertile fields and
pleasant gardens, in ignorance, doubting, distrust, impatience, and sorrow, but
shall come out of them full of faith and of the holy Ghost, and replenished
with all spiritual joy. With this reading of the scripture, we must join the
reading of the writings of those who have gathered the doctrines and
exhortations contained therein to their proper heads, in form of catechismes,
sermons, commentaries, treatises, disputations, common places, and prayer, and
so have prepared spiritual food for others, who have not the like opportunity
of doing it. The benefit and profit, which the Chuch reapeth by this means,
is very great. For by this means many points of singular use are gotten, and
as it were dug out of the scripture, which otherwise would lie in the^, as
in the bowels of the earth, hidden and unknown, especially they who are not
endued with so great a measure of knowledge and judgment, as that they are
able of themselves to understand the scripture, and therout to gather
whatsoever is needful for them. And therefore they are to be red both
thankfully, in respect of god, the giver and author of them: and also
carefully, in regard of our own profit and edification, yet not with that
reverence, estimation, and confidence, which is to be used in reading the
scripture. For that which man says may be false, but whatsoever God speaks,
is undoubtedly true. For the which cause, we are not to rely and depend wholly
upon the writings and authority of any man, of what learning and account
soever he be, as it is ye custom of many, who not content to acknowledge, and
admire the excellency of gods gifts in men, do so addict themselves to al their
sayings, opinions, and fashions, that they take for undoubted truth, without
any further inquiring of it, or examining it by the word of god, whatsoever
proceeds from them, whereof many inco^ueniences follow. For first, as no man is
without his errors, wants and infirmities, so by this me^ns it comes often to
pass, that in stead of sound and wholesome food, they receive into their souls
corrupt errors infecting the^. Yea, as for those sound doctrines which they
have from them, they do not examine them by the rule of gods word, but take them
hand over head upon their words, and so have no firm and settled persuasion,
and resolution of them in their minds. Thirdly, by this partial conceit, which
men have of some one teacher or writer, they are brought to contemn al other
men with their gifts and and labors, and so deprive themselves of that great
fruit and edification which they might reap by the^.

Sect. 7.
BEside the scripture, which is as Paradise, the Garden of God, where^n grow
all manner of trees bearing fruit for the sustentation of the soul of man, we
have other pastures wherein we are to feed, to wit, the creatures, and the
actions of god. The creatures serve for the use and suste^tatio^, as of the
body: so also of the soul, the which may clearly see in them the goodness
power and wisdom of God, and so be stirred up to love and praise GOD. He
shall see the wonderful power of god, by the which the heavens and the earth
were created, the one in continual motion, the other vnmoueble: he shall see
the wisdom of God in framing every creature so curiously, in regard of the
workmanship, in contriuing every part so fitly, in regard of the natural use
of it, as no wit or imagination of man can come near, or almost imitate.
With these Meditations, the holy men of God have continuallye fed their
souls. Psalm. 8.4. When I behold the heavens the work of thy hands, the
Sun and the Moon which thou have created. What is man that thou should
vouchsafe him this honor, to be the Lord of these, to have the fish in the
Sea, the beasts of the field, at his commandment. Hitherto the Scripture
does often send us, to learn the doctrine of Gods providence, who if he
deck the Lillies of the field: if he feed the Ravens, Luke 12.24. yea, the
young Ravens not able to shift for themselves, how much more will he give to
his servant all needful and good things, yea, diligence and care in
providing for our selves. Pro. 6.6. Sluggard go to the Emmet, yea, whatsoever
beside is needful to be known and practiced by us.. For so we are to account
the whole world, and all the creatures therein contained, to be even as a
storehouse of soode: wherein as carnal men do fill and fat their bellyes
with that infinite variety of creatures, which GOD has made: so the
spiritual man may have even for the taking up, all manner of spiritual
instruction, consolation, and edifycation. For if the heathen, who have no
spiritual eyes, wherewith to see, can observe the power and goodness of God
in these creatures, as we are taught Romans 1. how much more shall the
spiritual man find in this feeld plentiful food for the feeding of the soul.

Sect. 8.
THE last feeld wherein this spiritual food of the word of GOD does grow,
and is to be gathered, are the actions of GOD: for as in the creation so also
in the administration of the world, God is to be seen and sought, as in the
one, the power, wisdom, and goodness of God, so in the other, his
providence, justice, and mercy, do manifestly appear, or rather clearly
shine. His providence, by the which all things, all the actions and faculties
of all creatures are disposed, ordered, directed, restrained, vpheld, as that
they all severally and jointly tend to those ends for the which he appointed
them, and the effecting of those things which he will have brought to pass, as
namely, first principally, and generally, the setting forth of his glory,
which is the last end both of the creation, and also of the administration of
all things: and secondly the execution of his justice upon the reprobate for
their sins, and of his love and mercy in the salvation of the elect. His
justice appears in that he recompenseth every one according unto his doings,
and that without favor or respect of person, laying fearful judgments even
upon his elect for their sins, and rewarding the good deeds of the reprobate
with temporal blessings: but most of all he does daily pour forth the
treasures of his goodness, love, and mercy, toward his faithful servants, in
preserving them from all evil, and in providing for them whatsoever is
needful. These things may profitably, and are diligently to be observed in all
the ages and stories of the Church: but they are especially to be observed in
the age and time wherein we ourselves live, for that we give greater credence,
and are more affected with those things which we behold with our own eyes,
which we have noted our selves, knowing the persons in whom they befell, and
all the circumstances of the said actions, then with those which we have at the
second hand by the report of others, and which in all respects are strange and
unknown unto us. Thus the Prophet David mentions Psalm. 37.25. one of his
own observations the which he had been al his life time, even a whole age in
gathering, of the gracious providence of God over his servants, saying: I have
been young and now I am old, yet did I never see the righteous forsaken or his
seed beg their bread. Of these observations concerning the blessings of God
bestowed on the righteous, and his fearful plagues poured on the wicked, the
books of Job and of the Psalms are full: yea, it is in many places made a
sign of godliness to mark the doings of God, as the neglect of it is of an
ungodly man, as Eccl. 2.14. The wise man has his eyes in his head, but the
fool walks in darkness. And Es. 57.1. The just man is taken away from the
plague that is coming, and no man regards: that is, carnal men who are not
acquainted with Gods dealings, nor exercised in marking the^, know not this,
that the untimely death of righteous men, is a forerunner of some grievous
plague which God is to bring upon that City or country where they dwelt.
And more especially, we are carefully to observe those actions of God which
concern our selves, as namely how he has from time to time provided for us al
things needful, even in our greatest wants, when as all men did forsake us: how
he has preserved us from great dangers, how he has chastised us for our
sins, how he has heard our prayers and granted our requests, how he has
comforted us in our afflictions, how he has rewarded all our good works and
godly endeavors, how he has assisted us by his spirit in time of tentation, how
he has sometimes let us remain in sin, irrepentance, and hardness of heart,
and at other times has given us soft hearts, melting at his promises and
threatenings, as wax before the fire, and sending forth rivers of the tears of
true repentance, how he has plagued for our sins, or blessed for our sakes,
our friends, acquaintance, wives, children, kinsfolk and servants, how he
has revealed himself, his will and truth unto us, and in short, how he has
in every respect dealt with us, since we first knew or served him

Sect. 9.
THus we see the right manner of feeding the soul with the heavenly manna the
word of God, contained in the scriptures, creatures, and actions of God: beside
the which, there is required in the right nourishment of it, spiritual
exercise. For it fares with the soul as it does with the body, the which
although it be fed to the full, and daily filled with meat, yet it cannot
be preserved, much less increased in health, strength and vigor, unless it
be exercised, that so the meat received into the belly, may be drawn and
fastened to the other parts of the body, which otherwise will not nourish, but
soon passes away without any profit: so, for the preservation of spiritual
health and strength, exercise is no less needful then food: the truth
hereof appears plainly in many, who although they feed their souls with
all are and diligence, being continually conversant in studying, hearing,
reading, meditating, and regarding the word: yet they are not nourished by this
food, because they do not join exercise unto it.

This spiritual exercise is the practice of christianity, or of spiritual
graces, or the performance of Christian duties, belonging either to God or man:
and therefore it must of necessity be of diverse kinds, as there are many
kinds of spiritual graces, and of Christian duties. The first and chief kind
of spiritual exercise, is prayer or invocation of the name of God, both public
and also private, by the right use whereof, we shall feel all the graces of
Gods spirit to be stirred up in us, yea, confirmed and increased: yea, all
drousines and heauiness of soul to be shaken off, as will easily appear by
considedering the several parts of it. For, the more that we confess our
sins, and the multitude and hainousness of them, as it were painting them out
in their natural shape, and in lively colors, the more we loath and abhor:
them: the oftener and more seriously that we consider the judgments of God
either present, or which are like enough to be shortly poured upon us for our
sins, and also the benefits temporal and spiritual, received at the hands of
God, the more we increase in fear and love, and all dutiful thankfulness
toward him, and therefore whosoever desires to preserve his soul in health
and strength, must have special regard to this, that he give himself to the
daily and continual use of prayer, the necessity and efficacy whereof is so
great, that it may truly be called the soul of the soul, that is, that
whereon the life and good estate of the soul does depend, it being impossible
that either that Christian who is diligent in prayer, should be weak in
grace, or that grace should abound where there is neglect of prayer. But what
shall we account diligence in prayer, or how often ought a Christian to
perform this duty? The answer we have in many places of the scripture, as
namely, Thessalonians 5.17. Pray without ceasing. And Ephesians 6.18. Pray in
the spirit with all perseverance, in all manner of prayer and supplications at
all times. And Luke. 18.1. He told them a parable to this end, that they
should pray always, and never be wearied. This general commandment is thus
to be understood and restrained, pray at all seasons upon all occasions:
think not this exercise to be needelesse unprofitable, or unseasonable at any
time, in the night, or in the day, in the morning, or at noone: in the town,
or in the field: in business, or in leisure. Thus have the servants of God
lived, and thus they have passed on their days in continual invocation of the
name of God. Thus did Paul. 1. These. 3.10. Night and day without measure I
pray, etc. And David. Psalm. 55.18. In the evening, in the morning, and at noone
day, I will meditate, I will make a noise in prayer, and the Lord shall hear
my voice. And we read of Daniel. Dan. 6.10. That it was his custom to pray
unto God thrice every day. Out of the which precepts and examples, we may
easily gather, how much time and care ought to be allotted, and bestowed
upon this exercise, and that it is continually to be performed. For it is not
with our souls in this respect, as it is with our bodies, the which may
easelie surfeit, of meat* or of exercise, for that they being of mean
strength, can not bear much of either, but are soon ouercharged and hurt:
whereas the soul has not any pitch or set limit either of holiness, but is
to grow on further, even when as it is at the highest, or of the means by the
which it is attained: and therefore we cannot exceed in this behalf: unless
perhaps we (as very few do) fall into the practice of that heresy which
gives all the time of a man's life to prayer, and none to the preservation of
life, in following the works of our callings, the which is in no case to be
admitted. And therefore that it may be known what is required at the hands
of a Christian in this behalf, and what is needful for the right dieting of
the soul, we will consider this point more at large, and in particular, in
this manner. As bodilye, so also spiritual exercise is either ordinary, or
extraordinary, the one is to be used daily, the other at some times only,
as occasions require. For as sometimes the body requires long and vehement
exercise, the which is not to be admitted in ordinary diet, for that it would
soon dry up and consume the body, so it is sometimes needful, that a
christian use extraordinary prayer, and that for the better performance of
this exercise, he lay aside for a time all other duties, cares and
incumberances whatsoever, the which he may not do ordinarily, as the Apostle
teaches. 1. Cor. 7. That when as it is so needful in any respect, as for
the avoiding or remoouing of any great afffliction, or heavy judgment, which
he has by his sins pulled upon his own head, for the obtaining of some
needful grace, or temporal blessing, he may omit for a season the duties of
marriage, and give himself wholly to prayer. But ordinary prayer may stand
with the performance of al other duties, neither hindering them, nor yet being
hindered by them: so that a Christian may both serve God by prayer, and also do
whatsoever his calling, although it be laborious, and troublesome, does require.

This ordinary prayer is performed after two sorts, either at set and
certain times, or else upon occasion: as we know that it is an ordinary thing
with men to eat, drink, and exercise themselves, both at times appointed for
these purposes, and also as diverse occasions do offer themselves: so a
Christian is to pray as the Apostle wills Timothy to pr^ach, both in season,
and out of season, at set times, and of a sudden. Set prayer is to be
performed in full and ample manner: the other kind which we will call sudden
prayer, briefly in few words: even as we know and see that men at their set
meals take a greater quantity of meat and drink, then they do at other
times. For why? set prayer must have in it all* the parts or kinds of prayer,
as the Apostle writes, Ephe. 6. Pray in all manner of prayer and supplication,
to wit, confession of sins committed, deprecation of judgments, present or
imminent, requiring of graces needful, thanksgiving for benefits received,
intercession for others. Set prayer must consist of all these parts: yea,
which is more, the particular (at least the chief) sins, judgments, graces,
blessings, benefits, persons ought to be rehearsed and mentioned: whereof it
comes, that this kind of prayer containing in it so many diverse matters,
cannot be contained in a few words, or uttered in a short time, whereas
sudden prayer, conceived upon some particular occasion, and having but one
matter, may be dispatched in one word.

Sect. 10.
THe uses of set prayer are manifest, for they are many, eue^ as many as are
the necessities of the soul, all which are supplied by means of it. But
wherefore then serves sudden prayer? Surely for sudden uses happening beside
a man's expectation, and necessarily requiring this duty of prayer. As when a
Christian commits any sin, in thought, word* or deed, straightway he
desires God to pardon his sin: likewise, when he receives any blessing from
God, he gives thanks without any delay: and likewise in all other parts of
prayer, as we know that the church in these latter ages has generally taken up
this custom of praying, at the taking of meat, the which of temporal
blessings is most needful, and most often received. This kind of prayer may be
performed at any time, and in any place: for of it the apostle writes, 1.
Tim. 2.8. I will that the men pray in every place, lifting up pure hands, yea,
in the midst of other affairs whatsoever, and in the company of others: but
for set prayer, choice must be made of a secret place, and of such a time
wherein we are freed, and as it were loosed from all other business, that so we
may have our minds and affections wholly set upon it. Mat. 6.6. When thou
praiest, enter into thy chamber, and when thou have shut thy door, pray to the
Lord in secret. And therefore we are to account some part of the night ye
fittest season for this work, because then we are freed from all other duties,
belonging either to our callings, or to our brethren, and so may without being
interrupted or any way hindered, set our selves to pray unto God, as we read
Psalm. 119.61, even at midnight will I rise to praise thee, and to think of all
thy judgments, or at the least, to sequester our selves in the day time from
the company of others, as we read, Genesis 24.63. That Isaac in the evening did
walk forth into the fields, to meditate and pray. And Mat. 14.23. That Christ
when his time of prayer was come, sent the multitude away, and went up to the
mountain alone to pray, and was there alone, as also Mark 1.35. That very
early in the morning before day, he went into a desert, or solitary place,
and there prayed. But as for sudden prayer, he did often perform that, in
the midst of other affairs, and in the company of others, even of the whole
multitude. Thus he prayed. John 11.41. upon occasion of the miracle which he
was about to work, in raising Lazarus from death. Whereby it appears, that
what with extraordinary and ordinary, what with set and sudden prayer, the
life of a Christian is a continual exercise of praying, to the daily and
diligent performance whereof, he whosoever desires to have his soul in good
estate, is to look carefully, least that by any means he be drawn away,
and become negligent in this behalf, as we see it often to come to pass,
that Christians do so entangle, and even ouerwhelme themselves with worldly
cares, and affairs, that they can scarce spare any time, either for
extraordinary, or for ordinary, either for set, or for sudden prayer. Yea,
if there be no outward hinderance, yet the slouthfulnes of the flesh unwilling
of it self to take pains, in this or any other spiritual exercise, is a
sufficient hinderance, and makes many cold, negligent, yea, and at length
altogether careless of this duty, as we read, Mar. 14.37, that the disciples of
Christ, when as they had this duty imposed upon the^ by the express
commandment of Christ, were by drowsy sluggishnesse hindered from the
performance of it: the which so far prevailed with them, that they could not
get the upper hand of it, no not when they were sharply reproved by Christ, and
stirred up to prayer, for so he says, Peter sleep thou? could thou not
watch one hour? Watch and pray lest ye fall into temptation: the spirit is
willing but the flesh is weak. And therefore Christ speaking of praying, Luc.
8.1. adds this caveat, that they should pray and not be wearied with it. So
that we being forewarned by Christ, are to take heed least that by these or
any other means, we be either altogether hindered or made negligent in this
exercise, wherein, as has often been said, the welfare of the soul does
consist: as no doubt we shall, if we consider and weigh the unspeakable
fruits and comfort arising of it. What ought to be less irksome, or more
pleasant to a Christian soul, then to have daily company, conversation,
conference and talk with God, his savior and redeemer, his protector and
mediator, his Lord and his God, the fountain and full treasure of all
blessings, the giver of all good things? What ought to be more carefully
performed then that which procures pardon for all sins, which remooueth all
evils, which supplieth all temporal and spiritual wants, which increases all
graces, and preserves the soul in sound and perfect health, even as bodily
exercise does the body. And therefore as me^ feeling their bodies any way
heavy, distempred and out of course, straightway they fly to this remedy of
exercise, not doubting but that it will soon put it away. So whenever we
feel our selves prone to sin, and untoward and sluggish in the service of
God, if we give our selves to this exercise of prayer, and stretch out the
ioints of our souls before God, we shall no doubt feel a great change in our
souls, and that now they are light and able to lift up themselves to heaven.

Sect. 11.
THus we see what singular force and virtue in preserving the soul in the
grace of Gods spirit, this exercise of prayer has: and that not only by the
extraordinary blessing of God, who according to his gracious promises grants,
whatsoever his children ask by prayer according to his will (in the which
respect prayer is as profitable for the body as for the soul, for it procures
temporal blessings, as well as spiritual graces) but also by a proper virtue
inherent in it self. For if we set aside the extraordinary work of God in
pouring his spirit and grace into their hearts, who ask it by hearty prayer:
the very action of prayer does, although not merit, yet both confirm and
increase grace. In the which respect it is not of force for temporal blessings,
for no man can by praying enrich himself: only it procures the blessing of
God upon the labors and endeavors of a Christian, and so brings riches: but
as for spiritual graces, it works not the beginning, but the continuance and
increase of them, not only from God, but also by it self, as has been noted
before, and will more plainly appear by that which follows. For first for
prayer in general, whosoever gives himself to a diligent use of it, he does
of necessity daily enter into a serious consideration of his spiritual state,
and of all things appertaining unto it, the which cannot but work in him a
great measure of grace. For as the careless neglect and forgetfulness of
heavenly things coming from a greedy seeking, and a sensual enjoying of
earthly pleasurs, brings a daily decrease: so the serious and continual
meditation of them, brings increase of grace, the which in scripture is
called watchfulness, as the contrary neglect is drowsy sleeping: and
therefore these two are usually joined together, Watch and pray. As Mar. 13.33.
Look, watch and pray: and Math. 26.41 VVatch and pray, least ye fall into
temptation: that is, give your selves to prayer, and so consequently to a
serious consideration of your own estate (such as uses to be not in drousie
heads, but in men given to much waking) that by this means you may be strong
in grace, and so enabled to resist the force of sin. This appears more
evidently in the particulars: for it is impossible that a man should make a
full and plain confession of his sins before God, desiring him for his mercy
sake in Christ to pardon them, promising and vowing unto him that he will
never again so displease and so dishonor him, and not be made (even) by this
confession far off from committing of sin. And if we suppose that the
corruption of sin is so strong in him, and does so much prevail, that
notwithstanding his diligent praying, he still falls into sin, yet that will
stand true which we affirm, to wit, that diligent prayer, and the committing
of sin, will not stand the other, for if prayer cannot make him cease from
sinning, yet his sinning will make him leave off praying, and be ashamed to
open his mouth to God, or lift up his eyes to heaven, with whom it will seem
that he does nothing but dally and dissemble, promising obedience, and
straightway performing rebellion, yea, to tread down under foot the blood of
Christ as a vile thing, by the which he was a little before washed and cleansed
from his sins. Likewise for thanksgiving, which is another part of prayer,
what heart is there that is so flintie, and so vngraciouslye unthankful, as
not to be by the consideration of the unspeakable love and mercy of God showed
toward him, stirred up to love, obey and glorify God in all things. By these
means and many other, which may easily be gathered by these, prayer continues
and increases spiritual strength, and therefore it is to have a chief place
in these spiritual exercises which we endeavor to describe.

Sect. 12
TO this head of prayer we are to refer singing, which is a kind of praying,
for prayers and psalms have the same matter, only they differ in manner of
uttering, which in the one is plain and natural, in the other tuned and
artificial. The use and end of it, is to stir up by the pleasant harmony,
and agreement of the soundes, spiritual joy and cheerfulness, and so to
remove the heavy lumpishnesse of the soul, as we read Iam. 5. Is any of you
afflicted, let him pray, is any merry, let him sing. For the which purpose it
is of notable force, as the experience of many of the servants of God do teach
us, of whom many do (and many mo might truly do it) testify thus much of the
exercise of singing, that it has usually strangely altered and affected their
minds, that it has replenished their souls with heavenly delights, and even
made their hearts to melt away in tears of unfeigned repentance, the which
before the use of this exercise were so hard and dead in impenitencie, that
neither the ministry of the word, nor private prayer (the which two have the
greatest force and the first place in this spiritual Diet, the one for food,
the other for exercise) could pierce into them, or any jot move them. Thus it
pleases God by weak means, to bring to pass strange things, and by this
pleasure of the sense, for so it is, although it be not so gross as the other
kinds are) to kindle in the hearts of his servants, spiritual joy, love,
zeal, and obedience, even as we read 2. Kin. 3.15. that Elizeus being about
to prophecy, called for a ministrell, and so prophesied by the means of his
playing, the which stirred up the heat and zeal of his affection to speak
the word of God. This exercise of singing (yea, and that with an addition of
the harmony of musical instruments) was daily and familiar with the Prophet
David, as those most excellent songs which he made and has left behind him
to the Church, as monuments of the surpassing zeal and joy which he had in
serving GOD, do plainly witness, Psalm one hundred and fitie: Praise the
Lord in the sound of the trumpet, praise him upon the viole and harp, praise
him with the timbrell, flute, and with all sorts of sweet Instruments, As
also the Apostle exhorts. Ephe. 5.18. Be not drunk with wine wherein is
excess, but be filled with the spirit, speaking to your selves in Psalms, and
songs, and spiritual hymns, making melody in your hearts to the Lord. The
which spiritual delight of singing with a loud and tuned voice, yea, with the
sweetest instruments of music increasing the pleasure, and even rauishing the
soul with surpassing delight, ought not to be accounted light or unseemly for
a christian to use, who in this case may say with David, skipping before the
Arc, I will yet be more light in serving and praising God. 2. Sam. 6.23.

Sect. 13.
TO the second head of spiritual exercises, are to be referred all those
whereby a Christian edifieth others, in the knowledge and obedience of Christ:
for by edifying other, he edifieth himself, by imparting his spiritual graces
to other, he does not only not loose them, but also confirms and increases
them to himself. This we are taught by the parable of the Talents, the which
being put forth to use, brought forth, or rather brought in as many mo. In the
which respect the public ministry of the word is accounted a very effectual
means of increasing all manner of grace in the heart of the teacher, not as it
is made by the supernatural and miraculous work of God, the ordinary means of
begetting grace, but as has been said of prayer, by a virtue inherent in it
self, agreeably to common reason: the which teaches us that by all
likelihood, as they who dress much meat for others, taste some themselves,
and as nou^ses who chew meat for young children, suffer some to slip down
into their own bellies, so the ministers of the word, who study day and night
how they may be setting before the eyes of the people the ugly and filthy
shape of sin, should themselves be greatly inamoured with it, that they who
labor to affright others with the fearful judgments of God, should stand in
some awe, and that they who inflame others with the love of God, should heat
themselves, and in brief, that all the doctrines, exhortations, threatenings,
and promises which they propounde to the people in the name of God, should
redound to their own profit and edification. All men know and we confess,
that often that comm^^h to pass Romans 2.20. He that professes himself to be a
guide to the blind, a light to the ignorant, himself blinded with the deceit
of sin. And many, although they teach others, that they should not sin, yet
they themselves commit most heinous sins: yet it is not possible, but that
one endued with faith, and the spirte of God, should by the diligent and
careful preaching of the word, be wonderfully strengthened, and increased in
all manner of grace. In this sense the Apostle writes. 1. Tim. 4.15.16. These
things exercise, and give thy self unto them, that it may be seen among all
men how thou profitest in them: take heed to thy self, and unto doctrine,
for so doing thou shall save both thy self and them that hear thee. Thus we
are to account, that al they who are any way called to the expounding or any
kind of handling of the scripture, have a good means of profiting in
godliness: as also they who having the charge and government of others
committed unto them, as husbands, parents, and masters, they are by private
teaching, catechizing, and instructing of their families, wives, children, and
servants, to exercise, and so to confirm and increase those graces, which they
have received. Yea, no man is altogether destitute of this spiritual exercise:
for if he have no public function, nor yet by his private calling any
subject unto him, yet in that he is a Christian, this duty of exhorting and
edifying others, and so of exercising his gifts, does belong unto him.

Sect. 14.
THe last kind of spiritual exercises, is the practice of Christian duties,
or a Christian life, consisting not in a bare and naked profession, or in word
only, but also in deed and action, when as every grace of Gods spirit
lurking inwardly in the heart, sends forth fruit in life, according to the
nature and kind of it. For, as it comes to pass in our bodies, both in the
whole, and also in the several parts and members of them, that the more they
are exercised, the more they are both confirmed in strength, and augmented in
quantity, and contrarily, the more they cease from perfourming their natural
functions, the less able they are to perform them, yea, by this means it
comes to pass, that they are little and weak: even so it comes to pass
in the soul, the graces whereof as they are more or less put in practice in
the doing of of good works, and the performaunce of Christian duties: so they
do either increase, or decay. For example, a Christian is diligent in
practicing the duties of love toward his brethren, he imparteth his goods,
and whatsoever he has unto them, for the relieuing of their necessity, and
the supply of their wants: this Christian by this means increases love in
his own soul: by giving, he becomes more liberal, by showing mercy on
the distressed, more pitiful, the more he gives to his brethren of his
temporal goods, the more he gets to himself of spiritual love: the more
we suffer afflictions, the more we learn patience, as it is said of Christ
in the fifth to the Hebrews, and the eight verse, That he learned patience by
his sufferinges, and as it is said in the fifthe to the Romans, That
afflictions work patience: the more the body is tamed and kept under by
fasting and such other means, the more the soul is strengthened, and so it
comes to pass in all other graces. For by practi^e they are kept and
increased, by the want of practice, they are diminished and lost. Whereby it
appears how necessary good works are, in regard of the good estate of the
soul, and that as they take their being from inward graces: so they give back
again unto them strength, and increase. Thus Christ, Mat. 7. in the parable of
the wise and foolish builder, makes the practice of Christianity, to be the
foundation of Religion in the heart of a man, even that without the which it
cannot stand and continue, but will decay by little and little, and at length
fall to the ground: in like manner Paul, 1. Tim. 6.17. makes good works the
foundation of godliness, although in truth, and in proper speech it be the
fruit of it. And Iam. 1.22. Be ye not only hearers, but also doers of the law:
otherwise ye deceive your selves: for that all your Religion will soon vanish
away, and come to naught. For the facultyes both of body and soul are lost by
idleness, as they are strengthened by use and labor: and therefore we are not
to doubt, but that good works howsoever little esteemed by many, and seldom
to be found in the lives of any, have a necessary and notable use in this
spiritual Diet. And surely whosoever considers the lives, and professions of
many Christians, yea, even of those of whom we are to think no otherwise but
that they are truly endued with faith, how fruitless and altogether barren of
good works they are, need not marvel why most men either decrease or stand
at a stay in godliness, but may easily see and acknowledge, that the graces of
God are lost for want of use, and the practice of Christian duties. For now a
days ch^istians being too much ad^icted to the world and worldly pleasures,
content themselves with the performance of those Christian duties, which belong
to God, as are prayer, hearing the word, receiving the sacraments, leading an
unblameable life. But as for the duties of love and mercy, which cannot be
performed without cost, the impairing of our worldly state, and diminishing of
our earthly pleasures, these are not to be found among men, but clean laid
aside as things of no necessity, nor of any great use in regard of salvation.
But the truth is, that the more they are neglected, the more the graces from
the which they should proceed, are diminished. For as good children are to
their parents, so good works are to inward graces, they cherish and maintain
them, as they came from them, and so are in respect of them both as causes and
as effects. And therefore that we may be stirred up to the daily practice of
good works, we will breefely consider in how many other respects they are good
and needful.

Sect. 15.
THe first motive, and that which ought to be of greatest force to persuade us
to good works, is the setting forth of Gods glory, for the which purpose we^
were both created in the beginning, and recreated in regeneration. 1 Cor. 6.20.
You are bought with a price, therefore glorify God in your bodies and souls,
which are Gods. For that God is greatly glorified by our good works, we know
both by the scripture and by common reason. Mat. 5.16. Let your light so shine
before men, that they seeing your works, may glorify your father who is in
heaven. And Ioh. 15.8. Herein is my father glorified, that ye bring forth
much fruit, and become my Disciples. And 1. Pet. 2.12. Have your conversation
honest among the Gentiles, that they beholding your good works may glorify God
in the day of their visitation. Yea, this is agreeable to reason it self, for
by this means it appears, that the God whom we serve, is not evil or
unjust, or any approuer of evil, but of purity, justice, uprightness, and
goodness. Again, by obeying Gods commandments we show and profess to the
whole world, that we acknowledge, love, and fear him, that we believe his
word, promises, and threatenings, that we hope and trust in him, whereas by
neglecting those Christian duties which God requires, we show indeed
(whatsoever we profess in word) that we make small reckoning of him or of his
word. Secondly we ought to abound in all good works, that so we may give both
to others, and also to get to our own consciences many arguments and pledges of
true regeneration, the which cannot be known by any other means. But shall
we go a little further, and say that good works are some cause of our
salvation, as being in part the matter of our justification. It is not good or
lawful to speak or lie in the cause of God, or to persuade good works by an
untruth, yet, thus much we may safely say, that look what is to be given to
renewed holiness in the matter of our justification and salvation: So much may
and must be granted to good works, which are a part thereof, to wit, the
holiness of the outward action. For holiness is exercised by good works,
especially by those which are most costly and troublesome unto us. For
whosoever does any thing contrary to his temporal commodity, he does it in all
likelihood in some spiritual respect, and for conscience sake. Notable for
this purpose is that saying and pratise of David. 2. Sam. 24* 4. who when as he
might have had the threshing floor and the oxen for sacrifice of free gift at
the hands of Araunah, he would needs give him the full price for them, saying:
I will not offer a burnt offering to the Lord my God which shall cost me nothing:
as if he had said, if I serve God at another ma^s charges, how shall it appear
that I do it in love, obedience, and conscience toward him. In like manner
ought every Christian to say with himself, I know that many hypocritical
reprobates, and proud Pharisaicall heretics have given all their goods (even a
thousand times more then I have) to the relief of the poor, the maintenance
of learning, and other good uses: that God regards the heart and not the
hand: that my best works are sinful, and (in themselves) abominable in his
sight: yet for the manifestation of the sincerity of my faith and love, I will
labor to abound in all good works toward all men, to the uttermost of my
power: yea, my service which I offer to God, shall be costly and chargeable
unto me, although I know this will be grievous to flesh and blood. There shall
no day pass me without some good work, no more then there does without
prayer, and other spiritual exercises.

Sect. 16,
THus we have in some sort declared that part of spiritual Diet, by the which
the soul is preserved in health, and strength, yea, augmented in these
respects, from one degree of grace to another, till it come to the measure or
stature of the fullness of Christ, that is, toward that absolute perfection of
holiness which is in Christ, in whom there is nothing either imperfect, or
wholye wanting. This perfection can not be attained unto in this lif^: for as
long as the soul remains in this sinful tabernacle: so long it shall have
in it infirmities, wantes, and relics of sin, which keep out the
perfection of grace: yet we must endeavor to come as near it as we can, daily
rising up from strength to strength. In the which respect, the soul differs
from the body, the which has a short time of life, but far shorter of
growth, and an appointed limit or periode of stature, beyond the which it
cannot be brought, but there stands at a stay. But as for the soul,
although it also have a set pitch, beyond the which it cannot go: yet
because it cannot be attained unto in this life, therefore it is to grow
continually. Yea, it being of so subtle a nature, and so quick motion, is
seldom or rather never made to stand at a stay: but if it do not increase, it
does decrease in grace. For although sometimes Christians do so frame the
course of their lives in a safe, quiet, and prudent kind of mediocritie, that
there is not in them any sensible change, in respect of godliness, but as
they were minded and affected, and as they lived many years ago, so they go
on and do still continue: yet without all question, there is some inward
change, either to the better, or which is liker, to the worse. For, as when
the bodies of men, or rather of children, do not grow up to their full and
natural stature, it argues some secret distemperature, and some natural
infirmity in them: so when Christians do not grow on from one measure of grace
to a greater, it does of necessity infer an evil constitution of the soul.
And therefore no man ought to count it sufficient, and as much as is required at
his hands, that he does not decrease in grace and godliness, but rather to
think, as it is indeed, needeful that he grow on from grace to grace, as we
are often taught and exhorted in the scripture, Ephesians the fourth chapter
and fifteenth verse, Following the truth in all things, let us grow up in Christ
who is the head in all things. And in the second Epistle of Peter third chapter
and ninteenth verse: Let us grow in grace and in the knowledge of Christ. This
is to be brought to pass by the same means, by the which the health and that
measure of grace whereunto we have already attained, is preserved: for as the
holiness of the soul is nourished by the same thing by the which it is
begotten, so it is increased by the same Diet, by the which it is nourished.
For, as there is required a greater virtue and force both of nature, and of
diet, to augment the body in stature, then to keep and continue it in life
and health: so he that desires not only to continue, but also to go on in
grace, must indeed use this conseruatiue Diet of spiritual food and
exercise, which has been in part described, yet in a greater measure, with
greater care and diligence. Here is required a free kind of life, not
entangled* much less overwhelmed with worldly affairs, cares and
encumberances, in the midst whereof, although a Christian may serve God, and
work his own salvation, and maintain that measure of grace, which he has
received from God, yet he cannot give himself so wholly to the use of those
means, which are effectual for this purpose, as is needful. This free kind
of life being got, he is, (that we may use the words of the Apostle, in the
first Epistle to the Corinthyans, the seventh Chapter, and five and thirty
verse) to cleave to GOD, to his service, and to all spiritual exercises,
without separation or intermission, to wit, to the hearing, reading, and
studying of the word of God, to the considering of his works, and observing
of his actions, to prayer, singing of Psalms, to the exhorting horting and
instructing of others in the ways of godliness: and lastly and summarely to
the daily performance of all Christian duties, and the exercising of all those
graces which he has received.

The last use and commodity of good works (the which is also the least, and
i^ truth, little to be esteemed in comparison of the other, and yet that which
perhaps will prevail with those with whom we have to do more then the other)
is temporal retribution: for so it pleases GOD, for the encouragement of his
servants, to reward their good works with temporal blessings, as also he
requiteth their sins with temporal punishments. By this argument the Apostle
stirs up the Corinthians, 2. Cor. 9.6. to make a libeberall contribution to
the Church which was in Jerusalem. He that sows sparingly shall reap
sparingly, and he that sows liberally shall reap liberally: for God is
able to make you abound in all blessings, that you having sufficient may
abound to every good work: and so no doubt it is, for howsoever men of
carnal minds judge it a loss and damage to do the works of love and
mercy, yet sure it is, that he that abounds in them, does heap up for
himself, for his children and for his friends, treasures of blessings, which
he shall certainly meet with, when as he himself little thinks of any
such thing: as we read Eccle. 11.1. Cast thy bread on the waters, and after
many days thou shall find it: By this argument which God in mercy has
given unto us for the helping of our weakness in this behalf, we are to be
encouraged to go on in a daily and liberal practice of Christian duties
toward our Brethren, and not to spare for any cost: for we do not loose
it, but only lend it to the Lord, who will assuredly pay us our own with
advantage, we shall receive a hundred fold in this life, and a far better
reward in the world to come. For GOD i^ not unjust, that he should forgette
the good works, the painful love of those who minister unto the Saints:
yea, although it be but a cup of cold water given to a Prophet or any of
Gods servants, it shall not be forgotten, but have a reward.

This Motive to good works God has given unto us, not that we should rest in
it, or that it should have the chief place in this consultation: for then
Satan may object, against us, as he did against Job, Does Job serve God for
naught? have thou not compassed him in with thy blessings? And so to us, thou
do not serve God, or perform these Christian duties in love, either of him
or of thy brethren, or for conscience, but in a greedy desire, and a carnal
hope of advantage. And therefore it is better, if so be that we can contemn
and pass by this argument, not mistrusting the truth of Gods promise in this
behalf, but preferring simple obedience, the sincere love of God, and the
reward of eternal glory, before any reward that God can give unto us in this
world. So that, to conclude this point, by these and such other motives which
the word of God does plentifully afford unto us, we are to stir up our
selves, to the daily performance of all Christian duties of love,
thankfulness, compassion and mercy: and to account this kind of spiritual
exercise, no less needful to be daily performed, then any other.

CHAP. III.
Sect. 1.
HItherto we have declared how the soul of man being by God endued with the
spiritual life of holiness, and also with health and strength, whereby it is
able to perform all the actions belonging unto it, is to be ordered and
preserved in that estate. The which thing, if as it ought to be desired, and
endeavored by all Christians: so it might be brought to pass, then were this
our labor brought to an end, there being nothing else needful to be
declared as touching the welfare and good estate of the soul But as for the
welfare of the body, it is not sufficient that we have learned and do know
the art and means of preserving health: for that notwithstanding all our
knowledge, cunning and care in this behalf, infirmityes and diseases may
happen, as we know by daily experience that many notable Phisicians have
fallen into dangerous and mortal sickenesses, and by them be brought to
untimely death: so, it is not sufficient for our spiritual welfare, that we
know how to diet and order our souls as long as they are in health and
strength, it being also required, that we know how by a convenient and meet
diet to recover them out of sickness, and to heal all the maladies happening
unto them. For why? No man as (we remaining in these earthly and corruptible
bodies) can promise unto himself continual and certain health, because both
our knowledge, and also our care in practicing is imperfect. For if no man can
attain so exact knowledge of his body, which is sensible, but that there may
be hidden in it corruption and secret sicknesses, never perceived till that
they cannot be amended, as it comes often to pass in impostumes, plurifies,
and such other inward diseases, what marvel if we cannot attain to so
perfect knowledge of the state of our soul (the nature whereof is far more
subtle, and therefore much more hard to be thoroughly known) especially by him,
who is fallen into some special sickness, wherein men are far less able to
order themselves aright, then they are in health. And therefore as we have in
the former part of this treatise showed how the health of the soul is to be
continued, when it is present: so now we are to declare how it is to be
procured where it is wanting, or recovered when it is lost. It is indeed the
part of a wise man, to be careful in keeping the health, both of his body,
and of his soul, and not presuming of his cunning in recovering it to be
careless of it. No man is so foolish as to cast himself into the sea, although
he think that he may escape by swimming: to wound his body, because it may
be healed: to take poiso^, because he can counterpoise it by the contrary: and
therefore no man ought to make this use of this Treatise, to let his soul fall
into any spiritual meladie, because he knows where to have a remedy.

It is so much easier to keep sickness out of the body and soul, then to
get it out after that it has gotten entrance, as it is more easy for a whole
and strong man, then for a sick and weak man, to withstand or resist his
adversary: for possession is of great force* And therefore this restoratiue,
or rather curatiue diet, which now we take in hand, ought not to be to any
man an occasion of sin, and of negligent ordering of his soul, but to be
accounted the last refuge, whither we must fly, when as by the force of
sin, we are driven from the former diet of preserving health, But how
comes it to pass, that the soul which is of a spiritual and so pure a
nature should be subject to infirmities, and diseases? Surely by the
corruption of sin in it, the which where it has the whole place and rule
(the contrary holiness being altogether wanting) as it is in carnal men, is
the death of the soul, as holiness is the life of it: where it is and
works, yet kept under and ouerruled so that it cannot prevail, it is an
infirmity: and lastly, when it having in this wrestling prevailed and gotten
the upper hand, does reign and rule, it is a sickness of the soul: so that
sin in the carnal man is death, in the regenerat soul it is either an
infirmity, or a disease: fu^ther it cannot go, it being impossible that it
should wholly expel holiness out of the soul of the regenerate man, as it
were heat out of the body, and so bring death. For as Abraham is brought in,
speaking to the rich man. Luke 16.26. as betwixt heaven and hell, so between
carnalitie and regeneration, there is such a gulf set, that they who would
cannot without the miraculous work of Gods spirit, pass from the state of sin
to regeneration, nor from regeneration to the state of sin, by that or any
other means. Yet as long as the soul is out of that resting place, which in
that place is called Abraham's bosom, or rather as long as it is but in the way
toward it, it does often look back to sin, yea, return and go back
again, even til it come to deaths door, and the gates of hell: but there it
stays, having no entrance granted yea, in truth desiring none. And that we
may return to our accustomed similitude, the soul of man has in it two
contrary qualities, sin, and holiness: of the which, as the one prevails
against the other: so is the soul in weakness, or in strength, in sickness,
or in health, in death, or in life.

Sect. 2.
THe evils of the soul, which are to be cured, are of two sorts,
infirmityes, and diseases. Spiritual infirmity, is the relic of sin,
subdued in a faithful man, working against grace, making him prone or re^die
to fall into outward and actual sin, and backwarde in performing the
contrary spiritual duties. This description, which does in some sort set down
the nature of the evil, is to be particularly explaned. And first, in that we
make it a relic of sin, we distinguish it from humane infirmity, the which is
the weakness of man's nature, and of all the faculties both of body and soul,
being compared with the nature of angels, and which makes that he cannot
serve God in so great measure, that he is not so strong against the temptation
of sin, not so far from committing it, or so sure and constant in
holiness, but that he may decrease in it, yea, omit for a time some duties,
(yet without sin) as the Angels are. To this kind we are to refer, that
ignorance, fear, and forgetfulness, and many other infirmities, which had
place in the state of man's innoce^cie, and which may be seen in the humane
nature of Christ. Those natural infirmities are not sins, for they were
created in man by God, all whose works are good: neither are they the relics
of sin, for they were before sin, and in him who knew no sin: yea, the
Angels themselves being compared with God, are more weak, have mo and greater
infirmites then man has in respect of them. But these infirmities whereof we
speak, are the relics of sin, and sin it se^fe, not lying idle, but
working: otherwise the relics of sin are in all men, and cannot possibly be
removed.

But we speak of infirmities, which may be removed, and from the which
many Christians are free. For sin may by the power of Gods Spirit be so
suppressed, that it have not a day he and ordinary work in us, as these
infirmities have, in bringing forth actual sins: not outwardly, (which is
sin perfected) for then these infirmityes were grievous diseases, but
inwardly in the mind, will and affections: all which the corruption of sin
does daily work, but it is seldom brought forth into act, being put back
and kept down by the power of Gods Spirit: yet sometimes it does prevail even
to actual sin. For as that City which is continually beseeged and
assaulted, can not but be taken at length, at one time or other, as they who
have the care and defense of it committed unto them cannot but sometimes
remitte of their diligence, and be overtaken with sleep, drink,
forgetfulness, fair promises and pretenses, or by some such means: so where
the corruption of sin is continually working in the heart, it cannot be but
that it should at one place or other, upon one occasion or temptation or other,
burst forth into open sin. For example, a Christian is endewed by God, with
the gift of continency, by virtue whereof he leads a life free from all
adultery, fornication, and all such uncleanness. Yet he feels inwardly in his
min^e that burning whereof the Apostle speaks. 1. Cor. 7.9. Here are both the
gift of God suppressing sin, and also the relic of incontinency, not living
idle, but working vehemently, and continually: not in life and action, but
inwardly in the soul. Yet where this infirmity is, there sometime the outward
sin it self will happen. For although a Christian do ordinarily keep watch
and ward over his soul, least that he do fall into sin, yet sometime he will
be somewhat careless, overcome by the force and variety of temptation, and
so fall into the sin of uncleanness. An other example we have in the said
Epistle in the Chapter following. A pagan being converted by the word and
spirit of God, renounceth his false gods, and serves the true god, only in
christ. Here is the grace of GOD preuayling against the corruption of sin,
and suppressing it. Yet there is a relic of this sin in his mind, whereby he
thinks that his Idols, his old gods are not altogether void of power and
excellency, and ought to have some kind of worship given unto them. This is
the infirmity and the work of it inwardly in his mind: yet he suppresseth it
by the knowledge and grace which he has received from God, so that he is not
an open Idolatour, but serves the true God only: yet so as that he may easily
be drawn by the examples and persuasions of others to give some outward worship
and honor to these false Gods. Many other instances might be brought, but
these may serve. Now that we see what a spiritual infirmity is, we are in the
next place to see how it is to be healed and removed. Wherein there is great
care and diligence to be used: both for that God being a spirit, requires the
inward purity of the soul, as well as the outward purity of life, as also in
regard of the great danger of falling into great and open sins, wherein this
weak Christian is: Who although for a time he walk uprightly in the ways of
godliness, yet he is like enough to stumble and fall, when he meets with a
stumbling block, to wit, any great occasion and provocation to sin,

Sect. 3.
But whither are these infirmities curable or no? Surely there is no question,
but that the grace of Gods spirit is able to mortify all the corrupt lusts
and inclinations of our sinful nature, whatsoever they be. Yea it is like
inogh, that God who has begun the good work of grace in our hearts, will
perfect and accomplish it: and that as he has cut down the body of sin, so
he will in his good time, pull the roots out of the ground also. There are
indeed some infirmities in the faithful, which are incurable, some which are
hardly and very seldom cured. In the first sort, we are to reckon the original
corruption of sin, which is an infirmity, yea corrupt, as being the relic of
sin* and sin it self. This infirmity sticks so fast in our very bones and
marow that it is altogether impossible to be removed, and therefore no man
ought to hope for, or to go about the total healing of it. For although it be
not impossible for God to sanctify us fully and wholly, as the Apostle
prays, 1. Th^ss. 5.23. yet it is contrary to his revealed will and word, who
in great wisdom has left this corruption in the faithful, to exercise them,
while they remain here on earth: yea as this infirmity can not be wholly
taken away, so it can not be wholly hindered from working: for it sends
forth some fruits even in the most holy men, who sin often.

But we do not speak of this infirmity in this place: for although the former
part of this definition agree unto it, yet the later does not. It is indeed a
spiritual infirmity, yea the relic of sin, yea working many ways, and
striving against the grace of Gods spirit.

Yet it does not make a faithful man prone and ready to the committing of
actual sins, or backward in serving of GOD: For notwithstanding it, many
are far off from actual sins, and forward in serving GOD. But those
spiritual infirmities, in the healing whereof we are to labor, do work
sensibly and forcibly, yea they do in some sort prevail usually inwardly in
the faculties of the soul, and sometimes they prevail in the outward act:
original corruption may be so restrained that it cannot work but secretly,
and without force or apparaunt effect: but these do after a sort part stakes
with grace, reigning inwardly in the faculties of the soul, at least often,
and as it were by course, howsoever they be so subdued and repressed, that
they seldom come to the perfection and act of sin. Yet of these infirmities
whereof we speak, some are in a manner incurable, to wit: First, those which
are grounded upon some erroneous opinion, the which as it is an infirmity in
it self, so often it brings forth an evil custom in action, and as usually
it being inueterat is incorrigible, so is the effect which comes of it. For
example, many think that they may lawfully give themselves to the daily and
continual use of all worldly pleasures, being not in nature unlawful,
howsoever for use they are inconvenient, and a hinderance to their salvation:
this is their opinion, and this is their practice, thus they live, and thus
they do.

The like we are to think of all those infirmities which have their beginning
and foundation in an unchangeable constitution of the body, howsoever this
unchangeable disposition of the body, came, whither by nature, or by some other
accidental means: For example, many are by the distemperature of their bodies
incessantly and vehemently provoked, and even pricked on to carnal lust, to
drunkenness, to slothfulness, to anger, impatiency, and to other sins.
Hereof it comes, that the soul following the disposition and temperature of
the body, is also thus affected. For the sense of pleasure of sin in the
body, makes the mind to think of it, the will to choose, the affections to
embrace and hunt after it. The which motions of the soul, although they be
continually withstood by the grace of Gods spi^ite, striving not only to keep
them from bursting into actual sins, but also wholly to dispossess them,
yet they have too sure footing to be clean taken away But how hard of healing
soever they be, we must endeavor by all means to free our selves from them:
both for that we are, as long as they remain in us, in continual danger of
falling into open, grievous, and presumptuous sins, as has been said, that
that city which is continually both besieged, and also assaulted, is in
continual danger, as also because they are a continual trouble and grief
unto us, yea an hinderance to the perfourmance of all duties, belonging either
to God, to our brethren, or to our selves, and our own callings: In the which
respect, the Apostle 1. Cor. 12.7. calls one of these spiritual infirmities
a prick in the flesh, and the messenger of Satan, continually buffetting him,
that is, greatly troubling and greeuing him. The means by the which they are
to be removed are these.

First and chiefly, prayer unto God, from whom only comes every good and
perfect gift, yea fervent, earnest, importunate, and incessant prayer, as the
said Apostle says, that he desired GOD thrice, that is, earnestly and often,
that he would take that infirmity and temptation from him. Where it is added,
that GOD made him this answer, My grace is sufficient for thee: My power is
made perfect in weakness. Whereby it may seem, that his importunity in
prayer, was either reproved, which is not to be thought, or else forbidden,
which may be admitted, (although it be liker, that he was not forbidden to
pray, but only comforted and strengthened in temptation) we are not therefore
to be weary of prayer, or to give over, as despayring of victory against it,
but rather to call for grace at the hands of God, yea even to the last gasp
to continue in earnest prayer. The second means is to remove the causes of it,
whither it be in the body, or in some evil custom, and company, or an
erroneous opinion. The third is to avoid all occasions, which may provoke us
to that sin, or put us in mind of it. The last, is not to suffer it to have
any settled place in our minds or affections, as it were coming to
composition with it, and giving ha^fe unto it. For if it bear rule in the
sou^e, it will certainly break forth often in outward actions: but rather to
put it far out of our minds, and not give unto it any resting place.

Sect. 4.
THus much of the infirmities of the soul, the diseases follow: a spiritual
disease is the reigning of sin, or ordinary and h^bituall preu^iling of sin
against grace. This definition is to be particularly declared thus. It has
been often said, that in the soul of man there are two contrary qualities, sin
and holiness: these two are of contrary natures, continually warring the one
against the other. The field wherein this battle is fought, is the will of
man, the which is haled now to this, now to that side, at length the one
gets it, and withal the victory. For in this battle the outward action
(which proceeds wholly from the will, for that a man wills, that he does)
is the victory: which if it be sinful, then sin has prevailed: if sin take
the repulse, and cannot be brought forth, then grace has prevailed and gotten
the victory, there is the infirmity of the soul: but if sin prevail, there
is a grievous disease of the soul. Yet not any preuayling of sin, but the
ordinary preuayling of it makes a spiritual sickness. For it has been
said, that even in spiritual infirmities, sin is sometimes brought forth,
but not usually or ordinarely: As Noah's drunkenness, Lots incest, David's
murder and adultery were not ordinary, but happened perhaps but once in all
the time of their lives, and therefore these sins argued not any diseases,
but infirmities in their souls. Thus we see what spiritual disease is: the
kinds of it are two, total and particular, the one stretches it self over
the whole soul of man, making a sensible decrease in all the parts of his
holiness, the other rests in some part, as it comes to pass in bodily
diseases, whereof some go over the whole body, as fevers, consumptions,
leprosies: and many other are but in one part, as the plurisie in the side, the
gout in the feet, and such like. Of the former kind, there especially are
three: Whereof the first may be called security or impenitency. The second
worldlines. The third distrust. For the first, although total impenitency
cannot be in a man regenerate (for where faith and repentance are once truly
wrought by God spirit, there they abide for ever) yet whenever he continues
in committing gross sins, contrary to his own knowledge and conscience, as the
faithful sometimes do, then he is impenitent in respect of those sins. Indeed
usually when he first begins to commit sin, he does straight way by
repentance recover his former state, flying to God in humble prayer for pardon
of it, and for grace, whereby to resist it. This he obtains at the hands of
God, who, as the father of the prodigal young man, in the Gospel, is more
ready to give pardon and grace, then he is to ask it, and therefore he
meets, and in a manner preuenteth him with it. Yet sometimes afterward it
comes to pass, that he falls into the same s^n, and remembering how lately
he was by the grace of God recovered out of it, is backward and unwilling to
go to God for help as before, either being ashamed to ask that again, which
he so lately obtained, and so carelessly lost, or perhaps despayring of
attaining it, although he should ask it: Or lastly, being so inueigled and
besotted with the pleasure of the sin, that he resolves with him self to
continue in it: and so thinks (and that truly) that it is in vain, or
rather impossible for him to repent of that sin, wherein he is resolved to
continue. Whereupon he goes on from day to day, from year to year in his
sin, never calling him self to account for it, and scarce once thinking of
leaving it, till at length he become so benumbed and hard-hearted in it, that
he can not repent of it, though he would, he can not power forth tears of
sorrow and grief, as he did at the first.

Thus he affected in his conscience, in respect of his sin, does in a manner
give over all holy and spiritual exercises, as the hearing, meditating,
reading and conferring of the word of God, public and private prayer, and all
other means serving for edific^tion. Using them not in conscience, but in
hypocrisy, and in outward show, being cold, yea heavy, lumpish, and dead in
all such actions. If it so fall forth, that his conscience be stirred up by the
ministry of the word, by some judgment, or any other means, so that he
purposes and desires to repent, and to leave his sin, yet he finds him
self so untoward to this work, and so hard hearted, unable to call upon God
in hope of being heard, that he gives it over at the first, and so is further
of then he was. This is a kind of impenitency, the which that it is a disease
spreading it self over the whole soul of man we can not doubt: it may well
be compared to that sickness, wherein men lie for dead for many hours
together, so that it can hardly be perceived that they draw breath. It comes
of the committing of and yielding to great and heinous sins, such whereof a
man's conscience tells him, that they cannot possibly stand with the fear and
service of GOD, but that of necessity the one must be left off and laid aside.

The cure of it consists in the practice of the whole doctrine of repentance,
for in it a man is brought almost to that estate, wherein he was before
regeneration, so that now as it is, Hebrews. 6.1. He must lay again the
foundation of repentance from dead works. He must enter into a serious
consideration of that fearful estate wherein he is: whereof it will certainly
follow, that he will never please himself in it, or be content till he find
some remedy. The which is to be sought at the hands of God by earnest prayer,
by avoiding all occasions of those sins, which have thus prevailed over him,
and by forcing himself although most untoward, to the daily use of all holy
and spiritual exercises, whereby the graces of Gods spirit may be kindled and
stirred up in him. An example both of this impenitency, and also of this renewed
repentance, we have in the Prophet David, who by committing two heinous sins
adultery and murder, fell into this estate, and therein continued for some
time, and by the grace of God was recovered out of it, as we read Ps. 51.10.
Creat in me a clean heart o God, and renew a right spirit within me: cast me
not from thy presence, and take not thy holy spirit from me. Restore me to the
joy of thy salvation, and stablish me with thy spirit.

Sect. 5.
THe second general disease of the soul is worldliness, which is an
immoderat desire of getting, having and enjoying worldly pleasures: it is in
the Scripture called covetousness, and said to be the root of all evil, that
is, that which works in men decrease of all the parts of holiness, and so
all manner of sin. For it steals away the heart of man from God, making him
set all his care, study, and to bend the whole course of his life, on earthly
pleasures. 1. Timo. 6.10. They that will be rich, fall into temptations and
snares, into many foolish and noisome lusts, which drown men ^n perdition. For
the desire of money, is the root of all evil, which while some have lusted
after, they have erred from the faith, and pierced themselves through with many
sorrows, as 2. Tim. 4.10. he complains of Demas that he had forsaken him,
and embraced the present world. This is the common disease of this age, wherein
those who fear and serve God, are almost generally far more addicted to the
world, then is meet, dividing themselves in a manner betwixt God and Mammon,
being far more greedy in desiring, careful in seeking, wretched in keeping,
and light in using earthly, pleasures, then in reason they should be, who know
them to be vain, and momentany, and who do certainly hope and look for
eternal glory and pleasure in heaven. By the which means they become faint and
weak, in regard of spiritual strength: For first, the care and time, which
should be bestowed in preserving and increasing it, is bestowed in getting
worldly pleasures: Secondly, the mind is besotted, and even overwhelmed by the
continual and immoderat use of them. Thirdly, it makes them lay aside the
performance of christian duties of love, belonging both to God, and to their
brethren, by the diligent use whereof, as the soul is strengthened in godliness,
so it is w^^kned by the neglect of the^. And lastly, the greedy desire of
worldly things makes me^ use many unlawful means for the obtaining of them,
and not to be so careful in keeping a good conscience, as they should be.

This disease of the soul is not so gr^euous and dangerous, as is the former,
to wit, impenitency, wherein the practice and exercises of godliness, are
neglected: for this worldly christian serves God and performs all good
duties although seldom, coldly, and negligently, yet in truth and sincerity of
heart. Yet it is more seld^me cured then the other, for that it is not so
evident and sensible, and therefore not much considered and regarded. Yea it
has a great show and appearance of perfect health and strength, in that there
is no christian duty wholly wanting, no gross sin committed, but only such
as have a show of Christian liberty, which makes it lawful for the faith full
to seek and enjoy riches, and all other worldly pleasures. Whereof it comes
that men flatter themselves in this state, and rest contented with it, whereas
no man's conscience can be so continually dead and blind, but that it will
sometimes check him in regard of the other, and even drive him perforce to
seek some remedy for it. The cure of it consists in this, that we do daily
and diligently consider, the vanity and baseness of all worldly pleasures: that
in comparison of spiritual things, they are as dung in respect of the most
pure and fine gold: that nothing is more unseemly, then that the soul of man,
which GOD by his spirit has sanctified and lift up to Heaven, there to enjoy
his presence, which is perfect happiness, should so much debase it self as to
lie wallowing in the puddle of earthly pleasures, or have any sound joy in the
use of them, which ought rather to be loathsome and irksome unto him.

By these and such other meditations, the grace of Gods spirit which now is
clogd and pressed down with worldly cares, is to be stirred up: the mind and
affections to be lift up from earth to heaven, and we inured to a contempt of
the world, and a cheerful and liberal practice of all christian duties,
especially in giving to our brethren, (or rather in lending to the Lord, for
so it is indeed) part of those temporal blessings which we have received:
leaving all sensual Epicurisme and wretched niggardnes to the children of this
world, whose God are their bellies, who have their portion in this life, and
eternal perdition in the life to come.

Sect. 6.
THe third and last general disease of the soul, is distrust, which is a
doubting of the truth of Gods word and promises made, as touching the salvation
and happiness of the faithful. This although in truth it be a particular
disease of the mind, yet in that force and effect it stretches it self over
the whole soul of man, working a decrease of holiness in all the faculties of
it, it is to be accounted and may fitly be called a general disease: it
arises of a supposed impossibility o^ Gods word, being found contrary to our
own experience and to man's reason. Thus the propet David considering the
mise^able estate of the godly, together with the prosperity of the wicked, was
tempted to think and say that it was in vain to serve god. And thus many
other godly men feeling and seeing in the beginning of their conversion, yt God
works strange and wonderful things in them, and for them, promise to
themselves the like strange experiments of Gods power and love toward them,
the which when as they do no not come to pass according to their expectation,
al going on in an ordinary course, and happening to one as to another, they
fall into this doubting and distrust of Gods presence, providence, power, and
love toward them, and so wax daily more and more slack and backewarde in all
the ways of godliness, and in serving God.

But this temptation is to be resisted, by considering that God for the trial
of the faithful, and the hardening of the wicked, works not openly and
sensibly, but secretly, till the time come, wherein al things shall be
revealed: especially this evil shows it self in the time of adversity,
when as the love of God is ouershadowed with crosses, in the which we see not
the love, but rather the anger of God afflicting us for our sins and trial.
But as touching them, we are to know, that God does in the^ show his love
more then in prosperity, and therefore we ought by them to be the more
persuaded of his love, and the truth of his word. Yea, sometimes this distrust
becomes despair, wherein the faithful man is driven beside his faith and
hope, yea, beside himself, and in a manner out of his wit, supposing his
sin to exceed the mercy of God, and ^o be altogether unpardonable. He
cannot be comforted by remembering his former state of faith and grace wherein
sometime he stood, but is by that means confirmed in despair, as thinking
his sin to be in that respect the more grievous and unpardonable, it being
committed against so great a measure of grace. And so he applying to himself
that which is written ( Heb. 6.6. It is impossible that they who were once
enlightened, and tasted of the heavenly gift, if they fall away, should be
renewed again by repentance, seeing they crucify to themselves the son of
God, and make a mock of him) languisheth in horror of conscience, and a
fearful sense and expectation of the wrath of God. This is the most fearful
sickness which can happen to a faithful man, yea it is the state of the
wicked spirit^ in hell* who continually live, or rather die, in a desperate
sense of the endless wrath of God. The remedy is to be looked for at the
hands of God, who only is able to appease these storms, and in stead thereof,
to give a quiet calm: yet the means must be used by our selves, to wit, the
consideration of the examples of many godly men, to whom God has remitted as
many, and as great sins as ours are, yea having bee^ committed after a
greater measure of grace received. For the which purpose, we must also
remember, that there is no proportion betwixt then mercy of God, which is
infinite: and our sins, which are as nothing in respect of the sins of the
whole world: al which, the mercy of God in Jesus Christ is able to do away:
that the place of Scripture before mentioned, and such other are to be
understood, of the malicious and despitefull oppugning of the Gospel once
embraced. And lastly, that where sin, there the mercy of God abounds, and
his glory is set forth.

Sect. 7.
BEside these general disease^, which make a man decrease in all the parts of
godliness, there happen to the soul many particular diseases, which contain
themsemselues within one part or faculty of it, the rest remaining whole and
sound. These are as many as are the parts of r^nued holiness, or the graces of
Gods sanctifying spirit, the want of any one whereof, makes a spiritual
disease: for where any grace is wanting, there the contrary corruption of sin
does prevail and reign. If it be asked whether that one truly regenerate can
be wholly destitute of any grace, and if he may, what difference there is
betwixt him and a carnal man? we answer, that regeneration is the root, and
the possibility, but not the act of all graces: as a living body, although
naturally it be thee subject of sense, yet some one part of it may be benumbed
and senseless: so the soul of one regenerate, has in it at least the
beginnings and seeds of all graces, howsoever some of them at some times do
not work or appear: whereas a carnal man is altogether destitute, yea,
incapable of them. Among these particular diseases, the first place is given to
the diseases of the mind, the which are three in number, conceate, error, and
ignoranc^ of Gods particular providence. Conceate, is a fond opinion which a
man has of his own excellency in respect of others, esteeming himself more
just, wise, and holy, then any other, and therefore more highly in Gods favor,
and more worthy to be honored among men. This proceeds from that self
love, which is naturally in every man, (yea, in every living thing) by the
which he is moved to desire, and to endeavor the advancing of himself, and
the bettering of his own estate: for the which purpose he has his mind
continually set and fixed on those things, wherein his excellency does
consist: and so fitting his opinion to his desire and affection, thinks them
to be mo and greater, and himself more excellent in respect of them, then he
is in deed. Thus are not only carnal men in regard of outward blessings and
natural gifts, but even the godly often puffed up in pride, in regard of
spiritual graces, seeing themselves to be advanced to so high a dignity, as
far passing the common condition of men, as the heaven is higher then the
earth, as wisdom is better then folly, light then darkness, holiness then
sinfulness, and happiness then eternal misery. Yea, as they have a more
certain knowledge of their own gifts and graces, which they feel wrought,
and working in their hearts and lives, then of other men, which they but
conjecture: and of other men's wants, infirmities, sins and faults, then of
their own, whereof they cannot abide to think or hear: so they think far
better of themselves, then of others. This corruption does many ways show
forth it self, as namely, in insolent talk and behauior, in obstinate
maintaining of erroneous opinions, and unlawful or unmeet practices, and
especially in contempt of our brethren, their company, gifts, opinions, in
t^o sparing acknowledging of their virtues and graces. But it is carefully to
be resisted and avoided, as being displeasing, yea, odious to GOD, who
resists the proud, and gives grace to the humble, and in whose eyes,
nothing is more acceptable then a meek and lowly spirit: as also hurtful to
our selves, in that it makes us obstinate and incorrigible in errors and
sins, and depriueth us of that good and comfort, which might be reaped by
the gifts and company of our brethren, whereof we may reap great profit
and comfort.

The remedy of this disease, is the consideration, not of our gifts and
graces, but of our ways and sins, the which no doubt will pull down these
peacockes feathers, and make us base, yea, vile in our own eyes. By this
reason the Apostle exhorts the Romans. Romans 12.3. not to be drunk and
besotted with any great conceate of themselves, but rather to think soberly
and modestly of themselves, for that God has given his graces, not all to any
one, least he should have matter of pride, but some to every one, that none
should be subject to the contempt of others. Wherein the great wisdom and
godnesse of God, is to be considered, praised, and admired, who does so temper
his graces bestowed on the faithful, with their own wants and sins, that
neither the one is able to lift up the mind too high in vain conceates, nor
the other to press it down too low with disgrace, but supplyeth the greatest
wantes with other most excellent and rare gifts, and qualifyeth the abundance
of grace, with some great want or grievous sin, as we are taught by the
examples of Lot, Noah, David, and Solomon, that the most heinous and horrible
sins have been found in the holiest men, and extreme folly in the mirror of
wisdom.

Sect. 8.
THe second disease of the mind is error, the which usually comes of
conceate, and does accompany it. Where we do not mean any light errors in
matters of small importance, for no man either is, or can be free from these,
as long as he is in this world: but such as are near about the foundation and
substance of Christian Religion, and which may seem to endaunger a man's
salvation, as about Christ his incarnation, passion, natures, about the manner
or matter of our justification, the Church or Sacraments, or any other weighty
point. Yet not any such error makes a spiritual disease, but only when as
it happens in a time of light and knowledge, wherein the contrary truth is
both plainly revealed by God, and also generally, or at least commonly
acknowledged by the Church. Otherwise, if it be a time of ignorance, and
darkness, wherein that truth is revealed, the most grievous error that is,
does not argue the distemperature of the soul, or make a spiritual disease:
as we know, no man accounts him either blind or ill sighted, who cannot see
and discern things in the night, or in the dark dungeon: or him to be of an
evil constitution of body, who is infected with a common sickness or plague.
But it comes often to pass, that the faithful are ignorant, when they
might see the truth, it being by others seen and acknowledged. In this case
great errors argue an evil constitution of the mind and an unsound judgment:
yea they make our regeneration to be doubted of, and called into question: For
this is a property of a mind sanctified and enlightened by Gods spirit, if not
to search and find out the truth, when it is unknown, yet to acknowledge and
receive it, when it is offered. But notwithstanding all this, it cannot be
denied, (for the experience of all ages does witness it) that men truly
regenerat, may both live and die in great and most dangerous errors, yea when
as the truth is both expounded to them by others, and also sought for by their
own labor and continual study. The remedy of this disease consists in
these things. First, that we suspect our selves in those opinions wherein we
disagree from those who are godly and learned: knowing that they have the
spirit of God to lead and guide them into all truth as well as we. Secondly,
in knowing that God does often suffer them to fall into gre^u^us errors, to
whom he does show great favor, not only in their regeneration, but also in
immediate and extraordinary revelations. So we read Deuteronomy. 13. If there arise
among you a Prophet, a dreamer of dreams (and give thee a sign or wonder, and
it come to pass) saying, let us serve strange Gods, you shall not hearken to
the words of that Prophet, for the Lord your GOD proves you whither you love
the Lord with all your heart: this point is to be noted, for that howsoever few
or none of the faithful in these days, have occasion given unto them of
conceit and obstinacy in error, by extraordinary revelation (the which is not
now in use) yet because the Church of Rome maintains all her errors by this
means, whereas if it were granted, that many of her children had this gift, yet
it would not thereof follow, that whatsoever they held or thought is true and
agreeable to Gods word.

The third and last of those diseases which are most usual in the mind, and
which we will here mention, is the ignorance of the particular providence of
God, and of his rewarding every one, even in this life according to his works:
for many Christians although they be persuaded, that God will in his universal
judgment reward both the godly with eternal g^ory, and the wicked with shame
and misery, yet they are not persuaded, that he executes justice and mercy in
this life, especially in regard of matters of less moment, either good or
evil. This ignorance is a petty Atheism, many ways hurtful to the soul,
and therefore by all means to be avoided: it takes from them the fear of
Gods judgments, which should be a bridle to restrain them from sin, yea the
hope of reward for good works, by the which they should be pulled forward to
the cheerful performance of them. Whereas the word of God techeth (as
experience also will without doubt testify to him that will observe the doings
of God) that he notes as it were in a day book, even their least actions
both good and evil, yea the most secret motions of their minds, and suffers
none of them to go unrecompensed, yea he recompenceth every work in the own
kind, inflicting a punishment like unto the sin, and giving a blessing to
the good work, that it may be known, that the one does belong, and is to be
referred to the other.

The diseases happening unto the conscience are many, but of them all, the most
usual is the false testimony of it, excusing where it should accuse. For
seeing that it does manifestly appear, that in the lives of many Christians,
there are many things unlawful and contrary to Gods word, we must of
necessity grant, that either they sin wittingly against the testimony of the
conscience, or which is more agreeable to charity, and therefore rather to be
thought, that their consciences are false witnesses, affirming evil to be good,
and good to be evil. Hereof it comes, that many christians think it lawful
for them to dissemble, lie, and gloss, in their dealings and affairs with
their brethren, when as their profit and advantage do so require: that they
may give the time appointed, or at the least due to holy exercises, and to the
service of God, to eating, drinking, sleep, pastime, company, traffic, and
to any worldly pleasure or profit: that they need not practice any duties of
love, pity, or thankfulness to their brethren, but in all things regard, and
do that only which stands with their own profit. And lastly, when as they
do those things which they know and think to be unlawful, yet this lying
witness bears them in hand, that God will wink at these scapes, and in a
manner allow them to do so: and so they draw God into the society of their
sin, making him as it were the receauer of their theft, and thinking of him
that he is like unto themselves.

This disease is diligently to be searched out, by examining our consciences
and lives by the rule of the word, and law of God, which will not lie: And in
those cases, whereof we cannot attain to any certain knowledge of the truth,
to abstain from action, till GOD give unto us some ground whereon to lean:
thinking it far better to abstain from many things, yea although it be to our
trouble and loss, then to do any thing in a doubtful and wavering mind:
much less then, to sin presumptuously against God, by doing that which we know
to be unlawful. We must in this case learn to remove all those props whereon
this false witness does rely it self, as namely: First the privilege of
Christian liberty, under pretense whereof, many take unto them selves greater
scope then is meet, and make vaga^ies beyond the limits of the law of God. But
we know, or else we are to learn, that the Gospel does not abrogate any jot or
title of the law: that Christ has freed us from the curse, but not from the
obedience of it. Yea that our liberty in things indifferent and lawful, is to
be restrained, and kept within the compass of conueniency, and the spiritual
edification of our selves and our brethren in godliness, the which if we do
neglect, we transgress the law, even in doing that which otherwise is
permitted by the law.

The second proppe, whereon this lying witness leans, are the examples of
virtuous and godly men, endued with a great measure of knowledge, and of all
spiritual graces, and therefore worthy to be made patterns for others to
behold and imitate, who have practiced, defended, allowed, or tolerated that
which we allege against the received opinion and practice of the godly to be
lawful. But neither will this serve the turn, for no man's life is a law: the
best men do sometimes go astray, yet they must then go alone, and not lead
others out of the way.

Thirdly, this false excuser will bring in way of defense, the manifold
commodities which will ensue hereof: the necessary uses redounding to our
selves, and to our brethren, to our souls and to our bodies, and by these
plausible pretenses, labor to justify that, which is not warrantable by the
word of God: but we are straight way to stop his mouth, with that true and
known saying, that we must not do evil that good may come of it.

By these infirmities and diseases of the soul, we may gather the rest, and
learn to avoid and heal them, to our unspeakable comfort and eternal
salvation.

FINIS.

