CONTAINING HIS TEN YEARS TRAVEL THROVGH THE TWELVE DOMJNIONS OF Germany,
Bohmerland, Sweitzerland, Netherland, Denmark, Poland, Jtaly, Turkey, France,
England, Scotland, and Ireland.

Divided into III Parts.

THE I. PART.

Contains a Iournall through all the said twelve Dominions: Showing
particularly the number of miles, the soil of the Country, the situation of
Cities, the descriptions of them, with all Monuments in each place worth the
seeing, as also the rates of hiring Coaches or Horses from place to place, with
each days expenses for diet, horse-meate, and the like.

THE II. PART.

Contains the Rebellion of Hugh, Earl of Tyrone, and the appeasing thereof:
written also in form of a Iournall.

THE III. PART.

Contains a Discourse upon several Heads, through all the said several
Dominions.



AT LONDON Printed by John Beale, dwelling in Aldersgate street. 1617.

HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE


WITH the Kings Majesty's full and sole Privilege to the Author Fynes Moryson
Gent. his Executors, Administrators, Assigns and Deputies for 21 years next
ensuing, to cause to be imprinted, and to sell assign and dispose to his or
their best benefit, this Book and Books as well in the English as in the
Latin tongue; as well these three Parts finished, as one or two Parts more
thereof not yet finished, but shortly to be perfected by him: Sraitly
forbidding any other during the said years, to imprint or cause to be
imprinted, to import utter or sell, or cause to be imported uttered or sold the
said Book or Books, or any part thereof within any of his Majesty's
Dominions; upon pain of his Majesty's high displeasure, and to forfet three
pounds lawful English money for every such Book, Books, or any part thereof
printed, imported, uttered or sold contrary to the meaning of this Privilege;
besides the forfeture of the said Book, Books, etc. as more at large appears
by his Majesty's Letters Patents, dated the 29 of April, in the fifteenth
year of his Majesty's reign of England, France and Ireland, and of Scotland
the fiftieth.

To the Right Honorable, VVJLLJAM, EARL OF PEMBROKE, Lord Chamberlain of his
Majesty's Household, one of his Majesty's most Honorable Privy Counsel, and
Knight of the most noble Order of the GARTER, etc.
Right Honorable,
SInce I had the happiness imputed to Salomons Servants by the Queen of
Sheba, to stand sometimes before You, an eye and ear witness of your Noble
conversation with the worthy Earl of Devonshire, (my deceased Lord and
Master,) I ever admired your virtues and much honored your Person. And because
it is a thing no less commendable, gladly to receive favors from men of
eminent worth, then with like choice to tender respect and service to them: I
being now led by powerful custom to seek a Patron for this my Work; and
knowing that the weakest frames need strongest supporters, have taken the
boldness most humbly to commend it to your Honors protection: which vouchsafed,
it shall triumph under the safeguard of that massy shield; and my self shall
not only acknowledge this high favor with humblest thankfulness, but with
joy embrace this occasion to auow myself now by public profession, (as I have
long been in private affection,)

Your Honors most humble and faithful servant, FYNES MORYSON,

To the Reader.
FOr the First Part of this Work, it contains only a brief narration of
daily iournies, with the rates of Coaches or Horses hired, the expenses for
horses and man's meat, the soil of the Country, the situation of Towns, and
the descriptions thereof; together with all things there worthy to be seen:
which Treatise in some obscure places is barren and unpleasant (espetially in
the first beginning of the work,) but in other places I hope you will judge it
more pleasant, and in some delightful, inducing you favorably to dispense with
the barrennes of the former, inserted only for the use of unexperienced
Travelers passing those ways. Again, you may perhaps judge the writing of my
daily expenses in my iournies to be needles and unprofitable, in respect of the
continual change of prices and rates in all Kingdoms: but they can never be
more subject to change, then the affaies of Martial and civil Policy: In
both which, the oldest Histories serve us at this day to good use. Thirdly and
lastly, touching the First Part of this Work, when you read my expenses in
unknown Coins, you may justly require the explaning of this obscurity, by
expression of the values in the English Coins. But I pray you to consider,
that the adding of these several values in each days iourny, had been an
Herculean labor; for avoiding whereof, I have first set before the First Part,
a brief Table expressing the value of the small Coins most commonly spent,
and also have expressly and particularly for each Dominion and most part of the
Provinces, set down at large, how these values answer the English Coins, in a
Chapter written of purpose to satisfy the most curious in this point, namely
the fifth Chapter of the third Book, being the last of this First Part: in
which Chapter also I have briefly discoursed of the best means to exchange
moneys into foreign parts.

Touching the Work in general, I will truly say, that I wrote it swiftly, and
yet slowly. This may seem a strange Riddle, and not to rack your wit with the
interpretation, my self will expound it: I wrote it swiftly, in that my pen
was ready and nothing curious, as may appear by the matter and style: and I
wrote it slowly, in respect of the long time past since I viewed these
Dominions, and since I took this work in hand. So as the Work may not
unfitly be compared to a nose-gay of flowers, hastily snatched in many
gardens, and with much leisure, vet carelessly and negligently bound together.
The snatching is excused by the haste, necessary to Travelers, desiring to see
much in short time: And the negligent binding, in true judgment needs no
excuse, affected curiosity in poor subjects, being like rich imbroidery laid
upon a frize ierken; so as in this case, only the trifling away of mxch time,
may be imputed to my ignorance, dulnes or negligence, if my just excuse be not
heard: in the rendering whereof I must crave your patience. During the life of
the worthy Earl of Devonshire, my deceased Lord, I had little or no time to
bestow in this kind: after his death, I lost fully three years labor (in which I
abstracted the Histories of these 12 Dominions through which I passed, with
purpose to join them to the Discourses of the several Commonwealths, for
illustration and ornament: but when the work was done, and I found the bulk
there of to swel, then I chose rather to suppress them, then to make my gate
bigger then my City.) And for the rest of the years, I wrote at leisure,
giving (like a free and vnhired workman) much time to pleasure, to necessary
affairs, and to diverse and long distractions. If you consider this, and with
all remember, that the work is first written in Latin, then translated into
English, and that in diverse Copies, no man being able by the first Copy to put
so large a work in good fashion. And if you will please also to take knowledge
from me, that to save expenses, I wrote the greatest part with my own hand,
and almost all the rest with the slow pen of my servant: then I hope the loss
of time shall not be imputed unto me. Again, for the work in general, I
profess not to write it to any curious wits, who can endure nothing but
extractions and quintessences: nor yet to great Statesmen, of whose reading I
confess it is unworthy: but only unto the unexperienced, who shall desire to
view foreign kingdoms. And these may, the rather by this direction, make
better use of what they see, hear, and read, then my self did. If active men
never read it, I shall wish them no less good success in their affairs. If
contemplative men shall read it at leisure, making choice of the subjects
fitting their humors, by the Table of the Contents, and casting away the book
when they are weary of reading, perhaps they may find some delight: only in
case of distaste, I pray them remember, to and for whom it was written. To
conclude, if you be as well affected to me, as I am to you, how soever I
deserve no thanks, no doubt I shall be free from blame. And so I wish you all
happiness, remaining

Yours in due respect, Fynes Moryson.

A Table of the Contents of the several Chapters contained in this Book.
THE FIRST PART.
The first Book.
Chap. 1. OF my iourny from London (in England) to Stood, Hamburg, Lubecke,
Luneburg: my return to Hamburg, and iourny to Magdeburg, Leipzig, Wittenberg;
and the neighboring Cities (in Germany.) Chap. 2. Of my iourny from Leipzig,
to Prage, (in Bohemia) to Nurnberg, Augspurg, Vlme, Lindoy, Costnetz, (in
Germany) Schaphusen, Zurech, Baden, and Bazell, (in Sweitzerland.) Chap. 3. Of
my iourny from Bazell to Strasburg, to Heidelberg, to Franckfort, to Cassiles,
to Brunswicke, to Luneburg, to Hamburg, to Stood, to Breme, to Oldenburge and
to Embden, (the last City upon the confines of the Empire of Germany.) Chap 4.
Of my iourny from Embden in Germany, to Leiden in Holland, and through the
united Prouiuces of the Low Countries. Chap. 5. Of my iourny out of the united
Provinces, by the sea coast to Stood, and Lubeck, in Germany, of my sailing to
Denmark, and thence to Dantzk in Prussen, and my iourny through Paland, to
Poduoa in Italy.
The second Book.
Chap. 1. Of my iourny from Paduoa to Venice, to Ferrara, to Bologna, to
Rauenna, and by the shore of the Adriatique Sea to Ancona; then crossing the
breadth of Italy, to Rome, seated not far from the Tirrhene Sea. Chap. 2. Of my
iourny to Naples, and my return to Rome, and of the description of both
Cities: of my iourny cursory to Sienna, Fiorenza, Pistoia, Lucca, and Pisa, and
the description of the three last Cities. Chap. 3. Of my iourny to Ligorno, my
return to Florence, (or Fiorenza) and to Sienna, and the description of these
Cities. Of my iourny by land to Lirigi, (in which again I passed by Lucca and
Pisa) and by sea to Genoa, with the description of that City, and my iourny by
land to Pauia, to Milano, to Cremona, and to Mantoua, with the description of
the Cities, and of my return to Paduoa. Chap. 4. Of the Sepulcher of Petrarch
at Arqua; of my iourny to Vicenza, Verona, Brescia, and Bergamo: (in Italy)
then passing the Alps to Chur, Zurech, Solothurn, Geneua, and (in my return
thence) to Berna, (in Sweitzerland,) thence to Strasburg, (in Germany,) and to
Chalon, to Paris, to Roan, and to Diepe, (in France,) and finally of my passage
by sea and land to London (in England.)
The third Book.
Chap. 1. Of my iourny to Stood, through the united Provinces of Netherland,
and upon the seacoast of Germany; then to Brunswicke, and (the right way) to
Nurnberg, Augsburg, and Insprucke (in Germany), and from thence to Venice in
Italy, and so by the Mediteranean Seas and the I lands thereof, to Jerusalem.
In which journey, I slightly pass over the places described in my former
passage those ways. Chap. 2. The description of the City of Jerusalem, and
the Territory thereof. Chap. 3. Of my iourny from Jerusalem by land to Ioppa,
by sea to Tripoly in Syria, by land to Haleppo and Scanderona, and of our
passage by sea to the I land Candia. Chap. 4. Of my iourny from Candia (partly
by land, and partly by sea) by the sea shoares and by the I lands of the AEgean
sea, Pontus and Propontis, to the City of Constontinople, and of my iourny
thence by sea to Venice, and by land to Augsburg, Nurnberg, and Stood (in
Germany,) and of my passage over sea into England. Chap. 5. Of my iourny
through many sever all Shires of England, Scotland, and Ireland. Chap. 6. Of
the manner to exchange moneys into foreign parts, and the diverse moneys of
diverse parts, together with the diverse measures of miles in sundry Nations,
most necessary for the understanding of the former Iournall.
THE SECOND PART.
The first Book.
Chap. 1. Of the Induction or Preface to my Irish Iournall, and a compendious
narratich how Charles Blount Lord Mountioy, (my Lord and Master of happy
memory) was chosen Lord Deputy of Ireland, and of this worthy Lords quality; as
also of the Counsels in general by which he broke the Rebels hearts, and gave
peace to that troubled State, together with his particular actions in the end
of the year 1599. Chap. 2. Of the Lord Deputies particular proceedings in the
prosecution of the Rebels in the year 1600.
The second Book.
Chap. 1. Of the Lord Deputies particular proceedings in the prosecution of the
Rebels, and of the Spaniards innading Ireland in the year 1601. Chap. 2. Of
the besicging of the Spaniards at Kinsale, with the delivery of the Town to
the Lord Deputy, and their return into Spain in the same year 1601.
The third Book.
Chap. 1. Of the prosecution of the war by the Lord Mountioy Lord Deputy,
against the Rebels in the year 1602. Chap. 2. Of Tyrones taking to mercy,
whereby the war was fully ended; and of a new mutiny of the Cities of
Mounster, for establishing the public exercise of the Roman Religion, with the
appeasing thereof, together with the Lord Deputies recalling into England, and
the rewards there given him for his service in the beginning of the year 1603:
with mention of his untimely death within few years after; and the state of
Ireland some ten years after.
THE THIRD PART.
The first Book.
Chap. 1. THat the visiting of foreign Countries is good and profitable, but
to whom, and hew far. Chap. 2. Of Precepts for Travelers, which may instruct
the unexperienced. Chap. 3. Of the Opinions of old Writers, and some Proverbs
which I observed in foreign parts by reading or discourse, to be used either
of Travelers themselves, or of diverse Nations and Provinces.
The second Book.
Chap. 1. Of the fit means to travel, and to hier Coaches or Horsesin
general. Chap. 2. Of Sepulchers, Monuments and Buildings in general, (for I
have formerly spoken particularly of them.) Chap. 3. Of Germany, Bohmerland and
Sweitzerland, touching the Geographicall description, the situation, the
fertility, the traffic, and the diet. Chap. 4. Of the united Provinces in
Netherland, and of Denmark and Poland, touching the said subjects of the
precedent third Chapter. Chap. 5. Of Italy touching all the subjects of the
third Chapter going before.
The third Book.
Chap. 1. Of the geographicall description of Turkey, the situation, fertility,
traffic and diet. Chap. 2. Of France, touching the particular subjects of the
first Chapter. Chap. 3. Of England, touching the particular subjects of the
first Chapter. Chap. 4. Of Scotland, touching the subjects contained in the
first Chapter. Chap. 5. Of Ireland, touching the particular subjects of the
first Chapter.
The fourth Book.
Chap. 1. Of the Germans, Bohemians, Sweitzers, Netherlanders, Daues Polouians
and Italians apparel. Chap. 2. Of the Turks, French, English, Scottish, and
Irish apparel. Chap. 3. Of the Germans and Bohemians Commonwealth, under which
title I contain an historical introduction, the Princes Pedegrees and Courts,
the present state of things, the Tributes and Revenues, the military state for
Horse, Foot, and Navy, the Courts of Justice, rare Laws, more specially the
Laws of inheritance and of women's Dowries, the Capital Judgments, and the
diversity of degrees in Families, and in the Commonwealth. Chap. 4. Of the
particular Commonwealths, as well of the Princes of Germany, as of the free
Cities such of both as have absolute power of life and death. Chap. 5. Of the
Commonwealth of Sweitzerland, according to the diverse subjects of the third
Chapter. Chap. 6. Of the Netherlanders Commonwealth, according to the foresaid
subjects of the third Chapter.
The rest of this Work, not as yet fully finished, treats of the following
Heads.
Chap, 1. OF the Commonwealth of Denmark, under which title I contain an
historical introduction, the Kings Pedigree and Court, the present state of
the things, the Tributes and Revenues, the military power for Horse, Foot, and
Navy, the Courts of Justice, rare Laws, more specially those of Inheritance
and Dowries and Contracts for marriage, the Capitol or Criminal Judgments,
and the diversity of degrees in Families and the Commonwealth. Chap. 2. Of the
Commonwealth of Poland, under which title, etc. Chap. 3. Of the Commonwealth of
Italy, touching the historical introduction, the Princes pedegrees, the Papal
dominion, and the Late power of the King of Spain, with some other subjects of
the first Chapter. Chap. 4. Of the particular Commonwealth of Venice, touching
most of the foresaid subjects. Chap. 5. Of the Commonwealth of the Duke of
Florence, the Cities of Lucca and Genea, with the Dukes of Urbino and of
Mantoua. Chap. 6. Of the Commonwealth of Italy in general: touching the rest
of the heads which belong to the general State of Italy, rather then of any
part thereof. Chap. 7. Of the Commonwealth of the Turkish Empire, under which
title etc. as follows in the first Chapter. Chap. 8. Of the Commonwealth of
France, under which title, etc. Chap. 9. Of the Commonwealth of England, under
which title, etc. Chap. 10. Of the Commonwealth of Scotland, under which title,
etc. Chap. 11. Of the Commonwealth of Ireland, under which title, etc. Chap.
12. Of Germany touching Religion. Chap. 13. Of Bhemerland, Sweitzerland, the
united Provinces of Netherland, of Denmark and Poland touching Religion. Chap.
14. Of Italy touching Religion. Chap. 15. Of the Turkish Empire touching
Religion. Chap. 16. Of France, England, Scotland and Ireland touching Religion.
Chap. 17. Of the Germans nature, wit, manners, bodily gifts, Universities,
Sciences, Arts, language, pompous Ceremonies, specially at Marriages,
Christnings and Funerals: of their customs, sports, exercises, and
particularly hunting. Chap. 18. Of the Bohemians, Sweitzers and Netherlanders
of the united Provinces, their natures, wits, manners, etc. Chap. 19. Of the
Danes and Polonians nature, etc. Chap. 20. Of the Italians nature, wit, etc.
Chap. 21. Of the Turks nature, etc. Chap. 22. Of the Frenchmens nature, etc.
Chap. 23. Of the Englishmens nature, etc. Chap. 24. Of the Scotchmens and
Irishmens natures, wits, manners, etc. Chap. 25. A general, but brief
discourse of the Jews, the Grecians, and the Moscouites.
A brief Table to understand in the First Part the expenses in small Coins
most commonly spent.
For England.
A Gold Angel of the standard of 23 Caracts 3 grains and an half, is three
penny weight and 8 grains, and is given for ten silver shillings, 12 pence
making a shilling, the silver being of the standard of 11 ounces two penny
weight, and the shilling four penny (or ninety six grains) weight.

For Scotland and Ireland.
The English Coins are current and spent.

For Germany.
The Reichs Doller of Germany is worth four shillings four pence, and the
silver Gulden is accounted three shillings four pence English Twenty Misers
silver Groshen, 32 Lubecke shillings, 45 Embden stiuers, four Copstucks and a
half, 55 groates, 36 Maria grosh, 18 spitz-grosh, 18 Batz, make a Reichs
Doller. Two sestings make a Lubecke shilling: four Drier a silver grosh: two
dreyhellers a Drier: two schwerd grosh a schneberger: four creitzers a batz:
four pfennning a creitzer.

For Bohemia.
Three Pochanels make a Creitzer: 9 creitzers and one Pochanell make four
weissgrosh of Morauia: 30 grosh a Doller: two hallers a pfenning: and 5
pfenning a grosh.

For Sweitzerland.
Six Rappen make a Plappart or 3 Creitzers: and 20 Plapparts or 60 Creitzers
make a silver gulden: two finferlins make a finfer, and 5 a batz: four angster
make a creitzer, twelve a Bemish: 60 creitzers a silver gulden.

For the Low Countries.
Four Orkees or Doights make a stiuer: two blanks a stiuer and a half: six
stiuers a shilling: 20 stiuers a gulden or three shillings four pence, being
two shillings English: 20 shillings a pound: and one hundred pound Flemish,
makes sixty pound English.

For Denmark.
Two Danish shillings make one Lubecke; and 66 Danish shillings make one Reichs
Doller.

For Poland.
Thirty Polish Grosh make a silver Gulden; 40 a Reichs Doller; three Pochanels
a Creitzer, seven a Grosh.

For Italy.
The silver Crown almost five shillings English, is given for 7 Lires of
Uenice; two Lires make a Iustino: 20 Soldi a Lire: one Lire and 4 Soldi a
Mutsenigo. 4 Bagatines a Quatrine: two Betsior 3 Quatrines or a Susine and a
half, make a Soldo: two Quatrines make a Susine: three Susines a Boligneo, and
12 Bolignei a Lire. Ten Giulij, or Poali, or Carlini make a silver Crown; ten
Baocci a Giulio or Paolo: four Quatrines a Baocco: eight Baelli or Creitzers
make a Giulio: twenty Soldi or Bolignei of Genoa make a Lire of Genoa, whereof
15 make 20 shillings English; and 3 of these Lires with 15 Soldi, make a silver
Crown: seven Soldi and an half make a Reale: four Soldi a Caualotto: six
Quatrines a Soldo; and two Deniers of Genoa a Quatrine: 114 Soldi of Milan make
a silver Crown: 20 Soldi a Lire: and a Lire and a half makes one Lire of
Genoa.

For Turkey.
The silver Crown or Piastro worth five shillings English, is given here for
70, there for 80 or more Aspers: A Meidine of Tripoli, is an Asper and an half
a Meidine of Caiero three Aspers; and an Asper some three farthings English.

For France.
Twelve Deniers make a Soulz: fourteen Soulz and a half a Testoone: fifteen
Soulz a Quart d'escue: twenty Soulz a Frank: sixty Soulz a French Crown, or
six shillings English.



AN ITINERARY WRITTEN By FYNES MORYSON Gent. First in the Latin Tongue, AND
THEN TRANSLATED By him into ENGLISH:

AN ITINERARY WRITTEN BY FYNES MORYSON, Gent. CONTAINING His ten years travels
thorovv TWELVE DOMINIONS. The First Part.
The First BOOK.
CHAP. I. Of my iourny from London (in England) to Stood, Hamburg, Lubeck,
Luneburg, my return to Hamburg, and journey to Magdeburg, Leipzig, Witteberg,
and the neighboring Cities (in Germany.)
BEing a Student of Peter-house, in Cambridge, and entered the eighteenth year
of my age, I took the degree of Bachelar of Arts, and shortly after was chosen
Fellow of the said College by Queen Elizabeth's Mandat. Three years expired
from my first degree taken in the Vniuerfitie, I commenced Master of Arts, and
within a year after, by the favor of the Master and Fellows, I was chosen to
a vacant place of Privilege to study the Civil Laws. Then, as well for the
ornament of this profession, as out of my innated desire to gain experience by
traveling into foreign parts, (to which course my Parents had given consent
some few years past, upon my first declaring of my inclination to the said
profession,) upon the privilege of our Statutes permitting two of the Society
to travel, I obtained license to that purpose of the said Master and Fellows,
in the year 1589, being then full 23 years old. And presently leaving the
Vniuersiy, I went to London, there to follow some studies fit to enable me in
this course; and there better taught, and these studies, the visiting of my
friends in the Country, my going to Oxford to take the same degree I had in
Cambridge, and some oppositions upon new deliberation made by my father and
friends against my journey, detained me longer in those parts then I purposed.

At last, in the beginning of the year 1591, and upon the first day of May, I
took ship at Liegh, distant from London twenty eight miles by land, and
thirty six 1591.
by water, where Thames in a large bed is carried into the Sea. Thence we set
sail into the maine, and the eight day of our sailing, the Merchants Fleet of
sixteen ships being dispersed by a fogge and tempest, two Dunkerke Pirates
followed our ship, till (by Gods mercy) the fog being cleared after some few
hours, and two of our ships upon our discharging of a great Piece drawing
toward us, the Pirates despairing left to pursue us. That they were Pirates
was apparent, since as we for trial turned our sails, they likewise fitted
themselves to our course, so as we though flying, yet prepared our selves to
fight, till God thus delivered us. The ninth day toward night, we fell upon
an Island called the Holy Land (vulgarly Heiligland), and not daring to enter
the River Elue before the next morning, we struck all sails, and suffered
our ship to be tossed too and fro by the waves all that night, (which
Mariners call lying at Hull.) This Island has only one Port capeable of some
six ships, in the form of the Moon decreasing, and lying open to the East.
On the North side is a great Rock, and the rest of the shore is all of high
Cliffes. It is subject to the Duke of Holste, and by that title to the King of
Denmark; but the inhabitants are so poor, as they yield no other tribute then
stones for the Dukes building. It is in circuit some three miles, and has
about one hundred Families.

The tenth day we entered the River Elue, and landed at Stood. This is an
ancient Stood.
City, and one of the Empires free Cities, and one of those Sea-Townes, which
from the privilege of traffic with their Neighbors, are called Free Cities
(vulgarly Hansteten), but of late was become so poor, as they had sold the
privilege of coining money, and some like Rights to Hamburg; till the English
Merchants removing their seat of traffic from Hamburg to Stood, it began
lately to grow rich, not without the envy and impouerishment of the Hamburgers.
In the Dutch Inns I paid for each meal four Lubeck shillings and an half,
and in the English Innes eight pence English. In the great winding and troubled
Stream of Elue, which ebs and flows as high as Luneburg, certain Booyes are
laid to show the channels and sholes of the River, and the maintaining of each
of them cost 40 pounds yearly, and of all a thousand pounds at the least, at
the common charge of Stood and Hamburg: but after frosts begin, they are taken
up, and reserved to the next Spring. Of old when Stood flourished, this charge
belonged only to it, taking some contributions of the other Cities for the
same. This free City had then chosen the Bishop of Breme for their Protector,
and had but small scattered revenues, to the value, of ninety pounds sterling
by the year; but the soil is so fertile, as they milk their Cowes thrice
each day. Of late the Hamburgers had in vain attempted by Nauall forces to
forbid the arrival of the English at Stood, whom as they had grieved having
their seat with them, as well with exactions, as with forbidding them free
exercise of Religion, so now sometimes by laire treaty, sometimes by force,
they labored to draw back unto them. Those of Stood have by privilege the
preemption and choice of Rhenish Wines passing by them. This City might be
made strong, if the works they have begun were perfected. The fields of the
North and East sides may be drowned, and because the high Hills toward the
West and South (though somewhat distant) seemed to threaten danger, they had on
those sides raised an high and broad wall of earth, fastened on the outside
with Willowes, in which place an Armory for all munitions was built; but the
gates of the City, for ridiculous ostentation of strength, were furnished with
Artillery of stone painted over. The territory without the City belongs on the
West side to the Bishop of Breame, and on the East side to the Earl of
Scbeneburg and the Duke of Holst. From Stood to Hamburg are five miles. In a
Wagon hired for five Lubecke shillings each person, we passed two miles, then
crossing the Elue (not without danger in respect of the shallow places and
present storm) we hired another Wagon for four Lubeck shillings each
person, and through thick woods passed the other three miles to Hamburg. The
passage by water to Hamburg had been much easier, especially for a stranger,
and a boat daily passes from Stood thither in some three hours space, if the
wind be not contrary, wherein each man paies three Lubecke shillings for his
passage: but all Passengers without difference of condition must help to row,
or hire one in his stead, except the wind be good so as they need not use
their Oars; besides that the annoyance of base companions will easily offend
one that is any thing nice.

Hamburg is a Free City of the Empire, and one of them which (as I said) are
called Hamburg.
Hansteten, and for the building and populousness is much to be praised. The
Senate house is very beautiful, and is adorned with carved statuaes of the
nine Worthies. The Exchange where the Merchants meet is a very pleasant place.
The Haven is shut up with an iron chain. The City is compassed with a deep
ditch, and upon the East and North sides with a double ditch and wall. Water is
brought to the City from an Hill distant some English mile, by pipes of wood,
because those of lead would be broken by the ice, and these pipes are to be
seen under the bridge, whence the water is conuaied by them unto each Citizens
house. The Territory of the City extends a mile or two, and on one side
three miles out of the walls. It has nine Churches and six gates called by
the Cities to which they lead. It is seated in a large plain and a sandy
soil, but has very fat pasture ground without. On the South side and some
part of the West, it is washed with the River Elue, which also puts a branch
into the Town, but on the North and somewhat on the East side, the River
Alster runs by toward Stood, and falls into the Elue. The streets are
narrow excepting one which is called Broad-street (vulgarly Breitgasse.) The
building is all of brick (as in all the other Sea-bordering Cities, lying from
these parts toward Flanders) and all the beauty of the houses is in the first
entrance, having broad and fair gates into a large Hal the lower part whereof
on both sides is used for a Warehouse, and in the upper part lying to the view
of the door, the chief household stuff is placed, and especially their
vessel of English Pewter, which being kept bright makes a glittering show to
them that pass by; so as the houses promise more beauty outwardly then they
have inwardly. Here I paid each meal four Lubeck shillings, and one each
night for my bed. The Citizens are vnmeasurably ill affected to the English, to
whom (or to any stranger) it is unsafe to walk out of the gates after noone,
for when the common people are once warmed with drink, they are apt to do
them injury. My self one day passing by some that were unloading and telling
of Billets, heard them say these words: Wirft den zehenden auff des Englanders
kopf, that is, cast the tenth at the Englishmans head. But I and my companions
knowing well their malice to the English for the removing their traffic to
Stood, were content silently to pass by as if we understood them not. Hence I
went out of the way to see Lubeck, an Imperial City, and one of the above
named Hans-townes, being ten miles distant from Hamburg. Each of us for our
Coach paid twenty Lubeck shillings, and going forth early, we passed through
a marish and sandy plain, and many woods of Oaks (which in these parts are
frequent, as woods of Fur be in the upper part of Germany) and having gone
six miles we came to a Village called Altslow, for the situation in a great
marish or boggy ground, where each man paid for his dinner five Lubeck
shillings and a half, our Dutch companions contributing half that money for
drink after dinner. In the afternoon we passed the other four miles to
Lubeck, in the space of four hours, and until we came within half a mile of
the town, we passed through some thick woods of Oak with some fair
pastures between them, (for the Germans use to preserve their woods to the
uttermost, either for beauty or because they are so huge and frequent as they
cannot be consumed). When we came out of the woods we saw two fair rising
Hills, and the third upon which Lubeck was feated.

On the top of this third Hill stood the fair Church of Saint Mary, whence
there Lubeck.
was a descent to all the gates of the City, whose situation offered to our
eyes a fair prospect, and promised great magnificence in the building. The
City is compassed with a double wall, one of brick and narrow, the other of
earth and broad, fastened with thick rows of willowes. But on the North side
and on the South-east side there were no walls, those parts being compassed
with deep ditches full of water. On the South-east side the water seems
narrow, but is so deep. as ships of a thousand tun are brought up to the
City to lie there all winter, being first vnladed at Tremuren the Port of the
City lying upon the Baltic Sea. To this Port one mile distant from Lubeck we
came in three hours, each man paying for his Coach five Lubeck shillings, and
four for our dinner, and returned back the same night to Lubeck. The building
of this City is very beautiful, all of brick, and it has most sweet walks
without the walls. The Citizens are curious to avoid ill smells, to which end
the Butchers have a place for killing their beasts without the walls upon a
running stream. Water is brought to every Citizens house by pipes, and all the
Brewers dwelling in one street have each of them his iron Cock, which being
turned, the water falls into their vessels. Though the building of this town be
of the same matter as that of the neighboring towns, yet it is much preferred
before them, for the beauty and uniformity of the houses; for the pleasant
gardens, fair streets, sweet walks without the walls, and for the Citizens
themselves, who are much commended for ciuilty of manners, and the strict
execution of Justice. The poor dwell in the remote-streets out of the common
passages. There is a street called the Funst Haussgasse, that is, the street of
five houses, because in the year 1278. it was all burnt excepting five houses;
since which time they have a law, that no man shall build of timber and clay,
except he divide his house from his neighbors with a brick wall three foot
broad; and that no man shall cover his house with any thing but tiles, brass,
or lead. The form of this City is like a lozing, thick in the midst and
growing narrower toward the two ends, the length whereof is from the gate
called Burke Port toward the South, to Millen Port toward the North. We
entered the Town by Holtz Port on the West side, to which gate Hickster Port is
opposite on the East side. It is as long again as broad, and two streets,
Breitgasse, that is, Broad-street, and Konnigsgasse, that is, Kings-street,
run the whole length of the Town, and six other streets make the breadth;
and if you stand in the midst of any of these streets, you may there see both
the ends thereof. Here I paid each meal four Lubeck shillings, having my bed
free; for a quart of Rhenish wine five Lubeck shillings, and as much for Sack,
neither do I remember that ever I had a more pleasant abiding in Germany,
either for the sweetness of the place, the courtesy of the people, or my diet.
The Citizens are very courteous to all strangers, whom the Laws
extraordinarily favor above the natives, so they only abide there for a time
and be not inhabitants, neither are they less friendly to the English, though
they complain of injuries (so they call them) offered them by us at Sea. This
City has many things worth the seeing. There be ten fair Churches, whereof
one was used for an Armory of all munitions for war. Saint Mary's Cathedral
Church (vulgarly Vnserfraw kirk) is fairer then the rest, where there is a
fair and artificial Clock, in the top whereof is a picture, whereof both the
ears of the head are seen, which Painters esteem a master work. In the
Porch thereof are three Marble pillars, each of them thirty foot long of one
stone, only one of them is peeced for one foot. But the Image of the Virgin
Mary in this Church, and of Christ crucified in Burk Kirk are thought works
of singular art; for which they say a Spanish Merchant offered a mass of
money. I will confess truly, that my self beholding the Virgins statua all
of stone, did think it had been covered with a gown of white buffin, and
that being altogether unskillful in the grauing Art, yet I much admired the
workmanship. Without Millen Port there is a Conduit of water, which serves all
the Town, the more notable because it was the first of that kind, which since
has been dispersed to London and other places. On al sides out of the town
there be sweet walks, especially toward Jerusalem (so they call the Passion
of Christ graven in diverse pillars) where also is a pleasant grove, under the
shade whereof Rope-makers and like Artificers use to work. The Canons of the
Cathedral Church have great privileges, and as it were an absolute power over
themselves, and of old they had a gate of the City free to themselves to go in
or out at pleasure; till the Citizens finding how dangerous it was to the
maintaining of their freedom from any subjection, upon a good opportunity
when the Emperor came thither, did of set purpose lead him into the City by
that gate, where falling on their knees they besought him that it might be
bricked up, and never more opened, he being the last man that ever should enter
thereat.

From Lubeck we took our journey to Luneburg, being ten miles distant, and
the first night we lodged in a Village called Millen, where a famous lester
Oulenspiegell (whom we call Owly-glasse) has a Monument erected: he died in
the year 1350. and the stone covering him is compassed with a grate, least it
should be broken and carried away peece-meale by Passengers, which they say
has once already been done by the Germans. The Townsmen yearly keep a
feast for his memory, and yet show the apparel he was wont to wear. This
Country is barren and sandy ground; full of thick Woods of Oaks: by the way
in Kasborough Castle, they said that a Duke of inferior Saxony lay imprisoned
by the Emperors command, his brother governing the Dukedom, charged with
great debts by his prodigality; but his Villages hereabouts were possessed by
the Hamburgers and Lubeckers by right of morgage. We passed the Elue twice, the
Coachman paying for himself his Coach, and each one of us a Lubeck shilling,
and beyond the Elue the ground was somewhat more fertile. At Millen I paid for
my supper four Lubeck shillings and a half.

The next day we came to Luneburg, which by the Citizens for defense of their
Luneburg.
liberty was strongly fortified, for it is one of the free Imperial Cities;
but the Duke of Luneburg challenges a superiority over it. The walls built of
earth are high and broad and the ditches very deep. The building is very
fair, especially that of the Senate house, and almost all the houses are of
brick. They have two large market places, and the streets are broad, but very
filthy and full of ill smells. The City it self being almost of a round form
is seated in a Valley, but has Mountains near it on the West side, and
further off on the East; An high Mountain called Kalkberg hangs over it on
the North side; in the top whereof is a strong Castle, which the Citizens had
got into their hands some threescore years before my being there. Not far from
the City is a Monestary called Luna, whereof some say the Town was named,
others say it had the name of the River running by it now called Eluenau, of
eleven Rivers running into it; which Histories testify to have been called
Luna of old. But others prove both the River and the Town to have had their
names of the Idol Isis, bearing two horns of the Moon, which was kept in the
Castle upon Kalkberg, and worshipped by the people. Among the things best
deserving to be seen is the Fountain of Salt, and the house wherein salt is
boiled, over the gate whereof these verses are written.

Ecce salinarum dulcissima dona coquuntur.
Gratuita summi de bonitate Dei:
Mons, Pons, Fons, tna dona Deus, da pectore crescat,
In nostro pietas, nec minuatur Amor.
Behold of finest salt this Fount does store afford,
By the Almighties grace and free gift from above:
The Mountain, Bridge and Fountain are thy gifts O Lord,
For which let us increase in piety and love.
To all the poor round about, and to all the Citizens for their private use
salt water is freely given: and they say this Fountain once lost his virtue
when they denied to give water to the poor. Every one gives the Porter a small
reward when he comes in, not when he goes out, as otherwhere is used; for this
is proper to the Germans that they will be paid ere they begin to work, as
if they had done. The profit of this salt Fountain is divided into diverse
parts; some to the City, some to the Duke of Luneberg, (who howsoever he be so
called, yet has no power over the City but only over the Country;) some
belongs to the Monastary, and diverse Earls have their parts, (whereof some
boil not the salt in their own name, but set it out to others:) There be
fifty two rooms, and in each of them eight leaden pannes, in which eight
tons of salt are daily boiled, and each tun is worth eight Flemmish
shillings. In the said Monastery within the Town, they show a table of gold,
which Henry Leo Duke of Saxony took from Milan and placed here, and it is
fastened to the Altar, being more then an ell and half long, and about three
quarters broad, and little or nothing thicker then a French crown. They show
also four Crosses of pure gold, which they said a certain Queen once took
from them, but presently fell lunatike, neither could be cured until she had
restored them. In the open streets some Monuments are set on the walls, in
honor of certain Citizens, who died in a nights tumult, when the Duke hoped
to surprise the City. I said that the Senate house is stately built, in which
they show to strangers many vessels of gold and silver, of a great value and
quantity for a City of that quality. From Luneburg I returned to Hamburg,
whither I and my company might have had a Coach for 4. Dollors. But we
misliking the price hired a wagon for three Lubeck shillings each person to
Wentzon, three miles distant from Luneburg. Here the Duke of Lunebergs
territory ends, to whom each man paid a Lubeck shilling for tribute, my self
only excepted, who had that privilege because I went to study in the
Universities. Here each man paid two Lubeck shillings for a Wagon to the Elue
side, being one mile, and the same day by water we passed other three miles to
Hamburg, not without great noy somnesse from some base people in the boat; for
which passage we paid each man three Lubeck shillings. Let me admonish the
Reader, that if when we took boat we had only crossed the Elue, we might have
hired a Wagon from Tolspecker a Village to Hamburg (being three miles) for two
Dollors amongst six persons. Being at Hamburg and purposing to go up into
Misen, because I had not the language, I compounded with a Merchant to carry
me in his Coach, and bear my charges to Leipzig for ten gold Guldens.

The first day having broke our fast at Hamburg, we passed seven miles over
the Heath of Luneburg, and lodged in a Village. In our way we passed many
Villages of poor base houses, and some pleasant groves; but all the Country
was barren, yet yielded corn in some places, though in no plenty. The second
day we came to a little City Corneiler, through a Country as barren as the
former, and toward our iourneis end we passed a thick wood of a mile long.
The third day we went seven miles to Magdenburg, which is counted six and
twenty miles from Hamburg, and this day Magdenburg.
we passed a more fertile Country, and more woody; and they showed me by the
way an Hill called Bockesberg, famous with many ridiculous fables of Witches
yearly meeting in that place. This City of old called Parthenopolis, of Venus
Parthenea, is now called Magdenburg, that is, the City of Virgins, and for an
Inland City is very fair, and the Germans speak much of the fortification,
because Mauricius Elector of Saxony besieged it a whole year with the Emperor
Charles the fifth his Army, yet took it not. Howbeit I think that not so much
to be attributed to the strength of the City, as to the distracted mind of the
besieger, who in the mean time solicited the French King to join with the
Dutch Princes to free Germany from the Emperors tyranny, and the French Army
being once on foot, himself raised forces against the Emperor. The form of
this City is like a Moon increasing, the Bishopric thereof is rich, and the
Margraue of Brandeburg his eldest son did then possess it, together with the
City and territory, by the title of Administrator, in which sort he also held
the Bishopric of Hall, and he lay then at Wormested, a Castle not far of.
In the market place there is a Statua erected to the Emperor Otho the Great,
founder of that City, and Munster writes of another statua erected to Rowland,
which I remember not to have seen. In the Senate House, they showed a singular
picture, made by one Lucas a famous Painter, dead some thirty years before;
where also is the picture of that monstrous German, with all the dimensions of
his body, who not long before was led about the world to be showed for a
wonder. This man I had not seen, but in this picture I could scarce reach the
crown of his head with the point of my rapier, and many of good credit told
me, that they had seen this man's sister half an ell higher then he. In the
Church that lies near the market place, there is a Font of great worth, and a
Lute painted with great Art: the Cathedral Church of Saint Maurice was built
by Otho the Great, very sumptuously, where his wife lies buried in the year
948. and the inscription is; that she was daughter to Edmund King of England.
There they show one of the three vessels in which our Savior Christ turned
water into wine at Cana in Galile. There be in all ten Churches, but the above
named are the fairest. Hence we went fourteen miles to Leipzig, being a day
and a halfes journey through fruitful corn fields, and a Country full of
rich Villages, the Merchant with whom I went, bearing my charges: from Hamburg
I might have hired a Coach to Leipzig for six persons (those of Nurnburg
bearing eight) for 24. dollers, and if a man go thence to Luneburg, he may
easily light on a Coach of return at a less rate, so that in respect of the
cheapnes of victuals in these parts, no doubt I gave the Merchant too much for
my charges in this journey.

Leipzig is seated in a plain of most fruitful corn ground, and full of rich
Villages, Leipzig.
in a Country called Misen, subject to the Elector Duke of Saxony: and the
Country lying open to the eye in a most ample prospect, only one wood can be
seen in this large plain. The streets are fair, the market place large and
stately, and such are the chief houses, built of free stone four roofes high:
there is a convenient conduit of water in the Suburbs, lying toward Prage, the
ditch is dry, the walls of stone threaten ruin; neither may the Citizens
fortify the Town, nor use red wax in their public seals, nor wind a Horn
in their night watches, as other Cities do: these and other privileges being
taken from them in the year 1307. when they killed their Duke Ditzmanus in
Saint Thomas Church. Out of this City they have (as many Cities in Germany
have) a beautiful place to bury their dead, called Gods-aker, vulgarly
Gotts-aker,) where the chief Citizens buy places of burial, proper to their
families round about the Cloisters, and the common sort are buried in the
midst, not covered with any building. Here I found this Epitaph: the numerall
Letters whereof show the year when the party died.

FoeLIX qVI In DoMIno nIXVs ab orb fVgIt.

And like Epitaphs are ordinarily found through Germany. This City has an
University, and in the year 1480. the Students of Prage removed hither to fly
the Hussites war; but at this day the University is much decayed, by reason
that Wittteberg lies near, having better conueniency for the Scholars
living. From hence I took my journey in the afternoon to Witteberg, and came
that night to Teben a Village four miles distant, through a Wood so large as
we could not pass it in two hours, beyond which the ground was barren till
we passed the River Elue, which runs by Witteberg, all the length of it
from the East to the West, but is somewhat distant from the Town.

The next day we passed four miles to Witteberg, which has his name of
Wittekindus, the first Christian Duke of Saxony, and is seated in a plain
sandy ground, having Witteberg.
on the North Hills planted with Vines yielding a sower grape plentifully, yet
they make no wine thereof. One street lies the whole length of the Town,
being all the beauty thereof, and in the midst of this street is the
Cathedral Church and a fair market place, in which the Senate house is built,
and near the West gate is the Dukes Church; It is prouerbially said, that a
man shall meet nothing at Witteberg, but whores, students, and swine, to which
purpose they have these two Verses:

Ni Witeberga sues, ni plurima scorta teneret,
Ni pubem Phoebi, quaeso quid esset ibi?
Had Witeberg no swine, if no whores were,
Nor Phoebus train, I pray you what is there?
Whence may be gathered that the Citizens have small traffic, living only
upon the Scholars, and that the streets must needs be filthy. In the study of
Doctor Wisinbechius this inscription is in Latin;

Here stood the bed in which Luther gently died.

See how much they attribute to Luther, for this is not the place where he
died, neither was there any bed, yet suffer they not the least memory of him to
be blotted out. Luther was borne at Isleb in the year 1483, and certainly died
there in the house of Count Mansfield, where after supper the seventeenth of
February he fell into his usual sickness, namely the stopping of humors in
the Orifice of his belly, and died thereupon at five of the clock in the
morning, the eighteenth of February, in the year 1546. the said Count and his
Countess and many other being present, and receiving great comfort from his
last exhortations: yet from his sudden death the malicious Jesuits took
occasion to slander him, as if he died drunken, that by aspersions on his life
and death, they might slander the reformation of Religion, which he first
began. These men (after their manner) being to conjure an unclean spirit out
of a man in Prage, gave out that he was free from this spirit for the time that
Luther died, and that when he returned, they examined him where he had been
that time, and the spirit should answer that he had attended Luther. Phillip,
Melancthon, borne in the year 1497. died 1560. and both these famous men were
buried, and have their Monuments in the Dukes Church at Witteberg, which is
said to be like that of Jerusalem, and in that both of them are round, I will
not deny it, but I dare say they differ in this, that Jerusalem Church has
the Chauncell in the midst with Allies to go round about it, whereas the
Chancell of this Church is at the East end of it. The Wittebergers tell many
things of Luther which seem fabulous, and among other things they show an
aspersion of ink, cast by the Devil when he tempted Luther, upon the wall in
S. Augustines College. Besides, they show a house wherein Doctor Faustus a
famous coniurer dwelt. They say that this Doctor lived there about the year
1500. and had a tree all blasted and burnt in the adjoining Wood, where he
practiced his Magic Art, and that he died, or rather was fetched by the
Devil, in a Village near the Town. I did see the tree so burnt; but walking
at leisure through all the Villages adjoining, I could never hear any memory
of his end. Not far from the City there is a mountain called the Mount of
Apollo, which then, as of old, abounded with medicinable herbs. In a Village
near the Town there be yet many tokens that the Emperor Charles the fifth
encamped there. I lived at Witteberg the rest of this summer, where I paid a
Gulden weekly for my diet and beer, which they account apart, and for my
chamber after the rate of ten Guldens by the year. I hear that since all
things are dearer; the Scholars using to pay each week a Dollor for their
diet, and a Dollor for chamber and washing. Hence I took my journey to
Friburge that I might see the funeral of Christianus the Elector. Three of us
hired a Coach all this journey for a Dollor each day, with condition that we
should pay for the meat of the horses and of the coachman, which cost as much
more. And this we paid because we had freedom to leave the coach at our
pleasure, though we returned with it to Leipzig, to which if we would have tied
our selves, we might have had the coach for half a Dollor a day. The first day
we went six miles to Torge, through sandy fields yielding corn, and we dined
at Belgar a Village, where each man paid five grosh for his dinner, and by the
way they showed us a Village called Itzan, where Luther made his first Sermons
of reformation.

Torge is a fair City of Misen, of a round form, falling each way from a
mountain, and seated on the West side of Elue. It has a stately Castle
belonging to the Torg.
Elector Duke of Saxony, who is Lord of Leipzig, Witteberg, and all the Cities
we shall pass in this journey. This Castle is washed with the River Elue, and
was built by John Fredricke Elector, in the year 1535. It has a winding way
or plain staire, by which a horse may easily go to the top of the Castle, the
passage being so plain as the ascent can scarcely be discerned. The Hall,
Chambers and Galleries of this Castle, are very fair and beautiful, and
adorned with artificial pictures, among which one of a boy presenting flowers,
is fairer then the rest. Also there is a picture on the wall, of one Laurence
Weydenberg a Sweitzer, made in the twentieth year of his age, in the year
1531, showing that he was nine foot high. In the Church there is a Monument of
Katherine a Nun, which died 1552. and was wife unto Luther. The Village
Milburg is within a mile of this City in the way to Dresden, where the Elector
Frederick was taken prisone by Charles the fifth, in the Protestants war.
The lake near the City is a mile in circuit, for the fishing whereof, the
Citizens pay 500. guldens yearly to the Elector of Saxony, and they fish it
once in three years, and sell the fish for some 5000. guldens. The bear of
Torge is much esteemed through all Misen, whereof they sell such quantity
abroad, as ten water-mils besides wind-mils, scarcely serve the town for this
purpose.

From Torge we went six miles to Misen in our Coach hired as aforesaid, and we
dined Misen.
each man for five grosh in the village Stars, and we passed through goodly
cornehils, and fair woods of fur and birtch. The City Misen is round in
form, and almost all the houses are built on the falling sides of Mountains,
which compassing all the City, open toward the East, where Elue runs by.
Duke Frederick surnamed The wise, and Duke George, surnamed papisticall, are
buried in the Cathedral Church. Here I paid six grosh every meal. The City is
subject to the Duke of Saxony, having the same name with the whole Country in
which it lies. Hence we went three miles to Dresden in a Coach hired as
aforesaid, and passed through sandy and stony Hills, some fruitful valleys of
corn, and two Woods of fur, whereof there be many near Dresden, whither
being come, I paid six grosh for my dinner.

This City of Dresden is very fair and strongly fortified, in which the
Elector of Dresden.
Saxony keeps his Court, having been forty years past only a village. When
the first stone of the walls was laid, there were hidden a silver cup gilded, a
Book of the Laws, another of the coins, and three glasses filled with wine,
the Ceremonies being performed with all kind of Music and solemnity. The like
Ceremony was used when they laid the first stone of the stable. The City is of
a round form, seated in a Plain, running between two Mountains, but some
what distant, and the houses are fair, built of free stone, four or five
roofes high, whereof the highest roof, after the Italian fashion, is little
raised in steepness, so that the tops of the houses appear not over the
walls, excepting the Electors Castle built betwixt the North and West side,
and the Church Tower built between the West and East side. In this Tower the
watchmen dwell, who in the day time give notice by Flags hung out, what number
of foot or horse are coming toward the Town. To which Tower they ascend by
two hundred seventy stairs, and in the top two Demiculuerins are planted. We
entered on the East side through old Dresden, being walled about, and so passed
the Elue, compassing the walls of new Dresden on the East side by a Bridge of
stone having seventeen arches, under which half the ground is not covered
with water, except it be with a flood. Upon the Bridge we passed three gates,
and at the end entered the City by the fourth; where the garrison Soldiers
write the names of those that come in, and lead them to the Innes, where the
Hosts again take their names. The City has but two little Suburbs. The
Citizens were then as busy as Bees in fortifying the City, which the Elector
then made very strong. The ground rises on all sides toward the Town, and
the new City has four Gates; Welsh-thore, Siegeld-thore, New-thore, and
Salomons-thore: and is compassed with two walls, between which round about
there is a garden, from which men may ascend or descend to it at each Gate.
Over the outward wall there is a covered or close Gallery, private to the
Elector, who therein may compass the Town unseen. He has used the best
wits of Germany and Italy in this fortification, wherein he has spared no
cost. The walls are high and broad of earth, whose foundation is of stone, and
they are on all sides furnished with great Artillery, yea in that time of peace
the streets were shut with iron chains, at eating times, and all night.

The Electors stable is by much the fairest that ever I saw, which I will
briefly describe. In the first Court there is a Horse-bath, into which they may
bring as much or little water as they list, and it has 22. pillars, in each
whereof diverse Arms of the Duke are graven, according to the diverse families
whose Arms he gives. The same Court serves for a Tilting-yard, and all
exercises of Horse-manship: and there is also the Horse-leaches shop, so well
furnished as if it belonged to a rich Apothecary. The building of the stable is
four square; but the side toward the Dukes Palace is all taken up with two
gates and a little Court yard; which takes up half this side, and round about
the same are little cuboords peculiar to the horsemen, in which they dispose
all the furniture fit for riding. The other three sides of the quadrangle,
contained some 136. choice and rare Horses, having only two other gates
leading into the Cities market place, opposite to those gates toward the
Court. These horses are all of foreign Countries, for there is another stable
for Dutch horses, and among these chief horses, one named Michael Schatz (that
is Michaell the Treasure) was said to be of wonderful swiftness: before each
horses nose was a glass window, with a curtain of green cloth to be drawn
at pleasure; each horse was covered with a red mantle, the rack was of iron,
the manger of copper: at the buttocke of each horse was a pillar of wood which
had a brazen shield, where by the turning of a pipe he was watered; and in this
pillar was a cuboord to lay up the horses comb and like necessaries, and above
the back of each horse hung his bridleand saddle, so as the horses might as it
were in a moment be furnished. Above this stable is a gallery on one side,
adorned with the statuaes of horses and their riders, with their complete
Armours fifty in number, besides many Armours lying by the walls. On the other
side is a gallery having forty like statuaes, and thirty six sledges which they
use in Misen, not only to journey in time of snow, but also for festival
pompes. For in those Cities, especially at Shrouetide, and when much snow
falls, they use to sit upon sledges drawn with a horse furnished with many
bells, at the foot of which sledge they many times place their Mistresses, and
if in running or sudden turning, the rider or his Mistress slip, or take a
fall, it is held a great disgrace to the rider. Some of these sledges are very
sumptuous, as of vnpurified silver as it comes from the Mines, others are
fairly covered with velvet and like stuffes. Above the forepart of the stable
toward the market place, are the chambers wherein the Elector feasts with
Ambassadors. In the window of the first chamber or stoue, being a bay window
toward the street, is a round table of marble, with many inscriptions
persuading temperance, such as are these,

Aut nulla Ebrietas, aut tanta sit vt tibi cur as:
Demat. --
Be not drunken in youth or age,
Or no more then may cares assuage.
Again, Plures crapula quam ensis.
Gluttony kills more then the sword.
Yet I dare say, that notwithstanding all these good precepts, few or none ever
rose (or rather were not carried as unable to go) from that table. Twelve
little marble chaires belong to this table, and the pauement of the room is
marble, and close by the table there is a Rock curiously carved with images of
fishes and creeping things. This Rock puts forth many sharp pinacles of
stone, upon which the vessels of gold and silver are set forth at the feasts,
and when the drinking is at hottest, the statua of a horseman by work of great
Art, comes out of the Rock, and presents each stranger with a huge boule of
wine, which he must drink off for his welcome, without expecting that any
should pledge him. In the next chamber belonging to this stoue, is a bedstead of
marble and both have hangings of gold lether. There is another chamber and
another stoue like these, and above them in the uppermost loft, there be many
little rooms, whereof one is furnished with spears, another with saddles (and
among them I remember one which in the pummell borea gilded head, with eyes
continually moving, and in the hinder part had a clock) the rest are furnished
with swords, shields, helmets, and feathers. Among the swords, every Prince has
his own, which the successors use not to wear, and there is one belonging to
the Electorship, when he exercises his office as Marshal of the Empire. There
was another Sword, having in the hilt two little Pistols. Here I saw laid up an
Iron chain, in which they said, that Duke Henry the Father of Manrice the
first Elector of this Family, should have been hanged in the Low Countries,
who escaping, brought the same with him, and laid it up here for memory: After
the Funeral of Christianus, returning from Friburg to this Town, I found
only fifteen of those choice Horses in the stable, all the rest having been
given to Princes coming to the Funeral.

The Dukes Palace in Dresaen was built by Mauricius, part of the City walls and
the gates were built by Augustus, who did also lay the foundation of this
Stable. But Christianus the Elector perfected the walls of the City, with the
close gallery over them, and built this famous stable; setting this inscription
upon the walls in Latin. Christianus Duke of Saxony, Heir to Augustus the
Elector of happy memory, and imitator of his virtues, caused this Stable to be
built, and the Yard adjoining to be fitted for Tilting and military exercises:
the present age, etc.

The Armory at Dresden is no less worth the noting, wherein were Arms and all
kind of munition for seventy thousand men, but of late it had been somewhat
emptied by an expedition into France, undertaken by the Duke at the
solicitation of the Count of Turin, Ambassador for Henry the fourth King of
France.

The Duke was at great charge in keeping Garrison Soldiers at Dresden, and
Officers, as well for the stable as the Armory. In these parts and no where
else in Germany, they use boats of a hollow tree, driven not by Oars, but by
battledores, whereof I saw many upon the Elue, as likewise water mils swimming
upon boats, and removed from place to place, the like whereof was since made
at London by a Dutchman, but became unprofitable by the ebbing and flowing of
Thames. At Dresden I paid seven grosh a meal.

Hence in our Coach hired, as aforesaid, we passed four miles to Friburg,
through Friburg.
fruitful Hills and Mountains of corn, but few or no Woods: and here we paid
each man fix grosh a meal. This City is of a round form, compassed of all
sides with Mountains, having many Vauts, or Caves under it; by which the
Citizens enter and go out of the City by night, to work in the silver Mines.
Yet has the City two walls, and two ditches, but altogether dry. It has five
gates, and four Churches, among which Saint Peter's Church is the fairest. The
Elector has his Castle in the City: and in the Church (as I remember of Saint
Peter) wherein the Dukes use to be buried; Mauricius has a very fair monument
of black Marble, raised in three piles, whereof each is decked with diuets
statuaes of white Marble and Alablaster; whereof two Belong to Mauricius, the
one in posture of praying, the other armed, and receining a deadly wound. Two
Monuments were begun, but not then perfected, for Augustus and Christianus. The
territory of Friburg abounds with silver Mines; whereof some and fine hundred
fadomes deep, some seven hundred, and some nine hundred, and after each thirty
fadomes, the earth is supported with great beams of timber, lest it should
fall; and from each of these buildings, winding stairs of wood are made, to
descend to the bottom.

The Citizens live of these Mines, and grow rich thereby, whereof the Elector
has his proper part, and uses to buy the parts of the Citizens. The worke-men
use burning Lamps under the earth both day and night, and use to work as well
by night as by day: and they report, that coming near the purest veins of
silver, they are often troubled with evil spirits. These worke-men go out to
the Mines by night, through the Caves under the City, and being called back
from work by the sound of a bell, they come in the same way. The water which
the worke-men use, springs in a mountain an arrow shot from the Town, whence
falling to a lower mountain, it is conuaied by hollow trees to fall upon the
wheels of the mils, so as a little quantity thereof drives them. These Mils
draw the water up out of the Mines, for the depth of forty fadome, whence it
runs in pipes toward the City. When they try and purify the silver, first
with water they wash away the red earth, then they beat the metal with a hand
hammer, and thus broken, they cast it into the fire, which they make in the
open air, lest the workmen should be stifled with the fume of the brimstone.
Then they melt the metal six times, by a fire made of whole trees, in a
little house adjoining. Then in another house they sever the metal from the
earth with a sieve. Then again they beat the metal with an hammer driven by a
Mill; and thus beaten, they wash it upon three clothes hanging slopewise, and
the purest silver sticks to the uppermost cloth. This done, they melt it
again six times, and the best of the dross is lead and silver, the rest
copper; and this silver and lead being again melted, the lead falls from the
silver like dust. The fire wherein they try this silver is so hot, as it
consumes the brick Furnaces in three days. The workmen besides their hier,
use to be rewarded for expedition of the work. The means by which they find
silver, are very strange, being by a rod, which vulgarly they call
Chassel-wand, or, the Divine Rod, which they carry in their hands, and when
they go over silver, they say the Rod bends or breaks, if it be straightly
held: and there were not above seven men in this City, which had skill of this
mystery. The ways are planted with trees to direct passengers, lest as they
go to the City, they should fall into the Mines: for as they report, it has
often happened that the Citizens themselves have perished in this sort; and the
like mischance happened lately to five workmen, though skillful in the ways.
These Mines of Friburg were first found in the year 1180, yielding to this day
rich veins of silver. There be other Mines of silver near these since that
time discovered, namely at Schaneberg, found in the year 1470, at Anneberg.
found 1510, in Ioachimus valley, found 1526. For this Elector of Saxony has
many Mines of silver, which lest any should think to belong of right to the
Emperor, it must be observed that the Princes Electors have Regal power
under the Emperor, granted by privilege in the Laws of the golden Bulla, by
which they have right to all Mines found in their own Territories.

After I had seen the Elector Christianus his funeral at Eriburg, (the
ceremonies whereof shall be described in the proper place,) I returned to
Dresden in a Coach hired as above said, and so from Dresden to Misen; but from
Misen I returned not to Torge, but took another way to Leipzig, being ten
miles, which we went in one day, four miles to Owsen, three to Wortson, where
we dined, and thence three miles to Leipzig, all through plain and fruitful
corn fields. I spent this winter at Leipzig, that I might there learn to
speak the Dutch tongue (the Grammar whereof I had read at Witteberg,) because
the Misen speech was held the purest of all other parts in Germany. Here each
Student uses to bay for his diet a Gulden weekly, besides beer, for which
every man paies according to his drinking; some less, some more, most beyond
measure. For the Citizens have no beer in their houses but one kind, which is
very small, and buy the better kinds (as that of Torge, which the richer sort
usually drink) from a public house; where it is sold by small measures, to
the profit of the Senate. Besides, the Scholars pay severally for their bed
and chamber. My self lodged with a rich Citizen, and for diet, bed, and
chamber, paid weekly a Doller and a half.

CHAP. II. Of my journey from Leipzig to Prage (in Bohemia) to Nurnberg,
Augspurg, Ulm, Lyndaw, Costnetz (in Germany) Scaphusen, Zurech, Baden, and
Bazell (in Sweitzerland.)
BEing to take my journey to Prage, in the end of the year 1591, (after the
English account, who begin the year upon the twenty five of March,) I returned
again to Dresden; from whence I wrote this Letter concerning my journey, to a
friend lying at Leipzig.

Honest M. Know that after I parted from you at Torg, by good hap, and beside
my expectation, I light upon a Coach going to Dresden, with which good hap,
while I was affected, and hasted to hire a place therein, I had forgot to pay
for my Coach for the day before. But when we were ready to go, remembering my
error, and entreating my consorts to stay a while for me, I ran back to
the Inn, as speedily as the Parasite Curculio in Plautus; and finding not the
Coachman there, I gave the money to the servant of the house before witnesses,
and so returned to the Coach all sweating with have. There I found that
dunghill rascal the Coachman, having my gown on his back. I laid hold of the
garment, as if I knew it, and he held it as fast, as a pledge for his money. I
being enraged that he should use me so, when I had dealt honestly with him,
drew my sword, and making known that I had paid the money, bad him lay down
the gown upon his peril. I had almost drawn a rabble of Coachmen on my back,
but they forbore me in this heat, for you know they are not apt to quarrel in
the morning; but if I had thus provoked them in the afternoon, being warmed
with drink, sure they would have run upon me, though they had been naked. Will
you know the companions of my journey? I was alone among a Coach full of women,
and those of the Electors Duchess Chamber for sooth, which you would have
said to have been of the black guard. It was a Comedy for me to hear their
discourse; now declaiming against Caluenists, now brawling together, now
mutually with tears bewailing their hard fortunes: and they fell into al these
changes, while the wind blew from one and the same quarter. Is anything
lighter then a woman? and lest the flock of geese should want matter,
sometimes they charged me to be a Caluenist, sometimes a Jew; and I answered
merrily, that if any of them were but a Consuls wife, I would satisfy them for
my religion. At eight a clock in the night, the horses being spent, my self
wearied, and only their tongues untired, we came to a Village called
Derwaldhan, where we should lodge. We entered a kind of Barn, my self not
without sighs. Lipsius should here have had no cause to complain of stinking
beer, brown bread, and often shaking hands. No man returned salutation to us:
the women my companions, drew out victuals they had brought to eat, I being
fasting to that hour, with great fear and trembling of heart, expected that
at least they would give me some raw bacon, or dried puddings. But they thought
nothing less. At last I desired an egg or two for my supper. The servant
answered that the old woman was in bed, and that he knew not the mystery,
whether any eggs were in the house or no. If the Comicall Poets Saturio had
been here he would have fallen into a sound. To be brief, the women took
compassion on me, and I without blushing was content to eat of free cost, and
made them know that I was no Jew, for I made no religion to eat what was before
me.

The next morning before the day star arose, I was walking in a meadow, what
do you bless your self with a cross? Sure I am no less sleepy then I was,
but he is soon apparelled that has a dogs bed in straw: yet this straw was
clean, which is no small favor, and when I gave the servant a Misen groshe
for his pains, he was astonished, as if he had never seen a whole groshe
before, so as he forgot to thank me, only showing it to the standers by, as
if I had deserved another burden of fresh straw. The Women, Virgins, Men and
Maids, servants, all of us lay in one room, and my self was lodged furthest
from the stoue, which they did not for any favor, though contrary to their
opinion I was glad of it, delighting more in sweet air, then the smoke of a
dunghill. My companions laughed at me for babbling dutch in my sleep: surely
reason commanding me waking, had not power over me in sleep, to hinder me from
reuoluing the pleasant passages of the day past. On Saturday the same day I
came to Dresden, from whence five passengers were newly gone for Prage in a
Coach, but after three days expectation I have found new consorts, and to
morrow being Wednesday, and the eight of March, I begin my journey to Bohemia.
While I dispaired of consorts, I was determined to go in a boat'vpon the Elue,
and had now bought clean straw, in which I meant to triumph alone, when by
good hap, turning from the river to the Inn, I light upon this commodity of a
Coach, which has freed me from the annoyance of the water and Mariners.
Embrace in my name our common friend G. B. and of my loving hosts family, let
not a whelpe go unsaluted. Farewell honest M. and return me love for love:
from Dresden the seventh of March, 1591.

My self and four consorts hired a Coach for 14. dollers from Dresden to
Prage. The first day we went three miles to Gottleben a Village, where we paid
five Bohemian groshe, that is six white groshe each man for his dinner. Half
the way was on the West side of the River Elue, in a fertile plain, then we
passed the Elue, and traveled through mountains, yet fertile, and a baggy
wood. After dinner we went two miles, to a Village, where we lodged, through
stony mountains without any wood, and in the mid way there was a wooden
pillar, which divided the territory of the Saxon Elector from the kingdom of
Bohemis.

The second day we went two miles through stony Mountains, bearing not one tree,
to Ansig a little City, where we paid for our breakefast four Bohemian
groshes. The same day we passed three miles in a straight between rocks, lying
upon the Elue, and two short miles through fruitful corn fields, to Wedin lying
upon the river Aegra, which runs a little below into the Elue, but was here at
this time so deep, by a flood or melting of snow, as our Coach in coming to
the bridge of Wedin by the bank side, took water. The third day we passed a
miles to a village called Welber or Welberg, through fruitful hills of corn
without any wood, and there each man paid 5 Bohemian grosh for his dinner.

In the afternoon we went three miles, for the most part through fruitful
hills of come, the rest through Rocks and Mountains planted with Vines, and so
came to Prage, through which the River Molda runs, but is not nauigable. On
the West side of Molda is the Emperors Castle, seated on a most high
Mountain, in the fall Prage.
whereof is the Suburb called Kleinseit, or little side. From this Suburb to
go into the City, a long stone bridge is to be passed over Molda, which runs
from the South to the North, and diuides the suburb from the City, to which as
you go, on the left side is a little City of the Jews, compassed with walls,
and before your eyes toward the East, is the City called new Prage, both which
Cities are compassed about with a third, called old Prage. So as Prage consists
of three Cities, all compassed with walls, yet is nothing less then strong, and
except the stinch of the streets drive back the Turks, or they meet them in
open field, there is small hope in the fortifications thereof. The streets are
filthy, there be diverse large market places, the building of some houses is of
free stone, but the most part are of timber and clay, and are built with little
beauty or Art, the walls being all of whole trees as they come out of the
wood, the which with the bark are laid so rudely, as they may on both sides be
seen. Molda in the winter uses to be so frozen, as it bears carts, and the
ice thereof being cut in great pieces, is laid up in cellers for the Emperor
and Princes to mingle with their wine in summer, which me thinks can neither
be sauory, nor healthful, since neither the heat of the clime, nor the
strength of the Bohemian wines (being small and sharp) require any such
cooling. One thing they boast to be proper to that kingdom, that the Elue,
Aegra, Molda, and all other Rivers watering Bohemia, have their spring heads in
the same.

In public Innes they demand some six Bohemian grosh for a meal, yet do they
not commonly give meals at an ordinary rate, as they do through all Germany;
but what meat you require, that they dress, and the servant buying all things
out of doors (after the manner of Poland) makes a reckoning of the expenses.
My self had my diet with a Citizen very conveniently for a doller and a half
weekly. I did here eat English Oysters pickeld, and a young Bohemian coming
in by chance, and tasting them, but not knowing the price, desired the Merchant
to give him a dish at his charge, which contained some twenty Oysters, and
finding them very sauoury, he called for five dishes one after another, for
which the Merchant demanded and had of him five dollers, the dearnesse no less
displeasing his mind, then the meat had pleased his taste.

As you pass over Molda from the Suburb Kleinseit, into the City; there is a
hand of stone as it were cut off, upon the gate of the City; signifying to
strangers, that whosoever draws a sword there, or upon the bridge; loses his
hand; and the like hand there is to the same purpose, on the Senate house in
the town. The Emperor has two enclosures walled about, which they call
Gardaines, one of which is called Stella, because the trees are planted in the
figure of stars, and a little fair house therein is likewise built, with six
corners in form of a star. And in this place he kept 12-Cammels, an Indian
Ox, yellow, all over rugged, and hairy upon the throat, like a Lion; and an
Indian Calfe, and two Leopards, which were said to be tame, if such wild beasts
may be tamed. They were of a yellow color spotted with black, the head partly
like a Lion, partly like a Cat, the tail like a Cat, the body like a
Greyhound, and when the hunts-man went abroad, at call they leaped up behind
him, sitting upon the horse like a dog on the hinder parts, being so swift in
running, as they would easily kill a Heart. I remember that a gentleman of
Hungary walking in the streets with me, and observing a picture on a wall of a
German protecting an Hungarian from a Turk, with this inscription: Not for thy
sake, but my own: took this occasion to complain much of the Emperor, and
relate many things wherein his prodigality and other errors had overthrown
Hungary, and had done nothing less then ease their afflicted fortunes. In the
Church Emaus, this inscription is graven;

The tenor of King Alexander the Great, his etc.

We Alexander the Great of King Phillip the founder of the Grecian Empire,
Conqueror of the Persians, Meades, etc And of the whole World, from the East
to West, from North to South, son of great Jupiter, by etc. so called. To you
the noble stock of the Sclauonians, and to your language, because you have
been to me helpers, true in faith, and valiant in war, I confirm all this
tract from the North to the South parts of Italy, from me and my successors to
you and your posterity. If any other Nation be found there, let them be your
slaves. Dated in our City of Alexandria, newly founded by us upon the great
River of Nilus: the twelfth of the Goddess Minerua: witnesses are Aethra, and
the II. Princes, whom we appoint successors to us dying without heir.

Also there were these verses, showing by numerall letters the antiquity of
Prage University, from the year 867. though the Colleges there about ruined,
scarce show any shadow of this University.

HaeC sChoLm qVo SLV I Das unno est erecta sub auras,
Ostenait rVbrae LItera picta notae.
The numerall great letters show the year,
This universal School was founded here.
In the Church of the Emperors Castle, these things are to be seen. A fair
Chapel named after the Emperors sister, married to the French King, and
crowned Queen of the French Another Chapel belonging to the Barons, called
Popelij (the greatest family of the Kingdom, next to the Baron of Rosenberg)
which Chapel is proper to them for burial, and is dedicated to St Andrew the
Apostle. In the Emperors Church is a Monument of Rodolphus the second, then
living Emperor, built of white marble, and compassed with grates of iron. In
the same place lie buried Charles the fourth in the year 1378. Wenceslaus in
the year 1419. Ladislaus in the year 1459. Ferdinand the fourth, in the year
1564. Maximillian the second, in the year 1577. (all being Archdukes of
Austria, and Emperors) and George Pogiebrachius a Bohemian, and King of
Bohemia. To all these is one Monument erected, and that of small beauty: In the
same Church is the Monument of a Bishop, who being the Queens Confessor, was
cast into Molda because he would not reveal her confession to her husband
Wenceslaus. They do so reverence the Monument of this Bishop (since made a
Saint by the Pope) as they think he shall die with shame, that passes by it
without reverence. In Old Prage toward the South, and upon the East side of
Molda, there is an old Palace, where they show a trap-doore, by which the
Queen was wont to slide down into a Bath, where she used to satisfy her
unlawful lust. In the same place is graven the leap of a horse, no less
wonderful then Byards fabulous leap. The House of Kelley a famous English
Alcumist, was of old a Sanctuary, and built for an order of Friars, upon the
gate whereof these verses are written,

Has aedes veterum favor and clementia Regum,
Omnibus exemptas Legibus esse dedit:
Audeat ergo iugum nemo his servile minari,
Quos hic cum Vrabsky curat alitque Deus.
This house through old Kings Clemency
Free from all Laws no threats respects;
Dare not fright them with slavery,
Whom under God Vrabsky protects.
In the Senate house the City Arms are painted, being a Castle with three
Towers ore, and two Lions argent Langed gules, are the supporters, and these
Verses are written upon the Arms;

Qui dedit haec veteri turrita insignia Pragae,
Omina venturae sortis amica dedit.
Mole sua vt celsae transcendunt moenia Turres,
Sic famum superas inclita Praga tuam.
Who so these towred Arms to old Prage gave,
Gave lucky signs of future happiness;
For as the Towers ore top the walls most brave,
So Prage thou do surpass thy fame no less.
Not far from Prage they say, that the Crown of the Kingdom is laid up, in
Karlsteine Castle. At Prage in Bethlem Church, they show a Pulpit in which John
Hus used to preach at the first reformation of Religion. I lived at Prage some
two months, and being to depart from thence, I would have gone to Vienna (the
famous Fort against the Turks) but my desire to see Nurnberg and Augspurg so
prevailed, as I left that journey, which by chance happened better then I
imagined, for being called back into the Low Countries (as hereafter I shall
relate), I passed thence through Poland into Italy, because France was shut up
by the civil wars, and I ever shunned to go twice one way, and so had the
opportunity (more fit then the former) to see Vienna. Now for their sakes who
may pass from Prage to Vienna, give me leave to remember, that in this way
their is a Village called Chassel, some nine miles from Prage, where the famous
Captain of the Bohemians, called Ziska, lies buried, who did lead the Hussites
valiantly, and being ready to die, wished them to make a Drum of his skin,
ominating that the sound thereof would be so terrible to the enemies, as they
would run away, (such confidence had be in Arms, as being dead he thought to
terrify his enemies.)

In the beginning of the year, 1592. I took my journey from Prage to
Nurnberg, 1592.
being six days journey. The first day after dinner, we went four miles,
partly through rocky Mountains, partly through a fruitful corn plain, and
lodged at Berawn, where a loaf of bread, worth two third parts of a Creitzer,
was as big as a threepenny loaf in England; by reason of the abundance of
corn in that Country. And here each man paid for his supper fourteen
Creitzers. This City belongs to the family of the Poples. The second day we
went four miles to Zudermont, all through Mountains and Groves, and two great
Woods, yet reasonably fruitful in Corn, and by the way we saw the City Bodly,
and the City Spil, the fairest of that Kingdom next to Prage, both belonging
to the Emperor, and two Castles; belonging to the Barons Popeles: and here
each man dined for sixteen Creitzers. After dinner we went two miles to
Pilsen, half the way through Woods, where is a little City Ruchtsan, and half
through Hills and Plains fruitful in Corn, (almost the whole Country of
Bohemta being hilly, and rich ground for Pasture and Corn) and here we supped
each man for twenty three Creitzers. The third day we went three miles to
Kladen, through pleasant Hills of Groves, pasture and corn, where each man
dined for eighteen Creitzers. After dinner we went three miles to Frawenberg,
through high Mountains and great Woods, having no great store of corn; in all
which territory, the Cities and Villages acknowledge the Emperor for their
supreme Lord, as he is King of Bohemia. For this Kingdom is not divided (as
others be) into Provinces and Countries, but into Noble-mens Territories. Here
we paid each man eight Creitzers for our supper, and twelve for wine.

The fourth day we went a mile and a half to a little river, dividing
Bohemia, or Boemerland from Germany, through rocky Mountains, and many Woods
of tall Fir trees, fit to make Masts for Ships. Then we entered a Country
belonging to that Elector Palatine of the Rheine, which Elector is called
vulgarly the Phaltz-graue, and we came within half a mile to Weithawsan, where
each man dined for eighteen Creitzers. After dinner we went two miles in the
Phaltzgraues Country, through woody Mountains, and one mile in the Landgraue
of Leytenberg his Country, through fruitful corn fields, and lodged at
Shenhutton, where each man paid six Creitzers for his supper, and thirteen
for wine. For in these parts they drink no beer (as before) but wine, and
that at a lower price) then other where, whether it be native or foreign: yet
no man must wonder that we spent more in wine then meat, all my consorts being
Dutchmen. The fifth day we went in the Phaltzgraues Country, four miles to
Amberg: through fruitful Hills of corn, and some few Woods, and this City
belongs to the Phaltzgraue) being seated in the upper Palatinate. After dinner
we went in the Marquess of Anspach his Country, (who is also called the
Burggaue of Nurnberg) two miles to Hous-coate, a Village, where each man paid
six Batzen for his supper. The sixth day we went three miles, passing by
Erspruck, a City subject to the Nurnbergers, and many villages belonging to
diuets Lords, and a fort in the mid way called Schwang, belonging to seventy
two Lords, and being then by course in the Phaltzgraues keeping; for all these
Lords keep the same by course for three years. The first and greater part of
the way, was through fruitful Hills of corn, the rest through sandy pastures,
and a Wood of a miles length. We dined at a poor Village, each man for six
Batzen. After dinner we went two miles to Nurnberg, through sandy corn fields,
and passed by many houses and gardens of the Citizens, whether they use to come
out of the City, sometimes to recreate themselves. The Wood which we passed in
the morning, lay on our left hand toward the South; as we entered the City on
the east side, and not far from the City, turns itself and runs farther
toward the South.

The City of Nurnberg, seated in a barren sandy ground, yet is very rich by the
Nurnberg.
Citizens industry. For as commonly few be rich in a fertile Country, (either
because having enough for food, they are given to idleness, or because
abundance makes them prodigal,) so the Nurnbergers planted in a barren soil,
by their subtle inventions of Manual works, and cunning Art, draw the riches
of all Countries to them. The River Bengetts runs by the City, but is not
Nauigable, nor bears any the least boats. This River runs from the East
(where we entered the Town) toward the gate Lauff-thore, and so compasses
the suburbs toward the South, where dividing into two beds, it enters the
City, and coming out again at the West, washes the City walls. On the East
side, the Margraues of Brandeburg, besieged the City, at the command of Charles
the fifth; therefore on this, and the South side, besides a dry ditch, and two
stone walls compassing the whole City, diverse Bulwarks are built upon the
wall. On all sides as you come up to the City, the earth rises, and almost at
every gate there is a long suburb. Upon the walls there be many Towers,
distant one from the other some 1000 ordinary walking paces, and the whole
circuit of the City is less then a German mile. Among the said Towers, three
are stronger then the rest, and furnished with Artillery. The first is on the
East side near the gate Lauff-thore. The second is on the South side, under
the gate Fraw-thore, (and on the same side is the gate Spittle-thore.) The
third is on the North side under the gate New-thore, (and on the same side is
another gate called Burk-thore.) There is a Castle called Burk, which by Nero
the Emperor, was of his name called Noricum Castrum. It is certain, that this
Castle stood in the time of Charles the Great; and the City being of it self
not ancient, is thought to have had his name of this Castles old Latin name.
On the West side is the gate Haller-thore, so called of him that caused it to
be built; where is a pleasant walk, thick shadowed with trees, where the
Citizens use to walk for pleasure.

The City is absolute of it self, being one of the free Cities of the Empire,
and me thinks the chief, or at least second to Augsburg: surely it may perhaps
yield to Augsburg in treasure and riches of the City, but it must be preferred
for the building, whichis all of free stone six or seven roofes high: I speak
of the whole City of Augsburg, for one street thereof is most beautiful, and
some Palaces there are fit for Princes, of which kind Nurnberg has none. The
Tower which I said was of old called Noricum Castrum, hangs over the City,
which being seated in a plain, has no mounts near it, and is of a round
form. The said Tower is compassed with a dry ditch very deep, upon the wall
whereof they shaw a Spaniards blood there sprinkled, who undertook to betray
the Castle to Charles the fifth: as also the print of a Horses feet in memory
of a wonderful leap from the Castle side to the other side of the bridge. The
Senate House lies under the side of this Castle or Tower, as it were under the
shield of Ajax; and under the same house and under the earth be the public
prisons. The Armory is built on the South side of the Town, and is opened to
no man without consent of the Senate, (which in all other Cities of Germany is
readily showed to strangers.) And in that Armory by the Citizens report they
have 400. great pieces of Artillery, with great store of all Munitions. The
City has also a Granary, which is so large, as diverse years provision for
corn may be laid up therein. It has teri Churches, whereof only four are
used for prayers and preaching; and in one of them lies buried Zebalemus-King
of Denmark, who first converted the City to Christian Religion. Near the
Church of Saint Laurence is the golden fountain, so called of the beauty and
magnificence, and it distills water out of twenty leaden pipes. Near the Church
called Frawenkirk, is another fair Fountain gilded over, and compassed with
an iron grate. It is unlawful to walk in the night without a torch, or a
candle and lantern. In the Innes they give no beer at the table, but diverse
kinds of wine, and a large diet, if not delicate: for which every man paieth
six batzen a meal, and besides for his chamber or lodging (which he may have
private to himself) three creitzers by the day. In the Almes-houses, out of
gifts by the last testament of those that die, they maintain great numbers of
poor people, and in one of them twelve old men apart, and in another twelve
old men, and as many old weomen.

Whilst I lived at Prage, and one night had set up very late drinking at a
feast, early in the morning the Sun beams glancing on my face, as I lay in
bed, I dreamed that a shadow passing by, told me that my father was dead, at
which awaking all in a sweat, and affected with this dream, I rose and wrote
the day and hour, and all circumstances thereof in a paper book, which Book
with many other things I put into a barrel, and sent it from Prage to Stood,
thence to be conuaied into England. And now being at Nurnberg, a Merchant of a
noble family, well acquainted with me and my friends, arrived there, who told
me that my Father died some two months past, I list not write any lies, but
that which I write is as true as strange. When I returned into England some
four years after, I would not open the barrel I sent from Prage, nor look
on the paper Book in which I had written this dream, till I had called my
sisters and some friends to be witnesses, where my self and they were
astonished to see my written dream answer the very day of my Fathers death.

I may lawfully swear, that which my kinsmen have heard witnessed by my
brother Henry whilst he lived, that in my youth at Cambridge I had the like
dream of my Mothers death, where my brother Henry lying with me, early in the
morning I dreamed that my mother passed by with a sad countenance, and told me
that she could not come to my commencement; I being within five months to
proceed Master of Arts, and she having promised at that time to come to
Cambridge: And when I related this dream to my brother, both of us awaking
together in a sweat, he protested to me that he had dreamed the very same, and
when we had not the least knowledge of our Mothers sickness, neither in our
youthful affections were any whit affected with the strangeness of this
dream, yet the next Carrier brought us word of our mothers death.

Being (as I have said) certified of my Fathers death at Nurnberg, and thinking
not fit to go on my journey into Italy, and yet being loath to return into
England, before I had finished my purposed voyage, I took the middle counsel,
to return into the Low Countries, that in those near places I might dispose
of my small patrimony (for in England gentlemen give their younger sons
less, then in foreign parts they give to their bastards) and so might leave
the same in the hands of some trusty friend. Yet lest I should loose the
opportunity of seeing Augsburg, meaning to return some other way into Italy, I
resolved to go from hence to Augsburg, and then to cross over the West parts
of Germany; and so to pass along the River Rhein into the Low Countries.

To Augsburg (being two days journey and a half) I hired of the City Carrier
(in whose company I went) an Horse for two Dollors, as I remember. The
Merchants of Nurnberg and Augsburg; give pensions to eight of these Carriers,
daily passing between those Cities, besides the profit they make of letters,
and other things they carry by horse. The first day after breake-fast, we rode
one mile in a thick wood, and another mile through sandy corn fields,
somewhat woody, both in the territory of the Nurnbergers, and four miles more
in the territory of the Margraue of Anspach, to Blinfield, where each man paid
for his supper and horse meat six batzen. The second day we rode four miles
to Monheime through a wood of Juniper, full of black berries and barberies, at
the end whereof was a free City called Wassenberge, and after through fruitful
hills and valleies of corn, all the territory, excepting the free City,
belonging to the Marshall of the Emperor (not of the Empire): when we came
almost to our iourneies end, the Carrier had a guide given him, according to
custom, for thieves using to lie by that way. Monheime belongs to the
Phaltz-graue of Newburg, being of the family of the Phaltz-graues of Rhein, and
there we paid each man for his dinner and horse-meat thirty four creitzers,
which make eight batzen and a half, and there we tasted Juniper wine, which I
never remember to have tasted else where. After dinner we rode two miles and a
half through fruitful hills of corn, and a small wood of Oaks (though all the
woods of upper Germany be commonly of fur, bearing green leaves all winter,
as those of inferior Germany toward Denmark, be all of Oaks.) By the way we
passed a Monastery granted to the Phaltzgraue of Rhein by the Emperor, and a
free City of the Empire, called Donaward, of the two Rivers Danow and Werd,
meeting there, and there we passed by bridge the Danow, running by the City.
Then we rode to Weschendorff two miles and a half more, through fruitful
fields of corn and pastures, the Country belonging to the Fugares (Citizens of
Augsburg) and to diverse other Lords. The Castle of this place belongs to the
said Fugares, who are rich and famous for their treasure; and though they have
princely revenues, and the title of barons, yet still are merchants: here each
man paid for his supper and hors-meat 8. batzen and a half.

The third day in the morning we rode three miles to Augsburg, through a
fruitful Augsburg.
plain of corn; without the walls whereof on the East and North, and some part
of the South sides, the fields are drowned with waters, and men pass to the
City by causies, for on these sides the ground lies low: but on the West side
is all the beauty of the City, where the houses are seated upon a hill, and
there is a place for the Merchants to meet, called the Berle, and likewise the
Senate house in the street Weingasse, so called of the Wine cellars. There also
be many Palaces stately built, of the Fugares and other Citizens: all the
building is of free stone six or seven roofes high; but in other parts it is
more poorly built of timber and clay. On this West part of the City is the
Gate called Kuknerthore, and the ditches are dry, as they be round about the
City; the walls are of stone, which being on all other sides narrow, are on this
side broad: for upon the walls of this side there be little houses built for
five hundred Garrison Soldiers to dwell in, with their wives and families:
which place is vulgarly called Die schwang. Here the Soldiers keep watch each
three days by turn, and each of them have for pay six guldens by the month,
and there is a market place, whether the Soldiers upon any difference use to
challenge each other. On this West side is another gate vulgarly called Der
Einlasse, by which passengers are received into the City by night, when the
gates are shut; and this their entrance is so curiously admitted, as many
strangers desirous to see the fashion, suffer themselves of purpose to be
locked out at night, and willingly give a reward to the soldiers letting them
in: when they receive in those that are shut out, diverse gates are opened; and
no man being seen to open them, are presently shut on the back of them that
come in: then they being thus shut as it were in a prison, a box is put down
to them in which they cast a reward; which done, the Watchmen out of win dowes
behold each man that is to enter, and so being safe from all treason, let them
pass by the last gate into the City. On the South side there be two gates,
Roatthore and Smitbogenthore; on the East side the gate Iacoberthore, and a
little gate called Holeblatten-thorelin. On the East side the River Werda and
the Brook Lecca running toward the North in three arms, divide the City, and
the Suburbs on that side are more strongly fortified then other where. The City
joined with the Suburbs is of a round form; and in the Suburbs on this side,
the Fugares have built many houses to be let for a gulden yearly to the poor
that are Papists. On the North side the walls are higher built, and the ditches
are deep filled with water, and there be four other gates: this side of the
City lying lowest, the fields without are (as I said) all drowned with water.
Here each man paid for each meal six or seven Batzen: I paid for two meals
and my horse meat twenty three Batzen. This City has a very fair conduit
called the Stately Workmanship, vulgarly Statlich Kunst, and the fountain of
the water is ten miles from the City. There be ten very fair Churches. In the
Cathedral Church it is written in golden letters, that the bowels of Otho the
Emperor are buried there. Also there is a curious picture of Christ praying in
the garden, whilst his Disciples slept; and upon a very fair Clock are three
statuaes of the three Kings of Colen, (so they call the Wise Men of the East)
and these carried about by a circle of iron, worship Christ when the Clock
strikes. In the Senate House (where the imperial Parliaments vulgarly called
Reichs-tagen have often been held) I found nothing to answer the magnificence
of this City; only on the gates this is written: Wise men build upon the
Rock, Fools upon the Sand: (for I said this part of the City on the West side
was built upon a stony hill.) In the Jesuits Church the Altar is of silver
gilded over, and another Altar of Christ's Nativity is curiously painted like
the barks of trees. Augsburg (called of the Vandals, for distinction from
Augsburg Rauracorum in Sweitzerland,) is divided from the Vandals by the Brook
Lycus, and being of old a City of Rhetia, now is reckoned the metropolitan
City of Suenia, vulgarly Schwaben, and is said said to have been built by the
son of Iaphet, six hundred years before Rome was builded. Of old they had a
yearly feast to Ceres, and now upon the same day they have a Fair: and for
the fruitfulness of the soil, the City gives a sheaue of corn for their
Arms. This City was utterly destroyed by Attila, King of the Hunnes, and when
he was dead, was rebuilt again. It is a free City of the Empire, (which are
vulgarly called Retchs-statt,) and as other free Cities, it is governed by
Senators. There be many Alms houses for the poor, and one, wherein four
hundredth are nourished, by rents of land and houses, given to that house of old
by good men. The City is seated upon the Northern mouth of the Alps, in a
fruitful plain of corn and pastures, and Hills full of game for hunting, and
it may be gathered how populous it is, by that a German Author writes, that in
a year when no plague reigned, 1705 were baptized, and 1227 buried.

Being constant in my purpose taken at Nurnberg, to go from Auspurge, to the
West parts of Germany, and so into the Low Countries; yet I will remember the
Reader, that he shall find the journey from Augspurg to Venice, described in
my voyage from Stood to Venice, and thence to Jerusalem. From Augspurg I rode
to Vlme, and thence to Lindawe, and all the way hired my horse for six or
seven Batzen a day, paying for the days in which my horse returned, and hyring
footmen to bring them back, and bearing their charges. The first day I rode
four miles through the territory of the Fugars, and the Bishop of Tilleng, and
one mile in the territory of the Archduke of Austria, of the house of
Inspruch, in a mountainous Country full of Woods, of Juniper, Ashes, Oaks,
and Beaches, to Burg; where each man paid for his dinner and horsemeat, eight
Batzen.

In the afternoon I rode four miles to Vlme, through a fruitful plain of
corn. Entering the City, we passed by a Bridge, the River Danow, which (though
running in Vlme.
a plain) yet has a most violent course, so as boats carried down the
stream, use to be sold at the place wherethey land, it being very difficult to
bring them back again; yet some Barks of burden are sometimes drawn back,
by the force of horses. My self have seen ten horses drawing one Bark, but
they use a greater number, according to occasion, some thirty or more, as they
report; and he that rides on the horse nearest the Bark, is called Wage-halse,
that is, Neck venturer, because hce and the horse are often drawn under the
water, till the other horses draw them out again. This River has four great
water falls, whereof the greatest is at Struddle, eighteen miles from Vienna,
which is hardly to be passed, except it be in a flood. And the multitude of
Bridges are very dangerous for boats, by reason of the violent stream, and
especially because the Mariners are many times drunken, or negligent. They use
for a charm, to sprinkle their drawing horses with water, and use with
continual loud cries to make them draw. This Navigations is very necessary that
the lower Oestreich, being fertile, may supply the upper being barren, with
wine and corn. Munster writes of two falls of this River, one below Lintz,
where the waters make a terrible noise, beating upon the rocky bed, the other
at Gryn, where the water makes a dangerous whirle-poole of unsearchable depth.
Vlme is seated in Schwaben or Sueuia, as Augspurge is, and has his name of
Elm trees. Charles the Great built a Monastery in this Village, which in time
grew to a City, and under the Emperor Fredrick the third, bought their
freedom of the Monks. The building thereof is of wood and clay. The order of
Knights called in Latin, Teutonicus, was in old time of great power, and has
yet a house in this City. It has one stately Church, in the Yard whereof, the
Mount Oliuet is curiously engraven. It has a fair Senate house, and the
Armory has such store of Ordinance and all Munitions, as it yields not
therein to the proudest City in Germany. The writing Tables, made in this City,
are famous for their goodness, and are thence carried into foreign parts. The
diet of the Innes of this City (seated in a most fertile soil) is very
plentiful, both in meats and banquets, where each man paid for his dinner,
seven Batzen. In this Country they drink nothing but wine, (as they do in all
upper Germany,) but it is sharp, and the Mass or measure is sold for three
Batzen. When we were at dinner, a Tumbler came in, and being admitted to show
his cunning, he stood upon his head and drank a measure of wine, which seemed
strange to the beholders.

After dinner, we rode a mile in a pleasant valley upon the Danow, which we
passed, and rode two miles further in the like fertile plain, which is very
large, and by all men much commended for the fruitful pastures thereof. And so
we came to Baltring, subject to a little free City called Bubery, and here
each man paid five Batzen for dinner, and three for horse-meat. Next morning,
after a miles riding, we came to the City Bubery and rode two miles further to
Waldshut, through woody Mountains, and corn valleys, which were so boggey, as
many times we had almost stuck fast. The Country belongs to the Archduke, of
the family of Inspruck; and here we paid each man nine Batzen for dinner and
horsemeat. After dinner we rode two miles through a woody Country, to
Rauenspurg, a free City, seated between Mountains, whereof one hangs over
it, and the River Ach runs by it, in a narrow bed; so as the waters falling
from the Mountains very swiftly, do many times ouerflow, to the great damage
of the Country; and from the Mountains many wooden pipes convey water to the
City. In these parts be many Alms houses, for those that are infected with
Leprosy, who may not come near the Passengers, but do beg of them a far
off, with the sound of a wooden clapper. Here each man paid for his supper
and horse-meat, twelve Batzen and a half. The first day of May, we rode three
miles, one through a Wood, the rest through a plain of corn and enclosed
pastures, and Hills planted with Vines, to the City Lindaw. By the way we saw
the house of Count Montfort, and passed the River Arba by a Bridge, which does
often ouerflow the plain, doing great hurt; and there we paid half a
Creitzer tribute to the said Count, for each man. We were now come out of
Sueuia, and had rode two miles in Algoia, and on the left hand toward the
South, we discovered the mouth of the Alps, which in this place is called
Spliego.

Lindaw is a free City of the Empire, which freedom it bought in the year
1166, and it is almost an I and, seated in the lake called Acronius (vulgarly
Bodensea) being Lindaw.
joined to the continent by a Bridge of stone on the North-east side, where it
has only one gate, called Burg-thore, by which we entered. On this side, the
fields are very pleasant, and planted with Vines, and near the Bridge there is
a Rampire, so old, as they say, it was erected by the Heathen, before any
Christians were. Hence the City lies in length toward the South West: partly
on the West, and altogether on the South side lies the lake Bodensea, that is,
upper sea, close by the houses of the Citizens, where they descend by stairs
to take water. Beyond the lake are most high Mountains, which were then
covered with snow, and at the foot of the highest Mountains, there is a Tower,
which they report to be built by Hannibal, near which is the place, famous by
the defeat of Hasdrubal. On this side the City, they show a stone, whence they
say, the Saint called Aurelia, passed the lake (woe to them that believe) at
one step. The River Bregets falls most violently from the said Mountains,
whence also the Rheine discendeth in a narrow bed, and may be passed with
horse and foot when it ouerfloweth not. Both these run into the Lake, and the
Rheine, till it come out of the Lake again, loses the name. There is but one
Church in the City, besides a ruined Monastery. The Citizens draw their water
to seethe their meat, and mingle it with wine; not out of the Lake, but from
Wels. Three Consuls chosen for life, and twenty Senators govern the City.
Beyond the Lake in the Territory of the Arch Dukes of Austria, is a bath of
great virtue, and a Monastery built by Otho the second, with great privileges,
upon a vow he made, being in great danger, when he passed the Lake, and there
murderers have a sanctuary. There is much salt made in the City, and carried
thence to other parts. Here I paid each meal six Batzen. They drink
altogether wine, whereof the measure of the old is given for eleven Creitzers,
the new for nine, (of which measures twenty make some twenty two English beer
quarts. By ill fortune I was here forced to exhibit a Petition to the Consuls,
both in the Dutch and Latin tongues, the event whereof I will set down after
the Petition. The form whereof in English was this, after the Dutch fashion,
ever tedious in their styles or titles.

Honorable, provident, good, wise, Lords and Consuls; I humbly desire you to
respect my cause, as of a stranger far from his friends, and bereaved of his
money by deceit. Thus my case stands. Being at Nurnberg, and purposing thence
to go to Bazell, there to study, I dealt with a Merchant, that he would
exchange my money thither, retaining only so much as would plentifully serve
me for my expenses thither. There I met with M. B. a Citizen of Lindaw, who
told me that the gold Guldens of Rheine were not to be spent in these parts
without loss. So as I finding him acknowledged by the Carriers of this City
(then being there) and by many Nurnbergers, for the son of a Senator in this
Town, was induced to deliver him some gold Guldens, to be paid me here in
French Crowns, and we coming in company together to this Town, when I saw
many principal Citizens gratalate his return, I was induced to deliver him
the rest of my gold Guldens, which I had kept for the expense of my journey,
upon his promise to exchange them into French Crowns. So as in all he is to
pay me thirty two French Crowns wanting six Creitzers, (for twenty seven of
which French Crowns, and thirty six Creitzers, I took his bill at Nurnberg,
but the rest I delivered him here upon his bare word.) Here I expected his
payment eight days, and when I was instant with him to put off the payment no
longer, he is stolen out of the Town, and his brothers give me no hope of
payment: being not so noble, as to ponder the case rightly, or to have any due
fecling of my state. Being in this case, not able without money to go on my
journey, or endure the delays of a suit in Law against him here; all my hope
is in your just help, which failing me, I know not what course to take.
Therefore I desire earnestly of your worthiness, to assist me, and give
expedition to my cause, that I may be delivered by your goodness.

My debtor, while he lived in the public Inn with me, used me with all
courtesy; but finding himself disinherited by his father lately dead, and so
dispairing of means to pay me, he was now fled to the Monastery beyond the
Lake, being a sanctuary for wicked-persons and bankrupts. He that knows the
honesty of the Dutch, will not much marvel that I was thus deceived by a
Dutchman, whom I knew not to be tainted with foreign vices, but it grieved me
to be thus-scorned by fortune, and it afflicted me beyond measure, that I
should be forced to spend the time (dearer to me then gold) in following the
Law at Lindaw, which I hoped to employ in my studies at Bazell. Therefore not
to be wanting to my self, I hired a horse, and made this cozenage known to
the Archdukes officer, desiring him to exclude my debtor from the privilege
of the Monastery. But this Dutch Gentleman, finding me to speak Latin
readily, took me for some Schoolmasters, and despised both me and my cause:
so as I returned to the City weary and sad, having obtained no favor. But a
better star shined there on me, for the Consuls that day had determined in
Court, that my debtors horses should be sought out, and delivered to me; and
the Lawyers and Clearkes were so courteous to me, as neither they nor any other
would take the least reward of me, though I pressed them to receive it. Then
my debtors brother being loath the horses should be carried away, paid me my
money, and I gladly took my journey thence towads Bazel. This integrity of the
Dutch Magistrates, (which especially in the Cities of the reformed Religion,
having found by many testimonies, I cannot sufficiently commend) and courtesy
of the Dutch toward strangers, I have thought good in this place thankefully
to acknowledge.

Upon the Lake Acrontiis, vulgarly Boden-sea, that is upper sea, I passed by
boat four miles to Costnetz, and paid for my passage three Batzen. Between
this upper sea and the lower sea, vulgarly Vnden-sea: this City Costnetz lies
on the bank Costnets.
lengthwise, and is subject to Ferdinand of Inspruch, Archduke of Austria,
whose base son has also the Bishopric of that City, which is famous by a
Council held there, whither John Hus was called, with the Emperors safe
conduct, in the year 1414, yet was there condemned of Heresy, and burned. On
the West side of the City; within the walls, in the Monastery called
Barfussen Cloister, is the Tower wherein he was imprisoned; and without the
walls on the left hand, as you goeout, is a fair meadow, and therein a stone
upon the highway, to which he was bound, being burnt the same year 1414, in
the Month of July. Where also his fellow Ierom of Prage was burnt in September,
the year following, both their ashes being cast into the Lake, lest the
Bohemians should carry them away. The Senatehouse in which this Council was
held, is of no beauty. When the Emperor Charles the fifth, besieged this
City, it was yielded to the hands of Ferdinand King of Bohemia, and brother to
Charles, who made the Citizens peace for them. Here each man paid eight Batzen
a meal, and for wine between meals, eight creitzers the measure.

Hence I went by boat, two miles to Styga, and paid for my passage two Batzen.
We took boat at the end of the Lake close by the City; where the Rheine
coming again out of the Lake, and taking his name therein lost, does run in
all narrow bed; and when we had gone by water some hour and a half, we
entered the lower Lake, called Vnden-sea. Near Costnetz is an Island called
little Meinow, and in this lower lake is another Island called Reichnow, of the
riches, the Monastery thereof having of old so much lands, as the Monks being
sent to Rome, used to lodge every night in their own possessions. This Island
is said to bear nothing that has poison, so as any such beast dies presently
in it: and in the Monastery are some relics of Saint Mark, for which (as
they say) the Venetians have offered much money. VVriters report that of old, a
Monk thereof climing up a ladder, to look into a huge vessel of wine, and
being overcome with the vapor, fell into the same, with a great bunch of keys
in his hand, and that shortly after this wine was so famous, as Princes and
Nobles, and many sickly persons usually sent for the same; the cause of the
goodness being not known to proceed of the putrified flesh, till the vessel
being empty, the keys and the Friars bones were found therein; the Monks till
then thinking that their fellow had secretly gone to some other Monastery of
that Order: yet the Dutch in my company reported, that this happened in a
Monastery not far off, called Salmanschwell. By the way was a stately Palace
belonging to the Fugares of Augsburg. On the East Side, out of the walls of
Styga, lie woody fields, on the West Side the Island Horue; and pleasant Hills
full of vines and corn. In this City, the Bishop of Costnetz has his Palace,
who is Lord of the two Islands, Meinow, and Reichnow, and has very large
possessions in these parts, mingled with the territories of other Lords. And
this City is upon the confines of Germany and Sweitzerland.

Hence I passed by boat two miles to Schaffhausen, and paid for my passage two
Schaffhausen.
Batzen. The swistnes of the Rheine made the miles seem short, and this river
again loses his name in the said lower Lake, and when it comes (or rather
violently breaks) out of it, then resumes it again. This City is one of the
confederate Cantons of Sweitzerland. Not far from this City, on the South
side in the river Rheine, is a great fall of the waters over a rock some fifty
cubits downward, passing with huge noise and ending all in foam. And for this
cause the Barks are forced to unlade here, and to carry their goods by carts
to the City, and from the City to imbarke them again, which yields great
profit to the City, by taxations imposed on the goods, which must necessarily
be landed there. On both sides the river, as we came to this City, are pleasant
hills planted with vines, and fair pastures with sweet groves. The City is
round in form, and is washed with the Rheine on the South side; and upon the
bank of the river within the Town, is a pleasant green, where the Citizens
meet to exercise the shooting of the Harquebuze and crosse-Bow, where also is
a Lynden or Teyle tree, giving so large a shade, as upon the top it has a
kind of chamber, boarded on the floor, with windows on the sides, and a
cock, which being turned, water falls into a vessel through diverse pipes, by
which it is conveyed thither for washing of glasses and other uses: and here
the Citizens use to drink and feast together, there being six tables for that
purpose. On the same South side is a Monastery, with walls and gates like a
little City. It has the name of (...) that is a sheep, or Schiff, that is a
ship, and Hausse, that is a house, as of a fold for (...), or road for
ships. Here I paid for each meal six batzen. For the better understanding of
my journey from Schafhusen to Zurech, I will prefix a letter which I wrote to
that purpose from Bazel.

To the Right Worshipful Master Doctor John Vlmer.
IN those few hours I staid at Schafhusen, you have made me your Servant for
ever. I remember the hours of our conversation, which for the sweetness thereof
seemed minutes to me: I remember the good offices you did toward me a
stranger, with gentleness, if not proper to your self, yet proper to your Dutch
Nation. Now as soon as I had pitched my tents at Bazell, (for me thinks I am
one of the Nomades, every day changing my dwelling,) I thought fit to give you
account of my journey, whereof I am sure you desire to know the success. I
will ever be ruled in doubtful cases by the counsel of so wise and so good a
friend as your self: but you shall never more persuade me to take a journey on
foot, which I find unprofitable for my health and purse. The other day after
dinner by your advice, I took my journey on foot, and with more sighs then
paces, came in four hours with much pain to the little City Eglisaw, and
coming to the Inn, they offered me meat, but I did nothing but so cry out
for my bed, as you would have said I was the eldest son of sloth. To be
brief, they being slow to satisfy my desire, I flung my self on the fether
bed without sheets, and so at ease supped on the old fashion with the cloth
spread on the bed: you gave me a pleasant companion to guide me the way, who
made it seem shorter with his good discourse, and was very diligent to serve
my occasions: next morning early by twilight, we began our journey, having the
gates opened for a little reward. You may think that I was fresh after my
nights rest for a new journey, but I rose early only to be out of my pain. By
nine of the clock in the morning we came to the fair City Zurech, which
seemed fairer to me at the end of my tedious walk: presently I ran into my
chamber, and with like importunity as before, obtained my bed to be made: the
Mercury you gave to guide me, brought me meat plentifully, and there we dined
together; then because he was to return to Schafhusen that night, I gave him a
Gulden for his pains, besides paying his charges, and fifteen Creitzers of
free gift. Each of us went to our task, he (as I thought) to go, I to sleep.
Since I have begun, I will tell you Historically all circumstances, so you
promise me not to reprove him, but rather to salute and thank him in my name,
which if you refuse, I conjure you on all love to read no further. After four
hours behold this honest man, with a garland of roses on his head, a glass
and pot in his hands, and well armed with drink, entered my chamber; I being
half asleep wiped my eyes, as if I had seen a vision, till he drinking to
me, and importuning me to pledge him, made me know it was no apparition: we
drunk a whole hour together, then in good earnest he went away, and did
nothing (to my knowledge) more wisely, then that being drunken, he left his
reckoning of forty eight Creitzers to be paid by me, who was sober. Neither
Ceres nor Bacchia could for twenty hours draw me from bed, but the next
morning I delivered your betters to Master Doctor S. who used me very
courteously, and presented me with a Book he had lately printed. So this
Comedy is ended, only I will add the Epilogue. Here at Bazell I can get for
no money the Book of Semlerus de Repub. Heluetica, which you commended unto
me: at last I found it in a friends study, who esteemed it as the apple of his
eye, yet I so prevailed with him, as he let me have it, upon my faithful
promise; that because I meant to blot the same with notes, I should procure him
a new Book; wherein if you do not disingage me by sending the same unto me,
I shall forfet the small credit of a stranger. Farewell good Sir, and I pray
you let us not suffer this spark of our love to go out, but rather with often
writing, let us set all the coal on fire. Again farewell: from Bazell the 24.
day of May 1902.

From Schafhusen I took my journey on foot (as is above written) and went
half a mile in the territory of that City, and a mile and a half in the
territory of the Count of (...) Sweitzer, the lands of Zurech lying on the
South side from us; and so we passed through Mountains yielding corn, and
planted with vines, and through woods, pastures, and a large valley of corn,
and in four hours space (for the miles of Sweitzerland are so long, as they
reckon the iourneies of horse or foot by the hours, and not by the miles) came
to Eglisaw, and entering the same, passed the River Rheine by a Bridge, where I
paid two creitzers for tribute, and there I supped for five Batzen.

The next morning I went two miles on foot in six hours space to Zurech,
through Zurech.
a long wood, and hills of corn (which they say are often blasted with hail)
and through woody Mountains, and hills of enclosed pastures, with store of
Vines planted near the City, which is one of the Cantons of Sweitzerland,
having on the West side the Lake called Zurechsea, and the Brook Limachus,
having his head eight miles further on the same side, ruuneth into this lake,
and after coming out, divides the City into two parts, called the greater and
the less City, having three bridges for passage, the greater where of the
Merchants use for their meetings. The foresaid Lake is three miles long, and
has on each side pleasant hills planted with Vines. The foresaid Brook near
the City bears only small boats, and is all taken up with water mils, but
above toward the Alps is deeper, and below near Baden runs into the
Rheine. The streets of Zurech are narrow, and the Houses builded of timber and
clay, and the City it self is seated upon and between hills, which on the East
side of the Brook grow higher from it. On the North-west side is a pleasant
Mountain, and a fair meadow for shooting with gunnes, and other exercises,
wherein is a fair Lynden or teyle tree, yielding large and sweet shadow, where
the Citizens meet to recreate themselves, and to feast together. The Arms of
the City are a Man and Woman, called Falix and Regula: without the City on the
South, is the foresaid Lake, and beyond it the Alps covered with snow. On the
West side is a plain, and the Mountains far off, but on the North and East
sides the Mountains lie near. The Citizens have a custom that when they go
forth against the enemy, they place the Ministers or Pastors in the front, or
where they may partake the danger, and there is a place two miles from the City
toward Lucerna, where Zwinglius a famous Preacher and reformer of Religion was
killed in the field. Here I paid each meal six batzen.

I rode three miles to Baden in three hours, and so hired my Horse as besides
the price of six or seven batzen the day, I paid as much for the days in which
he returned, Baden.
and also paid the hire and charges of one to bring him back. Most part of our
way was in the territory of Zurech, through hills of corn and vines, and a
plain of enclosed pastures. Entering the City we passed the brook Limachus by
a bridge: the Suburbs are built upon the ascent of a Mountain, and the City on
the top of it, where there is a Castle upon a Rock, of old very strong, but
now ruinated: on the North side descending into a valley by the brook on the
right hand, or upon the East side, within a musket shot lie the Baths, which
are famous for medicine, and are in number thirty, seated on each side the
Brook, which divides them into Bethora the great and the little. In the
great, diverse Bathes are contained under one roof of a fair house, and
without the gate are two common to the poor. These waters are so strong of
brimstone, as the very smoke warmeth them that come near, and the waters
burn those that touch them. Of these one is called the Marquis Bath, and is so
hot, as it will scald off the hair of a Hog: many having no disease but that
of love, how soever they feign sickness of body, come hither for remedy, and
many times find it. Weomen come hither as richly attired as if they came to a
marriage: for Men, Weomen, Monks, and Nuns, sit all together in the same
water, parted with boords, but so as they may mutually speak and touch, and it
is a rule here to shun all sadness, neither is any jealousy admitted for a
naked touch. The waters are so clear as a penny may be seen in the bottom,
and because melancholy must be avoided, they recreate themselves with many
sports, while they sit in the water; namely at cards, and with casting up and
catching little stones, to which purpose they have a little table swimming upon
the water, upon which sometimes they do likewise eat. These Bathes are very
good for Weomen that are barren. They are also good for a cold brain, and a
stomach charged with rhume; but are hurtful for hot and dry complexions, and
in that respect they are held better for Weomen then Men. The Innes were wont
to pay tribute to the three Cantons, of Baden, Brucke, and Bazell; but now
Baden alone makes great profit of them, by the great concourse of sickely
persons, and the Parliaments of the Cantons commonly held there. I paid for my
diet six Batzen a meal.

From hence I hired a Horse at the same rate as before, and passing through
woody Mountains, came in three hours riding to the City Brucke. By the way I
passed the Brook Russe, which runs from Lucerna into these parts, and the
boat was drawn by a cable running upon a wheel, by reason of the waters
swift course: where I paid for my passage six creitzers: and when I came
near Bruck, I passed the Brook Ara by a bridge, paying one creitzer for
tribute; and here I paid five batzen a meal. From hence hiring a horse as
before, I rode in two hours space to Hornsea, through steep Mountains, and a
wood of Oak: by the way lies Kingsfeld, that is Kingly field, a Monastery so
called, because Widow Queens, and Kings, forsaking their Scepters, and
inferior Princes were wont of old to enter into this place for the solitary
profession of Religion. In the same Cloister of old, lived the Friars of Saint
Francis order, in the building on the right hand as you come in, and the Nuns
of Saint Clara on the left hand, and both came to the same Chapel, the Friars
to the body of the Church, and the Nuns to close galleries above, looking out
and hearing through grates. The Emperor Albertus being killed by his Nephew in
the year 1380. at Santbacke three miles distant, this Monastery was built for
his memory, though his bones were buried at Spire. The revenues of this
monastery grew in time to be yearly forty thousand Guldens, which are now
appropriated to the common treasure of the Sweitzer Cantons. Leopold Duke of
Austria lies here buried. Ferdinand of Insprucke, one of the Archdukes of
Austria, is Lord of Hornesea; all the rest of the territories from Schafhusen
to this place, belonging to the Cantons of Sweitzerland: and here I paid six
batzen a meal. Hence I hired a horse as before, and rode in five hours to
Rheinefeld through fruitful hills of corn, having on all sides woody
Mountains in sight. Here again I passed the Rheine, and paid two raps for my
horse and my self; footmen paying but one. The Rheine passes by with a
violent course, and washes the Town on the East side. Here I paid six Batzen
a meal.

Hence hiring a Horse as before, I rode in two hours space to Bazell, through
a fair plain of corn and pasture, lying upon the Rheine, having on all sides
woody Bazell.
Mountains in sight, and near the City were most pleasant fields planted with
vines, to the which fields the territory of the said Archduke extends on the
East side of the Rheine. I entered by little Bazell seated in a plain on the
East side of Rheine, and so passed by a bridge of wood into the greater Bazell,
seated upon pleasant hills on the West side of Rheine. This City of old was one
of the imperial free Cities; but now is joined to the Cantons of Sweitzerland,
and was built in the year 3 and 2: having the name of a Basiliske, slain by a
Knight covered with cristall, or of the word Pasell, which in Dutch signifies a
beaten path, or of the greek word (...) as a kingly City. The less Bazell was
of old built by an Archduke of Austria, in prejudice of the greater, and after
being sold to it for thirty thousand guldens, was incorporated thereunto: The
greater has many caves under the hills, and suffered a great earthquake in the
year 1346, at which time the Palace near the Cathedral Church fell into the
Rheine, and another Earthquake in the year 1356. wherein 180. persons were
killed, all the people flying out of the Town. Eugenius the Pope held a
Council in this City, the year 1431. The Bridge of wood joining the little
and great City, divided by the Rheine, is broad enough for two carts to pass
at once; and toward little Bazell six Arches are of stone: but toward great
Bazell where the Rheine tunneth most swiftly, eight Arches are built of wood,
that they may be more easily repaired, and upon any war from Germany more
readily broken down. This City is of the form of an half Moon, (I mean the
great City, reckoning the less for a Suburb) and being seated upon diverse
hills on the West side of the Rheine, imbraceth between the two horns the
lesser City, seated in a plain on the East side of Rheine. On the West side of
the greater, the Emperor Rodulphus of Habspurg besieged the City, and on this
side something toward the North, within the walls, is a most pleasant green
for walking, called peter platz. In this place is the Armory of the City, and
the tribunal of Justice, and some fair houses of private men, and a most
pleasant shade of trees, among which is an Oak, whose boughs are in circuit
one hundred forty walking paces, and from the root are more then twenty such
paces in length forward. And they report that the Emperor Manimilian the second
supped under this Oak, and gave 2000. Guldens to keep and trimic. On the East
side of great Bazel, the Rheine runs by it, from the South to the North, and
the yard of the Cathedral Church lies over the river, and has a Lynden tree,
which gives very pleasant shade, having seats under it, and along the river.
The course of the Rheine is very swift, but not so violent as that of the
Danow; yet the watermen of Bazel (as those that dwell upon the Danow) sell
their boats at Sirasburg, which they weekly carry thither, and cannot bring
back against the stream of the Rheine, and so they return home on foot,
(always remembered that this river is at the broadest between Bazel and
Strasburg.) Pope Pius the second, founded an Vniuersine at Bazel, in the year
1459, and gave it all the privileges of Bologala in Italy. In the public
Innes, men pay six Batzen a meal; but the Students have their diet with
Doctors and Citizens for some eight Dollers a month. My self dieted with the
Ouerseer of the Coledge, and paid two Guldens a week; for strangers may hire
chambers in the Coledge, and the Ouerseer willingly admits them to diet with
him. In the Cathedral Church, this is written upon the Sepulcher of Hotoman, a
famous Civil Lawyer:

Francisie Hotamant Of Francis Hotoman I. C. Conns. at Law. Mortalis (...) The
mortal parts Tantisper assernandas So long to be kept Dum Till Christo
inbente, Christ bidding Immortales exurgant They rise immortal Amici. His
friends Sub hoc Saxo Under this stone Deposuere. have laid. Loco Honoris ergo
The place for honors sake, Ab AEdis Cur atoribus. By the governors of the
house Liberal: concesso. Being freely granted. Vixit An: 63. M. 5. He lived 63.
years five M. D. 20. Ob: Pride: 20, days: he died the day before Id: Febru.
Ano. The Ides of Febr. in the year MILCXC. MILCXC.

Gallia progennit, sernat Basilea sepultum,
Interitus expers nomen, vibque viget.
He borne in France, lies buried here,
His lasting Name lives every where.
In the same place lies Oecolampadius buried, (to whom Luther opposed himself;
when in the first reformation of Religion he violently brake down the Images,)
and he has this inscription in Latin:

M. John Oecolampadius by profession a Divine, most skillful in three
languages: first Author of the reformed Religion in this City, and the true
Bishop of this Church: excellent in sanctity of Doctrine and life, is laid
under this short stone. In the year of war Lord, M. D. XLII.

In the same place lies buried Erasmus Roterodamus: with this inscription in
Latins To Desiderius Erasmus, Roterodamus, a most great man carry way, whose
imcomparable learning in all kinds of Arts, joined with like wisdom, (...)
come shall admire and celebrate, Boniface Ameribachius, Jerome, Frobenius,
Nichol: Bishop, heir and Extertitort of his last Will and Testament: to their
Patron of happy memory, which by his writings he has got, and so long as the
world stands shall retain: for the reposing of his mortal body, have laid
this stone. He died the fourth of the Ides of July, being now seventy years
old, in the year of our Lord, MDXXXVI.

These two Verses are written upon the Tomb of Lodouicus Pontanus:

Hic iacet art Plato, Cato, vita, Tullius ore,
Vermes corpus alit, spiritus astra petit.
Here lies Plato, Cato, Tully,
For his Art, life, and eloquence,
Worms do feed upon his body,
His soul to heaven is mounted hence.
There be also the Monuments of Henricus Glarianus, and of Bishop Hatto, whom
the Emperor Charles the Great, sent Ambassador to Irene Empress of the East.
In this City a stone is showed, called the hot stone, vulgarly Heisteine, upon
which the Consuls, and diverse others were beheaded, who had conspired to betray
the City, if the clock striking false had not prevented, and deceived both
them and the enemies, lying in ambush without the City, and expecting a sign
to be given them at the hour appointed. And for this cause (or as others say,
to hasten the Council held in the Senate house) the clock to this day strikes
one, when it should strike twelve. Near the stairs of the Senate house is an
old Statua on foot, armed, but without a sword, bearing a Scepter, clad with a
loose gown, with a bird sitting on the Helmet, and has this inscription;

Hono and virtuti L. Munatij L. F. L. N. L. Pron Planci Cos Imper:and Ter VII
viri Epulonum Qui triumph ex Raetis Edem Saturni F. ex Manub Agros diuisit in
Italia Beneuenti. In Galliam Colonias Ded Lugdunum atque Rauracum.

Ciuitas Basiliensis Ex bellicosiss gente Alemannorum In Rauracorum fines
Transducta Simulac^rum hoc ex Senatus Auct Dicandum statuendumque Curauit. Anno
salutis Christian MDXXC.

Of Lucius Munatius the son of Lucius, grandchild of Lucius, great
Grandchild of Lucius surnamed Plancus; Being Consul, General, and thrice One
of the seven Presidents of the holy Banquets Who triumphed of the Rhaetians,
Built Saturnus Temple with the spoils, Divided the Land in Italy at Beneuento,
Deduced Colonies into Gaul, To Lions, and about Bazel.

The City of Bazel deduced Of the most warlike Nation Of the Alemans; Into the
Territories of the Rauraci (or Basilians,) By authority of the Senate, Procured
This Statua to be consecrated and here set. In the year of Christ, MDLXXX

In the house where the Doctors, and other Graduates take their degrees, are
the bones of an Anatomy, (for the Magistrates use to grant the bodies of some
men executed to serve this use,) and it has this inscription:

Nostro perempti scelere, aliena viuimus manu,
Et facti vasa honoris, qui fuimus ignominiae.
Killed for our wickedness, we live by others here,
And vessels are of honor, as of shame we were.
CHAP. III. Of my journey from Bazel to Strasburg, to Heidelberg, to Frankfort,
to Cassiles, to Brunswicke, to Luneburg, to Hamburg, to Stood, to Breme, to
Oldenburg, and to Emden, (the last City upon the confines of the Empire.)
I Went by boat to Strasburg, fourteen miles, and in six hours, upon the
swift Rheine we passed six miles to Brisake; a City subject to Ferdinand of
Inspruch, Archduke of Austria: but of the villages often intermixed, some are
subject to the Margraue of Baden, and some to diverse Bishops. All the Territory
on the West side of Rheine, almost to Strasburg gates, is subject to the said
Archduke, or the Bishop of Bazel, or the Duke of Wirtenberg. The boats
coming down to Brisake and Neoberg, pay tribute, and send forth two
Mariners, taking from thence two other in their stead. At Brisake, each man
pays two Rapps for passing the bridge, which is shut up with an iron chain,
and kept by watchmen, lest any boats should pass without touching there. I
said before, that the boats and barks coming down, are sold at the end of
the way, because they cannot be brought up against the stream. Brisake is
seated upon a round and high Mountain, and though it be improbable that there
should be any want of waters so near the foot of the Alps, yet this City has
a fountain, where water is sold, and a certain price is given for the
watering of every beast.

We passed the other eight miles to Strasburg, the same day in eight hours,
being helped with the same swiftness of the Rheine, which being often divided by
the way, makes many little Islands. The bridge of Strasburg over the Rheine, is
more Strasburg.
then a Musket shot from the City, on the East side thereof. The bridge is of
wood, and has threescore five Arches each distant from the other twenty
walking paces, and it is so narrow that an horseman can hardly pass by a
cart, it lying open on both sides, and it is built of small pieces of timber
laid a cross, which lie loose; so as one end being pressed with any weight,
the other is lifted up, with danger to fall into the water. It is like they
build no stronger bridge, either because they have tried that the swift course
of the Rheine will easily break it down, or because in the time of war it
may be good for them to break it: in which case it were far greater charge
to rebuild it with stone, then with wood. The Rheine lying thus far off from
the City, the boats are brought up to the same by a little channel. The
brooks of Bress and Elb, pass through many streets of the City, and fill all
the large ditches thereof with water. The City is very well fortified, having
high walls of earth, the bottomes whereof are fastened with stone, and the
sides with trees planted on the same. On the West side toward France, are the
gates Weissen-thore, and Rheine-thore. On the East side toward the Rheine, is
the gate Croneberg-thore, at which, though it be out of the way, for the
jealousy of neighborhood, the French must enter, and at no other. On the
East side is the Butchers gate, called, Metsiger-thore. On the same side is the
Cathedral Church. The circuit of the Cty is three hours walking. The
buildings and Churches are fair and high, of free stone; most of the streets
are narrow, but those divided by water are broader. I paid six Batzen a meal,
and for wine extraordinary three Batzen the measure. Many things in this City
are remarkable. The Steeple of the Cathedral Church is most beautiful, and
numbered among the seven miracles of the world, being begun in the year 1277,
and scarce finished in twenty eight years. In the building of one gate
thereof, they say, three Kings treasure was spent; in whose memory three
statuaes are there engraven. The Church is covered with lead, which is rare in
Germany, where the chief Churches are covered with brass, growing in the
Country. The brazen gates of this church are curiously carved.

The Clock thereof is of all other most famous, being invented by Conradus
Dasipodius, in the year 1571. Before the Clock stands a globe on the ground;
showing the motion of the heavens, stars and planets; namely, of the heaven
carried about by the first mouer, in twenty four hours, of Saturn by his
proper motion carried about in thirty yeeeres, of Jupiter in twelve, of Mars in
two, of the Sun, Mercury and Venus in one year, of the Moon in one month.
In the Clock it self there be two tables on the right and left hand, showing
the eclipses of the Sun and Moon, from the year 1573, to the year 1605.
The third table in the midst, is divided into three parts. In the first part
the statuaes of Apollo and Diana, show the course of the year, and the day
thereof, being carried about in one year. The second part shows the year of
our Lord, and of the world, the Equinoctial days, the hours of each day, the
minutes of each hour; Easter day, and all other feasts, and the Dominicall
Letter. The third part has the Geographicall description of all Germany, and
particularly of Strasburg, and the names of the Inuentor, and of all the
worke-men. In the middle frame of the Clock is an Astrolobe, showing the sign
in which each Planet is every day; and there be the statuaes of the seven
Planets, upon a round piece of iron lying flat, so as every day the statua of
the Planet comes forth that rules the day, the rest being hid within the frame,
till they come out by course at their day; as the Sun upon Sunday, and so for
all the week. And there is a terrestrial globe, and the quarter, and half
hour, and the minutes are showed. There is also the skull of a dead man, and
two statuaes of two boys, whereof one turns the houre-glasse when the Clock
has stricken, the other puts forward the rod in his hand at each stroke of the
clock. Moreover there be statuaes of the spring, summer, Autumn, and winter,
and many observations of the Moon. In the upper part of the clock are four
old men's stutuaes, which strike the quarters of the hour, the statua of death
coming out each quarter to strike; but being driven back by the statua of
Christ with a spear in his hand, for three quarters, but in the fourth quarter
that of Christ goes back, and that of death strikes the hour, with a bone in
the hand, and then the chimes sound. On the top of the clock is an Image of a
Cock which twice in the day croweth alowd, and beats his wings. Besides, this
clock is decked with many rare pictures, and being on the inside of the
Church, carries another frame to the outside of the wall, wherein the hours
of the Sun, the courses of the Moon, the length of the day, and such like
things are set out with great Art.

Besides in the City there is a fair house, in which citizens and strangers at
public meetings or otherwise, use to feast their invited friends. Near the
gate Rheinethore, is the Armory, vulgarly Zeighauss, which abounds with
Ordinance and all Munitions. They have a Theater for Comedies, and a Tower to
lay up their treasure, called penny Tower, vulgarly Phennigthurne. They say
this City is called Argentina in latin, of the word Argentum, because the
Romans of old laid up their treasure here, and Strassburg in Dutch, of the word
strass (that is way) and Burg (that is a City) as being built where many ways
lead to many Provinces. I had almost omitted one remarkable thing, namely the
fair House of the Cannons, called Bruderhoff, that is the Court of the
Brethren.

I hired a coach for a Dollor my person, from Strassburg to Heidelberg, being
sixteen miles. The first day after dinner I went four miles to Leichtenou,
through a plain all compassed with Gardens and Orchards and paid six batzen
for my supper. The next morning we went four miles to Milberk, through a sandy
and barren plain; the Margraue of Turloch, uncle to the Margraue of Baden is
Lord of this Village. By the way thither, we passed a Fort of the Margraues of
Baden, where tribute is paid for all Merchandises brought out of Sweitzerland
and France, and these frequent tributes are gathered by the Dutch Princes, upon
pretext that they free the way from thieves: to which purpose when the Fayres
of Franckfort draw near, they send out certain Reyters, that is Horsemen,
vulgarly called Geleyte, which conduct the Merchants and their goods out of the
Frontiers. The said Fort included the high way with Rampires, lest any should
pass without paying tribute: besides, by the way we might see the City of
Baden, toward the South, seated upon a Mountain. After dinner we went three
miles to the Village Graben, through a sandy ground, but somewhat less barren.
The Margraue of Turloch is Lord of this Village.

The third day in the morning we went five miles to Heidelberg, through sandy
fields, but fruitful in corn, all lying in a plain, as the rest of the way
from Strassburg hither, and near Heidelberg we passed a great wood of Oaks,
full of great hea ds of Heidelberg.
red Dear, which lay still by the way, and would not stir for our cries, or
fear of our Coach wheels, but seemed to know their privilege, all hunting
being forbidden upon high penalties. Heidelberg is compassed with high
Mountains, on the South, East, and North sides; but toward the West, beyond
the City and a long Suburb, (being the sole Suburb in the Town) the
Mountains lie open. This Suburb is longer then the City, and they both lie in
great length from the East to the West, and they both consist almost of one
street, and are built in the plain, though compassed with Mountains. On the
South-east side there is a fair and pleasant market place, and not far
thence a very high Mountain called Konigstull, that is, Kingly seat, upon the
middle ascent whereof, is the Castle, in which the Phaltz-graue of the Rheine
holds his Court, and upon the top of this Mountain are the ruins of an old
Tower, blown up with gunpowder. From this Mountain on the South side run
caves under the Earth, to the Western part of the Mountain of Goats, upon
which Mountain is a Tower called Trotz-keyser, as if it were built in despite
of Caesar, and it is worth the seeing, for the antiquity and building, having
no gate, but being entered by the cave under the earth, and being built with
lime tempered, not with water, but wine, incredibly durable, at the time when
the Emperor making war against the Phaltzgraue, besieged this City. In the
valley under this Mountain of Goats, toward the City, is a pleasant walk, of
the sweetness called the Phylosophicall way. In the ditch parting the City and
Suburb, is a place for the exercise of shooting with the Musket and
Crosse-bow: On the North side of the City the shallow and vnnauigable River
Neccar, runs in a plain by the City between it and the Mountain from the
East to the West, and in the same course having run more then a mile, falls into
the Rheine, and though it be shallow, yet sometimes it ouerflowes the Bridge of
the City, as it did in the year 1565. passing into the Town. On the North
side you pass a bridge built of wood upon arches of stone, to a pleasant walk
upon the bank of the River, between the Mountain and the water: and from
thence you go up to the holy Mountain, vulgarly Heiligberg: and some say this
City had his name of that Mountain; but others say it has the name of the
Dutch word Edelberg, that is Noble Mountain, others of a Colony of Romans,
being Heathen, will have it at first called Heidenberg, that is, the Mountain
of the Heathen. Vpou this Mountain be the ruins of a Church of great
antiquity, first dedicated to Mercury, and since made a Monastery, and near
the same is a ruined Cloister of Nuns (as commonly their nests were not far
distant) and there is a passage under the Earth from one Cloister to another.
This is a most high Mountain, and has a thick wood. The City of Heydelberg,
by reason it is compassed with Mountains, has a very unhealthful air, which
makes Funerals very frequent therein; but the water is held very healthful.
In the Innes they ask seven batzen the meal, but the Students have their diet
in Citizens or Professors houses for two guldens, or one doller weekly: and
the fame of the Professors drew many Students at this time to this University.
There is (to my remembrance) but one Church used for prayer and preaching, and
there is a monument with this inscription in Latin;

Viglius Suicherius laid this to the memory of Rodulphus Agricola, borne in
Friestand: he died in the year 1485, ihe 28 of October; he lived 42 years and
two months.

There is another Epitaph to this Rodulphus Agricola, made in verse by
Hermolaus Bar barus Patriarch of Aquilegia.

Inuida clauserunt he mar more fata Rodulphum,
Agricotam, Frisij spemque decusque soli,
Scilicet hoc vno meruit Germania lauds,
Qutequid habet Latium, Graecia quicquid habet.
Envious Fates under this stone have closde
The Frisons joy Rodulph Agricola,
By whom all praise on Germans is impofde.
That Italy or Greece had to this day.
While I lived here the rest of this summer, I made a journey of pleasure to
see the Cities lying upon the West side of the Rheine, and hiring a Horse after
the wonted price at Heydelberg, I rode two miles and a half to the Rheines
side, and then half a mile further to the City of Spire, where the imperial
chamber is held, in which Court Spire.
the chief differences of the Empire are judged; and the Electors themselves,
or any absolute Princes under the Empire, may be called thither to trial of
law. The City is built in a plain, on the West side of Rheine, and has more
antiquity then beauty, or magnificence. Here I paid eight batzen each meal.

From hence I rode one mile to the City of Wormz, famous for many imperial
Parliaments held there of old: and by the way we passed Frankendale, a little
City newly and very fairly built, which place Casimire the Elector gave unto
the Flemmings of late, who then had built many fair brick houses there, and
then compassed it with a wall; and Casimire taking upon him the tutorship of
his Nephew, against the will of the Lutherans, who rejected him as a Caluinfst,
took some of these Flemmings to guard the Castle of Heidelberg. The building
of Wormz shows great antiquity, and Wormz.
wants not magnificence, where I paid feuen Batzen a meal. This territory on
the West side of the Rheine is very fruitful, and yields the best Rhenish
Wines, so called of the Rheine by which they grow. From hence again I passed
the Rheine, and returned to Heydelberg.

Then I took my journey to Franckfort Fair. The first day I passed four
miles to Bentzon, having hills on my right hand toward the East, planted with
Vines, and fields set with roots; and upon my left hand toward the West, a
fair and fruitful plain: and here I paid seven Batzen for my supper. The
second day in the morning I passed four miles in the territory of George
Landgraue of Hessen, to Arhelygen, through woody mountains, planted with some
Vines, and a plain for one mile sandy, but the rest good pasture. We passed by
Dormstat, where the said Landgraue holds his Court, and there each man paid
six Fenning tribute. At Arheligen I paid six Batzen for my dinner. In the
afternoon I passed some three miles to Franckfort, through a sandy plain, and
a wood of Oaks and Beeches, and by the way they showed us a strange leap of a
Stagge, which being chased, did leap over a cart (if you may believe them)
loaded with hey.

Franckfort is a free City of the Empire, famous for the Electors meeting
there, to choose the Emperor, and for two yearly Faires, as also for many
Parliaments of the Franckfort:
Empire held there, and it is called Franckfort upon the Maene, to distinguish
it from another City of the same name, built upon the Brook Odera, and named
thereof. For the River Maene running from the East to the West, divides the
great City from the less called the Saxons House, vulgarly Sachsen-hausse, and
between them is a bridge of stone upon four narrow Arches. Both the Cities
are governed by the same Senate and Law, and have the fame name, either of
Francus rebuilding it, or of a Foord for passage of the Franckes or French. The
City is compassed strongly with a double wall; and upon the East side is the
gate Heilegthore, where is the Jews street, who are permiteed to dwell in this
famous Mart-towne, and suck the blood of Christians by extortion. There is
another gate called Freydigthore: On the North side of the City is the gate
Brickenport, and a large place for an Horse Fair. On the West side is the gate
of strangers, vulgarly Welsh-thore, so called because the French enter that
way: it is very strong; and without the gate there is a very pleasant walk
upon the bank of Maene, among Vineyards and Meadows, with sweet Groves. On
the South side the Maene runs by, dividing (as I said) the new City from the
old. In the new or less City called the Saxons-house, is a house of old
belonging to the Teutonike order of Knights, which by old privilege is to this
day a Sanctuary for banckrupts and manslaiers, so they be not wilful and
malicious murderers; but they enjoy this privilege only for fourteen
days, so as when the time is near out, or upon any opportunity during the
time, they use to steal out, and returning after an hour, begin a new to
reckon again the fourteen days. A little before my coming thither, a
certain bankrupt of Colen entered the same for a debt of twenty thousand
Guldens. On this side some ground without the walls belongs to the City, but on
other sides it has almost no Land without the walls. The City is of a round
form, seated in a large plain, the streets are narrow, and the houses built
of timber and clay, the foundations of some being of stone. In the Innes they
ask seven or eight batzen a meal, but Merchants and many strangers use to
hire a chamber, and buy their meat of the Cooks.

From hence to Hamburge I and four others hired a Coach for fifty Dollers, and
besides were to pay for the coach-mans diet, for here first the coachman
conditioned to be free from paying his diet, vulgarly Maulfrey; that is free
for the mouth, whereas in other parts our coach-men paid for themselves.
Always understand that at the times of the faires, Coaches are set dearer then
any time else. The first day after breakfast, we went three miles to
Freideburge, through corn fields set with cabages and roots, and by the way
we passed a Village belonging to the Count of Hanaw. Freideburge is a free City
of the Empire, and the buildings are of timber and clay: here each man paid
seven batzen for his supper and for his part of the coach-mans supper. The
second day in the morning, we went three miles to Geysen, through fruitful
hills of corn. Phillip Landgraue of Hessen left three sons, William of
Cassiles, whom Maurice his son succeeded, and was now living, and Lodwicke of
Marpurg, and George of Dormstat. This territory belonged to the Landgraue
Lodwicke, (for all the brothers in Germany have the same style of honor) and
he was also at that time Lord of this City Geysell, which is fortified with
walls of earth, and deep ditches, but the building is base of timber and clay,
and for the most of mere dirt. These verses were written upon the gate of the
City.

Captus erat Princeps non mart sed Art Philippus,
Cum been munitum destrueretur opus.
Nominis hoc patrij Lodouicus amore refecit,
Anno bis septem lustra sequente none;
Principe dignus honos, patrias surcire ruinas,
A quibus Hassiacos Cbriste tuere polos.
Prince Phillip captiu'de not by war, but Art,
This work of strength was then demolished;
In Countries love Prince Lodwicke for his part
Rebuilt it, seventy nine years finished,
Ruins repair is for a Princes hand,
From which disasters Christ shield Hessen land.
Here I paid six Batzen for my dinner, and my part for the Coachman.

In the afternoon we went three miles through high stony mountains and woods
of oaks, to Kirnham, belonging to the Landgraue Lodwick, whose Court at
Marpurg lies a mile from thence. All of us at supper drunk six measures of
wine, besides beer, and from henceforth we paid severally for meat and
drink, and at this time each of us paid ten Weissenfenning for both together.
The third day we passed three miles to Dressed, through high mountains with
woods of Oak, and many fruitful valleies of corn, and each man paid with his
portion for the Coachman four Weissenfenning for meat, and as much for wine.
This territory belongs to Landgraue Maurice of Cassiles. After dinner we passed
three miles to Fester, through high mountains full of oak woods, and entered
the City, seated upon a mountain by a bridge of stone, upon which side great
store of water falls from the mountains, the houses were of timber and clay,
each one for the most part having a dunghill at the door, more like a poor
Village, then a City: but such are the buildings of the Cities in Hessen, the
houses of Villages being of mere dirt, and thatched. Here each man paid for
his meat and old wine; and his part for the Coachman an Orts Doller, or fourth
part of a Doller.

The fourth day we passed three miles to Cassiles, a City where the Landgraue
Maurice Cassiles.
holds his Court, all our way lying through fruitful hills of corn. The City
is strongly fortified with walls of earth and deep ditches, but the houses are
basely built like the rest in Hessen. Phellip his grandfather built the castle,
and William his father the walls. For my dinner and my part for the coachman I
paid the fourth part of a Doller.

In the afternoon we passed two miles through woody mountains, to Myndaw, in
the territory of the Duke of Brunswike, who is also Lord of the City. The River
Visurgis runs by it, over which there is a bridge of stone upon five Arches.
Here each man paid for himself and his part for the coachman, seven
maria-groshen for meat, and as much for wine. The beer of this territory is
very bitter, and like a potion makes one laxatiue. The fifth day we passed
three miles and a half, through Mountains for half the way, and the rest
through corn fields most fruitful, and dined at Norton, each man paying five
batzen and a half. After dinner we passed two miles and a half to a poor
Village, through a like fruitful plain of corn, and by the way we passed
Namerton, a City belonging to the Duke of Brunswicke. In this Village each man
paid five Maria-groshen. The sixth day we passed two miles to the City Zeason,
through hills and fields of corn, the building of the City is of mere clay,
covered with thatch, but our diet was plentiful, and each man paid six
Maria-groshen for himself, and his part for the Coachman. After dinner we
passed three miles to a poor village, through woody mountains, yet fruitful
of corn and pasture, and through a great Fen and here each man paid seven
Maria-groshen.

The seventh day we passed three miles to Brunswike, through a fruitful plain
of corn, end a large Fen set with willow trees near the City. Many fields as
we came besides Brunswike.
the corn, were set with cabage and roots, and within a mile of Brunswike we
left on the right hand toward the South, the City Wolfenbieten, where the Duke
of Brunswike keeps his Court, and though he be so called of an old title, yet
he is not Lord of Brunswike, which is a free City of the Empire seated in a
plain, all the territory round about it being most fruitful in corn. The
City is of a quadrangle form, and in circuit contains two miles, being held
greater then Nurnberg, and less then Erford. It has high walls of earth
fastened with willowes, and is very strong, having the walls on some sides
double, and otherwhere treble, besides that it has a woody valley between
deep ditches filled with water, and is compassed with the River Aneur. Within
this wall and river are five Cities, distinguished by privileges, but united
by laws. The first seated toward the west, is called Altstat, that is Old
city, having almost at the entrance a fair market place, and near it the
cathedral Church, called Martinstifft. The second lying toward the North, is
called Newstat, that is New city. The third lying toward the East is called
Imsacke. The fourth lying toward the South is called Imhagen. And the fifth
which was built first of all, and lies also toward the South, is called
Altweg, that is, The old way. This city of old was the metropolitan city of
Saxony, and had the name of Bruno, and the Dutch word Vuick, signifying a
Village. It has twelve Churches, whereof two have the steeples covered with
lead, which being very rare in Germany, is held to be magnificent; the rest are
covered with tiles, one excepted, which (to my remembrance) is covered with
brass, which being lesserare with them is less esteemed, and the houses are
built of timber and clay. In the yard of the Cathedral Church there is the
statua of a very great Lion, which the Emperor Henry the first, surnamed Lion,
erected there.

From Branswike I went to Luneburge, and the first day in the morning passed
four miles to a certain Village, through a sandy plain, and fenny wild
ground, and by the way we passed Getherne a village, where the Duke of
Luneburge (Lord of this territory) has a Castle, and he holds his court some
five miles off, at Sell. Here each man paid for his dinner five Lubecke
shillings. In the afternoon we passed five miles to a country house, through
like Fenny and woody wild grounds, seeing but one Village in the way; and here
each man paid for supper three Lubecke shillings. Next morning we passed four
miles to a Village Empsdorff, through like grounds: and here each man paid for
dinner five Lubecke shillings the coach-mans part being reckoned: for I
formerly said that hiring a Coach from Franckfort to Hamburg, we were tied to
pay for the coach-mans diet, himself paying for his horse-meat, as commonly
they do. After dinner we passed three miles to Luneburge, through a soil as
barren as the former, where each man paid for himself and his part of the
coach-mans supper, eight Lubecke shillings. I speak nothing of the City which
I have described before, but go on with my journey.

The next morning we passed three miles to Wintzon, through a Fenny ground, and
woods of Oak, yielding some corn, but sparingly, and here our coachman paid
a Lubecke shilling for his Coach to the Duke of Luneburge, whose territory
ends here. Then we passed a mile further to Bergendorff, and by the way our
coachman passing over the Elue, paid a Lubecke shilling to the Officers of the
Cities of Lubecke and Hamburg, to which Cities this territory is subject, and
governed by them in course, the soil whereof after the passage of the Elue, is
more fruitful, the fields being full of corn, and ditches of water planted
with willowes: here each man paid six Lubecke shillings for our dinners. In the
afternoon we passed three miles to Hamburge, having on the left side toward
the West, fair pastures, and on the right hand toward Humburge.
the East, woods of oak, and fruitful hills of corn. From hence I passed by
boat with a fair wind in three hours to Stood, and paid for my passage three
Lubeck shillings. These things I briefly set down, having described these
Cities before.

From Stood I wrote this Letter to Francis Markham, an English gentleman, whom
I left at Heidelberg.
NOble Sir, I gladly take this occasion of witnessing my love to you, which in
a word I have done, omitting all ceremonies as your self have given me
example: Only for my promise sake, I will trouble you with the short relation
of my journey. When we parted at Eranckfort, you know I had for companions of
my journey two Flemmings, poor Merchants of Linen cloth, and a Dutch Rider,
and a Booke-binder of Denmark. I coming first to the Coach, took the most
commodious seat, which these my worthy companions (forsooth) took in ill part,
yet neither their murmuring nor rude speeches could make me yield the place to
them. We passed through Hessen to Brunswike, which journey since you purpose
to take, I advise you to pass as soon as you can, that you may be out of your
pain, and come to more pleasant Countries: for there you shall have gross
meat, sower wine, stinking drink, and filthy beds, and were not the way free
from robberies, and the people courteous, I know not what other inconvenience
might happen to a stranger in any passage. Your diet shall be for most part of
cole worts, which was so strange to me, and so hard of digestion, as it greatly
troubled me, and wrought upon my body like physic. At Brunswike I saw a
lamentable sight, which I dare scarce relate to you, knowing your tenderness in
those cases, yet for promise sake I must tell you, that I saw a very fair
maid of fifteen years, married to mine Host an old ohurle of seventy years.
Be not discouraged, I will tell you a merry accident. Who would have thought
that my companions had dissembled so long their malice to me, that now it
might break forth with more bitterness? You know Brunswike is a free city of
the Empire, and one of those, which for privilege of traffic upon these
coasts, are called Hans-steten. Here out of custom passengers coming at first
to enter traffic, use to give the wine to the old Merchants, to which custom
gentlemen for sociablenes have submitted themselves, so as the custom is
almost grown into a Law. Now, for this purpose, salt being put about the
table, for all to swear whether they were free or no, I confessed that I had
not yet paid for my freedom, yielding my self to their censure. To be brief;
after they had fined me some cannes of wine, and with many ceremonies, had made
me free, it remained that he whom they had chosen to be my Godfather, making a
grave Oration, with some rude ieasts after their fashion, should instruct me
with some precepts how to recover this expense. One of my companions easily
took this charge upon him; and after many circumstances, he concluded in this
manner: You are an Englishman, and because your country men love to sit
easily, and to fare delicately, I advise you, that both at table and in coach,
you be careful to take the best place, which if you be diligent to perform,
you shall be soon satisfied for this expense. By chance my place then at
table was between the coachman and his servant, for you know the Dutch are
not curious of place, and little regard strangers in that kind; but I knew
where my Gentleman's shoe wrung him, namely in that I had chosen my place in
the coach. And thus I answered him; Sir I take thankefully your grave counsel,
and will make use of it; but me thinks it is too general, making no
distinction of degrees, for if I have Gentlemen to my companions, who are not
willingly overcome in courtesy, I should rather yield them place: but if I
fall into base and clownish company, I will not fail to make use of your
counsel. The Gentlemen at Table smiled, and so we ended this ceremony with a
health. Hence I passed to Lunchurg, and so to Hamburg; where the people after
dinner, warmed with drink, are apt to wrong any stranger, and hardly endure an
Englishman in the morning when they are sober. Therefore without any stay, I
passed hence to Stood. It is strange how the people rail on Englishmen in
these parts. For that which we call war at sea, and the royal Navy, that
they term robbery and Pirates ships: neither have they the patience to hear
any justification or excuse. You see what toys I write, rather then I will
leave you unsaluted, and if you use not like freedom to me, farewell
friendship. So I take my leave, from Stood the first of October, 1592.

From Stood I passed to Emden, and for the better explaning of that journey,
give me leave to prefix the following Letter; out of the due place, being
written from Emden, and directed

To AEgidius Hoffman, a Gentleman of Flaunders, my dear friend, Student at
Heidelberg.
NOble AEgidius, the Letters you gave me to deliver at Breme, have produced a
comicall event, (such may all the passages be of our love,) which you shall
understand in a word. When in my purposed journey I came to Stood, more tired
with the base companions I had, then the way; it happened, whilst I spent some
days there with my friends, every man spoke of Spanish thieves, vulgarly
called Freebooters, who stealing out of their Garrisons upon the Low Countries,
lay in the villages, and upon the highways, by which I was to pass in my
journey to Emden, from which City a Merchant was newly arrived, who terrified
me more then all the rest, affirming that in one day he had fallen thrice into
these cut-throtes hands, and though he were of a neutrall City, yet had paid
many Dollers for his ransom, adding, that they inquired curiously after
Englishmen, promising rewards in the villages, to any man should give them
notice when any such passed. I knew not what counsel to take. There was no
less danger from the Pirates of Dunkirke, if I passed by sea, especially in a
ship of Hamburg, no other being in the harbor, and they being like to betray
me, out of malice to our nation. Besides, the weather was very tempestious, and
not like to change. Therefore my obstinate purpose to see the Cities upon this
coast, made me resolve to go by land. So I bought an old Brunswicke thrummed
hat, and made me a poor Dutch suite, rubbing it in the dust to make it seem
old, so as my Tailor said, he took more pains to spoil it, then to make it. I
bought me linen stockings, and discolored my face and hands, and so without
cloak, or sword, with my hands in my hose, took my place in a poor wagon. I
practiced as much as I could, Pythagoricall silence; but if any asked me who I
was, I told him that I was a poor Bohemian, and had long served a Merchant at
Leipzig, who left me to dispatch some business at Stood, and then commanded
me to follow him to Emden. If you had seen my servile countenance, mine eyes
cast on the ground, my hands in my hose, and my modest silence, you would have
taken me for a harmless young man. Many pleasant events happened to me thus
disguised; wherewith I will not trouble you, only one I am tied to impart to
you. When I came to Breme, I was doubtful what to do with your Letters. I
thought not to deliver them, but keep them till a fitter time, or at least to
send them by a messenger. But in so doing I should have broken my promise to
you, have lost the fruit of your recommendation, and the opportunity to see
your mother and sisters, without hope hereafter to see them. Then I thought to
deliver them, and because I was disguised in base apparel, to confess who I
was, and wherefore so disguised. But when I looked my face in a glass, I could
not for shame take this course. At last I resolved to deliver them, and to say,
I was servant to my self, (wherein I lied not, for I have ever too much obeyed
my own affections,) and that my master meaning to pass from Stood by sea, for
fear of the abouesaid dangers, had sent me by land, with command to stay for
him at Leyden. To be brief, I went to your mothers house, where a servant
opened me the door, to whom I gave your Letters; but when he scarce looking
at me, would have locked the door, I took my Letters again, saying I had
promised to deliver them with my own hand; and so I entered with him, and gave
them into the hands of your mother and sister, who inquired much after you, and
so much after my master, as I might perceive you had made friendly mention of
me in your Letters. They entertained me with much courtesy, being thus
disguised for my own servant; and when I went away your mother would needs
give me six batzen to spend, neither would any refusal prevail, but I must
needs take them. So I set a mark upon these pieces, left I should spend them;
and am not out of hope, ere I die, to show them to you. To the purpose; at the
door I met your brother, whom I had seen at Frankfort, and was not a little
afraid left for all my disguising, he would have known me. Let it not trouble
you, that I tell you another merry accident I had in the same City of Breme.
Disguised as I was, I went to the house of Doctor Penzelius, desiring to have
the name of so famous a Divine, written in my stemme-booke, with his Mott,
after the Dutch fashion. He seeing my poor habit, and a book under my arm,
took me for some begging Scholar, and spoke sharply unto me. But when in my
masters name I had respectively saluted him, and told him my request, he
excused his mistaking, and with all courtesy performed my desire. I will
trouble you no longer, but hope by some good occasion to embrace you, and tell
you all the other passages of my journey. In the mean time I go forward to
Leyden in Holland, you (as you do) ever love me, and as my soul, live and
farewell. From Emden the twenty one of October, 1592.

I paid twenty four Stiuers for my passage eleven miles in a wagon from
Stood to Breme. And the first day after breakefast, we passed three miles to
Ford, a poor City, subject to the Bishop of Breme: through wild, fenny; and
woody grounds. The Town is seated in a Fenne, having a long paued Causey to
pass unto it; and the gate being opened to us by night, each man gave the
Porter two Lubeck shillings, and by the way in a village' each man paid, six
Fenning for his person. At Ford the Bishop of Breme has a Castle, strongly
fortified with Rampires of earth, and deep ditches full of water; and here
each man paid for his supper three Lubeck shillings and a half. The waggoner
taking me thus disguised (as formerly I have said) for a poor Bawre; said
these words to me in Dutch: Du knecht hilff zu tragen die pack hye: that is Ho
good fellow, help here to carry this pack; I answered, ya gar gern, yea most
willingly; and smiling laid my shoulder to the burden, and groned deeply,
but helped him very little. Next morning early, by Moon light, we passed on
three miles, through large and wild woods, to a Country house; and by the way
my companions fell in talk of English affairs, so foolishly, as my laughter,
though restrained, had often betrayed me; if twilight had not kept me from
being seen. Their ignorance greatly shortened my way, with the pleasure I took
in their answers to some such questions propounded by me, whereof my self had
many times been forced to give an account to others. By the way they showed
me a Hill called Meineidig, of certain false witnesses of old sinking there
into the ground. At this Country house, each man paid for his breakfast three
Lubeck shillings and a half. Then from six of the clock in the morning, till
nine, we passed five miles to Breme; through an Heath, and many huge Woods of
Oak; having toward the South a Fenne of ten miles length, which of the
vastness and wildenesse, is called the Devils Fenne. By the way within a mile
of Breme, each man paid half a Sesling tribute, to the officers of the City;
and from thence we passed a winding paued Causey, to the very City. Men may
also pass from Hamburg to Breme by water.

This City is one of the Imperial free Cities, and of them which upon this
Seacoast, Breme.
are called Hans-steten, for freedom of traffic, and it is very strongly
fortified with high walls of earth, and deep ditches filled with water:
besides that the Citizens may drown the Fenny fields almost round about at
pleasure. The building of this, as also of the neighbor Cities; is partly of
brick, partly of stone, and very fair, but the streets here are filthy. The
City is five miles distant from the sea; And the river Visurgis running from
the South east to the North West, by the South west side of the City runs
all the length of the same. On the North east side, the walls of earth are
broad, and there be three fair gates, with strong Rampires. Upon the South
West side, being compassed all with Fennes, there be no walls. In the
furthest angle or corner toward the North west, where the City grows narrow;
there is a strong Fort built, and the gate is within an Island, beyond which
lies a plain of fair pastures. Osen-bridge lies not far hence, from which
town great quantity of narrow linen cloth is brought into England. At Breme I
paid half a Doller for dinner, supper and breakfast; and a stiebkin or
measure of wine extraordinary.

They had here also the custom of making strangers free, and the same
ceremony of giving salt to swear by; and I confessing that I was not free,
committed my fine to their censure, hoping they would deal better with me,
for my poor disguised habit, but it saved me nothing; the chief man saying to
me in Dutch: Gutt gesell du must gedult haben, es geit gleich bistu knecht
oder here, deise gewonheit betrefft beyde zu gleich. That is, good fellow thou
must have patience, it is all one whether thou be a servant or a master,
this custom touches both alike.

After dinner, taking my journey from Breme, we passed a mile upon a stony
Causey, called Steinweck, that is, stony way; and there each man paid to the
officers of Breme, a quarter of a Stiuer. Then entering the Territory of the
Grave (that is Count) of Oldenburg, we passed a mile through fair pastures,
compassed with ditches of water, to a village, where each man paid a Sesling to
the Count, and to this place each man paid for his Wagon five groates. Here
when my companions had drunk their fill, and had slept a while in the straw,
as my self did upon a bench, to shun the stinking heat of the stoue; we hired
another wagon for three miles, paying fifteen groats: and that we might more
securely pass, we took our journey at midnight, through a heath of huge
woods of Oak, and came to Oldenburge, early in the morning before the gates
were open.

The City is built of mere clay, but the Counts Castle is built in a round
form Oldenburg.
of stone, with deep ditches of water, over which they pass by a drawing
bridge, and both the Castle and the City are strongly fortified. Here we had
English beer, the goodness whereof made my companions speak much in honor
of England, and of the Queen, with much wonder that she being a Virgin, was
so victorious against the Spaniards, till in this discourse they all fell fast
asleep.

After breakfast the next morning, we having hired a wagon for eighteen
groates, passed four miles in the territory of the said Count; and one mile to
Stickhausen, in the territory of the Count of Emden, who had a Castle there.
Then because we could get no wagon in this place, we went one mile further on
foot, which being very long, and my self having some gold Guldens in my
shoes, which I could not remove without suspicion; the way was very irksome
to me, and we came to a country house, but we found good cheer, each man
paying for his supper seven groates. My self sitting last at the table, by
reason of my poor habit, paid as much as the best, and fed on the worst,
but I had more mind of my bed, then of my meat. And one of my companions after
supper, having straight boots, when I had taught him to pull off one by the
help of a staff, for recompense of my counsel, desired me to pull off the
other, which being disguised as I was, I could not well refuse. The next
morning we hired a wagon for eleven stiuers, and passed along mile to Leere, a
town subject to the Count of Emden, who dwelt not far off, at Dunort a strong
Castle. Our way through a Fen, was so deep, as the wagon wheels being pulled
off, we went good part of the way on foot.

Here we understood that the Spanish Free-booters (called by the English
Malcontents) lay at Aurick, another castle of the said Count, and being loded
with booty, had taken a bark by force, to pass over the Emsz. These
cut-throates used at this time to raunge out of the Spanish Garrisons upon the
Low Countries, and to spoil all passengers in these parts, which they did with
more confidence, because the Count of Oldenburg, being offended with the
Citizens of Breme, permitted these thieves to rob them, who were also very
malicious against those of Breme, because they had lately taken thirty four
Free-booters; and beheading them altogether, had set up their heads upon
stakes. Besides the Count of Emden having been lately driven out of Emden, by
the Citizens in a tumult about religion, did permit these Free-booters to lie
in his Country, and spoil the Merchants of that City. The chief Captain of
the Free-boaters then lying at Aurick: was Hans Jacob, a notable roge, and very
malicious to the English, whom he used to spoil of their very apparel, and to
handle them cruelly; mocking them with these English words; I cannot tell, and
swearing that he would make them tell, both of themselves, and of their
country men passing that way. Some few days before he had taken four
English woollen clothes, and many Flemmish linen clothes; which they divided by
the length of a ditch, in stead of a better measure, and we were glad to hear
that in this division they fell at variance, for when this Hans I acob would
have stopped a part, for the chief Captain of the Garrison, the rest cried out
in Dutch: wir woollen dein mawger kopff lieber in zwey kleiben: Stelen wir sur
andern vnd hangen far vns selbs? That is, we will rather cleave thy lean pate
in two. Shall we steal for others and hang for our selves? And they used many
reproaches against him and their chief Captain, saying in Dutch: Finstu was,
bringt mirs, hangstu aber, habt dirs: Die Iudem, pfaffen, hauptleinte, vnd in
hund, ver dienen ihr kost mit thr mund: That is, find thou ought, bring it
me, hangest thou, take that to thee? The jews, Priests, Captains and dogs,
earne their living with their mouth; but these cut-throates, howsoever they had
passed the Emsz, yet meant presently to return, and had their spics in every
town and village.

I return to my journey. While we lay at Leere for a night, a Doctor of the
Civil Law seeing me walk in the garden, and thinking my servile habit not
fit for contemplation, commanded me to draw water for his horse, giving me no
reward presently but only a nod; yet after when he had drunk with his
friends, going out, he said to me, Knecht door hastu zu drincken, That is,
Sir drink you what is left. After supper, having expected a bed almost till
midnight, the maid at last told me I must lie upon the bench; but after,
while I was washing my feet, which the gold in my shoes had gauled, she
espying my silk stokings, which I wore under my linen, ran to her mistress,
and procured me a very good bed. This effect pleased me well, but I was afraid
of the cause, by which lest I should be discovered, I hasted away early next
morning. I paid here for my supper and breakfast, fifteen Stiuers, and
giving the servant one for his pains, he would have restored it to me,
seeming by my habit to have more need thereof then himself.

All this night and the next day, great store of rain fell, and the wind was
so tempestuous, as we could not pass by water, neither would my companions
hire a wagon, besides that, the way was at this time so dirty, as no wagon
could pass it. Notwithstanding since now only two miles remained of my
dangerous journey, and I thought no thief would come out in such rain, I
resolved to go on foot with my companions to Emden, being two miles, but of
unspeakable length, and difficulty to pass. In the high way we had three
passages; one upon the top of the Bank, lying upon an; arm of the Sea, or
rather upon the River Emsz running into the Sea, and in this passage the
tempestious wind was like to bear us over; and blinded us with driving salt
water into our eyes, besides that we went over the shoes in dirt. The second
passage was on the side of the bank, from the water, somewhat fairer then the
other, but in that most troublesome, that we were forced continually to lean
upon a staff, which every one had in his hand lest being not stayed with the
staff, we should fall into the lower way, which was intolerably dirty. The
lower way, or third passage, in the bottom of the bank furthest from the
water, was for the passage of wagons, but the fields round about being
ouerflowed in winter, this passage was now (...). In this way we passed a very
long mile, from the little City Leere, to the Village Aldernsea, from seven of
the clock in the morning to twelve. We come out at first ten companions in
this journey, but at the very coming out (...) six of them left us, despairing
to pass against a contrary wind in a foul rainy day and their feet sticking
fast in the dirt, and they mocked at our obstinacy in going. Within a while, my
self was wet to the skin, and my shoes at every step, were almost to the
off, so as I was forced to bind them on with four points, neither did any of
us look back at his fellow, to help him if he could not follow, and if I
should have fallen into the Sea, I am confident none of them would have come
back to succor me. After we had gone half a mile, one of our four companions
being a young man: with a black beard, and able body, would not go one foot
further, though he had but one Stiuer in his purse, and was forced to borrow
money of us, that he might stay in a poor Alehouse. When we came to
Aldernsea, the Freebooters spies, came to the Inn and gaped upon us, so as
though I were wet to the skin, yet I durst not pull off any thing to dry, sest
my inward garments better then my upper, should betray my disguise: neither
durst I call for wine and spend freely lest they should think I had store of
money. Each of us paid seven Stiuers for his dinner. Here another of our
companions left us, being so tired, as he went to bed without eating one bit.
So as now I had only one companion left, called Anthony, a man of little
stature, and a Citizen of Emden. We so be free of this dangerous journey, went
forward, and as we came out of the Village, the Free-booters spies came close
to us, and beheld us narrowly; but seeing us all covered with dirt, they took
us for poor men, and a prey unfit to be followed. We gathering up strength
went on, till at last we were so weary, as having no strength to choose our
way, we cast away our staves, and went almost up to the knees in dirt, in the
lower way.

At last, having gone one mile (as me thought wondrous long) from one of the
Emdex.
clock in the afternoon to five, we came to Emden, where my self entering
the gate, could not stand till the Soldiers writ our names, but had lain down
on the ground if they had not given me a seat. Now being out of all danger of
the Free-booters, in giving my name, I wrote my self an Englishman; the
standers by not a little wondering that I had put my self to this dangerous
passage. And truly this journey, if it were free from all danger; yet the ill
diet and lodging would yield trouble enough, for which I appeal to Lipsius,
who has pleasantly written of the entertainment in West-Phalen, and
Oldenburg. The City of Emden lies in the utmost border of the Empire, and is
only divided by the River Emsz; from the united Province of Netherland, and by
an Inland Sea from West Freez-land, being one of them. The Country about Emden
abounds with villages, and from a Tower at Goricome, a man may see at once
upon a saire day twenty two walled Towns. Not far from this City, near
(...), is the place where the Duke of Alu^a defeated the forces of Lodwick of
Nassaw, his Dutchmen refusing to fight, except they were first paid. All the
fields about Emden are drowned in winter, and the City lying upon the Sea; for
want of fresh waters they dress most of their meat with rain water. The air
is very unhealthful, but the City is fairly built of brick, and the Citizens
are very courteous. On the South side the River Emsz washes the City with his
salt streams, on which side is the Haven, and the Citizens are said to have
some three score ships of a hundred tons a piece, and some six hundred barks
of their own. In the Churchyard on this side, many pieces of Ordinance are
laid, toward Leere and Dunort the Counts Fort, and the like are laid upon the
Haven, and some places of advantage: for the City has no walls on this side.
On the West side, beyond the water lies Marish ground to the mouth of the Sea,
and upon this side is a strong old Castle. On the North side the City is
compassed with a wall of earth, and deep ditches full of water, and there be
two strong gates, Belgar-port, and New-port, without which the fields are
Fenny. On this side there is a passage by boat, to the suburbs on the East
side, where the fields without the town are fair pastures in summer, but all
ouerflowed in winter; and upon the Rampire of the wall, are many Winde-mils.
The City is of a round form, if it were not somewhat longer from the East to
the West. At Emden they pay ordinarily six Stiuers a meal, three stiuers for a
quart of English beer, eleven Stiuers for a quart of Spanish wine, thirteen
Stiuers a quart of Rhenish wine, and seven Stiuers for French wine: my self
paid for supper and breakfast twenty three Stiuers.

CHAP. IIII. Of my journey from Emden in Germany, to Leyden in Holland, and
through the united Provinces of the Low Countries.
ON Thursday the twenty seven of October, in the year 1592, I took ship after
dinner at Emden; being to sail Ann. 1592.
into West Freesland, one of the united Provinces, and paid for my passage
ten Stiuers. The same night we cast anchor near Vrspenhurn, a Fort seated
beyond the Emsz, and belonging to the States of the united Provinces; and
beyond this Port toward Plaunders, on the same side of the Emsz, lies the
Territory of the City Groaning, seated in an Island, rich in pastures, and at
this time governed by a Spanish Garrison, which the Citizens had willingly
received, though the States after besieged this City, and drove out the
Spaniards, and united the City to the rest. As we lay at Anchor, two little
Islands lay on the North side, one subject to Emden, the other to Groaning, and
beyond them lay the German Sea. On Friday we set sail with a scant wind, and
toward night were left upon a Flat, vulgarly called Gat: where the water
forsaking us, we walked out of the ship upon the sand, compassed round about
with the Sea, till the same flowing back again, our ship floated. On Saturday
we set sail again, and toward night rested upon a like Flat, expecting the
flood. Three of these Flats are in this Inland sea, and there be two like Flats
in the Inland sea, beteene Freesland and Holland. At last we landed on Sunday
in Freesland, at the Village Aniou, lying near the Sea shore, whether we
hired a sledge for eight stiuers, and were drawn thither over the ice and snow.

After we had dined for twelve stiuers each man (whereof more then half was
reckoned for drink) we went in a skeut by water, in four hours space, one
mile to Dockam: and each man paid for his passage four stiuers and a half, we
could not Dockam.
pass by wagon, the high way being then drowned. Nothing were more pleasant,
nothing more quick, then Sea-voyages, if a man might promise himself a good
wind, and a reasonable gale: but through contrariety of winds and tempests,
they commonly prove tedious. This small voyage which afflicted us four days,
might have been passed in six hours, if the winds had favored us. And this
hope of a short passage, caused us to make no provision of victuals, so as the
Bark being governed by one Mariner and a boy, who had nothing but cheese and
musty bread to live upon, and so could not much relieve us; each hour of these
four days seemed a year unto us. Dockam a City of West Freesland, little in
circuit, is in two places divided with water, which at this time over flowed
into the very houses. The wall is strong with rampires of earth, and the houses
here, as in all these parts of Netherland are built of brick. Here I paid for
my supper twenty stiuers, eating at an Ordinary, but the company sitting at the
fire, and drinking after supper, all uses to be divided equally, whether a man
drink or not.

The first of November we went by water in six hours space two miles to
Lewerden, having on each side the water, fertile pastures, and passing by two
Forts, and each man Lewerden.
paid for his passage three stiuers. The City is fair and well fortified, and
William Count of Nassau, cousin to Count Maurice, and Governor of Friesland,
had his residence in the same. The streets are large, and divided with water,
and the houses are fairly builded of brick. The City has no Suburbs, and is
of a round form, but the waters dividing the streets, slowly or not at all
moved, are in this City (as almost in all other of these Provinces) subject to
stinking. In the midst of the City there is a dam tolet in water at pleasure,
which in this place and two miles further is salt in taste. Passengers entering
the City leave their swords with the guard of soldiers, and receive them back
when they go out of the Town. The Villages hereabouts paid yearly
contribution to the Spanish garrison of Groaning, left they should break in, and
spoil them. Here (they say) the first sermon of reformed religion was made, in
the Monastery of the Iacobinet: and here I paid for my supper fourteen
stiuers.

From Lewerden we went by water from eight a clock in the morning, to five in
the Froniker.
afternoon, two-miles to Froniker, an University of Friesland, lately renewed,
and one mile to the City Harlingen, and we paid six stiuers for our passage.
Entering this City, we left our swords with the guard of soldiers, who
restored them to us when we Harlingen.
went away. It is a little City, and lies in length from the East to the West,
but is somewhat more narrow toward the North, where the houses are thinly
built. On the west and North sides, lies an arm of the Sea, coming out of the
German Sea, and here enclosed with the continent and Islands. On the South and
East sides without the gates, are fair pastures in a large plain. I lodged in
an Englishmans house, the chief Host of the City, who either dispising England
and Englishmen, or too much respecting his masters of Friesland, gave me such
entertainment, as I took him for one of the old Picts: for having placed his
Gentlemen of Friesland at one table, he called me to the second, and seeing
that I took it in ill part, lest I should no less dislike my lodging, he
entreated a gentleman of Friesland to admit me partner of his bed, but I
hearing the gentleman condition with him about the cleanness of my body and
linen, for very scorn would not trouble his worship, but chose rather to lie
upon a bench. And it was most ridiculous, that this Host excused himself to
me, as having for countries sake made bold with me, whom he had never seen
before. I paid for my supper and breakefast with wine, thirty stiuers, and one
of my consorts drinking no wine, paid sixeteene, whereof nine was for beer.

From Harlingen I went by the said Inland Sea, vulgarly called Zwidersea,
fourteen miles to Amsterdam, and paid eight stiuers for my passage. Some of
our passengers going only to Enchusen, paid five stiuers, for by covenant
between the Cities, the ships must land their passengers at Enchusen, and
there receive such new passengers Enchusen.
as they find, and one ship at least is bound daily to make this passage. From
the said Harlingen a City of Friesland, we passed in four hours sail to
Enchusen a City of Holland, which is fortified with a wall of earth, and strong
rampires, and lies in length from the North to the South. The Haven lies on
the East side; and the new City was then building toward the West side. This
City lying between the mouth of the German sea, and Amsterdam, another City of
Holland, and in the beginning of the war taking part with the Prince of
Orange, forced Amsterdam by stopping all supply of victuals, to yield to the
said Prince. Having made short stay here, we took ship again, and sailing
from sieve a clock in the evening, to twelve in the night, in the same Inland
sea, we entered the River Tay, where we cast anchor till four in the morning,
and then setting sail, passed one mile in that River before six of the
clock, and landed at Amsterdam.

Five streets of this City are divided with water the River: Tay flows like a
large and calm sea on the North side, where is a safe port, the traffic
being great in this Amsterdam
City, and at Midleburg since the passage to Antwerpe was stopped. Upon the
Haven lics a field or market place, called Campplata, where the Citizens use to
behold their friends going to sea, and returning home. From this place toward
the South lies Warmerstrat, a long and large street, between two Rivers, which
part of the City is called, the new Ditch. The Merchants in summer meet upon
the Bridge, and in winter they meet in the New Church, in very great number,
where they walk in two ranks by couples, one rank going up, and another
going down, and there is no way to get out of the Church, except they slip out
of the doors, when in one of those ranks they pass by them. On the East side
of the City there is a wall of stone, higher then the City, having a pleasant
walk upon it. In the same place are houses for exercise of shooting in gunneo
and crosse-bowes: beyond this wall there is another of earth, and between
these walls the new City was plotted out, where of few houses were then built,
but since I hear it is fully finished. Likewise on the South and West sides
there be two like walls, and between them the plot of the said new City, in
which many fair houses were then built. The fields on all sides without the
gates being fenny and drowned with water, do make the City more strong, but
for this cause (they say) the foundations of the houses being laid in water,
cost as much or more as the houses themselves. The River Amster (of which, and
the word dam, the City is named) running from the South through three lakes,
enters this city, and passing through it, falls into the River Tay on the
North side. The City has five gates, which are shut at dinners and suppers,
though the danger of the war be far from them. There be two Churches in
which they have two sermons each second day, and four on sunday. The City lay
in length from the North to the South, but adding the plot of the new City, it
is of a round form. The streets are narrow, and the building of brick, with
a low roof, showed antiquity. They have two Almeshouses (called Gasthausen,
that is, Houses for strangers) which were of old Monasteries. One of these
houses built round, was a Cloister for Nuns, wherein sixty beds at this time
were made for poor weomen diseased, and in another chamber thereof were fifty
two beds made for the auxiliary Soulders of England, being hurt or sick, and
in the third room were eighty one beds made for the hurt and sick Soldiers
of other Nations: to which soldiers and sick weomen they give clean sheets,
a good diet, and necessary clothes, with great cleanliness, and allow them
Physicians and Surgions to cure them: and most of the Cities in these Provinces
have like houses. Here I lodged with an Englishman, and paid for dinner and
supper twenty stiuers, and for a guest invited to supper, ten stiuers, and for
three pints or chopines of Spanish wine, twenty one stiuers.

From Amsterdam I went in a boat three miles to Harlam, and paid for my passage
four stiuers: we had not passed far from Amsterdam, when we came to a damme,
shutting out the flowing of the sea, for the waters are salt thus far, though
the ebbing and the flowing of the sea can hardly be discerned at Amsterdam, for
the depth of the River Tay; and because Inland seas show little ebbing or
flowing. Our boat was lifted over this damme by ropes, and so let fall into the
water on the other side, for which the Mariners paid tribute. There is another
damme for greater Barks, and as by these dammes they let in waters to the Land
at pleasure, so they have other dams at Torgay to let them out again into the
Sea, when the Land has too much water. From hence we had the Seashore all the
way on the North side, not far distant and on both sides of the water in
which we passed, were fair pastures, parted with ditches of water.

The River running from Amsterdam, from the East to the North, does turn near
Harlam toward the South, and divides the City, which on all sides is
compasied Harlam.
with Nauigable waters. On the North side near the gate Ians-port, Don
Frederick, son to the Duke of Alun, pitched his tent in a meadow, when he
besieged the City with the Spanish forces, and much spoiled those parts,
beating down Gentlemen's fair houses (dwelling frequently in that part) with
his Artillery, playing into this street, having the name of the Knights of
Saint John. On the same side are two other gates, Sayle-port, and Cruyse-port,
and without them toward the sea, being half a mile distant, are very fair
pastures, but there is no river nor ditch that leads from the City to the sea.
For these Provinces have only three passages to go to sea: one between
Rotherodam and Bril, a Fort of Zealand, the second at Vlishing another Port of
Zealand, and the third from Amsterdam between two Islands, called the Fly and
Shelling. We coming from Amsterdam to Harlam, entered the City by the gate
Kleine holt Port, on the East side, where the very Almes-houses were beaten
down, in the aforesaid siege of the Spaniards, and the walls then beaten
down, were not yet rebuilt. On the South side is the fifth gate, Grote-holt
Port, the street whereof is the fairest, next that of the Knights of Saint
John. On this side was a wall of stone, but at this time they were building
another very strong wall beyond it of earth. In the New-street is the house for
exercise of shooting, and another old house for the same use, and one
marketplace sweetly shaded with trees, and a second marketplace of good
length for the selling of Cattle. Likewise on this side another part of the
Spanish Army lay, and destroyed a most pleasant Wood, of which the gate and
street have the name. And they report that the Spaniards taking the City, used
great cruelty to all; but especially to the Garrison of the English Soldiers.
The Histories witness, that three hundred were beheaded; and more then two
hundred drowned in the Lake, called Harlam-mere. On the West side the City is
compassed with a wall of earth, and there be fair pastures betweeue the City
and the Sea. Among the Churches; that which is called the Great, is the
fairest, and our Ladies Church, vulgarly called Vnser-fraw kirk, is the next
in beauty. All the sea coast of Holland, is a sandy down, in which are great
store of conies. This City makes great store of linen clothes, and has some
five hundred spinsters in it. The water here (as most of these Cities)
standing, and little or nothing moving, is subject to stinking, so as they are
forced to fetch water for brewing by boats. Here I paid for supper, and my
part of wine twenty stiuers, and for my dinner without wine, thirteen stiuers.
About a mile from the City is a very sweet Hill, called Weligheberg, whether the
brides use to walk, and there take their leaves of the Virgins. And in the mid
way toward Almer, is another Hill, where the Counts of Holland were wont to
be consecrated. In the marketplace, over against the Palace, they show the
house of one Laurence John, whom they brag to be the first inuentor of the
Press for Printing; and they show two bells of the brass of Corinth, which
they say were brought from Pelusium, a City in Afric upon the Nyle.

From Harlam we hired a wagon for eight stiuers, and came five miles in five
hours space, to Leyden, our waggoner baiting his horses in the mid way, but
staying Leyden.
very little. In the way we had on all sides fair pastures, and passed by the
Lake, or Mere of Harlam, lying toward the South, and the sea banks within
sight toward the North. The high ways in these Provinces seem to be forced,
and made by Art; being sandy and very dry, though all the pastures on both
sides be compassed with frequent ditches of water. At the gates of Leyden, the
men go out of the vvaggon, and only women may be carried into the City, lest
(as I think) the wheels of the loaded wagon, should break the brick
pauements of the streets.

Hence I returned presently to Amsterdam, that I might receive money sent me by
exchange. So I hired a vvaggon for eight stiuers my part, from hence to Harlam,
and by the way I observed, that the wagon having past more then half the
way, must have the way given them by all the wagons they meet, because their
horses should in reason be most weary. At Harlam I paid for supper, bed, and
breakfast, twenty five stiuers. Hence I went by vvaggon, and paid for my part
of it sixteen stiuers, for three miles to Amsterdam, and there receiving my
money, returned to Harlam, drawn over the snow and ice (which had plentifully
fallen) on a sledge: for which I paid four stiuers; and I observed many marks
set up in the fields, to direct the way to passengers.

From Harlam I returned to Leyden, where I lodged in a French-mans house, for
intending to bestow all my time in the French tongue, till by Letters I should
dispose Leyden.
of my estate in England, and there being a famous University in this City, I
found no abiding fitter for me then this. I paid for my diet and chamber in
this French-mans house three guidens, and fifteen stiuers weekly, but in the
common Innes they pay ten or fifteen stiuers a meal, according to the
quantity of beer they drink, and ordinarily twenty stiuers or more, if they
drink wine. Leyden is so called of the words Legt bey de dunen, that is, lies
by the Downs (so they call the sandy banks of the Sea, as the English do
likewise in Kent, Leyden is of a round form, or perhaps somewhat longer from
the East to the West, where the Rheine passes by it. It is a City of much
beauty, the houses are very fairly built of brick, and be uniform. The
Churches are covered with long slates (as they be almost through all Holland)
and among the streets one is much fairer then the rest, in the midst whereof
is a piece of ground railed in, where the Merchants meet. Many streets are
divided with waters, which are passed by wooden bridges, and in deed if a man
dig two foot in any part of Holland, he shall find water. I said that the
Rheine passes by this City, yet does it not fall into the Sea, but leeseth it
self in many standing ditches of water, in this low part of the continent.
Toward the North-west about a mile from the City, there is the end of a ditch
dug of old from the very City, and vulgarly called Malgatt, because the
Citizens spent much treasure, in a vain hope to make a Haven for ships, and a
nauigable water to come up to the Town; for the heaps of sand daily cast up
by the Sea, filled the place up, where they thought to have made the Haven, as
fast as they could dig it, yet was it long before they would cease from this
ill advised work. Notwithstanding salt water comes under the earth from the
Sea into this ditch and they carry the same unto the City to make salt thereof.
Upon the same Seashore, toward the North, and like distance from the City, is
a Village called Catwicke, seated upon Mountains of sands, on the maine sea.
Upon the same shore further toward the North, is a place where they say the
Romans of old had an Armory, the ruins whereof (some musket shot from the
shore) more or less appear, as the wind couers them with sand, or blowing
from another quarter, drives away the sand, and so lays them open. Hereabouts
they say that many coins of the Romans are oftentimes dug up, and near the
Hoch-landish Church is a Monument built by Caligula the Emperor, which now
belongs to a Gentleman of that Country. Upon the North side of this city the
Villages Warmond and Nortwicke, lie upon the aforesaid Downs, but the City
has no gate that directly leads to them. Leyden has five gates,
Regenspurgport, on the West side, which leads to Harlam, and to Catwicke; and
white port which leads to Hage, between which gates there is a low
watergate of iron grates, for boats to pass in and out. Near White Port
lies a house, where they exercise shooting with the Piece and Crosse-bow. On
the South side is the gate Kow-port, leading into the pastures. Upon the East
side is the gate Hochwertz-port, more fortified then any of the rest, and it
leads to Vberden, Gonda, and to Alphen. There is another gate Zillport, which
leads to Vtretcht, whither you pass by water or land. The foresaid street,
which I said was the beauty of the Town, lies from the West to Hochwertzport,
on the East side, and is called Breitstrat, that is Broadstreete.

In the spring time of the year 1593 purposing to see the Cities of the united
Provinces, An. 1593.
I hired a Wagon for six stiuers, and went from Leyden to Delph, three miles
in three hours space, through corn fields and rich pastures, and having gone
two third parts of the way, we passed over the water that runs from Leyden to
Delph. In all these parts the high way has ditches on both sides, and is very
plain, sandy, and very dry, being daily repaired by the country people. By
the way is a mill, in which they make oil of rape and line seeds mingled with
wallnut shells, and they have many such miles in those parts. Not far of, at
Voberg, the Histories write of a holy Grove, famous for a conspiracy against
the Romans.

The City of Delph, lies in length from the North to the South, and the
falrest street called Corne-mart, lies the same way. Here (as in all the Cities
of these parts) Delph.
the buildings are of brick, but the houses of Delph are more stately built,
and seem to have more antiquity then other where. In the New Church is a
Monument of the Prince of Orange, the poorest that ever I saw for such a
person, being only of rough stones and mortar, with posts of wood, colored
over with black, and very little erected from the ground. Near the Church is a
large marketplace, and within a little Island the Senate house is built. The
Haven is on the South side. The Prince of Orange dwelt here in a Monastery,
and used to eat in a low parlor, whence as he ascended the stairs into the
chamber, a wicked murderer gave him his deaths wound, who flying by a back
door, was after taken in the City, and put to a most cruel, but most
deserved death. The Countess of Buren, daughter to this said Prince, now lived
in this Monastery with her family. Here I paid for one meal, for my self and
a guest invited by me, and two pots of Rhenish wine; three guldens, and five
stiuers. When the Spanish Army most pressed the united Provinces, the Prince of
Orange then lying here, to shun a greater mischief from the Spaniards, brake
down the banks of the sea, and let in the waters, which did much hurt to the
Country, but saved them from the Spaniards, who with great fear hasted away,
giving great rewards to those that guided them to the firm continent. At Delph
are about three hundred Brewers, and their beer, for the goodness, is called
Delphs-English; but howsoever they had Brewers, and the very water out of
England, they could never make their beer so much esteemed as the English,
which indeed is much bettered by the carriage over sea to these parts.

Hence I went to Sluse, so called of the damme to let waters in and out, and
came thither in two hours, paying for my wagon thirteen stiuers, which I
hired alone, for if I had light upon company, we should have paid no more
between us. Hence I passed the River Mase, where it falls into the sea, and
came to Brill, my self and two others, paying twelve stiuers for our passage:
but the bark being presently to return, and therefore not entering the Port,
set us on land near the Town, whether we walked on foot.

Brill is a fortified Town, laid in pledge to Queen Elizabeth, for money she
lent the States, and it was then kept by four English Companies paid by the
Queen, Brill.
under the government of the Lord Burrowes. The Town is seated in an Island,
which was said to be absolute of it self, neither belonging to Zealand, nor
Holland. On the North side, the River Mase runs by. On the East side are
corn fields, and the River somewhat more distant. On the South side are corn
fields. On the West side are corn fields, and the maine Sea little distant.
Here I paid for my supper and dinner twenty stiuers, and for a pot of wine
eighteen stiuers.

From hence I returned by water to Roterodam in Holland, and paid for my
passage three stiuers. In the mouth of the River of Roterodam, lies the City
Arseldipig, and another called Delphs-Ile, being the Haven of Delph, which was
then a pleasant Village; but growing to a City, and having been lately burnt
by, fire was fairly rebuilded.

Roterodam lies in length from the East to the West. The Haven is on the South
Roterodam.
side, being then full of great ships; upon which side it lay open without
walls, having many fair houses, and a sweet walk upon the bank of the
water. Neither is it fortified on the sides toward the land, nor seemed to me
able to bear a siege; having low walls on the North and East sides, yet
compassed with broad ditches. The street Hoch-street is fair and large,
extending it self all the length of the City; and lying so, as from the gate
at the one end, you may see the gate at the other end, and in this street is
the Senate house. In the market place toward the West, is the statua of
Erasmus, being made of wood, for the Spaniards brake down that which was made
of stone; and the inscription thereof witnesses, that he was borne at
Roterodame, the twenty eight of October, in the year 1467, and died at Bazel
the twelfth of July, in the year 1531. In New-Kirk-street, there is the house
in which Erasmus was borne, wherein a Tailor dwelled at this time, and upon
the wall thereof, these Verses are written:

AEdibus his natus, mundum decorauit Erasmus,
Artibus ingenuis, Religione, side.
The world, Erasmus in this poor house borne,
With Arts, Religion, Faith, did much adorn.
The same Verses also were written in the Flemmish tongue, and upon the wall
was the picture of Erasmus. Upon the same West side is the house for exercise
of shooting in the Piece and Crosse-bow. The waters of Roterodam and Delph,
being near the sea are more wholesome then the standing waters within land.
Here I lodged at an English-mans house; and paid for my supper ten stiuers,
for my breakfast two stiuers, and for beer between meals five stiuers: by
which expense, compared with that of the Flemmish Innes, it is apparent that
strangers in their reckonings, pay for the intemperate drinking of their Dutch
companions.

From hence I went by sea three miles to Dort, in two hours space; to which
City we might have gone great part of the way by vvaggon, as far as Helmund,
but then Dort.
we must needs have crossed an Inland sea, for the City is seated in an Island,
having been of old divided from the continent of Holland, in a great flood.
The form of the City resembles a Galley, the length whereof lies from the East
to the West. We landed upon the North side lying upon the sea, where there be
two gates, but of no strength. On the East side is the New gate, Reydike, and
beyond a narrow water, lie fenny grounds. On the South side, the ditch is more
narrow, yet the sea ebbs and flows into it, and upon old walls of stone is a
convenient walking place. On this side is the gate Spey-port, and beyond the
ditch lie fenny grounds. On the West side is the gate Feld-port, and a like
walk upon walls of stone, and there is a greater ebbing and flowing of the
sea. There is a great Church built of brick, and covered with slate; being
stately built with Arched cloisters, and there of old the Counts of Holland
were consecrated. From this part the two fairest streets Reydike-strat, and
Wein-strat, lie windingly toward the North. Turning a little out of the fair
street Reydike-strat, toward the South, lies the house for exercise of
shooting in the Piece and Crosse-bow, and there by is a very pleasant grove;
upon the trees whereof certain birds frequent, which we call Hearnes,
vulgarly called Adhearne or Regle, and their feathers being of great price,
there is a great penalty set on them, that shall hurt or annoy those birds.
There is a house which retains the name of the Emperor Charles the fifth, and
another house for coining of money; for the Counts of Holland were wont to
coin money at Dort, as the Counts of Zealand did at Midleburg. Between the
fair streets, Reydike-strat and Wein-strat, is the Haven for ships, to be
passed over by bridges, and there is a market place, and the Senate house;
which has a prospect into both these streets. The houses are higher built
then other where in Holland, and seem to be of greater Antiquity. This City
by privilege is the staple of Rhenish vvines, which are from hence carried to
other Cities, so as no imposition being here paid for the same, the pot of
Rhenish wine is sold for twelve stiuers, for which in other places they pay
eighteen, or twenty stiuers. For three meals I paid here thirty stiuers.

From hence I went by water to the States Camp, besieging Getrudenberg, and
Getrudenberg.
came thither in two hours space, but the vvindes being very tempestuous, we
saw a boat drowned before us, out of which one man only escaped by swimming,
who seemed to me most wretched, in that he ouer-liued his wife and all his
children then drowned. The besieged City lies in the Province of Brabant; and
the County of Buren, being the inheritance of the Prince of Orange, by right of
his wife; and in this Month of June, it was yielded to Count Maurice, the
Spanish Army lying near, but not being able to succor it.

The Sea lying upon this part of Brabant, was of old firm land, joined to the
continent, till many villages by diverse floods (and seventeen Parishes at once
by a famous flood) were within less then 200. years ago swallowed up of the
Sea, and for witness of this calamity, diverse Towers far distant the one from
the other, appear in this Sea, and according to the ebbing and flowing, more
or less seen, do always by their sad spectacle put the passengers in mind
of that woeful event. And the Hollanders say, that these floods caused the
Rheine to change his bed, as hereafter I shall show in the due place.

From Count Maurice his Camp at Getrudenberg, I failed in six hours space to
the Island Plate, and at midnight putting forth again, failed in ten hours
space to the Island Tarlot, and from thence in three hours space to the City
Bergenapzome, where Bergenapzome.
we landed. By the way we saw one of the aforesaid Towers high above the water,
being a steeple of some parish Church swallowed up in the said deluge, of which
there be many like sad remembrances in this Inland sea. The channel leading to
the City is called Forcemer; and has upon the bank many strong sorts, and in
this channel lay a man of war to defend passengers from the bordering enemy.
This City is strongly fortified, and is sented in Brabant, and had many castles
of the enemy lying neerert, and it was governed by a garrison of English, not in
the Queens, but in the States pay, as Ostend at that time was (whereas
Virshing and Brill pledged to the Queen for money, wore kept by English
Garrisons in the Queens pay) and Sir Thomas Morgan was at this time Governor
of this City. At out entrance every man gave his nameto the Guard. Without the
City on the West side, many akers of land were drowned, when the Prince of
Orange (as I said) let in the waters to drive the Spaniards out of those parts,
which from that day to this, could never be dried and gained again. On this
side I entered the City, where be many poor houses built in form of a Lutes
neck, which being added to the City almost of a round form, make the whole
City much like unto a Lute. On this side were three strong rauelings, and upon
the neck of the said Lute is the Haven, in the channel Forcemer, which going
no further into the land, ends in a mill made of purpose to keep the ebbing
water, so as the ditches may always be full. On the North side is the prison,
not unpleasant for situation, and the English House, and the House of the
Governor; which of old belonged to the Count of Brabant. Between the Gates
wouldport and Stephenbergport, which are both strongly fortified, the River
Zome falls into the Town, whereof it has the name, yet the channel being
stopped, it seems here a standing water, rather then a River. Toward the
East, the City is very strongly fortified, and there is the Gate Boskport, so
called (as I think) of the word Bosco, which in the Italian tongue, signifies
a wood: for on this side without the gates, were many woods and orchards, till
they were destroyed in the war. On this side is another Raueling of great
length, and beyond the fortifications lie fair pastures, but somewhat covered
with waters. And from hence we might see Woudcastle, scarce three English
miles distant, which was then possessed by the Spaniards. On the South side is
a new fort, beyond a strong bulwark, and a very strong counterscarp compassing
the City. And from hence was of old a most pleasant walk, under the shade of
trees; to the old castle, some mile distant. On this side in a pleasant grove
were many such birds, as I said to be at Dort, vulgarly called Adherne, much
esteemed for the feathers they bear in their fore head, and there is a penalty
set on those that hurt or drive them away. On this side also is the English
Church, and upon this and the East sides the Prince of Parma in camped, when
he besieged this City. There is in the midst of the City a triangular market
place, and from the sharp end thereof toward the West, sieve rauelings run
beyond the walls. The houses are built of brick, and seem to be built of old.
The Church has a very high steeple, whence the watchmen show the coming and
number of horsemen by hanging out white flagges, and of foot by read. All the
Villages hereabouts, though living under the Spaniard, yet pay contribution to
this Garrison, lest the soldiers should upon advantage break out, and spoil
them. The Citizens live of mannall arts, and the expenses of the Garrison.

From hence I sailed to Midleburge, and at one ebb of the Sea, passed in seven
hours space to Der-goese, and at another ebb in four hours space to
Armaren, a City of the Island Walkern, belonging to Zealand, and I paid for my
passage six stiuers. From hence in half an hour I walked on foot to
Midleburge, the houses whereof are stately Midleburg.
built, and very high, especially the new City, and are all of brick, as be
the Cities of Holland, and as be the houses of Vlishing, but some of these are
stately built of free stone, yet the streets are somewhat narrow. Here I paid
for my supper five stiuers in the English House, where the Host is only bound
to provide for the Merchants and such gucsts as they inuit, yet many times he
admits English Gentlemen both to lodge and eat there. The House lies in the
street Longdels, and howsoever the Merchants cat there, yet they hier their
lodgings scatteringly in the City, and refused an Abbey which the Senators
offered them to lodge therein, perhaps out of fear, lest in any civil tumult
they might more easily be wronged, if they should all lie together. This City
is the Staple of all Merchandise, excepting Rhenish wine, for which by old
privilege Dorte is the Staple. Therefore French and Spanish Wines are here
sold much more cheap then other where, because they are free of impost in this
place, and have great impositions laid on them, being carried out to other
Cities. The form of the City is round, save that on the East side, the
buildings of the new City being unperfected, made it to have the form of a
half Moon, though the plot thereof were round Coming from Armuren, I entered
on this East side, by a very fair gate, called the New Gate, where the water
falling into the Town, passes to the Burse, where the Merchants meet. There
is a public House for shooting, the wall on this side (as round about the
City) is of stone, and is rather adorned then fortified with some Towers. And
this wall is double, upon the Inner whereof compassed with deep ditches, many
Houses are built. On the West side without the gates, almost half way to
Vlishing, is Rammakins Castle, kept by English Soldiers, sent from Vlishing to
that purpose, being a place of great importance, because the channel going to
Midleburge, runs within the command of their Artillery. On this South side is
the Haven, and without the walls very fair pastures, to the uttermost part of
the Island. Also on this side is a new Haven made for ships in the winter time,
and the gate is called, Rammakins Port, of the said Castle. On the West side
you may see Vlishing a mile off, and in a clear day, the Downs of Kent in
England. On this side within the walls is a round market place, and the
Senate House of anticke building, and two Gates called of the Cities to which
they lead, Vlishing port, and Longe-ville port. On the North side is an Abbey,
and pleasant walking, and another public House for exercise of shooting. This
populous City has only two Churches, either because the people being of many
sects in Religion, and much occupied in traffic, scarce the third part comes
to Church, or else because the people being much increased by strangers,
coming to dwell in these parts, upon the stopping of the passage to Antwerp in
the civil wars, it is no wonder that the old Churches will not receive them.
The Citizens may at pleasure drowned all the fields about them. And this, one,
and the chief Island of Zealand, called Walkerne, contains sieve walled
Cities, besides Villages; but the air is reputed unwholesome. Midleburge is the
chief place of traffic in Zealand, as Amsterdam in Holland.

From hence I went in a long Wagon covered with hoopes and cloth to Vlishing,
a long mile; and paid for my passage two blankes. Ten English foot companies,
one Vlishing.
hundred and fifty in each company, under the government of Sir Robert Sidney,
kept this strong Town for the Queen of England, and under her pay; being
engaged to her for money lent the States, and the ten Captains in course
watched each third night. The City is little and of a round form, but very
strong. It has a narrow Sea on the West side, where, upon the last confines of
Zealand and the united Provinces, is one of the three passages (whereof I
formerly spoke) to the Maine Sea. On this side is the Mountain of the Mill,
where the Soldiers watch nightly, and beyond the Mountain is a damme to let
in the Sea at pleasure. On the South. side is the Gate Waterport, strongly
fortified, lying upon the Inland Sea. On this side toward the North, the Sea
flowing into the Town, makes one Haven, and toward the East another, and
divides the City into three parts, the Old, the New, and the Middle, whereof
any one being taken by the enemy, yet the other are fortified for defense.
Beyond these Havens or channels, is a Mountain lying over the City, upon which
the Soldiers kept guards day and night, as they did likewise upon the Bridge
dividing the Cities, and upon other lower hills, at all the gates of the City,
and in prayer time, at the door of the English Church. This Church is on the
East side, and is common to the English and Dutch at diverse hours. Between
the high mountain and this Church, was the Governors House, belonging of old
to the Counts of Zealand, and the public house for exercise of shooting, but
less pleasant then the like houses are in other Cities. On the same East side
lie two ways, one to Rammakins Castle, the other to Midleburge. On the North
side the Downs of Kent in England may easily be seen, and there is the
Hospital or Gast-house for sick people, and for sick and maimed soldiers,
of which a Mountain thereby has the name. On this and the East sides, are two
Mils to retain the water when the Sea ebs, that the ditches round about may
always be filled, and if need be to ouerflow the fields. These ditches are
commonly a pikes depth, and can by no art or enemy be dried. The Citizens want
good water, having no wels, nor any fresh water, but rain water kept in
Cesternes. The foresaid number of Soldiers in the Garrison was not sufficient
to master the Citizens, only their courageous minds dispising death, kept the
Citizens in such awe, as they durst not attempt to recover their liberty by
force, which they hoped to obtain by peaceable means, and the united
Provinces depended upon the opinion of the Queens aid, perhaps more then upon
the aid it self, so as either failing, they were like to be a prey to the
Spaniards. Since that time I heard the Garrison was diminished, so as it seems
the English had less strength to keep it, if the States changing their minds,
should attempt to surprise it. Being invited by my English friends, I spent
nothing in this City.

Hence I returned to Midleburge on foot, upon a paued causcy, having on each
side rich corn fields, and fair pastures, with many orchards; and in the
midway a Gentleman called Aldegondey, famous for his wisdom, has his Castle,
wherein he dwelt. At Midleburge I paid six stiuers for my supper, and two for
my bed, and providing victuals to carry by Sea, I paid for a loyne of mutton
twenty four stiuers, as also for my washing seven stiuers, and staying in the
Town two days, I spent in all four guldens and four stiuers.

I took ship at ten in the morning; and between the Island Der-goese, and the
Inland Sea, called Zurechsea, I saw two Towers of Villages swallowed in the
foresaid deluge, and sailing by the Island Plate, and the Island of Brill, we
passed certain booyes directing to find the channel. The next day in the
afternoon, I landed at Roterodam in Holland, and paid ten stiuers for my
passage. Thence I passed in two hours space by boat to Delph, and paid two
stiuers for my passage. Thence in two hours space I passed to the Hage by
Wagon, and paid for my passage two stiuers; for which journey one man alone
may hire a Wagon for seven stiuers.

At the Hage Count Maurice with his mother in law the Countess of Orange (born
The Hage.
of the Noble Family of the Chastillons in France) and the General States of
the united Provinces, and Princes Ambassadors, have their residence, which
made me desirous to stay here a while, to which purpose I hired a chamber, for
which, for my bed, sheets, tableclothes, towels, and dressing of my meat, I
paid twenty five stiuers weekly. I bought my own meat, and living privately
with as much frugality as conveniently I might, I spent by the week no more
then five guldens and a half, though all things were in this place
extraordinarily dear. My beer in one week came to fourteen stiuers, and
among other things bought, I paid for a quarter of lamb thirty stiuers, for a
Hen seven stiuers, for a Pigeon four stiuers, for a Rabet three stiuers. I
remember not to have seen a more pleasant village then this: great part of the
houses are fairly built of brick, though many of them in by-streetes be
covered with thatch, and some few are stately built of freestone. The village
has the form of a Cross, and upon the East side coming in from Leyden,
there is a most pleasant Grove, with many wild walks like a maze, and nearer
the houses is another very pleasant walk, set round about with willowes. Here
is the public house for exercise of shooting in the Piece and Crosse-bow,
which has a sweet prospect into a large green plain, where they use to
spread linen clothes in the sun, and here certain rows of trees being
planted; yield a pleasant shade to them that walk therein. One of the said
rows of trees called Vinareberg, leads to an old Castle of the Counts of
Holland, compassed with a dry ditch, in which Count Maurice dwelt, but in the
great Hall thereof were many shops of Merchants for small wares. Upon the walls
of the said Castle, and upon the windows of the Church, these words were
written in latin.

To Charles the fifth, etc. To the most invincible Caesar Charles the fifth
Roman Emperor, the victorious desender of the Catholic Religion, and
Augustus. The Prouisors of this House have placed this, in the year 1547.

Thereby was the statua of Charles the fifth, kneeling on his knees. In the
window were painted the Arms of all the Knights of the golden Fleece. The
Histories of the Country report the building of this Palace to be wonderful,
in that the top of the Hall is not joined with beams, but with arches: but for
my part I observed no great magnificence in the work. The second of the
foresaid rows of trees, called Furholt, leads to a gentleman's house, the
fairest and most stately built in this Village. In the midst of the Hage lies
the market place, and the Church. On the South side is the water that leader to
Delph: and round about on all sides without the Village, are fair pastures,
excepting the North-side, where the sandy downs of the Sea lie near to the
Village. In the Church is a Monument of Count Albertus, Duke of Bauria, and
another of a Count of Hanaw, with diverse others, which I omit, as having no
antiquity or magnificence.

While I stayed at the Hage, I walked out in half an hours space to the
village Lausdune, where I saw a wonderful monument, the History whereof
printed in a paper, Lausdune.
the Earl of Leicester (as they said) had carried with him into England,
leaving only the same in written hand, the copy whereof I will set down,
first remembering that two basens of brass hanged on the wall, in which the
children (whereof I shall speak) were baptized.

The manuscript was in latin a follows,

En tibi monstrosum nimis and memorabile factum,
Quale nec a Mundi condition datum.
Haec lege, mox animo stupefactus lector abibis.
So strange and monstrous thing I tell,
As from the worlds frame nere befell,
He parts amasde that marks it well.
The rest in latin is thus englished;

Margaret wife to Hermanuus Count of Henneberge, daughter to Florence Count of
Holland and Zealand, sifter to William King of the Romans, and Caesar, or
Gouermour of the Empire. This most noble Countess being about forty two years
old, the very day of preparation called Paraseene, about nine of the clock, in
the year 1276. This year fell in a lying and supersitious age.
brought forth at one birth three hundred sixty five children, which being
baptized in two basens of brass, by Guido suffragan of Vtretcht, all the males
were called John, and all the females Elizabeth; but all of them together with
the mother, died in one and the same day, and lie buried here in the Church of
Lausdune: and this happened to her, in that a poor woman bearing in her arms
two twins, the Countess wondering at it, said she could not have them both
by one man, and so rejected her with scorn, whereupon the woman sore troubled,
wished that the Countess might have as many childen at a birth, as there be
days in the whole year; which besides the course of nature, by miracle fell
out, as in this table is briefly set down for perpetual memory, out of old
Chronicles, as well written as printed. Almighty God must be in this beheld and
honored, and extolled with praises for ever and ever. Amen.

From the Hage, my self and other consorts hired a Wagon for two guldens, and
passed to Leyden, having on both sides fair pastures, fruitful corn fields,
and some pleasant groves.

CHAP. V. Of my journey out of the united Provinces, by the Sea coast, to Stood
and Lubeck in Germany. Of my saving to Denmark, and thence to Dantzk in
Prussen, and my journey through Poland to Padoua in Italy.
IN the end of the Month of June, and the year 1593: having now dispatched by
Letters, all my business in An. 1593.
England, and having seen the united Provinces, I was in doubt by what way I
should return into Italy: and having already passed the two ways of Germany,
that by Augspurge, and the other by the Sweitzers, and the way by France being
then shut up by the civil wars, the common desire of Travelers not to pass
the same way twice, but to see as many new Countries as their course will
permit; made me resolve to pass through the Kingdoms of Denmark and Poland,
and by the fortified City of Wien in Austria. In which journey, howsoever I
should go much out of my way, and was like to endure many troubles; yet I
thought nothing was difficult to a willing mind. Therefore I hired a wagon
from Leyden to Vtrecht, and paid for my part twelve stiuers. We passed three
miles and a half in three hours, by the village Alpha, where the Spaniards
encamped, when they besieged Leyden; and by a little Town called Gonda, having
on both sides fair pastures, but somewhat over flowed, and ditches set with
willowes; and we came to a little village, where the waggoner gave his horses
meat. Then in four hours space we passed four miles and a half, having on
both sides fruitful corn fields, and like ditches set with willowes, and so
we came to Vtrecht. But a mile and a half before we came thither, we passed
out of the Territory of Holland, and entered the Bishopric of Vtrecht, which
is one of the united Provinces. Not far from the City we saw a cross, set
up for a Monument of a Bishop dying in battle against the Hollanders. I had
almost forgotten the little City Werden, which they showed us by the way, and
told us, that the form thereof was like the City of Jerusalem, which at that
time I had not seen, and therefore mention this from their report, rather then
from my judgment.

The City Vtrecht is seated in length from South-east, by East, to North-west
by West, and upon the end at South-east by East, is the gate Weitefraw, where
the Rheine V'tretcht.
enters the City. At the other end, Noth-west by West, are the ruins of an old
Castle, which the Spaniards kept before the wars, to bridle the City: and there
be two gates, Saint Katherine-port, and Wert-port, each of them having their
suburbs. On the South-west side are walls of earth, but the ditches were
almost dry. On the North-east side is the gate Olske-port, and there be three
strong Rauelings, one defending the other. On this side be two streets fairer
then the rest, called New-graft, and Altkirkhoffe; and there is a pleasant
walk well shaded with trees, upon the bank of the River. In the midst of the
City is the Cathedral Church, having a fair Tower, and a Bell, which they
report to be of eighteen thousand pounds weight Near to the same is the
Bishops Palace, wherein the Bishops dwelt before the union of the Provinces;
but at this time there dwelled the Countess of Meurs, whose husband died in
these wars. In the same part lie the market place, and the Senate house. The
houses of the City are of brick, and fairly built, but lose much of their
beauty by being covered on the outside with boords, and they seem to have
more antiquitic, then the buildings of Holland. There be thirty Churches, but
only three are used for divine service. In Saint Mary's Church, (which as I
remember is the Cathedral Church) these verses are written upon a pillar.

Accipe posteritas quod per tua secula narres,
Taurinis culibus fundo solidata columna est.
Posterity hear this, and to your children tell,
Bull hydes bear up this pillar from the lowest hell.
Upon a second pillar this is written in Latin.

A Frison killed the Bishop because he had learned of him, being drunk, and
betrayed by his son, the Art to stop a gulf in this place, the year 1099.

Upon a third pillar this is written in Latin:

The Emperor Henry the fourth, built this Church to our Lady, because he had
pulled down another Church at Milane, dedicated to her.

And to my understanding, they showed me at this time manifest signs of the
aforesaid gulf, which these inscriptions witness to have been in this place.
Here I paid for my supper twenty stiuers, and for my breakefast six stiuers.

From hence I went to Amsterdam, five miles in three hours space, and paid
for my passage in the wagon ten stiuers. For half the way on both sides we
had fair pastures, and saw many strong Castles belonging to Gentlemen. Near
Vtrecht, at the passage of a river each man paid a Doight, and before we came
to the half way, we passed the confines of this Bishopric, and entered the
County of Holland. Then in the space of two hours and a half, we came to
Amsterdam, having in our way on both sides fair pastures.

On Friday in the beginning of the Month of July, at five a clock in the
evening, I took ship, upon the Mast whereof was a garland of Roses, because
the master of this ship then wooed his wife, which ceremony the Hollanders
used. And the sea being calm, we passed eight miles to Enchusen, where we
cast anchor. By the way we passed a shole, where our stern struck twice upon
the sand, not without fear of greater mischiese. On Saturday we'sayeld
between West Freesland upon our right hands toward the East, and Holland upon
our left hands toward the West, and after ten miles sailing, came to the
Island Fly, which being of small compass, and Fly.
consisting of sandy hills, has two villages in it. From hence they reckon
twenty eight miles by sea to Hamburg in Germany, whether we purposed to go.
As Soon as we cast anchor here, the Master of our ship went aboard the
Admiral of certain ships, which used to lie here, to guard this mouth of the
sea, with whom he spoke concerning our passage to Hamburg, and delivered him
Letters, commanding that our ship should have a man of war to wast it. This
Admiral lay continually in this harbor, to guard this passage into the sea,
and he commanded nine ships, which were upon all occasions to wast the
Hollanders to Hamburg, and defend them from the Dunkirkers, and all Pirates. But
at this time there was not one of these men of war in the harbor, and the
Admiral himself might not go forth. So as for this cause, and for the
tempestious weather, we stayed here all Sunday. But upon Monday, the wind
being fair for us, and contrary for the men of war that were to come in, so
that losing this wind, we must have expected (not without great irkesomnesse)
a second wind to bring in some of these men of war, and a third wind to
carry us on our journey: the Master of our ship (carrying six great Pieces,
and having some ten Muskets) did associate himself with seven other little
ships, (having only Pikes and swords) and so more boldly then wisely resolved
to pass to Hamburg without any man of war.

This Monday morning we hoysed sail, but being calmed at noone, we cast anchor
between the Fly, on our left hand toward the West, and another little Island
Shelling on our right hand toward the East: and lying here, we might see two
little barks, houering up and down, which we thought to be Fishermen, and
nothing less then Pirates of Dunkirke. Here till evening we were tossed by the
waves, which use to be more violent upon the coast; but a fair wind then
arising, all our ships gladly weighed anchor. At which time it happened that
the anchor of our ship brake, so as our consorts went on, but our Master,
according to the nauall discipline, not to put to sea with one anchor, returned
back to the harbor of the Fly, there to buy a new anchor, all of us foolishly
cursing our fortune and the stars. On Tuesday morning while we sadly walked
on the shore, we might see our consorts coming back with torn sails, and
dead men, and quarters of men, lying on the hatches. We beholding this with
great astonishment, took boat to board them, and demanding the news, they
told us that the little barks we saw the day before were Dunkirkers, having in
each of them eighty Soldiers, and some few great Pieces, and that they had
taken them, and spoiled their ships, of their chief and lightest goods, and
had carried away prisoners to Dunkirk all the passengers and chief Mariners,
after they had first wrung their foreheads with twined ropes, and with many
horrible tortures, forced them to confess what money they had presently, and
what they could procure for ransom. Further, with mourning voice they told us,
that the Pirates inquired much after our ship, saying that was it the bride,
with whom they meant to dance, cursing it to be destroyed with a thousand tuns
of devils, and swearing that if they had foreseen our escape, they would have
assailed us by day, while we rode at anchor. They added, that they had left no
goods, but those they could not carry for weight, and had changed their ragged
shirts and apparel with the poor Mariners. And indeed they had just cause to
bewail the escape of our ship, being laded with many chests of Spanish
Ryalls, whereof they were not ignorant, using to have their spies in such
places, who for a share in the booty, would have betrayed their very brothers.
As we had just cause to praise almighty God, who had thus delivered us out of
the laws of death, so had we much more cause to bewail our rashness, yea
and our wickedness, that we had striuen, yea and repined against his divine
providence, which with humble and hearty sorrow I confess to the glory of his
sacred name. In this Island I paid for my supper and bed ten stiuers, for my
breakfast and dinner eight stiuers.

On Wednesday we had a most fair wind, but the terror of our last escape,
made us stay in the harbor. In the evening I went to lodge in the village, and
paid ten stiuers for my supper and bed, and there I saw great store of all
kinds of shel-fish, sold for a very small price.

Since this journey by Sea, (had besides our expectation) proved so difficult,
my self, though I had seen the Cities upon the sea coast of Germany, yet
preferring my safety before the charge and trouble of that way, did resolve to
pass to Hamburg by land, with which purpose when I acquainted my consorts;
suddenly all the passengers resolved to leave the ships, and to go by land; at
which resolution the Masters of the ships stormed, but when each of us had
paid them a Doller for our passage from Amsterdam to the Fly, they were well
pacified.

My self and nine consorts in my company, hired a boat for thirty stiuers,
each man paying three stiuers: and so upon Thursday in four hours space, we
sailed three miles to Harlingen a City of west Freesland, passing the aforesaid
Inland sea. And the same day hiring a boat, for which each man paid six
stiuers: we passed a mile to the City Froniker, where is an University, and
passing by water through the midst of that pleasant little City, we passed two
miles further, to Lewerden, where we lodged, and I paid for my supper ten
stiuers. The next morning, being Friday, we passed in six hours space two
long miles to Dockam, and each man paid for his boat hire three stiuers.
Without delay in the afternoon we entered a bark, to sail from West
Freesland, one of the united Provinces, into East Freesland, a Province of the
German Empire: but scarce one mile from the town we cast anchor, to expect the
flood; and lying there, we heard from the land great noise, barking of dogs,
cries of men, and sounding of bells, which proceeded from some Spanish
Free-booters breaking out of Groaning, to spoil the Peasants. All the next day
we sailed, and in the evening for our better safety we cast anchor near a
man of war, (whereof there be some appointed to lie in this Inland Sea, to
guard the friends of the States,) and early the next morning being Sunday, we
set sail, and by the rising of the sun, landed in the Island of Rotermere
(which is divided from the continent by this Inland Sea, and has the maine Sea
on the other side,) whence soon after we parted, and were put on land in East
Freesland, a Province of the Empire, and passing one mile on foot, came to the
City of Emden.

I said that the States maintained some men of war in this Inland Sea, and
these used to send out in lesser boats some bodies of men, to search the
Barks whether they be friends or not; which bodies of men are vulgarly called
Dieiagt, that is, the hunting, of a metaphor taken from the hunting of dogs.
For my passage from Dockam to Emden I paid ten stiuers, and here for supper and
breakefast I paid twenty three stiuers, though the ordinary rate be but six
stiuers a meal without wine: and for a pound of cherries I paid eight stiuers.

In our journey to Stood, the first day we came in six hours space three
miles, to the village Detrem, upon the confines of the county of Emden, passing
through fruitful corn fields, and fair meadows; and being eight in the
Wagon, we all paid fifteen stiuers for the same. From hence we went a mile
through wild and fenny fields, to the village Open, and each four consorts
paid for their Wagon three stiuers, and our Wagon was driven by a woman. Here
the Grave or Count of Oldenburg has a Castle, and each man paid for his supper
seven groates. By night we passed four miles through a wild heath, to
Oldenburg, and four consorts paid ten stiuers for a Wagon. They have very
little horses in these parts to draw the Wagons, like to the gallo way nags of
Scotland. The second day we passed two miles and a half in four hours
space, through a sandy heath ground and thick woods of oak, and came to a
Village; where each man paid for his dinner four stiuers. After dinner we
passed more then a mile through a like woody Heath, and in three hours space
came to Delmerhurst, where the Count of Oldenburge has a fair and strong
Castle, though it be a poor Village: and here each man paid half a stiuer to
the Count, and for our Wagon ten stiuers. The same day we passed a mile
through sandy pastures, and in three hours space came to Breme, where each man
paid for our Wagon four groats, and for our supper five lubecke shillings.
From Breme we passed four miles through wild fields, yielding some little
corn, and thick woods, and in six hours space came to a poor house; where
each man paid for dinner five lubecke shillings. Here those which carried any
merchandise paid tole: and one man having a pack which a man might carry on
his shoulder, paid four lubecke shillings for the same: but all that go to
study in Universities, or be no Merchants, are free from this imposition. After
dinner we passed three miles in five hours space to Furd, where each man paid
for his supper five lubecke shillings. The next day from two of the clock in
the morning to seven, we passed three miles through a heath and woods of oak,
and came to Stood, where each man paid for his Wagon from Breme twenty two
Lubecke shillings. At Stood I paid for my dinner in a Dutch Inn four Lubecke
shillings and a half, and for a steifkin or measure of Rhenish wine, half a
doller. I briefly pass over this journey upon the seacoast of Germany,
because I formerly discribed the same.

The one and twenty of July, I passed in four hours space by boat five miles
to Hamburge, and paid for my passage by water three Lubecke shillings, for my
supper four, and one for my bed. Early in the morning I passed six miles in
six hours space, through wild fenny fields, woods of oak, and some few
fields of corn, and came to the Village Altslow, seated in a bogge, whereof it
has the name; where I paid for my dinner five Lubecke shillings and a half.
Give me leave to tell you a ridiculous toy, yet strange and true: At Hamburge
gate leading to Lubecke, we found a dog that followed us, and some passengers
of credit assured me, that for many years this dog had lien at that gate,
and every day without intermission, watching the first Coach that came forth,
had followed the same to this village Altslow, being the bayting place at
noone, and after dinner had returned back to Hamburge gate, with another Coach
coming from Lubecke, for Coaches pass daily between those Cities.

After dinner we passed four miles in four hours space, through hills more
thick with woods, but in many places bearing good corn, and came to Lubecke.
For my place in the Coach this day I paid twenty lubecke shillings, and this
night for my supper and bed, I paid six lubecke shillings. Here I bought the
foureteenth Book of Amadis de Gaul, in the Dutch tongue, to practice the
same: for these Books are most eloquently translated into the Dutch, and fit
to teach familiar language; and for this Book I paid eighteen lubecke
shillings, and for the binding four; and for a Map of Europe to guide me in my
journey, I paid fourteen lubecke shillings: Also I paid for a measure of
Rhenish wine five lubecke shillings, and as much for a measure of Spanish wine.
From Lubcke I passed two miles in three hours space, through fruitful hills of
corn, and some woods of oak to the village Tremuren, and paid for my coach
the fourth part of a Doller (which notwithstanding uses to be hired for five
lubecke shillings) and for my supper I paid four lubecke shillings. I formerly
showed that this village is the Haven, where the great ships use to be vnladed,
and from thence to be carried vpto lie at Lubecke in the winter.

Here I took ship to sail into Denmark, upon the Balticke Sea, so called,
because it is compassed by the Land, as it were with a girdle. This sea does
not at all ebb and flow, or very little, after it has passed in by the
straight of Denmark, being more then twenty four miles long, so as upon the
shoares of Prussen, Muscaw, and Suetia, this sea seems little to be moved, and
many times is frozen with ice, from the shore far into the sea; and the waves
thereof once stirred with the winds, are very high, neither is the water of
this sea any thing so salt as otherwhere, so as the ships sailing therein, do
sink deeper at least three spans then in the German Ocean, as manifestly
appears by the white sides of the ships above water when they come out of this
sea, and enter the said Ocean. And this will not seem strange to any, who have
seen an egg put into salt pits, and how it swimmes, being borne up with the
salt water. The Master of the Lubecke ship in which I passed to Denmark, gave
me beer for four lubeck shillings; for which the Dutchmen and Danes drinking
more largely, paid but one lubecke shilling more, and every man had provided
victuals for himself. I paid for my passage twenty four lubecke shillings,
and gave four to the mariners. From Lubecke they reckon twenty four miles to
Falsterboaden, and from thence seven miles to Coppenhagen, so called as the
Haven of Merchants. We left upon our lefthand toward the South, a little Island
called Munde, and (as I remember) the third day of August, landed at
Drakesholme, being one mile from Coppenhagen, whether I passed in a Wagon
through some pastures and barren corn fields; and near the City I passed over
the Coppenhagen
Haven from one Island to another. I paid for my Wagon three lubecke shillings.

At our entrance of the City, on the East Side, is the Kings Castle, where the
Court lies, especially in winter time. On this side, the City lies upon the
sea, and there is the said Haven, as likewise on the North-side the sea is
little distant from the City. When I entered the gates, the guard of soldiers
examined me strictly, and the common people, as if they had never seen a
stranger before, shouted at me after a barbarous fashion; among which people
were many mariners, which are commonly more rude in such occasions, and in all
conversation. The City is of a round form, in which, or in the Kings Castle, I
observed no beauty or magnificence. The Castle is built of freestone in a
quadrangle. The City is built of timber and clay; and it has a fair market
place, and is reasonably well fortified. Here I paid for three meals and
breakefast eight lubecke shillings, and as much for beer. The King at this
time lay at Roschild, purposing shortly to go into the Dukedom of Holst,
where he had appointed a meeting of the gentlemen at Flansburge, to receive
their homage there, which upon Roschild.
old piuiledges they had refused to do unto him in Denmark.

Therefore I went four miles in four hours space, through a wild hilly
Country, to Roschild, so called of the Kings Fountain; and my self and one
companion paid twenty lubecke shillings for our Wagon: and though it were the
month of August, yet the wind blowing strong from the North, and from the Sea,
I was very cold, as if it had been then winter. Roschild has a Bishop, and
though it be not walled, has the title of a City; but well deserves to be
numbered among fair and pleasant Villages. Here they show a whet stone, which
Albrecht King of Suetia, sent to Margaret Queen of Denmark, despising her as
a woman, and in scoff bidding her to whet her swords therewith: but this
Queen took the said King prisoner in that war, and so held him till death.
Here I paid seven Danish shillings for my supper. In the chancell of the Church
is a monument of black and white stone for this Queen Margaret and her
daughter, and the Danes so reverence this Queen, as they have here to show the
apparel she used to wear. In this Church are the sepulchers of the Kings,
whereof one erected by Frederick, for Christianus his father, is of black
Marble and Alablaster, curiously carved, having his statua kneeling before a
Crucifix, and hung round about with sixteen black flags, and one red.

Having seen the King and the Courtiers, my self and my companion next day
returned to Coppenhagen, each of us paying for the wagon ten Lubeck
shillings: and here I paid for my supper six Lubeck shillings, and three for
beer.

From hence I passed by sea, four miles in five hours space, to Elsinure, and
paid for my passage eight Lubeck shillings, and for my supper eight Danish
shillings. And because I was to return hither, to take ship for Dantzke, I
passed the next morning three miles in four hours space; through Hills of
corn but somewhat barren, and woods of Beech, to Fredericksburg, and having
but one companion with me, we paid for our wagon thither, and so to
Coppenhagen, each of us twenty two Lubeck Fredericksburg.
shillings. Here the King has a Palace, and a little Park walled in, where
(among other foreign beasts) were kept some fallow Dear, transported hither
out of England, the twenty four year of Queen Elizabeth's reign. I paid for
my dinner four Danish shillings, and as much for beer.

In the afternoon we passed five miles in six hours, through barren fields of
corn, and groves of Beech and hasel-nuts, to Cappenhagen, and by the way we
saw a Cross, set up in memory of a waggoner, who having drunk too much, drove
his wagon so fast, as he ouerturned it on the side of a Hill, and himself
broke his neck. The waggoners have an appointed place at Coppenhagen, where
they have a stable for their horses for two Danish shillings a night, but
themselves buy hay and oats. And the next day by noone, they must return to
their dwellings, though they go empty, when no passengers are to be found.

From hence, my self and one companion, hired a wagon for twelve Lubeck
shillings each of us, to Elsinure, being five miles, whither we came in five
hours, fetching many circuits upon the sea coasts.

This is a poor village, but much frequented by seafaring men, by reason of
the straight sea, called the Sownd; where the King of Denmark has laid so
great impositio^ Elsinure.
upon ships and goods coming out of the Balticke sea, or brought into the
same, as this sole profit passes all the revenues of his Kingdom. In this
village a strong Castle called Croneburg lies upon the mouth of the Straight,
to which on the other side of this Narrow sea, in the Kingdom of Norway,
another Castle is opposite, called Elsburg, and these Castles keep the
Straight, that no ship can pass into the Baltic sea, or out of it, having not
first paid these impositions. They say there is another passage between two
Islands (for all the Kingdom of Denmark consists of little Islands) but the same
is forbidden upon penalty of confiscation of all the goods. And they report
that three ships in a dark fog passed this straight without paying any
thing; but after, this being made known to the Kings ministers, at the return
of the said ships all their goods were confiscated. In respect of the Danes
scrupulous and jealous nature, I did with great difficulty, (putting on a
Merchants habit, and giving a greater reward then the favor deserved,)
obtain to enter Croneburg Castle, which was built four square, and has only
one gate on the East side, where it lies upon the straight. Above this gate is
a chamber in which the King uses to eat, and two chambers wherein the King and
Queen lie apart. Under the fortification of the Castle round about, are
stables for horses, and some rooms for like purposes. On the Southside toward
the Baltic sea, is the largest road for ships. And upon this side is the
prison, and above it a short gallery. On the West side toward the village is
the Church of the Castle, and above it a very fair gallery, in which the King
uses to feast at solemn times. On the North side is the prospect partly upon
the Island, and partly upon the Narrow sea, which reaches twenty four miles to
the German Ocean. And because great store of ships pass this way in great
Fleets, of a hundredth more or less together: this prospect is most pleasant to
all men, but most of all to the King, seeing so many ships, whereof not one
shall pass, without adding somewhat to his treasure. On this side lie two
chambers, which are called the King of Scotland his chambers, ever since his
Majesty lodged there, when he wooed and married his Queen. The hangings
thereof were of read cloch, and the chaires and stools covered with the same,
but they said that the rich furniture was laid up in the Kings absence. The
Haven will receive great number of ships, and it has Croneburge Castle on
the North side, the Castle of Elsburg on the East side, and Zealand (the chief
Island of the Kingdom) on the West side, and the Island Wheen on the South side.

To which Island the long straight or narrow sea lies opposite toward the
North, leading into the German Ocean. This Island Wheen is a mile long, and not
altogether so broad, having only one grove in it. This solitary place, King
Fredrick, Father to Christianus now reigning, gave to a Gentleman called
Tugo-Brahe for his dwelling, who being a famous Astronomer lived here
solitarily at this time, and was said to have some Church livings for his
maintenance, and to live unmarried, but keeping a Concubine, of whom he had
many children, and the reason of his so living, was thought to be this; because
his nose having been cut off in a quarrel, when he studied in an Vniuersitiy
of Germany, he knew himself thereby disabled to marry any Gentlewoman of his
own quality. It was also said that the gentlemen less respected him for living
in that sort, and did not acknowledge his sons for Gentlemen. King Frederick
also gave this learned Gentleman of his free gift, many and very fair
Astronomicall instruments, and he living in a pleasant Island, wherein no man
dwelt but his family, wanted no pleasure which a contemplative man could
desire. Besides the aforesaid instruments, this Gentleman had a very fair
Library, full of excellent books, and a like fair still-house. Besides not
far from his house, he had a little round house of great beauty, in which he
did exercise his speculation, the cover thereof being to be removed at
pleasure, so as lying with his face upward, he might in the night time fully
behold the Stars, or any of them. In this little house all famous Astronomers
were painted, and the following Verses were added, each to the picture, to
which they belong.

Sulueta Heroes: vetus O Timochare salve,
Ether is ante alios ause subire polos.
God save ye worthies: old Timocherus
I greet thee, more then many venturous,
To mount the Stars and show them unto us.
Tu quoque demensus Solis Lunaeque recursus,
Hipparche, and quot quot sidera Olympus habet.
And thou Hipparchus, thou did measure even,
The course of Sun, Moon, and all Stars of heaven
Antiquos superare volens, Ptolomee labores,
Orbibus and numeris promptius astra locas.
Ptolomy, thou to pass old ages reach,
The Numbers and the Orbs do better teach.
Emendare aliquid satis Albategne studebas,
Syderaconatus post habuere tuos.
Thou Albategnus somewhat yet to mend
Did strive, but were prevented by thine end.
Quod labor and studium reliquis, tibi contulit Aurum
Alphonse, vt tantis annumerere viris.
These got by pains and study, thou by gold
Alphonsus, with such men to be inrol'd.
Curriculis tritis diffise Copernice, terram
Innitam, astriferum flectere cogis iter.
Copernicus, thou old said sawes did doubt,
Thou make heaven stand, and earth turn round about.
In the best place this Gentleman Tugo Brahe had set his own picture, with the
following Verses;

Quaesitis veterum and proprijs, normoe astra subegi,
Quantiid: Iudictum posteritatis eret.
With old Rules and my own, the Stars I place,
Which aftertimes, as it deserves, shall grace.
Many Instruments are there placed by him, which himself invented, and he
has made a solemn dedication of the house to the ages to come, with earnest
prayers that they will not pull down this Monument.

The Danes think this Island Wheen to be of such importance, as they have an
idle fable, that a King of England should offer for the possession of it, as
much scarlet cloth as would cover the same, with a Rose-noble at the corner of
each cloth. Others tell a fable of like credit, that it was once sold to a
Merchant, whom they scoffed when he came to take possession, bidding him take
away the earth he had bought. The great reuenew exacted in this straight, has
given occasion to these and the like fables. And in truth, if either the King
of Suetia, or the free City of Lubeck, had the possession of this Island, and
were fortified therein, they might easily command this passage, and extort what
they list, from the Merchants passing that way, and perhaps conquer the parts
adjoining; but the possession thereof were altogether unprofitable for any
Prince, whose Territories lie out of the Sound, the entrance whereof is forbid
by the two foresaid strong Castles. But lest I should be as foolish as they, I
return to my purpose. And first give me leave to mention, that there lies a
City not far distant, in the Kingdom of Norway, which is called London, as
the chief City in England is called.

Upon Sunday, the twenty six of August, in the year 1593, I took an English
An. 1593.
ship here, to sail into Prussen, having first bought for my victuals half a
lamb for twelve Danish shillings, thirty eggs for six shillings, and some few
pots of Spanish wine, for forty two Danish shillings, with some other small
provisions. From Elsinure to Dantzk, they reckon eighty English miles. As Soon
as we were come out of the harbor, we saw two ships sailing two contrary
ways, and yet having both a forewind, which sometimes happens upon the shore,
as mariners know. For of these two contrary winds, the one is airy, which
holds when you are gone into the maine, the other is from the earth, and in
short time fails at the very shore: which event we presently saw with our
eyes, one of the ships going fairly on his course, the other casting anchor.
The English ship in which I went, was called the Antilope, being of one hundred
fifty tuns, or thereabouts, and one Master Bodley was the Master thereof, who
showed me manifest signs, where his ship in two places had been struck with
lightning; the first whereof passed into the pumpe, and rent it, but coming to
the water, was by the nature thereof carried upward, and coming out at the top
of the pumpe, made two little holes; then passing to the great Mast, rent it,
and made a great crany therein, from the hatches to the top. The second struck
the top of the said maine Mast, and again rent it, in such wise as it would
scarcely bear sail, till we might come to Dantzk, where the best Mastes are
sold at a good rate. The first day we sailed in the Baltic sea, some five
miles with a scant wind, and cast anchor near Copenhagen. With a fair wind
and good gaile, Mariners usually sail some three Dutch leagues in an hour.
On Monday early, we sailed along the shore three miles to Falsterboden. On
Tuesday early, we sailed eighteen miles to the Island Brentholm, and upon our
left hands saw the land in two places, and there sounding with our plummet,
sand of Amber stuck thereunto. The same day by noone, we sailed the length of
that Island; and upon Wednesday, by three of the clock in the morning, having
sailed thirty miles, we passed by Rose-head, being a Promentory (...) Dantzk.

On Thurs-day by eight of the clock in the morning, having sailed eighteen
miles, we came to a Land called Rettell, and entered the Port of Meluin, where
the water was scarce two fadome deep, our ship drawing one fadome and a half:
the entry was narrow, and there were many booyes floting upon shoales and
sands; and the weather being calm, we were drawn in by a boat with Oars. In
like cases ships use to draw themselves in, by the casting and weighing of
Anchors, with great labor, and flow riddance of way. From Kettell we passed
ten miles, and came to the Port of Meluin. Meluin.
Iu the aforesaid entry of the River, on the right hand toward the West, we
saw Dantzke seated not far from the sea shore, where it has a haven, but not
so safe as this: and toward the North-east in the same place a channel
runs up to Konigsberg, the Court of the Duke of Prussen. The Port of Meluin
is searce ten foot deep, but our ship passed through the mud, like a plow upon
land. This port is a little distant from the City, on the North-side, where we
entered by a fair large street, called Martgasse, lying thence toward the
South. Prussen of old was subject to the order of the Teutonicke Knights, but
by agreement made between the King of Poland and the Margraue or Marquis of
Brandeburg, Master of the said order, part of the province was given to the
said Marquis and his heirs, with title of Duke, under homage to the King of
Poland, with condition that for want of heir male, it should return to the
Kingdom of Poland; and the other part was then united to the said Kingdom:
but Dantzke and Meluin remained free Cities, acknowledging the King of Poland
for their Protector, for which cause they give him many customs, and permit
his Officer to abide in the City, ard receive the same. Meluin is a little and
fair City lately compassed with new walls, and at this time grew rich by the
English Merchants, having their staple in the same. They give good fare for
four grosh a meal; and he that paies for two meals in the day, may besides
have meat or drink between meals, at pleasure, without paying any thing. The
same evening we landed at Meluin, our Mariners staying in the ship,
entertained other English Mariners coming aboard; and according to their
custom, giving them a piece when they departed: it happened that the piece
being of iron, brake; and therewith cut the Cook off by the middle, and rent
all the prow of the ship. The English Merchants at Meluin had no Preacher,
though the Citizens gave them free exercise of religion: so that how so ever
they excused in, by reason that learned Preachers could hardly be drawn to
come so far for means to live, yet I thought them not free of blame in this
point; because our Merchants further distant in Asia, and living under the
Turks Empire, found means by their bounty to have learned Preachers. Neither
indeed did I ever observe in any other place ( Italy excepted) that our
Merchants wanted Preachers, where they held their staples.

From Meluin I went ten miles in one day to Dantzke, and we being only two
conforts; Dantzke.
paid each of us a Doller for our Coach. In the morning we went six miles, and
by the way passed the River Begot, coming out of the river Vistula, where our
Coachman paid three grosh to have his Coach carried over a damme. Beyond this
river we entered the territory of the King of Poland, and passing all this way
through fruitful come fields, and rich meadows, and pastures, in a Country
abounding with towns and Villages, we dined in a Village where we two by
covenant paying for our coachman, spent each of us eigh grosh. In the
afternoon we passed the rest of the way, one mile in the-Kings territory,
where we passed another damme of the river Vistula, and three miles to Dantzke
in the territory of the same City. The King of Poland at this time was at the
Port of Dantzke, called Der Mind, an English mile from the City, expecting a
wind to sail into his Kingdom of Suecin, and had with him his Queen, and
many Ladies and Courtiers. Therefore desirous to see the King and the Queen,
with their train? I walked the next morning to this Port, which is barred with
a mountain of sand, so as the ships must unlade in the road, before they can
enter this Haven; neither is any village built there, but only one Inn, in
which the King (...) with all his train: but beyond the water there is a
strong Castle of a round son. From hence after dinner I returned on foot to
Dantzke. The next day the King had a good wind, but before this (as those of
the Romish religion are very superstitious) the King and the Queen (being of
the house of Austria) while sometimes they thought Monday, sometimes Friday, to
be unlucky days, had lost many fair winds. The City of Dantzke is a very
fair City, and howsoever few ages past, they had not any houses built of
stone, yet at this time many were built of freestone, and the rest of brick,
with great beauty and magnificence, being six or seven roofes high. And they
had public gardens for sports, banquets, and exercises, which are very
pleasant. They have a very fair Senate House, called Hoff, that is, the Court;
and the Citizens have a strange fashion, to put off their hats when they pass
by it. From the market place being round (in which the King of Poland lodged
some days) to the gate Hochethore (being richly engraued) lies a very fair
street called Longgasse) and leads up toward the Mountains hanging over the
City. The famous River Vistula does not enter the City, but passes by it on
the East Side, and running toward the North, falls into the Balticke sea, But a
little brook enters the City on the South Side, and runs through it toward
the North. There is a fair water conduit, vulgarly called Wasserkunst, where
by a mill the waters are drawn up into a cesterne, from whence they are
carried by pipes into all the streets and private houses; besides that many
Citizens have their private wels. The aforesaid brook drives many mils, among
which, one for the grinding of corn, belongs to the Senate, and it has
eighteen rooms, and brings into the public treasure every hour a gold
gulden, and another without any help of hands, saweth boords, having an iron
wheel, which does not only drive the saw, but hooketh in, and turns the
boords to the saw. The Garners for laying up of corn called speiker, are very
fair, and very many lying together, in which the Citizens lay up corn brought
out of Poland, and according to the wants of Europe, carry it into many
kingdoms, and many times relieve fruitful Provinces in time of casual dearth.
The Queen of Poland came in a disguifed habit to see these garners: and they
have a law that no man may carry fire or a lighted candle into them. In the
Church called Parkirk, the resurrection of our Lord is painted with great art,
and the same again is figured under a globe of glass, which kind of painting
is here in use. This City compassed with one wall, contains three Cities,
governed by three Senates, out of which one chief Senate is gathered to
govern the whole City; and these three Cities are called Furstat, that is, the
fore City, and Alistat, that is, the old City, and Reichstat, that is, the
Empires City. The whole-City united, lies in length from the South to the
North, and upon the South Side is Furstat, where the foresaid brook dividing
the City does enter, and there is the aforesaid water conduit, and without the
walls a fair village or suburb called Scotland, in which there is a sanctuary,
which offenders may enter, paying a gulden to the Bishop; and none but
Artificers, and for the most part shoomakers, d well in this suburb. On this
side, and toward the East and North, without the walls, lie plain fields,
which may be drowned at pleasure. Upon the East Side within the walls, are the
aforesaid garners for corn. On the West Side without the walls, great
mountains hang over the City, and upon them Stephen King of Poland encamped,
when he besieged the City, which has for defense very high walls on the same
side. Upon the North-side in a corner lies Altstat, between which and Furstat
on the South Side, lies the chief City Reichstat, in the midst whereof is
the aforesaid market place, and a public armory; besides that great Ordinance
is planted upon the walls round about the City. I said that from this market
place, the fair street Longgasse lies to the gate Reichstat. Between
Reichstat and Altstat, lie the foresaid two mils, to grind corn, and saw
boords, both (in my opinion) very rare. The City of Dantzke, from the Roman
superstition, has the same Saint for protector of their City, which England
has; namely, Saint George, whom they carry in their flags and banners. And by
the way let me remember, that the state of Genea in Italy, and the Island of
Chios, vulgarly Zio, in the sea near Constantinople, carry also the same Saint
in their flagges. At Dantzke I paid fiuegrosh, a meal and being to pass into
Poland, where good meat is not in all places to be had, I carried some
provision in the Coach, and paid for two hens five grosh, and for each measure
of wine (all kinds being of like price) I paid ten grosh, which measure is
called a stoop, and is somewhat bigger then the English guart.

The ninth of September, after the old style (for the new style is used in
Poland,) I took

The ninth of September, after the old style (for the new style is used in
Poland) I took my journey to Crakaw, and we being four consorts, hired a
Coach for forty guldens. The first day in the morning we passed five miles in
five hours space, through fruitful hills of corn, and only one wood, in that
part of the Dukedom of Prussen, which belongs unto the King of Poland, and
came to the City Diersaw, by which the river Vistula runs. After dinner we
passed three miles, through a wood and a Fen, to the Village Zunzane, inhabited
by Hollanders, who having dried the Fen, made the fields much more fruitful.
And from thence the same night having passed the river Vistula, we went half a
mile to Gratenis, a City belonging to the Sborosky, a family of Gentlemen. The
second day in the morning we went five miles, through a wood and fruitful
fields of corn, to a little City Colmersea, where that day was a meeting of
the neighbor Gentlemen. If you except Crakaw, and the greater Cities, the
building in these parts is poor, being of mere dirt in the Villages, and of
timber and clay in the better towns, the houses being covered with straw, or
tiles of wood, and the gentlemen's houses be far distant one from the other,
and of no beauty. After dinner we went four miles through fruitful fields of
corn, to the City Toarn. Hitherto we had given money to a Hollander, one of
our consorts, for the paying of our expenses, and now by his account each of us
had spent three guldens and a half, for he had provided wine and such things
which we could not find in Villages, to be carried in our Coach. In this City
we supped at an Ordinary, and five of us paid two dollers. The river Vistula
passes by this City, and for passing the same by a bridge, we paid for our
Coach two grosh, and then entering Massouia, a Province of the Kingdom of
Poland, the third day in the morning we passed three miles through a wood of
fur, and one mile through corn fields, and I have omitted what I paid for my
dinner. In the afternoon we passed three miles through a wild plain, and
woods of oak to Britzoll, where I likewise omitted my expenses. The fourth day
in the morning we passed five miles, through corn fields and woods of oak, to
Quodonab, where I forgot my expense. I formerly said that four of us had hired
a Coach from Dantzke to Crakaw, but the horses being but two, were extremely
weary; so as one of our company having a letter to take post horses (if so I
may call poor iades) paying a grosh for each horse every mile; which Letter is
vulgarly called Podwoda-briefe. I was easily induced to leave the Coach, and
bear him company; and they telling us that we had now passed more then half
the way, we agreed so, as we two who left the Coach, should pay each of us six
guldens for the same. But the Hollander ouer-reached us; for we had not gone
half the way, and yet paid more then half the price which we should have paid
for the whole journey. This done, we two drawn upon a sledge, passed two miles
through corn fields that afternoon to a poor Village, and paid for our
passage two grosh. The fifth day in the morning hiring a country Wagon, and
two horses at the same rate, we passed two miles through fields of hops, and
sandy fields of corn, and two woods of fur, to Lonzchizcha, and from thence
five miles through woods and sandy fields, to another village, and paid for our
sledge half a grosh each mile, and for a horse for two miles six grosh, and
for three miles seven grosh. Here we invited two Polackes to dinner, yet both
together spent only four grosh and a half for us and them, for we had ten
eggs for a grosh, and all other victuals very cheap. After dinner we hired
two horses, and a Country Wagon for eight grosh, and passed four miles
through a stony way, and sandy fields of corn, to Peterkaw, where the King
has a Castle, and there we bought for our selves, flesh, bread, and beer, for
our supper, at a very cheap rate, and giving one grosh to the Hostess for
dressing our meat, and for butter and fire, she was very well content with it.
The sixth day in the morning we passed five miles, and in the afternoon two
miles, with the same Wagon, for which we paid seven grosh, and the same
horses, for which we paid fourteen grosh. And we passed through woods of
high fur trees, and some few fields of corn. Our meat we bought our selves,
and as formerly our Hostess dressed it, and we fetched our beer without
doors. I remember we paid three grosh for a goose, two for a partridge, two
for a loyne of mutton, and three for a pigge. They sold a bushel of oats for
two grosh, which at Thoarn they sold for six grosh. In these parts were great
store of hop-yards. After dinner we passed three miles through woody hills, and
corn fields, and paid for our horses and a country wagon twelve grosh.

The seventh day in the morning, we passed to a poor village four miles,
through fruitful hills of corn, and many woods of fur, and one of oak, and
we hired our country wagon with two horses, for fourteen grosh. Further we
went three miles to another village, through hills of corn, and a heath full of
woods, and paid for one horse and a wagon, six grosh. After dinner we passed
to a village three miles, through fruitful hills of corn; and by the way we
might see a stately Gentleman's house, and Gentlemen hawking in the fields: and
I remember not in all my long travel, ever to have met hawkers or hunters in
the fields, but only here, and once in Bohemia. In this village the King
has a Castle. The eight day, in the morning, we passed forward with the same
horses and wagon, which we had in the afternoon before, and went two miles to
Pnecho, and we paid for our horses and wagon fifteen grosh, and gave one to
the waggoner. Here the King has another fair Castle. From hence we passed two
miles to a village, through mountains and corn fields, and paid for two
horses and a wagon four grosh, and gave to the waggoner procuring our horses
one grosh.

The same day we went three miles, through little mountains of corn, to
Crakaw, and paid for two horses and a wagon six grosh. Here we lodged with
the Crakaw.
Fleming, consort of our journey, and had our diet after the Dutch manner, and
price. Fortified Cities, are very rare in Poland, they placing their strength
in their swords and horsemen, rather then in walls. Of all the Cities, Crakaw
is the chief, where the King and his Council reside. It is seated in a
plain, having mountains on all sides, but somewhat distant, and it is
compassed with two walls of stone, and a dry ditch. The building is very
fair, of free stone four roofes hye, but covered with tiles of wood for the
most part. It is of a round form, but somewhat longer from the East to the
West. In the midst of the City is a large market place quadrangular, wherein is
the Cathedral Church, and in the midst of the market place is the Senate house
for the City, about which are many shops of Merchants. Upon the East side of
the City is the Kings Castle, seated on a hill; being fair, and high built,
almost quadrangular, but somewhat more long then broad, and lying open on the
South side, without any building above the wall. On the East side be the
Chambersof the King and Queen, with galleries adjoining. On the North side is
a fair gallery; some forty five walking paces long, where they use to feast
and dance. On the West side are the chambers of the Queen Dowager; from whence
are private stairs to the gate of the Castle; by which the French King, Henry
the third, stole away secretly into France. On the same side is a Chapel, in
the which the Kings are buried. Upon the East side of this City, where this
Castle is seated, lie four suburbs; namely, the Jews little City, and
Cagmen, which is divided by the river Vistula, from the other two, called
Stradam and the Stews. And Stradam belongs to the City, but the rest have
their own Magistrates and privileges. Toward the South and South-west, lies
the suburb Garbatz, belonging to the City, which of late was burnt in the
civil war, by the forces of Zamosky, one of the Palatines, and Chancellor of
the Kingdom, defending the Election of Sigismund now King, against Maximilian
of Austria, chosen King by another party. On the North side are the suburbs
Biskop, and Clepart, which have their own Magistrates.

From hence being to take my journey for Italy, I bought a horse for eighteen
Guldens, and he that sold him, according to the manner there used, caused his
bridle to be put on, and so by the same delivered the horse into my hands. I
paid fifteen grosh for a pair of shoes, fifty for a pair of boots, nine
for spurs, two guldens and a half for a saddle, a gulden and a half for other
furniture for my journey, nine grosh for stirrups, eight grosh for four horse
shoes, and eight grosh for each bushel of oats. An Italian Gentleman being
to return into Italy, bought likewise a horse; and with this fair companion I
took my journey. The first day toward evening we rode two miles through
fruitful hills of corn, to a Country house, where I paid for my supper two
grosh, for hay a grosh and a half, for a quarter of a bushel of oats, two
grosh, and gave to the Ostler half a grosh. The second day in the morning we
rode three miles, through woods of fur, to a village, where I paid for my
dinner two grosh, for hay half a grosh, for the third part of a bushel of
oats a grosh and a half. After dinner we rode one mile and a half through a
great wood, having the Mountains of Hungary on our left hand, and passing the
river Vistula, we rode a mile through fenny fields, and woods of fur and
beech, and came to a little City Opsenson, where I paid for my supper eight
grosh, and for some three English pintes of wine five grosh, for beer a grosh
and a half, for a third part of a bushel of oats, nine grosh, and for hay
and straw a grosh and a half, and this City was subject to a Gentleman of
Poland.

The third day in the morning, we rode three miles and a half, through fields
somewhat ouerflowed, but fruitful in corn, and a wood of fur, to Plesua,
subject to the Barrons of Promnitz, and seated in Silesia, a Province of the
Dutch Empire; for after one miles riding we came out of Poland, into the said
Province, which is subject to the Emperor, as likewise Morauia is, by his
right as he is King of Bohemia: but in Silesia they speak Dutch, and Morauia
has his own language, little differing from that of Bohemia. Also in our way
we passed the river Vistula by boat, and another arm thereof by a bridge. Here
the Barrons of Promnitz have a Castle, wherein they reside; and here I paid
for my dinner six grosh, for beer one, for hay and a third part of a bushel
of oats two grosh, and for a measure of wine (somewhat bigger then the English
quart) ten grosh. After dinner we rode two miles, through fruitful fields of
corn, to a little City subject to the Emperor, (not by large subjection, but
proper right to all the Revenues of that Territory) as he is King of Bohemia:
and I paid for supper three grosh, for a third part of a bushel of oats with
hay and straw five grosh. The fourth day we rode two miles in the morning,
being now entered into Morauia, where the miles are exceeding long, as they be
in Bohemia: and we passed through most fruitful hills of corn, and some woods,
and came to a little village, seated a little beyond the City Freestat,
belonging to the Dukes of Tesch, and here I paid for my dinner three grosh,
and as much for my horse-meat. After dinner we rodetwo miles through hills and
mountains, fruitful of corn, and some woods of oaks: for Morauia is a
pleasant Country, very fruitful, and full of towns and villages; and we
came to Ostrenam, where I paid for my supper three grosh, for beer two, for
my horse-meat four and a half. The fifth day in the morning we rode three
miles, through fruitful hills of corn to the village Boteuisa; being very
pleasant and full of orchards, and subject to a Gentleman of that Country. By
the way we passed on horseback two arms of the river Odera, which has his
head three miles distant. Here we dined with the Preacher (or Minister) of
the Town, because the Host of the Inn was newly dead; and I paid for my
dinner four grosh, for beer one grosh, and for horse-meat two grosh.
Afterdinner we rode two miles, through most fruitful hills of corn, to a
pleasant village (as all Morauia is pleasant and fertile) and I paid for my
supper five grosh, and four for my horse meat. The sixth day in the morning we
rode three miles, through fruitful hills of corn, having woody Mountains on
both hands; and in the midst of the way, passed by the City Granitz, and came
to Leipny. The Cities in these parts are built with Arches half over the
streets, so as in the greatest rain, a man may pass in the streets under them
with a dry foot, and such is the building of this little City, where in some
thirty families of Jews did dwell. Here I paid for my dinner four grosh, and
for my horse-meat two grosh (hitherto I mean groshes of Poland) After dinner
we rode a mile and a half in a paued way, with corn fields on both hands, to
the City Speron; where I paid for my supper five grosh, (I mean now, and
hereafter groshes of Morauia,) and for my horse-meat three grosh: and here I
paid for an Orange two grosh. In this journey through Poland, and from Cracaw
to this place, we had here the first bed, having before lodged upon benches in
a warm stoue. The seventh day in the morning, we rode two very long miles,
through most fruitful hills of corn, and rich pastures, to a village, having
by the way passed by the City of Creitzon (wherein many Jews dwelt) and by
very many villages: and here I paid for my dinner three grosh, and for my
horse-meat one grosh, for a measure of wine like an English pint, three
creitzers After dinner we rode a mile and a half, through most fruitful hills
of corn, to a place called, The Jews village, beyond the Episcopal City
Vascon, and I paid for my supper two grosh, and for my horse-meat three grosh
and a half. The eight day in the morning we rode two miles, going much out of
our way, and passed through most fruitful hills of corn, and pleasant
vineyards, to Nimsich, and I paid for my dinner four grosh, for my horse-meat
one grosh and a half. After dinner we rode half a mile, through hills planted
with vines, to Tracht, and I paid for my supper six grosh, for my horse-meat
two and a half, and for beer to wash my horses feet, six creitzers.

The ninth day in the morning, we rode four miles to a village, through hills
of corn, and in the mid way were the confines of Morania, and of Austria into
which we now entered. Here I paid for my dinner fourteen creitzers, and three
for my horse-meat. The vintage being now at hand, when we came from our Innes
in the morning, we used to carry bread with us, and so to break our fast with
bunches of grapes gathered by the way. After dinner we rode two miles, through
hills and mountains most fruitful of corn and wine, to Pasdorffe, and I paid
for my supper eighteen creitzers, and nine for my horse-meat. The tenth day in
the morning we rode two miles and a half; through hills of corn, and many
woods, to a village, not far from Vlrich-kirke, and here I omitted my expense.

After dinner we rode two miles and a half through a very large plain,
fruitful of corn and pasture, with many pleasant woods, and compassed round
about with mountains, and came to Vienna, vulgarly called Wien. Near the City
on the North side the river Danow runs by, from the East to the West, three
arms whereof close Vienna.
together (with some ground between, which many times is ouerflowed) we
passed by three bridges, whereof one has twenty nine arches, the other fifty
seven, and the third fifteen, each of those arches being some eighteen
walking paces long. Between the second bridge, and the third next to the City,
is a pleasant grove, and good part of the ground under the bridges is many
times dry; but when the river rises, it does not only fill the all beds, but
ouerfloweth the fields on both sides. At the gate of Wien, each man paid for
his horse two pochanels; and when we came to the Inn, the Host sent our
names written to the Magistrate. Wien the metropolitan City of Austria, is a
famous Fort against the Turks, upon the confines of Austria, which if they
should once gain, their horsemen might suddenly spoil the open Countries of
Bohemia, and Morauta, and good part of Salesia. The City is of a round form,
and upon the North side there is an ascent to it upon a hill, otherwise without
the walls on all sides the ground is plain, except the West side, where
mountains lie a good distance from the City, and upon that side the Sultan of
the Turks encamped, upon the hills near the gallows, when in the time of the
Emperor Rodulphua, he besieged the City, or rather came to view it, with
purpose to besiege it the next summer. The streets are narrow, but the building
is stately, of free stone. Two Towers of the Church are curiously engraven, the
like whereof is not in Germany, except the Tower or steeple of Strashurg. The
common report is, that two chief workmen had great emulation in building
them; and that one having finished his Tower, found means to break the neck
of the other, lest his workmanship should excel that he had done. One of the
Towers some three years past, was shaken with an earthquake, and indeed the
houses of this City are many times shaken therewith, and they have a Prophecy
of old, that this City shall be destroyed with an earth quake. It is dangerous
to walk the streets in the night, for the great number of disordered people,
which are easily found upon any confines, especially where such an army lies
near, as that of Hungary, governed by no strict discipline. Ernest as and
Mathias, Archdukes of Austria, and brothers to the Emperor Rodulphus, did at
this time lie here, both in one house, and did eat at one table, and in the
time of their meals, it was free for strangers and others to come into the
room. I stayed three days a Wien to ease my weary horse, and I paid each
meal twenty four creitzers, for oats the day and night eighteen, and in
like sort for hay six creitzers.

From hence we took our journey for Paduoa in Italy, and the first day after
dinner werode six miles, in a plain of vineyards, pastures, and corn fields,
with some woods, to a village, where I paid fifteen creitzers for my supper,
and eight for my horse. The next day in the morning we rode four miles,
through a wild plain, by the City Newstat, and not far thence came to
Newkirke, where I paid twenty four creitzers for my dinner, four for my
horse, and twelve for a measure of wine, like our English quart. Henceforward
we had no more beer, but only wine set on the table. After dinner we rode
three miles through woods and mountains, planted with vines, and a rich valley
of pasture and corn, all in a stony soil, to Schwatzen. I observed that the
horses we met laded with wine, had their noses covered, which they said was
done, lest they should be overcome with the vapor thereof: This City is seated
between most high mountains, in a narrow straight, hewn out of a Rock, and
shut up with a wall of stone. Here I paid for my supper twenty creitzers, and
for drinking after supper (vulgarly schlaffdruncke, that is, sleeping drink)
six creitzers, and for the fourth part of a bushel of oats, nine creitzers
(which before we had for four creitzers and a half) and for hey and straw
three creitzers. The third day in the morning we rode two miles, through woody
mountains, the ascent of one of them being half a mile, and through rich
pastures, to Mor thusly, and I paid for my dinner eighteen creitzers, and for
my horse-meat five creitzers, oats being deerer here then before. This day
near Spitle we passed out of Austria into Styria. After dinner we rode two
miles, through woody mountains, yielding good pastures, to a village, where I
paid for my supper twenty four creitzers, and twelve for my horse-meat. The
fourth day in the morning we rode four miles, through mountains with pasture
and woods, and valleies of corn, to the City Brucke, where I paid for my
dinner fifteen creitzers, for my horse-meat five creitzers, the third part of
a bushel of oats being here sold for twenty four creitzers. After dinner we
rode in like way two miles, to the City Lowen, and I paid for my supper
fifteen creitzers, for three little measures and a half of oats, fourteen
creitzers, for stable three creitzers, and four for dregs of wine to wash my
horses feet. The fifth day in the morning we rode two miles in like way to a
village, where I paid nine creitzers for my dinner, and four for my horse
meat. After dinner we rode in the like way, and over mountains covered with
snow, three miles and a half, to a village, not far from which, Charles of
Gratz, Archduke of Austria, (uncle by the Father side to the Emperor
Rodulphus, and Father to the Queen of Poland, lately married to King
Sigismond,) was of late buried in a Monastery near Knettelfeld. In this
village I paid fourteen creitzers for my supper, and twelve for my
horse-meat. The sixth day in the morning we rode one mile in like way, to
Iudenburg, that is, the City of the Jews, and I paid fourteen creitzers for
breakefast. Then we rode five miles in a stony way, through high mountains, to
Newen-markt, and I paid eighteen creitzers for my supper, and fifteen for my
horse-meat. In this Country of Styria, many men and weomen have great wens
hanging down their throats, by drinking the waters that run through the mines
of metals.

The seventh day in the morning we rode two miles to the confines of Styria,
and entering Carinthia, passed by the City Freysacke, in which was a fair and
strong Castle, seated upon a high mountain, and so we passed one mile further
to a village, all our way having been very troublesome by reason of the stony
mountains, and narrow passages, we having a coach in our company. Here I
paid twenty four creitzers for my dinner, and fourteen for my horse-meat.
After dinner we rode two miles in a plain compassed with mountains, to
Sternfield; where I paid ninteene creitzers for my supper, and sixteen for my
horse-meat. The eight day in the morning we rode one mile, through a fruitful
plain of corn, to a pleasant City, Saint Voyte. As in Styria, so here in
Carinthia, the men and women have great wens upon their throats, with drinking
the waters that pass the Mines. Here I paid for my dinner and supper forty
eight creitzers, and twenty four for my horse-meat, for we staid here to rest
our horses, and every day we took shorter iournies, because we had a Coach in
our company, which could hardly pass the streights and stony ways of the
Alps, and in no other part of the Alps, they use at any time to pass with
Coaches, but here very seldom, in respect of the ill way. The ninth day we
rode three miles, through a fruitful plain of corn, to Feldkirken, where I
paid nine creitzers for my dinner, and four for my horse-meat. After dinner we
rode about two miles, by the side of a lake on our left hand toward the South,
beyond which lake Boleslaus King of Poland lies buried in a Monasbery, who
having killed a Bishop, warning him to amend his life, did upon his own free
will do penance there, taking the habit of a Monk, and serving in the same
Cloister, as a lay brother to warm stoues: but the Polackes say, that the body
of the dead Bishop did many miracles, whereupon with great expense of treasure,
they of late obtained at Rome, to have him made a Saint. And so we came to a
village where I paid twenty creitzers for my supper, thirteen for my
horse-meat, and eight for drink after supper. The tenth day in the morning we
rode about a mile, through high and rocky mountains, to the City Villake, by
which the River Draw runs, and here I omitted my expenses. After dinner we
rode three miles, through high and rocky mountains, and a narrow way; and our
Coachman by the way showed us upon the left hand toward the South, a Castle,
which of old belonging to the Governors of the Province, was now demolished,
and because money received of the Turks for treason, was hidden here, they say
that ever since ill spirits walk in that place.

In the villages of Carinthia (being a Province of the Dutch Empire) the
Country people speak Wendish, or the tongue of the old Vandals, which I have
like wise heard to be used in villages near Angsburg, and near Witteberg in
Saxony, and upon the shore of the Balticke sea in Pomern, and Meckleburge, so
as it seems, that barbarous nation, though scattered and loosing their name,
yet still lives in those places.

So we came to Altaporta, that is High gate, where I omitted my expenses. The
eleventh day in the morning we rode a mile, through high mountains and rocky,
and a narrow way to the village Trenise, where the Dutchmen showed a pasport,
and we all had a like pasport given us from the Emperor his Officers, which we
were to deliver to the Venetian Officers at Pontena, left either for suspicion
of infectuous sickness, or any other cause, they should not permit us to enter
into Italy. In the said village I paid fifteen creitzers for my dinner, and
five for my horse-meat.

After dinner we rode two miles, in a stony way between mountains, to
Pontena, which the Dutch call Pontafell, and by the way there was a wall of
stone between the mountains, and a village called Chiusa, where there was a
gate, shutting up the high way, upon which was written in Italian.

La chiusa,
L'Alpi chiudono i confini della famosa Italia, manon
ponno may chiudere l'honer del sagio Contarini.
The enclosure or shutting up.
The Alps close up the confines of famous Italy, but can never enclose the
honor of the wise Contarini.
The Contarini are a family of Gentlemen in Venice. Here the Venetian soldiers
keeping this passage, required a benevolence of us, which we willingly gave,
and out companions paid four Venetian lires for the four horses in their
Coach, but we that were horsemen paid no tribute. Here we had another
passe-port to be showed at Venzona. I paid at Pontena thirty sols of Venice for
my supper, thirty five for oats, and ten for hey.

And give me leave to remember, that I having for the cold at Dantzke, in the
beginning of September, put on a woollen wasecoat, was forced now at the
entering of Italy, for great heat in the end of October, to put off the same.

The twelfth day in the morning we rode four miles (meaning Dutch miles,
though we be now entered into Italy, because my Dutch companions so reckoned
them.) We now had entered the Italian Province Frioly, which the Latins call
Forum Iulij; because the Legions used to be sent from hence over the Alps, and
the Venetians call Patria, that is country; because the Venetians fled from
hence, into the Lakes of Venice, when Attila King of the Huns invaded Italy, by
this name acknowledging it to be their country, from whence they originally
came. Aquilegia the seat of the Patriarchs, destroyed by Attila, was of old
famous; but the Venetians by the Popes favor, have drawn the Patriarchs seat
to Venice. By the way we passed seven branches of the River Tagliamonti on
horseback without boats, the stream being so violent by the waters falling
from the mountains, that it dazels the eyes, if the passenger look upon the
water; for which cause we passed warily, turning our eyes from the water, and
having guidespassing before us, to try and show us the Fordes. By the way upon
a bridge, this was written in Latin:

For the carrying over of Dutch merchandise, by the streams of Ledra, S. S.
President of the Province, speedily built this Bridge.

So we came through a plain somewhat wild, or less fruitful, to
Spilenburg; where I paid twenty one sols for my dinner, eight for oats, and
four for hay. After dinner we rode two Dutch miles, through wild stony fields,
to Sanuocate, where I paid thirty sols for my supper, thirty two for oats, and
ten for hay. The thirteenth day in the morning, we rode three Dutch, or
fourteen Italian miles; through wild grounds, and stony fields of corn, and
near our iournies end, by many Orchardes and Vineyards, to Konian, where I
omitted my expense. By the way we met a Gentleman, in his coach drawn with
oxen. After dinner we rode two Dutch, or eight Italian miles, and in a wild
field, passed two branches of a river by a boat, in which we sat on
horseback; and we paid sixteen sols for our passage, and thence we came to
a village, where I paid forty sols for my supper, twenty three for oats, and
ten for hay. And coming hither on All-soules evening, which they keep with
great superstition, we could not sleep for little bells tinckling all night.
The fourteenth day in the morning, we rode six Italian miles, through fruitful
hills of corn, and by pleasant Vineyards, to Treuigi, a City little in circuit,
but fortified, and built of brick, with arches hanging over the streets, under
which men walk dry in the greatest rain, where I have omitted my expenses.

After breakefast we rode twenty two Italian miles, through a most pleasant
plain, in which we passed over a river, and came to Paduoa. Here I sold my
horse for twenty Paduoa.
silver crowns, which I bought at Crakaw for eighteen guldens; and by the
way, I might have sold him for twenty six crowns or more, and from the place
where I sold him, might easily have hired a coach or horses to Paduoa, but my
foolish hope to sell him deerer, and desire to save the charge of hiring a
coach, or horse, kept me from selling him by the way, whereof I repented when I
came to Paduoa, where horsemeat was very dear, and the horse-coarsers finding
that I must needs sell him, agreed among themselves, so craftily, sending me
every day new buyers, to offer me less then before they had offered, as when
I had kept him fourteen days, I must have been forced to sell my horse at
their price, if I had not found an English Gentleman by chance, who returning
into Germany, gave me twenty crowns for my horse. I stayed all this winter at
Paduoa, in which famous University I desired to perfect my Italian tongue,
where a Student may have his table at an Ordinary (vulgarly a la dozena) and
his chamber for eight, or at most, for ten silver crowns the month: but few
live after this fashion, save the Dutch, and strangers new arrived, and having
not yet got the language; but rather they hire a chamber, which is to be had
for a zechine, or ten lires the month, or at a lower rate, the Hostess being
to find linen, and dress the meat you buy. My Host had a large house, with
a fair court, hired yearly for forty crowns, and with him, my self and some
Dutch men lodged, each having his chamber and plentiful diet, for eight silver
crowns the month.

When I went to Venice, I lodged with an Hostess, an old widow, which had a
house like a Palace; for which, she paid two hundred crowns yearly, and
there I paid for a chamber four silver crowns by the month, every man there
buying meat at his pleasure, which the Hostess dresseth; and finds linen.

But that the price of things may better appear, it will not be amiss
particularly to set some prices down for both Cities; for howsoever strangers
spend more in Venice, then in Padnoa; yet that is not by reason of diet, but
for the greater price of chambers, and extraordinary inticements to spend. The
prices I will briefly set down, in some few particulars, because in the due
place treating of diet, I am to speak more largely thereof. It is the fashion
of Italy, that only men, and the Masters of the family, go into the market
and buy victuals, for servants are never sent to that purpose, much less
weomen, which if they be chaste, rather are locked up at home, as it were in
prison. Again, the small coins of brass, are very helpefull to the poor,
all victuals being sold in small portions, according to the smallest money,
yea, the very spices, which in the shoppes are put up in papers, ready beaten,
according to greater or the very least coins. The Italians are sparing in
diet, but particularly at Padnoa, the markets abound rather with variety, then
quantities of meat. Some hundreds of turkies hang out to be sold, for six or
seven lires each, according to the goodness. And this territory yielding better
corn then other parts, they have very white bread, light, and pleasant in taste,
especially that which is called Pan-buffetto. I remember I bought a pound of
mutton for five sols and a half, of veale for eight, of porke for eight, a fat
hen for two lires, eight little birds for six sols, a great and fat pigeon for
two lires, a pullet for thirty five, and sometime forty sols, an Eele after ten
sols the pound, kreuises the pound three, and sometimes six sols, a pike the
pound seven or eight sols, round cockles the hundred three sols, the long,
which we call rasers, the hundredth twenty sols, the skalops which they call
holy cockels, twelve for a lire, Cheuerns the pound four sols, a plaise six
sols, tenches the pound eight sols, sawsages the pound ten sols, six eggs
eight sols, butter the pound fourteen sols, piacentine cheese the pound six
sols, and parmesan the pound ten or twelve sols, a measure of salt for the
table four sols, rice the pound three sols, ten snailes four sols, apples the
pound two sols, pears and wardens the pound four sols, chestnuts the pound
three sols, dry grapes the pound two sols, sometimes three; almonds the pound
five sols, six orenges for one gaget, a pomegranat one sol, oil the pound ten
sols, a secchio of wine thirty five sols, or the pound thereof eight sols, wax
candles the ounce two sols, and ten small wax candles twenty two sols, other
candles the pound sixteen sols, or fourteen if they be little, a quire of
writing paper five sols. The Hostess dresseth your meat in the bargain for
your chamber, and finds you napkins, tableclothes, sheets, and towels; and
either in your chest or her own, will lay up the meat, and very bread you
leave, more prouidently then any of our parts would require; and little boys
attend in the market places with baskets, who for a soll will carry home the
meat you buy; and dare not deceive you though you go not with them. I paid to
my tailor for making a cloak four lires, and for my doublet and hose eight
lites; to my laundresse for making a shirt a lire, that is, twenty sols; for
washing it two sols; and for washing four handkerchers one sol. And this shall
suffice for particular expenses.

The City Paduoa, was built by Antenor a Trojan, and the Heneti driven out of
their Country, joined themselves to these Trojans. These with joint force
drove out the Euganei from the fertile Euganean hills near Paduoa, where
Hereules left them, and these Heneti gave to their posterity the name of
Venetians, to whom the Colonies of Tuscany joined themselves, then the French
subdued all this Province, till at last they subjected themselves to the
Romans, and were made Citizens of Rome. The Roman Empire declining, the
Visigothes under Alaricus drove the chief Citizens of Paduoa, into the lakes
of Venice. Then Attila King of the Hunnes spoiled Paduoa, and the Longobards
burnt it, which being rebuilt, and flourishing under the German Emperors,
Acciolinus usurped the government thereof, in the year 1237. But Pope
Alexander the fourth helped by the Venetians, restored it to liberty in the
year 1257. In the faction of the Guelphes and Gibellines, Paduoa then and from
that time has bin subject to many Princes of the Scaligers, and Cararrians,
til about the year 1402. the Venetians took the City, which they held to the
year 1509. when the French King Lewis made them yield to the Emperor; but the
Venetians after two months recovered it, and to this day it is subject to
them, who send a Magistrate called Podesta, every fifteen months to govern
it. Some say Paduoa was first called Antenoria (as the Heneti gave the name of
Venice to the Country) till after Antenors death, the Heneti called it Paduoa,
of a City in their Country whence they were driven. Others say it has the
name from a Greek word, upon the flying of Swannes: others say it is so called
of the river Po, called in Latin Padus, or of the territory lying beyond the
Po, the River giving name to the territory, and that to the City. Before it was
destroyed by Attila, it was seated on the East Side of the River Medoacus, but
after it was built on the other side, in a fenny soil, where now the market
place is, but since it has been enlarged on both sides the water, being
without the outmost walls seven miles compass, and of a triangular form, as it
seemed to me. The first angle is on the North-side, where is the Monastery of
the Hermites of Saint Augustine, and the stately Palace Areno, in which the
French King Henry the third was lodged, when he returned from Poland into
France. The second angle is toward the East; where is the gate at which they
take water to pass upon the River Brenta to Venice. The third angle is toward
the South, where is the monastery Santo, called of Saint Anthony of Lisbon, and
the monastery of Saint Iustina. And these angles taken away, the old City is
round. On the West Side upon the walls, is built the old Palace of the old
City. Paduoa is seated in a sweet plain, having no trees near the City. Of old
the wall was triple, and now it is double. The inner wall is some three miles
in compass; and is very high having a walk upon it round about, with pleasant
shade of trees, where Gentlemen use to play at the balloone. This wall
compassed round with the Brent, has fourteen gates, with as many bridges of
stone. The river Brent likewise compasses the outward wall, which is about
seven miles compass, and has six stately gates, but this wall is nothing so
strong as the other. The River Athesis diuides the territory of Paduoa, from
that of Uerona, and the river Po diuides it from that of Ferrara.

Two rivers of old called Medonci, enter the City; the greater at this day
called Brenta, falling from the Alps, with the right hand branch, runs to
Paduoa, and with the left hand branch to Rosta, and dividing again into two
branches, one by the dirch Brentella is carried to Paduoa, the greater takes
the name Bachilio, and near to the walls of Paduoa, receives the waters of
Brentella, increased with a branch of Brenta. These Rivers enter the City, and
with diverse channels drive many mils, compass the walls, and not only make the
fields fertile, but serve to carry all commodities (abounding here) from hence
to Venice, and to bring from thence such things as they want, and besides do
cleanse all filth of the stables and priuies.

The air at Paduoa is very healthful, and the building is with arches of
stone, hanging over the streets, under which they walk dry in the greatest
rain; but the streets are thereby made narrow, and in the midst are dirty.
There be five market places: in the first the Gentlemen and Students meet and
walk: in the second herbs are sold, in the third corn: in the fourth wood,
and in the fifth straw. The aforesaid monastery of Saint Anthony, is inhabited
by Franciscan Friars, and is much fairer then any other religious house; the
Church whereof was of old dedicated to Juno, and after to the Virgin Mary; and
at last to Saint Anthony. The pauement thereof is of marble, and the building
very stately, having in the top seven globes covered with lead, and three high
towers. The Chapel wherein St Anthony lies, is all of marble, and round about
it the miracles are engraven, which they attribute to this Saint: at whose
feast day they use to present for great gifts the hallowed girdles of this St,
which they tie about their loins, and attribute strange effects thereunto. Here
is a statua of marble, erected to Peter Bembus; and in the large yard there is
a horse-mans statua of brass, which the Senate of Venice erected to Gatta
Melata. In the Church of Franciscan Minorites, there is a statua erected to
Roctha Benello, a Physician, sitting in his chair. In the aforesaid monastery
of Saint Iustina, the order of Saint Benedict was first established, and from
thence dispersed into Italy, and the Church thereof was of old dedicated to
Concord, and after being made the Bishops Church, was endowed with great rents.
These Monks have a black habit, and in the Church they show the relics of
the Martyr Saint Iustina, of Saint Prosdosimus a Greek, (who is said to have
been Saint Peter's Disciple, and to have converted Paduoa, and to have baptized
Saint Iustina, when she suffered Martyrdom) and likewise of Saint Maximus
(both Bishops, and protecting Saints of the City,) as also of Saint Luke the
Evangelist, brought by Vrius a Monk from Constantinople; but the Venetians say
the relics of Saint Luke are with them. Biondus writes, that here was a
Church dedicated to Jupiter, and the sepulcher of Titus Liuius. In the first
court yard of this Monastery, the incredible miracles of Saint Benedict are
painted. In the second I found this Epitaph:

Adoleseens tametsi proper as,
Hoc te saxum rogat vt se aspicias;
Deinde quod scriptum est legas.
Hic sunt Poet a Pacuuij sita ossa:
Hoc volebam nessius ne esses: vale.
D. M.
Young man tho thou hastest
This stone desires thee to behold it;
Then to read that is written.
Here are laid the bones of the Poet Pacunius,
This I would have thee know: Farewell.
D. M.
A large and pleasant meadow lies before this Monastery. There is another of
the Benedictines in this City, but those Friars wear a white habit, and live
with more severe rules. In the Monastery of Saint Augustines Hermits, before
named, are the sepulchers of the Princes of the family Carraria. The Cathedral
Church was of old Magnificall, and to this day has twelve Churches under it
within the City. The Marble chest containing Autenors bones, being found when
the foundation of the Almes-house was dug, was then brought to the Church of
Saint Laurence; wherein was found a gilded sword, and Latin verses in a
barbarous style, showing that the Letter A, should be fatal to the City;
which they say have proved to true by Attila, Agilulsus, Accidanus, Ansedissus
and Albertus: under whom the City was much afflicted. This chest is erected
upon Marble pillars at the door of the Church, and upon the wall these verses
are written in Latin:

Iuclitus Antenor post dirutae maenia Troiae,
Transtulit huc Henetum Dardanidumque fugas,
Expulit Euganeos, Patauinam condidit vrbem,
Quem tenet hac humili marmore casa Domus.
Famous Autenor, Troyes walls pulled down,
Henets and Dardans remnant here did train;
Expeld the Euganeans, built fair Padnoa Town,
Whom this low Marble house does here contain.
Another Epitaph of the same Antenor, seems lately written by the very name of
the City, and sauoureth a Transalpine wit, giving small credit to Liuy, or
their fabulous Antiquities:

Hic iacet Antenor Paduanaeconditor vrbit,
Proditor ipse fuit hique sequnutur eum.
Antenor Padoaes founder lies here,
He was a Traitor, these him follow near.
The Monument of the Trojan horse of wood, is kept in the Palace of the
Capilist family, whereupon they are called the Capilists of the horse. There
be eighteen Cloisters of Nuns in the City, and two of repenting or
illuminate women, so they call whores entering Cloisters. About the midst of
the City is a fair Palace, where the Venetian Podesta or governor dwells, the
gallery whereof (in which he sits to judge causes) is very large, and has
a high arched roof hanging by Art, not sustained by many pillars, and the same
is covered with lead, and adorned with many pictures of the famous Painter
Zoto, and the length thereof is one hundred forty walking paces, the breadth
forty three paces. There is the Statua of Julius Paulus, Doctor of Civil Law,
and of Peter Aponensis, or, d'Abano; and of Titus Liuius, and of Albertuo the
Hermitan, placed over the four doors. At the West end of this gallery, is a
Monument of Titus Liuius the Historian carved within the wall, and these verses
are written upon the wall in Latin:

Ossatuumque caput, lives tibi maxim Liui,
Prompto animo hic omnes composuera tui:
Tufamam aeternam Romae, patriaeque dedisti,
Huic criens, illi fortia facta canens.
At tibi dat Paetria hac: and simaiora liceret,
Haec totus stares aureus ipse loco.
Greatest Liuy, thy country men have laid,
Thy head and bones here with a ready mind:
Thy Country, and Rome thou have famous made,
Here borne, while their greatest acts thou have refinde:
Thy Country gives thee this, if more it might,
Here all in gold thou should stand shining bright.
This Titus Liuius died in the fourth year of the Empire of Tiberim Caesar,
and in the sixty six year of his age. Not far from this Monument stands a
brazen Image of the same Liuy, with this inscription in Latin:

The bones of Titus Liuy of Paduoa, by all mortal men's consent worthy, by
whose pen truly invincible, the Acts of the invincible Roman people should
be written.

Besides, they show in the City Titus Liuius his house. And this Monument,
orthese bones of him were brought thither from the Monastery of Saint Iustina.
The Court where the Senate meets, lies near to the said gallery of this
Palace; where there is astone, which they call the stone of Turpitude, (that
is, filthiness or disgrace:) whereupon debtors, which disclaim the having of
goods to pay their debts, do sit with their hinder parts bare; that with this
note of disgrace, others may be terrified from borrow ing more then they can
pay. They have a Pesthouse called Lazaretto, and two like houses for Lepers,
and one Alsmes-house for the poor strangers, another for Orphans, and a third
for children cast out, or left in the streets. Near the Church of Saint Luria,
there is a Well, called the Devils Well; which they say was brought into the
street by Art Magic, out of the courtyard of a Gentleman, denying water to
his neighbors. This City has little traffic, though it lies very fit for
the same, because the Venetians draw it all to themselves.

But Gentlemen of all Nations come thither in great numbers, by reason of the
famous University, which the Emperor Frederick the second, being offended with
the City of Bologna, planted herein the year 1222, or there abouts, some
coming to study the civil Law, other the Mathemetickes, and Music, others to
ride, to practice the Art of Fencing, and the excercises of dancing and
actiuity, under mostskilful professors of those Arts, drawn hither by the same
reason. And Students have here great, if not to great liberty and privileges,
so as men-slaiers are only punished with banishment, which is a great
mischief, and makes strangers live there in great jealousy of treason to be
practiced against their lives. The School where the professors of liberal
Sciences teach, is seated over against Saint Martins Church, and was of old a
public Inn, having the sign of an Axe, which name it still retains. The
promotion of degrees is taken in the Bishops hall, near the Cathedral Church,
and the Doctors are made in the chief Church. And there be eight Colleges
built for poor Students of several Provinces.

The Athestine family of the Dukes of Ferrara, and the Honorian family, of the
tyrant Acciolinus, and the Carrarian family of their own Princes, had their
beginning in this City, as they write. And they do no less triumph of diverse
Citizens borne here, namely Marsilius, Mamerdinus a Minorite who being a
Divine, wrote learnedly in the year 1329, of the power of the Pope and
Emperor, defending the majesty of the Emperor against the Pope: and Julius
Paulus a civil Lawyer, Disciple to Papinius, and living in the time of Titus
Liuius; and Francis Zabarella a civil Lawyer, dying in the year 1417, and
Peter D'Abano a Physician and Astrologer, dying in the year 1312: whose body
being to be burnt for suspicion of his being a coniurer, his Concubine buried,
but his picture and his books were burnt by the Emperors command: and Michael
Sauonarola a Physician, and Titus Liuius a famous Historian: And Lucius
Aruntius Stella, and Caius Valerius Flaccus, all Poets celebrated by Martial:
and Augelus Beoleus a Stage Player of wonderful elocution, dying in the year
1542, and Thraseas Peto a famous Soldier, hated by Nero: and Andreas Mantinia,
the best Painter of his age, being knighted, and dying about the year 1517,
and Augustinus Zoto a Painter, with other famous men.

The Second Book.
CHAP. I. Of my journey from Paduoa, to Venice, to Ferraria, to Bologna, to
Rauenna, and by the shore of the Adriaticke Sea, to Ancona: then crossing the
breadth of Italy, to Rome, seated not far from the Tirrhene Sea.
Whosoever comes into Italy, and from whence soever; but more especially if he
come from suspected places, as Constantinople, never free from the plague; he
must bring to the Confines a certificate of his health, and in time of any
plague, he must bring the like to any City within land, where he is to pass,
which certificates brought from place to place, and necessary to be carried,
they curiously observe and read. This paper is vulgarly called Bolletino della
sanita; and if any man want it, he is shut up in the Lazareto, or Pesthouse
forty days, till it appear he is healthful, and this they call vulgarly far'
la quarantans. Neither will the Officers of health in any case dispense with
him, but there he shall have conueuientlodging, and diet at his pleasure.

In the spring of the year, 1594, (the Italians beginning the year the first
of January) An. 1594.
I began my journey to see Italy, and taking boat at the East gate of Paduoa,
the same was drawn by horses along the River Brenta; and having shot two or
three small bridges, and passed twenty miles, we came to the Village
Lizzafusina, where there is a damme to stop the waters of Brenta, lest in
process of time, the passage being open, the Marshes on that side of Venice
should be filled with sand or earth, and so a passage made on firm ground to
the City; which they are careful to prevent, and not without just cause,
having found safety in their Isles, when Italy was often ouerflowed by barbarous
people. Besides, they say that this damme was made, lest this fresh. water
should be mingled with their salt waters; since all the Gentlemen of Venice
fetch their fresh water by boats from thence, the poorer sort being content
with Well water. Here whiles our boat was drawn by an Instrument, out of the
River Brenta, into the Marshes of Venice, we the passengers refreshed our
selves with meat and wine, and according to the custom, agreed upon the price
of our meat before we did eat it. Then we entered our boat again, and passed
five miles to Venice, upon the marshes thereof; and each man paid for his
passage a lire, or twenty sols, and for a horse more then ordinary, that we
might be drawn more swiftly from Paduoa to Lizzafusina, each man paid four
sols, but the ordinary passage is only sixteen sols. We might have had
coaches, but since a boat passes daily too and fro between these Cities, most
men use this passage as most convenient. For the boat is covered with arched
hatches, and there is very pleasant company, so a man beware to give no
offense: for otherwise the Lumbards carry shirts of Male, and being armed as if
they were in a Camp, are apt to revenge upon shameful advantages. But commonly
there is pleasant discourse, and the proverb says, that the boat shall be
drowned, when it carries neither Monk, nor Student, nor Curtesan (they love
them too well to call them whores,) the passengers being for the most part of
these kinds. I remember a young maid in the boat, crossed her self whenever
an old woman looked upon her, fearing she should be a witch, whereat the
passengers often smiled, seeing the girl not only cross her self for fear,
but thrust her crucifix toward the old woman's eyes. I said formerly that two
Rivers Medoaci, run through Paduoa, and that the greater by the name of
Brenta, running to the village Lizzafusina, is stopped with a damme, lest it
should mingle it self with the salt marshes of Venice, and that also the
lesser River by the name of Bachilio, passes through Paduoa. This lesser
stream runs thence into the ditch Clodia, and going out of it makes a
haven, called de Chiozza, which lies in the way from Venice to Farraria, and
there it divides it self into two streams; and entering the salt marshes,
makes the haven of Venice, called Malamocco. Besides other Rivers falling from
the Alps, through Frioli, do increase these marshes, which are salt by the
tides of the sea, though the same does very little ebb or flow in this
Mediterranean, or Inland sea. And this haven Malamocco is very large and deep,
and is defended with a bank from the waves of the Adriatique sea.

The Description of Uenice.


Upon the West side of venice beyond the marshes, lies the Territory of Paduoa.
On the North side beyond the marshes, lies the Province Frioli. On the South
side beyond the marshes, lies partly the firm land of Italy, and partly the
Adriatique sea; On the East side beyond the marshes lies the Adriatique sea,
and the City consists all of Isles, compassed round about with the said
marshes.

A The great channel. B The market place of Saint Mark, seated in the first
Sextary of Saint Mark. C The Cathedral Church of Saint Peter, the seat of
the Patriarchs, seated in the second Sextary, called Caestelli Oliuolo. D The
third Sextary on this side the channel, called di Canarigio. E The Church of
Saint James lies near the bridge Rialto, and is seated in the fourth Sextary
of Saint Paul, being the first of them beyond the channel.

The rest of the City is divided into two other Sextaries beyond the channel,
namely the fifth di Sta Croce, and the sixth de Dorso duro.

F The Church of Saint George the greater. G And the Church of Santa Maria
delle gratie, both lie in the Sextary di Santa Croce. H The Island Giudecca
belongs to the sextary di Dorso duro. K The bank of the sea, vulgarly Il Lido.
L The Island Murana. M The new Lazaretto. N Mazorbo. O Buran P San Franscesco
del deserto. Little Islands. Q Torcello. R Duo Caestelli. S La Certosa. T Sta.
Hellena. V Lazaretto Fecchio. -- W Chioza. X Malamocco, the haven within the
sea bank. Y Pcuegia, an Island. Z San' Georgiod' Alega, in the way as we come
from Paduoa to Venice, a little Island. (...) La Concordia: a little Island.
The Henetians of Paphlagonia, their King Palemon being dead at the siege of
Troy, joined themselves to Antener, and possessing these parts, after they had
driven out the Euganeans, called the country Venice, and through their great
virtue were made Citizens of Rome, and their chief men Senators thereof. But
when Attila King of the Huns invaded Italy, and the Empire of the West being
weakened, did destroy the same, the said Henetians came out of Histria, now
called Frioli, and from the Territory of Paduoa, and other Italians came from
adjoining parts, into certain Islands compassed with marshes, that they might
be safe from those Barbarians; and about the year of our Lord, 421, began to
build a City, which proving a safe retreat from the tyranny then continually
oppressing Italy, in process of time by civil Arts grew incredibly. These
Islands were in number sixty near adjoining, and twelve more distant; which
being all joined in one, have made this stately City, and the chief of them
were called in the vulgar tongue, Rialto, Grado, Heraclca, and Caestello
Oliuolo. The Island Grado was of old the seat of the Patriarchs, after that the
Patriarchate of Aquilegia in Histria, was by the Popes authority translated
thither: but now the seat of the Patriarchs is removed to Caestello Oliuolo. At
first Consuls governed the City, then Tribunes, chosen out of each I Will one,
till the year 697, when the Citizens abiding in Heraclea chose them a Duke,
who dwelt in the same I Will. After forty years they chose a Tribune of
soldiers, in stead of a Duke, with like authority as he had, and at last in
the year 742, meeting in the Island Malamocco, they chose a Duke again, and
removed his seat from Heraclea, to that Island. Then Pipin reigning in Italy
about the year 800, the Venetians demolished Heraclea which was built again,
but never recovered the old dignity, being more notable in the seat of the
Bishop, then in the number of Citizens. For most of the Gentlemen removed their
dwellings into the Island Rialto, otherwise called Riuo alto; either of the
depth of the marshes, or because it was higher then the other Islands, and
thereupon called Ripa alta. Whereupon that Island getting more dignity then the
rest, the Citizens in process of time joined the sixty Islands lying near one
to the other, with some four hundred bridges; of which Islands (as is above
said) and of the twelve more distant, this stately City consists. Then by
common counsel, the seat of the Dukes was established in this Island, who built
the stately Palace which at this day we see. And now a new Dukedom arising
out of these salt marshes of the sea, from that time daily grew in dignity. But
the City was first called Kialto, and after, of the country from whence the
Citizens came, was called Venetia, or in the plural number Venetiae: because
many Dukedomes and Provinces, or many Nations were joined in one, and at this
day is vulgarly called Venegia. That the City was first called Rialto, appears
by old records of Notaries, written in these words: After the use of Venice.
In the name of eternal God, amen: subscribed in such a year of Riuoalto, and
in these words after the use of the Empire; In the name of Christ, amen:
subscribed, dated at Venice. This stately City built in the bottom of the
gulf of the Adriatique sea, in the midst of marshes upon many Islands, is
defended on the East side against the sea, by a bank of earth, which has five
(or some say seven) mouths or passages into the sea; and is vulgarly called Il
Lido: and being so placed by nature, not made by Art, bends like a bow, and
reaches thirty five miles; and by the aforesaid passages, the ships and the
tides of the sea go in and out, and the deep marshes whereof I have spoken,
are made of these salt waters, and of diverse fresh waters falling from the
Alps, and vulgarly called, il Tagliamonts La liuenza, la praac, la Brenta, Il
Po, l' Adice, and il Bacchiglione. On the West side, the City is compassed with
marshes, and after five miles with the Territory of Paduoa. On the North side
with marshes, and beyond them partly with the Province Frioli, partly with the
aforesaid sea bank. And upon the South side with many Islands, wherein are many
Churches and Monasteries, like so many Forts, and beyond them with the firm
land of Italy. The City is eight miles in circuit, and has seventy parishes,
wherein each Church has a little market place, for the most part four square,
and a public Well. For the common sort use well water, and rain water kept in
cesternes; but the Gentlemen fetch their water by boat from the land. It has
thirty one cloisters of Monks, and twenty eight of Nuns, besides chapels
and almes-houses. Channels of water pass through this City (consisting of many
Islands joined with Bridges) as the blood passes through the veins of man's
body; so that a man may pass to what place he will both by land and water. The
great channel is in length about one thousand three hundred paces, and in
breadth forty paces, and has only one bridge called Rialto, and the passage
is very pleasant by this channel; being adorned on both sides with stately
Palaces. And that men may pass speedily, besides this bridge, there be
thirteen places called Traghetti, where boats attend called Gondole; which
being of incredible number give ready passage to all men. The rest of the
channels running through less streets, are more narrow, and in them many
bridges are to be passed under. The aforesaid boats are very neat, and covered
all save the ends with black cloth, so as the passengers may go unseen and
unknown, and not be annoyed at all with the sun, wind, or rain. And these
boats are ready at call any minute of the day or night. And if a stranger know
not the way, he shall not need to ask it, for if he will follow the press
of people, he shall be sure to be brought to the market place of Saint Mark,
or that of Rialto; the streets being very narrow (which they paue with brick,)
and besides if he only know his Hosts name, taking a boat, he shall be safely
brought thither at any time of the night. Almost all the houses have two gates,
one toward the street, the other toward the water; or at least the banks of
the channels are so near, as the passage by water is as easy as by land. The
public boats, with the private of Gentlemen and Citizens, are some eight
hundred, or as others say, a thousand. Though the flood or ebb of the salt
water be small, yet with that motion it carries away the filth of the City,
besides that, by the multitude of fires, and the situation open to all winds,
the air is made very wholesome, whereof the Venetians brag, that it agrees
with all strangers complexions, by a secret virtue, whether they be brought up
in a good or ill air, and preserves them in their former health. And though I
dare not say that the Venetians live long, yet except they sooner grow old, and
rather seem then truly be aged: I never in any place observed more old men, or
so many Senators venerable for their gray hairs and aged gravity. To conclude,
the situation of Venice is such, as the Citizens abound with all commodities of
sea and land; and are not only most safe from their enemies on the land, being
severed from it by waters, and on the sea being hedged in with a strong sea
bank, but also give joyful rest under their power to their subjects on land,
though exposed to the assault of their enemies.

The City parted in the midst with the great channel, coming in from the
sea bank near the two Castles, is of old divided into six sextaries, or six
parts, vulgarly sestieri; three on this side the channel, and three beyond the
channel. The first sextary on this side the channel, is that of Saint Mark;
for howsoever it be not the Cathedral Church, yet it is preferred before the
rest, as well because the Duke resides there, as especially because Saint Mark
is the protecting Saint of that Ciry. The body of which Saint being brought
hither by Merchants from Alexandria: this Church was built in the year 829. at
the charge of the Duke Justinian, who dying, gave by his last will great
treasure to that use, and charged his brother to finish the building, which was
laid upon the ruins of Saint Theodores Church, who formerly had been the
protecting Saint of the City. And the same being consumed with fire in the
year 976. it was more stately rebuilt, according to the narrownes of the
place, the Merchants being charged to bring from all places any precious thing
they could find fit to adorn the same, whatsoever it cost. The length of the
Church contains two hundred foot of Venice, the breadth fifty, the circuit
950. The building is become admirable, for the singular art of the builders and
painters, and the most rare pieces of Marble, Porphry, Ophites (stones so
called of speckles like a serpent) and like stones; and they cease not still to
build it, as if it were unfinished, lest the revenues given by the last wills of
dead men to that use, should return to their heirs (as the common report
goes.) There were stairs of old to mount out of the market place into the
Church, till the waters of the channel increasing, they were forced to raise
the height of the market place. On the side toward the market place are five
doors of brass, whereof that in the midst is fairest, and the same, with
one more, are daily opened, the other three being shut, excepting the days of
Feasts. Upon the ground near the great door, is a stone, painted as if it
were engraven: which painting is vulgarly called, Ala Mosaica, and upon this
stone Pope Alexander set his foot upon the neck of the Emperor Frederick
Barbarossa, adoring him after his submission. The outward part of the Church is
adorned with 148. pillars of marble, whereof some are Ophytes, that is
speckled, and eight of them are Porphry near the great door, which are highly
esteemed. And in all places about the Church, there be some six hundred pillars
of marble, besides some three hundred in the caves under ground. Above these
pillars on the outside of the Church is an open gallery, borne up with like
pillars, from whence the Venetians at times of Feasts, behold any shows in the
market place. And above this gallery, and over the great door of the Church,
be four horses of brass, gilded over, very notable for antiquity and beauty;
and they are so set, as if at the first step they would leap into the market
place. They are said to be made to the similitude of the Horses of Phoebus,
drawing the Chariot of the Sun, and to have been put upon the triumphall
Arc of Nero, by the people of Rome, when he had overcome the Parthians. But
others say that they were given to Nero by Tiridates the King of Armenia, and
were made by the hands of the famous engrauer Lisippus. These Horses
Constantine removed from Rome to Constantinople, and that City being sacked,
the Venetians brought them to Venice, but they took of the bridles, for a
sign that their City had never been conquered, but enioied Virgin liberty.
And all the parts of these horses being most like the one to the other, yet by
strange art, both in posture of motion, and otherwise, they are most unlike one
to the other. Above this gallery the Image of Saint Mark of marble, and like
images of the other Evangelists, of the Virgin Mary, and of the Angel
Gabriell, are placed, and there is a bell upon which the hours are sounded,
for the Church has his Clock, though another very fair Clock in the market
place be very near it. The roof in form of a Globe, lies open at the very
top, where the light comes in; for the Church has no windows, and the Papist
Churches being commonly dark, to cause a religious horror, or to make their
candles show better, this is more dark then the rest. I pass over the image
of Saint Mark of brass in the form of a Lion, gilded over, and holding a
book of brass. Likewise the artificial Images of the Doctors of the Church,
and others. I would pass over the Image of the Virgin Mary, painted ala
Mosaica, that is as if it were engraven, but that they attribute great miracles
to it, so as weomen desirous to know the state of their absent friends, place a
wax candle burning in the open air before the Image, and believe that if their
friend be alive, it cannot be put out with any force of wind; but if he be
dead, that the least breath of wind puts it out, or rather of it self it goes
out: and besides for that I would mention that those who are adjudged to death,
offer wax candles to this Image, and as they pass by, fall prostratero adore
the same. To conclude, I would not omit mention thereof, because all ships
coming into the Haven, use to salute this Image, and that of Saint Mark, with
pieces of Ordinance, as well and more then the Duke. A Merchant of Venice saved
from shipwreck, by the light of a candle in a dark night, gave by his last
will to this Image, that his heirs for ever should find a wax candle to burn
before the same. Above the said gallery are little chambers, in which they lay
up pieces of stone and glass, with other materials for the foresaid painting,
ala Mosaica, which is like to engrauing, and Painters having pensions from the
state, do there exercise that Art, highly esteemed in Italy. The outward roof
is divided into four globes, covered with lead. Touching the inside of the
Church: In the very porch thereof is the Image of Saint Mark, painted with
wonderful art, and the Images of Christ crucified, of him buried, and of the
four Evangelists, highly esteemed; besides many other much commended for the
said painting like engrauing, and for other workmanship. And there be erected
four great pillars of Ophites, which they say were brought from the Temple of
Solomon. At the entery of the door is an old and great sepulcher, in which
lies the Duke Marine Morosini. Not far thence is the image of Saint Geminian in
pontifical habit, and another of Saint Katherine, both painted with great art.
When you enter the body of the Church, there is the great Altar, under which
lies Saint Mark, in a chest of brass, decked with Images of silver gilded,
and with plates of gold, and Images enamelled, and with the Image of Christ
sitting upon a stately throne, adorned with pillars of most white Marble, and
many precious stones, and curiously engraven. At the back of this Altar there
is another, which they call the Altar of the most holy Sacrament, made of the
best marble, with a little door of brass, decked with carved Images, and with
four pillars of Alablaster, transparant as Crystal, and highly esteemed; and
upon the same hang every day two lamps of Copper: but at the times of feasts
there hang two of pure silver. Moreover the Organs are said to be the work of
a most skillful Artificer. In the higher gallery compassing the Church, is the
image of Pope Pelagius, under which is a place where the holy relikes are kept,
which Pope Clement the eight gave to John Delphin Knight, one of the
Procurators of Saint Mark, and Ambassador at Rome for Venice, namely a piece
of a bone of Phillip the Apostle, a piece of the cheeke-bone, and four teeth
of the Martyr Saint Biagius: pieces of bones of Saint Bartholmew, and Saint
Thomas (forsooth) of Canterbury, and of the Apostles Saint Matthew, and Saint
Mark, (whose body they say is laid in the foresaid chest) and part of the
hair of the blessed Virgin, and a piece of a finger of the Evangelist Luke,
and a piece of a ribbe of Saint Peter, with many like, which they show to the
people to be adored certain days in the year. Above the Altar of Saint
Clement, these verses are written, which show how they worshipped Images in a
more modest though superstitious age.

Nam Deus est quod I mago docet, sed non Deus ipse
Hane vide as, sed mente colas quod cernis in ipsa:
That which the Image shows, is God, it self is none,
See this, but God here seen, in mind adore alone.
Likewise these verses of the same Author, be in another place.

Effigiem Christi qui transis, pronus horona,
Non tamen effigiem sed quod designat adora.
Esse deum ratione caret, cui contulit esse
Materiale lapis, sicut and manus effigiale.
Nec Deus est naec homo, praesens quam cernis Imago,
Sed Deus est and homo, quem sacra signat Imago.
As thou Christ's Image passest, fall the same before,
Yet what this Image signifies, not it adore.
No reason that it should be God, whose essence stands
Material of stone, formal of workemens hands.
This Image which thou see, is neither God nor Man,
But whom it represents, he is both God and Man.
At the entry of the Chancell, is the throne of the Dukes, made of walnut-tree,
all carved above the head, and when the Dukes sit there, it was wont to be
covered with carnation satin, but now it is covered with cloth of gold, given
by the King of Persia. There be two stately pulpits of marble, with Histories
carved in brass, where they sing the Epistles and Gospels. On the left hand by
the Altar of Saint James is a place, where (if a man may believe it) the body
of Saint Mark, by a creuice suddenly breaking through the marble stone,
appeared in the year 1094. to certain Priests who had fasted and prayed to
find the same, the memory of the place where it was laid at the building of
the Church about 829. being utterly lost. I believe that the memory thereof was
lost about the year 829. when superstition was not yet ripe, but that it was
found in the year 1094. that age being infected with gross superstition, let
him that list believe. They themselves seem to distrust this miracle, while
they confess that the same body was most secretly laid under the great Altar,
and never since showed to any man, but once or twice, and that after a
suspicious manner. To the foresaid pulpits another is opposite, where the
Musicians sing at solemn Feasts, and from whence the Dukes newly created, are
showed to the people, and likewise the holy relikes (as they term them) are
showed twice in the year. The walls in the Church are so covered with the best
marbles, as the lime and brick cannot be seen: and these pieces of marble
with their spots and brightness, are very beautiful, whereof two are held for
admirable Monuments, which are so joined, as they lively represent the Image of
a man. Here Marino Morosini first of all the Dukes hung his Arms upon the
walls, whom the other Dukes after him in number forty three have followed, and
there hung up their Arms. In the midst of the Church hangs a banner, given
by the Citizens of Verona, in token of subjection, and two others for the same
purpose given by the Citizens of Crema and Cremona. The Marble pillars setin
Caves under the Church, bear up the pauement, which is made of pieces of the
best marble, carved and wrought with little stones of checker work very
curiously, especially under the middle globe of the roof, and near the great
door. And among the rare stones opposite to the singers pulpit, they show one
of such natural spots, as it is esteemed a Jewel, which by change of color
(they say) does show the change of weather. Moreover they show certain Images,
carved by the direction of the Abbot John Ioachim of old time, whereof many
show future events, as that of two cocks carrying a wolf upon their back,
which they understand to be Lewis the twelfth, and Charles the eight, French
Kings, casting Lodouico Sfortia out of his Dukedom, and in like sort, (to omit
many other more hidden) that of the Lions fat in the waters, and lean upon
land, which they understand to be the power of Venice by sea, and the weakness
by land. Besides they say the same Abbot caused the Images of Saint Dominicke
and Saint Francis to be drawn upon the door of the Sanctuary, long before
they lived; and the title of Saint is added to each of them, but the name is
not set upon the pictures, yet they both are painted in the habit of their
order. They show two like pictures drawn by direction of the said Abbot,
whereof they understand one to be the last Pope, under whom shall be one
shepherd and one fould: but they say it is unknown what the other signifies.
Before the new Chapel of the blessed Virgin, there be two little chambers,
whereof one is called the Sanctuary, in which their holy relikes are kept, the
other is called the Jewel house, because the treasure of Saint Mark (so they
appropriate all public things to Saint Mark) is there kept, and it is
vulgarly called Luogo aelle groie, that is, the place of the Jewels.

The Procurators of Saint Mark, keep this treasure, and make no difficulty to
show it to strangers of the better sort. In this place I saw the Ducall Cap,
(vulgarly ill corn, or, Beretta Ducale) which the Dukes wear at their
Creation, being of inestimable value, for the multitude and price of the
Jewels, especially of a diamond upon the crown of the Cap, and a chrysolite
sct in the midst. I saw two crowns of Kings with twelve stomachers of pure
gold set with rich Jewels (which the Noblewomen wore at Constantinople before
the Turks took it) and twelve other Crowns all of pure massy gold; all which
the Venetians dividing with the French, had for their part, when they took
Constantinople, in the year 1203. I saw a saphyre of extraordinary bigness, and
a Diamond which the French King Henry the third gave to this state, when he
returned that way from Poland; and two whole Unicorns horns, each more then
four foot long, and a third shorter, and a little dish of a huge price, with
innumerable vessels, which for price, rarenes, and workmanship, are highly
valued. They say that a Candian thief took away this treasure, which is kept
with many doors and bars of iron, but that he restored it, being betrayed by
his fellow.

In a Chapel of this Church, is a Font of brass, with a brazen image of
Saint John baptizing, and the Altar thereof is of a stone brought out of Asia,
upon which they say Christ did sit, when he preached at Tyrus: but others say
it is the stone upon which the Patriarch Jacob did sleep. They show there the
chair of the blessed Virgin, of stone, and two pieces of marble spotted with
the blood of John Baptist, and the marble sepulcher of Duke Andrea Dandoli. In
the Chapel of the Cardinal Zeno, they show the Rock struck by Moses, and
distilling water, and two precious pieces of porphery. In the upper Vestry they
show the picture of the Virgin, painted by Saint Lukes hand, and the ring of
Saint Mark, and his Gospel written with his own hand, and a piece of the
Cross of Christ, and of the Pillar to which he was tied, and Books covered
with massy silver, and candlestickes, chalice, and many vessels of silver
gilded, all set with little precious stones, and the Bishops Miter of great
price, and many rich vestures for the Priests. The chief Priest of this Church
must be a gentleman of Venice, and though he be no Bishop, yet the Popes have
given him great privileges, and he is to be chosen by the Duke; because the
Dukes built this Church, whereupon it is ever since called the Dukes Chapel.
This Church of Saint Mark, is not unworthily called the golden Church, for the
rich ornaments thereof, especially for the Images thereof, painted ala mosaita,
like a work engraven. For the workmen do incorporate gold with little square
pieces of glass, and guild the same over; then breaking them in very small
pieces, they lay them upon the pictures.

Among the Parish Churches belonging to Saint Mark, is the Chapel of Saint
Theodore, where the Inquisitors of Religion sit thrice a week: namely the
Popes Nuntio, and the Patriarch (an Inquisitor by his place, and at this time a
Dominican Friar) and three Senators chosen by the Senate. Likewise the little,
but most fair Church of Saint Germinian, is seated in the market place of
Saint Mark, whose Priest according to the custom of Venice, is chosen by them
that have unmoueable goods in the Parish, and is confirmed by the Patriarch, in
which Church the most notable things are, three Images graven upon the great
Altar, and the sepulcher of John Peter Stella, Great Chancellor, and the Altar
of Lodonito Spinello, and the Monument of James and Francis Sansouine, famous
engrauers. In the Church of Saint Mary Zebenigo, the Monuments of Sebastian
Fosearint, a Philosopher, and of Jerome Molini, a Florentine Poet, and the
picture of the Lords Supper. In the Church Saint Vitale, the artificial statua
of that Saint on horseback. In the Church Saint Angelo, built by the family of
the Morosmi, the Altar of the holy Sacrament. In the Church of Saint Fantino,
the Architecture, and among other Images, the head of a Crucifix, and the
singular Images of the blessed Virgin, and Saint John, painted standing by the
Cross. In the Vestry of Saint Fantino (whose Monks use to accompany and
comfort those that are executed) the two Altars, and in the first of them the
brazen Images of the blessed Virgin and Saint John, and in the second the
excellent Marble Image of Saint Jerome. In the Parish Church of Saint Luke,
seated in the midst of the City, amonument of four most learned men, and
another of Peter Aretine, called the scourge of Princes, are the most
remarkable things. The Inquisitors worthily condemned the books of this
Aretine, for the filthiness of them (howsoever they be yet commonly sold) and
the common report is, that they also commanded his horrible Epitaph to be
blotted out, which was set in this Church of Saint Luke, in these words;

Qui gaice l'Aretin' Poeta Tusco,
Chi disse mal' d'ogniun', four a che di Dio,
Scusandosi, dicendo, is nol' conosco.
Here lies the Aretine, a Poet of Tuscany,
Who spoke ill of all but of God,
Excusing himself, saying, I know him not.
Of the same Aretine says Ariosto:

Ecco il flagello de'i Principi, Il Diuin' Pietro Aretino
Behold the scourge of Princes The Divine Peter Arctine.


In the stately Church of Saint Saluatore, the Marble image of Saint Ierem,
another of him, and a third of Saint Laurence, and the great Altar of pure
silver, are curiously engraven: and in the chapel of the holy Sacrament, the
Image of Mary Magdalen; and in another chapel, the Image of Saint Augustine,
praying among his Monks; and not far off two Images of the Monument erected
to Duke Francis Venerio: all painted with great Art, and the Altar of the
blessed Virgn equal, or to be preferred to the best in the City: the Altar of
St Antony, and two Monuments of Dukes, all adorned with rare engraven and
painted Images, and a fair pair of Organs. In the Church of Saint Bartholmew,
the picture of Manna falling from heaven, and the brazen Images of Christ, of
the four Evangelists, 'and six Angels. In the Church of Saint Giuliano, many
pictures, but especially that of Christ carrying his Cross, and near the
door another of Saint Jerome, and two Marble Images upon the Altar. In the
Church of Saint Stephen, rich with Marble and pillars, the Marble Images of the
Apostles, with the pillars whereon they stand, and the Altar engraven with
brass, and the Monument of James Suriani, and another of Anthony Cornari with
this inscription:

Antenij ad Cineres viator adsta
Hic Cornarins ille, quem salebant,
Rerum principia and Deos docentem
Olim Antenoria stupere Athena,
Accitus Patrias subinde adoras,
Ornatus titulis fascibusque,
Doctrina venetam beauit vrbem.
At the ashes of Anthony, passenger stand,
This is that Cornarius whom of old,
Teaching the principles of Nature and the Gods,
Antenors Athens was wont to admire.
After called home to his Country,
Graced with Titles and Magistracy,
With his Learning he made Venice happy.
These things I say are in these Churches most remarkable.

The second sextary on this side the channel, vulgarly Il sestiero di
Castello, has the name of the Castle Oliuolo, which seated toward the sea,
may seem to be divided from the City, yet it is joined thereto by a long
bridge. Of old it was a City by it self, and therefore the Dukes Throne being
established in the Island Realto, the Bishops seat was made here, who is
invested by the Duke, and was consecrated by the Patriarch of Grado, till that
being extinguished, this was raised to the dignity of a Patriarch, in the year
1450. In the Cathedral Church of Saint Peter, this is written upon the
Chapel in Latin; Who ere thou be that approachest, worship: Within these
grates of Iron the cross is enclosed, that is adorned with three hairs of the
beard of Christ, with a nail, the cup in which he drunk to his Disciples, and
with a piece of the true Cross, etc.

This Patriarcall seat has two old pulpits of marble, the monuments of the
Bishops and Patriarchs, which with the adioining Palace of the Patriarchs, are
the most remarkable things thereof. In the Church of John Baptist in Bragola,
many curious pictures, the sepulcher of that Saint gilded over, the Image of
Christ, the pictures of the less Altar, especially that of Christ baptized,
that of Saint Hellen, that of Christ's resurrection, and the lively picture of
Christ sitting with his Apostles at his last supper. In the Church of Saint
Mary Formosa, this inscription is read; Vincentius Capellus most skilful in
Navigations, and Prefect of the Galleys, nolesse praised of old, who received
signs of honor from Henry the seventh, King of Britany, etc. There, upon the
great and very fair Altar, the Images of the four Evangelists, and upon the
top, that of Christ's resurrection, and of two Angels. In the Church Saint
Marina, the statua on horseback erected by the Senate to Tadeo della volpe of
Imola, and the great Altar, with the pillars of prophry. In the Church of Saint
Leone, the Images of Saint Jerome, of Christ at supper with his Disciples, of
John the Evangelist, and Saint Michaell, all painted by the hands of most
skillful workmen. In the Church of Saint Anthony, four most fair Altars (in
the second whereof the Image of Christ, and in the third rich with excellent
pillars, the History of ten thousand Martyrs painted, and in the fourth the
espousals of the blessed Virgin, areal painted with singular Art) and a foot
statua erected by the Senate to Victor Pisanus. In the Church of Saint
Dominicke, the library, and pictures of the Altars. In the Church of Saint
Francis di Paola, many things given upon vow, and hung upon the walls. In that
of Saint Francis della vigna, a very fair and stately Church, the Altar of the
Chapel belonging to the Family Grimani, and the pictures and brazen images of
the same: and in the Chapel of the Family Dandoli, the picture of Saint
Laurence martyred, and in the Chapel of the Iustiniani, being very rich, the
Images of the four Evangelists and twelve Prophets. In the Chapel of our
Lady, the monument of Mark, Anthony, Morosini, Knight and Procurator (famous
in the war which the French King Lewis the twelth, made in Lombardy, and
thrice Ambassador from the State) also the famous library of this monastery,
and the bells (which they say were brought out of England after Queen Mary's
death.) In the Church of the Saints, John and Paul, (being one of the chief
Churches) the situation, the architecture, the pictures, and the monuments of
sixteen Dukes; and another of Mark, Anthony, Bragadini (who having defended
the Island Cyprus from the Turks, when they took it, had his skin fleed off,
by the command of the tyrant, against his faith, in the year 1571.) Also three
horsemens statuaes, one to Leonardo de Prato, Knight of Rhodes, another to
Nichola Orsino Count of Pitiglia, both erected in the Church, the third for
greater honor erected in the market place, to Bartholmeo Coleoni of Bergamo,
for his good service to the State in their Wars; all three crected by the
Senate. Also a foot statua erected by the Senate, to Deunys Naldo, a most
valiant Commander of their foot, and the stately sepulcher of James de
Cauallis, and the Chapel of the Rossary (magnificall in the architecture, in
rare marbles, in the art of engrauers, and excellent pictures, especially that
of Christ crucified.) In the Church of Saint Mary delle Virgini, (a Cloister of
Nuns, built by the Dukes, and belonging to them by special right) two marble
sepulchers. In the Church Saint Gioseppe, the admirable monument of the Germani
(with admirable Images engraven of the Duke Grimani created, and his Duchess
Morosini, crowned, and the like curiously wrought:) also the Image of Christ
transfigured, and another of Christ buried, are the most remarkable things.
And whereas the graven images of this Church, be of rare beauty, they say that
the chief of them were brought out of England, after the death of Queen Mary.
In the Church of Saint Fustina (a parish Church, and yet the chief cloister of
Nuns, twice rebuilt by the family Morosini,) two curious statuaes of marble
of Paros. In the Church of the Holy sepulcher, (being a cloister of Nuns) the
sepulcher of Christ like that at Jerusalem, of ophites and like stones. In
Saint Zachary a cloister of Nuns, the pall of the Virgin painted, another
like it in the chapel, the sepulcher or Altar under which the said Saint
(father to John Baptist) is laid, and at the back of the great Altar, three
sepulchers of Porphry and Ophyts, the stones of the great Altar, and the
stately architecture of the Church, are the things most remarkable: and the
same cloister has great revenues. In general understand that the Churches are
for the most part built of brick, and some few of free stone, though they be
so covered with Marbles and like stones, as the brick or free stone is scarce
seen in the inside. In the Priory of St John, belonging of old to the Templary
Knights, and now to the Knights of Rhodes or Malta, it is remarkable that the
revenues thereof be great, and that the Priory is given by the Pope, which Paul
the third gave to the Cardinal Saint Angelo his nephew (for so they call their
bastards) whom Alexander the Cardinal of Farness succeeded, yet not as
Cardinal, but as Knight of Malta, and after him the Pope gave it to the
Cardinal Ascanio Colonna. And the most remarkable things in the Church are the
pall of the great Altar, the supper of our Lord painted, the picture of Christ
speaking with the woman of Samaria, and that of Herod's banquet, when he gave
John Baptists head to Herodia. The Greek Church belongs to this sextary, built
in Rio di San' Lorenzo. The almes-house Saint Lazero, feeds four hundred, or
five hundred poor people; for all that beg are sent thither, and they have
many of these houses. These are the most remarkable things in the Churches of
this sextary.

The third sextary, or sixth part of the City on this side the channel
(meaning toward the gulf of Venice) vulgarly is called Ilsestiero di
Canaregio, of the canes or pipes which they were wont to use in the building of
ships. In the Church of the Prophet Jeremy (built by three families, Morosini,
Malipieri, and Runandi, the sepulcher of Saint Magnus (who built eight Churches
when the City was first founded) and the Image of the blessed Virgin much
adored. In the Church of Saint Marciali, the Images as well of the great Altar,
as of the Altar of Angelo Raphaeli. In the Apostles Church (where excellent
sermons are made in the Lent,) the carved Image of our Lady upon the Altar, and
her picture upon the same painted by Saint Luke. In the Church of Saint John
Chrysostom, the pictures of three Theological virtues, and of Saint Mark,
and the carved Images of the Virgin, and the Apostles. In the Church of Saint
Giob, the ingrauing of the chapel of the Grimani, and of the Altar of the
Foscari; the picture of Christ in the garden, with his Apostles sleeping, and
the pictures of the next Altar, namely, that of the Virgin, Saint Sabastian,
and Saint Giob. In the Church of Saint Mary de serui, the pictures of the great
Altar, especially of the Virgins assumption, and also of the Virgins Altar, and
of Saint Augustins Altar, especial that of the wise men adoring Christ, and
the carved Images of another Altar, the Marble sepulcher of Duke Andrea
Vendramini, being the fairest of all other in the City, and the Oratory of the
banished men of Lucea, who first brought into this City the weauing of silk,
and of whom many were made Gentlemen of Venice. In the Church of Saint Mary
del' Orto, the huge Image of Saint Christopher, the History of Moses, and the
prophicies of the last judgment painted, the painting of the arched-roof, rare
for perspectiue Art, and che chief of that kind, the Monument of Jasper,
Contarini Cardinal, of the Marble of Paros, and the pillars of our Ladies
Altar, with many Marble stones. In the Church of Saint Mary de Crostechieri,
the ancient pictures, the notable pall of Saint Laurence, worth seven thousand
crowns, and the pictures in the chapel of Lewis Vsperi. In the Church of
Saint Lucia, the Monument and chapel of the Saints. In the chapel of Saint
Luigi, the great Altar, fairest of those built of wood. In the Church of Saint
Mary of the Miracles, the fairest of any Nunnery, for the beauty and rare
stones, the walls covered with Marble, two Marble Images of two children under
the Organs, (the works of famous Praxitiles,) the Images of marble of Paros,
the stones of Porphery and Ophytes wonderfully carved, the great Altar of
Marble, engraven with great Art, the brazen Images of Saint Peter, Saint Paul,
and of Angels. These are the things most remarkable. In the Church of Saint
Mary of Mercy, Sansouine witnesses this Epitaph, (which I will set down, left
any should think incredible, the like practices of Papists against Emperors,
and John the King of England,) in these words: To Ierom Sauina, a Citizen of
Venice, Prior of Saint Mary's, notably learned in good Arts; but more renowned
for piety, which he also showed at his death toward his enemy, who gave him
poison in the challice at the Lords Supper, by many arguments of his charity.
He died in the year MDCI. Also in the great school, the same is witnessed in
these words: To Ierom Sauina wickedly killed by poison given, (O horrible
villainy) in our Lords Supper, etc.

The fourth sextary or sixth part of the City, and first of those beyond the
channel, (meaning toward the Territory of Paduoa,) is vulgarly called of the
chief Church Il sestiero di San' Polo. In which Church of Saint Paul, the most
remarkable things are these: the picture of Christ washing his Apostles feet,
the pall of silver gilded, and the precious stones upon the great Altar; the
pictures of the Altar of the holy Sacrament, and of the blessed Virgin, and the
Images of Saint Andrew and the Apostles upon pillars. In the very fair market
place of the same Church, of old a market was weekly held, and to the year
1292, the market was held here on Wednesday, and in the market place of Saint
Mark, on the Saturday; but at this day none is held here, but both in the
place of Saint Mark, for the benefit of those that dwell there, and that the
houses may be more dearly let, which belong to Saint Mark. Near the Church
of Saint Siluestro, the Patriarchs of Grado dwelt, till the Bishop of Castello
Oliuolo was made Patriarch. In the Church of Saint James of Rialto, narrow, but
very fair, the precious stones and the pictures of great Art and antiquity,
and the five Altars. In the Church of Saint Mary Gloriosa, fair and great, the
Belfrey stately built, the Monument of the most famous Painter Titiano, two
Images of Marble near the great door, the Marble Image of Saint John, over
against the Florentine chapel, the chancell paued with Marble and adorned
with the graven Images of the Prophets, at the charge of the family Morosini;
the rare pictures of the great Altar, the Epitaph of Francis Bernardo; who
being employed into England in his young years, made peace between King Henry,
and the French King Francis, which many great men had attempted in vain, and
for this brave act was Knighted by both the Kings. These things in this church
are most remarkable.

The fifth sextary, and the second beyond the channel of the chief Church, is
called il Sestiero di Santa Croce: in which Church, being a cloister of Nuns,
Duke Dominick Morosini lies buried, with this inscription: Here lies Dominick
Morosini Duke of Venice, with Sophia his Duchess; he was a good Duke, and
most wise, full of faith and truth; etc. He took the City Tyrus, and under him
Istria and Pola were subdued with fifty galleys, where of were Captains his
son, and Marino Gradonico. This glorious Duke died in the year MCLVI. Also
the Marble pillars of the great Altar, the brazen Angels, and the brazen
Images, of Christ rising from the dead, of Saint Francis and Saint Anthony. In
the Church of Saint Simion Prophet, the picture of Christ's supper with his
Apostles. In the Church of St. Giacomo dell' Orio, a pillar esteemed for a
Jewel, a Marble pulpit, one of the fairest in the City, and the Images of the
chapel for christning. In the Church of Saint Eustace, the pictures of Christ
whipped, of Christ carrying his cross, and of Christ praying in the garden,
all of great Art. In the Church of Saint Mary Matter Domini, the great Altar of
most pure silver, and the passion of Christ engraven, the Altar of the blessed
Virgin with her picture; and the Altar of the holy Sacrament with the rich
Porphery and Ophyte stones; and the Marble Images of Saint Mark, and Saint
John the Evangelist. In the Church of Saint Andrew, the fairest of this
sextary, and a cloister of Nuns, the pictures of Christ crucified, and of his
supper with his Apostles, and the most fair Altars of the Virgin, Saint
Anthony, and Saint Nicholas. In the Church of Saint George the greater, (giving
name to the Island in which it is seated, over against the market place of Saint
Mark, and the chief Church next that of Saint Mark,) the pall of the great
Altar, and the brazen Images; two brazen Images of the Organs, the seats of the
wal-nut tree wonderfully engraven, another Altar built by Vincent, Morosini,
the Altar of Saint Stephen the first Martyr; the Altar of the blessed Virgin
and her Image, the Altar of Saint Lutia with her Image, and the wonderful
crucifix of another Altar. In the Church of Saint Mary delle gratie, the
infinite gifts hung up there upon vows. In the Church of the Holy Ghost, the
Pall of the great Altar, and the marble stones and pillars, and the brazen
candlestickes, and a skreene of brass gilded, and the pictures of Saint
Marks Altar, the candlestick of the great chapel, curiously carved, the rare
Images and arched roof of the Altar of the Cratch; being all the work of the
famous Painter Titiano, whose rare image also the Friars have: and in the
public refectory of the Friars, the admirable pictures of the resurrection, of
Sampson, and especially of Christ supping with his Apostles. In the monastery
of Saint Hellen, (giving name to the Island, and founded by Alexander Boromeo,
and being one of the fairest in the City) a cross of inestimable value. In the
Church of Saint Andrew della Certosa, the monument of Austine Barbadici, who
hartening the confederates to fight, was chief cause of the victory against
the Turks by sea, in the year 1571. and while he lived, by fair and rough
terms, kept the league unbroken, which presently upon his death was
dissolved. In the Church of Saint Nicholas del Liro, the sepulcher of Duke
Dominicke Contarini, rich with porphery and ophyte stones, and a well of fresh
water, lying very near the sea, and having so full a spring, as it serves all
the ships and galleys. The almes-house of Saint Lazerus, is built for lepers.
The old Lazereto is a pesthouse, where the Prior and Physicians have yearly
fee to attend the sick. Not far from that, is the new Lazareto, whither they
are sent who are suspected to have the plague: but as soon as they begin to be
sick, they are sent thence to the old Lazareto: and hither all suspected men
are sent to try their health, which if they keep for forty days, then they
are set free. These things are in this sextary most remarkable.

The sixth sextary, and the third and last beyond the channel, is of the form
of the Island, called Il sestiero di dorso duro. In the Church of the Saints,
Geruaso and Protese, the graven Images and pictures in the chapel of the holy
sacrament. In the cloister of Saint Agnes, the Prioresse brings up six
Virgins, which being of ripe years, are either married or made Nuns, and
six more of good families sent thither in their place. In the Church of Saint
Gregory, there is a second monument erected to Anthony Bragadini, traitorously
slain by the Turks at the taking of Cyprus. The Island Giudecca belongs to
this sextary, the chief Church whereof is Saint Eufemia, it having nine other
Churches. The Church of the Jesuits is called Saint Mary of Humblenes, and it
has pictured with great art the pals of the passion of Christ, of the Apostles
Peter and Paul, of Christ circumcised, and of Saint Francis, and the great
Altar is one of the fairest in the City. In the Church Carmini, a singular
pair of Organs; the Images of the blessed virgins, four Evangelists, and
Christ crucified: and upon the altar of Christ crucified, two stones shining
like crystal, which are esteemed for jewels. In the Church of Saint Mary of
Charity, the rich chapel of San Saluadore. In the most fair Church of the
Capuchine Friars, seated in the Island Giudecca, the images of brass, and the
fair screene of the great Altar. In the most fair Church of Saint Mary the
greater, being a Nunnery, the rare pictures of the greater chapel. In the
Church of the holy cross Della Giudecca, the monument of the Cardinal Francis
Morosini, sent Ambassador to the Turk, and Nuncio to Pope Sixtus the fifth, in
the French Court: and here the rest of his Family use to be buried. The
Monastery of the converted is for whores repenting. Another is built for Orphan
Virgins, the Church whereof has rich screenes of marble, with brass images:
and in the same live some two hundred and fifty Virgins of alms, and by the
work of their hands, which coming to ripe years, are either married or made
Nuns. These things are in this sextary most remarkable.

The Venetians have six fraternities or great schools, such as be also at
Rome, and the Gentlemen and Citizens all give their names to one of them, as in
England at London, the Citizens have companies, into which the King, Queen,
and Nobles, many times vouchsafe to be admitted. And in these schools, as it
were in Universities, they use to have exercises of religion. The first of them
is called Saint Mary of Charity, after the rule whereof, the rest are framed,
and the great Guardian thereof is chosen yearly, and wears a skarlet gown
with large sleeves, which they call Ducall sleeves, and he has the title of
Magnifito by privilege. These schools give dowries yearly to 1500. Virgins,
and distribute among the poor much money, meal, and clothes: for besides many
gifts by last testaments daily given to those uses, each of the schools has
some five or six thousand ducats in yearly reuenew, and they are governed
like common wealths. In the said school, the Images of the Apostles, and the
pictures, especially one of the blessed Virgin, and another of the four
Doctors of the Church, are very fair. In the school of Saint John the
Evangelist, the passion of Christ is wonderfully figured, and Phillip the
second King of Spain, and his son Ferdinand, and Don John of Austria, and
other Princes, have been of this fraternity. The third is of mercy. The fourth
of Saint Mark. The fifth of Saint Rocco, passing the rest in ceremonies and
pomp, and number of brethren. The sixth is of Saint Theodore, and each of
these has his Church and Palace, and precious monuments, and these are
subject to the counsel of ten; for there be many less schools, each art
having his school, and these are subject to the old Justice, and out of them
when need is, soldiers are pressed.

It remains to add something of the magnificall building of this City. And in
the first place, the market place of Saint Mark is paued with brick, and it
consists of four market places, joined in one; whereof two may rather be
called the market places of the Dukes Palace (ioining to the Church of Saint
Mark) the one being on the furthest side from Saint Mark, between the
palace and the great channel, the other right before the palace toward the
channel, four hundred foot in length, and some one hundred and thirty in
breadth. The third is before the Church door of Saint Mark, and lies in length
five hundred and twenty foot toward the Church of Saint Geminiano, and has
one hundred and thirty foot in breadth, which may more properly be called the
market place of Saint Mark. The fourth is on the other side of the Church,
toward the Church of Saint Basso. In this market place of four joined in one,
are solemn spectacles or shows, and all processions made, and there on
Ascension day, is the Fair held, and the markets on wednesday and saturday:
there they use to muster soldiers; and there the gentlemen and strangers daily
meet and walk. Before the door of Saint Marks Church, are three pieces of
brass carved, and for bigness like the bodies of trees, upon which at
festival days three rich banners are hung, in sign of liberty, or as others
say, for the three Dominions of Venice, Cypro, and Candia.

Under the tower of the Clock, fifty foot distant from Saint Marks Church, is
a passage to and from this market place; and this tower all covered with
marble, bears a remarkable Clock, which shows the course of the Sun and
the Moon daily, and the degrees they pass, and when they enter into a new
sign of the Zodiac, and above that the gilded Image of our Lady shines,
placed between two doors, out of one of which doors, only at solemn
Feasts, an Angel with a Trumpet, and the three Wise Men of the East following,
pass before our Ladies Image, and adore her, and so go in at the other door.
Above that, there is a carved Image of a Lion with wings, and upon the very
top, two brazen Images, called the Mores, which by turns striking with a
hammer upon a great bell, sound the hours.

The houses opposite to the Palaces of the Procurators of Saint Mark, are
called the houses of the State, and they belong to the Church of Saint Mark,
and having some fifty shops under the Arches of the upper roofes (where men may
walk dry when it raines) they yield great rents to the Church. Opposite to
these are the Palaces of the said Procurators, which are also in the said
market place, which I said to be more properly called the market place of Saint
Mark, and these being stately built, sixty six foot high, and the stones
curiously carved, do not only adorn the market place, but in summer give a
pleasant shade to passengers, besides that under the Arches of them, men may
walk dry in the greatest rain, and the shops under these Arches yield great
rents, and under these Palaces out of four little streets there be so many
passages to and from the market place. These Palaces are built at the charge
of the State, the nine Procurators being to have nine Palaces: for as yet they
were not all built; but in the mean time any palace falling void, it was
given to the eldest of them that had none, yet not according to their age, but
according to their election.

The steeple or belfrey of Saint Mark, distant some eighty foot from the
Church, and set over against it, is to be admired, not only for the
foundation, strangely laid under the earth; but also for many other causes. It
is built four square, each square containing forty foot, and it is three
hundred thirty three foot high, of which feet the pinnacle contains ninety
six, and the wooden Image of an Angel above the pinnacle covered with brass
and gilded, and turning with the wind, contains sixteen feet. It is adorned
with high pillars of marble, and with a gallery at the bottom of the pinnacle,
made with many pillars of brass, and upon the pinnacle with great marble Images
of Lions, and from the top in a clear day, men may see a hundred miles off the
ships under sails; and it bears four great bells, whereof the greater called
La Trottiera, is rung every day at noone, and when the Gentlemen meet in Senate
with like occasions: but when a new Pope or Duke is made, all the bells are
rung, and the steeple is set round about with wax candles burning. I went to
the top of this steeple, which has thirty seven ascents, whereof each has
fourteen less ascents, by which the going up is as easy, as if a man walked
on plain ground, at the contriuing whereof I much wondered. In the lodge of
this steeple, the four brazen Images of Pallas, Apollo, Mercury, and of Peace,
and above them, the figure of Venice, with the Dominion by sea and land, and
the Image of Venus the Goddess of Cyprus, and of Jupiter the King of Candia,
present themselves, and near the great gate the Images of the blessed Virgin
and of Saint John Baptist, are highly valued.

Right over against the Dukes Palace, in the foresaid second market place of
the palace, is the library, whose building is remarkable, and the architecture
of the corner next the market place of the Bakers, is held by great Artists a
rare work, and diverse carved Images of Heathen Gods, and Goddesses in the old
habit, are no less praised, as done by the hands of most skillful workmen. On
the inside, the arched roofes curiously painted, and the little study of iuory,
with pillars of Allablaster, and rare stones, and carved Images (in which an
old breniary of written hand, and much esteemed, is kept) are things very
remarkable. The inner chamber is called the study; in which many statuaes and
half statuaes, twelve heads of Emperors, and other things given to the State
by Cardinal Dominicke Grimani, are esteemed precious by all antiquaries. And
in this Library are laid up the Books, which the Patriarch and Cardinal
Bessarione gane to Saint Mark (that is to the State) by his last will, and the
most rare books brought from Constantinople at the taking thereof, and
otherwise gathered from all parts of Greece. Out of this Library is a passage,
to the chambers of the Procurators of Saint Mark: before you enter them most
fair statuaes, and on the inside rare pictures, draw your eyes to them.

Not far from thence are two pillars (the third whereof in taking them out of
the ship, fell into the sea, and could never be recovered) and they be of huge
bigness; for the erecting whereof, as a most difficult thing, great rewards
were given to a Lumbard, and immunity was given to him by privilege, for all
that should play at dice under them. Since it is accustomed, that all condemned
men are executed between these pillars, which of old were put to death near
the Church of Saint John Bragola, and upon one of these pillars stands the
brazen statua of Saint Mark, under the form of a Lion, and upon the other
stands the marble statua of Saint Theodor. The statua of Saint George bears a
shield, in token that Venice rather defends it self, then offends others,
since the right hand carries a defensive weapon.

Behind the Library is the Mint house (vulgarly called La zecca, whereupon I
think the gold coin of the Venetians is called Zecchino) in which house it is
remarkable, that there is no wood in any part thereof, but for fear of fire
it is all built with stone, brick, and bars of iron. Here the great statuaes
of Giants, lifting up their massy clubs, as it were forbidding the entrance;
and in the court yard the statua of Apollo, holding wedges of gold in his hand,
to show that gold is made to grow in the bowels of the earth by the virtue of
the sun, are things remarkable.

From hence on the left hand is the market place, which I said to be the first
of the Palace, seated between the channel the Palace. And from hence on the
right hand is the fish market, in which (as likewise in that of Rialto) store
of good fish is to be bought twice in the day.

The market place in which the said Bel-frey and Library are built, is also
adorned with the stately Palace of the Duke, all covered with Marble, and most
sumptuous in the carved Images and pictures, and in the pillars of the Arched
walk on the outside. The first stairs toward the second market place of the
Palace, and over against the said Library, are very stately, and are vulgarly
called Scala de Giganti, that is the stairs of the Giants, so called of two
huge Marble statuaes of Mars and Neptune, which the common people call Giants.
But the Palace has many other stairs, whereby men ascend thereunto. Opposite
to the aforesaid statuaes, are two other of Adam and Eve, but not so great as
they: and not far from thence is a stone gilded, with an inscription which
the Senate placed there, in memory of the French King Henry the third, whom
they entertained, passing that way from Poland into France. On the left hand is
the Chapel of Saint Nicholas, which is the Dukes private Chapel. Hence you
ascend into a large Hall (as they call it) or a large Gallery; in the midst
whereof the golden staites shine with gold, and two marble Images and rare
pictures. On the left hand of the said stairs, is the passage to that part of
the Palace, which is assigned to the Duke for his dwelling, and in the first
chamber, called the Dukes Arms, Sala del seudo, the pictures of Christ's
resurrection, and another of him crucified, are much praised, though it has
many other rare pictures. When you have ascended the golden stairs, your shall
see four rare pictures. From thence the way on the left hand leads to the
Chancery, where many chambers are adjoining, proper to diverse Councels of
State, all adorned with graven Images and pictures of the best; namely, the
chambers of the Council rich in the painting of the arched roof. That of the
Pregadi, having general rare painting and caruing. That called Ia secreta, in
which the secret writings of the State is laid up. The Chapel of the
College, where the Duke and the Senators daily hear Mass, and it appears by
an inscription, that the Antiquities were of old laid up there, among the
pictures whereof, that of Christ's resurrection, and the Map of the Territory of
Venlce, are much praised. That of the Council of Tenn, in which the picture of
the Wisemen offering gifts to Christ is much praised, (near the same are
chambers, in which many rich Armors and rare Monuments are laid up.) And that
of the great Council, one hundred fifty foot in length, and seventy four in
breadth, adorned round about with rare pictures, namely on the side toward the
foresaid second market place of the Palace, the History of Frederlcke the
Emperor, and of Pope Alexander the third is cursorily painted. Toward the
foresaid first market place, lying between the Palace and the channel, the
History of Constantinople, taken by the Venetians and French, is painted; and
the capitulation of the voyage, made in the Church, and the rest of the Saints
in heaven, are reputed rare works.

The prisons of old were under this Palace of the Duke, but lately a new house
is stately built of the stone of I stria, for that use near the bridge Della
Paglia.

The four square market place of Rialto, is compassed with public houses,
under the arches whereof, and in the middle part lying open, the Merchants
meet. And there is also a peculiar place where the Gentlemen meet before noone,
as they meet in the place of Saint Mark toward evening; and here to nourish
acquaintance, they spend an hour in discourses, and because they use not to
make feasts one to another, they keep this meeting as strictly as Merchants,
lest their frinship should decay. The Goldsmiths shoppes lie thereby, and over
against them the shoppes of Iewellers, in which Art the Venetians are
excellent. There is the Palace of a Gentleman, who proving a Traitor, the
State (for his reproach) turned the same into a shambles, and some upper
chambers to places of judgment. The fish market lies by this shambles, a great
length along the bank of the great channel, and in the same shambles and fish
market, as also in the like of Saint Mark, great plenty of victuals,
especially of fish, is daily to be sold. A public Palace stately built lies
near the bridge of Rialto.

This bridge in the judgment of the Venetians, deserves to be reputed the
eighth miracle of the world. The old being pulled down, this new bridge began
to be built in the year 1588, and was scarce finished in three years, and is
said to have cost two hundred fifty thousand Ducats. It is built of the stone
of Istria, upon one arch over the great channel, and the ascent to the top
has thirty six stairs on each side, and upon each side of these stairs, are
twelve little shoppes covered with lead: not to speak of the carved Images, of
the blessed Virgin, the Angel Gabriel, and the two protecting Saints of the
City, namely Saint Mark, and Saint Theodore.

Thereby is a Palace called Il Fontico de i Todeschi, because the Dutch
Merchants have it to their use.

The Armory built for all kind of Arms and Munitions, vulgarly called l'
Arsenale, as it were the Tower of the Senate, is compassed with walls being in
circuit more then two miles, where some four hundred Artificers are daily set
on work about naual provisions, and they receive weekly for wages about one
thousand two hundred ducats. Within the same is a several place to make
cables, and within the circuit hereof and no where else in the City, they build
Ships and Galleys, and there be always in the same about two hundred galleys
ready for service. To conclude, the State of Venice, being not grown to full
strength, did in a hundred days space, arm one hundred galleys against
Emanuel Emperor of the East, and no doubt their strength has every day grown
greater to this time. In the said compass of the Armory, lies a great boat
called Il Bucentoro, because it carries about the number of two hundred; which
boat has upon it a kind of chamber which uses to be richly hung, and covered
over, when in the same the Duke and Senators be carried by water at some times
of solemnity, especially at the feast of the Ascension, when of an old custom,
they go forth to espouse the sea, by the ceremony of flinging a ring into the
same, and to challenge the command thereof, given them by Pope Alexander the
third.

The Jews have a place to dwell in severally, called Il Ghetto, where each
family has a little house, and all have one courtyard common, so as they live
as it were in a College, or Almes-house, and may not come forth after the
gates are locked at night, and in the day they are bound to wear a yellow cap.

Though the City be seated upon little and narrow Islands, in the midst of
marshes and tides of the sea; yet has it gardens in great number, and
abounding with rare herbs, plants, and fruits, and water conduits, which with
thecarued Images and pictures, (out of the Gentlemen's courtesy) may be seen
by any curious stranger.

The public Libraries of special note are these: Di S Giouanni and Paolo: di
San' Francesco: di San' Stefano: di San' Georgio Maggiore: and di Sant'
Antonio. Also private Libraries may be found out by those that be curious, and
will be after the same manner easily showed them, and are indeed most worthy
to be sought out for the rareness of many instruments, pictures, carved
Images, Antiquities, and like rare things: For the Venetians being most sparing
in diet and apparel, do exercise their magnisicence in these and the like
delights, and these precious Monuments, they will with great courtesy show to
any strangers, or to any loving antiquities, which my self-found by experience,
more-specially at the hands of Sigr. Nicolao vendramini, a Gentleman dwelling
in the Island Give decca, who most courteously showed me and my friends, though
being altogether unknown to him, some rare clockes, admirable carved Images,
and a pair of Organs having strange varieties of sounds.

The Palaces of Gentlemen were called houses, but are, and worthily deserve to
be called Palaces, some hundred of them being fit to receive Princes. For
howsoever this Commonwealth at the first founding, was tied by many laws to
mediocrity, and the equality among the Citizens, yet pride has by degrees
seized upon the same. The said Palaces have one door toward the Land, and
another toward the water, and most of them have gardens. The foundations are
laid of Oak in the waters, and the stone of Istria is much esteemed. The
flooers of the upper rooms are not boorded, but plastred with lime tempred
with tiles beaten to dust. The windows are for the most part very large, the
greater rooms lying almost altogether open to receive air, but the lodging
chambers have glass windows, whereof the Venetians brag, glass being rare in
Italy, where the windows are for the most part covered with linen or paper.
And howsoever glass be common with us on this side the Alps, yet it is
certain that the glass makers of Venice, dwelling in the Island Murano, have a
more noble matter, and thereof make much better glass then we can. To
conclude, as I said the Venctians are most sparing in diet and apparel, so not
only in the building of their houses, but in the furniture thereof, the
general sort passes their degree, and many of the Gentlemen use Princely
magnificence. These are accounted the chief Palaces: That belonging to the
Procurators office, near the Church of Saint Anthony. The old Palace which
belonged to the Templary Knights. That of the family Gritti near the bridge
Della Madonna. That of Alexander Gritti, near the market place of Saint John
Bragora. That of Dandoli, near the bridge Della Paglia. The Palace near
Saint Francis Church, which the Senate bought, and use to assign it to the
dwelling of the Popes Nuncio. That of the Duchess of Florence, built upon the
channel of the Dukes Palace. That of the Vetturi, near the market place of
Saint Mary. That of the Patriarch Grimani, near the Malipieri. That of the
family Georgij, near the same. That of Francis Priuli. That of Lodwick
Georgij. That of the Capelli. That of Peter Giustniani. That of those of
Pesaro, near the Church of St. Benedict. That of the Loredani near Saint
Stephens Church. That of Zeni. That of Contarini. That of Siluester Valierij,
near the Church of Saint Job. That of the Cornari, near Saint Paul's Church.
That of James Foscarini, near the Church Carmeni, That of the Michaeli, near
Saint Lewis Church. That of Lewis Theophili, near the Church Della
Misericordia. The chief Palaces upon the channel are these. That of the
Loredani. That of the Grimani, near Saint Lucia. That of Delphini. That of the
Cornari, near Saint Maurice Church, and that of the Foscarini, an old building
but having the best prospect of all the rest. In which the Venetians
entertained the French King Henry the third. To conclude, there be two rich
Palaces in the Island Giudecca, one of the Dandoli, the other of the Vendramini.

In this famous City are twenty thousand families, and three thousand of the
Gentlemen, and no age has been so barren, which has not yielded worthy men
for Martial and civil government and learning. Of this City have been three
Popes, Gregory the twelfth, Eugenius the fourth, and Paul the second, and many
Cardinals of which these are the chief: Peter Morosini, Mark I andi, Anthony
Corari, John Amideus, and in our age John Baptist Zeni, and Dominick Grimani.
Also Peter Bembus was a Venetian, whom Pope Paul the third made Cardinal.
Here was borne Pantalean Iustinianus, Patriarch of Consiantinople when the
French ruled there. And Venice has yielded many most learned men, Andrew
Dandoli, Duke Francis Barbarigi, Andrew Morosini, who wrote the History of his
time in Heroique Verse. And many famous Civil Lawyers, Lodwicke Foscarini, and
Ierom Donati. And many rare engrauers, and painters, Titiano, Tenterotto, and
Belino. And many Commanders in the war, John Bolari, Marino Gradinici,
Dominick Morosini, (the first prouisors of Military affairs,). Andrew
Morosini, and Simion Dandoli, and many more famous in all kinds of virtue, to
the chief whereof I have said, that the Senate erected many Statuaes and
Monuments. Give me leave to add this of the family Morosini, namely, that
among the most famous men, whose pictures were in the chamber of public
meeting, before it was burnt; there were the pictures of Barbaro and Marco, and
Autonia, Morosini: And that the same family has given three Dukes, Dominico,
Marino, and Michaele; and three Patriarchs, and twelve Procurators of Saint
Mark, (which number few families have attained, only that of the Contarini,
that of the Iustiniani, and that of the Grimani, have a little passed it). And
that my self being at Venice, found there eighty Gentlemen of this name. Let
the Reader pardon this observation, which I make for the Confonancy of that
name with my own, only differing in the placing of a vowell, for more gentle
pronuntiation, which the Italian speech affects; yet these Gentlemen being of
one family, write their names somewhat diversity, some writing in their own
tongue Morosini, others Moresini, and in the Latin tongue, Morocenus, and
Maurocenus.

Of the hiring of chambers, and the manner of diet in Venice, I have spoken
jointly with that of Paduoa, in the description of that City, only I will
add, that this City abounds with good fish, which are twice each day to be
sold in two markets of Saint Mark and Rialto, and that it spends weekly five
hundred Oxen, and two hundred and fifty Calves, besides great numbers of young
Goats, Hens, and many kinds of birds, besides that it abounds with sea
birds, whereof the Venetian writers make two hundred kinds, and likewise
abounds with sauoury fruits, and many salted and dried dainties, and with all
manner of victuals, in such sort as they impart them to other Cities. I will
also add that here is great concourse of all nations, as well for the pleasure
the City yields, as for the free conversation; and especially for the
commodity of traffic. That in no place is to be found in one market place
such variety of apparel, languages, and manners. That in the public Innes a
chamber may be hired for four sols a day; but for the cheapenes and good
dressing of meat, most men use to hire private chambers, and dress their own
meat. That in the Dutch Inn each man paies two lires a meal. That no stranger
may lie in the City more then a night, without leave of the Magistrates
appointed for that purpose; but the next day telling them some pretended causes
of your coming to the Town, they will easily grant you leave to stay longer,
and after that you shall be no more troubled, how long soever you stay, only
your Host after certain days gives them account of you. To conclude this
most noble City, as well for the situation, freeing them from enemies, as for
the freedom of the Commonwealth, preserved from the first founding, and for
the freedom which the Citizens and very strangers have, to enjoy their goods,
and dispose of them, and for manifold other causes, is worthily called in
Latin Venetia, as it were Veni etiam, that is, come again.

From Venice to Farraria are eighty five miles by water and land: and upon the
third of February (after the new style) and in the year 1594. (as the Italians
begin the year Anno. 1594.
the first of January) and upon Wednesday in the evening, my self with two
Dutchmen, my consorts in this journey, went into the Bark, which weekly
passes betwixt Venice and Ferrara. The same night we passed twenty five miles
upon the marshes, within the sea bank, to Chioza or Chioggia, or (to speak
vulgarly, the better to be understood in asking the way) a Chioza, the first
village on firm land, or rather seated in an Island, where the Ditch Clodia
makes a Haven. The next morning in the same Bark we entered the River, and
passed fifteen miles to the Village Lorea, and after dinner ten miles in the
territory of Venice, and eight miles in the Dukedom of Fervaria to Popaci, and
upon Friday in the morning twenty two miles to Francoline, where we paid for
our passage from Venice thither, each man three lires and a half. By the way
on land upon both sides the River, we passed a pleasant plain, and fields of
come divided by furrows, in which furrows Elmes were planted, and upon them
Vines grew up to the tops. Such is the manuring of Lombardy, or the Lower part
of Italy toward the West, where the Vines growing high, yield not so rich
wines, as in the other parts of Italy upon mountains and hills, upon the sides
whereof the Vines supported with short stakes, and growing not high, yield much
richer wines. By this way our Bark stayed many times in Villages, where we had
time to eat, or to provide victuals to be carried with us; and we had an
Ingistar, or measure of wine, something greater then our pint, for three sols
of Venice: we bought bread after the weight, for they have loaves of all
prices, in which a stranger cannot be deceived. It is the fashion to see the
meat in the kitchen, and to agree of the price before you eat it, which if you
do not, you shall be subject to the Hosts insatiable avarice, who take
pleasure to deceive strangers. And the price of the meats you may understand,
by the Italians, whom you shall see buy of the same. And if the decrenesse
displease you, you may carry dry figs and raisons, and dine with them, the
price of bread and wine being certain; but you must sup at your Hosts
Ordinary, if you will have a bed. I said that we left our Bark at Francoline,
where we might have hired a coach to Ferraria, for which we three should have
paid twenty two bolinei, but the way being pleasant to walk, we chose rather
to go these five miles on foot.

Ferraria is a very strong City of Fiaminia, and near the City, the River Po
dividing it self, has made a long and broad Island, which now is grown to
firm land. Ferraria.
It was compassed with walls by the Exarches of the Eastern Emperors, Lords
thereof, and after it was subject to the Bishops of Raucnna; then it came into
the hands of the Princes of the family of Este, the lawful heirs whereof
possessed it to the year 1394, when it passed to the line of Bastards. These
Princes of Este were at first Marquesses, and afterward were created Dukes,
and Hercules of Este was the third Duke, who lived about the year 1550. At
this day the family of Este being extinct, the Bishop of Rome has invaded this
Dukedom. The City seated in a plain, is compassed with a fenny bank, and is
of a triangular form, the three corners being toward the North, West and
South. On the South side the river Po did run of old, but it has now left
his bed, which is dried up to firm land. But the less branch thereof runs
from Francoline to Chioza, where it falls into the sea, the greater making many
lakes at Comatio, yields the Duke much profit by the fishing of eeles. In the
heart of the City is a large market place, and joining thereunto a little
Island, in which the father of Hercules of Este built a stately Palace, called
Belueder, and in the market place before the door of the Palace, there is a
statua sitting in a chair, erected to Duke Burso, and another of a horseman,
and of brass erected to Duke Nicholas. The streets are broad, and very dirty
in winter, and no less subject to dust in summer. The houses are built of
freestone, but according to the building of Italy, are almost flat upon the
top, so as that upper roof has neither chambers nor windows. The houses are
not built one near the other, but divided with most pleasant gardens, and
dispersed.

On the North side of the City without the walls, the Duke has a large Park
for hunting, and to keep therein many strange beasts. There be two stately
Palaces besides the Dukes; one of the Bentiuoli, the other of Caesar, Nephew
to Duke Alfonso, who being eighty years old, begot him of a Concubine; and
because the Popes had intruded themselves into the succession of this Dukedom,
which this holy mother the Church daily gaped to enjoy, upon the want of
lawful heirs males; the Duke could not obtain by entreaty, or any money, to
have the right of succession conuaied to this Nephew. And howsoever he were now
eighty years old, yet the opinion of his command in miltary affairs, made the
common people report, that the Pope would grant the succession to his Nephew,
upon condition he should lead an Army into Hungary against the Turks. But the
event showed, that the Popes thought nothing less: for this Caesar defending
his possession fearfully, the Popes have since that time, and long before I
wrote this, invaded this Dukedom, and united it to the Patrimony of Saint
Peter. The circuit of the City is said to contain seven miles, and in the same
is an University little frequented, and a fair College wherein the professors
read. The Duke has two stables, in the one, one hundred twenty horses for
coaches, in the other fifty for the saddle. In the Beneuentane Monastery, is
the sepulcher of the Poet Ariosto, borne in this City, and it is of red Marble,
with this inscription in Latin;

To Lodwick Ariosto Poet, a Patrician of Ferraria, Augustine Musicus, to so
great a man and so well deserving of him, has caused this Monument and Image
of Marble to be erected at his own proter cost, in the year of the Lord M D
LXXIII, Alfonso the second being Duke: he lived LIX years, and died in the
year of the Lord M D XXXIII the eighth of the Ides of June.

The Statua of Marble is to the shoulder, and is set over his Tomb with those
verses:

Hic Ariostus est situs, qui comico,
Aures Theatri sparsit vrbanas sale;
Satyraque mores strinxit acer improbos;
Heroa culto qui furentem carmine
Datumque curas cecinit, atque pralia;
Vates corona dignus vnus triplici,
Cui trina constant, quae fuere vatibus,
Graijs, Latinis, vixque Hetruscis singula.
Here Ariosto lies, whose pen still feasts,
The Civil ears on stage with comic ieasts,
Whose Sayters scourged the foul sins of his time;
Who sung the frantic worthy, in sweet ryme:
Great Dukes, fierce battles, and their pensive care.
Thus has one Poet, three crowns to his share;
Greek Poets, Latins, Tuscanes, each scarce one
Of these attained, he has all three alone.
In the Monastery Certosa there is a round pinnacle, the Monument of Duke Borso.
In the Church of Saint Mary of the Angels, are laid up some trophies of victory
against the Venetians, which when a Citizen of Ferrara showed upon a time to a
Venetian, in fashion of bragging, he answered pleasantly and wittily: to my
remembrance, when you of Ferrara got this victory against us, we took the
Country of Poleseno from you, and though we were overcome yet we keep that to
this day. Ierom Saucnorolla a Friar was born in this City, who in a late age
was of great fame and authority among the Florentines, and for some opinions of
religion was burnt by the Pope. Here I paid thirty bolinei for a meal, in the
chief Inn, where we were well used, when in baser Innes we had paid more
with vile usage.

From hence they reckon thirty four miles to Bologna. We went on foot three
miles to the village La Torre della fossa, and in the midst of the way, we
observed the old bed of the River Po, which was now dried up. From hence we
hired a boat for four bolinei and four quatrines, and passed in a broad ditch
between high reeds, to a place called Mal' Albergo, that is, the ill lodging,
being nine miles; and we understood there, that four soldiers were drowned
the day before in the said ditch by their own folly, playing and tumbling in
the boat. We had now passed seven miles in the State of Bologno, and lodging
here, each man paid for his supper sixteen bolinei. The next morning a boat
went from hence to Bologna, but since they asked for each man's passage twenty
two bolinei, and that the day was fair and the way very pleasant, we chose to
go on foot these eighteen miles to Bologna. In the midway we came to a
Country Inn,. where they demanding excessive prices for meat, we for sparing
in the beginning of our long journey, and loath to be made a prey out of their
opinion of our gluttony, took bread and wine of them at the known price, and
dined with some provisions we had with us; namely, one pound of Raisons, for
which we had paid seven bolinei, a pound of figs at the same price, and a
pound of Almonds at the same price, bought at Ferraria to this purpose. After
this refection we went the rest of our journey through pleasant fields, manured
after the Lumbard fashion, before discribed.

When we entered the gates of Bologna, the soldiers demanded a courtesy of us,
which we gladly gave them, perceiving they would not search our portmanteaus,
Bologna.
which otherwise by their office they may do. This is a City of Flaminia, of
old subject to the Exarchate of Rauenna, til the Eastern Emperors were cast out
of Italy, by the conspiring of the Popes with the Kings of Lombardy, and so the
Exarchate was united to that Kingdom, and shortly after the Popes likewise
conspiring with the French King Charles the Great, against the Kings of
Lombardy, and dividing Italy between them, this City fell to the Popes share,
howsoever they did not then attain the possession thereof, or at least did not
keep it long: for afterward the City was subject to many tyrants, sometimes
under the Vicounts of Milano, and at last invaded by the Citizens thereof;
namely the Family of Bentiuoli, under pretense to defend the common liberty,
till the Pope about the time of the French King Lewis the twelfth, conspiring
with him to invade Italy, did cast out the Bentiuoli, and by little and little
reducing the Citizens to obedience, and using them to the Church government,
did at last set over them his Podesta, and a Cardinal Legate (both strangers)
to govern them. This populous City is of a round form, and of great circuit,
but the walls are round about almost fallen down. The City is seated in a large
plain, and such is the whole territory, only on the South Side without the
walls lie the Apennine mountains, which divide Italy almost in the midst, all
the length thereof even from Genoa, to the furthest limits of the Kingdom of
Naples, bordering upon: he sea toward the East. On the same South Side, are
the schools of the University, and the monastery of Saint Michaell, and the
rich stately monastery of Saint Dominicke, in which is the sepulcher of the
said Saint curiously engraven, and of white marble, and under a rich skreene
lies the body, which they superstitiously worship, and they show the place
where the Saint gave up his last breath. Their refectory or place where the
Monks eat, is fair and large, and the Cellars of wine, and their store
thereof are so great, as would better become the Temple of Bacchus, then a
Cloister of Monks. It has two foure-square Court yards, with arched Cloisters
to walk under, and they be pleasantly planted round about with Cedars, of
which they especially esteem one, planted by the hands of that Saint, who
likewise with his own hand did beautify a well of water no less esteemed by
them. Their public Library is much esteemed for many books of written hand,
wherein they brag to have a Bible written by the hand of Esdras. The building
of this monastery is very stately, and it has large galleries, as well below
under the Arches, as round about in the vpperroofe. Here is a monument of Hans
(that is John) son to the Emperor Frederick the second, and they have a
place given by privilege to the Dutch for burial. The building of the City is
anticke, and many houses seem to have been built by the Lombards. The
foundations of the houses are of free stone, and the rest for the most part of
brick, built with arched Cloisters toward the street, under which they walk
dry in the greatest rain. The Palaces of Gentlemen are built toward the
street, stately on the inside, but with little show on the outside, and they
all seem to have been built of old. The windows are not glased (which the
Venetians brag to be proper to their City, as a thing to be wondered at) but
they are covered with paper, whereof part is oyled over. Toward the West side
of the City, is a large market place two forked, in which is a fair conduit of
water, with the Images of Neptune, and diverse Goddesses pouring water out of
their mouths and breasts, and all made of metal. In this market place is the
Senate House, vulgarly called Il palazo della signoria, on the one side whereof
are the Courts of judgment, on the other the lodgings of the Governor. At the
very entry is a statua of brass, erected to Pope Gregory the thirteenth, a
Citizen of Bologna, which appears by an inscription in the Cathedral Church:
and within the Palace is a statua of white stone, erected to Pope Paul the
third, and another statua of a Giant. The stairs of the Palace are made
winding, and rising by little and little, give so easy an ascent, as a horse
may go up without difficulty: (the like staites be at Ferrara in the Dukes
Palace, and at Venice in the steeple of Saint Mark, and at Torge a City of
Germany.) Within the Palace is the statua of Julius the second, Bishop (or
rather the God Mars) of Rome, engraven to his shoulders, with aleane and
longface. Upon the door of the Palace is written in golden letters, that the
Emperor Charles the fifth held his Court there, when the Pope put the
imperial Crown upon his head, in the Church of Saint Petronius, which Church
is of the old Lombard building: and this Saint is the protecting Saint of the
City. Near the stately Cathedral Church of Saint Peter, is a house called the
mountame of piety, where poor men may borrow money freely, bringing pawnes, to
avoid the oppression of the jews usury. Among the Lombard buildings there is
an old Tower, called d' Asinelli, built of brick with four hundred seventy
two stairs, which they esteem one of the highest in Europe. From this Tower
without the gates, all the fields are full of Palaces and Houses. At the gate
of Saint Francis, is a pinnacle with this inscription. The Sepuicher of
Accursius, who wrote the gloss upon the Law, Son to Francis H us. In the
territory of this City is a medicinal water, found in the year 1375. very
famous throughout all Italy, of which is prouerbially said; Chibene l' Acqua
della Porretta, O che lo spezza, o che lo netta, that is, He that drinks the
water of Porretta, either it bursts him, or else it cleanses him. The strangers
students here, call the stately Palace of Cardinal Caup: the sins of the
Dutch, as built by the Fines imposed on them. We staid in this City two days,
and being three consorts, hired a chamber each man for four bolinei the day,
the Hostess giving us linen, and dressing our meat, and we paid for an Eele
by the pound five bolinei, (for they sell fresh water fish by the pound) for a
pike the pound four bolinei, for three apples two quatrines, for a pound of
raisons four bolinei, for a pound of small nuts four bolinei; for an ingestar
of wine (a measure somewhat bigger then the English pint) four bolinei, for a
wax candle six bolinei. It was now the time of Lent, and so we were forced to
eat only fish, as the Italians did.

In the territory of Bologna, there is a place almost an Island, called
Forcelli, which was an Island of old, and Historians witness, that the
Triumuiri, Augustus, Antonius, and Lepidus here divided the world between them.

From Bologna the right way for Rome is directly to Florence, which way I never
passed, disposing (as I thought) my journey more commodiously; yet for the
direction of other passengers, it will not be amiss to set down the way. From
Bologna to Pianore are eight miles, to Lograno six, to Scaricalasino five, to
Caurez three, to Fiorenzuola twelve, to Scarperia ten, to the bridge Saint
Piero two, and to Fiorenza or Florente two miles.

At Bologna we chanced to light upon post horses, being to return twenty miles
to Imola, and each of us paid five poli for his horse. By the way toward the
South were pleasant hills, toward the foot of the Apennine mountains. On the
left hand toward the North, were fields manured after the Lombard fashion
before described, and we passed by the Castle Saint Petro, (the Italians call
the walled Towns which have no Bishops seat, by the name of Castles.) When we
entered the gates of Imola, according to the custom, we delivered our swords
to a boy, who was to carry them to our Host, that he might keep them till we
went out of the Town; and here each of us paid two reali for our supper, and
half a reale for our bed. The next morning we rode ten miles to the City
Faenza, through a sandy way, and a barren soil, yielding some few vines
growing upon trees, and each man paid for his horse eight poli.

From hence our right way to Ancona, had been to Forli Cesena, and Rimini; but
our desire to see the old famous City of Rauenna, made us go out of the way
twenty Rauenna.
miles to the said City, through a dirty way, and fruitful fields of corn;
and each of us paid seven poli for his horse. Rauenna is a most ancient City,
whose walls the Emperor Tiberius either built or repaired. Here of old was the
harbor for the navy of Rome. Here the Emperor of the East, after the
Western Empire was extinguished, made the seat of his Exarch. After, by the
conspiring of the Popes, and the French Kings, Pipin and Charles the Great, all
the Cities of this Exarchate fell to the Popes share. Yet others write that the
French King only added Tuseany to the Patrimony of Saint Peter; and it is most
certain that these Cities for long time did not acknowledge the Pope for their
Lord, till at last the Popes in like sort conspiring with the French Kings,
Lewis the twelfth, and Charles the eight, had their aid to subdue these
Cities, and then Pope Julius the second by terror of his excommunications
extorted Rauenna and other Cities from the Venetians, and casting out the Lords
of other Cities, the Popes from that time, being very skillful to fish in
troubled waters, have gotten possession of all the territories, from the
confines of the State of Venice, to Ferraria, Bologna, and along the Coast of
the Adriaticke sea, to Ancona. It is said that Rauenna stands not now in his
old place, for at this time it is some two miles distant from the Sea: but the
soil thereof is most fruitful in corn, and unfit to yield wine, and it is
rich in pastures. The houses are built of brick and flint stone, and are so
old as they seem ready to fall. This City having been often taken by enemies,
has lost all the ornaments which it had, from so many Exarches and Kings of
Lombardy, and from the Bishops thereof, who were so powerful, as they strove
long time for primacy with the Bishops of Rome. On the North-side of the City
lies the sea, but distant from the same, and without the walls is a wood of
Pine-trees, and not far thence lie the ruins of a very old and most fair
Church, Saint Mary the Round, whose roof was admirable, being of one stone,
and in the same Church was the rich sepulcher of the Lombard King Theodoricus,
which the soldiers pulled down with the Church, to get the metals thereof.
On the East Side the sea lies some two Italian miles distant, where is the
Haven for ships, so much spoken of in the Roman Histories, where the navy of
Rome did winter, yet is it now neither convenient nor secure for ships; neither
indeed can any but very small boats come up to the Town. On the South Side
without the golden gate (built by the Emperor Claudius) lie the ruins of a
stately Palace, built by the same King Theodoricus, and likewise of the City
Caesaria. In a Chapel of the Cathedral Church is a most rich Font, and they
report that many Kingly monuments were of old in this Church. In the market
place lies a vessel of Porphry, a Kingly monument, which the Citizens in the
year 1564. brought from the foresaid sepulcher of King Theodoricus in the
ruined Church of Saint Mary, near the gate on the North-side. In the monastery
of Saint Francis, is the sepulcher of the Poet Dantes, with these verses in
Latin;

Exigua tumuli Dantes hic sort iacebas,
Squallenti nullis cognite pene situ.
At nune marmoreo subnix us conder is Area,
Omnibus and cultu splendidiore nites.
Nimiram Bembus Musis incensus Hetruscis
Hoc tibi (quem inpri nis hae coluere) dedit.
In a poor Tomb Dantes thou did lie here,
The place obscure made thee almost unknown,
But now a marble chest thy bones does bear,
And thou appearest fresh as flower new blown.
Bembus with Tuseane Muses ravished,
Gave this to thee, whom they most cherished.
In the year 1483. the sixth of the Kalends of June, Bernar: Bembus the
Praetor, laid this at his own charge: The strength, merit, and crown of the
Friars minorite couents. S. V. F. and these verses were added in Latin;

Iura Monarchtae, superos, Phlegetonta, lacusque
Lustrando cecini, voluerunt fata quousque.
Sed quia pars cessit melioribus hospita castris,
Actoremque suum petijt faelicior Astris.
Hic claudor Dantes, patrus extorris ab oris,
Quem genuit parui Fiorentia Matter Amoris.
The Monarchies, Gods, Lakes, and Phlegeton,
I searched and sung, while my Fates did permit;
But since my better part to heaven is gone,
And with his Maker among the stars does sit,
I Dantes a poor banishd man lie here,
Whom Florence Mother of sweet Love did bear.
In the Church of Saint Vitalis the pauement is of marble, and the walls all
covered with precious stones of many kinds, but unpolished as they were taken
out of the mines, show great antiquity and magnificence, and do not a little
delight the beholder. Also there be certain Images graven in some stones, I
know not whether by nature, or strange art, which are to be admired. Among
which I remember one stone had the picture of a Turk in all the apparel they
wear, another the Image of a Monk in his habit, another of a Priest with his
bald head, and two other, the one most like the foot the other the leg of a
man. There is an Altar of Alablaster, and the Church is of a round form, whose
roof is painted A la Mosaica, like engrauing (of which kind of painting rare
and much esteemed in Italy, I have spoken before in the description of Venice.)
In this Church is a fountain of water, which by virtue given it from this
Saint, (as they say) being thrice drunk off, gives remedy to the headache.
Another Church of Saint Geruasiue is so joined to this of Saint Vitalis, as it
seemed to me but a Chapel thereof; and in this Church also is the Saint
buried, of whom it has the name: and there be also the sepulchers of
Placidiae, sister to the Emperor Honorius, and of her sons and daughters,
and of her nurse, with her husband. Here we paid each man three poli for his
supper.

From Rauenna we rode thirty five miles to the old City Rimini (namely, ten
to Sauio, five to Ceruia, five to Cesnadigo, and fifteen to Rimini) through
wild fenny fields, and a great Wood of Pine-trees, and by the sandy shore of
the sea, between which and the Apenine Mountains (dividing Italy by the
length) the Valley was so narrow, as we continually did see the snowy tops of
those Mountains toward the South, and for the most part did see together with
them the Adriatique sea toward the North. In the foresaid Castle Cesnadigo,
the Postmaster would have forced us to take new posthorses, if he that let
our horses to us, had not pleased him, by the payment of some money: for the
posthorses are known by a list of furre they wear in their bridles; and if a
man ride into a Town upon a Post-horse, he must either go away on foot, or
take another Post-horse there, for no private man dare let him a horse, which
makes passengers loath to hier posthorses of return, though many times they
may be had at good rate, rather then he will return empty with them; yet if a
man will walk a mile or two, he may easily hier a horse in other Towns, which
are frequent in Italy. And let no man marvel, that these Princes favor the
Post-masters and Inkeepers to the prejudice of strangers, because in that
respect they extort great rents from them. By the way, in the Village Bel'
Aria, each of us paid two bolinei for passage of a River. The Brook Rubico,
now called Pissatello, by this way to Rimini, did run from the West into the
Adriatique sea, and there of old was a Marble pillar, with this inscription in
Latin; Here stay, leave thy Banner, lay down thy Arms, and lead not thy Army
with their Colors beyond this Brook Rubico; therefore if any shall go
against the rule of this command, let him be judged enemy to the people of
Rome, etc. And hereupon it was, that Julius Caesar returning out of France, and
first stopping here, and then after he had seen some prodigious signs,
passing over this Brook with his Army, uttered words in Lattin to this effect;
Let us go whither the prodigics of the Gods, and the sins of our enemies
call us. The Die is cast.

In the Marketplace of Rimini is a monument of the same Caesar yet remaining,
where Rimini.
words in the Latin tongue are graven in a stone to this effect; The Consuls of
Rimini did repair this pulpit, decayed with age, in the months of November
and December, in the year 1555. Under that is written; Caius Caesar Dictator
having passed Rubico, here in the Market place of Rimini spoke to his fellow
soldiers, beginning the civil war. In the same Marketplace of Rimini is a
pleasant Conduit of water. The City has no beauty, and lies in length from
the East to the West. On the West Side is a bridge built by the Emperor
Augustas, which they hold to be very fair. Toward the East is a Triumphall
Arc, built by the same Augustus, with old inscriptions, and a pinackle
erected, which shows the Flaminian way to Rome, and the Emilian way toward
Parma.

I said, that the Popes territory extends this way as high as Ancona, and
these inhabiters of Marca are accounted a wicked generation, the greatest part
of the cut-throtes and murderers dispersed through Italy, being borne in this
Country. Our Host used us very ill, demanding of each of us a poli for our
bed, and three polo for our supper; and when we desired a reckoning, demanding
for a little piece of an Ele one polo and a half, and for three little Soles
ten bolinei, besides that by the aforesaid privilege, he forced us (being
Postmaster) to take horses of him at what price he listed.

The next morning we rode fifteen miles to the Castle la Catholica, where is a
bridge dividing the territories of the Pope, and the Duke of Vrbine: then we
rode to Pesaro ten Pesaro.
miles, and each man paid for his horsefoure poli, and all our way was through
fruitful hills and little mountains.

This City has a fair round Marketplace, and a pleasant Fountain therein,
distilling water at eight pipes. The air is thought unwholesome; for which
cause, and the great plenty of fruit, nothing is more frequent here, then
Funerals in the Month of August, and the Inhabitants seldom live to be 50
years old: each of us paid a Polo for our dinner, calling for what meat we
liked, and agreeing first for the price.

From hence to Ancona ate forty five miles, and we hired three Horses for
twenty five Poli, with condition, that our guide (vulgarly called Veturale, or
Veturino, should pay for his horse-meate, and bring them back again. After
dinner we rode five miles to the little City Fano compassed with high walls of
Flint, and lying upon a hill-side toward the sea, and subject to the Pope,
where we did see a triumphall arck of marble, curiously engraven. Then we rode
fifteen miles more to Senogalita, a strong City, and subject to the Duke of
Vrbin. By the way we passed the Bridge Di Metro (having foure-score Arches) and
the Bridge Di Marctta (having fifty Arches), both built of wood, and very low,
as serving to pass over little Brooks; which notwithstanding, by reason of
the Mountains being near, do often ouer-flow. All this days journey was by
the Seashore on our left hand toward the North, and fruitful hills of corn
toward the South, over which hung the Apenine Mountains; whence many times
the waters descend violently, by reason of the narrow valley between the fea
and the said Mountains. It is prouerbially said of the Magistrate of
Senogallia; il Podesta commanda and fallo stesso: that is, The Governor
commands and does it himself; whereby it seems he is little esteemed. The
City is of a small circuit, but very strong, and the houses are built of
brick, with a roof something flat, after the Italian fashion. The Inn is
without the gate, and so the more comodious for strangers, who may come late,
and depart early, which they could not do, if their lodging were within the
walls. It is true, that he who buys has need to sell; for the Duke extorting
great rent from the Inkeeper, he in like sort oppresses the passengers: for a
short supper at a common table, each man paid four Poli, or Poali (a coin so
called of Pope Paul). The next morning we rode fifteen miles to Fimesino, and
ten to Ancona, having the sea on our left hand toward the North, and
fruitful mountains on our right hand toward the South. Fimesino is a Fort,
and belongs to the Pope, but the Inn without the gate belongs to the Duke of
Vrbine: And again, when you have passed the Bridge, all the Territory to
Ancona is subject to the Pope.

The City of Ancona is compassed with three Mountains, and has the form of
a Anconae.
half Moon. On the North side is a Mountain, upon which the Governor
dwelles, and upon the East side is another Mountain, and upon the side of
these two Mountains the City is built to the valley, and seaside, toward
the North. On the Southside is the third Mountain, upon which is the Castle
called Capoae Monte, built in the same place where the Temple of Venus stood;
and upon this side the City is narrow, there being no houses built upon the
Mountain, but only in the valey upon the sea. The Pope has soldiers in this
Castle, and thereby keeps the City in subjection: for the Citizens long
defended their liberty, and how soever they were subject to the Pope, yet
secretly chose their Magistrates every year, to the year 1532; at which time
Pope Clement the seventh built this Castle against the Turkish Pirates. but
besides he used it to bring the Citizens in absolute subjection. The streets
are narrow, and the ways ill paued with Flint. The Haven is of a triangular
form, and is now very pleasant, as of old it was of great fame for a most
secure Port, yet it seemed not to me capable of many or great ships. Perhaps it
was of old fit to receive the Roman Navy of Galleys; but since they have
neglected to preserve it. Traiane the Emperor repaired this Haven, and adorned
it with a stately triumphall Arc of marble, which remains to this day. About
this Haven there is pleasant walking, and the place where the Merchants meet,
called la Loggia, lying upon the sea, is as sweet an open room, as ever I
saw; but narrow, and nothing answerable for stately building to the Exchange of
London. It is beautified with sweet pictures, among which one of an Angel,
which looks right upon you, on which side soever you behold it, is much
esteemed. They have a proverb, one Peter in Rome, one Tower in Cremona, and one
Haven in Ancona (for the excellency of them). Near the gate of the City (to
my remembrance) on the East Side, is a very sweet Fountain, pouring water out
of many heads of stone.

At Ancona, according to the custom of passengers, we agreed with a Vetturine,
or letter of horses, that each of us paying him fifty five Poli, he should
find us horses, and horse meat, and our own diet to Rome; and to this end
his servant followed us on foot, after the fashion of the Italians, who ride
slowly, and these servants are called Vetturini, or Vetturals. Now we were to
cross the breadth of Italy, from the Adriatique to the Tyrrhene Sea. The first
day in the Morning, we rode fifteen miles to a little City, called Madonna di
Loretto, through fruitful Mountains, and passing an high Promontary. By the
way was an Altar, with this inscription in Latin; O passenger, go on merrily,
etc. Gregory the thirteenth has well paued the rest of the way. The like
inscription is in the ascent of the Mountain, upon which the little City
Loreto stands: for this way (in a fruitful Country of corn, and a dirty
soil) was paued at the charge of the said Pope.

A certain chamber has given beginning to this City and the Church thereof,
then I. oreto.
which nothing is esteemed more holy among the Papists; and because many gifts
of great price use to be given by vow to our Lady of this Church, the City is
well fortified against Pirates, who did once spoil the same, and were like
again to be invited by the hope of rich spoils to the like attempt, if the
Town lay unfortified. It is of little circuit, and lies in length from East
to the West, so narrow, as it has almost but one street in the breadth, and
all the houses of this street are Innes, or Shops of them that sell Beads to
number prayers. On the East side, after a steep descent of a Mountain, lies a
valley of two miles, and beyond that the sea. On the North side, to wards
Ancons, though the sea be very far distant, yet from this City, seated upon
a high Mountain, it may easily be seen. Upon the doors of this Church, famous
for men's superstitious worship, these verses are written:

Illotus tlmeat quicunque intrara, Sacellum,
In terris nullum sanctius orbis habet.
Enter not here un washed of any spot,
For a more holy Church the world has not.
At the Church door is a statua of brass erected to Pope Gregory the
thirteenth. As I walked about the Church, behold in a dark Chapel a Priest,
by his Exorcismes casting a devil out of a poor woman: Good Lord what fencing
and truly coniuring words he used! How much more skillful was he in the devils
names? then any ambitious Roman ever was in the names of his Citizens, whom he
courted for their voices. If he had eaten a bushel of salt in hell; If he had
been an inhabitant thereof, surely this Art could never have been more familiar
to him. He often spoke to the ignorant woman in the Latin tongue, but nothing
less then in Tullies phrase, and at last the poor wretch, either hired to
deceive the people, or (if that be more probable) drawn by familiar practice
with the Priest, or at least affrighted with his strange language and cries,
confessed her self dispossessed by his exorcisme. In the body of the Church, a
Table of written hand, in the Greek, Latin, and many other tongues, was
fastened to a Pillar, setting down at large the wonderful history of the
Chamber in the midst of the Church, which I confess was less curiously
observed by me, abhorring from that superstition, and hastening from thence as
much as I might; yet give me leave to set down the sum thereof out of the
itinerary of Villamont a French Gentleman. This Chamber or Chapel (says he)
is the very house, in which the Queen Virgin of Nazaret was Let the Reader
believe as he list. Woe to him that lelecues. Woe to him that believes.
borne, brought up, and saluted by the Angel, foretelling her of Christ's
birth, and in which Christ was conceived, and in which the Virgin dwelt after
Christ's ascension, accompanied with the holy Apostles, especially with Saint
John by Christ's command, which the Apostles after the Virgins death, for the
great mysteries done here, turned into a Chapel, consecrated to the
sacrificing of Christ, and dedicated the same, and with their own hands, made
the great Cross of wood, now set in the window of the Chapel, and in which
Saint Luke made with his hand the picture and Image now set above it. Let me
add: This Chapel from a House became a Chamber, and of a Chamber was made a
Chapel, and it is built of brick, and is thirty foot long, twelve and a
half broad. In the chimney (as Villamont says) as yet remain the holy ashes,
which no man dare take away, and the Altar also, upon which the Mass is sung,
was made by the Apostles hand. There is a room into which you first enter,
which is divided from the Chapel by an iron grate, for no man enters the
chapel without leave, but must say his prayers in the outter room; yet leave
is given to any that ask it. Villamont adds, that he found by diligent
search; that this Chapel was much reverenced in the primitive Church: but the
holy land being subdued by Sarasens, then by Turks; he faith it happened in the
year 1291. that this house was taken up from the foundations, by Angels, who
in the night miraculously carried it to the Sea shore of Sclauonia, where it
was made known to the people by the shining of the Virgins Image, and then by
a vision of a religious man, the Virgin her self made known the History to
him. He adds the Virgins Oration, wherein she gives her self many titles,
which in later ages were first invented, and she does so extol her own
praises with her own mouth, as he that reads the old song of the blessed
Virgin, would cry out with the Latin Poet, only changing the name. O how is
she changed from that Virgin, which so modestly spoke of her self.

Villamont adds, that messengers were sent into Palestina, who found this
History to be most true: yet this Chapel did not long abide in Slauonia, but
the Angels in the year 1294. took it up again, and transported it to this
Sea coast of Italy, where again it was made known by the shining of the
Image, and many miracles daily done; whereupon the Chapel of the Image was
called Madonna di Loreto, that is, our Lady of Loreto. And because thieves
lying in the wood, did spoil strangers, who daily came thither for devotion,
the Angels (as he says) the third time took it up, and set it down in a
private possession of two brothers, who disagreeing in the division of the
profit rising by the concourse of people, the Angels the fourth time took it
up, This Image never rested till it came into the Popes Territory where it is
not more helpefull to others, then profitable to the Pope and Church men.
and placed it in this firm seat, where now it remains. After it was often
visited by strangers, Pope Paul the second built an other stately Church over
it, Pope Leo the tenth having first fortified the little City against Pirates.
Let me add, that Pope Sixtus the fifth, borne in this Marca of Ancona,
established a Bishop in this Town, and so made it a City. Villamont relating
the treasure of this Church, among the rest, names certain Mapps of Cities,
and Mountains, and the Images of the twelve Apostles, a great Crucifix,
Candlesticks, and infinite Vessels of silver, Images, Chalices, Crosses, of
gold, and many precious stones of huge value, two Crosses made all of precious
stones (whereof one was given by the Archduke of Austria), and a Heart of gold
set with precious stones (the gift of the Duchess of Lorayne) and a vessel of
huge value, which the French King Henry: the third gave, with this inscription:

Vt quae prola tua Mandum Regina beasti
Et regnum and Regem prole bear velis.
Henri. III. Franc. and Pol. Reg.
Christianiss. M. D. LXXXIIII.
Additaque Regni insigdia.
O Queen who with thy Child the world have blessed.
Let not this King and Kingdom childlesse rest,
Of Henry the third, of France and Poland most Christian King, in the year
1584.
The Arms of the Kingdom are also set upon it.
Thus far Villamont relates,

He remembers no gift of greater value, then this of Henry the third, yet
(with leave be it spoken) this King, a very slave to the Roman Church,
obtained not his petition. All these gifts are given upon vows, and my self
did see in the outward reome of the Behold how holy these walls of brick are,
which cannot abide the impure touch of Marble,
Chapel (into which all are admitted) a Galley under all salles, all of
beaten gold; given by the vow of the Duke of Florence, upon the recovery of his
health Villamont adds that this Chapel is compassed with a wall of white Marble,
curiously engraven, but that this wall could never by any art be fastened to
the Chapel, and that the Chapel is also compassed with twenty pillars,
bearing the Images often Prophers, and the ten Sybills. He adds, that many
miracles are here done, and first gives instance in the person of the Marquis
of Baden, in the year 1584. Secondly he sets it down for a Maxim, and proves
it by an example, that no man ever took any thing out of this Church, without
great mischief betalling him; and that the robbers thereof are compelled to
restore, as it were by infernal furies. Let me say truly (always reserving
due reverence to the blessed Virgin, to whom the Scriptures teach such divine
worship to be most unpleasing, as the Papists yield her), I say let me with due
reverence tell a truth. My self and two Dutchmen my consorts, abhorring from
this superstition, by leave entered the inner Chapel, where we did see the
Virgins picture, adorned with precious Jewels, and the place (to increase
religious horror) being dark, yet the Jewels shined by the light of wax
candles. When we were entered, the Priest courteously left us, to give us space
for our devotion: but when we came forth (as the Italians prouerbially speak
of the Priests avarice, Every Psalm ends in, Glory be, etc. as if they should
say, All religion to end in profit) it was necessary for us to cast alms into
an iron chest behind the Altar, covered with an iron grate. Therefore my
consorts, of purpose to delight the Priests ears with the sound of money, as
with music, did cast into that chest many brass quatrines, but of small
value, and my self being last, when my turn was to give alms, did in stead
thereof, gather some ten quatirnes of theirs, which lay scattered upon the
grate, and got that clear gain by that Idol. God forbid I should brag of
any contempt to Religion; but since it appears, that such worship is
unpleasing to God: and because Papists will have all their miracles believed, I
will freely say by experience, that having gotten these few quatirnes in such
sort as I said, yet after that, God of his mercy preserved me in my long and
dangerous travel, and from that time to this day, by his grace, I have
enjoyed, though no abundant, yet a competent estate, and more plentiful then
in my former days. The fourth miracle related by Villamont (for I omit the
third) is worth all the rest, which he says hangs up in this Church, written in
the Italian tongue, and also printed; namely, that a French woman possessed
with a devil, came hither, and being exorcised by a holy Canon, did answer,
that she had seven devils, and he casting them out, that the first called
Sordo, at his coming forth blew out a torch; and that the second was called
Heroth, the third Venteloth, the fourth Arcto. And while he makes them all
(without torture or command) to confess their own wicted acts; and while he
omitteth the other three, yet he does not omit that the fourth told the Priest
things unknown to the world, namely, that he showed him the stone, upon which
the Angel stood, when he saluted the Virgin; and likewise the place where the
Virgin at that time stood, and that those places were afterward no less
worshipped then the Chapel it self. This Villamont relates. Of these things
revealed by the devil, give me leave to say, that if the devil had been the
greatest friend the Church of Rome has, he could not have told a more
profitable thing to it, and that the Roman Church is not altogether
ungrateful, which believes the father of lies in so great a matter, and does
not so much as put him to his oath: but they are wise, to be of Ouids opinion,

Cur ego non votis blandiar ipsemeis?
Why should I not flatter my own desires?
I will end the rest in one word. There is incredible concourse to this place
from all parts professing the Roman Religion, neither is any man in the most
remote parts of Europe oppressed with any calamity, but he vows some gift to
this Image. In this Church I did see fifty banished men, vulgarly called
Banditi, who were banished for murders, and such like crimes, and now had
their pardon, upon condition, that for some years they should serve the
Emperor in Hungary against the Turks. These men abhorred in all Italy, yet
(no doubt) at this time very devout, did make stiff vows, to expiat their
sins, and to have happy return out of Hungary, yet they held their hands
from giving any large alms. My self and my consorts were all this day
fasting, for it had been an vnperdonable sin to have demanded meat in our
Inn, before we had been in the Church, and would have given open occasion to
suspect our Religion. At last when we returned to the Inn, our Vetturine gave
us our dinner.

The same day after a slight dinner we rode fourteen miles, upon a causey
paued with stone, and winding about a mountain, then through fields abounding
with Olive trees, but having no vines and we came to the City Macerata, where
the Popes Legate lies, and keeps his chancery for this Marca of Ancona. Part
of this Province yields rich wine, whereof they have only white wine in the
Innes. The second day in the morning, we rode twenty two miles to Poluertna,
through a pleasant way, and fruitful fields, yielding corn and olives. And by
the way near the City Tollentine, were the confines of the Marca of Ancona,
and of the Dukedom of Spoleto. After dinner we rode ten miles to the Castle
Sereuallo, through stony and barren mountains. The third day in the morning we
rode sixteen miles to Fuligni, through most stony and barren mountains, which
are called Apennine, and divide the length of Italy, and through a large plain
planted with olive trees, and compassed about with mountains. This City was
built upon the ruins of the City Forum Flaminium.

After dinner we rode ten miles to the City Spoleto, through a firtle plain,
but stony, yielding together in the same field, vines, corn, Almond and Olive
trees, and at the end of the plain this City is seated, partly in a plain,
partly on the side of a mountain, upon the top whereof is a strong Castle,
built upon the ruins of an old Amphitheater, to the which men pass over a
bridge of stone, vpheld by twentyfour great pillars and joining two mountains,
which have a deep valley between them, but narrow and without water. In the
Church of this Castle, they show a picture of the blessed Virgin painted with
Saint Lukes hand, of which kind there is an infinite number among the Papists.
Theodoricus King of the Goths, built a stately Palace in the City, which
being ruined, Narses the Eunuch Governor of Italy under the Eastern Emperor
did rebuild it. The Dukedom of Spoleto is subject to the Pope, who took it,
when he cast the Eastern Emperors out of Italy, and after extorted the grant
thereof from the renewed Western Emperors. And the soil of this Dukedom is
most fruitful, of corn, wine, almond, and olive trees, and of most sweet
fruits. Of the wine Martial thus writes;

De Spoletanis quae funt curiosa lagenis
Malueris, quam si musta Falerna hib as.
If with Spoleto bottels once you meet,
Say that Falerno must is not so sweet.
The fourth day in the morning, we rode ten mils through stony and most barren
mountains, and five miles through a fertile plain; wherein grew together
corn, vines, and olive trees, (which trees I observed always to grow in stony
ground, which soil in Italy uses to be more firtile then other,) and seven
miles through a more firtile plain; in the end whereof is the City Narni,
whose situation is altogether like that of Spoleto. The Italians told me that
the soil of this territory, is made dirty with the sun and wind, and dusty
with rain, which since I have found confirmed by learned Cosmographers. On the
South Side of Narni, the River Negra falls with great noise from a steep Rock,
and the Friar Leandro (who has best discribed Italy) affirms that the River
Velino makes a Fen, (which Cicero numbers among wonderful things,) and that
this Fen ends in a Lake, of old called Veanus, now vulgarly called Lago di
pie di luco, and that between the running out of the waters, there is a
Fountain of Neptune, (which Pliny has described) and that this Lake is the
Navel of midst of Italy; and lastly, that the water falling into the Lake
(compassed with mountains) by steep discents, makes noises like the groans,
yellings, and sighs of infernal spirits. From whence, and by other arguments,
he seems to prove plainly, that the verses of Virgill in the seventh Book of
his AEneados, are meant of this place, and that others are deceived, who think
them meant by Tenaso in Apulia, especially since the valleys Ansancti are in
this place, vulgarly called Nesanto, for Ansanto, which signifies on all sides
holy, because they are fertile. The verses of Virgil are these;

Est locus Italiae in medio, sub montibus altis,
Nobilis, and fama multis memoratur in oris,
Ansancti valles, etc.
Hic specus horrendum, and saeui spiracula Ditis,
Monstrantur, etc.
Italtes Center has great Mounts beneath
A noble place, which is far known by fame,
The Ansancti valleys, etc.
A dreadful hole, whereat fierce Dis does breath,
Here may be seen, etc.
After dinner, we rode twelve miles to a little Town, lying beyond the River
Tyber, namely, eight miles to the Castle Otricoli, through woody Mountains,
and Valyes bearing Olive trees, and corn together with those trees; and from
thence to the side of the River Tyber two miles in pasture fields. Here we
passed to the West side of this so famous River, where of old the Emperor
Augustus built a stately bridge; but now men and horse pass in a ferry-boate,
which is drawn over with the force of men's hands, by a great cable fastened
a-crosse the River. And least the boat should be carried away with the swift
stream, a second cable is fastened a-crosse the River by posts on each side
higher then a man; and they have a third short cable, to the one end whereof
the boat is fastened, and the other end has a strong wheel, which is put
upon the second high cable, upon which the boat slips forward, as it is drawn
with men's hands by the first low cable: for the bed of the Tyber is broad in
this place, and has his spring not far off, among the high Apenine Mountains,
and falling thence with great force, would carry away any boat rowed with
oars: But from thence the bed of the River grows narrow, and is such at Rome,
as it scarce deserves the name of a Brook, and nothing answers the glorious
fame which Italians have given it, who always extol their own things to the
sky. Hereupon it is necessary, that when any store of rain falls, or much
snow suddenly meltes, those waters falling from the Mountains, should ouerflow
the fields, and the City of Rome it self, as they have often done, with great
danger of the City, the same being not far distant from this Ferrey, and
these high Mountains among which the river has his spring. But from Rome it
runs in a narrow bed: 2 miles to Ostia with a slow course, and there ends in
Lakes, the mouth of the haven being so stopped, as the least Barks cannot pass
to and from the sea. Here beyond our expectation, our Veturine alleged, that
he had agreed with us to pay for our diet, not for our passages of Rivers; by
which captious trick, each of us was forced to pay two Giulij for our passage
over the River. Of the foresaid twelve miles to the little town where of I
spoke two miles remained, which we rode, and there lodged that might. The fifth
day in the morning, we rode seventeen miles to Castel' nuouo, through woody
Mountains, and Valies of corn, in a way very dirty and slippery; and here our
Veturine tied to pay for our diet, put a new trick upon us, saying, that he
would not dine, but go on to Rome, yet if we pleased to dine, he would out
of his duty stay for us, otherwise being ready to finish the rest of his
journey. We smiled at the knaves craft, and each of us paid two poli and a
half for our dinners.

After dinner we rode thirteen miles to Rome (of old the Head-Citie of the
World) through winding hills and pastures; and when we came to the first Gate,
we did meet Rome.
many English men on horseback, without boots, being all Priests, going to
Madonna di Loreto. I was much afraid, lest some of them being Scholars of
Cambridge, should know me brought up in the same University; neither was the
hearing of the English tongue, or the sight of English men, ever before so
unpleasing to me. From this first Gate we rode, in the way of Flaminius, by the
winding banck of Tyber, and many caves under mountains and hills, to the
bridge called Ponte-Mole, which unites the said way of Flaminius, lying on
both sides the River, and there we passed to the East Side of the said River
Tyber; and passing on the same way of Flaminius, we entered the City by a
large Gate, vulgarly called Porta del Popolo, and by a Market place vulgarly
called Fore del Popolo, in which Marketplace is the Church of S. Mary del
Popolo.

CHAP. II. Of my journey to Naples, and my return to Rome, and of the
description of both Cities. Of my journey cursory to Sienna, Fiorenza, Pistoia,
Lucca, and Pisa, and the description of the three last Cities.
DEferring the view of Rome till my return, I thought best to pass on
presently to Naples, lest if I had staid longer, I might perhaps have been
betrayed into the hands of the Spaniards when I should come thither, for that
Kingdom is subject to the Spaniards, with whom the English then had war:
besides that in like cases, delay brecds danger; into which if I should have
fallen, I hoped to escape with more ease and contentment, when I had been at
the furthest of my journey. Therefore according to the fashion, I agreed with a
Vetturine at Rome, for forty four Giulij to give me a horse to Naples, and to
pay for my diet and horsemeat. I say it is the fashion, especially in ways of
danger and trouble to get meat, that passengers should agree with their
Vetturine for their diet; which if they do not, they shall be subject to the
fraud of Hosts, in such a journey, and hardly get so good meat as they, who
daily passing, are well acquainted in all places. And in this tumultuary
journey to Naples, it is most of all necessary for strangers thus to agree with
their Vetturine, since the Hosts are great extorters from all men, and
especially from strangers; and it would be difficult for strangers not knowing
the fashion of that hasty journey and of the Country, to provide for
themselves. When we went out of Rome, our consorts suddenly in a broad street
lighted from their horses, and gave them to the Vetturines to hold, and so went
themselves to the Holy stairs, vulgarly called Le scale sante, that they might
there pray for a happy journey; at which time my self and my consorts slipped
into the next Church, and going in at one door, and out at the other, escaped
the worshipping of those holy stairs, and at fit time came to take our horses
with the rest. They say that these stairs were the same which Christ ascended
in Pilates house at Jerusalem; and that they were from thence brought to Rome:
and indeed at Jerusalem the place of them lies void, so as I would in this mnch
rather believe the Romans, then in the transportation of the Chamber at Lareto,
which they would have done by the Angels, and that often and at unseasonable
times, whereas in so many voyages into Palestine it was not difficult to bring
these stairs from thence. Yet they being of marble, and very rich, I would
feign know how such a monument could be preserved, when Jerusalem was
destroyed. And if they say they belonged to that house of Pilate, which they
show at this day, I dare be bold to affirm that the magnificence of these
stairs is nothing answerable to the poor building of that house.

The twelfth of March we rode twelve miles to Marino, a Castle belonging to the
Roman Family of Colonna, and we passed through a fruitful plain of corn,
having on our right hand toward the South, the ruins of old Rome, and the
Castle Tusculo, where Cicero wrote his Tuseulane questions, not far from
Palestrina, of old called Preneste, where Marius besieged by Scylla, killed
himself, and we might often see the Tyrrhene sea: and having upon our left hand
toward the North, an anticke conduit, made of brick, lying all the length of
the way from Rome to the Eastern mountains, in which Marino is seated, and
from whence the water was so far brought to Rome, and upon the same side
having a new conduit built by Pope Sixtus the fifth, when the pipes of the
other were broken: but the same is much lower and less magnificent then the
other, and upon this hand we had mountains not far distant. Marino was of
old called Marianavilla, and from this Castle the mountains which by the way
we had on our left hand toward the North, cross over to the Tyrrhene sea,
toward the South, shutting up the large plain from Rome hither. And these
mountains planted with vines, and having a sweet prospect into the same
plain, are very pleasant. Whereupon there be very many Palaces of Roman
Senators built upon these mountains, which lying high, of the fresh air,
vulgarly this place is called La Frescada. Among these mountains in the
Village Tiuoli, the deceased Cardinal Hipolito of Este, built a Palace and a
wonderful garden, which being ten mile distant from the City of Rome, the
passengers for the most part having scene Rome, did in the Cardinals time, and
yet many times do pass that way. For it resembles a terrestrial Paradise, by
reason of the fountains, statuaes, caves, groves, fishponds, cages of birds,
Nightingales flying loose in the groves, and the most pleasant prospect. In
this Castle Marino we made some stay, to expect some passengers which were
longer detained at Rome by their business.

And the Pope in this place gives sixty Horsemen Musqueters to accompany the
Carrier, vulgarly called Il Procaccia, and to defend him from the spoiling of
banished men, vulgarly called Banditi. And for this cause all passengers go in
this Carriers company, neither dare any pass alone. For these banished men
lurking upon the confines of the Popes State and the Kingdom of Naples, many
times make excursions as far as these mountains, to do robberies, and the
week last past they had killed many passengers, and had robbed the Carrier,
who does not only bear letters, but leads many Mules laded with goods. The
chief of these banished men was the Nephew (so they call Church-mens bastards)
of the Cardinal Caietano, who having eight thousand crowns yearly reut in
these parts, was banished by the Pope, and he understanding that a Roman
Gentleman passed with that Carrier, who had great friends about the Pope, and
hoping to make his peace by taking him prisoner, did for that cause assail
that Carrier and his guard, till hearing that the Gentleman while they fought,
had escaped to the next City, he withdrew himself and his men into the
mountainrs. This danger from banished men, makes the journey to Naples very
trouble. some; and it is not safe nor lawful for any man to leave the company
of this Carrier. So as the passengers rise before day, and take horse, and so
sitting all the day, yet ride not abouc twenty miles, for the slow pace of the
mules, and at noone they have no rest, only when they have the Inn in sight,
so as there is no danger of thieves, they are permitted to gallop before, that
they may eat a morsel, or rather devour it: for as soon as the mules are
past, they must to horse again, every man not only making have for his own
safety, but the soldiers forcing them to be gone, who are more slow then the
rest. To conclude the mules going a very slow pace, it was very irksome to the
passengers to rise before day, and to follow them step by step.

Having dined at Marino, and our full company being come, we together with our
guard of horsemen rode eight miles to Velitri, through woody mountains,
infamous for the robberies of banished men, and upon our right hand toward the
South and toward the Tyrrhene sea, was a Lake vulgarly called Lago Nympao,
which the old Romans (delighted with doing difficult things) used to fill with
sea water, and therein to make nauall fights. One wood by which we passed was
more dangerous then the rest, where the Pope maintains forty foot to assist
the Guard of horse, till they have passed the same. The descent of the last
mountain near Velitri, was two miles long, yet pleasant by reason of the
multitude of Vines growing upon short stakes, which use to yield the richest
wine. Velitri is by writers called Belitre, an old City of the Volsci, and
famous for the birth of the Emperor Augustus, and the dwelling of the Octauian
Family. The second day in the morning we rode thirteen or fourteen miles to
Sermoneta, and in the midst of the way our guard of horseleft us, and their
trumpet asked of every man a gift in courtesy, which we gladly gave, and there
new horsemen meeting us, took upon them our guard. After dinner we rode eight
miles to a little town La casa nnoua, and five miles to an old City, which
Liuy callesh Priuernum, yet other Co'mographers write that the ruins thereof
lie in a plain two miles off, whereas this is seated upon a mountain, yet
growing to a City by the decay of the former, is called Priuernum, and vulgarly
Piperno. We passed through woody mountains, full of Olive trees on the right
hand, and a fruitful plain of corn, and many Orchards of Orange trees, and
like fruits, on the left hand. And among the mountains on the right hand, the
most remote was called Circello, of the famous Witch Circe, and it is a
Promontory hanging over the sea, where at this day they show the cup, in which
Ulysses drunk the enchanted potion, and under the hollow caves of this
mountain, the Turkish Pirates lurk in the summer time, and rob the
Christians. The last five miles of our journey, all the passengers and
soldiers were put before the Carrier and his Mules; for then we turned out of
the plain toward mountains on the left hand, where (as they said) the
banished men had the week before assailed the Carrier. After we had dined, the
horsemen left us, and certain foot did after guide us from one City to
another. The third day in the morning we had a guard of horsemen, and rode
twelve miles to Terracina, an old City, so called in the time of the Emperor
Tiberius, and we passed through a fertile plain of corn on the right hand
toward the Sea, and stony hills full of Olive trees on the left hand toward
the Land, and many vineyards, and ruins of houses near the City. After we had
this morning rode two miles, we passed by an old Monastery called la Badia
della fossa nuoua, where they have a monument of Saint Thomas Aquinas, but his
body was carried to the City Tolouse in France, when the Frenchmen had the
Kingdom of Naples. And after we had rode ten miles our guard of horse left us,
and certain foot meeting us, conducted us other 2 miles. In this way the
waters in many places at the foot of the hills did stink of brimstone, but
infinite Laurel trees on all sides refreshed our smell. Terracina in the
flourishing time of Rome was called Anxur, and it is seated upon a mountain,
as most of the foresaid Cities are, and it lies upon the sea, which the land
imbraceth like a half Moon, this City lying upon one horn thereof, and the
City Caieta upon the other, of which City the Cardinal had name, who did
oppose himself to Luther. The floods of the sea make great noise, with
striking upon hollow caves of Rocks. A soldier came out of the Tower of
Torracina, and demanded of every man five baocci, which we paid, though it
were only due from them, who had portmanteaues with locks. Near this City we
did see the ruins of a stately Theater. After dinner we rode ten miles to the
City Fondi, through a stony way, being part of the old way of Appius; and upon
the right hand we had a plain toward the sea, and upon the left hand rockey
Mountains toward the land, where we passed by the City Monticello. At the
midway, the Popes guard having left us, we came to two old ruined walls,
shutting up the way, and lying from the Mountain to the sea. This place called
Sportelle, deuides the territories of the Pope and the King of Naples, and is
kept by a Garrison of Spaniards. I remember at our coming back, these
Soldiers demanded of the passengers a gift in courtesy, and when some refused
it, they stopped their passage, and only troubled them in the searching of
their carriage, under pretense that they might carry some prohibited things.
Those Soldiers did accompany us to the City Fondi. I call the same and some
other places by the name of City, because they were Cities of old, though now
they be only Villages, and have no other beauty, but the ruins of age. This
old City was sacked in the year 1534 by Barbarossa a Turkish Pirate. It is
seated in a Plain, having only a meadow and a field ouerflowed between it
and the sea, and the houses are built of Flints and such little stones, but it
had most pleasant Orchards, of Citrons, Oranges and Lemons. The Orange trees at
one time have ripe and green fruits and buds, and are green in winter,
giving at that dead time a pleasant remembrance of Summer. By our Veturines
sparing, our diet was daily very short, and at Terracina we could not so much
as get wine; and here our supper was so short, as we judged our Vetturines good
Physicians, who persuade light suppers. The wines of Fondi and Cecubo (for the
mount Cecubo is not far distant) are much celebrated by the Roman Poets,
namely, by Horace. The fourth day in the morning, we rode ten miles to Mola
vulgarly called Nola, upon a paued Causey between stony Mountains, being part
of the way of Appius, and through great woods of Olive trees, having by the way
many Orchards of Oranges and like fruits, and entering near Mola into a more
open air. Not only this Village, but all this sea coast is called Mola, of
the Miles (as I think) driven by waters falling from the Mountains, and it is
numbered among the most pleasant places of Italy. Mola is built upon the ruins
of old Formia, which are to be seen in the fields round about it. Among these
ruins is the house of Cicero, who speaks of his Village Formia, where Scipio
and Lelius came to recreate themselves; and there is also the sepulcher of
Cicero, so as it seems he was killed by Anthony in this Territory. After
dinner we rode eight miles through a wild field with low shrubs, upon a paued
way, till we came to the River Garigliano, whose narrow and deep stream we
passed by boat, and stayed long about the putting over of our horses, our
company being great, and each horseman paid five baocci for passage. Near
this River we did see the ruins of a most fair Theater, built of brick and
flint, and of another old and round Theater, and of a Conduit built of brick,
upon a 140 arches. Not far hence among huge and snowy Mountains, is the
City Traeto, which has the title of a Dukedom, and was of old called
Minturne. After we had passed the River, we rode seven miles to Sesso, and
three miles to a Country house, through a fruitful Plain of corn, having the
Tirrhene sea so near us, as we might see it three or four times. And because
the other Carrier coming from Naples to Rome, lodged with his consorts a mile
before us in the Village Castellano, we were forced to lodge in this Country
house. The fifth day in the morning, at the beginning of our journey, we met
the said Carrier with his consorts, and we rode eight miles to the Village
Francolisse, in a most pleasant way, between Hills of black clay like stone,
but a most fruitful Country. This Village lay on the left hand of our way
toward the land, among very pleasant Hills; and the place is not far
distant, where Hanibal brought into straights by Fabius, did escape by a
stratagem, tying fire upon the horns of Oxen.

After we rode 8 miles to the most pleasant City Capua, through a most sweet
Plain, Capua.
called Laborina, because it is laborious to the tiller, but it is wonderful
fruitful, and abounds with Olive trees, and vines planted upon Elmes. Here
we dined, not according to our covenant at our Vetturines charge, but at our
own cost, and each man had such meat as he chose, and that (as I think)
because the passengers being now out of danger, and in a place abounding with
all dainties, refused to be dieted at their Veturines pleasure, and chose
rather to feast themselves as they list. And in deed we had excellent cheer,
delicate wine most white pure bread, and among other dainties, I remember we
had black Olives, which I had never seen before, and they were of a most
pleasant taste. Here each of us paid two Giulij and a half for our dinner.
This City is newly built, but if you go out of the Gates to Saint Mary's
Church toward Naples upon the South-West side of the Town, there you shall
see a Colossus, and a Cave, and many Monuments of old Capua among the Orchards:
the delicacies of which City were of old so famous, as we read, that the Army
of Hanibal grew effeminate thereby. This new City has a Castle upon the
North-East side, built upon the walls, wherein is a Garrison of soldiers,
which keeps the City in obedience, and the River Vulturnus runs upon the
same side of the City, which they pass with a bridge of stone, near which
there is an inscription, that Phillip King of Spain repaired the way, and
built the bridge. The City is of a little compass, but strong, and it has a
fair Senate House, and a fair Church called l' Annonciata, with a fair Altar.

After dinner we had no guard, neither were tied to accompany the Carrier, but
it was free for every man to take his way and company, or to ride alone at his
pleasure. So from Capua we rode eight miles to Anuersa, a new City, otherwise
called Aduersa, and of old called Attella, whence were the old satyricall
Comedies, which were full of baudery, and were called Attellane. And between
this City and the Mountain Vesuuius, now called Somma, out of the way toward
the land, and near the Castle Airola, is the Valley Caudine, where Hanibal put
the Romans, drawn into straites, disgracefully to pass under a pair of
gallows, which were called the Caudine gallows, well known to all that have
read Liuy.

The same afternoon we rode further eight miles to Naples. And all this way
from Naples.
Capua to Naples, is a most fruitful plain of corn, and vines growing high
upon Elm trees, according to the Tillage of Lombardy, one and the same field
yielding corn, and wine, and wood to burn, but the other wines of this
Country growing upon hills and mountains, and all the other fruits, cannot be
worthily praised. We entered Naples on the East side by the Gate of Capua,
where the Vice-Roies use to enter in pomp. And this Gate is stately built, and
upon this side, the suburbs are long and fair, and the street of Capua
within the walls, is no less fair, in which is the prison: and because we were
attired like Frenchmen, the prisoners scoffed at us, and to my great marvel,
the Citizens of good sort did not forbear this barbarous usage toward us.

The description of Naples, and the Territory.


(A) Rome far distant.

(B) Capua.

(D) Torre di Graco, and the Mountain Somma.

(E) The Mountain Pausilippo.

(F) The Island Nisita, or Nisa.

(G) The Island Procida.

(H) S. Martino (as I think) an Island.

(I) Ischia, an Island.

(K) Caprca, or Capre, an Island.

(L) Palmosa an Island, and beyond it the Syrenes Island, famous by tables.

(M) The City Caieta.

(N) Circello, a famous Mountain for the Witch Circe.

(P) The Bay of Baie or Pozzoli.

(R) Linternum, now called Torre della Patria,

(X) The Promontory Miseno.

(Y) The Cape of Minerua.

(Z) The old City Cuma.

(a) The Gate of Capua.

(b) The Kings Gate.

(c) The Church S. Clara.

(d) The Castle of S. Ermo. (eeeee) Scattered houses.

(f) The Haven.

(g) Il. Molle.

(h) The Castle deuouo.

(k) The Vice-Royes house.

(l) The new Castle.

(m) The Lake d'Agnano, compassed with the Mountain Astruno.

(n) Grotta del can'.

(o) Solfataria.

(p) Pozzoii.

(q) Tripergola.

(r) The Lake of Auernus.

(s) Baie.

(t) Cento Camerelle.

(v) Piscina mirabile.

(w) The Elisian fields.

From the foresaid part on the East Side of the City, where we entered by the (
a) Gate of (a) Capua, without the walls, toward the land. Eight miles from the
City lies (D) Torre di Graco, now called Torre d'ottauio, where Pliny, writer
of the Natural history, and Admiral of the Nauey of Augustus, was near the
said sower choked with vapors, while too curiously he desired to behold the
burning of the Mountain Vesunius, now called Somma. This Mountain Somma is
most high, and upon the top is dreadful, where is a gulf casting out flames,
and while the winds enclosed, seek to break out by natural force, there
have been heard horrible noises and fearful groans. Therest of the Mountain
abounds with vines, and Olives, and there grows the Greckewine, which Pliny
calls Pompeies wine; and of this wine they say, this place is called Torredi
Graco. The greatest burning of this Mountain brake out in the time of the
Emperor Titus, the smoke whereof made the Sun dark, burnt up the next
territories, and consumed two Cities, Pompeia, and Herculea, and the ashes
thereof covered all the fields of that territory. It brake out again in the
year 1538 with great gaprig of the earth, and casting down part of the
Mountain. The Palace there, taking the name of the next Village, is called
Pietra Biancha, that is white stone, which on the inside is all of marble,
decked with carved work in the very Chambers, and there is an Image of a
Nymphe sleeping, and lying upon an earthen vessel, out of which great quantity
of water flows, and falls into Marble Channels, wherein fish are kept as in
pondes. This Palace was built in the year 1530 by a Counselor to the
Emperor Charles the fifth. At the foot of this Mountain, of old Decius, the
first of all the Roman Consuls did by vow give himself for the Army. And at
the bridge of the Brook Draco, the last King of the Goths Teius, was slain,
having three Bucklers all pierced with his enemies arrows. On the same East
side coming back to Naples, (yet the said Mountain lies Northward) you
shall come to a stately Palace, which the Kings of Naples have built, and
called it Poggio Reale, being not above a mile from Naples. There of old was
seated the City Paleopolis, and it lies in a most sweet Plain.

From the said Palace the way leads right to the Kingly (b) Gate, called
Porta Reale, at which only the King enters in solemn pomp, and from this
Gate right to the West, lies a most fair and large street called Strada
Toletana, the way whereof on both sides is raised with a fair and large
pauement for men to walk upon, and it has a fair Marketplace. When you come
to the end of this street, there is the Church of Saint (c) Clara, called
vulgarly San' chiara, which was built by Agnes of Spain, wife to King Robert,
where are artificial sepulchers of the said Robert (coming of the French
Kings) and of his wife Agnes, and of other Kings and Princes of the French
family Durczzana. And there in a Chapel the Monks day and night sing with a
lamentable voice, or rather groan for the rest of their deceased souls. In
the Church of Saint Dominick is an Altar, which they say, cost some twenty five
thousand Crowns; and in the Vesterie lie the bodies of nine Kings in coffins
of wood, covered with peuter, and having black velvet laid over them. Among
these Kings are Alphonso the first, King of Aragon, and Ferdinand his son,
and Ferdinand the second. And in this place also, the Monks in like sort sing,
or rather houle rest to their souls. They show a Crucifix, which they say, did
speak to Thomas Aquinas in this manner; Thomas, thou have written well of me,
what reward do them ask? And that Thomas should answer; No reward Lordbut
thy self only. I have heard, that Saint Bernard knowing the frauds and
impostures of the Monks, and not dissembling them, when the Image of the
blessed Virgin did in like sort praise him, did with much more piety and
wisdom answer out of S. Paul, 1. Cor. 14. Let women be silent in the Church,
for it is not permitted them to speak.

Not far thence are the public schools of the University, which the
Emperor Frederick the second founded there In the most fair Church of the
Monks of Saint Oliuet, the Images of Ferdinand the first, and Alphonso the
second, are so lively engraven, and do so artificially represent them, as well
in the bed dying, as upon their knees praying, with the mourning of the
bystanders, (the horror of Religion being increased with lamps continually
burning,) as my self by chance passing by this Chapel, thought I had fallen
among living Princes, not dead Images; and perhaps I have seen a more
sumptuous monument, but a more beautiful did I never see. In the little Church
of the Hermitane Friars, Saint John in Carbonara, is a monument of Robert King
of Naples, and of Ioane the first his sister, of white marble, being an Altar,
which the Italians think the most stately monumenr of Europe; but for my part
I dare not prefer it to some in Germany, nor to many in England, nor to the
monuments of the Turkish Emperors. Many tables are hung up by vow in this
Church. There is a fair sepulcher of white marble erected to N. Caraccioli
Marshall of the Kingdom. I omit the most fair Church of Saint Mary of the
Preachers, almost all of marble, and the Cathedral Church called Episcopio,
and the Church of Saint Laurence.

Upon the North-west and by-north part of the City, is the Fort called (d) S.
Eremo cut out in a high Rock, yet the ascent thereunto is so easy, as a
horseman may well mount to the top. Upon this mountains top lies a plain; in
which this Castle is seated, which commands the City, though it were taken by
the enemy. A little beneath is the monastery of the Carthusians, and upon
pretense to enlarge that monastery, the Emperor Charles the fifth built this
most strong Castle, to bridle the wonted petulancy and inconstancy of the
Citizens; and from thence there is a most sweet prospect as well into the City,
as to the bays of the sea.

Toward the South Side is the Haven, and beyond the ( f) bay of Naples lies
firm land; for the Sea coming in from the West, makes this bay. Upon this
side is a fortification for the safety of the haven, which is called (g) Il
Molle, and it drives off the waves of the sea, and makes the Haven like an
half Moon, and therein at this time were twenty galleys and ten small ships.
The Armory lies upon the Sea, from whence the galleys and ships and land forces
are armed; and among other things, there is kept the rich Armor (yet without
any ornament of gold) of the French King Francis the first, which he did wear
when he was taken prisoner at Pauia. Thereby lies a large market place, in
which is a fair fountain, with many Images casting out water. Also there is a
Tower where they set light by night to guide sea men into the Haven. In the
said market place is a stone, upon which many play away their liberty at dice,
the Kings officers lending them money, which when they have lost, and cannot
repay, they are drawn into the galleys, for the Spaniards have slaves of both
sexes.

On the outside of the said Molle, or fortification upon the haven toward the
west, and near to the shore, lies the most strong fort called (l) Castello
nuouo, seated in a plain, and built by Charles the first of Arion, and so
fortified by Alphonso the first, King of Aragon, as it is numbered among the
chief forts of Europe. The inward gate is most fair all of marble, and it
has a little fouresquare hall, in which the Parliaments are yearly held, and
the Viceroyes weekly sit in judgment. Near this hall is a fair tower, in
which the Kingly ornaments are laid up; namely, a scepter of gold, with great
diamonds upon the top, the sword with the haft and scabbard of gold, adorned
with precious stones; the Kings Crown shining with precious stones, a golden
cross, an huge pot of gold set with precious stones, great Vnlcornes horns,
and the chief kinds of precious stones.

Further toward the West, (yet so near, as the garden of the Palace lies
upon the ditch of this Castle), is the ( k) Viceroyes Palace, which has a
large and most sweet garden, and delicate walk, paued with diverse colored and
engraven marbles. And in this garden are two banqueting houses, whereof one is
very stately built, and has a sweet fountain close to the table continually
pouring out water. Also there is a delicate cage of birds, wrought about with
thick wire, and it is as big as an ordinary stil-house, delicately shadowed
round about, wherein are many kinds of singing birds, as well of Italy as
foreign Countries.

A little further within the water, is the ( h) Castle of the egg, built upon
a rock by the Normans, which Rock is of an ouall form, and gave the name to
the Castle, vulgarly called Castel' del' vuono, which at this day is ruinous;
and some say it was the Palace of Lucullus; but it is certain that the
Normans built it, as they did also another Castle which is old, and called the
Capuan Castle, of the adioining Capuan-gate. Naples was of old called
Parthenope, of one of the Sirens there buried, whom they write to have cast her
self into the sea, for grief that by no flattery she could detain Ulysses
with her. The Citizens of old Cuma built Naples, and left it should grow great
to the prejudice of Cuma, they pulled it down again till at last oppressed
with a great glague, upon the warning of an oracle, they built it again, and
changing the old name Parthenope, called it Naples, which in Greek signifies a
new City. It is seated at the foot of hills and mountains, in length from the
North-east to the South-west, or rather seems to be triangular, whereof two
corners lie upon the sea, and that toward the West is more narrow then the
other, and the third blunt corner lies toward the mountains. Upon the
East Side there be pleasant suburbs, and upon the West Side more large suburbs;
but upon the North-side without the walls, there be only some few ( eeeee)
scattered houses built upon the sides of hills.

The houses of the City are four roofes high, but the tops lie almost plain,
so as they walk upon them in the cool time of the night, or at left in
general the tops are not much erected, like other parts of Italy, and the
building is of free stone, and shows antiquity: but the windows are all
covered with paper or linen cloth; for glass windows are most rare in Italy,
and as it were proper to Venice. It has three fair broad and long streets,
namely, La Toletano, la Capuana and la vicaria, the rest are very narrow. There
be eight gates toward land, and as many toward sea, among which the Capuan
gate, since the Emperor Charles the fifth entered thereat, is decked with
monuments and statuaes. There be in this City very many Palaces, of Gentlemen,
Barons, and Princes; whereupon the City is vulgarly called Napoli Gentile:
Among these, two Palaces are most stately, one of the Duke of Greuina, which
the King of Spain forbad to be finished; the other of the Prince of Salerno.
There be four public houses, called Seggij, in which the Princes and
Gentlemen have yearly meetings, and there also is the daily meeting of the
Merchants. Almost every house has his fountain of most wholesome waters. Near
the market place are many Innes, but poor and base; for howsoever the City
abounds with houses where they give lodging and meat, yet it deserves no
praise for fair Innes of good entertainment. On all sides the eye is as it
were bewitched with the sight of delicate gardens, as well within the City, as
near the same. The gardens without the walls are so rarely delightful, as I
should think the Hesperides were not to be compared with them; and they are
adorned with statuaes, laberinthes, fountains, vines, myrtle, palm, cetron,
lemon, orange, and cedar trees, with laurels, mulberies, roses, rosemary, and
all kinds of fruits and flowers, so as they seem an earthly Paradise. The
fields are no less fruitful, bringing forth abundantly all things for the use
of man. The Kings stables without the walls are worth the seeing, for the horses
of this Kingdom are much esteemed; and if any man buy a horse, to carry out of
the Kingdom, he pays the tenth part of the price to the King.

The City being seated upon the sides of hills, and by lying open to the South,
being subject to great heates, and most parts of the streets being narrow, so
as in walking the heat is not to be endured, and yet they cannot use Coaches,
one fashion pleased me beyond measure, that at the end of many streets they
had chaires, vulgarly called Seggioli di Napoli, which those that are weary do
enter, and they being covered round about, and only having windows on the
sides, he that is carried therein, cannot be seen of any, and yet himself may
see all that pass. Two Porters carry these chaires by two long staves fastened
thereunto, and lift them but little from the ground, and so for a moderate
price carry the passenger to any part of the City. After I observed the same
fashion at Genoa, which is in like sort seated upon the sides of hills and
mountains, and in Cities so seated, I think this fashion very convenient.

The territory of Naples has many famous antiquities, and wonderful things to
be seen, which that we might behold, we went early in the morning on foot out
of the Southwest-side of the City; and having passed long suburbs and scattered
houses we came within a Musket shot to the mountain (E) Pausilippo, which is
wonderfully pleasant, as well for the houses and villages built upon it, as for
the excellent fruits which it yields of all kinds. This mountain being hard
to be ascended, extends it self in good length from the sea toward the
land, so as the way would be very troublesome to Pozzols, either ascending the
mountain, or compassing it, had they not found a remedy to this inconvenience.
Therefore the Progenitors of these Citizens (which some attribute to Lucullus,
as they do all magnificall things, and others to one Bassus: but Leander the
Cosmographer, a witness without exception, attributes it to Coccius a Roman,)
I say, their Progenitors with wonderful Art and huge expense, dug a passage
under this mountain, and so made a plain way to Pozzoli and those parts. This
way Strabo calls a Cave, and it is vulgarly called La grotta di Napoli, and
serves this famous City in stead of a gate, yet is it a musket shot distant,
and always lies open. And the foresaid Leander witnesses, that it is twelve
foot broad, twenty four high, and two hundred long, to which length if you
add 500. foot more, which at both ends was dug, but lies not covered as
the rest, but in open air, this work may well be said to be an Italian mile
long. My self observed, that part of the passage under the mountain, to be
nine hundred and sixteen walking paces long, and nine broad, and the hight I
imagined to double the breadth, yet is it in some places biger then in other.
And for the breadth, it is certain, that two Coaches, or Carts may pass
together, one by the other. The entrance and the going out at the other end,
are like two gates, and of old light came in by many holes or windows from the
top of the mountain; but the falling of earth did by little and little stop
this light; and in the time of Seneca this passage was so dark, as he compares
it to a prison, and at last the light was so stopped by the fall of earth, by
nettles and shrubs, as there was no light at all, till Alphonso the first of
Aragon, King of Naples, opened two windows toward the two ends, which only
light it has at this day to direct passengers. At the entrance of either end,
the opposite gate seems no bigger then a full Moon, and a man entering there,
would seem a little child. It has no light in the midst, but like twilight,
or the Ouidian light which is in thick woods, and in the twilight of morning
and evening passengers use torches, and continually the carters or horsemen when
they pass by the midst of the cave, use to give warning one to the other,
crying vulgarly Alla marina (that is toward the sea) or Alla Montagna (that is
toward the mountain) according to the side on which they come. Before we
entered this cave, among other stately Palaces, one vulgarly called,
Merguilino, built by James Sanazzarro, a famous Poet almost of our age, and
given by his last will to a religious house, contains the sepulcher of a
learned man, upon which Bembus is said to have written these verses,

Da sacro cineriflores, hic ille Maroni
Sincerus, Musaproximus, vt tumulo.
These relikes deck with flowers, Sincer us here
In tomb as muse to Maro comes most near.
Upon the mountain of Pausilippo, is the sepulcher of Virgil, showed in two
places, whom Seruius writes to have been buried in this way near Naples; and
that these verses were written upon his sepulcher;

Mantua me genuit, Calabrirapuere, tenet nunc
Parthenope, cecinipascua, rura, Duces.
Mantuan borne, Calaber dead, me holds
Parthenope, who sung ploughs, Dukes, sheepefolds.
Or thus;
Mantua gave me life, Calabry death, my grave
Parthenope, who sung pastures, Ploughs, Captains brave.
Or thus;
Mantua life did lend to me,
Calabers laid me on deaths carre;
My bones lie at Parthenope,
Who sung sheep, tillage, feats of war.
And the best judgments hold, that he was buried in the Church of the Friars
regular canons, at the entrance of the cave, as you go from Naples, and not in
the Church at the going out of the Cave; and though both places show the
sepulcher, yet these verses are in neither place, but the inscriptions are
worn out with age: the Monks report, that there was a statua of brass upon
his sepulcher, which those of Mantua stole fro thence, and indeed, at Mantua
they show such a statua, whether stolen from hence or no, let them dispute.

When we had passed this Cave, we bent our way from the Sea toward the land,
and came to the Mountain ( m) Astrune, being of form like a Theater,
compassing a large Plain. Alphonso the first, King of Aragon and Naples, and
his son Ferdinand, used to inuit the Princes, Nobles, and People of the
Kingdom, to hunting in this place, turning the dogs and beasts they hunted,
into the valley, himself and the noble men sitting in a pleasant Grove upon
the top of the Mountain, and the people being scattered round about the
Mountain, to behold the sport. In the same plain compassed with this
Mountain, is the Lake of ( m) Agnano which is said to be without bottom, and
to have nothing in it but frogs. And at the foot of the inside of the
Mountain next to Naples, there is a venomous Cave, vulgarly called ( n) la
grotta del'can', that is the Cave of the dog; because they try the poison by
putting dogs into it This Cave is some eight foot high, and six broad, and
goes some four paces under the Mountain, where a sign is set, beyond which,
if any living thing pass, it presently dies. Pliny writes, that this cave was
called Cherone a scrobae, euaporating a pestilent air. We gave two poli to a
woman (dwelling there) for a dog, to try the poison with it, which dog we
fastened to a long staff, and so thrust him into the cave, holding him there,
till he seemed dead, and being taken our, would not move for any blows we
gave it; then according to the fashion, we cast the dog into the aforesaid
Lake, and when he was drawn out, he began by little and little to move, and at
last, being come to his senses, ran away, as if he had been mad. The common
sort attribute this to the blessing given to the water by the Saint of which it
is named but nothing is more clear, then that the sprinkling of any water will
revive the spirits choked with any ill vapor. Besides, many have tried, that
living things cast into that cave, and held there for longer time then is
usual, could never be fetched again to life by this or any other water. They
report, that a French Gentleman of Tournan trying to fetch a stone out of this
cave beyond the aforesaid sign, paid for his curiosity by unrecoverable
death. And that the French King Charles the eight, commanding an Ass to be
thrust into this cave, the beast could never be fetched to life again. And
that don John, base son of the Emperor Charles the fifth, forced a
Gally-slaue to go into this cave, and he falling dead, forced another slave to
fetch him out, who likewise fell dead, and that he killed the third slave with
his own hand, because he refused to fetch out his two dead fellows. Many
cast frogs into this cave, and except they presently leap back, this vapor
kills them, which is said to rise out of Mines of Brimstone and other metals.
Into the foresaid Lake they cast flax, which will be sleeped in that water in
14 hours, though it lies usually two weeks in other waters. And this water,
though cold to touch, yet seems to boil. The Earthquakes and flames breaking
out of these Mountains, by the vapors enclosed, gave the Poets occasion to
feign, that Giants were buried under them. Not far hence are the wholesome
baths, vulgarly called I bagni d'Agnano, which kind of baths are very frequent
in this part. Here lie the ruins of a great Village of Lucullus, and Writers
affirm, that he brought the Sea water into the foresaid Lake, cutting the
passage through Mountains. Here also are the ruins of the Village of Cicero,
which retain the old name, and the Emperor Adrian dying at Bait, was buried
here, and his successor Anthony here built a Temple to him.

Upon the top of a Mountain near this place, is a round field like a
Marketplace, vulgarly called ( o) Solfataria, which Strabo calls Forum vulcani:
and Pliny writes, that of old this place was called Campi Flecrci. It is of an
Ouall form, somewhat more long then broad, having 1500 foot in length, and
1000 in breadth, being compassed on all sides with Mountains, except the
entrance, lying toward Pozzoli. All the earth is hollow, and being beaten
with a man's foot, sounds like an empty vessel; and not only the earth by
the Brimstone is made yellow, but it made our boots and shoes of the same
color, with walking upon it, yea, when I cast a piece of silver upon the
ground, it was presently made yellow and with no rubbing could be made white
again. In this Ouall Market place (as I may call it) there is a short and
narrow ditch of water, which is almost round, and the water thereof boyles, as
if fire were under it. They say if any thing be cast into it, that it will be
sodden in short space; but some part of it will be consumed: and Leander
reports, that one cast four eggs into it, and presently took three fully
sodden, but the fourth was consumed. Also he witnesses, that this little ditch
is not always in one place, but in time works it self from one place to
another in this circuit, and yet is never greater, and that the old ditch is
filled presently with new matter. An horseman cannot well come to this place,
and as the same Leander writes, an horse man coming boldly thither, was
swallowed up into the hollow earth. And that the strange heat of this water
may appear, one of the Viceroyes Guard, a Duchman, and coming hither,
according to their fashion, to guide his Country men my consorts, told us,
that one of his fellows not long before, coming in like sort as he did, to
guide his Countrymen hither, either being careless, or rather (as it is most
probable) having drunk too much, and not guiding his feet well, by chance
stumbled into this ditch, and when one of his friends took him by the hand to
pull him out, that he pulled of all the skin from his hand, and that after
better advice, they pulled him out with a cloak flung about him, but that
within few days he died, neither could the Physicians give him any remedy or
promise any hope of his life. At the foot of the Mountain there is a hole,
where the vapors with their own motion, continually cast up little stones and
stinking smelles; but if any man move these vapors by a staff, or any thing
put into the hole, the more they are stirred, the greater stones they cast up,
yea flames of fire sometimes. There be some cottages near this place, where
they make Brimstone, and all these parts smell of brimstone, and if the wind
blow from hence toward Naples, the stink thereof may be smelled thither. On
all sides here be Baths of wholesome waters, which of old were famous.

After we had passed huge ruins of old buildings, we came at the foot of a
mountain to the City (p) Pozzoli, of old famous, and called Puteolis, to which
all these ruins are said to have belonged of old, and it had the name of the
Latin word Puteus, as also it has the present name from the Italian tongue, of
the wels, which are frequent. I say it has the present name of the Italian
word Pozzo, signifying a well, though some will have it named presently of
Puzzo, which signifies a stink, because of the smell of brimstone in these
parts: but the city being most ancient, cannot have the old name of an Italian
word: and it is certain, that the Roman Princes of old used this part for the
place of their recreation; for the great sweetness of the Country, and the
plenty of medicinal waters, whereupon they gave it the first name. Others say
that it was of old called Diciarchiam, but at this day it is called Pozzoli, or
Puzzoli. Here we dined, and were forced to give our swords to the Host, there
being a great penalty set upon any that carry their Arms. The City has
nothing worth the seeing, but the old Church, first built to Heathen Idols, and
after by Christians dedicated to Saint Proculus, and it has the names of the
workmen that built it graven upon it, and there be showed the bones of a Giant
of wonderful bigness. The Haven of this City was of old very commodious, but by
negligence is grown of no use.

Here the sea entering between two Mountains, was of old called the Creek of
(P) Baie, of that City seated on the opposite shore, or the Creek of Pozzoli,
of this City. Suetonius writes that the Emperor Tiberius consulting about his
successor, and inclining more to his true Nephew, Thrasyllus the Mathematitian
should answer, that Catus should no more reign, then he should ride over the
Creek of Baie. Wherefore Caius being Emperor, and hearing of this divination
(not as others say, in emulation of Xerxes, who made a Bridge over Hellespont,
nor to the end that with the fame of this great work, he might terrify the
rebellious Germans and Britans) did build a Bridge over this creek of the sea,
being about three miles long, that he might thereupon pass from Baie to
Pozzoli. Of this Bridge thirteen piles of brick may be seen near the shore
at Pozzoli, and as many on the other side near the shore of Baie, and some of
these piles have yet arches upon them, but ready to fall. And from these piles
the Inner part of the bridge was founded upon two ranks of ships fastened
with ancors, and covered over with a bancke of earth, to make the passage like
the way of Appius. The rest Suetonius adds in these or the like words. Over
this bridge he went to and fro for two days; the first day upon a trapped
horse, having his head adorned with a Crown of Oak leaves, and bearing an
Hatchet, a Sword, and a Garland, and a robe of cloth of Gold. The next day in a
Coch-mans habit, driving a Coch drawn by four famous horses, carrying before
him Darius a child, one of the pledges given by the Parthians, his Pretorian
Soldiers accompanying him, and his friends following him in a Coach, etc. He
that desires to comprehe^d the magnificence of this work, must first know, that
the Mediterranean sea is very calm, having little or no ebbing or flowing, and
that this Creek is yet more calm, and that this bridge was built in the
furthest part of the Creek, very near the land. These things considered, (if
my judgment fail not), there is greater cause of wonder at the Bridge built
by the Duke of Parma besieging Antwerp, being in like sort built upon barks
fastened one to the other, and also at the Bridge of London, bearing a great
ebbing and flowing of the sea, and built of free stone, upon so firm a
foundation, as it bears many great and fair houses upon it: but whatsoever
the magnificence were, surely the vanity of this work was great, to spend so
much upon this Bridge, the way by land being not a mile longer then by the
Bridge. Give me leave to digress so far, as to remember, that the Territory
of Falernum is not far from Pozzols, the wine whereof called Falernum, is so
much praised by Horace. After dinner we went from Pozzoii, to view the
Antiquities lying upon this Creek; and first we came to the Labyrinth, a
building under ground, which has the name of the multitude of rooms, with
such passages to and fro; as a man may loose himself in them; and here we had
not only need of the thread of Ariadne, but of light also to conduct us.
Leander thinks, that all this building was to keep fresh water: Then we came
to the Amphitheater, being of an Ouall form, the inner part whereof is 172
foot long, and 88 broad, the building whereof is little ruined: And Suetonius
writes, that this was built for the Plays of Vulcan. Not far thence, near
the shore, is a fountain of clear and sweet water, flowing plentifully out
of the sea, so that for a great distance we might with our eyes distinguish the
same from the sea water, which Leander thinks to have been brought by pipes
under the earth, to these houses of the old Romans. Near this place are the
ruins of many buildings, now called Belgeimano, which the Emperor Tiberius is
said to have built, when hereturned with triumph from the German war.
Between the rocks that compass this sea, is the way Attellane, which leads
those that pass to Rome, to the way of Appins, and there be many baths, for
most of the waters are medicinal.

Near the Lake of Auernus upon the side toward Pozzoli, lies a Mountain, (
q) which lately broke out of the earth, where of old were the bathes of
Tripergola, whence the dwellings in this part, and this place, are called
Tripergola, and here of old were many large and stately buildings, but by
reason of many Earthquakes, and roberies of Pirates, the houses were long since
forsaken, and at last in the year 1538 were swallowed up by the earth. For in
that year upon Michaelmas day was a terrible Earthquake in this place, which
brake out with fire in great flames, casting up stones, with a great tempest of
wind, and darkness of the air, so as the people thought the worlds end was
come. And at this time the ashes of this fire were carried by the wind to
places twenty miles distant. At last after seven days, this confusion ceased,
and then the aforesaid Mountain breaking out of the bowels of the earth was
first seen, being three miles high, and at the bottom four miles compass.
Upon the top of this Mountain is a hole some fistie paces broad, which
toward the bottom grows more and more narrow, where it seems round, and of
little compass, having a clear water, yet giving a stink of brimstone, and
this hole is like a Theater made by art. In the foresaid fearful Earthquake,
caused by the breaking out of the vapors enclosed under the hollow earth, many
famous bathes were lost, and no more seen. Not far hence is the Mountain of
Christ, so called, because they say, that Christ with the squadrons of the
Fathers, passed this way when he ascended from Hell. But the French Gentleman
Villamont worthily judges this to be fabulous, and likewise the miracle of the
Crucifex here, bearing the marks of Christ, yet does he give too much credit
to the miracles of Loreto.

Upon the shore of the creek of (r) Baie, lies the Lake (as Virgil says) of
the foul stinking Auernus. This Lake is a natural Haven, but is not used,
because the Haven of Lucrinus is between it and the sea. It is compassed with
high hills on all sides, but only where the Sea enters on the South Side at a
passage fifty paces broad, and the form of it is round, and the hills that
compass it now seem pleasant, but of old were all covered with a thick wood,
which shutting up the air, and by the shadow drawing many birds to it, was
thought to be the cause that these birds stifled with the smell of brimstone,
fell suddenly dead, till the Emperor Augustus caused the wood to be destroyed.
And of the birds thus killed, the Lake was called Auernus. For this smell of
brimstone, and the shadow of the foresaid wood, darkening the Lake, and the
black color of the water, and because the sun is shut out from the Lake by
the hills, this Lake was feined by the Poets to be one of the Lakes of hell.
Leander writes of a fountain here, the water whereof no man would drink,
because they thought it came from hell, derived by the heat of Phlegiton,
whereupon an Oracle was built here, as in a place consecrated to Pluto, and the
Cymerians living here in a Cave, entered this place when they had sacrificed to
the Gods for the souls of the dead. Leander also says, that they used to
sacrifice men in this place, and names Elpenor sacrificed by Ulysses (for he
understands Homer to mean this place,) and also Misenus sacrificed by AEneas,
though Virgil write that he died here. Some will have this Lake to be the
famous Fen of Acheron, of which Virgil writes;

Tenebrosa palus Acheronte refuso.
The dark Fen of Acheron powered out.
This also Sernius affirms, and shows that this Lake comes from the infernal
River Acheron, so called as without joy. But Leander shows that Acheron
feigned by the Poets to be a river of hell, is a river of Calabria, and that
there is another river of that name in Greece. They say that the water of this
Lake Auernus seems black, because it has no bottom: but Leander affirms
that some by a long rope found the bottom to be three hundred and sixty
fathom deep. The hills that compass Auernus are very steep, with a head long
fall, whereupon Virgil says;

Facilis discensus Auerni.
The descent of Auernus is easy.
Under the hill toward the West side, is a Cave, which they call the cave of
Sybilla of Cuma; and among many rooms there is one, in which she is said to
have attended her devotion, but Leander thinks this place to have been a
sweating Bath. Of this cave Virgil thus writes:

Horren daeque procul Secreta Sybillae:
Antrum immane petit. and inferius:
Extisum Euboicae latus ingens rupis in Antrum, etc.
Vnde runnt totidem voces, responsa Sibillae.
Of dreadful Sibill the far distant rites
To the vast cave he goes. And after
An huge den cut out in the Euboyan rocks vast side, etc.
Whence rush so many voices, Sybill answering.
From these hills to the neighbor City Baie, they say the earth is all
hollow with caves under it, and that the Cimerians of old dwelled under an hill
toward the seashore. And Leander thinks that cave to have belonged to them;
and surely whether it belonged to them, or any old Prophets, or to the
Prophetess Sibilla, or whose work soever it was, the wonderful Art and huge
expense therein do plainly appear. These Cimerians of old did lead strangers
under the earth to the Oracle, and were diggers in mines, and reputed to have
the spirit of divination; whereupon the King gave them pensions for revealing
secrets unto him. These men never saw the Sun, but came abroad only in the
night; whence is the proverb of Cimerian darkness, and the fiction of the
Poets, that they did lead strangers to the Court of Pluto They write, that
these having deceived the King by false divination, were by him destroyed. Upon
the Hills of Auernus, they show the ruined Temple of Mercury, and another
Temple of Apollo, little broken down. Nero began a ditch to be made from the
Lake Auernus to Ostia, to avoid the trouble of going by sea. From the said
Lake there was a sluice of old into the Lake Lucrinus, by which when there was
any flood of the sea, the water passed out of Lucrinus into Auernus Lake: but
this is now stopped since the foresaid Earthquake of Tripergula. The Lake
Lucrinus is so called in Latin, of the gain made by fishes sold. Suetonius
writes, that Julius Caesar let in the Sea to this Lake as also into the other.
For the Senate of Rome making great gain of the fish sold here, (till the Sea
did once break in with such force, as the fish went out of these Lakes at the
ebbing of the Sea) did thereupon command Caesar to give remedy thereunto,
which he did, raising banks against the Sea, at which time he made a passage
for the fish out of one Lake into another. We gave a Clown three poli for
leading us through the Cave of Sybilla.

Upon the Sea shore lies the bath, commonly called of Cicero, which the
Physicians call the bath of Tritoli, of a Latin word for rubbing, the letter F
being changed into T, and this Bath lies near the ruins of the Village of
Cicero, called his Academy. I know not whether this Village (or rather Palace)
had the name of Academy or no; for I find in my notes a Village of Cicero in
the way from Naples to Pozzoli, and likewise the mention of this bath of
Cicero, and his Academy, near the Lake of Auernus. And Leander mentions a
village of his, in both places: but Villamont speaks of a Village near
Pozzoli, and of a Palace in this place called Accademy; and these differ not
much from my notes: but others confound the Village and the Bath, putting both
together, so as writing of these intricate caves under the earth, my selfeam
fallen into a Laberinth, wherein I had much rather die, then go back to
Naples for searching the truth. We entered this Bath Tritoli, and gave a Clown
one Poalo for conducting us. The passage to enter was strait, and extends
far under the Mountain, and there is a mark set, which they say no man ever
passed. We did sweat extremely, yet I desired to come to that mark, till at
last feeling my spirits begin to fail me, I was glad to return, and to creep
upon the earth, where the air was more cold then above. They say that this
bath is very healthful, and much frequented in the spring time, and that Nero
had of old a Palace built over it.

Near this lie the ruins of Baulos or Boaulia, named of the oxen stolen, by
Gerion, for here was the Temple of Hercules, and Seruius, expounding Virgil,
says that Eneas did here speak with Hercules. Leander writes that Hortensius
did here make cesternes, wherein he kept his so much prised Lampreyes. Tacitus
and Suetonius in the life of Nero, make mention of this place. For Agripina
mother of Nero, passing by water from the Village of Piso to this Baulos, was
of purpose and by the command of Nero put into a rotten boat, that she might
be drowned, which boat splitting in the midst of the passage, Agripina
perceived the intent, and silently (the neight being dark) slipped into
another boat, and so for that time escaped: but her waiting-maide being in
great danger, and crying out that she was Mother to Nero, found death by that
name, by which she hoped to save her life, being presently struck into the
water by one of the conspiratours. At last when wicked Nero resolved to kill
his Mother he invited her to a feast, entertaining her lovingly on the Sea
shore, and when she returned, out of show of duty attending her to this Baulos,
lying between the Misene Promontory and the Lake of Raie; but at the same time
he commanded that she should be killed, and here under the earth we did see
her sepulcher in a cave, curiously carved, and one of the sinest old monuments
I did ever see.

Hence we passed to (s) Baie, an ancient City, and for the sweetness
preferred to Rome by Horace:

Nullus in vrbe locus Baijs praelucet am aenit.
No place of Rome sweet Baie does excel.
The situation of this City is most sweet: but all the houses near the
shore are drowned, except the Baths, and the houses upon the mountain are all
ruined, neither do any dwell here, but some few poor and miserable people
(such as the husbandmen of Italy are commonly) yet these ruins show the pride
and magnificence of that old time. This City is said to have the name of a
friend of Ulysses there buried. Here be the foresaid ruins of Caligula his
Bridge, which I said do lie on this side the Creek. Here we did see the
stately ruins of two Senators houses, where the excellent pictures did yet
remain upon the highest roof. They showed us a tree (as they said) turned
into a stone and the ruins of the Temples of Diana and Venus.

From hence we walked toward the Mountain Misenus, and near the dead sea;
first, we came to ( t) a hill, made hollow by the building under it, which is
vulgarly called of the number of the rooms Cento camerelle, that is, One
hundred little chambers. Leander says, that it was a Cesterne to keep
fresh water, whereof the Romans had great store in these parts, whether they
came certain seasons of the year to recreate themselves; and all this
Territory on both sides near this Creek or Bay of the Sea, are so full of
ruined Palaces, Temples, and Sepulchers, as a man would say they were not
several Villages, but one great City. This said building is large, and four
square, and sustained by four ranks of four square pillars, into which we
were let down at a hole in the earth. Round about the entrance there were many
Celles, almost four square, and of an unequal bigness, parted with enteries
winding about, and because the building is intricate, some think it was a
Laberinth.

( v) The ruins of a stately building are opposite to this, into which we
descended by forty stairs; it has no windows, but all the light comes in at
crannies, and it has four ranks of fouresquare pillars to bear up the
arched roof. Every rank has twelve pillars, and in all they be forty eight,
and each one is twelve foot distant from the other, and twelve foot high; to
which if you ad the high roof of the building, the room is twenty five foot
high, which I beheld not without being amazed at the magnisicence of the Romans
in these buildings. This house is little broken down, and the plaster of the
wall is so hard, as I could not pierce it with my dagger, and it is vulgarly
called la piscina mirabile. It is certain, that the Romans of old bestowed
great charge in building places for the keeping of fish, and some think this
was built to that purpose by Antonia, the wife of Drusus; others say by
Hortensius: but Leander says, that it was built to keep fresh water, and he
(with other Writers) does judge it a stately monument of the Palace of
Lucullus built near Baie, which he proves out of Plutarch, who mentions one
Palace of Lucullus in his foresaid village for his Summer dwelling, and
another here near Baie for his Winter abode. And Tacitus says, that the
Emperor Tiberius foreseeing his death, and often changing places, at last came
to this place, and here died. It were an infinite work if I should severally
describe the Palaces of Marius, Caesar, and Lucullus.

I will not omit, that our Guides (I know not how credibly) showed us certain
round ( w) fields, compassed round with Mountains, and at this time plowed,
which they said were the Elisian fields.

We are now come to the ( x) Misene Promontary, which has the name of Misenus,
friend to Eneas, buried here, or rather by him sacrificed to the gods at the
Lake Auernus as is aforesaid. Upon the top of this Mountain was a Tower, of
old called Faro, upon which a light was hung for a sea-marke. Under the
Mountain (especially where it grows narrow, and upon three sides is washed by
the Sea) there be so many houses under the earth, as the pillars thereof seem
only to bear up the Mountain, and among them there is one called Grotta
Traconara, of the winding passages therein, which by the ruins now remaining,
seems to have been a magnificent work, and this Leander thinks to have been
built to keep fresh water.

Right opposite to this mountain, is the (Y) Cape of Minerua and near that
lies the Island (K) Caprea, or Capre, easy to be seen by the white and high
cliffes, and famous by the cruelty, and more then goatish lusts of the Emperor
Tiberius, when he withdrew himself out of the sight of the Senate and people
of Rome, to live there in solitude. This Island has no Haven, neither can
little boats land there; whereupon being safe from Pirates, it was held a
place of pleasure in the time of Augustus. The creek of the sea, coming in
between these two foresaid Promontories, was of old called Sinus Cratera. Upon
the side of the mountain Misene, lying toward Cuma, is a lake of salt water,
called the dead sea, into which, water falls our of the creek of rozzols, and
it was of old more large. For Suetonius writes that Augustus kept one Navy in
this Lake, and another at Rauenna, to guard the upper and lower sea. And
Tacitus writes that his successor Tiberius kept two Nauies in those places. At
this day the Lake is parted from the Sea, with a bank some fifty paces broad,
and it is almost round in form, and some two miles broad; and Plutarke writes
that Lucullus made this Lake to keep fishes therein.

From this mountain Misene, we walked upon the Sea shore five very short
miles, and came to the ruins of the old City (Z) Cuma, built by the Calcedons
of the Greek Island Euboia, and the oldest City in all Italy, and it is said to
have had the name of a good presage from the Captains of the Navy, or a woman
great with child of that name. It was seated of old upon a hill near the sea
shore, and yet on the side toward the land, the walls are standing, but the
daughter has devoured the mother: for the increase of Naples, was the decrease
of Cuma, yet the ruins still remain, and upon the top of the hill was the
Temple of Apollo, of which Virgil writes;

At pius AEneas arces, quihus altus Apollo, etc.
But good AEneas, high Apollees Towers, etc.
And there is yet an ancient Temple partly ruined. A triumphall Arch is yet
unbroken, but some say the foresaid Temple was consecrated to Hercules. Of old
Aristodamus did lead the forces of Cuma, and after his victory they made him
their Prince: and Liuy writes that Tarqutnius the proud, being banished came to
him, and there died. Historians write that Drusus made a Ditch from this shore
toward Capua. In the hill or mountain of Cuma, there is a labyrinth under the
earth, and from this hill we did see diverse Islands near the Land. The Poets
fable that in one of them called (F) Nisa, the Witch Calipso dwelt. That in the
second called (G) Procida, the Giant Typheus was buried, because of the flames
that sometimes break out of the earth. The third is called the (H) Island of
Saint Martine. The fourth is called (I) Ischia, wherein the Kings of Naples
have a strong Castle, to which the King fled for a time, when the French King
Charles the eight took Naples.

We walked along this shore of the sea, to the Tower called (R) della Patria,
being sixteen miles from Naples, eight miles from Baie, and five miles from
Cuma. It is seated in a pleasant place, and upon the West Side has a Lake
called by the name of the Tower, and the River Vulturnus running into the sea.
On the South Side the sea is near, and upon the East and North sides, it has
pleasant fields and hills. At this day there is no building standing but the
said Tower, and a poor miserable Inn to lodge passengers. But among the
shrubs there be many ruins of houses, and of a bridge, and this place was of
old called Linternum, whether Scipio the Affrican retired into voluntary
banishment, to fly the envy of the ungrateful Romans, and there he built him
a stately Palace, and a sepulcher in which he would be buried; saying that the
ungrateful Romans should not have so much as his bones. Liuy in his twenty two
Book calls Linternum a sandy soil, beyond Vulturnus from Rome: but Leander
thinks that he spoke this of the territory, not of the place it self; and
that the rather, because in his twenty three Book, he writes; that Sempronius
the Consul, did lead the forces to Lintcrnum beyond Vulturnus, and there does
agree in the situation thereof with all writers; and the sharp fountain like
vinegar, whereof Pliny writes, is found among these ruins, which water he
says makes them drunken that drink thereof, though others write that they
have taken it moderately without any such effect. Pliny also writes, that this
water moderately taken, has the virtue to cure the headache. While Scrpio
lived here in solitude, Liuy and Plutarke write, that certain bold and valiant
Pirates, upon the fame of his virtue, came to see the face, and hear the words
of so great a Captain. Liuy in his thirty eight Book, writes that he did see
two sepulchers of Scipio, this at Linternum, and the other at Rome, near the
gate Capena, both decked with carved Images; and that these verses were written
upon his Tomb at Linternum;

Deuicto Annibale, capta Carthagine, and aucto
Imperio, hoc cineres marmore tectus habes.
Cui non Europa, non obstitit Africa quondam,
Respice res hominum, quam breuis vrna premat.
Hannibal foild, Carthage sacked, and The Empire
Enlarged, thine ashes in this marble lie,
Whom Europe or Afrique, nere made retire
How short a chest holds? see man's vanity.
Leander thinks that Scipio was buried in this place, as well because Liuy
writes it; as for the words of Scipio related by Valerius Maximus, that his
ungrateful Country should not have so much as his bones. And he thinks that
the monument at Rome was either built by Scipio in the time of his prosperity,
or by his friends long after, in memory of so worthy a kinse man. As we walked
from Cuma to Linternum, we did see no memorable thing, but took this journey
only out of desire to see the monument of this famous man, neither did we know
the danger from banished men in this place, who often resort to this poor
Inn; yet for that cause this way from Naples to Rome, more commodious then the
other, and therefore having post-masters appointed there for public affairs,
had long been forsaken by passengers. This way to Rome is thus distinguished
into miles. From Naples to la Patria sixteen miles, to la Rocca fourteen, to
la Fratta eighteen, to Ponte Curto, ten, to Capetano eight, to Frusalone
eighteen, to Piedauani three, to val'di Montone twenty two, to la Ficha
fourteen, to Rome eight. There is no house at Linternum but the foresaid base
Inn, and there we lodged, and found not our supper answerable to the
fruitfulness of Campania, neither had we any beds, and could hardly get clean
straw, which inconveniences were accompanied with the fear to be surprised by
the banished men, so as we slept not one wink that night. Here we did see two
Towers, one compassed with water, and near the Tower della Patria, we did see
the ruins of a stately Palace, which they said was the Palace of Scipio, and
that he was buried there. Also we did see a pillar, upon which were the Arms
engraven of the Kings of Spain and Naples, and we did see the ruins of a
bridge, which showed the old magnificence thereof. But there was nothing to be
seen, that might counteruaile the danger we had run. Our journey the day
before from Naples to Baie was very pleasant, through most fruitful hills of
corn and vincs. But from Cuma to this Tower, the way upon the sea shore was
wild and barren, yet not far distant within land we might fee most pleasant
and fruitful hills.

When we had passed a night without sleep at Linternum, we returned early in
the morning to Naples, by the same way we came, but with a more right linc. And
there I made no stay, because England then had wars with Spain, but took
the next opportunity to return to Rome with the Carrier, after the same
fashion I came hither; and I paid to my Vetturine fifty two poli for my horse
and horse-meat, and my own diet from Naples to Rome, and beyond my covenant
(to gratify him) I was content to pay for my diet the first and last meal,
which I promised of my own free will, yet should have been forced thereunto,
for otherwise he would have carried me fasting to Rome, and have given me
slender diet at Capua, being a plentiful place; and I observed the other
passengers to do the like in these places, where they were out of danger.

I pass over the iournies, (which I have discribed before, and will only say in
a word, that we returned to Rome, where that I might stay with more security,
to see the antiquities Rome.
thereof, it happened very fitly, that the Cardinal Allan an Englishman, having
used to persecute the English coming thither, and therefore being ill spoken
of by them, had changed his mind, since the English had overthrown the Spanish
Navy, in the year 1588. and there was now small hope of reducing England to
papistry, and therefore to gain his Country-mens love did not only mislike
that they should be intrapped at Rome, but did himself protect them, though
suspected for religion, so they would seek his favor: whereof I being
advertised by the experience of others, when I had in silence, and through many
dangers seen Naples subject to the King of Spain, and was now returned to
Rome, I presently went to the said Cardinal, and after the fashion, having
kissed the hemme of his vesture, I humbly desired, that according to this his
courtesy, for which he was much honored in England, he would receive me
into his protection, till I might view the antiquities of Rome. He being of a
goodly stature and countenance with a grave look and pleasant speech bad me
rest secure, so I could command my tongue, and should abstain from oftence.
Only for his duties sake, he said, that he must advise me, and for the love
of his Country entreat me, that I would be willing to hear those
instructions for religion here, which I could not hear in England. I submitted
my self to these conditions, and when (after due reverence made) I would have
gone away, the English Gentlemen and Priests there present, ouertooke me in the
next room. Among these was an Englishman, a Priest of Calabria, who in my
journey from Naples hither, had been my consort by the way, at the table, and
even in bed, whom I had often heard talking with the Italians of English
affairs, but more modestly and honestly then any man would expect of a Priest.
He taking my self and one Master Warmington an English Gentleman by the hands,
with an aftonished look, did congratulate with me, that I, who had bin his
companion at bed and board, and whom he had taken rather for any countriman,
was now become an English man. All the rest commended my judgment, in coming
to the Cardinal, and inquiring after my lodging, promised to be my guides in
Rome, and for Countries sake, to do me a good offices, and so after mutual
salutations, I went from them. I well knew, that such guides would be very
troublesome to me, for they (according to the manner) disputing of Religion, I
must either seem to consent by silence, or maintain arguments full of danger
in that place, besides that to gratify them for their courtesy, I must needs
have run into extraordinary expenses. Therefore having told them my lodging,
I presently changed it, and took a chamber in a vitling house, in the
Marketplace, close under the Popes Palace, where I thought they, or any else
would least seek me, and so being free from that burden, and yet secure in
the Cardinals promised protection, I began boldly, (yet with as much have as I
possibly could make) to view the Antiquities of Rome.

The description of Rome, drawn rudely, but so as may serve the Reader to
understand the situation of the Monuments.


I. Il Borgo. II. Trasteuere. III. l'Isola. IIII. The Gate del popolo. V. The
gate Pinciana. VI. The gate Salara. VII. The gate Pia. VIII. The gate di San'
Lorenzo. IX. g. Maggiore. X. g. di S. Gionanni. XI. g. Latina. XII. g. di S.
Sebastiano. XIII. g. di S. Paolo. XIV. g. di. Ripa. XV g. di. S. Pancratio.
XVI. g. Settimiana. XVII. g. di S. Spirito. XVIII. g. Fornac: XIX. g. la
portusa. XX. g. di Belucdere. XXI. g. di S. Angelo. XXII. Monte Capitalino.
XXIII. M. Palatino. XXIIII. M. Auentino. XXV. M. Coelio. XXVI. M. Esquilino.
XXVII. M. Viminale XXVIII. M. Quirinale. XXIX. M. Vaticano XXX. M. Ianiculo
XXXI. M. Pincio XXXII. M. Citorio. XXXIII. M. Iordano. XXXIIII. M. Testaceo.
XXXV. The bridge di S. Angelo. XXXVI. b. Vaticano XXXVII. b. Sisto. XXXVIII. b.
di quatro Capi. XXXIX. b. di S. Maria. XL. b. di S. Bartolomco. XLI. b.
Sublicio. A. The Church of S. Giouanni Lateran'. B. C. of S. Pietro. C. C. of
S. Maria Maggiore. D. C. of S. Croce in Hierosolyma. Q. The Palace of the
Pope. 3. Beluedere. 4. Castel' di S. Angelo. 5. l'obelisco di Ginlio Cesare. 6.
The sepulcher di Cestio. 7. Circus Maximus. 8. The Church of S. Stefano
rotondo. 9. Trofei di Mario. 10. lacolonna di Traiano. 11. la colonna d'
Antonio. 12. The Church of S. Maria srpra la Minerua. 13. C. di S. Maria
rotonda. 14. The Marketplace Nanona. 15. C. di S. Maria della consolatione.
16. The Market place di Fiori. 17. C. de la Trinita. 18. C. di S. Rocco. 19.
The Bath of Dioclesian. 20. le set sale. 21. The Arch of Constantine. 22. The
Arch of Vespasian. 23. The Arch of Septimius Seuerus. 24. The Theater of
Marcellus. 25. The Palace of the Cardinal di Farnese.

Rome being situated on the East side of Tiber, may further be distinguished
into three parts seated on the West side of Tiber, whereof the first is called
(I) Il Borgo, and it contains the Popes Palace, compassed with high walls
by Pope Nicholas the fifth, and the Garden thereof, which of the fair prospect
is called Beluedere, and the Library, and the Church of Saint Peter In
vaticano, and the field or Marketplace lying before the Church, and the strong
Castle Saint Angelo, all which were compassed with walls by Pope Leo the
fourth, and for a time this part was of him called Leonina, but now it is
called Il Borgo. The second part is called (II) Trasteuere that is beyond the
Tiber, and was called of old I anicolo, of the Mountain included therein; and
also was called the City of the men of Rauenna, of the Soldiers which
Augustus kept at Raucnna against Anthony, and after placed them here. And
because the air is unwholesome, as the wind is that blows here from the
South, it is only inhabited by Artisans and poor people. And at this day it
is compassed with walls, which seem ancient, save that it lies open toward
the Tiber and Rome, and it is adorned with Churches and buildings, but much
severed one from the other. The third part is called (III) l' Isola, that is an
Island of Tiber, which of old was called Licaonia, of the Temple of Jupiter of
Licaonta. When Tarquinius the proud was of old banished from Rome, the people
abhorring to convert the goods of such a wicked man to private uses, did make
his ground a field for training of soldiers, and called it Campus Martius, and
the Senate commanded the great store of his corn, chafe, and straw, to be
cast into the Tyber, of which matter growing together, they say this Island
first came. After a Temple was built in this Island, to Esculapius, brought
hither from Epidaurus in the shape of a Serpent; and the I Will being consecrated
to him, was then made in the form of the ship that brought that serpent,
whereof there is a monument in the Garden of Saint Bartholmew, namely a stone
in the form of a ship with a Serpent graven upon it. It is a quarter of a mile
in length, and some fifty paces in breadth, and it is full of stately Churches
and houses.

If you draw a line from the East Side of the Mountain Capitolino (XXII) to
the Gate del popolo, (IIII) lying toward the North; and from the said
Mountain draw aline to the furthest part of the Bridge upon the West side of
the Island of Tyber, this compass may truly be called Rome, as at this day it
is inhabited; for the rest lies wild, having only ruins, and some scattered
Churches and houses, and toward the South, fields of corn within the walls.
They say, that Romulus did only build upon three Mountains, the Palatine, the
Capitoline, and the Celian, yet others add the Esquiline, and that he
compassed them with walls, and that he built the Gate Carmentalis, so called
of the mother of Euander, which lies under the Capitol upon the right hand
between the rock Tarpeius and the River Tiber, and was also called the cursed
Gate, of the 300 Fabij, which went out of the same to fight, and were all
killed in one day. And that he built the Roman Gate lying near the Mount
Pallatine, toward the Amphitheater, called Obelisco, and the Gate Pandana, so
called, because it was always open. After, seven Mountains being enclosed,
Rome had eight Gates, and after thirty four (as Liuy writes), and at last
thirty seven Gates.

At this day the first Gate is called (IIII) delpopolo, lying on the East Side
of Tiber toward the North, which of the River was of old called Flumentana,
and of the way of Flaminius, to which it did lead, was called Flaminia. The
second Gate is called (V) Pinciana, of a Senator of that name, and of old was
called Collatina of a Palace adjoining, and it is a mile distant from the
former Gate. The third Gate is called (VI) la Salarta, of salt brought in that
way, and was of old called Quirinalis, of the Temple, or the Mountain
adjoining of the same name, and also called Agona of a Mountain, or as having
no corner; and also called Collina of a Hill, and it is less then a mile
distant from the last named Gate. The fourth Gate is called (VII) la Pia, of
Pope Pius the fourth, who repaired it, and the way without it, and it is more
then half a mile distant from the last named Gate. At this day it is many
times called Saint Agnese of a Church lying near it. And it was of old called
Viminalis of Oseyres growing there, and also called Figulensis of Potters
dwelling there, and also called of old Numentina of a Castle. I will omit the
Gate, of old called Inter Aggeres, because almost no ruins thereof remain at
this day. The fifth Gate is called (VIII) di S. Lorenzo of the Church near it.
It was of old called Tiburtina (though others think that Gate was nearer to
Tyber on this side) and Esquilina of a place near it, and Taurina of a bulls
head which still is graven upon it; and it is a mile and a half distant from
the last named Gate. The sixth Gate is called (IX) Maggiore, and was of old
called Neuia, and Labicana, and Praenestina. The seventh is called (X) dt S.
Giouanni, and it was of old called Caelemontana of a Mountain, and
Quercotulana of an Oak, and Settimia, and Asinaria. The eighth is called (XI)
Latina of Latium to which it leads, and was of old called Firentina, and is
more then a mile distant from the seventh Gate. The ninth from the eighth more
then half a mile distant, is called (XII) di S. Sebastiano, of the Church to
which it leads, and was of old called Capena of the City or River of that
name; and also Camena of a Church, and Appia of the way which Appius the Censor
paued, and Fontinale of the Fountains; and some write it was called Trionfale
for part of the Triumphs that did enter there. And the brother of the Horatij
escaping in the fight against the brothers Curiatij, did return at this Gate:
without the same is the Sepulcher of Scipio the Africane, whereof I spoke
describing Linternum near Naples (where he would be buried, far from his
ungrateful Country). The tenth Gate is called (XIII) di S. Paolo of the
Church whither it leads, and was of old called Trigemina of the 3 Horatij
going out there, and called Ostiensis, as leading to Ostia where Tyber runs
into the Sea, and it is a mile from the (...) Gate, and as much distant from
the River Tyber. The eleventh Gate lies on the West side of Tyber, in that part
of the City which I said is called (II) Trasteuere, and is distant from Tyber
half a quarter of a mile, being called (XIIII) di ripa, and was of old called
Portuensis, as leading to the Haven of Rome, made by the Emperor Claudius. The
twelfth Gate almost a mile distant from the former, is called (XV) di S.
Pancratio, and of old was called Aurelia of Aurelius the Emperor, or of the way
Aurelia, and of others called Pancratiana, and it lies near the Mountain
Ianiculo. The thirteenth Gate half a mile distant from the former, is called
(XVI) Settimiana, of the Emperor Settimius, whose name is engraven upon it,
and it was repaired by Pope Alexander the sixth. Some think this Gate was
called Fontinale, others Festinale, and it is the last Gate in Trasieuere. The
fourteenth Gate is called (XVII) di S. Spirito and it is the first in that part
of the City called (I) Borgo. The fifteenth gate is called in the map (XVIII)
Fornacum, but I find it called by Writers del Torrione, and Posterula, and to
be repaired by Pope Nicholas the fifth. The sixtenth Gate is called (XIX) la
Portusa, being neete to the Popes stables. The seuententh is called (XX) di
Beluedere, lying near the Popes Palace and (3) Garden, and it is called in
some Mapps Angelica, and by others Giulia, of the Pope Giulius. The eightenth
is called (XXI) di S. Angelo, and delCastello of the Castle S. Angelo, and it
was of old called Enea, and more lately di Cenello. I pass over the Gate
called of old la Trionfante, where the greatest triumphs did enter, because no
ruins remain thereof, but only it is said to have bin seated near the
Triumphall Bridge. (XXXVI)

It remains to speak of the ways leading to Rome, which I will note with the
letters of the Gates leading to them. And first I will only name the ways
that are within the walls.

The first la Suburra begins at the Amphitheater, called Coliseo (20), and
leads to the Church Saint Lucia in Orsia. The second la Sacra, lies from the
Arch of Constantine (21) to the Arch of Vespasian (22), through Forum Romanum
(23), to the Capitol (XXII.) The third la Nuoua, did lead from the greater
Palace in Mount Palatine (XXIII) to the Bath of Antonius in Mount Auentine
(XXIIII). The fourth la Trionfale, did lead from the Mount Vaticano (XXIX), to
the Capitol in the Mount (XXII) Capitolino. The fifth la via retta, was in the
Campius Martius, where is la colonna di Traiano (10).

The Friar Leander describing Rome, names twenty nine ways within and
without the walls namely, 1. Appia. 2. Latina. 3. Labicana. 4. Campana. 5.
Praenestina. 6. Cumana. 7. Flaminia. 8. Cassia. 9. Tiburtina. 10. Collatina.
11. Nomentana. 12. Salaria. 13. Emilia. 14. Portuesen. 15. Cornelia. 16.
Claudia. 17. Valeria. 18. Ostiensis. 19. Laurentina. 20. Ardeatina. 21. Galica.
22. Tiberina. 23. Settimia. 24. Quintia. 25. Gallicana. 26. Triumphalie. 27.
Praetoriana. 28. Laticulesen. 29. Aureliana. And upon these ways he relates
many stately Palaces built out of the City. Now I will note the ways without
the Gates by the same letters, by which I have noted the Gates leading to them.
Among these the most famous is the way of Appius, called the Queen of ways,
most part of the chief Triumphs entering that way. It begins at the Gate of
Saint (XII) Sebastian, and is paued to Capua, and then divided into two ways,
that on the left hand leading to Brundusium, and that on the right hand leading
to Pozzoli and to Cuma, having stately Pallates on all sides, and it has the
name of Appius Claudius the Censor. In this way two miles from the City the
Romans built a Temple in memory of Hannibal who incamping there, was forced to
raise his siege with disgrace. The way of Flamintus is no less famous, which
lies from the Pillar of Antoninus (11) to the Gate (IIII) del popolo, and did
lead to Rim. ni upon the Adriatique Sea, and part of it was called Quincia,
and it was joined with the way called Claudia, and of old was called the large
way. Where the way of Flaminius ends, there begins the way AEmilia, made by
his fellow Consul AEmilius, Lepidus, leading to Bologna, and paued to the very
Alps. Yet there is another way of the same name near Pisa. The way Collatina
is without the Gate (V) Pinciana; the way Salaria without the Gate (VI)
Salaria; the way Tihurtina without the Gate (VIII) Saint Lorenzo, the way
Praenestina without the Gate (IX) Maggiore, on the left hand or East Side; and
the way Labicana on the right hand or South Side of the same Gate. In the way
Praenestina is the stately Conduit, or Aqueduct of Pope Sixtus Quintus,
extending it self many miles upon the next Plain, where lie the ruins no
less wonderful, whereof I spoke in my journey from Rome to Naples. To
conclude, the way Latina is without the Gate (XI) Latina; the way Ostiensis
without the Gate Saint (XIII) Paolo; the way Aurelia without the Gate (XV)
Saint Pancratio; which (if I be not deceived) was called also the way Vitelia,
paued from the Mount Ianiculo to the Sea. But who would not wonder, that from
the Gate (XIX) Portusa, the way should lead into the Valley of Hell (for so it
is called), close to the holy Seat of the Popes.

Rome was of old called Septicollis, of seven Hills, or little Mountains
contained within the walls, namely Capitolinus, Palatinus, Auentinus, Celius,
Esquilinus, Viminalis, and Quirinalis. Hereof the first and chief is (XXII)
Capitolinus, of old called Saturnius, of the City Saturnia, and Tarpeius of
the Virgin Terpeia, which betraying her Country to the Sabines, giving them
entrance at that place, was for reward there killed by them. And at last in the
reign of Tarquin the proud, it was called Capitolinus of a head dug out of
the ground. At this day it is vulgarly called Il Capidoglio. It is divided into
two parts, namely, the Capitolium, and the Rock Tarpeius, lying on the
Northside of the hill. And it had sixty Churches, whereof the chiese was of old
dedicated Ioni Optimo Maximo, where the Triumphers used to give thanks for
victory, and to offer rich spoils to Jupiter. And it was adorned with the
stately building of the Capitolium, and with many stately Palaces of noble men.
The second Mount is called (XXIII) Palatinus, of Palantus, Grandfather to
Euander, (among many diverse opinions following Virgil). At this day it is
vulgarly called Palazzo Maggiore, and it is a mile in circuit, but is not at
all inhabited. And upon the side lying toward the Circus, they show a little
house in the place where Romulus dwelt, only preserved in memory of him. And
upon this Mount Catilina and Catullus and Cicero did dwell. The third mountain
was called (XXIIII) Auentinus, of birds, by whose flight they used to prophecy,
or of the King Auentinus. And it was of old called Romorio, of a place in the
top, where they observed the flight of the birds, and it has two miles in
compass. The fourth Mount is (XXV) Celius, of Celius King of Hetruria, and was
of old called Querquetulanus, of a Wood of Oaks. And a little Mountain being
part of it, is vulgarly called Celiolus, where I shall show the Church of Saint
John the Evangelist to be seated. Upon this Mountain was the house of Scipio
the Africane, near the Church of Saint George. The fifth Mountain was called
(XXVI) Esquilinus, or Esquilia, of the guard of the Pretorian soldiers, or of
the fragments of meat cast there to feed hawks. It reaches from the
Marketplace of Traian, to the Baths of Dioclesian, and the Gate of S. Lorenzo,
and the monument of Marius, vulgarly called I Trofei. And at this day it is
called Cespius, and they say, that Virgil dwelt upon this Mountain. The sixth
Mount was called (XXVII) Viminalis, being long and narrow; and some say it is
part of the Mount Esquiline, but all writers generally reckon it among the
seven hills, and it had the name of the Church of Jupiter Viminius, so called
of the Oseyers growing there, and they say Marcus Crassus dwelt upon this
Mountain. The seventh Mount was called (XXVIII ( Quirinalis of the Quirites,
or Senators dwelling there, or of the Spear of Juno, and it was also called
Egonus. At this day it is vulgarly called Monte Cauallo There be two other
Mountains beyond the Tyber, which are seated in Toscany, not in Latium; for
Leander makes all the places most near to Rome on this side to belong to
Hetrurta. The first of these Mountes is called (XXIX) Vaticanus, of the crying
of an infant, or of a god of that name, as Gellius writes, which god was the
god of prophecies. Pope Leo the fourth compassed this Hill and the next field
with walls, and called it Leonina, but at this day it is called Il Borgo. The
other Mount beyond Tyber was called (XXX) I aniculus of I anus dwelling and
buried there, and is now vulgarly called Mortorio. Within the walls of Rome
there be some other Hills or little Mountains, but less famous. The first is
called (XXXI) Pincius, and vulgarly de li hortuli, reaching to the Gate
Salaria. The second was called (XXXII) Citorius, and of old Citaterius of the
Tribes descending from thence to choose Magistrates, as those that were suitors
to be Magistrates descended from the Mount Pincius, and went into Campus
Martius. The third Mount less and more obscure, is called (XXXIII) I or danus,
of the family Orsini, who at this day have their Palaces upon it. The fourth
Mountlesse and obscure is called (XXXIIII) Testaceus, of earthen pots, for the
Potters of old dwelt there, and the images and vessels of the Temples were for
the most part of earth. And when the dead bodies were burned, the ashes were
laid up in these vessels, whereupon a heap grew to a Hill, and a Hill to a
Mount. Many do falsely think, that it had the name of such vessels, in which
tribute was brought to Rome, and then the vessels were broken here.

Of old eight bridges were built over Tyber, among which is reckoned Pons
Miluius, vulgarly Ponte Mole, without the gate (IIII) Delpopolo more then a
mile distant from Rome, and near this bridge Constantine the Great, under the
sign of the Cross did overcome the tyrant Maxentius. Also this bridge was
famous for the night lusts of Nero. The second bridge is called (XXXV) di
Castel' Sant' Angelo, and it was of old called Elius, of the Emperor Elius
Adrianus, who built it; but Pope Nicholas the fifth built it as now it stands,
and set upon it the Image of Saint Peter with his keys, and of Saint Paul with
his sword. The third bridge is called (XXXVI) Vaticanus, as leading to that
Mount, and was also of old called Triumphalis, of the Triumphs passing upon
it, and it was not lawful for the Country people to enter that way, but at
this day only the ruins thereof are seen. The fourth bridge is called
(XXXVII) Ponte-Sisto of Pope Sixtus the fourth, who repaired it. It was of old
called Ianiculonsis of that Mount, and Aurelius of the way of that name, and it
was built of marble by Antoninus Pius, and after being decayed, was long called
Ponte Rotto, that is, the broken bridge, till the said Pope repaired it in the
year 1475. and it is two hundred and fifteen foot broad, and is built upon
three Arches of stone. The fifth bridge ioining Rome and the Island, and next to
the Capitolium, is called (XXXVIII) Ponte at quattro Capt, and was of old
called Tarpeius, of the Rock Tarpcia, which is in the Mount Capitolino, and
was called Fabricius of the repairer, and it is seventy foot long, and has but
one Arch of stone. The sixth bridge of a Church near it is called (XXXIX) di
S. Maria AEgittiaca, and was of old called Scnatorim and Palatinus, and it is
somewhat longer then the bridge Sisto. The seventh bridge of a Church near it
is called (XL) di S. Bartolomeo, and it is opposite to the fifth bridge, and
ioineth the Island with that part of Rome called Trasteuere, and of old it was
called Psquilinus, and Cestius, and it is sixty foot long, having but one Arch
of stone. The eight bridge at the foot of the Mount Auentine, was of old called
(XLI) Sublicius, because it was built of wood, in the war with the Tuscanes,
that it might be more easily broken and repaired. And we read that the Tuscanes
being Victors, had taken Rome, if Horatius Cocles had not defended the bridge,
till it was broken down behind him, which done, he saved himself by swimming.
After that Emilius Lepidus built this bridge of stone, and called it Emilius;
and when it was broken with floods, first the Emperor Tyberius repaired it,
and then Antoninus Pius built it very high of marble, and condemned men were
cast from it into the water. This bridge being the first that was built over
Tyber, now is not to be seen by any ruins.

Rome by the great power of the Emperors, and since of the Popes, has been
long most famous, and was first built in Latium upon Tyber, fifteen miles from
the Tyrrhene sea, (as the Greeks write) by Ascanius, Eurilantes, Romulus, and
Remus, Nephews to AEneas, or (as other Greeks write) by the Achiui, or (as
other Greeks write) by the sons of Roma, a woman of Troy, married to the
Latin King of the Aborigenes, which sons were Romulus and Remus, or (as
Xenagoras writes) by the son of Ulysses by Circe, to omit many other opinions
of the Greeks. The Latin Historians do no less vary. Some say it was built
by the sons of AEneas, namely, Romulus and Remus. Others say that Ascanius
built Alba, and Remus built Capua, and Romulus built Ianiculum, after called
Rome. But I omit these diverse opinions, and will follow Leander the Friar, who
says that Rome the daughter of the King in Italy, built Rome the same year
that Moses was borne. And when the City had been long forsaken, for the
unwholesome air of the Fennes adioining, that Euander coming from Arcadia into
Italy, seated himself upon the Mount Palatine, and built a City called
Palantium, of his City in Arcadia, and he being dead, that Hercules coming
with an Army, left some of his consorts here, who built upon the Mount of
Saturnius, after called Capitolinus. Before the destruction of Troy, for the
unwholesome air, Rome being again forsaken, that the Albani began to dwell
there in Cottages, and seed their flocks there. For by the continual over
flowings of Tyber, the field was made fenny, and the air unwholesome; but
Historians write that upon sacrifices made to God Vertuno, these Fennes by
little and little were dried up. He add that Amulius took the Kingdom of
the Albani from his brother Numiter, whose daughter Rhea a Vestall Virgin being
great with child by Amulius, Mars, or any other, brought forth Romulus and
Remus, and Amulius left them by Tyber to perish in the waters, but a she wolf
sed them, and after Faustulus ouerseer of all the flocks and cattle of Amulius,
took them home, who coming to ripe years killed Amulius, and restored their
Grandfather Numitor to his Kingdom: but themselves being desirous to build a
City upon the Mount Palatine, at the foot whereof they had been cast out,
Romulus drew with a plow the circuit of the City, of a quadrangular form, in
the 430. year after the destruction of Troy, and in the year of the World
3211. He gave Mount Celius to be inhabited by Celius King of Toseany, aiding
him against the Sabines, and then taking by force the Sabine weomen, and they
making peace between them, he gave to Tatius and his Sabines for their
dwelling the Mountains Capitolinus and Quirinalis, and to his brother Remus
the Mount Auentinus, and kept for himself and his men the Mountains Palatinus
and Esquilinus, till the rest being dead, himself alone became Lord of all.
The seven rocks were of old called seven hills, having a pleasant plain
between them and Tyber: and this circuit is in form of a bent bow, the Tyber
standing for the string. Romu'us made the City four square, but he being dead,
Ancus Martius enclosed the Mount Ianiculus beyond Tyber, and Seruius enclosed
other Mounts on this side of the Tyber. Six Kings reigned two hundred forty
three years in Rome, and Torquine being banished, it became a popular State,
wherein Consuls yearly chosen did govern, and eight hundred eighty seven
Consuls, in four hundred sixty four years, by forty three battles obtained
the Empire almost of the whole world. In the mean time the Decemuiri (that is
ten men) ruled for two years, and the Tribunes for Military affairs, having
Consular power, ruled forty three years, and in the time of any difficult
war, a Dictator was chosen, who with absolute power ruled till that business
was ended, and there were no Magistrates for four years. At last Julius
Caesar with the title of perpetual Dictator, invaded the Empire, which being
after divided into the Oriental and Occidentall Empire, and the Occidentall
being destroyed by the incursions of barberous Nations, the Bishops of Rome by
little and little cast their Oriental Lords out of Italy, and erected a new
Occidentall Empire in France, that they might invade the power of the Roman
Emperors, and of the heavenly jurisdiction upon earth, under pretext of
Religion, by a new monster of a Roman wit, drawn from the supremacy of the
Apostle Saint Peter.

Pliny in his time makes the circuit of Rome twenty miles, and Vopiscus in the
time of the Emperor Aurelius, makes the circuit fifty miles, but he joined to
Rome all the neighbor villages. At this day if you add to Rome the two parts
beyond Tyber, called Trasteuere and Borgo, the circuit at the most is fifteen
miles, for others say thirteen or fourteen, besides that a very great part of
this circuit within the walls is not inhabited: and the walls not
withstanding lie not upon their old foundations, neither are built of that
matter, but as it pleased those who repaired them. Among which Belisarius
governor of Italy, under the Emperor Justinian, built Rome demolished by the
Goths, and made the circuit of the walls less; and Pope Adrian the first, a
Roman, the walls being fallen, built them as now they stand, and many of his
successors have since added new ornaments to decayed Rome. But the old walls
(as appears by some ruins) were built of four square stone, the rest are of
diverse building, as it pleased the repairers, and have a brick gallery to
walk upon, under which men may stand dry when it raines; and they being ready
to fall with age, have many round Towers, which in like sort are ready to fall.
Rome at this day is troubled with the old ouerflowings of Tyber, by reason of
the Tybers narrow bed, not able to receive the waters, falling suddenly from
near mountains, after great rain or melting of snow. For memory whereof,
these inscriptions are upon the walls of the Church of Saint Mary sopra Minerua.
In the year 1530. (if I be not deceived; for the first words are raced out)
the Ides of October, Clement the seventh being Pope.

Huc Tyber ascendit, iamque obruta totafuisset
Roma, nisi celerem virgo tulisset opem:
Thus far came Tyber, and all Rome had drowned,
Had we not from the Virgin, swift help found.
And there in another place this verse is written, in the year MVD.

Extulit huc tumidas turbidus Amnis aquas.
Thus far this muddy brooks water did swell.
In each place is a red mark upon the walls how high the water ascended, by
which it appears, marking the seat of the Church, that all the plain was
ouerflowed between it and the Tyber. By reason of these floods, and for that
the City is built upon the caves of old Rome, (which makes the foundations to
be laid with great charge) and also by reason of the vapors rising from the
Baths, the air of Rome is at this day unwholesome. The Romans drink rain
water, and the troubled waters of Tyber, kept in Cesternes, and they brag
that it is proper to the water or Tyber, the longer it is kept to grow more
pure. Surely strangers do not like that water, howsoever the Romans (making a
virtue of necessity) do say that it was only made good to drink at Rome, and
no where else, by the blessing of Pope Gregory the Great.

Now being to describe the antiquities of Rome, I will first set down out of
order the seven Churches, famous for the indulgences of Popes, which they say
were built by the Emperor Constantine the Great. Then I will set down the
rest in due order, as they are seated: And because I finished in have the view
of Rome in four days, I will distinguish the Antiquities into four days
iournies.

The first day being to visit these seven Churches, by reason of their
distance, and the have we made, I and my consorts hired each of us a mule, each
man for two poli, and we never found our error till the evening, when we
demanding the way of a man of mean sort, he replied thus with some anger; What
do you ride to heaven, and we poor wretches go on foot without shoes to
visit these holy Churches. By this we found our error, and were glad that we
had passed that day without further danger. In general these Churches are bare
on the Inside, without any pictures, except some few about the Altars. This day
we first rode to the chief Church, (A) dt S. Giouanni Laterano, seated upon
Mount Celius, and built by Constantine the Great, in his Palace, and it has a
stately Font, in which that Emperor was baptized; and in the Church there be
four most fair pillars of brass. The Church is sustained by four rows of
brick pillars, and there hang certain banners taken from the French, and
near the door the Popes, Sergius the fourth, and Siluester the second, are
buried in low monuments. In the Church yard are old sepulchers, and little
pillars of marble. Near to this Church lie those holy stairs, whereof I spoke
in my journey from Rome to Naples, when our Italian consorts went to pray for a
happy journey, kneeling without the grates. But they that will have the grates
opened, to pray there, use to creep upon their knees from staire to staire,
and upon each staire to say a pater noster, and Aue Maria. These stairs are
twenty six in number, divided into three rows, and they be of marble, vulgarly
called Scale Sante, and were brought from the house of Pilate in Jerusalem. It
is not safe for him to inquire after relikes, who will not worship them: yet to
satisfy the curious, I will set down the chief by beare-say. Here they show
a tooth of Saint Peter; a Cup in which Saint John drank poison at the command
of Demitian, and had no hurt. The cloth with which Christ dried his Disciples
feet, the heads of Peter and Paul, the rod of Aaron, the Arc of the
covenant, the table at which Christ supped; three marble gates of Pilates
house, the Image of Christ being twelve years old, with the like. Part of
these (they say) were brought from Jerusalem by the Emperor Titus, yet he was
no Christian, nor like to regard the monuments of Christ. One Chapel of this
Church is called, Sanctum Sanctorum, and is thought to have been the Chamber
of Constantine, neither may any woman enter it. To conclude, the place is
showed here, in which many counsels have been held, and the Popes long dwelt
here, before the Palace in the Vaticane was built.

The Church of (B) Saint Peter in the Mount Vaticano, ioines to the Popes
Palace, they say it was built by Constantine the Great. The Popes have given
full remission of sins to them that pray here upon certain days, and like
remission for certain years sins, praying on other days; and the remission
of the third part of all sins, praying there upon Saint Peter's even. And you
must understand that all these Churches have some like indulgences. Here they
show the bodies of Saint Simeon, and Saint Jude the Apostle, and Saint John
Chrysostom, and of Pope Saint Gregory the Great: and the head of Saint Andrew
and of Saint Luke the Evangelist, and half the bodies of Saint Peter and Saint
Paul, and Christ's face printed upon the hand-kercher of Veronica, and the head
of the spear thrust into the side of Christ, and among many pillars brought
from Jerusalem, one upon which Christ leaned, when he did preach and cast out
Devils, which yet has power (as they say) to cast out Devils. Always
understand that in Italy Priests that cast out Devils, are most frequent,
neither are they wanting in any place where the Papists can hide their
impostures. Great part of these relikes they say were sent by the Turkish
Emperor to Pope Innocent the eight. But I omit these things, into which none
but Papists may safely inquire, and return to the monuments which lie open to
every man's view. The Chapel is most rich in which Gregory the xiij. lies, and
the stately sepulcher of Pope Paul the third has most fair statuaes. The
statua of Saint Peter of brass placed under the Organs, was of old erected to
Jupiter Capitolinus. In the Court of the Church (for I cannot call it a
Churchyard) the Emperor Otho the second lies buried, in a low sepulcher of
Porphry. There is a most fair Pineaple of brass, gilded, more then five
cubits high, which they say was brought hither from the monument of the
Emperor Andrian, in the place where the Castle of Saint Angelo now stands, (as
likewise the Peacockes were brought from the Monument of Scipio.)

The third Church of St Paul is without the (XIII) gate of St Paul, about a
mile from the City, in the way to Ostia, and they say it was built by
Constantine, and it stands upon eighty eight pillars of marble, in four
rows, each pillar being but one stone, and it is adorned with marble stairs,
and pictures Alla Mosaica, as if they were engraven, which are only in the
chancell and near the door. The Popes have given great indulgences to these
Churches, as well as to others. They show here the bodies of Saint Timothy,
Saint Celsus, and Sant Julian, Disciples to Saint Paul, and half the bodies of
Saint Peter and St Paul, and a Crucifix which of old spoke to Saint Briget, the
Queen of Sueuia, and many arms and fingers of Saints. Near this Church is
that of Saint Anastatius, where the head of Saint Paul being cut off, made
three leapes, and in the place where it fell, they say there sprang up three
fountains, which are there to be seen.

The fourth Church of Saint (C) Mary Maggiore, is upon the Mount Esquiline: I
will omit hence forward the indulgences and relikes, lest I be tedious. This
Church is adorned with forty pillars of Marble. The rich Chapel di praesepio,
(so called of the cratch in which Christ was borne, being kept here) is stately
adorned with the pauement engraued, the arched roof gilded, pictures Alla
Mosaica as if they were engraven, the stately sepulcher of Pope Nicholas, and
his statua of white marble. The Chapel of Pius Qutntus, built for him after
his death by Sixtus the fifth, is adorned with the Victory painted in golden
letters, which he and his confederates had by sea against Selimus Emperor of
the Turks, and is adorned with statuaes gilded, with four Angels gilded,
and precious stones, together with the rare Art of engrauers and Painters.

The fifth Church S. Lorenzo, is without the (VIII) gate of that name, in the
way to Tiburtina, something more then a mile from the City, and it is said to
be built by Constantine the Great. He that goes to this Church every wednesday
in a whole year, shall deliver a soul from Purgatory, if the Pope keep his
promise. It is adorned with a Pulpit of white marble, and most fair ophite
stones, and at the door, with a sepulcher of Saint Eustacius, of white marble
curiously carved, and another sepulcher opposite to that.

The sixth Church S. Sebastiano, is without the (XII) gate of that name, more
then a mile out of the City, in the way of Appius. Here is a place called
Catacombe, and there is a well, in which they say the bodies of Saint Paul and
Saint Peter did lie unknown a long time, and here is a way under earth to the
Church yard of Calixtus, where they say the Christians lav hid, in the times of
persecution; and that there were found 174. thousand which had been made
Martyrs, and that eight of these were Bishops of Rome. Here on all sides with
amazement I beheld the ruins of old buildings, and the sepulcher of the
Emperor Aurelius is not far from this Church.

The seventh Church (D) di S. Croce in Gierusalem, is seated between the gate
Maggiore, and the gate S. Giouanni, upon the Mount Celius or rather Celiolus,
being part of it, and it is said that Constantine the Great built it. Here they
show a little vessel filled with the blood of Christ and the sponge which they
gave him with vinegar upon the cross, and the title which Pilate writ upon the
Cross, and one of the thirty pence which Judas took for betraying Christ. And
no woman may enter into the Chapel wherein Helena is said to have prayed, but
once only in the year upon the twelfth of March. And this Church gives the
title to a Cardinal.

The second day we began the view of Rome with the (Q) Popes Palace, seated in
the part of the City, called Il'Borgo; which Palace Pope Nicholas the third
built, and Nicholas the fifth compassed with walls, and the Palace is of
great circuit, and the stairs are so easy, that Horses and Mules may go up
to the top of the Mountain, and with easy ascent and descent bear the Popes
carriage. At the entrance there be three galleries one above the other,
whereof the two first were built by Leo the tenth, and Paul the third, and the
third and highest by Sixtus Quintus, and they are all fairly painted and
gilded. Upon these lie two large chambers, and beyond them is a vast and long
gallery of four hundred seventy and one walking paces, in the midst whereof
is the famous Library of the Popes In vaticano; and therein are many
inscriptions of the Pope Sixtus Quintus who repaired it, and it is adorned with
many fair pictures gilded all over. I did fee the several rooms thereof.
The first one hundred forty and seven walking paces long, had three rows of
Cubbards filled with books: the second was thirty nine paces long; and the
third containing the books of greatest price locked up, was twenty paces
long. Pope Sixtus the fourth built this Library, with the Chapel of the
Palace, and the Conclaue. The wall of the Chapel shines like a glass with
precious stones: where the Pope Sixtus Quintus commanded Michael Angelo to
paint the day of Judgment, and the common report is, that this Pope promised
this famous Painter that he would not come into the Chapel, till he had
finished his work; yet by some Cardinals persuasions that he broke his
promise, and that the Painter thereupon made the pictures of the Pope and the
Cardinals in hell amongst the Devils, so lively as every man might know them.
Between this Chapel and the Conclaue, (where they choose the Popes) lies a
Kingly Gallery, not un worthily called vulgarly Sala Regia, (which others call
Sala del Conclaue). The wall of this Gallery in like sort shines with precious
stones, and the pauement is of precious marble, the arched roose all gilded,
and at the upper end I wondered to see the Massacro of Paris painted upon the
wall, with the Popes inscription greatly commending that detestable cruelty. At
the same upper end the foresaid Chapel (as you come up) lies one the left
hand, and the Conclaue on the right hand; in which Conclaue the Cardinals meet
to choose the Pope, divided into several rooms, but meeting at a common table,
and when they have chosen him, they lead him into a Chapel at the lower end,
and near the door of the said Kingly Gallery and place him there upon a hollow
seat of Marble. I know not whether this be the chair, in which the sex of the
Pope is tried, but I am sure it is hollow, with a hole in the bottom. After
they put a Banner out of a high window, and there make known to the people the
name that the Pope has chosen, and then his arms are hung up round about.
This Chapel at the lower end of the said Gallery, has the name of Pope Paul
the third, of the Family of Farnese, and it is little, and of a round form (as
I remember), but it is beautiful beyond imagination. The images of the
Apostles seem to be of silver, and Paradise painted upon the arched roof,
with Angels flying, being the work of Michael Angelo, seemed to me admirable.
Upon the other side of the said Library is the private Gallery of the Pope,
looking into the Garden (3) Beluedere, which is seated upon the side of the
Mount Vatican, where Pope Innocent the eight built part of the Palace, and
called it Beluedere, of the fair prospect of all Rome subject to the eye. And
Pope Julius the second placed in this Garden many very fair statuaes, namely,
of the River Nilus, of the River Tyber, of Romulus and Remus playing with the
papps of a shee-Wolfe, all being placed in the open Garden, and a most fair
statua of Apollo, another admirable statua of Lycaon with his children, another
of the boy Antoninus, whom the Emperor Adrian loved, another of Hercules
another of Cupid, another of Venus, another of Cleopatra sleeping with her arm
over her face, and bearing a Serpent, being a wonderful fair statua. And
these are all locked up, and not to be seen without favor.

Hence we went to the Castle (4) of Saint Angelo of old called Moles Adriani,
for it was the Sepulcher of the Emperor Adrian, upon the top whereof was the
Pineapple of brass, which before I said was since placed in the open
Courtyard of Saint Peter's Church. This Sepulcher of Adrian called Moles (4)
was demolished by Beasarius, in the war of the Goathes, upon the ruins
whereof Pope Boniface the eight built this Castle, and Pope Alexander the sixth
compassed it with walls and ditches, and placed therein a guard of Soldiers,
and built from this Castle to the Popes Palace an open and a close gallery, by
which upon any tumult, the Pope may pass safely from his Palace to the
Castle. And after Pope Paul the third built very fair chambers in this Castle.
On the outside is the statua of Pope Pius the fourth, and within is the statua
of Paul the third, upon which these verses are written of the Emperor Charles
the fifth coming to Rome.

E Lybia venit Romanas victor ad arces
Caesar, and in niueis aureus iuit Equis.
Ille triumphauit, sed tu plus Paul triumphas;
Victor namque tuis oscula dat pedibus.
With victory to Rome from Afric came
Caesar, on milk white Horses, golden all.
He Triumphed, Paul thy triumph has more fame,
This Conqueror to kiss thy feet did fall.
In this Castle they show the head of Adrtan, the statua of Saint Peter, a
bunch of Grapes of brass, the place where the Cardinal Caictan escaped out of
prison, and a Trap-doore where prisoners are let down into a dungeon. The
chambers are built in a circle round about the great chamber in the midst,
which is called Salaregia, and without is a round Garden within the walls, and
upon the top of the Castle, in the place of the said Pineapple, is the statua
of the Angel Michael, of which the Castle has the name. The meadows of
Qutntis Cincinates lie near this Castle.

In the (5) Market place or field before the Church of Saint Peter (where of
old was Metonianus Circus), Sixtus Quintus adorning Rome with many ornaments,
erected an Obeliske seventy two foot high, upon the top whereof the ashes of
Julius Caesar were put of old: but in the year 1586 this Pope consecrated the
same to the Cross, and put upon the top of it a Cross gilded, and beneath
four Lions gilded. This Obeliske is vulgarly called La Guglia di S. Pietro.
The globe, in which the ashes of Julius Caesar were put, is now showed in the
Capitol, and in the place thereof stands the said Cross, with the Arms of
the said Pope.

In this part of the City called Il Borgo, and in the very Marketplace before
Saint Peter's Church, is another Church called Saint Marie In Campo Santo,
because the yard thereof is all of earth brought from Jerusalem, wherein all
strangers are buried, and they say, there bodies are consumed in three days.
Near that lies the Church of Saint Spirito (called also Sassia of the Saxons
that of old dwelled there), and this is an Hospital for the sick, and for
Orphans, the rent whereof is said to have been each day seven thousand
Crowns, till Pope Sixtus Quintus did alien great part thereof to other uses,
and still of the surplusage at the years end, many Orphen Virgins are
married. The Chapel of Saint Angelo lies close to the Castle, and was built
by the Pope, who singing the Leteny there in the time of a great plague, made
the Romans believe, that he did see Michael the Angel putting up a bloody
sword in the sheath, and hereof the Castle has the name. And it is a School,
or Fraternity of Gentlemen, like to our Companies in London. The Church of
Saint AEgidius the Abbot, has great concourse to it in the month of
September, when Agues reign in Rome; for this Saint is the Patron for Agues.

From hence we went out of (II) Borgo by the Gate Saint Spirito, and entered
the second part of Rome Trasteuire, by the Gate (XVI) Settimtana, where under
the Church of Saint Peter Montorio, is the (...) of Nero, that is a place to
represent Nauall fights, and near it is the like of Julius Caesar. From this
Church, to the Church Saint Honorio, is a Plain, wherein was the large and
long Circus or Theater of Julius Caesar. In this part of the City the Church
of Saint Cecilia gives the title of a Cardinal, and so does the Church of
Saint Grisogona. The said Church of Saint Mary in this part of the City, is the
same which the old Romans called Taberna Meritoria, where they show a
Fountain, whence (they say) that oil did flow abundantly, and run toward
Tiber, the same night when Christ was borne; and this Church also gives the
title of a Cardinal, and the old Romans called it Taberna Meritoria, of the
soldiers nourished there, after they were past service by age or wounds. This
Church of Saint Peter is seated upon the Mount Ianiculus, in which there is a
stately Monument erected by Pope Julius the third, to his uncle the Cardinal
dt Monte. The Church of Saint Pancratius has many stones of porphry, and gives
the title of a Cardinal, and the Friars of Saint Ambrose dwell in this
Monastery. The Church Saint Honorio is a Monastery, and gives the title of a
Cardinal. Near the gate called Ripa, was of old the Romans Armory, of great
circuit, lying upon the Tyber, the vast ruins whereof yet remain, and the
people of Rome serving for more then two hundred years in the wars without
any pay, was wont here to take Arms at their going forth, and here to lay them
up at their return. And near this place he the meadows, given by the people
of Rome to Mucius Scaeuola, for his valiant behavior with King Porsena.

Hence turning to the left hand, we came to the (III) Island of Tyber, in which
the Church of S. Bartholmew (of old consecrated to AEsculapius) is adorned with
4 stately pillars of porphry, it gives the title to a Cardinal. At the foot of
the bridge (XXXIX) S. Maria, as you come out of the Island and enter into Rome,
is the ruined house of Pontius Pilate, and opposite to that is the most ancient
Church consecrated to the Moon, and upon the other side another to the Sun.
Here also is the Theater of Marcellus, and the porch of Mercury.

Not far thence is a marble head, called Bocca della verita, that is, the
mouth of truth, of a woman (as I remember) falsifying her oath, and bewraied
thereby; but others say it is the Idol of Rbea. Here also is the Church of
Saint Mary, called the Greek School, in which Saint Augustine is said to have
taught, but it is shut up. At the foot of Mount Auentine. (where the Jews use
to fish) if you look back, you shall see the ruins of the old bridge
Sublicius (XLI) Thence going to the gate of Saint Paul, among vines, you shall
see the ruins of one hundred and forty garners for corn, built of old by the
Romans. In the pleasant meadow wherein the (XXXIIII) mount Testaceus lies, the
Romans were wont of old to keep their Olimpike games. The sepulcher of (6)
Caius Cestius is most ancient, rising in a pyramid, and the inscription shows
it was built in three hundred and thirty days, which the common sort falsely
thinks to be the Monument of Romulus. This monument of stone is compassed with
walls, and it has an inscription in great letters, but raced out. Some also
think that it is the monument of Publius Sestius. From the gate of Saint Paul
we returned into the City, and under the Church of Saint Gregory, where
Laundresses continually wash, they say that of old the (7) Circus Maximut), or
greatest Theater) did lie between the Mount Palatine and the Mount Auentine,
being more then a quarter of a mile long, and half a quarter broad, which was
built by Tarquinius Priscus for the hunting of Bulls, and running of Horses, and
after was enlarged by Julius Caesar and other Emperors, so as it received 260
thousand beholders, being adorned with pillars and commodious seats, and at
this day the place is called Cerchi. Near this place were of late three rows
of pillars, one above the other; and this monument is called Il Setti zonio di
Senero, of seven soldiers engraued thereupon, and is thought to be the
sepulcher of Septismius Seuerus, but the Pope Sixtus the fifth pulled it down.
Near this place upon (XXIIII) Mount Auentine lie the Bathes half ruined of
Antonius Caracalla, built of brick, the large chambers whereof, almost
innumerable, are of exceeding height, having many stones and pillars of marble,
whereby it appears to have been a most stately work. The (8) church of S.
Stephano Orotando, seated in mount Celius, gives the title of a Cardinal, and
is possessed by Friars of Hungary, and it was a Heathen Church of Faunus. There
lie old and high walls, said to have been part of the conduit bringing water to
the Capitol. I have before spoken of the Church of (A) Saint John Lateran,
being one of the seven Churches, and of Constantines Font therein, and of the
Chapel called Holy of Holies, and of the holy stairs. I will add that here is
an Obeliske, called la Guglia, of old consecrated to the Sun, and brought out
of Egypt, which Julius Caesar, or Augustus, did direct in the Circus Maximus,
but Pope Sixtus the fifth brought it hither, in the fourth year of his
Popedom, and the year of our Lord 1588. and consecrating it to the Cross,
set a gilded cross upon the top of it. This Obeliske, if it were of one
stone, were to be preferred to that of Saint Peter, near the Popes Palace,
for otherwise it is higher and more curiously carved. I have spoken before of
the Church (D) S. Croce in Gicrusalem, being one of the seven Churches, seated
near the gate Maggiore. At the gate of this Church they show a place where the
whores keep a feast upon the twenty of August, and there of old was the Temple
of Venus. The Theater of brick which is in this Church, they say was built by
Statilius Tamrus. Hence returning into the City, we passed by a place, where of
old was a monument called Trofei di Marie, erected to Caius Marius, triumphing
upon Iugurtha and the Cymbri, and they say that the ruins thereof were
admirable, but now it is all defaced. Near the stairs of the Capitol, they
show a ruinous heap which some say, was this monument of Marius. Passing
toward the Capitol, we did see a Triumphall Arch erected to Galienus, which
of the Church adioining is called the Arch of Saint Vito, and it is little
perished with age.

Concerning the Churches lying from the Capitol to the south parts of Rome:
The Church of Saint Anastatia, that of Saint Mary In portico (of old dedicated
by the Heathens to Pudicitia), that of Saint John, that of Saint Paul upon
mount Celius, that of Saint Mary In Dominica, that of Saint Sistus, that of
Saint Sabina upon Monnt Auentine (in which they show a stone cast by the Devil
at the head of Saint Dominicke, and broken by miracle,) that of Saint Prisca
(of old dedicated to Hercules) that of Saint Balbina upon Mount Auentine, that
of Saint John at the gate Latina (where it is said Domitian cast Saint John
into boiling oil, but he escaped without hurt) that of Saint Mary in Via,
without the gate of Saint Paul, toward Ostia, all these Churches giuetitles to
Cardinals. Near the Church of Saint Alexius, is a palm tree, whereof I
remember not to have seen any other at Rome. In the Church of Saint Saua the
Abbot, near the other upon Mount Auentine, be the sepulchers of the Emperors
Vespasian and Titus his son, of white marble, and the Altar has two pillars of
porphery.

The third day we began our view of Rome, at the (10) pillar of the Emperor
Traian, erected to him making war against the Parthians, which he never saw,
dying in his return. It is seated in a little market place, and was
consecrated by Pope Sixtus the fifth to Saint Peter, whose Image of brass
gilded over, is set upon the top thereof, with this inscription in Latin;
Sixtus the fifth dedicated it to Saint Peter, the third year of his Popedom.
The victories and actions of Traian are engraven upon it, and his ashes were of
old placed in the top, and here also was the horse of Traian. This pillar is
said to be one hundred twenty three foot high, and it has within, two hundred
twenty three stairs to the top, and forty four windows to let in light.
Hence we turned toward the City, and came to (11) Campus Martius, near the
hill Citorius, which now is called piazza Colonna, of the pillar of Antoninus
Pias there erected, which Pope Sixtus the fifth dedicated to Saint Paul,
setting his Image on the top, and it has about one hundred and seventy stairs
to ascend, and fifty six windows, and the outside is curiously engraven with
the actions of Antoninus. The foresaid Campus Martius was the field of Tarquin
the proud, which the people of Rome dedicated to Mars, for military exercises.
Near the Church of Saint Mary liberatrice dalle pene d'Inferno, seated in
Forum Rominum, and near the (23) Arch of Settimius was of old the Temple of
Vesta, where her Virgins kept the sacred fire, and the Image of Minerua, and
being convicted of vnchaftity, were led out of the gate Salaria with silence
and were buried alive, in a place there called Campus Seeleratus, being left or
buried in a cave with a candle lighted, and water and milk. Near this Church
are most high pillars of the ruins of a marble gallery, which Caligula built
from the Capitol to the Mount Palatine. The (12) Church of S. Mary Soprala
Minerua, is so called, for being of old consecrated to Minerua, and it gives
the title of a Cardinal. Behind the Altar, is the statua of Pope Leo the
tenth, and near it another of Clement the seventh, both of white marble; and
another of Paul the fourth of brass. In this Church I did see the most proud
procession of the Pope, and there was such a press to kiss his feet, as I had
almost been carried by force to pass them, or undergo capital danger by
refusal. The Church of (13) Saint Mary Retonda, was of old called Pantheon,
and the building is most ancient and magnificent, being round in form, and
having no window, but all the light coming from the open roof, whence the
water falling is conuaied under the pauement, and it is about seventy walking
paces large every way. The porch is borne up with fifteen marble pillars, each
pillar being of one stone, and all of admirable beauty and bigness. The door is
of brass, the walls of brick, with the inside covered with precious stones, and
the pauement is of marble and porphery. Marcus Agrippa son in law to Augustus
built this Church, and dedicated it to Jupiter the Revenger, and to Ceres, and
to all the gods, whereupon it was called Pantheon. Not far thence are the
ruins of the Bath of Agrippa, in a place called Ciambella, und near the
Church of Saint Eustace, great ruins of the Baths of Nero are yet remaining.
The place of old called (14) Circus Agonius, is now called la piazza Nauona,
and it is the largest market place of Rome, wherein markets are kept every
wednesday. The Romans used it to see plays and games of old, being a large
place, yet of greater length then breadth. Here lies the Spaniards Church Saint
Iacobo, and many of that Nation dwell there; who upon Easter even, and upon
festival times of their own Nation, use to make fier-workes there, with many
other solemn games. It has three fountains, but the building is poor. At
one end of this market place, in a corner of a street opposite to a public
Palace, is the statua of Pasquin; upon a wall of a private house, which has
neither arms nor feet, they being cut off by passengers in the night. For all
libels, even against the Pope himself, use to be made in form of a dialogue,
and fastened upon this statua of Pasquine, and another of Marforio (whereof I
shall speak after) they two bearing the persons one of the question maker, the
other of the answeret. Near the Church of (15) Saint Mary de la Consolatione,
as we came back into the City, our guide showed us a place, where the house of
Ovid did stand. Concerning the Churches lying about the Mount Capitoline; that
of Saint Mary In Acquiro, seated in the market place vulgarly piazza
Crapanella, gives the title of a Cardinal. In the same market place is the
monastery and Church of the Jesuits. The Church of Saint Mauro has a little
Obeliske erected. That of Saint Eustaeo gives the title to a Cardinal. Near
it lies the Church of Saint Lew is proper to the French, (for all Kingdoms and
Provinces have their peculiar Churches at Rome.) The Church of Saint
Apollinaris, and that of Saint Thomas In pariont, and that of Saint Laurence In
Damaso and that of Saint Angelo Inpiscaria (which of old was confecrated to
Inno) and that of Saint Nicholas In Carcere, do all give the titles of
Cardinals. The Church and Hospital called Saint Mary del' Anima, is proper to
the Dutch Nation. The Church and Hospital of Saint Thomas, vulgarly di S.
Tomaso, is built for the English, and is seated near the (25) Palace of
Farnest.

The fourth day we began the view of Rome at the Marketplace, called (16) la
piazza di Fieri, lying in the way from the Island of Tyber, as you go to the
Bridge of S. Augelo. Here was the house of the harlot Flora, who made the
people of Rome her heir, whereupon the Romans to cover her shame, made her the
goddess of flowers, and yearly kept her birth day upon the third of April, of
which feast I shall speak after. This Marketplace is seated in the most
inhabited place of Rome, among all the chief shops of Merchants. And therein
the family of Orsini have a Palace, and near the same was the Theater of
Pompey, and his court or public house, pulled down because Caesar was therein
killed. And from this Market place toward the Island of Tyber, lies the street
of the Jews. In the way from the Church of the Trinity, to the Mount
Quirinalis, vulgarly called (17) Monte Cauallo, were the famous Gardens of
Salustius, and near that Church was the Naumachia (that is the place to
represent Nauall fights) called of Augustus. Near to the Church Saint Rocco,
lies the (18) Sepulcher of Augustus called Mansoleum, the ruins whereof yet
remain. He built it for himself and other Emperors, of a round form, and
adorned it with stones of Marble and Porphery, and like pillars and Obeliskes,
placing his own statua of brass upon the top, so as they daily dig up goodly
Images out of the Cave and Garden near it. The Pinnacle of this Monument Pope
Sixtus the fifth removed to the Church Saint Marie Maggiore, and this monument
with the Grove planted about it, reached from the Church Saint Rocco, to Saint
Marie delpopolo. Near to the Gate (IIII) del Popolo lies the said Church of
that name, under the Adtar whereof the bones of Nero were laid, which, they
say, were kept by spirits, till Pope Pascall by revelation from the blessed
Virgin had warning to cast the bones into Tiber. Whenever the Plague is in
Rome, this Church is made one of the seven in the place of Saint Sebastian,
with all the indulgences to it belonging, and it always carries that title.
Here be two fair Sepulchers, whereof one is for a Chauncelor of Millan, the
other for Pope Sixtus the fifth sisters son, both the work of Andrew
Sansouine. The yard of this Church has an Obeliske, almost as fair as that
near Saint John Lateran, which Pope Sixtus the fifth also erected. Concerning
the Churches from this Gate del popolo, to the (XXII) Mount Capitolino, the
Church of Saint Laurence in Lucinia, that of Saint Siluester, that of the holy
Apostles, that of Saint Marcello, and that of Saint Mark, do all give titles
to Cardinals. Near the Church Saint Siluester is the Monastery delle
Conuertite, that is, of Harlots repenting, and becoming Nuns. The Church S.
Mary de Rione dellapigna, is a Monastery di Sante Done miserabili, that is, of
holy miserable women, and near that is another Monastery delle mal Maritate,
that is, of women unfortunately married and left in want by their husbands. The
foresaid Gate delpopolo, was repaired and beautified by Pope Pius the fourth.
Near it lies the most sweere Vineyard of Pope Julius the third, and his
pleasant Fountain, casting up water two else high. Not far thence is a
triumphal Arch erected to Domitian, vulgarly called Portogallo. From this gate
Delpopolo, toward the (V) gate Pinciana, and near the (17) Church della
Trinita, we did see the Palace of the Florentine Cardinal de Medicis (who
from a Cardinal became the Duke of Florence by right of succession).

And this Palace was rich and stately, the stairs winding so artificially, as
it was a beautiful sight to look in a perpendicular line from the top to the
foot, and upon the stairs was a fair statua of Apollo. Hence there was a
Gallery open on the sides toward the Garden, fuil of beautiful Images, of
Lions, a shee-Wolfe, a Ram, all of white Marble, with other Images, and very
fair pillars. And the first Garden had only flowers; the second in the upper
part, had a sweet Grove, and the lower part was full of fruit trees. There was
a Fountain with a brazen Image of Mercury upon it. Upon a Mount called
Pernasso, were many Images of white Marble, of Pegasus, of the Muses, and one
of Cleopatra, fairer then that I saw in the Popes Garden, with two Images of
Cerberus, and another monster. There were two large Cesternes of Porphery. And
in a Chamber were the Images, of a Satyr, a Nymph, and a Gryphon. Lastly, in
the Grove were stairs paued with carved Marble, with figures of fishes, and
there was a most fair statua of Europa sitting upon a Bulls back. The
outside of the Grove was all of Fur trees, which are green in winter, but
the inside had most pleasant walks among rows of many other kinds of trees.
In this Grove was a most sweet Arbor, having four roofes, and as it were
chambers, one above the other, the first whereof is twenty stairs from the
ground, whence lay a most large and most fair Gallery of stone, under which
was a most pleasant solitary walk, between two walls, all set with
Orangetrees, and like fruit.

The large way leading to the Cities Gate Pia, was paued by Pope Pius the
fourth, and has on each side a pleasant walk, and is also called Pia of the
same Pope, as the (VII) Gate is which he built. Between this Gate and the
next of (VIII) Saint Laurence was of old a large Park, in which the people of
Rome kept beasts to be hunted. Hence we went toward the Mount Quirinalis,
vulgarly (XXVIII) Monte Cauallo, and under the most pleasant Vineyard of the
Cardinal of Ferraria, were many Caves and old ruins, and there is a field,
where in honor of (16) Flora (as I said formerly describing that Marketplace)
the harlots of Rome kept a yearly feast, and dwelling in the foresaid Caves,
used to run from thence naked into this field, with unspeakable liberty of
speech and gesture.

From hence passing a little lane, we ascended to (XXVIII) Monte Cauallo which
is so called of two Horses of Marble set there, which they write to have been
given to Nero by Mithridates King of Armenia, the one wrought by Phydias, the
other by Praxitiles. The common people holds one of them for Bucephalus, and
thinks that Alexander holds his bridle, and that they were wrought by the
foresaid engrauers in emulation one of the other. But the far different age
of Alexander, and the said engrauers makes this opinion improbable. Two men are
engraven, who hold the bridles of the horses, as if they should lead them,
and some think that they were made for two horses of Diomedes, which did eat
man's flesh, and were tamed by Hercules. The Palace of Nero was near this
Mount, and from thence they show some ruins thereof. This Palace (as
histories do witness) did reach from Mount Celius to Mount Palatine, and to
the furthest part of Mount Esquiline, and it was compassed with a lake, having
within the circuit thereof, Meadows, Vineyards, Woods, and Parkes, and all the
house was gilded, and thereupon was called golden; it shined with Iuory, and
precious stones, and the great Hall thereof did move round like the World,
casting out flowers and odors. From hence Nero saw Rome burnt with joy, and all
this building was burnt in the time of Traian the Emperor; and when Nero had
finished this house, he said, that he began then first to dwell like a man.
Upon this said Mountain of the Horses, the Pope has a stately Palace, which
a Cardinal of Ferrara built, and he being dead, Pope Gregory the thirteenth
seized upon it. The stairs are very fair, each having his pillar, and the
ascent is most easy. I think a fairer Gallerie can hardly be seen, being one
hundred and twenty walking paces long. There is a Chamber wherein Pope Sixius
the fifth died. A second wherein Ambassadors are heard. A third in which
Cardinals are chosen. The Popes study is very pleasant, and so is the Garden,
having many Fountains, Groves, Labyrinthes, a Rock artificially distilling
water, and many most sweet Arbours. Moreover, on this Mount is the most fair
Fountain of Pope Sixtus the fifth, called the Happy; for hither is the water
brought from the stately Conduit without the Gate Maggiore, in the way (IX)
Praenestina, reaching many miles, which was built by Pope Sixtus the fifth,
with Imperial magnificence, in the year 1587. And this Fountain casts out
waters from the mouths of four Lions of white Marble. Likewise upon the same
is the Image of Moses, striking the Rock with his Rod; and there be two other
mouths lower to cast out water, and it is all engraven with the said history
of Moses.

Descending from this Mount, we did see in a private Gentleman's house an Horse
of brass, esteemed at twenty five thousand pounds sterling, which Henry the
second had placed at Paris (as they said), it death had not prevented him.
Hence toward the East we went forward toward the Bathes of Dioclesian, and by
the way at the foot of the Mount of the Horses, we did see the Bathes of
Constantine. A man cannot sufficiently wonder at the ruins of Dioclesians
Baths, by which it seems they were of incredible greatness; and they report,
that this Emperor compelled many thousands of Christians to work upon this
building for many years. Under the earth are gates and diverse passages of
unknown extent. Upon these Bathes Pope Pius the fourth in the year 1561 built
the Church Saint Mary of the Angels, and with the consent of the people of Rome
gave it to the Carthusian Friars. In the rooms of this Bath Pope Gregory the
thirtenth, in the year 1575 built a Granary for Corn, and the said Church of
Saint Marie is beautified with fair pillars thirty spannes compass, and with
exquisite pictures, especially those two near the Altar, of the Emperor
Maximilian and his Empress. Hence we went to the Church of Saint (C) Marie
Maggiore, being one of the seven Churches, and under this Church, upon a Hill
near Saint Potentiana (which gives the title to a Cardinal) of old were the
Nouatian Bathes. And upon Mount (XXVI) Esquiline, near the Church Saint
Laurence In Palesperna, (giving title to a Cardinal) were of old the Olimpike
Bathes. And the said Church of Saint Marie is built, where the Temple of Isis
stood, highly honored of the old Romans. Pope Sixtus the fifth brought hither
in the year 1587 the foresaid Obeliske, from the Sepulcher of Augustus near
(18) Saint Rocco and it is the lowest and the least of all the Obeliskes. Upon
this Mount Esquiline was a place for burning dead bodies, but the Romans being
offended with the smoke, Augustus gave that field to Maecenas, who made most
famous Gardens there. Hereabouts lies the Chapel of Saint Luke, peculiar to
the Painters, and there was a grove consecrated to Juno. The Church of Saint
Anthony is little, but full of fair pictures, and in the Vineyard of the
Hospital, was the stately Church of Diana. And the famous Church of Mars was
built, where that of Saint Martin now stands (which gives the title to a
Cardinal). As we went from Mount Esquiline to the Theater of Vespasian, we saw
by the way a rare Monument, built by the said Emperor, or his son Titus upon
Mount Esquiline. It has nine Cesternes under the ground, and is vulgarly
called Set sale, of seven several chambers, where of each is seuentene foot
broad, twelve foot high, and one hundred thirty seven foot long, and has
four doors, which so answer one another, as a man may see all the rooms at
once. Near the Church of Saint Clement is the wonderful Theater of Vespasian,
vulgarly called Il Coliseo, in which the people were wont to see the fighting
of Fencers, the hunting of wild beasts, and like games, and it received one
hundred and nintie (others say eighty five) thousand persons, and the outside
was of old round, but the inside of Oual form, and as high as the top of Mount
Celius. I observed the building now to be of brick, and the foundation to be
sixty walking paces broad, and to have four rows of seats one above the
other, and the inside from the foundation of the seats to be eight walking
paces broad, and one hundred thirty and five paces long. The ruins of the
like Theater, but less, built by Statilius, lie near the Church (D) San'Croce.

The foresaid Church of Saint Clement gives the title to a Cardinal, but the
walls are all ruined, and this part is not inhabited, neither is the street
paued from thence to the Church (D) S. Croce, in memory (as they say) of Pope
Ioane, which being great with child, and having gone a folemne Procession from
(A) Saint John Lateran, to the said Church of the (D) holy Cross, as she
returned this way, amidst her pomp was delivered of a Child.

Near to the said Theater of Vespasian lies the Triumphall Arch erected to
Constantine the great, when he had overcome Maxentius, and it is most fair and
curiously carved. Near that is the Church of Saint Marie the new, which gives
the title to a Cardinal, and in the Garden is a monument of the idol Serapis.
The (22) Triumphal Arch erected to Vespasian, and Titus when he came from the
destruction of Jerusalem, has but one Arch, and is less then the former
erected to Constantine, but it is no less adorned with their actions engraven.
Near the said Church of Saint Marie the new, lie the vast ruins of the famous
Temple of Peace, the roof whereof is richly engraven. Near this is a kind of
Gibet, which they called of old Tygillum Sororium, that is, the sisters rafter,
because when the Horatij three brothers had killed the Curiutij three brothers,
yet only one of the Horatij remaining alive, he returning into the City, and
finding his sister weep for her private loss in a day of public joy, killed
her with his own hands, and for show of justice, was condemned to pass under
this rafter, without further punishment, in respect of his desert in that
battle. Upon mount Palatine of old was a Palace, now called vulgarly (XXIII)
Ilpalazzo Maggiore, in which most of the Emperors did dwell, and upon the
ruins thereof the deceased Cardinal Farnese had a pleasant Vineyard. And at
the foot of this Mountain, near the Chapel of Saint Theodor, they say that
Romulus and Remus were cast forth and nourished by a shee-Wolfe: for they say,
that Tyber of old did run this way, though now it has changed the bed. The
Church of Saint Cosmo gives the title of a Cardinal, and there the Temple of
Romulus was of old seated. Also the Temple and Palace of the Emperor Marcus
Aurelius, and his Empress Faustina, daughter to Antoninus Pius, were in this
place. In the same field of old called the (11) Roman Marketplace. I said
before, that the Temple of the Vestall Virgins was seated, near the Church
Saint Marie Liberatrice, which was also consecrated to Venus. There also in the
field called Vaccino, three pillars are yet remaining of the ruins of the
Marble Gallerie which Caligula built, and those pillars are very high, and not
far from them was the Lake or Gulf, into which Curtius cast himself for his
Countries sake. The Triumphall Arch erected to L. Septimius Seuerus, for his
victory against the Parthians, is curiously engraven with that war, and it is
the fairest Arch, next that of Constantine, and it is seated at the foot of
the Mount Capitoline, in the Market place, called of old Forum Romanum (for it
began at the foot of the (XXII) Mount Capitoline, and reached to the foot of
(XXIII) Mount Palatine, where now is the Church of Saint Cosmo.) And therein
was a Monument erected, called la Ringhiera, from whence Orations were made to
the people, and it is probable, that this was the place called Rostra, where
Cicero made his Orations to the people, for Antiquaries agree that it was in
this Marketplace. In which also at the foot of the Capitol, of old was a
Pillar, called Milliare Aureum, which showed the way to all the Gates, and
whether soever a man would go. There also at this day is a Church with a
brazen door, where was the Treasury of the people of Rome, the gates whereof
Julius Caesar broke, and took from thence infinite treasure. Near this place
is the statua of Jupiter Panarius (others say of the River Rheine) upon the
head whereof stood one of the feet of Domitians Horse of brass, and this
statua is now called Marforio, and it is of Marble, lying at length as upon a
Tomb, as that (14) of Pasquin stands upright against a wall, and upon these
two Images are fastened all the libels of Rome, framed in manner of dialogue.
This statua of Marforio was of late taken up by Pope Clement the eighth out of
the valley, and placed upon this Mount before the Capitol, as appears by the
inscription besides that the place was to be seen whence it was taken.

Upon this Mount (XXII) Capitoline, of old was seated the famous Capitol, and
now there is the Senate house, the building whereof has no magnificence.
Between two Senate houses is a yard, in which lies the Rock Tarpeia; from the
top whereof condemned men were cast of old. In the fore-yard of the Capitol,
is a horsemans statua of brass, gilded, which was erected to the Emperor
Marcus Aurelius, and for the engrauers art is held of inestimable price. From
this place great part of Rome lies open to the eye in a sweet prospect. The
foresaid statua was set in this place by Pope Paul the 3 in the year 1538.
Thereby lies a foot statua of white Marble, and the fore said monument, (9)
which Pope Sixtus the fifth, in the year 1590 removed to this place from the
old monument erected to Coius Marius. There also is the foresaid statua of (23)
Marforio which was taken away by the Consuls of Rome from the first place, and
placed here by Pope Clement the eight. Here also is the pillar of Combat, and a
most pleasant fountain built by Pope Sixtus the fourth, where lie two ancient
Images of white marble of two rivers Tygris and Nylus. There be also three
pillars brought from the Temple of Concord (where the old Senators of Rome did
meet.) Within the Capitol or Senate house it self, we did see many most
fair antiquities, namely, statuaes erected to Julius Caesar, to Octauius, to
Augustus, and to Marius seven times Consul; the Image of Hercules of brass
gilded over, which was dug out of the ruins of the Temple of Hercules, in
the time of Pope Sixtus the fourth, also the Images of Hercules his son, of
Jupiter, of Minerua, and of Ceres, all of marble, a head of brass upon which
was engraven Iunius M. Brutus; two statuaes of young men, whereof one stands
upright in the habit of a servant, the other being naked, has one foot above
the other knee, with a needle in his hand to pull a thorn out of it, and both
are of brass gilded over, and of admirable beauty. The Image of Auentine
dug out of Mount Auentine, a brazen image of a she wolf which gave suck
to Romulus and Remus, and it was made of fines imposed upon usurers, a brazen
statua of AEneas, a brazen statua erected to Pope Sixtus the fifth, for
repressing the banished men, another of marble erected to Pope Leo the tenth.
We did see in the hall of Judgment within this Capitol, the statuaes of
marble erected to Pope Gregory the thirteenth, to Pope Paui the third, and to
King Charles made a Senator of Rome. Upon the sight of these, a Gentleman told
us, that by a Law he was made infamous, who should make mention of erecting a
statua to any Pope while he lived. In the foreyard of the Capitol, we did see
the fragments of an huge Coloffus, and upon the wall near the stairs, the
Triumphs of Marcus Aurelins, engranen in square marble stones. There we did
also see marble fragments dug up under the Arch of Settimius, upon which
were engraven the names of Consuls, Dictators, and Censors, and under the very
porch, the head of an Emperor, the pillar of Nauall fights, the sepulcher of
Settimius Alexander Seuerus, and of his mother Iulia Mammea, brought hither
from the field of Fabricius; the image of Minerua, certain images of brass of
the Monster Sphynx; the bones intombed of Agrippina niece to Augustus, and wife
to Germanicus; the Image of a Lion devouring another beast, and certain
ancient vessels to keep wine. Upon this Mountain, of old were sixty Temples;
but of all other the Temple of Jupiter Optimus Maximus built by Tarquine the
proud, was most esteemed by the old Romans. From this Mountain we ascended by
128. broad stairs of marble (brought hither from the Temple of Quirinus upon
Monte Canalle) to the Church of Saint Maria Ara Caeli, built upon the ruins of
the Temple of Jupiter Feretrius, and of the Palace of the Emperor Augustus.
And upon these stairs were two statuaes erected to the Emperor Constantine,
and the Church it self is adorned with many marble pillars and stones, and a
Pulpit of porphery, and it has the name of an Altar, which they show there
erected to the Son of the Virgin, by Augustus, who they say had read in the
Oracles of Sybilia, that a Virgin should bring forth a son. The arched roof
of the Church is richly gilded, and here Pope Pius the fourth consecrated the
spoils taken from the Turks in the nauall victory of him and his
confederates, the memory whereof is there kept by an inscription upon a pillar.
Also the Senate and people of Rome, have here erected a table to Pope Paul the
third, upon which is written in golden letters, that while he was Cardinal, he
erected here many ancient monuments dug up in Rome at his own charge. On
the other side of the Mount Capitoline, (toward the West as I remember) at the
very foot of the mountain, is the Tullian prison, appointed for that use by
the old Kings Ancus Martins and Tullus, in which they say the holy Apostles
Peter and Paul were imprisoned; and at this day there is a Church under the
earth, called Saint Peter In Careere.

The (24) Theater of Marcellus son to the sister of Augustus, is near the
Palace of the Family Sauilla. Not far thence toward the fish market, was
the Porticus of Octauia, sifter to Augustus, but no ruins now remain thereof.
The (25) palace of the Cardinal Farnese is seated in a plain, being one of the
fairest in Rome, which for the dignity of such a City, has very few stately
Palaces. Here I did see an admirable statua, cut out in one stone, of a Bull
treading a woman under his feet, with the Images of two brothers standing
upright, and of a hunting dog, with the figure of a high Rock. Concerning
the Churches which we did see in this days journey. The (23) Church of Saint
Adrian in the market place called Romanum, or Boiarium. The Church of Saint
Peter and Marcellanus (between the (20) Theater of Vespasian and the Church
(A) S. Giouanni in Laterano, the Church of Saint Matthew, in the way toward
(C) Saint Mary Maggiore the Church of Saint Pietro in vincula (upon (XXVI)
Mount Esquiline, (where is a sepulcher of white marble of Pope Julius the
second, adorned with fair statuaes, namely, one of Moses of the rare work of
Michael Angelo,) the Church of Agata, upon the same mountain, the Church of
Saint Vito In Macello, the Church of Saint Eusebius (near the mounment called
(9) Trofei di Mario the Church of Saint Prasside, seared near (C) S. Maria
Maggiore whose chapel called Horto del Paradiso, no woman may enter), the
Church of Saint Quirico, the Church Saint Susanna upon (XXVIII) Monte Cauallo,
the Church Saint Vitallis: Al these Churches give the titles of Cardinals. The
Church Saint Costanza, is a long mile out of the (VII) gate Pis and was of old
dedicated to Bacchus, where is a most fair sepulcher and large, of porphry,
ten ordinary spannes deep, and fifteen long, curiously engraven with boys
quaffing, and bearing cups of wine, as in a Feast of Bacchus, which some think
to be the sepulcher of Constantia a Virgin, daughter to Constantine, but the
engrauing like a Feast of Bacchus seems more ancient, and to be wrought by the
Heathen Romans, and it is vulgarly called the sepulcher of Bacchus. This Church
is of a round form and little, but very fair, and borne up with twelve rows
of marble pillars, set in a round compass. Near this lies the Church of Saint
Agnese, having doors of brass, where the Lambs are kept, whereof the Pals of
Archbishops are made, which the Pope so dearly sels.

At my first coming to Rome I lodged in a public Inn, and paid three giulij
each meal, then as I have written, I hasted my journey to Naples, and after
returning to Rome, I hired a chamber by the day, and bought my own meat, but
my haste to be gone, made me not to note my particular expenses. Only I
remember that they who sold any thing in the market, used to look into the
hands of the buyers to see whether they brought silver or brass coin, and
thereafter made their price; whereupon many showed silver, till they had
bought, and then paid in copper, which the people durst not refuse. And from
hence it was, that in a solemn pomp, when the people fell on their knees
before the Pope, and I thought they only expected his blessing, they all cried
out; Holy Father command that we may have white bread, and that the Gentlemen
may be forced to take our brass quatrines: so as it seems they refused to
receive them. I scarce bought my meat one or two days in Rome: For after I had
been with Cardinal Allen, I formerly said, that to shun the company of his
Englishmen, I changed my lodging, and my self and two Dutch Gentlemen my
consorts, took a chamber in a victualling house, close under the Popes
Palace; and each of us paid for our bed each night one or two baocci, and
bought our meat in that house, agreeing for the price before we did eat it, and
so being ready upon all events of danger, and having no carriage to trouble us,
we hoped if need were to escape; yet still I rested much upon the Cardinals
promise, and being free from Englishmens company, and having two honest Dutch
Gentlemen for my consorts, both borne in the Palatinate of Rheine, where they
profess the same religion as in England, I did with more security set my self
freely to satisfy my curiosity in the view of Rome.

After being desirous to see the mouth of Tyber, where it falls into the sea, I
went out of the gate of Saint Paul, and having the narrow bed of Tyber on my
right hand, passed twelve miles to Ostia, through fruitful hills of corn, and
a vast wood at my iournies end. Here is a strong Castle seated in Latium, and
belonging to the Popes of Rome, which Pope Martin the fifth built, and Pope
Julius the second did more strongly fortify, but nothing remains of the
stately buildings of that City, but some poor houses. Strabo writes, that King
Ancus Martius first built this City, in a soil to which the River brought much
dirt. It is certain that of old the ships did cast Anchor without the Haven of
the City, and sent their goods to Rome in Galleys and Barks drawn up by a
rope, the Haven being not so deep to bear them. The Citizens were free from
Tribute, to make them dwell there, the air being then (as also at this time)
very unwholesome. Now the Tyber seems to end here in a Lake, and the waters
run in little channels under the paued high ways. The Haven of Traian is a
mile and a half from the Town, being broad enough, but so barred with sand
and like matter, as no ships can come to it; and only small Barks sometimes
pass from Naples and near places to Rome, and that very seldom. The foresaid
Haven was first built by Claudius, then repaired by Traian, and called of his
name, of which Suetonius writes thus in the life of Claudius; He made the Haven
of Hostia, drawing an arm on the right and left side, and making a bar at
the entery, where it was deep, which bar, that he might make more stable, by
Art, he sunk the ship wherein the great Obeliske was brought from Egypt, and
upon piles heaped up, placed a most high Tower, like to the Pharo of
Alexandria, out of which light was hung out by night, to direct the ships, etc.

When Traian repaired this Haven, the City Portuensis was built on the other
side of Tyber, toward the South-East, in the soil of Toscany, the Bishop
whereof is one of the seven Cardinals assistant to the Pope. The branch of
Tyber falling from Hostia and dividing it self, makes an Island compassed with
the sea, on the other side, in which are many ruins of stately houses and
great stones of Marble. This Haven seeming of no use, and barred up for the
security of Rome from any Nauall siege, the only Port that Rome has, is
called Citta'vecchia, seated upon the shore of Tuscany between the foresaid
Hostia and Ligorno, the chief Haven of the Duke of Florence. In this haven of
Rome, of old called Centum Cellae, and after ruined by the Saracens, and after
built again, the Popes of Rome (possessing many places in the neighbor soil
of Toscany) did build a strong Castle, and called it Citta Vecchia. I returned
from Ostia to Rome the same day, and paid five giulij for my Mule, and two for
my dinner.

I had purposed to see the famous Garden of the Cardinal of Ferraria at
Tiuoli, (whereof I spoke in my journey to Naples:) but Easter was now at hand,
and the Priests came to take our names in our lodging, and when we demanded
the cause, they told us, that it was to no other end, but to know if any
received not the Cummunion at that holy time, which when we heard, we needed
no spurs to make haste from Rome into the state of Florence.

Only I had an obstinate purpose to see Bellarmine. To which end having first
hired a horse, and provided all things necessary for my journey to Sienna; and
having sent away my consorts to stay for me, with my horse and boots at an Inn
in the Suburbs, that I might more speedily escape, if my purpose succeeded not:
I boldly went to the Jesuits College, and Bellermine then walking in the
fields, I expected his return at the gate, the Students telling me that he
would presently come back; which falling out as they said; I followed him into
the College (being attired like an Italian, and careful not to use any
strange gestures; yea, forbearing to view the College, or to look upon any
man fully, lest I should draw his eyes upon me). Thus I came into Bellermines
chamber, that I might see this man so famous for his learning, and so great a
Champion of the Popes: who seemed to me not above forty years old, being lean
of body, and something low of stature, with a long visage and a little sharp
beard upon the chin, of a brown color, and a countenance not very grave, and
for his middle age, wanting the authority of gray heirs. Being come into his
chamber, and having made profession of my great respect to him, I told him that
I was a French man, and came to Rome for performance of some religious vows,
and to see the monuments, especially those which were living, and among them
himself most especially, earnestly entreating, to the end I might from his
side return better instructed into my Country, that he would admit me at
vacant hours to enjoy his grave conversation. He gently answering, and with
gravity not so much swallowing the praises I gave him, as showing that my
company should be most pleasing to him, commanded his Nouice, that he should
presently bring me in, when I should come to visit him, and so after some
speeches of courtesy; he dismissed me, who meant nothing less then to come
again to him.

The very same hour at ten in the morning, upon the Tuseday before Easter, I
came to my consorts in the Suburbs, and presently we took horse after a short
breakefast. The way from Rome to Sienna is thus vulgarly noted: A Borgetto,
six miles, a l' Isole, one; a Bacchano, six; a Monterose, five; a Sutri,
four; a Roneignone, three; a lago di vigo, one; a viterbo, seven; a Monte
fiaschoni, seven; a Bolsena, seven; a San' Lorenzo, four; a Acquapendente,
six; a Recorseto a la Paglia, twelve; a Scanciericho, four; a Buon' Conuento,
seven; a Saraualle, four; a San' Michaele de la Seala, six; a Sienna, six;
In all from Rome to Sienna ninety six miles. I will follow my Italian
consorts in describing this journey, who do not much differ from this vulgar
number of miles, each of us paid fifteen paoli for his horse from Rome to
Scienna, and we had but one Vetturine, who went with us on foot, for the
Italians use to ride a slow pace, and he was to bring back our horses, and to
pay for their meat and for his own. The first day after breakfast we rode
twenty two miles to Monterose, through fruitful hills of Corn, and some
wild barren fields, and Woods at our iournies end. After we had rode five
miles, we came to a monument lying upon the high way, and called the Sepulcher
of Nero, in the place where he killed himself, when the Senate had condemned
him. And when we came to the little Town Bachano, I observed the mountains to
compass it in the form of a Theater with a Lake in the midst, like the
mountain Astrumo near Naples. Out of this Lake comes a Brook called Cremera,
upon the bank whereof three hundred Fabij with five thousand of their
followers, of old were killed in one day. Bacchano of old called Campagnano,
has the name of Bacchus. And it gives the name to the Territory, and to the
Wood near it, which is infamous for roberies. Monterose is subject to Pope
Clement the eighth (then living) his Nephew (so they call their bastards;) and
though it be seated within the old confines of Hetruria, yet now it is under
the Popes dominion. Here we supped at an Ordinary (vulgarly Al pasto) and each
man paid four giulij, and all the company complaining that so much was
demanded for our supper, the Host so thundered among us like the bragging
soldier, as he soon made both strangers and Italians glad to be quiet. The
second day in the morning we rode eight miles to Lago diVigo, where we broke
our fast, upon reckoning (vulgarly al conto) and each man paid eight baocchi.
After breakfast we rode fourteen miles to a little City Monte fiaschoni,
having passed by the way the City Viterbo, where Pope Caelestine the third
placed a Bishop, and made it a City. Of old it was governed by Princes borne
in the Town, till upon civil dissension between the Family of Gatti (aided
by the Roman Family Colonna) and the Family Magancesi (aided by the Roman
Family Orsini), the Pope brought the City into his subjection, about the year
1446. A most high Mountain lies near Viterbo, bearing Chestnuts, and a great
Wood of Oaks, infamous for robberies, where we did see many quarters of thieves
hanging upon the trees. The way to Viterbo was through a fruitful Plain of
corn, and beyond this Mountain were store of Olive trees and Vines. Viterbo
was of old called Faliscum, and it has 3 Cities within the walls: but we
passing suddenly through it, I observed nothing markeable but a fair Fountain
in the Marketplace. The way from thence was through a fruitful Plain of
Corn to the said little City Montefiaschoni, seated upon a high Hill, at the
foot whereof begins the Lake of Bolsena, and it is subject to the Pope, having
no singular thing in it, but the white and red Muskedine, one of the most
famous Wines in Italy. Here we three Consorts had two beds for ten baochi, and
we supped upon reckoning, and each man paid two giulij. The third day in the
morning we rode eight miles by the Lake Bolsena, through a Plain of Corn
having woody Hills of Oaks, not far distant, with store of Chessenut and
Olive trees. In this Lake there is an Island, which the Queen Amalasuenta,
famous for her wisdom, was killed by the command of the King of the
Ostrogothes. And in the Castle of Balsena they show a piece of bread
consecrated for the Lords Supper, which being in the hand of a Priest not
believing that it was the very body of Christ, did shed blood, (as they say,
who have many such lying Miracles). Then we rode six miles to the Castle
Acquapendente, through a plain of Corn, where each man paid one giulio for
his dinner upon reckoning. After dinner we rode through wild Mountains
bearing little Corn, twelve miles to the Brook Paglia, running under the
Castle Redicofani, and dividing the States of the Pope, and the Duke of
Florence, and we rode further in the State of Florence four miles to a Country
Inn, (as I think called Scancicricho) where each man paid three poali and a
half for his supper at an Ordinary (vulgarly Al pasto), having almost nothing
but red Herrings and Sallets to supper. The fourth day in the morning, upon the
last day of April after the new style, in the year 1594, we Anno 1594.
rode thirteen miles to a Country Inn, through high Hills of Corn, and for
the greater part very firtile, where each man paid seven baochi for his
breakefast.

The same day we rode eighteen miles to Sienna, through most pleasant Hills,
and a firtile Plain of Corn, with store of Vines on each side, and many
Palaces of Gentlemen, (so they call their houses, built of Freestone, with a
low roof, and small magnificence), and most frequent dwellings of husbandmen.
We came to Sienna the Friday before Easter day, and in a public Inn each man
paid three reali for his Supper.

The next day I went to Fiorenza for money, and rode through Woods and fruitful
Hills to the Castle Poggio (walled towns being called Castles) and after
through stony Mountains bearing Corn and Olives, till I came to the Village
Tauernelle, being seventeen miles from Sienna, where I paid two reali for my
dinner upon reckoning. After dinner I rode fifteen miles to Fiorenza, through
stony little Mountains, bearing great store of Olives, Almonds, and
Chessenuts, and many Poplar trees, and toward our iourneyes end, store of
Cedar trees; and we passed by innumerable Palaces of Gentlemen, and a most
fair Monastery called la Certosa, and a desert Rock, upon the top whereof an
Heremite dwelt all alone. This Territory yeeldes great store of Pinetrees, the
boughs whereof are thick and round at the top, but the rest of the tree has
neither boughs nor leaves, and it yields a very great Nut, with very many
kernels in one shell, which are pleasant in taste, and much used here in
Banquets. By the way I did meet a Dutch Lady, with her Gentlewomen, and
men-seruants all in the habit of Franciscan Friars, and not only going on
foot, but also barefooted, through these stony ways; and because they were
all (as well men as women) in Friars weeds, though I looked on them with some
suspicion, yet I knew not their sex or quality, till upon inquiry at
Florence, I understood that the Duchess of Fiorenza (or Florente) hearing
that some women were passed by in Friars apparel, and thinking they were
Nuns stolen out of their Cloisters, did cause them to be brought back unto
her, and so understood that upon penance imposed on them by their Confessor
for the satisfaction of their sins, they were enjoined to go in that Friars
habit barefooted to Rome; whereupon she dismissed them with honor.

I forgot to note what I paid for my horse from Sienna to Florence, whether we
came upon Easter day, and there I lodged in the Dutch Inn, and paid three
reali each meal. But I did not at this time view the City, deferring it till
my return.

The next morning I took my journey to Pisa, that by often removing, I might
shun all question of my religion, into which they use more strictly to inquire
at this time of the year, when they use to observe who receives not the
Sacrament: for howsoever there be less danger of the Inquisition in this
State, yet the Duke using not, and scarce being able to protect those that
rashly give open offense, I thought good thus warily to avoid these snares. I
went this journey on foot, meaning leisurely to see the next Cities, so little
distant one from the other, as they were pleasant iourneys on foot, especially
in so pleasant a Country. The first day in the morning I walked ten miles to
the Castle Prato, through the pleasant Valley of the River Arno. This pleasant
Castle (or walled Town) is of a round form, having (at the very entrance) a
large Market place, wherein stands a fair Cathedral Church, adorned with many
stones of marble: and here I paid twelve creitzers for my dinner.

In the afternoon I walked ten Italian short miles to the City Pistoia,
through a most pleasant plain called the Valley of Arno, tilled after the
manner of Lombardy, bearing Pistoia.
Corn and Wine in the same field, all the Furrows being planted with Elmes,
upon which the Vines grow. This City is seated in a Plain, and compassed with
Mountains, which on other sides are somewhat distant, but on the North-side
hang over the same, and here (as likewise at Prato and Florence) the streets
are paued with broad free stone, most casie to walk upon. And the Cathedral
Church is stately built, and the pauement is of Marble curiously wrought, like
the Church of Sienna. The City has the name (in the Latin tongue, as also in
the Italian) of a plague which invaded the City, when the Troops of the
Rebel Catilina being overcome, fled thither, whose posterity being seated
there, has nourished a greater plague by perpetual factions, showing thereby
of what race they came. Desiderius King of Lombardy compassed the City with a
wall. After the Florentines about the year 1150 subdued this chief City of
Hetruria, under whose government, first the faction of the Neri and the
Bianehi brake out, and defiled the City with murders, which being extinct,
the faction of the Cancellieri and the Panzaditi began, which lasted almost to
our time, with incredible hatred and murder. But of late times, the Duke of
Florence published an Edict, that upon great penalty, no man should wear any
Roses, or other signs of faction, which till that time they did bear upon the
parts of their body, where they might most easily be seen. From hence I walked
three miles through little Mountains to Sarauale, and two miles to Pouanni,
where the Plain begins to open; and three miles to the Brook Pescha, where I
paid a Creitzer for my passage by boat, and five miles to Borgo nuouo,
through Mountains full of Chess-nuts and other nut trees, and eight miles in
the territory of Lucca, through a large plain, to a solitary Inn, called La
Moretta. By the way I paid (upon reckoning) on reale and a half for my
breakefast, and in this Inn I lodged, and paid (at an ordinary) three reali
for my Supper.

The next morning I walked one mile to Lucca; the Emperor Charles the fourth
Lucca.
made this City free, which has kept the Liberty to this day, governed by
Senators, but lives in parpetuall fear of practices against this liberty from
the great Duke of Florence. It is seated in a plain, and strongly fortified,
and compassed with Mountains on all sides, but somewhat distant, and only
lies open on the side toward Pistoia, being two miles in compass, and having
about thirty four thousand Inhabitants. The strectes are narrow, and paued
with broad free stone, most easy to walk upon. The Palaces of the chief
Gentlemen are built of free stone, with a low roof after the Italian fashion,
and they have many pleasant Gardens within the walls. In the corner toward
North-west by North is a strong castle, near which lies the Cathedral Church,
stately paued with Marble, but very dark, as most of the Papists Churches are
built, either because they think darkness increases Religion, or to make it
an excuse for their burning candles in the day. There also lies the Senate
house; and all the Innes are in one street, that they may more easily look into
strangers, for any practice against their liberty; for which cause no man may
wear any weapons in the city, nor so much as a knife, except the point be
blunt These Citizens first spread through Italy the Art of making silk, and
weauing it into clothes, and by this traficke they have very rich families Here
I paid (at an Ordinaric) o reali for my dinner and supper. From Lucca I walked,
miles through a pleasant Plain, to the Mountain of Pisa, which diuides the
Territories of those two Cities, and it is very high and stoney, yet is full of
Rosemary, Time, and sweet smelling herbs, and the passage of it is 2 miles
long. After I went 3 miles through fenny ground, often ouerflowed with the
River Arno, and came to Pisa. Arno is a little River Pisa.
talling from the Apenine Mountains near Florence, through which City it
runs, and so passes through a most pleasant and fruitful Plain to Pisa,
through which City it also runs; and by reason of the narrow bed, and the
near Mountain of Pisa, is subject to ouerflow upon any great rain, so as
with great hurt it drowneth the fields of Pisa, and those that lie from thence
to the Sea. Pisa of old famous for navigations, was made free by the Emperor
Charles the fourth, about the year 1369. But long after it was the second time
sold to the Florentines by Galeacius Vicount of Millan. Then they practiced
with the French to recover their liberty, when Charles the eight passed that
way to conquer Naples, til they were the third time subdued by the Florentines;
since which time the family of Medici invaded the liberty of Florence, together
with that of Pisa, under the title of Great Duke of Florence, which they hold
to this day. But when Pisa was thus brought in subjection to Florence, many of
the chief Citizens chose rather to live at Venice, and other places, in
perpetual banishment with their posterity, then to be subject to the
Florentines Pisa was of old called Alpheo, of the builders coming from their
dwellings near (...) a River in Greece. The brook Arno runs from the Last to
the west through Pisa, seated in a Plain, and toward the North-West by North
is a Gate, and a most fair Cathedral Church, paued with Marble curiously
wrought, and having a most fair pulpit In which Church, near the high Alter,
is the Sepulcher of the Emperor Henry the seventh, whom Plutina and many
German Writers affirm, to have been poisoned by a wicked Monk of the Order of
the Predicants, at the Communion of our blessed Lords Supper. Upon this
monument these words are written in Latin.

In this (...) to be despised, are contained the bones of Henry the seventh,
Count of Luceburg, and after the seventh Emperor of that name, which the
second year after his death, namely 1319. the twentyfiue day of the Sextiles,
etc. were brought to Pisa, and with great honor of funer all laid in this
Church, where they remain to this day.

The steeple is near the Church but feuered from it, which seems to threaten
the salling from the top to the bottom, but that is done by the great Art of
the workmen, deceiving the eye; for it is as strongly built as the Church. I
ascended the same by two hundred and forty stairs of marble, in which ascent
it has seven galleries on the out side. Not far then to is a yard used for
common burial, called the holy field, vulgarly Campo Santo. In which the
Emperor Frederick Barbarossa, returning from Hic usalem, did lay great stone
of that earth, which he had used for ballast of his ships; and they say that
dead bodies laid there, doe-consume in a most short time. This yard is
compassed with a building all of Marble, which lies open like a Cloister, (we
call it a terras) and the same is covered with lead very sumptiously, having in
breadth 56 pillars, and in length 189. each distant from the other thirteen
walking paces. So as (in my opinion) this yard for burial is much more
stately, then that most fair yard for the same purpose, which I formerly
discribed at Leipzig in Germany, called in Dutch Got saker. In this place is a
sepulcher stately built of marble of diverse colors, with this inscriptioin
Latin; Pope Gregory the thirteenth, borne at Bologna, commanded this to be
made, so the most (...) the (...) Lawyer John Buon' Compagno, his brother by
the Fathers side, deceased in (...) the year 1544 at Pisa, where he was chief
Professor of that Law. Here I did see another sepulcher with this inscription
in Latin; To Matthew Curtius Physician. Duke Cosmo made this at his own charge,
in the year 1544.

At the West corner of the City, is the Armory, vulgarly called L Arsenalo,
where they build and keep the Dukes Galleys, which were there at this time no
more then seven in number; for the Duke used to send out in summer time some
two or three Galleys, (and seldom any more) to spoil the Turks, which he
might do more boldly, because the Florentines have no cause to fear the
Turks, since they use no traffic by sea, but send out their silks and other
commodities by strange ships, and only take care to entertain those Merchants
well, who bring them corn and victuals by sea. At the same West corner of the
City, is a bridge of brick over the River Arno, built high in the midst, with
three Arches, under which the boats pass. And toward the East there be three
other like bridges. Near the first bridge is another gate of the City, leading
toward the sea, and near the same, is the most sweet walk, that ever I
beheld. It has in breadth some five rows of trees, on each side, and a like
distance of green grass between those trees, but it reaches in length many
miles; and out of the River Arno are drawn two ditches, which run all the
length of it, one upon each side: so as the Citizens in summer time, use to
take boat in Arno, at their doors, with a a basket of victuals; and so many
Families of them, passing by the ditches on both sides the walk, sit down a
good distance the one from the other, and there sup and converse with great
pleasure. On the South side of the City a strong Fort lies near the wall, and
there is the third gate of the City. In the midst of the City upon the bank of
Arno, is the Palace of the Duke of Florence, and there is a statua erected to
Ferdinando the Duke then living, who much favored this City, in which he was
borne. Not far thence is a little, but most fair Chapel, all of marble,
built in the form of a Thorn, vulgarly called La Capella lesu di Spina. The
pleasant seat of the City, the courtesy of the Citizens, and my desire to
converse with the Professors of the University, made me spend some days in
this City, where I paid by the day for my chamber and bed three creitzers, and
my Host was tied to buy and dress such meat for me as I desired, wherein I
spent some three Giulij by the day, and if I had purposed to stay long, I might
have lived well at a more easy rate.

CHAP. III. Of my journey to Ligorno, my return to Florence, and to Sienna,
and the description of these Cities. Of my journey by Land to Lirigi, (in which
again I passed by Lucca and Pisa,) and by sea to Genea, with the description
of that City, and my journey by Land to Pania, to Milano, to Cremona, and to
Mantous, with the description of the Cities, and of my return to Padena.
I Hired a horse for three Giulij from Pisa to Ligorna, an Haven of this state,
which Ftolomy of old called Liburuum, (of which name there is another Haven
between Istria and Dalmatia), and Cicero called Labro. Not far from Pisa I
passed by boat the brook Serpe, running from Lucca; and paid two creitzers for
passing my horse, and one for my self. Then for three miles I rode upon a
paued way, and thirteen miles more through a plain of pasture, full of many
woods and Lakes, which lakes and fenny grounds, lying near Pisa, make the air
unwholesome some months of the year, and the Citizens much subject to sickness.

So after sixteen miles riding, I came to Ligorno, which was of old fortified
by the Pisans, and those fortifications were demolished by the Genoest, in the
year 1297. but peace being made between them, this place returned under the
command of the Pisans, and they being after subdued by the Florentines, this
place came also into their hands; and when the French King Charles the eight,
in the year 1494. restored the Pisans to liberty, this place followed their
fortune; till the Pisans again being subdued by the Florentines in the year
1509. this place also returned to their subjection. It is said to have the name
of Ligornus son to Phaeton. Cosmo de Medicis, Duke of Florence, began to
fortify again this ancient Town, and to measure out the circuit and the
streets thereof. And Duke Francis took upon him to go forward with this
unperfected work; and he being dead, Duke Ferdinand his brother, at that time
living, brought it to the form of a most strong Fort, and fair City. And at
this time the streets began to be replenished with houses, for the Duke made
this place as it were a sanctuary to offenders, upon whom he used to impose for
punishment, either to dwell there for ever, or at least for some years, and to
add one or more houses to the building: so as the City was now fair and
populous, but it was filled with Citizens guilty of crimes, and of no civil
conversation. My self hearing that they were such men, perhaps out of
preiudicate opinion, did think their looks barbarous, which made me look
more warily to my self, and to those things I had with me. The City is seated
in a plain, somewhat longer from the North to the South, then it is broad from
the East to the West; and the sea lies upon it, partly on the North, and partly
on the South, and altogether on the West side. And it has one Tower on the
North side, and another one the South side, reaching into the sea, out of which
they hang lights by night to direct sailors: and between these Towers, full on
the West side, there is a Haven for great ships further out into the sea, and
also near the City and compassed with the walls thereof, are two Havens for
Galleys and small Barks. The River Arno running from the East to the West,
passes by the City on the North side, and there falls into the sea; and at the
corner on the North side is a strong Fort. Here I paid (upon reckoning) two
giulij for my supper, and as much next day for my dinner, and returning to Pisa
by water, I paid seven creitzers for my passage.

Two weeks being thus spent, I thought good to return to Florence, that I
might receive my money, which I had not received before, because for fear of
the inquisition, I only stayed there Easter day in the Dutch Inn. Therefore
hiring a horse for four giulij, I rode forty miles to Florence, through the
pleasant valley of Arno, partly tilled after the manner of Lombardy, where the
same field yields corn, wine, and wood, partly divided into sweet pastures. By
the way it hapened that I brake a bough of a mulbery tree, to shade me from the
sun, and falling into the company of an honest Gentleman, he told me I seemed
a stranger, because I carried that bough, since those trees planted in the high
ways, belonged to the Duke, who preserved them for silkewormes, and had
imposed a great penalty upon any that should break a bough thereof; so: as if
I passed with this bough through any village, I should be sure to be taken and
kept prisoner, till I should pay a great fine: whereupon I presently cast away
this bough, with many thanks to him for his gentle warning.

How Florence came to be subject to the House of Medici, with the title of
Great Duke, I must hereafter show in the discourse of the Florentine
Commonwealth. At Florence. vulgarly Fiorenza.
this time I will set down (as briefly as I can) the description of the City,
and fields adioining It is a most sweet City, and abounding with wealth, the
Citizens are much commended for their courtesy, modesty, gravity, purity of
language, and many virtues. The City is innobled with the Dukes Court, and with
stately Palaces, built within and without the walls, and for the stately
buildings and sweet situation, it is worthily called Florence the beautiful,
vulgarly Fiorenza la bella. It is said to have had the name Florentia in Latin,
either of the Fluentini, (a neighbor people of whom they come) or of the
perpetual happiness into which it grew like a flower, or of the Citizens
wealth, and the Cities beauty flourishing like a flower. The pauement of the
City is not of flint (as at Rome) nor of brick (as at Sienna) but of very
broad and fair free stone. The houses after the manner of Italy; are built
with a low roof, excepting the Palaces, which are stately built of free stone
engraven. The windows (as in all the Cities of Italy (excepting Venice alone)
are not glased, but either lie altogether open, to take air, or are covered
with oyled paper and linen cloth. The streets are most broad, and have an
open air. In discribing the City, I will begin without the walls, And first
toward the North and East, it is compassed with pleasant Hills, planted with
excellent fruit trees, and lying in the form of an Amphitheater, and behind
them the high Mountains of the Apenine, somewhat removed, are instead of
strong walls to the City. Also on the South side, it has like Hills, and
distant Mountains, but toward the West it lies open to the most pleasant Valy
of Arno, which Valy continues as far as Pisa, and to the seaside. On all
sides without the walls, Palaces of Gentlemen are most frequent, and houses
of Citizens, not distant above three or four closes one from the other,
whereupon the Emperor Charles the fifth beholding the City and the Country
from a high steeple, affirmed, that Florence was the greatest City in the
whole world; and when he perceived that the standers by (...) doubtful of his
meaning, he added, that in good earnest he reputed all the Palaces without the
walls, compassed with Hills and Mountains as with walls, to be within the
circuit of the City. It is seated (as it were) in the Center of Italy,
between the air of Arezzo, producing quick wits (where Peter Aretine the Poet
was borne, of a sharp wit, though he abused it wantonly), and the air of Pisa
less pure, and yielding men of strong memory, so as it has had by this
temperature of air, many Citizens as well sharp to learn sciences, as strong
to retain them. The River Arno running from East to West diuides the City,
but into unequal parts, the far greater part lying on the North-side, and
the less on the South Side; and the bridge to pass from one to the other, is
almost in the very midst of the City, which is fairly built, yet is more
magnified by strangers then it deserves. It has little houses upon it, where
with it is covered, and upon each side are Gold-smithes shops, which make small
or no show at ordinary times: but when the Duke Ferdinando brought his
Duchess (the Daughter of the Duke of Loraine) to the City, at her entrance,
those shops were furnished with vessels of silver, and many rich Jewels, yet
borrowed of the Citizens to that purpose. And howsoever some strangers may
wonder at it, yet they who compare that bridge with the bridge of London, or
those Goldsmiths shops with the daily show of the Goldsmiths in Cheape-side,
shall find no cause to wonder thereat. The bridge has two hundred twenty
eight walking paces in length, and is built upon seven Arches. There be three
other bridges over Arno, but far less in bigness and magnificence then the
former; for the River is shallow, scarce covering the sand or stones, though
beyond the City it be increased with other waters, and is subject to
ouer-flowing upon any great rain. The City is of a round form, and upon the
walls thereof lie eight Fortes, whereof the greatest and strongest lies
toward the South. And the far greater part of the City on the North side of
the River, lies in a Plain, but in the less part on the South side of the
River, the houses toward the North-East are built upon the sides of
Mountains, and the dwellings are more scattered, having many and large
Gardens; and in that part there is a place vulgarly called le Ruinate, that is,
the ruinous, because the houses have been often ruined by Earthquakes, and
there you shall find this inscription in Latin: Duke Cosmo in the year 1533
forbad the houses of this Mountain to be rebuilt, which thrice fell by the
fault of the soil. Near that place lies a lane vnpaued, in memory of a Virgin
that dwelt there, whom a young man loved, who was borne of a Family of a
contrary faction to hers, between whom many cruelties had been exercised, and
they mutually loving each other, and despairing to get their friends consent
for marriage, and at last being impatient of delay, resolved with what danger
soever to meet together. But it happened, that the young man being to ascend
into the Virgins Chamber by a ladder, was surprised, who to save the reputation
of the Virgin, confessed, that he came to rob the house, whereupon he was
condemned to die, and being led to execution by the house where the Virgin
dwelt, she laying aside all shame, came running out, with her loose hair about
her ears, and embracing him, confessed the truth publikly, with which accident
both their parents were so moved, as laying aside all former malice, they
contracted affinity, and the young man delivered from the bonds of the hangman,
was tied to her in the sweet bond of marriage. And of this wonderful event,
the Florentines thought good to keep this memory for posterity. The Duke
has two Palaces within the City, whereof one is called Pallazzo di Pitti,
seated in this part of the City, which a Gentleman of Florence by name Lucca
della Casa de Pitti, began to build but falling into poverty and not able to
finish it, was forced to sell the same to Cosmo de Medicis, being Great Duke of
Florence, and shortly after convicted of treason, was beheaded. This is the
most stately Palace in the City, in the Garden whereof, called Belueder, are
many most sweet shades among pleasant Groves, together with a pleasant Cave
and Fountain. They say, that one Mule did bring all the matter to this
building, in memory whereof, these verses are written upon the picture of the
said Mule:

Lecticam, lapides, and marmora, ligna, Columnas
Vexit, conduxit, traxit, and ista tulit.
The Litter, these stones, marbles, pillars, wood,
Did carry, lead, draw, bear, this Mule so good.
The outward side of the Palace is of Freestone engraven, and the Ornaments
within are Regal. Between the two Chambers, wherein the Duke and the
Duchess lie apart, is a very fair Gallery, and in the chamber of the
Duchess, is a second bed most like her own for the Duke when he pleases to
lie there, and there is a Table wrought with silver and precious stones, valued
at 3000 Crowns. In the dining room are many fair statuaes, and the figure of
thirty Cardinals chosen at one time by Pope Leo the tenth, being of the house
of Medici. In the very Court are two great loadstones. The strong Fort called
Saint Meniato, lies over this Palace, and indeed over all the City, which
was built by Alexander de Medicis, nephew to Pope Clement the seventh, and had
lately been kept by a Garrison of two thousand Spaniards, as likewise another
Fort on the other side of Arno, built in the time of the free State, was
likewise kept by a Garrison of 100 Spaniards: For the Dukes of Medici advanced
to their Dukedom by the Emperor Charles the fifth, did at first admit these
Garrisons of Spaniards under an Italian Captain, either to show their
confidence in Spain, or to fortify themselves against the Citizens, whose
liberty they had invaded; but Duke Ferdinand then living (the Families of
Citizens being now extinct or suppressed, who had lived in the free state, and
could not endure subjection) being now confirmed in his Dukedom, had lately
effected, that these Spaniards should yield the Fortes to him, and depart the
Country. Upon the North-side of the River Arno, and upon the bank thereof, is
a monument of a horse buried in the high way, with this inscription in Latin:
The bones of the horse of Charles Capelli Venetian Ambassador, when the City
was besieged in the year 1533. And these verses were added:

Non ingratus herus, Sonopes memorande, sepulchrum
Hoc tibi, promeritis haec monumenta dedit.
Praise worthy horse of war thy thankful Lord
Thee for thy merits does this Tomb afford.
The City has diverse Marketplaces, 1. Mercato Vecchio; 2. S. Spirito; 3.
Santa Croce; 4. S. Maria Nouella, 5. Plazza della Signoria, which is the
fairest and largest of all the rest, and therein is the Senators Palace, and
many stately statuas, one of a virgin taken by force, and of the rauisher
beating her keeper, and treading him under his feet; another of Hercules,
treading Cacus under his feet (for the Florentines bear Hercules in their
great Seal); the third of David, all which are of white Marble; the fourth of
Perseus, carrying in one hand the head of Medusa upon his Shield, and treading
the bulk of her body under his feet, curiously wrought in brass. In the same
Marketplace is a most fair Fountain set round about with fair statuaes of
brass, and in the midst thereof, the statuaes of a Giant, and of three horses,
almost covered with water, all wrought in white marble, do power the waters out
of their mouths into the Cesterne. In the corner of this market place is the
Senators Palace, so called, because the Senate was wont to meet there in time
of the free State, but now it is the Dukes palace, and the second that he has
within the City. Therein I saw a Cat of the Mountain, not unlike to a dog,
with the head of a black color, and the back like an hedghog, a light touch
whereof gave a very sweet sent to my gloves. Here they showed us (as they use to
show to curious strangers) the Dukes Treasure (as they call it) namely, vessels
of gold and silver, Roses hallowed by the Pope (which these Princes hold for
rich presents); many chambers and galleries, having a sweet prospect upon the
Arno, and adorned with pictures and statuaes, notable for the matter, art, and
price; a most fair looking glass; a Theater for Comedies; one table of
Porphery valued at five hundred Crowns; another of Jasper stone, valued at
four hundred Crowns, a table then in the workmans hands unperfected, the
Jewels whereof they valued at fifty thousand Crowns, and the workmanship at
twelve thousand Crowns. Moreover, they showed us the pictures of the Popes of
the house of Medici; rich swords and hats, and a lather of silver to mount into
the Coach; and many notable antiquities; and certain birds of India, with many
other beautiful things, which they use to show to curious strangers, and for
the same expect some reward of them in courtesy. Among other things, I wondered
to see there the picture of Flizabeth our famous Queen: but the Duke of
Florence much esteemed her picture, for the admiration of her virtues, how
soever the malicious Papists had long endeavored to obscure her fame,
especially in those remote parts, whose slanders God turned to her greater
glory. Here they did show us the great Dukes study, called Il studiol' del gran
Duca, in which we did see most fair pictures; two chests of Crystal gilded
over; diverse statuaes, not of brass, but of mixed metals, shining here like
silver, there like gold; a cup of Amber, a little Mountain of pearls, wrought
together by the hands of Duke Francis; a Pyramid of Pearls as they grow in
oyster-shels; two knives set with Jewels, and a third Indian knife; a nail
half turned into gold by Torneser an Alchumist, the other part still remaining
Iron; a piece of gold unpolished, as it was dug out of the Mines; two
pictures of Flemings, whereof one was valued at five hundred, the other at
eight hundred Crowns; a clock of Amber; a piece of Amber falling upon a
Lizard, and retaining the lively form thereof; a stone called Vergoara that
cures poison; the head of a Turk all of pure gold; a most beautiful head of
a Turkish woman; a Table of gold, and of Jasper stone, and other Jewels, among
which one Emerald of a perfect green color, was highly valued, being round,
and almost as big as an egg, for they that kept it, reputed it worth one
hundred thousand Crowns.

Not far thence is a Palace of the noble Family of Strozzi, and another of
Alxeander great Duke of Florence, wherein is a ruined chamber, in which
certain conspirator, killed him. In the stately Church of S. Maria del (...),
are many most fair statuaes, and the pauement and outward parts of the walls,
as well of the Church, as of the steeple, are of carved Marble. And here are
kept three triple Crowns of three Popes of the Family of Medici. The tower or
steeple is very high, and in the ascent are 3 galleries round about the
outside, and it is all stately built of Marble, having four hundred forty and
nine stairs to the first gallerie. In which being most fair, and all of
Marble, the Emperor Charles the fifth supped, when he came to Florence. And
from this gallery to the second are fifty nine stairs, and from thence to the
third sixty eight stairs, where at the very top is a wonderful hollow Globe
of Brass, wherein 30 men may stand together, and upright; for it is higher
then any man, and is vulgarly called la Cupula. Another most ancient Church
lies close to this, which was of old dedicated to Mars, and now is dedicated
to S. John Baptist, and it is of around form, and has a most stately Font,
with the doors of mixed metal, much richer then Brass, and cutiously carved,
the like whereof, they say, the World yields not. And therein are to be seen
the monument of Pope John the twenty three, deposed at the Council of
Constantia, who before his Popedom was named Balthassar Cossa: the Statua of
the same Pope of mixed metal; and diverse other statuaes of the same metal
shining like gold. To conclude, in this little, but most fair Church, are kept
the monuments of the Pisanes subdued, namely, a Pillar, a Basket, and a chain,
and other notable things. Not far thence is the fair Church, called S. Maria
Nouella, upon the wall whereof this verse is written;

Sacrum pingue dabo, non macrum sacrificabo,
I will give Fatlings, not lean Sacrifice.
Which verse they observe may, by beginning with the words backward, be a true
verse, and of direct contrary sense, in this manner;

Sacrificabo macrum, non dabo pingue Sacrum:
Sacrifice lean, not Fatlings give will I.
But the Monks will not have it understood in the last sense, unprofitable to
their profession, but rather in the first, as if men were bound now to give the
Clergy their best goods, as they were of old to give the fattest sacrifice to
God. In the Church called L'Annonciata of the Angels Annuntiation to the
Virgin; the walls are round about hung with Images of men, and of men's feet and
Arms, some of wood, some of metals, which were offered to our Lady upon vow,
by those that had recovered health of body, or had been cured of diseases in
those parts. And as it cannot be expressed how much the Italians do attribute
to the virgin, so there is more concourse to this Church, then to any other. In
the Church of Saint Laurence, they keep many relikes, with incredible
reverence; and show them to the people to be adored. In a Chapel of this
Church are many fair statuaes of Marble, and one most fair erected to Duke
Alexander killed by treason, by which he is made sitting with a sad
countenance, his right hand laid to his mouth, and his left hand resting upon
his knee. And there be two statuaes of Giuliano Angelo, and Michaele Angelo,
two famous Painters and Engrauers. In another Chapel are low monuments
erected to Duke Cosmo of Medici, and to Laurence his son, who built this
Church; and to the Duchess of Cosmo, and to Duke Francis, and to his lawful
son deceased (for he had a base son yet living after his brother Ferdinando
had succeeded him) and also to Paulus Iouius, the Historian dying in the year
1574. (as I remember.) The Monument of Cosmo had this inscription in Latin; By
public consent to the Father of his Country. In a stately Chapel of this
Church is the Library of Pope Clement the seventh de Medici, full of rare greek
and latin books, but especially they show the Commentaries of Julius Caesar, a
written bible, Maps of Ptolomy drawn with lines of gold, the Hierogliphica (an
old manner of writing) of the Egyptians, and the Pandects in written hand,
brought from Pisa subdued. I dare not say that this is the same Library, which
was gathered by Lorenzo of Medici, in the year 1484. but I am most sure that I
did see these books in one of them. In this Church and the foresaid Chapel,
was also a monument erected to Duke Ferdinando then living. Near that is a
garden, in which we did see two Ostrages, and flax of India, making most strong
thread, and the herb that yields this flax, much like an Artichoke, but
far greater. In the monastery of Saint Mark, which Duke Cosmo built for
Dominican Friars, is a Chapel proper to the Family Saluiati for burial,
which is very rich with diverse colored marbles, images of brass, and
pictures, especially one rare picture of a red vale, which seemed two fingers
distant from the wall: And in this monastery is another Library of rare Books.
The Hospital of S. Maria Noua, is said to pass all others in Italy, for all
necessaries to cure and nourish the sick, and for orderly attendance, whereto
that purpose are ninety six beds in one room. Not far thence are two stables
of the Dukes, and in both of them were some thirty two horses of price.

The Duke kept fierce wild beasts in a little round house, namely, five Lions,
five Wolves, three Eagles, three Tigers (of black and gray color, not unlike
Cats, but much greater) one wild Cat (like a Tiger) Bears, Leopards (spotted
with white, black and red, and used sometimes for hunting), an Indian Mouse
(with a head like our Mise, but a long hairie tail, so fierce and big, that it
would easily kill one of our Cats), and wild Boares And the Keeper told us,
that the Duke and Duchess, with many Gentlemen, came lately to behold them,
(sitting in a gallery built round about the yard) at which time certain men
were put into little frames of wood, running upon wheels, to provoke these
beasts to anger; which being let loose in the Courtyard, walked without
offending one the other, and to this end these men had many fire-workes, from
which the most fierce of them did run away, only the wild Boar rushed upon
one of these frames wheeling toward him, and not only turned it over, but rent
out a board with his Tuske, so as all the company were afraid left the man who
lay therein should perish.

Upon the walls of the Church S. Croce, is a monument of Arno ouerflowiug, with
this in scription in the Italian tongue: In the year 1333. the water of Arno
ouerflowed to this height, and in the year 1557. to this, yet higher. In this
Church is the sepulcher of Michael Angelo Bonoritio, a most famous Engrauer,
Painter, and Bullder, whose bones were brought from Rome, at the instance of
Duke Cosmo, in the year 1570, and laid here. It is most certain that he was
most skillful in those Arts; and of him the Italians greatly boast, and with
all tell much of his fantastic humors: namely, that when he painted the
Popes Chapel, (whereof I spoke in discribing the Popes Palace) that he first
obtained the Popes promise, that no man should come in, till the work were
finished; and understanding that the Pope had broken this promise, coming in
himself with some Cardinals at the back door of the vestery, that he being
then to paint the last Judgment, did so lively figure the Pope and the
Cardinal (that tempted him) amongst the Devils, as every man might easily know
them. But that is abominable, which the Romans of the better sort seriously
tell of him, that he being to paint a crucifix for the Pope, when he came to
express the lively actions of the passion; hired a Porter to be fastened upon a
Cross, and at that very time stabbed him with a penknife, and while he was
dying, made a rare piece of work for the Art, but infamous for the murder:
and that hereupon he was banished Rome, and went to the Court of the Duke of
Vrbino, where he was entertained with much honor. And they report also that
when he was recalled to Rome with pardon of that fault, the Duchess of Vrbino
being bold upon her former acquaintance, should entreat him at his leisure to
paint all the Saints for her: and that he to show that so great a task should
not be imposed upon a workman of his sort, should satisfy this request, or
rather put it off with a rude and uncivil jest, sending her the picture of a
man's privy part, most artificially painted, and praying her to take in good
part the Father of all the Saines, till he could at leisure send their pictures.

In the house of John Bolena a Flemming, and an excellent engrauer, I did see
yet unperfected a horse-mans statua of brass, fifteen else high, the belly of
the horse being capable of 24. men, whereof four might lie in the throat; and
this horse was made as going in the high way, putting forward the near foot
before, and the far foot behind, and standing upon the other two, which
statua was to be erected to Duke Cosmo, being valued at 18. thousand crowns.
Also another foot statua of white marble, which was to be erected to Duke
Ferdinand then living. When I had seen these things within the walls, and about
the same, I went out to near places, to view other rarities; and I and my two
Dutch consorts, each of us hired a horse for a giulio and a half by the day.
Early in the morning we went out by the plain lying on the west side, and came
to Pratoline, the Pratoline.
Dukes famous garden, seven miles from the City, the conduits whereof for water
if a man well consider, he may justly say of the gardens of Italy, as Mounster
says of the Towns of Valesia, that their water costs them more then their
wine. This garden is divided into two enclosures, compassed with stone walls. In
the upper enclosure is a statua of a Giant, with a curled beard, like a
Monster, some forty six else high, whose great belly will receive many men at
once, and by the same are the Images of many Nimphos, all which cast out water
abundantly. Near the same are many pleasant fishponds, and there is a Cave
under the earth leading three miles to the Fountain of water, from whence by
many pipes the waters are brought to serve the works of these Gardens. There
is a Fountain which has the name of a Laberinth close by it. And a Fountain
of Jupiter and Iru distilling water; the Fountain of the Bear; the Fountain
of AEsculapius; and the Fountain of Bersia. I call these by the name of
Fountains, vulgarly called Fontana, which are buildings of stone, adorned with
many carved Images distilling water, and such are placed in most parts of Italy
in the marketplaces, open and uncovered: but in this and like Gardens, these
Fountains are wrought within little houses, which house is vulgarly called
grotta, that is, Cave (or Den), yet are they not built under the earth, but
above in the manner of a Cave. It remains I should speak of the lower Garden,
which is much more beautiful the^ the upper: for at the first entrance, there
is a Palace of little compass, but stately building, being of a round form,
the midst whereof contains the great chamber, larger then the other rooms,
which round about the same are little, but beautiful, and richly furnished for
private retreit. From under all the stairs of the Palace, and the pauements
round about, with the turning of a cock, spoutes of water rise up in great
force. For in respect of the heat of the Country, they take great pleasure to
wet the passengers in this sort. Under the Palace there is a Cave, vulgarly
called la grotta Maggiore, (which and like Conduits made as is abouesaid, I
will hereafter call fountains, because they are so vulgarly called.) In the
said Cave, a head of marble distilleth water; and two trees by the turning of a
cock shed waters abundantly, and a little globe is turned about by Cupid,
where the Images of Duckes dabble in the water, and then look round about
them; and in the midst of a marble table is an instrument, which with great
art and force, drives water into any furthest part of the Cave. So many and so
diverse are the castings of the water, as the most wary man cannot escape
wetting, where they make sport to betray all lookers on in that kind. Near
this, and under the Palace, is a Bath, the walls whereof shine with glistering
stones, and therein is a table of Alablaster. Near this is a cave strongly
built, yet by Art so made, as you would fear to enter it, lest great stones
should fall upon your head: and here by the turning of a pipe, certain images
of Nymphs are carried by the water out of the Cave, and in again, as if they
had life, no water being seen: and in this Cave seeming ruinous, are the most
curious Images of many beasts that ever I did see. In the next fountain, with
the turning of a Cock, the unseen waters cause a noise like thunder, and
presently a great shower of rain falls. But among all the Caves or Fountains
under the Palace, one is most fair and large, at the one end whereof, upon
the turning of a cock, by the same motion of water unseen, the Image of Fame
does loudly sound a Trumpet, while the image of a Clown puts a dish into
the water, and taking up water, presents it to the Image of a Tiger, which
dringeth the same up, and then moves his head, and looks round about with his
eyes, which is as often done as they please, who have the skill to order the
Cock At the other end of that Cave, is the Image of Syrinx with her fingers
half turned into reeds; and right against that, is the Image of Pan sitting
upon a stool, with a wreathed pipe in his hand, and Syrinx beckening to Pan,
to play upon the pipe, Pan puts away his stool with one hand, then standing on
foot, plays upon his pipe, and this done, looks upon his mistress, as if he
desired thanks or a kiss for his pains: and then takes his stool again, and
sits down with a sad countenance. I know not that any place in the World
affoords such rare sights in this kind; but lest I should be tedious, it shall
suffice only to name the other Images and Caves. As you go down from the
Palace, you shall first see the Cave of AEolus, another of Parnassus, where,
with the turning of a cock, a pair of Organs does make sweet music; and
there is a head which together with the eyes in moved to and fro by the unseen
water, and there is a pleasant shade with many statuaes (or Images) curiously
carved, and there the Duke does many times eat. The third fountain is called
Il villano, that is, the Clown. The fourth la pestaria, that is, the
fish pond, where a Ducke of India having four wings, did swim in the water.
The fifth La lauandara, the Laundresse, where the statua of a woman with the
turning of a Cock, beats a bucke, turning the clothes up and down with her
hand and the battledor, wherewith she beats them in the water. The sixth
vulgarly Caccioli, contains vessels to keep the water cold. The seventh Del
Rosso. The eight Grotta Copito, and in this Cave on all sides are marble
chaires, whereupon passengers willingly sit after their walking: but as soon as
they lightly press some of the seats, a paile of water falls upon his head that
sits upon it; besides the pauement is of marble, and therein many stones are so
placed, as lightly touched with a man's foot, they cast up water into his very
face and eyes. There be also well wrought Images, of a Serpent biting the
finger of a Man, and of a Toade creeping to and fro, and of a Dragons head
bowing down to drink water, which presently it vomits up again. The ninth Il
satiro, the Satire. The tenth La mascara, a woman with a vizard. To conclude,
there is a large cage of birds, made of wier, and open to the air, in which
are birds of all kinds and many Countries, not only singing to delight the
ear, but of most pleasant and diverse colors, to delight the eye.

Returning from this garden, we rode to the Dukes Palace, called La Petraia,
where at that time he held his Court, (such as I shall in due place relate) and
there we did see Duke Ferdinando, and his Duchess, daughter to the Duke of
Loraine, and the young Princes and Princesses of the house of Medici walking
into the Garden.

Thence we rode in our return to Florence, to another Palace of the Dukes,
called Il Castello, being two miles distant from Florence: in the Garden
whereof we did see a fair Oak, called la Quercetta, to the top whereof we
ascended by stairs, and there with the turning of a cock, the water sprung up
on all sides. There is a Fountain, or a statua of a woman, made of mixed
metal (richer then brass; called vulgarly di Bronzo,) and this statua shed
water from all the hairs of the head, and there be seats which cast out water
when they are set upon. Here in another Cave are diverse Images of beasts of
Marble, curiously wrought, namely, of Elephants, Camels, Sheep, Hearts, Wolves,
and many other beasts, admirable for the engrauers work. Here our guide
slipped into a corner, which was only free from the fall of waters, and
presently turning a cock powered upon us a shower of rain, and there with did
wet those that had most warily kept themselves from wetting at all the other
fountains. This Garden was full of pleasant hills and shades of Cipresse
trees, and had three Cesternes of Marble to keep water. Having now spoken of
all the Dukes Palaces within and near the City, give me leave to relate by
others report, that the Duke has another Palace ten miles distant from
Florence, called Il Poggio, which he built for the pleasure of hunting.

This day being thus spent, we returned to Florence; and the next day we went
out on foot by the South Gate, to the stately Monastery of the Carthusians,
called la Certosa, having in our company Italian Gentlemen, who caused us to
be well entertained there, and invited to dinner in their public Refectory,
where we had great cheer of fish, Pastry, and Sallats, but no flesh, which
those Friars never eat, at least not publicly. I made mention of this
Monastery in my journey from Sienna to Florence, at which time those that did
penance about Easter, flocked thither in great troops, and now our Italian
Consorts gave us the means to view the same. The Church is stately built, and
the seats of the Chauncell are of Nut-tree. They did show us the statua of
Saint Chrysostom to the middle of silver, whose relikes also they keep, and
they showed us one of the pots in which they said Christ turned water into Wine
in Cana of Galily, (whereof the Papists show many.) Also a statua of Saint
Dennis Areopagita, of silver, and like relikes kept there. These Friars
profess great austeritie in Religion, and are tied to keep silence, not
Pithagoricall for some years, but perpetual, the lay-brethren excepted, who
do the manual works of the house. They never eat flesh, for such is their
rule, which if they break, yet they do it not in the public place of eating
The Priest having sung Mass, does after it many times bow down his head, and
then falls prostrate on his face, praying. Each Friar has four cells or
chambers, and his private Garden planted with fruit trees, and therein a
private well. They have no beds, but sleep upon straw, and eat privately In
their own Celles, only eating together in the public rooms on the feast
days, so as they may easily in private break this vow of not eating flesh, if
they list. To conclude, they give large alms to the poor, and thus by show of
holiness, getting great riches from Laymens gift, they think to deserve heaven,
by giving them (as the proverb is) a pig of their own sow. The seat of this
Monastery is very pleasant, upon a Hill or little Mountain. Hence we returned
to Florence.

All the Cities of Italy have many houses wherein strangers may hire Chambers,
called Camere locanti; and in Florence there be only three or four public
Innes, all in one street for daily passengers, and three huoses like
Colleges, called Albergi, for those that make long stay in the City, wherein
they may hire Chambers for ten giulij the month, the host being tied, after the
manner of Italy, besides their Chamber and bed, to dress their meat, and
find them linen. I living after this fashion, remember these rates of things
bought: for a pound of Almons vulgarly vna lira di Mandole, one giulio: a pound
of great grapes dried, and called Susini six creitzers, two pigeons one
giulio, that is eight creitzers; two Apricotts a quatrine; a pound of Mutton,
fourteen fifteen or sixteen quatrines; a pound of Lamb twelve quatrines;
two eggs five or six quatrines, a pound of Raisons or less grapes dried two
baelli; and of another kind, called Passere, six baelli; two Hens forty or
fifty sols; two Capons sixty sols; two Apples one quatrine, and seven Apples,
one baello; an Orange two quatrines; two Citrones one baello; a pound of dry
figs seven or ten quatrines; a pound of the greatest reasons, or dried
Grapes called Sebibi, twelve quatrnies, and the best kind eighteen quatrines;
a pound of Rice fourteen or fifteen quatrines; a vessel called boccale, of
Oil, twelve crietzer or baelli (being all one); a pound of butter, containing
twelve ounces, two giulij, each ounce being seven quatrines; two ounces and a
half of sugar five baelli; an ounce of Nutmegs six baelli, a pound of Walnuts
twelve quatrines; two little fresh cheeses, called Recotti, thirteen
quatrines; a fit proportion of any herb for sallats one quatrine; and little
proportions of any spice one quatrine, which proportion you may increase as you
list. And I being lodged in the Albergo of the golden keys, called Allechiaui
d'oro nel'chiasso di (...) Beuigliane, paid for my chamber by the month twelve
giulij or reali; and moreover for salt at table five Crietzeri or baelli. And
in these Albergi, he that desires to live at an ordinary, without trouble to
buy his meat, vulgarly In dozina, shall pay for each meal two giulij, and if
he stay long, shall pay no more for two meals. And they were wont to give a
stranger his chamber and diet in these houses for ten Crowns the month,
each Crown being ten giulij.

I being purposed to live in the State of Florence this Summer, especially
desired to spend my time in learning the Italian tongue, reputed the most pure
in those parts; to which end I resolved to return to Sienna, and live in that
University: but because many Dutch and English Gentlemen lived there, which
were of my acquaintance, and solitary conuersing with the Italians best fitted
my purpose, I rather chose to live at the Castle S. Casciano, being a pleasant
seat, and lying eight miles from Florence, in the way to San' Casciano.
Sienna. And because I lived in a public Inn, and in a great highway, and
was shortly to pass through the Duchy of Millan, subject to the Spaniards,
who then had war with England, I did, for the avoiding of danger in that
journey, give out that I was a Dutchman: but I stayed here much longer then I
purposed, for it happened at this time, that the Roman Inquisitors pursuing an
English Gentleman, who had escaped their hands at Rome, did in stead of him
cast another English Gentleman into prison, who then lay at Sienna, and was not
much unlike him. And howsoever the first Gentleman escaping, the second was
shortly set fiee, yet this chance made inee make less haste to Sienna; besides
that I had my diet here at an easy rate, spending not above on Giulio each
meal, and yet having such meat as I most desired, neately dressed, and being
diligently attended: but especially the most pleasing conversation of a
Gentleman dwelling there, called Nicolao della Rocca, made me most unwilling to
leave that Castle, and the rather because he had made me acquainted with a
learned Kinsman of his Raphaele Columbano a Florentine. And I freely confess,
that the courtesy and manifold virtues of this Gentleman Nicolao della Rocca,
then took such impression in me, as I shall not only so long as I live
dearly love him, and his memory, but be glad to do any pleasure to his least
friend, or any Florentine, as well for their general good desert, as for his
sake more specially. He was my companion in viewing the pleasures of this
Territory, where among other things I did see many delightful Groves (vulgarly
Boschetti), Nets to catch birds ( Ragnaij), Gardens for that purpose (
Vccellart), al belonging to the Noble Florentine Families of Buondelmonte, and
Guicciardini, having Palaces near adjoining (of which sports I shall more
largely speak in the due place, treating of the Italian exercises.) And to
make the delights of my stay in this place more particularly justified, and to
explane some events therein mentioned, I will add two Epistles, which I then
writ of this subject, the first from this place, the second from Florence,
after I was departed from this Castle, and these being written in Italian, I
will also turn into English.

All' Illre Sigr Il Sigr T. H. Nobile Inghlese mio ossmo, A Pisa in Casaa di
Messier T. A.
MAndato ch io hebbi le meie lettere a la vulta di vos' Signoria, stetti di
lane fin' hora sempre in su l'occhi and l'orecchie (non senza rincrescimento
della tardanza) badando le suoe. Queste beanedette lettere tanto badate and
hormai capitate, spieghai con tanta furia, non che fretta, che piu non hebbe
may l'affamato di mettersi a tauola. E lodato sia Iddio, poiche s' e indugiato
vn' pezzo, finalmente il parto s'e fatto maschio, che tanti and cosi varij sono
i soggetti proposti da lei, che paiano rechiedere risposta distesa. Onde io che
son' scarico d' ogni impedimento, and sto sfacendato nella villa, come vn'
Romito nel deserto, mi stendero (con sopportatione pero delle suoe orecchie)
nel rispondere a tutti i particolari d' esse. E prima le diro raguaglio piu
minutamente del caso Siennese. Sappia dunque che pochi giorni fa, il Sigr. G.
M. con tutto che se fosse publicamente impacciato in fatti di Stato, non dimeno
per cauarsi il capriccio, trauestito da Suizzero, and par troppo (come mi
pareua) contrafatto, voise arrischiarsi d'andar' da Fiorenza a Roma. Il viaggio
gli riusci commoda(...)c e, pero non s'era piu presto tornato a Sienna, and di
la (con suoa buona ventura) senza punto d tardanza messosi in camino la volta
di Fiorenza, che dal'Inquisitori Romani sopragi^^se un mandato al Podesta di
Sienna di farlo prigione. Hora auenne ch'il Sigr G. L. stando a Sienna and
essendo (come sa lei) grandone, a aere allegro and hauendo altri contrasegni
della suoa barba and cera, fu preso dai Sbirri, and per l'Inquisitori messo in
prigione. Dove seppe con tal'discretione portarsi che loro auuedutosi d'hauerlo
pigliato cosi in escambio, gli resero la liberia, laquale good stando a Sienna
fin' hora. Ma quel mandato passando olire, arrivo fin' a Fiorenza, dove il Sig'
G M. per via d'vn' amico in Corte (non dico gia ch' il gran Ducane fosse
cons^^euole) essendone informato di sera in su l' Aue-Maria, diede subito a le
gambe, tenendo la volta di Paduoa, in tal fretta che pareua proprio volar' di
la dell' Apennino senza a le Ringratiato (...) il cielo che sia fugito a
saluamento, che con tutto che a noi altri Todeschi rileua nulla, pure anch' io
come un forestiero in attristo and ho viuo risentimento delle disgratie d'
altri che da suoi amici and dalla patria sono lontani. Non posso tenir le risa
quando m' imagino gli f^^ i salti ch' egli fa sopre le montose scoglie. I
contadini deuono pensar' ch' egli vada a la caccia d' i Caprioli, che forse non
s' accorgeranno quante fiate egli riuolge gli ovcchi sopra le spalle, and ad
ogni passo guata,di paura a che qualche Veltro Romano non se gli auentasse
adosso L'importanza, ch' egli non se faccia securo sotto qualche frasca, dove
per ogni picciol' vento che soffi^, protra essere tradito: che non fermandosi
per strada, vil' do saluo, inteso che gli biacchi Romani per tracciar' in Stato
d' i Veneti, poco, in State d'i Veneti, poco, di la dell' Alpi, nulla vagliano.
Hora che vada egli a buon' viaggio and vi diro fuora di burla, ch'io a la prima
senti gran' dispiaecre di questa percossa, finche intese le debt nuoue, mi
son'rihauuto. Del resto, buon' per loro, che questo gli sia accaduto nel'State
Fiorentino, che altramente i Preti l'arebbino fatto vn'mal scherzo. Tal sia di
questo. Hora per ristorarci, ragionamo vn' poco d' Orlando. E' quanto a la
vostra gran buona lingua Toscana (respondendoui capo per capo), vedete come non
e melsenza Mosche ne vostra lettra (per gratiosa che sia,) senza suoe punture
and fianchate. Puo far il cielo, come si puo capitar' male per essere
frainteso. Ch'io burla di voi? Dio non voglia ch'io burla d'amici miei may may
may: Mi rallegro ben co^^^^i tal' volta, etche volete ch' io faccia ^oi? non
conoscendo altro soggetto delle lettre di trattenemento, che Cortigianie O
baie. S' io pensassi che l' oreste scritto da buon' senno, mi verrebbe talmente
la Senapa al naso, che sarei per cozzar' col cappo contra il muro. Ma son'
chiarissimo, che conquesta brigha m' habbitate volsuto dar' la baia, per farmi
montar' in bestia contra mi stesso. Dunque vi replico, che malgrado vostra mi
stupiscio ancora d'i vostri Toscanismi, non ch'io pensi ch'abbiate auanzato
Petrarcha Dante,Boccacio, con quelli altri maestri della' fauella volgare, ma
che d'vn Nouizo siate riuscito vn' gran' Dottore, hauendoui fatto gran'
profitto senza ch'io me n' auedesse, si non in quel tratto che me ue deste
saggio per le vostre tanto garbate and gentile lettere. Talmente ch' il torto e
vostro, d'esserui apigliato all parole non al senso mio. Doglieteni poi di voi
stesso per quel' disagio ch' il scriuere nella lingua Toscana vi possa recare,
ch'io in Sul' ragionar' he cauato da vostra bocca propria, che questo vi
sarebbe caro, and da part mia spero coglierne frutto, dandoui occasion di
segnar' le meie scorrettioni, and di farmi part di quei vostri belli passi di
Lasco. Il che vi suplico far' meco a la libera, and in cito mostrarmi quanto mi
vogliate been. Conquesta risposta state cheto, sinon, fo giuro d'assassino, che
vi lodero tanto in sul' viso, che vine verra rossore. Passo inanzi, done mi
motteggiate, d'hauer messo quel' Oime a bella posta per far mostra eloquenza,
and fat professione d' essere schifo de lo scriuere per vergogna del vostro
rozzo stilo. Buona fe: Riconosco l'Ironia. Contentateui and godeteui nel' seno
senza trionfaruine, ch' io vicedo volentieri in ogni fatto d'ingegno, pure che
mi sia lecito di parreggiarui d'amore. Ma per vindicarmi di vostre sferzate,
and accioche non crediate ch' io cagliassi affatto per vostre bravery
Toscanesche, m'ingregnero di riuolgere la colpa che m'imputate in su le spalle
vostre. Et penso durarci poca satica, poiche voi sopra quella medesima
parolina, Oime, hauete fatto vn' si bel' discorso, che vi debbano hauer' vna
dolce inuidia gli valenti Teologi, i quali pero hanno il grido, poter' d' ogni
poco di soggetto ragionar' dalla leuata infin' al tramontar' del sole. Mi pare
poich' andate troppo animosamente a la volta d'i Ciarletani, non curando di
farui nemice queste gentaccie, a che se si aia nell' vnghie senza essere
ben'prouisto di Copia verborum, mi racomando, che in quanto al' menar' la
lingua, non hanno pari. Dauanzo la confidenza della lingua sciolta, and della
prontozza d'ingegno, vitrasporta a dir' molto male contra la cosa piu garbata
che altra che si sia nel mondo, cioe lettre di trattenemento. Per leuarui
questo errore, succintamente diro. Le cose che piu s'adoperano ci deuono essere
piu care. L'aere che ci nodrisce, sopra ogni cosa si pregia. Il pan' and il
vino, senza chi non si puo essere, piu si procacciano, che fasiani, tordi, O
quaglie! Tali sono le lettre sopradette, ch' in ogni gentil' brigata piu si
ragiona di cortesia, d'Amore, di ciancie, che del piattire, o maneggiar'il
stato. Et per non fasti dirui con infiniti argomenti: l'Arte and l'ingegno
del'Oratare, si mostrano nella rarita and sterilita della materia che si
tratta, come nel' lodar' l'Asina, nel' dispregiar' le scientie, e cose simile.
Ora per lettre di facende, non e huomo di si grossa pasta, che non le spedisca
destramente: la narratione del' biosogno, un Miracomando, and bello finito.
Maquelle altre, se non siano abellite con l'inuentiono, and quasi lisciate con
certe strauaganzo, riescono fracide and di poca lode al scrittore. E' vero, ch'
i Secretarij, Notaij, and tali gente facendate, scorticandosi (per modo di
dire) ne lo scriuere, and impazzan done gli ceruelli, hanno qualche pretesto di
ragione, a lamentar si d'i complementi amoreuoli. Ma voi scio perati, stando
nelle citta, and che piu importa nelli studi Toscani, doureste hor maigridare:
viuano le lettre di trattenemento, piene diparole gratiose. Hora fat voi,
andate, e si non vi pare ch'io v'habbia ben' acconciato, pigliateui spasso
dell' eloquenza contadienesca. In su' l' stringere, mi date delle Signorie per
farmi piacere, and me n' auertite ancora. O questo si. M' hauete tocco a punto
dove mi duo'e. Et non vedete ch' in Italia c'ha carestia d'ogni cosa delle
Signorie in fuora, che si danno a buona rata infino a i fachini. Tanto che si
ben' io ne fosse ambitioso, tuttauia per il souerchio godere, ne restaria
suogliato. Datemi allegramente del voi, senza parlar' in astratto con l' idei,
che non mi terro per affronto, anzi per Arra d' Amore. Io per me, uedendo che
le Signorie non vi sono a grado non vi ne daro may al'auuenire, si non in
escambio di quelle, che mi mandarete a me, and in quel caso vile rondero con
l'interesse. Quanto a le vostre offerte si calde d'amista, non mi basta l'animo
spieghare, quanto mi son' ite a sangue. Ma forza m'e responderui in present
con l'animo, fino che m'occorre farlo con l'opere: pure in quel mentre miui
impegno, and miui dono per tutto quel che porta il mio valsente Fat di me cio
che volete tenetemiui per schiauo, and si bisognasse, vendetemi a Turchi: che
volete altro? Direte poi che son' baie anche queste, and non sapete ch'il Poeta
sotto parole finte adombra il vero? Credetimi, se non volete ch' io vsa di
furiosi protestationi, perchae in ogni modo voglio che mi si creda. Parlo da
senno, commandatomi a fidanza, dove posio essere buono per vostro seruitto,
come io mi seruiro liberamento di voi, il che vedrete in effetto per la brigha
che vi da l'inclusa. Et con quaesto vi bacio le mani, and anche le guancie (a
la venetiana).

Da San' Casciano a li vinti tree di Luglio. 1594. Desso in guisa di fratello,
Fines Morysoni.


All' Illre Sigr il Sigr Nicolao Della Rocca mio ossmo, a casa suoa in San'
Casciano.
o sia consegnata a le mani, etc.
CHe possino essere consinate nelli studioli d'i Mercatanti queste faconde,
(per non dir' peggio): poiche m' hanno fatto, non dismenticarmi di V. S. (che
questo non farebbono g^amai), ma ben' a'inaugiar' troppo a farle feed della mia
dolce rime^branza di lei. Hora essendo o in su la partenza per andar' la volta
di Paduoa, mi son' mosso a scriuerle queste poche righe, con patto che non le
manda al' Academia della Crusca per essere censurate, poiche essendo io (per
dire, a Cauallo, forza e, che loro participano della confusione and del'
scompiglio in che io mi ^ruouo. E pure possible ch' vn' galant' huomo suo pare
manca della promessa? Io staua a vedere con che sicurta lei procedesse meco,
per pigliarne qualche saggio di suo amore, and l'a(peccaua parechi giorni (diro
liberamente non senza mio sconcio) per darle l' vltimi Ideij. Ma poiche,
operismomoragine, o altra cagione che si sia, questo aboccamento non
c'eriascito, ne manco ci resta mezo a reuederci per acconciar' a bocca questa
brigha Non c'ha altro remedio si non di far'pace a bell' agio per lettre. A che
debito io mentre che staro a Paduoa non mancaro da part mia, and tornato che
saro in paese mio, secondo l'occorrenze, raffazzonoro quel' poco della fauella
Toscana, che d' vn' viaggio fra tante confusione di lingue m' auanzera, and le
chiariro, ch' il suo amore mi sara assai piu cresciuto, che questa non mi sara
scemati. Duoe cose mi promano. La prima e quel' carico delle suoe cortesie
vsate verso di me, che m'ha messo in su' l' dosso, di tanto peso quanto lei sa:
loquale il Sigr Raphaele Colombani di qua anche piu m' aggraua, chi m' ha
inuitato amoreuolmente a casa suoa, m' ha menato a la Certosa, and in somma
trattomi con tanta amoreuolezza quanta non si puo dire. Io lo receuo come satto
per amor' di V. S. (che non m' inganno delli miei pochi merui) and tutta io non
lene ringratto altramente, perch in questi simili, fatti non c' ha pagha ai
parole. Il secondo ^ artello che lauoranel'mio ceruelio s' e ch' essendo, io
talmente tenuto a V. S. mi sento grauata la conscienza, a hauerla ingannata in
vn' certo particulare. Il che tanto piu mi pesa quanto piu per quel' inganno mi
si toglie affatto ogni speranza, di poter' mostra lene grati^udine, se per caso
mi se presentasse l' occasion, (della quale quanto io sia bramoso, Dio vel'
dica.) Hora per sgrauar' l' vna and sgannar l' altra a vn' tratto, per questa
charta (priuilegiata come le maschere, di non arrossire per grande che sia la
vergogna del' Patron) le fo feed ch' io son Inghlese, e non mica Todesco, come
l' ho dato ad intendere fin' hora. Et accioche non ne ritragga d' essere
abbatuto in qualche Iuntatore, o personaggio indegno di quella s^oa accoglienza
che m'ha fatta sopra modo gentile, sappia che per rispetti honor no li io m'
habbia in tal' guisa mascarato. Non dubito punto, che l'e gia hormai chiara
l'inimicitia ch' abbiano i nostri con i spagnuoli, tanto che si l' vn'
capitasse in man' dell' altro, difatto restaria prigione infino che fosse
riscattato. Hora hauendo Io da passare fra pochi giorni pel' Ducato di Milano,
mi pareua cosa sciocca di darmi a conoscere, spetialmente stando io in vn'
hosteria nella strada maestra, per dove tutti di quelle band giornalmente
passano. Ho firma speranza, che lei sia per farmi buona l' iscusa, o vero al
manco per perdonarmi l' errore. Si ricorda che le son s^ruitore piu che may, ne
posso essere piu suo che mi sono, and mantenga l' Inghlese nella suoa buona
gratia per quella suoa gentilezza propria, per laquale e stata acquistata al
Todesco: che degnandosi di commandarmi in persona d' Inghlese, mi rincuoro far'
ogni gran' cosa per amor suo, che potrebbe far' qual si voglia Todesco. Et con
questo, abbracciandola cosi da lontano, mi l' offero and racomando vna volta
per sempre. Et di nuouo le bacio le mani.

Da Fiorenza a li dieci d' Aousto, l' An' 1594. Di V. S. affettmo. seruitore,
F. M.


To the noble Gentleman M. T. H. a Gentleman of England my most respected, at
Pisa in the house of Master T. A.
AFter I had sent mine unto you, mine eyes and ears were ever attentive to
receive your answer, not without some grief that it was so long delaied.
These blessed Thus in English,
letters so much expected, are at last arrived, which I opened in as great
haste, as hungry men set down to table. And fair is our fortune, after
patient expecting, at last we have got a man-child: for so many and so diverse
are the subjects you propound, as they seem to require a large answer. And
therefore I that am as much at leisure in the Country, as an Hermit in the
Desert, will enlarge my self (with your patience) to answer all the
particulars. And first I will give you an account of the chance at Sienna.
Know then that of late Master W. M. howsoever he had publicly employed
himself here in matters of State, yet to satisfy his own humor, would
needs venture to go from Florence to Rome, apparelled like a Switzer, and (as
it seemed to me) too much disguised. His journey fell out well, yet he was no
sooner returned to Sienna, and from thence (by good adventure) gone toward
Florence, but a Mandate came from the Inquisitors of Rome to put him in prison
at Sienna. Now it happened, that Master W. L. lying then at Sienna, and being
(as you know) high of stature, and of cheerful countenance, and having other
marks of his beard and face, was taken by the Scrgiamts, and imprisoned by the
Inquisitors of Sienna. Where he carried himself with that discretion, as they
perceiving they had mistaken him, set him at liberty, which he now enioyes at
Sienna. But the Mandate passing forward came to Florence, where Master W. M.
having notice thereof in the evening about Aue Marie time, by a friend in Court
(I say not with the Dukes priuitie,) presently took him to his heels toward
Paduoa, in such haste, as he seemed to fly over the Apennine without wings.
And now (God be praised) he is in safety For howsoever this chance imports
not us that are Dutchmen, yet my self as a stranger, am sorry for any
disaduentures happening to others, who are far from their friends and
Country. I cannot hold from laughing, when I imagine with my self, what large
steps he makes over the rockey Mountains. The Country people will think
that he hunts for Kiddes, not marking how often he looks back, for fear
least some Roman Greyhound should lay hold on him behind. The maine doubt is,
that he think not himself safe, where he may be betrayed; for if he stay
not by the way, I dare assure you of his safety; the Roman Hounds having
little skill to hunt in the State of Venice, and none at all beyond the Alps.
Now let him go on his happy voyage, and I will tell you without jest, that I
was much astonished at this accident, till I was restored by understanding this
happy event. It was well for them that this happened in the State of Florence,
for otherwise the Priests would have sifted them like bran. So much for them.
Now for pastime, let us talk a little of Orlando. And that I may answer you
from point to point, first, concerning your excellent Tuscan language; see how
there is never honv without stinging Bees, neither are your loving letters
without their exceptions. How soon a man may be blamed, being misunderstood.
Should I jest at you? sure I never jest at my friends, sometimes I am merry
with them, and what would you have me do, knowing no other subject of idle
letters, but complement and mirth. If I thought you had written this in
earnest, I should take such pepper in the nose, as I should be ready to run
my head against the wall: but I am most certain you have picked this quarrel
with me, to make me angry with my self. Therefore I reply howsoever you
take it, that I am still amassed at your Tuscan eloquence, not that I think you
pass Petrarch Dante, and Baccaceo, and the other great Masters of that
language, but that of a nouice, you are become a Doctor, before I could
perceive it, had you not given me this taste thereof by your gentle letters.
So as you are in the wrong, taking my words and not my meaning; and blame your
self for the trouble you have in answering me in the Italian Tongue, since I
understood from your own mouth, that you would willingly exchange such
letters, which for my part will be profitable to me, giving you occasion to
correct my errors, and to impart unto me the eloquent phrases of Lasco. And
this I pray you do freely with me, and therein show me how much you love me.
Be content with this answer, otherwise (I swear by no beggars) I will praise
you so much to your face, as I will make you blush. I go forward, and come to
your quip, that I began my letters with the word (Alas) to show my cloquence,
and that you were ashamed to write to me for your rude style. Very good, I
find the Irony: content your self that I gladly yield to you in all points
of wit, so it may be lawful for me to equal you in love. Yet to revenge this
frump, and that you may not think I am daunted with your Toscan bravery, I
will attempt to cast that upon your own shoulders, which you impute to me, and
this I think to do with ease, since upon this one little word (Alas) you have
made so fair a discourse, as you may justly be envied by our great Divines,
who upon the least subject are held able to discourse from morning till night.
Again, me thinks you are somewhat too bold with the Mountibankes, not caring
to make them your enemies, into whose hands if you fall, without being well
stored with Copia verborum, woe be to you, for you know they are most skillful
Fencers with the tongue. Moreover, the confidence of your skill in this tongue,
transports you to speak ill of the most gentle and delightful thing in the
world, namely, of complementing letters. And to cure you of this error, I will
briefly remember you. That the things of greatest use, are most dear unto us.
The air that nourishes us, is most of all dear. All men seek more for bread
and wine, without which they cannot live, then for Phesants, Black-birds or
Quails: such are letters of complement: for in every gentle company, there is
more discourse of courtesy, love, and toies, then of Law or State matters. And
not to be tedious with many arguments. The art and wit of the Orator is most
showed in the barrenness of the subject whereof he speaks, as in praising the
Ass, dispraising liberal sciences, and in like subjects. Now for letters of
business, no man is so blockish that cannot easily dispatch them; when he has
told the business, and bid farewell, all is done. But if letters of complement
be not beautified with invention, they are dull, and the writer deserves small
praise. It is true, that Secretaries, and Scriueners, tired with writing of
business, have some reason to declame against letters of complement, but you
being at leisure, and living in a City, yea, in an University of Toscany,
should say with me, well fare letters of complement, full of gracious words.
Go too now, and if you think I have not well fitted you, heareafter make your
self sport with our Country eloquence. Toward the conclusion, you give me
many Master-ships (or worships) to do me pleasure, and you remember me of it,
least I should not see it. Indeed you have now hit me just where my pain lies,
yet you know nothing is so cheap in Italy as masterships, which are
plentifully given to very Porters, so as if I loved them well, yet the very
plenty of them, would make them irksome. Write you to me without any speaking
of Masterships in the third person, which I will take for no disgrace, 'but
rather for a pledge of your love. And for my part, since these titles are
unpleasing to you, I will hence forward send you no more of them, except it be
in exchange of those you shall send me, in which case I will pay you with
usury. Touching your affectionate offers of love to me, I cannot express how
I take them to heart, but for the present I can return you nothing but words,
till occasion serves to witness my love in action, and in the mean time I
leave my self at the stake with you, yea, I give my self to you, all that
little I am worth, do with me what you please, keep me for your servant, and
if need he, sell me to the Turks: what would you have more? You will say
also that this is written in jest, yet you know that Poets under fained words
shadow the truth. Believe me, except you will have me use furious
protestations, for I will and must be believed. I speak in good earnest,
command me with security, where I am good for your service, for my self will
freely make bold with you, as in effect you may see in the trouble I give you
by the enclosed. And so I kiss your hands, and also your cheeks after the
manner of Venice.

From Saint Casciano this 23 of July, 1594. The same, as your brother, F. M.


To the noble Sigr. the Sigr. Nicolao della Rocca my most respected, at his
house in Saint Casciano; or to his hands.
LEt this foolish business (not to say worse) be confined to Merchants
countinghouses, since it has made me, not forget you (which it can never do,)
but to use too great delay in giving you testimony of my kind remembrance of
you. Now being ready to take horse for my journey to Paduoa, I thought good to
write these few lines unto you, with condition that you send them not to be
censured in the Academy della Crusea, for my self being thus removing, they
must needs participate the confusion in which I am for the present. Is it
possible that a brave Gentleman like your self should fail of his promise? I
stood looking with what security you would proceed with me, to take it for
an evidence of your love, and expected many days (I will say freely not
without some inconvenience) to have the happiness to see you ere I went. But
since either by your forgetfulness, or other reason best known to you, this
our meeting has not succeeded, and there is no more hope that we should meet
to reconcile this quarrel, there is no other remedy but to make our peace at
leisure by exchange of letters. In which duty (for my part) I will not fail,
so long as I shall stay at Paduoa. And when I shall be returned into my
Country, I will upon all occasions, scour up that little Toscane language,
which after my long journey through confusion of tongues shall be remaining
unto me, to make it appear to you, that howsoever my language be decreased,
yet my hearty love toward you shall evermore increase. Two things lie heavy
upon me; first the burden of your courtesies, wherewith you have loded me, as
you best know, and wherewith Sigr Raphaele Colombani has newly charged me here,
by inuiting me friendly to his house, by leading me to the Monastery Certosa,
and by entartaining me with unspeakable kindness, which I take as done for your
sake, (knowing my own small desert), and yet I do not so much as thank you
for it, because I know such favors can not be repaied with words. The second
thing which lies heavy upon me, is that being thus bound unto you, I am
ashamed to have deceived you in one point, which so much the more grieves me,
because this deceit has utterly taken from me all hope, to express my love to
you hereafter upon any happy occasion, then which nothing should be more
pleasing to me. Now at once to disburden my self, and to clear you for being
any longer deceived, by this paper (having the privilege of Maskers vizards,
which never blush, howsoever their Masters have cause to be ashamed), I let
you know, that I am an Englishman, and not a Dutchman, as I have hitherto
caused my self to be reputed. And lest you should thereby doubt, that you
have cast your love upon a Iugler, or a man unworthy your so great favors;
know that for honorable respects I have thus concealed my Country. I am sure
you know, that the English have war with the Spaniardes, so as either falling
into the hands of the other, should be lawful prisoners upon Ransom, and I
being within few days to pass through the Dutchey of Milan, did therefore
think it no wisdom to make my self known, especially lying in a public
Inn, upon the beaten highway, which all men of those parts daily pass. I am
confident that you will make good my excuse, or at least pardon my error;
remember that I am your servant more then ever, neither can be more yours then
I am; and maintain the Englishman in your good favor, by the same
gentleness, in which you vouchsafed it to me as a Dutchman: for in whatsoever
you shall command me as an Englishman, my heart serves me to do you as
faithful service, as any Dutchman whatsoever. And so embracing you thus far
off, I offer and recommend my self to you once for all. And again I kiss
your hands.

From Florence this tenth of August, 1594. Your affectionate servant, F. M.


I had taken my journey from Saint Casciano to Florence, that I might receive
money, and now upon a sudden occasion being to return to Sienna, and from
thence to Padoua, I hired a horse to Sienna, but have omitted what I paid for
the same, and so I returned to Sienna by the same way I came, namely, to
Trauernelle fifteen miles, and to Sienna seventeen, which journey for others
instruction I will particularly set down.

To Saint Casciano eight miles; to Colmo four; to Barbarino six; to
Puodibonzo six; to Sienna five, being in all thirty two miles.

The situation of Sienna is most pleasant, upon a high hill, and the form not
unlike to an earthen vessel, broad in the bottom, and narrow at the mouth,
which narrow part lies toward the West, where coming from Florence, you enter
by the Gate Camolea. Near the same is a Fort, wherein the great Duke keeps
soldiers, and there without the gate is the Church of Saint Marie, whether was
great concourse of people for devotion. From hence to the East gate, leading
toward Rome, the streets lie even and plain, though the City be seated upon
a mount; and in this part toward the East, the City is broadest, and from this
gate a man may see the Castle Redicofini, forty miles distant, upon the
confines of the States of the Pope and the great Duke. Between the said gates,
as it were in the center of the City, lies a most fair Marketplace, in the
form of an Oyster, and lying hollow as the shell thereof is. And there is a
stately Palace of the Senate, built when the City was free; in the front
whereof is a statua of mixed metal, vulgarly called di bronzo, which seems to
be apparelled, having on the head a broad hat and this statua strikes the
hour of the clock. On the South-East side within the walls lies a large
field, which was then sowed with corn, yet the City has few or no Gardens
within the wall.

Not far from the walls on the South Side, lies the Cathedral Church
vulgarly called Il Domo, and howsoever it be little, it seemed to me the
fairest Church in Italy. It has but one door, to which you ascend by long and
broad Marble stairs. All the pauement is most beautiful of engraven Marble,
adorned with Images of the five Sybills; and there be in this Church some
twenty Images of mixed metal, besides many other of Marble. The seats of the
Chauncell are of Walnut-tree, curiously carved; and all the roof of the Church
is painted of sky color, and all set with stars. Upon the inside, and in
the upper part of the Church, are the Images of the Popes, wrought in stone to
the shoulders, set round about, where between Gregory the fourth, and Adrian
the second, I wondered to see the head of Pope Ioane, with the inscription
naming her, especially in a City so near Rome. Having noted this at Sienna,
and after my coming Pobe Ioane. This monument (as I heard) was defaced in the
time of Pope Clement the eighth then living.
into England reading the same, I searched Histories to see how they agreed in
this matter, which the Papists cannot hear with patience. And I found in
approved Authors, that after the said Gregory the fourth, succeeded Sergius the
second (confirmed by the Emperor Lotharius, in the year 844); then Leo the
fourth (dying in the year 854); then Pope Ioane (setting two years and few
months, and dying in the year 856); then Benedict the third, then Nicholas
the Great (in the year 858); then the foresaid Adrian the second (in the year
867.) And if any man ask, why the heads of Sergins the second, Leo the fourth,
Benedict the third, and Nicholas the great being omitted, the head of Pope
Ioane should stand between the heads of Gregory the fourth, and Adrian the
second, I leaving the curious search thereof to them that list dispute it, as a
matter nothing to my purpose, can suddenly give no other reason thereof, then
that I conjecture the said heads were set on the other side of the Church: for
at that time I was content to note the same, without casting this doubt, and so
not searching to satisfy my self therein. But I dare boldly affirm, that my
self and the two Dutch-gentlemen my consorts, did see this monument in this
Church near the door on the right hand as we came in. And since that time, I
have conferred with diverse worthy English Gentlemen, who affirmed that they did
see the same. In this Church are two sepulchers, one of Pope Alexander the
third, the other of Pope Pius the second. And in a Chapel of this Church, is
a most fair Font.

From this Church discending by slope and steep streets toward the
South-west wall, you shall come to a most pleasant Fountain, called Font
Branda, without the South-gate, of which the Citizens prouerbially say, that if
a stranger drink thereof, he shall so love Sienna, as he shall very
unwillingly and scarce at all depart from the City. But the Florentincs in
scorn of the Siennesi, have a proverb, Chi de font Branda beue, diuenta
pazzo; He that drinks of the fountain Branda, becomes a fool. It casts out
water by nine mouths of stone, and there be three places where Laundresses
wash, and near the same is a pleasant grove. On the same South side toward
the Sea, some few miles from the Town, lies a fenny plain called La Maremma,
most fruitful in corn, but infamous for ill air; so as the place being
forsaken by all Italians, is tilled by the Grisons, coming down from the
Alps to this place in winter time, when the Alphes are all covered with snow,
and in the spring time returning back into their own Country Sienna it self
is much subject to rain, so as a Spaniard coming often thither in rainy
weather, did write, or is said to have written to his friend, for a wonder,
that it always rained at Sienna. On the North-east side of the City, two large
fields within the walls, are sowed with corn: All the pauement of the streets
is of brick, which lasts the longer, because there be neither carts nor
coaches, but all burdens are carried upon the backs of Asses. There is a
stately Palace which Pope Pius the second built, who was a Citizen of Sienna,
of the Family of Picciolomini, and there in the Mount Oliuet the passion of
Christ is curiously graven. It is vulgarly and truly said, that Sienna abounds
with Fountains, Towers, and fair Weomen: There is no better place to live in
through all Italy, then the state of Florence, and more specially the most
sweet City of Sienna. The Citizens whereof are most courteous, and they have
many public meetings of the young weomen and Virgins to dance, where the
door is open for any Citizen or stranger.

Besides Sienna is commended for the best language, and in the same, and in all
the state of Florence, men live safe from robberies, and from the murders,
which are frequent in Lombardy. Add that they have delicate diet, at Florence
at a reasonable rate, and in the rest of the territory at a very cheap rate.
Our Hostess at Sienna gave us clean linen often changed both at bed and
board, a large chamber, a good bed, a linen canopy often changed, and did
provide our meat very cleanly; for which each man paid no morethen ten giulij
by the month. We bought our own meat, and I remember that the price of oil
was twenty five lires the barrel, that I paid for as much wood as an Ass
would bear four baelli. They have butter, but not so good as in the valley of
Arno, and they sell it twenty two sols the ounce. The Magistrate sets a price
upon every thing to be sold in the market, neither dare any man sell ought,
before his price be set; and upon the Butchers stals, a bill is set of the
prices at which they must sell their meat, so as a stranger cannot be deceived.
The price of wheat was 120. lires the Moggio, containing forty eight English
peckes, and each lire is a giulio and a half. The Toscanes hold Rams stones
fried for a great dainty, which they call 1 a Granella, and sell it after a
giulio the pound, at Sienna commonly they eat Kids flesh for three baeli the
pound, and a whole Kidde for four giulij and a half, Mutton two baeli and a
half the pound, a Kiddes head three baeli, Bacon eighteen quatrines the
pound, Cheese a giulio the pound, little birds a quatrine a piece, a vessel of
wine containing thirty two boccali and a half for ten giulij and two baeli.

The eighteenth of November in the year 1594, I rode forty miles to Lucca, and
ten Anno 1594 Nou. 18.
to Pisa. If any man desire to know the right way from Sienna to Pisa, I will
set it down by relation of a friend, who rode the same in a day and night,
without intermission, being fifty miles; the first seven through mountains,
thirteen miles through pleasant hills, and thirty miles in a plain, tilled
after the Lombard fashion, with corn, and vines growing upon Elmes, and he
reported the way to be most safe by night as well as day, though a man were
known to carry money. But I return to my own journey from Sienna, where I
hired a horse to Lucca for fourteen giulij; and the first day in the morning
I rode twenty two miles to Castle Fiorentine, in a narrow plain, between
fruitful hills of pasture and corn. By the way I lighted at Castle Certaldo,
seated upon a mount, that I might see the sepulcher of John Boccacio, upon
which these verses (of his own invention while he lived) were engraven:

Hac sub Mole iacent cineres ac ossa Iohannis,
Men's sedet ante Deum meritis ornatalaboris;
Mortalis vitae genitor Boccacius illi:
Patria Certaldo, studium fuit alma Poesis.
Under this Pile John's bones and ashes lie,
His soul at rest enioies his labors hire;
Borne at Certald, he studied Poesy,
Boccacio was the surname of his Sire.
Collucius Pierius has added more in old Lombard letters, in the year 1375,
and upon the very sepulcher other writings are raced out, under which this is
written in Latin: Lact antius Theobaldus when he was Podesta (or Governor) at
Certaldo for the people of Florence, admiring his pleasant wit and quick
invention, did for the renewing of his memory, erect this monument to him at
his own charge, and that by fines imposed in the year 1500. Also his statua
without a beard carved in marble, was set upon his Toome. At Castle Fiorentino
I paid three giulij and a half for my dinner, and one giulio for my
horse-meate.

After dinner I rode fifteen miles to Ponte Capiano, where every horse of
Carriers laded, and of Vetturines hired, paieth two giulij to the Duke, which
tax they say the Duke imposed, to withdraw Merchants from trading that way,
leading to Lucca. All the way the fields were tilled on the Lombard fashion,
with corn, and vines growing upon Elmes. Before we had rode two miles, I
passed the River Arno, and paid half a giulio for my passage. At Ponte Capiano
I paid ten baeli for my supper upon reckoning, and twelve baeli for oats for
my horse, and eight baeli for hay, straw, and stable room. The second day in
the morning I rode through the like way, (having mountains on my right hand
toward the North) seven miles in the state of Florence, and six miles to Lucca
in that free state. This City I have discribed before; and here I paid for my
dinner upon reckoning two giulij and a half. After dinner I hired a horse for
two giulij, and rode through like way, in a fruitful plain, five miles in the
state of Lucca, and then five miles more to Pisa, passing into that state over
a high mountain, and the rest of the way lying through fenny grounds. This
City I have discribed before, and here I paid for my supper three giulij or
reali.

And because the passage by sea was more dangerous from Ligorno to Genoa, I
hired a horse to Lirigi for one piastro or silver crown. The first day I rode
twelve miles, through an open plain, to Via Regia, and there passing out of
the state of Florence into that of Lucca, I rode eight miles through a thick
wood, where the quarters of thieves were newly hung up, who few days before
had robbed and almost killed a Frenchman; and then entering again the state of
Florence, I rode one mile to Pietra Santa, and five miles more in the same
state of Florence, and one mile and a half in the state of Lucca, and half a
mile to Masso in the state of the Prince of Masso, who is a Marquess of the
Family of Malaspina. All this way being through a plain, tilled after the
manner of Lombardy, with mountains of Chesse-nuts on the right hand, having in
all rode this day twenty eight miles.

In this City of Masso the Postmaster stayed us from going any further,
pretending to give us new horses, because those we had were hired of his man at
Pisa: but the true cause was, that we might lodge in his house that night, to
which my companions agreed, but my self being destrous to see the quarries of
marble at Carrara, took of him half the piastro I had paid at Pisa, and so I
left my horse. Then turning out of the way, I went on foot three miles to
Carara, through woody mountains abounding with Chesse-nuts. This Town is
subject to the Prince of Masso, and is famous for the marble, which is much
preferred before other, as well for the exceeding whitenes of some stones, as
for the length of pillars and tables dug thence, which madeit much esteemed
at Rome in the time of the free state, and of the Empire; and by reason it lies
near the sea, the stones are more easily conuaied to Rome, or else where. In
one of the quarries called Pianella, I did see many stones dug out, which
were as white as snow, and other quarries have veins of all colors: and they
sell as much marble as an Ox will draw for twenty sols; but if it be carved
there, the price is greater, according to the workmanship. Each quarry is
proper to some private man, and if any man dig in another man's quarry, they
fine him at twenty crowns, or more according to the damage. When I beheld the
beauty of Men and Weomen in these parts, which seemed to me greater then in any
other part of Italy, I remembered the Patriarch Jacob, who laid party colored
rods in the watring troughes, when the Ewes were in heat, to make them bring
party colored lambs: and I thought by the same reason and force of nature,
that they who dug these white marbles, might have a more beautiful race.
The Innes of this Town were base, and only fit to entertain Artificers: and
here I paid for a poor supper of herbs, eggs, and chessenuts, ten baeli.

The second day in the morning, I went forward in my journey on foot, and that
alone, first three miles to the confines of the Marquesate of Masso, then four
miles in the Territory of Genoa, to a strong Fort belonging to that State, and
seated in a plain; and I paid for my passage over the River Magra two baeli:
and after I went three miles over mountains, abounding with Olive trees, and
the tree Lecha yielding a fruit like the Olive, and so I came to Lirigi, a
Haven Town upon the Tirrhene sea, whence we were to sail by the shore to
Genoa.

There we expected passengers and a good wind for some few days. And at the
same time there was the French Cardinal of Ioyeuse, who was to sail into
France. I paid each night four bolinei for my bed, and eating upon reckoning,
I spent less then two giulij by the day. They use to make this voyage to Genoa
in little Barks called Fregate, and a less kind of boats called Feluce, and
each night to strike into some Port upon the Coast. I passed in a Feluca, and
paid three reali for my passage.

The first day we sailed in a short space from Lirigi to Wien, a Haven not
far distant, under a promontory, at the entrance into this sea, but the wind
being high, and our boat little, and somewhat over loaded, and the mariners
themselves showing no great confidence, we durst not put forth to sail any
further. I paid a cauelotto, that is four bolinei for my bed with a companion,
and six bolinei for my supper. The second day the wind being somewhat calmed,
we sailed not without danger thirty miles, to Sestri another Haven. This day
was the day of Saint Katherine, the Patroness of Mariners, who think that no
man was ever drowned that day, but they observe that after that day the winds
use to grow boisterous. I would willingly have gone by land, but this Coast
being all of high Rocks, there was no good high way over them, nor commodity
for passage. Yet you cannot imagine a more fruitful and pleasant place, then
the narrow valleys and hills lying upon the sea side: only this coast lying
upon the south sun; breathing fire out of Affricke, is subject to great heat
in summer time. This Territory does so abound with fruitful trees and flowers,
as the markets are furnished with them in the very month of December. It
yields noble wines; namely, Lavernazza, and in villages called Cinqueterre,
the wine called Le lagrime di Christo, that is, the tears of Christ, which is
so pleasant, as the Ialians say, that a Dutchman tasting it, did greatly lament
that Christ had not wept in his Conntrey. At Sestri we had delicate white bread
and excellent wine, (as likewise in all this journey) and all things at a
cheap rate, and each man spent there nine bolinei.

The third day we sailed ten miles over an arm of the sea, to Porto Fino,
called of old the Haven Delfinus, now they call it Fino for the goodness
thereof. On the East side of this Promontory the sea was most calm, but when
we passed to the West side, the winds were so high, and the waves so troubled,
as we had almost been cast away, and were by force driven upon the side of a
Rock, where my consorts trusted to their crucifixes, vows, and beads, (upon
which they number their prayers), and my self creeping upon hands and knees,
with great difficulty first got to the top of the rock, where being in safety,
the name of the Haven came in my mind, which answers to my Christian name,
and thanking God for my deliverance from this danger, I was glad that I escaped
christening in this Haven of my own name. After my other consorts climbed to
me, and thence we went on foot ten miles by the twilight of the evening and
Moon light, to a village, where each man upon reckoning paid six bolinei for
his supper.

The next morning early before day break, we went forward on foot, our
consorts of Genoa often warning us to be silent for fear of thieves, and after
we had gone six miles, we came by the breaking of the day to Genoa. By the way
we did see a Village Genoa
all ruined, and they told us that Turkish Pirates landing suddenly, had
spoiled the same and burnt it, and had pulled down the Churches and Altars,
and among other Prisoners, had taken away a most fair Virgin from her
bridegroomes side, who had married her the day before.

The description of Genoa.


(A) The Fort of the sea bank, (B) Statuaes erected to the builders thereof,
(C) the Palace of Andreetta D' Auria, without the walls upon the sea, (D) the
statua of Andrea d' Auria upon the wall, (E) the new Fort, (F) the new street
most stately built, (G) the Cathedral Church, (K) Saint Mathewes Church, (L)
the Dukes Palace, (M) the inner Haven, (N) the Tower Faro and the ruins of
the Fort called La Briglia, that is, the bridle, (PPPP) three gates of the
City, and the fourth leading to the Haven. On the North-east side where the sea
lies (P) upon the City we entered, and at the very entrance, we did see two
stately Palaces of Georgio d' Auria, and a Gentleman called Seba, and six
other Palaces, but less stately. Gtnoa is seated upon the sides of mountains
and hills, declining from the highest mountain on the Westside, toward the
East, and to the sea side. Upon the foresaid North, and North-east side,
werelong suburbs, and two gates, and without the walls a River falls from the
Western mountains toward the East, and so into the Sea. On the South Side is
the outward Haven, in the form of a half moon, upon the horn whereof
toward the East, lies the sea bank, called La Mola, about 600. paces long,
which keeps off the waves of the sea that beat upon the City on the East
side. And in the midst of this bank is a (A) Fort built to detend the Navy.
There also are certain statuaes (B) erected to the founders of the building.
And in the furthest corner of this haven toward the City, is an (M) inner
haven, compassed with walls, where the galleys lie under a covered biniding.
Near that is the Armory of the City, and the chief gally in the Port called, La
Reale, the Regal, was about seucnty five walking paces long, and they said that
four hundred Rowers belonged to the same. At the other horn of the outward
Port toward the south-west, is the (N) tower Faro upon firm land, kept by
certain watchmen, who by night hang out lights to direct the mariners at sea.
Near that lies the Fort Lahiigita, that is, the bridle, which the French King
Lewis the twelfth fortified: but the Citizens: expelling the French out of the
City, demolished the same. Thence as you walk toward the City, and before you
enter into the gates, lies; C) the stately Palace of Andreetta D' Auria (or
Doria) the building whereof, the garden, the stairs to descend to the sea, the
banqueting house, and diverse open galleries, are of Kingly magnificence. Not
far thence upon the wall is a (D) statua erected to Andrea (...) Aurta, late
Admiral to the Spanish Fleet. Then you come to the (P) gate of the City, and
not far thence within the walls, is (P) ano her gate leading to the inner Haven,
where the Galleys lie. Not far thence is the most fair Cathedral (G)
Church, in which is an ancient monument of metal, dug out of the adiovning
valley, which has an old inscription, showing the antiquity of the City-Not
far thence is the (K) Church Saint Matthew, wherein the Prinets of the Family
of (...) have long had their monuments. Near that lies the (L) Dukes Palace,
not his private Palace, but public, which is kept by a guard of Dutchmen, who
also have the keeping of two of the strongest gates of the City. In the Court
yard of this Palace, is a foot ftatua, armed and of white marble, erected to
the foresaid Andrea d' Aurta, by the Senate with the title of Father of his
Country, because ne had lately restored the Citizens to their liberty. And in
an upper chamber called Sala brutta, are diverse statuaes in the habits of
Senators, erected to Paulo Spinola, to Eattista Grimaldo, and Ansidio Gri. S.
C. On the West side without the walls are Palaces of Gentlemen, almost
innumerable and in the highest part of the City, was the new Castle (E) most
strongly fortified, which the Citizens demolished to preserve their liberty. A
little lower and within the walls, is the new street, vulgarly (F) La strada
Nuona, lying from the West to the North-east, each house whereof is built with
Kingly magnificence, neither do I think that any City in the world has so
fair a street. These houses or rather Palaces may be seen by strangers, for
the Gentlemen's servants keeping them; willingly show them to any desiring that
favor, as well in expectance of reward, as for the honor of their Master and
Country. My self did see the Palace of Giouan Battista d' Auria, the
building whereof was very stately, and the garden not only most pleasant, but
adorned with statuaes and fountains. And in one of the chambers were the
Gentlemen's Arms, whereof some were of pure silver gilded over The City has
certain inner gates, which always stand open and show that the circuit of the
City is now much increased and upon these gates are chains of iron, for
remembrance (as they say) of their liberty once lost.

The whole circuit of the City, excepting the Mola, is five miles; and save
that the inner Haven strikes somewhat into the City, it seems almost of a
round form. No doubt the City is of great antiquity, which some say was built
by Gianus King of Italy, and of him had the name; and that the Promontory
(...), was of old called the vineyard of Gianus. The monument in the Cathedral
Church witnesses that this City flcrished among the old Cities of Italy, about
300. years before Christ's incarnation. Others will have the City named of a
Latin word, as the gate of Italy. It is fortified toward the sea with all art,
and toward the land as well by nature as art, there being but one way to come
to it, and that over high and steep rocks. The streets are narrow, the
Palaces are stately built of marble, and the other houses of free stone, five
or six stories high, and the windows are glased, which is rare in Italy. The
streets are paued with flint, and the houses of the suburbs are almost as
fair as within the City. Corals are fished in this sea toward Sardinia and
Corsica Islands, not far distant, and the ounce thereof is here sold for three
lires. Now in the very month of December, the markets were full of summer
flowers, herbs, and fruits, whereof I shall speak more in the due place. It
is prouerbially said of this City; Montagne senza legni, Mar' senza pesci,
huomini senza feed, done senza vergogna, Mori bianchi, Genoa superba: That is,
Mountains without wood, Sea without fish, Men without faith, Weomen without
shame, white Moors, Genoa the proud. In good earnest, they report that the
Merchants being not bound by writing, make little account to break their
promise, and the French liberty of the Weomen makes the Italians judge them
without shame, and as Florence is called the fair for the building, so I
think Genoa is called the proud.

The chaires called Seggioli, whereof I spoke in the description of Naples, are
also in use here, in which the Citizens of both sexes are carried upon two
Porters shoulders, through the streets lying upon the sides of hills, the
chaires being covered with a curtain drawn, and having glass windows, so as
they may see all men, and themselves be unseen. Besides, in regard of the
narrow streets, and the steep mountains on all sides, they use horse litters
here in stead of Coaches. The men in their feasting, dancing, and free
conversation, and the weomen in their apparel, come nearer to the French then
any other Italians. Here I paid one reale by the day for my chamber, and
dressing my meat, which I bought my self, all things being at good rate in the
City, as in the Country. There is such store of fruits, as they give a citron
for a quatrine, and two Oranges for a quatrine; and to end in a word, my diet
here was for the manner and price not much differing from the same at Pisa.

They account ninety miles from Genoa to Milan, which journey I went on foot,
willingly exposing my self to this trouble, partly to spare my purse in the
bottom, partly to pass more safely in this disguise through the Duchy of
Milan, subject to the Spaniards, who then had wars with the English. The
first day after dinner, I walked all alone, seven miles to Ponte Decimo, by the
bank of a river between stony mountains, but frequently inhabited. And I
paid eight soldi for my supper on reckoning, and a cauellotto (that is four
bolinei) for my bed. The second day I went on foot eleven miles, ascending all
the way high mountains, and tired with the difficulty of the journey, only
refreshed with the hope of an easy descent from the mountains: and being very
hungry by the way, I chanced to meet with a begging Friar of the Order of Saint
Francis, who having victuals in his bag, gave me to eat, but would receive no
money for it; saying, it was against their rule to handle any money. Thence I
walked seven miles down those mountains, in the territory of Genoa to
Gauidon, and four miles more through a plain and dirty way, in the Duchy of
Milan to Seraualle, where I paid four cauellotti (that is sixteen bolinei)
for my supper and my bed. The third day in the morning, I walked fourteen
miles in a dirty way to Tortona, where I paid one soldo for tribute (as all
passengers pay) and seven soldi for my dinner upon reckoning. Thence I walked
after dinner in a dirty way five miles to Ponte Curon, and further in a way
somewhat fairer five miles to Voghera. All this way in the Duchy of Milan, was
in a most fruitful plain of corn, with Elmes planted in the furrows, and
vines growing upon them, and such is the way in all Lombardy, and to the very
City of Paduoa. At Voghera I paid three reali for my supper and bed.

And here by chance I sound an English Merchant in the Inn, who talking
rashly, did voluntarily (without being examined whence he was) profess
himself to be a Dutchman, and my self in disguised poor habit, sitting at
the lower end of the table, and speaking to him in the Dutch language, he was
forced for want of the language, to say that he was a Dutchman, but borne upon
the confines of France; and knowing no no other language but the French,
whereupon I speaking to him in the French tongue, he had as little skill in
that, as in the Dutch; so as I might perceive that he dissembled his Country,
and being not willing to press him, as having been my self often forced in
like sort to dissemble my Country, did forbear to speak any more to him in
the Dutch or French tongue, and we began to discourse in Italian, wherein he
had spoken little before he uttered these words, Iome ne repentiua: that is,
Irepented my self thereof, whereas an Italian would have said, Iome ne pentiua,
by which fillable added by him, I presently knew he was an English man. Supper
being ended, he perceiving himself to have been thus pressed by a poor
fellow, sitting at the lower end of the table, took me for a spy, and feared
I should betray him, and presently went into the stable, where he commanded his
servant to saddle their horses, that they might ride all night toward Genoa.
But I following him, and boldly speaking English to him, he was soon content
to stay all night, and to take me in my homely apparel for his bedfellow.

Having passed this night merrily, I hired a horse the fourth day for four
cauellotti, and rode eleven miles to Bastia, then I walked on foot seven miles
to Paula, and being Paula.
afoote-man, I paid five foldi for my passage over the River Po. This journey
hitherto was in a dirty way, having plain fields on both sides, tilled after
the foresaid manner of Lombordy and many rich pastures, which are rare in all
other parts of Italy. Entering Paula I passed a stately bridge, built over the
River (...), which runs from the West to the East, and after six miles
falls into the River Po. This bridge was two hundred walking prices long, and
so broad as two carts might pass together, and was built of stone, and covered
over the head with a roof, with open air on the sides, and supported with
pillars. The City lies in length from the East to the West, and a new fair
street diuides it in the midst, by the breadth from the South to the North. On
the West side of this street are two market places, one greater then the other.
In the less is a (...) called Regia Sole, of mixed metal, (vulgarly Dibronzo)
which some write to have been made with art magic, by the Emperor
Anastasius, for his own image, and to haud been placed by him upon the pillar
of the soldiers at Rauenna, where he kept his Court, and after Rauenna was
taken by Charles the great, that this Image being to be carried into France,
was by the way left here. Others will have it the statua of the Emperor
Antoninus Pias: for they are deceived who think it the statua of Odoacer King
of the Lombards, who has another statua in this market place. On the (...)
West side of the foresaid new street toward the North-side, is the Castle
which John Galiacius first Duke of Milon built, and the same Dukes Library; but
almost void of Books, and in this Castle lies a Garrison of Spaniards: Near
that is the Church of Saint (...), in a Chappol whereof, is a stately
Sepulcher, in which they say the bones of that Saint were laid; being brought
thither out of the Island Sardinia. And this sepulcher is of marble curiously
engraven, and worthy to be sought out and beheld. There I did read this
inscription written in Latin upon another sepulcher: The French King Francis
the first being taken by Caesar's Army near Pauia, the foureteenth of
Febru(...), among other Lords these were Lorayne Francis Duke of Lorayne,
Richard de la Poole Englishman, and Duke of Suffolk, banished by his tyrant
King Henry the (...). At last Charles Parken of Morley, kinseman of the said
Richard, banished out of England for the Catholic Faith by Queen Elizabeth,
and made Bishop hereby the (...) of Phillip King of Spain, ded out of his
small means erect this Monument to him, etc. In a Cloister of the same Church,
is a Sepulcher of this Charles Parken Bishop, decensed in the year (...).
There is another Monument of (...), King of Lombardy; and another of the Bishop
(...), with this inscription in Latin; Most (...) in the Greek and Latin
langues, who being Consul, was sent hither into bamshment. And with these
verses,

^
^
Has Death (...) ought? my goodness mounts the Skies,
Great is my same, my work lives in men's eyes.
On the East side of the said new street, and toward the North, lies the
Church of Saint Francis, where is a monument of Baldus the Civil Lawyer, and
they show his head of an extraordinary bigness. Without the walls of the
City on the North side, is a piece of ground of some twenty miles circuit,
compasted with a wall in many places broken down, vulgarly called Il Barco,
that is, the Park which John Galiacius Duke of Milan walled in to keep fallow
Dear, Hares, and Conies: but at this day it is divided into Pastures and
plowed fields. On the furthest side of this Park from the City, is the place
where the French King, Francis the first, was taken prisoner by the Army of the
Emperor Charles the fifth. Not far thence is the Monastery of the
Carthusians, called la Certosa, where the building of the Church, the stones of
Marble, the engrauing, the top covered with Lead, part of the great Altar of
Alablaster (highly valued), the Sepulcher of John Galiacius first Duke of
Millan, and the reuenew of the Church exceeding three hundred thousand Crowns
by the year, deserve admiration. The buildings of the City are of brick, and
seem to be of great antiquity. The Emperor Charles the fourth in the year
1361, at the instance of Galiacius the second, gave this City the privileges
of an University. The King of Spain permits jews to dwell here: but they may
not stay in Milan above twenty four hours. This City was the seat of the
Kings of Lombardy, whose old Castle is to be seen near the Church of Saint
Michael. After it was subject to the Kings of Italy, and the Berengarij being
overcome, it was subject to the Emperor Otho the first, by right of his wife,
and successively to the Emperors, with some show of a free City, which
freedom that they might more fully attain, they willingly yielded themselves
in the year 254 to the Archbishop of Rauenna. After they were subject to
usurping Citizens, whom the Vicounts of Milan expelled, and so joined this
City to their State, which together with the Dukedom of Milan came to the
Spaniards hands, in the time of the Emperor Charles the fifth. I lodged here
in a fair Inn, but common to the baser fort, the Hostess whereof was a
Masculine woman, and by the night letting in Ruffines to drink, I was not a
little afraid of some violence to be offered me in my chamber; whereupon I
firmly resolved with my self, to lodge ever after in the best Inn, and of
best fame, especially in Lombardy, infamous for murders, and here I paid for
my supper and my bed three reali.

I went on foot from Pauia, going forth at the Nothwest Gate twenty miles
through Milano.
rich Pastures, to Milan, called la grande, that is, The great, of the large
circuit thereof. The City has the name of Olanus, a Tuscane Captain; or the
Latin word media lana, that is, Half wool, of those kind of stuffes made in
the City. It is large, populous, and very rich, seated in a Plain (as all
Lombardy lies) and that most firtile, and by the commodity of a little River
brought to the City by the French, and almost compassing the same, it
abounds also with foreign Merchandise. Of old it was the seat of many Roman
Emperors: but the History of the City being contained in the History of
Italy, I will only remember, that the Archbishop thereof long time challenged
the Primacie in the Italian Church, never acknowledging the Bishop of Rome for
superior; and that he crowned the Emperor with a Crown of Iron, after the
people of Milan had approved him: That the King of the Ostrogothes had the same
Crown set upon his head after his victory, which Crown (they say) was given,
in sign that the Empire and the command of Milan were to be won by Iron. That
the Citizens of Milan were often Rebels to the Emperors. That the Vicounts
made vicarij of the City, did by little and little subject the Territory, and
the City with title of Duke of Milan. That the Family of Vicounts being
extinct in Duke Philip about the year 1447, the Dukes of Orleance by right of
their Mother, and Francis Sforza by the right of his wife, challenged the
inheritance of the Dukedom: but the Emperor thought the same to be fallen
back to his right. That Francis Sforza was by the people first made Captain
of their forces, and then chosen Duke. That the French King Francis the first,
defending the right of the Dukes of Orleans, cast Sforza out of the Dukedom in
the year 1449. That the Emperor Charles the sift, casting out the French in
the vere 1521, first restored Sforza to the Dukedom, with some restraint of
his power; but he being dead, invaded the Dukedom himself, whereupon after many
contentions and battles, it came to his successors the Kings of Spain, of the
family of Austria, to whom at this day it is subject.

The City is of a round for me, and has nine gates, the building shows
antiquity, and the houses are of brick and low built excepting some stately
Palaces (such as is that of the Duke of Terra Noua) the streets are broad,
and the pauement of brick, raised in the midst with broad stones.

When I came to the City on foot, I made offer to enter at the Gate called
Genese on the South side: but the Guard refused me as a footman to pasle into
the City; and lest by my importunity I should have made them look more
narrowly into my quality, (they being commonly expert men, to find out any
disguised person), I went back into the Suburbs, as it I would lodge there;
but as soon as I was out of sight, I walked further toward the East,
compaising a great Fen, and so joining my self to some Citizens, returning
from walking in the fields, I entered with them into the City, by the next
Gate on the same South side, which Gate is called Lodouico, and was only kept
by one soldier. A little Brook within the walls compasses the very center
of the City circularly; beyond which Brook, on the North-side within the
walls, not far from the Gate Zobia, is a large Meadow, wherein are no
houses: for there is the most strong Castle seated in a Plain, and kept by a
Spanish Garrison, into which no Frenchman may enter. Therefore I having gotten
so difficultly into the City, restrained my curiosity from attempting to view
this Castle, lest I should rashly expose my self to great danger. Further
toward the North without the Gate Renza, is a large Hospital for those that
are sick of the plague, having more chimnies (as they say) then the year has
days. Not tar from the Gate Genese, is the Church of S. Laurence, which os
old was dedicated to Hercules by the Emperor Maximinianus Erculeus buried in
the same; and it has a rare Image of the Virgin Marie, and 16 stately Marble
Pillars, and the building is Magnificent. The Emperor Theodosius is said to
have given to S. Ambrose Archbishop of Milan, one of the nails wherewith
Christ was fastened to the Cross, and the brazen Serpent that Moses lift up in
the Desert (the Image of which Serpent was of mixed metal, vulgarly called di
bronzo), and they say, that S. Ambrose left these relics in the Churches of
S. Tccla and of S. Ambrose; and the Altar under which the body of S. Ambrose
lies, is valued at 28000 Crowns. In the Church Delle Gratte, belonging to the
Been dictine Friars, not far from the Gate Zobia, is a stately Throne, and
under it an unperfected monument, which Duke Lodouico Sforza purposed to have
built for himself: but the French cast him out of his Dukedom, and he died in
France. And in this Monastery is a notable Library, and in the place where the
Friars eat, the supper of our Lord is painted with wonderful art. In the
little Chapel of S. Gottard, is the sepulcher of that Saint, whose name the
mountain of the Alps does bear, which is most famous for the difficult
passage. The great and stately Cathedral Church called Il Domo, is built all
of white marble, and supported with some 100, marble pillars, in which at this
day they sing the mass of S. Ambrose, differing from the Roman Mass, and
only agreeing therewith in the words of consecration.

From Milan to Cremona are accounted 52 miles, and I making short stay at
Milan, for the danger of my abode there, hired a horse to Cremona for a Crown
of gold wanting 8 soldi, and riding out at the Roman Gate, and bearing the
Carrier company, of whom I hired my horse, rode 12 miles the first day after
dinner to Marignano, through a plain Country of rich pastures, where I paid 3
reali for my supper. The second day I rode 30 miles to the Castle Pizighitone,
through like rich Pastures, having by the way paid 24 soldi for my dinner, and
near my iournies end 3 soldi for my passage over the River Adda, and at this
Castle 1 paid 30 soldi for my Supper. The French King Francis the first, taken
prisoner by the Emperor, in the year 1525, was for a good space kept with
much honor in the tower of this Castle. The third day in the morning 1 rode
ten miles to Cremona. The Family Pallauicini (at this day chief in the City)
when the Empire Cremona.
of Rome decayed, made themselves Lords of this City, whom Galeatius Vicount
of Milan subdued, and united the City to the State of Milan, and so by the said
Dukedom subdued by the Spaniards, it came into their subjection. The Cardinal
Francis Sfondrato, and Eusebius the writer of the Ecclesiastical History,
were borne in this City. The form of the City seems very like to a Cardinals
Hat with broad brimes, and it is seated in a Plain, one mile distant from the
River Po. We entered this City by the narrow part lying toward Milan, and
there is a most strong Fort built to keep the Citizens in awe, and kept by a
Spanish Garrison, and seated in a plain field, wherein are no other buildings
but the Fort it self. From hence going to the opposite and broader part of the
City, is a large and very fair Market place, near which is a Tower or
Steeple, of such height and beauty, as the Italians prouerbially say, One
Peter at Rome; one Haven at Ancona; one Tower at Cremona; thereby noting the
excellency. This Tower is built of brick, and has four hundred ninety and
two stairs in the ascent. Near the same is a statua of a Giant, who, they
say, was overcome by Hercules, the founder of the City; and the Citizens keep
a feast once a year, at which time with many ceremonies they adorn this
statua with rich robes. Near this Tower and Market place, lies the stately
Cathedral Church, and the fairest and richest Monastery is that of Saint
Dominick. This City has many stately Palaces, and the streets thereof are
broad and very pleasant. Here I paid thirty three soldi (that is the fourth
part of a Ducaton) for my supper.

From hence to Mantua are forty five miles, whether I hired a horse for five
lires: The first day we rode twenty two miles, where going out of the Duchy
of Milan, and passing the River Oye, we entered the Duchy of Mantua, and
then rode nine miles to Mercaria. And by the way we passed the pleasant Castle,
or rather City called Bozilia, belonging to Julius Gonzaga, being of the
Family of the Dukes of Mantua; which Castle was built with open cloisters or
arches toward the street, under which the passengers walk dry in the
greatest rain, and such are the buildings of the Cities in this Dukedom, and
in many neighbor places. By the way also in a solitary Inn I paid fifteen
soldi for my dinner, and at Mercaria I paid thirty four soldi for my supper.

The second day we rode fourteen miles to Mantua through most fruitful
fields, Mantua.
tilled after the manner of Lombardy, and in a most durtie highway. The
Histories report, that this City had the name of Manto, the daughter of
Tyresias. It is seated in the midst of Fennes or Lakes, made by the River
Mencius. The buildings are partly of Brick, partly of Free stone, and the
streets are large and clean. The form of this City is round, save that the
foresaid Lakes on the North and East-sides enter into the City, in the form
of an half Moon. Coming from Cremona I entered Mantua on the West side, by
the Gate Praedella, where is a fair street called Il Borgo. On the same side
toward the South, is the Gate Pistrella, which leads to the Dukes stately
Palace called Teye, seated some mile out of the City, and compassed with
water, where in the Giants Chamber I did see most fair pictures, and it is
built in a quadrangle only two stories high, with a low roof, after the
manner of the building of Italy. On the Southside is the Gate of (...), whence
the way lies by the bank of the Lake to a Village called Petula, two miles
distant from the City, in which, they say, that the famous Poet Virgil was
borne, and show the house where his parents dwelt. Partly on the North, and
partly on the East side, the City is compassed with Lakes, which usually are
covered with infinite number of water foul; and from these Lakes there is a
passage into the River Po, and so by water to Venice. On the North-East side is
the Gate of S. George, whence between the two Lakes is a causey two hundred
walking paces long, and beyond it a bridge of stone five hundred paces long,
like to a fair gallery, covered over the head, and supported with brick
pillars, having open windows, two paces distant one from the other, then
passing a drawbridge, you come to another causey between the said two Lakes,
which causey is two hundred forty walking paces long, before you come to firm
land. On the East side of the said bridge, and within the City, the Dukes
stately Palace lies upon the Lake, and to this Palace joins the Cathedral
Church of Saint Peter, where also is a pleasant Marketplace. There lie the
Dukes stables, and in one of them were some hundred horses for the saddle, and
in the other as many for the Coach, and he has a third stable without the
Gates, wherein is the like number of young Colts. On the North-side, at the
furthest bank of the Lake, is one only Gate, and a like bridge to pass into
the Suburbs, and there lics the way to the chief Palace of the Duke, some
few miles distant from the City, called (...), the building whereof is only
two stories hic, with a low roof, and the chief chambers were hung with
gilded leather, after the Italian manner, three skins whereof were commonly
sold for a Crown, and the Gardens of this Palace were exceeding pleasant. In
the midst of the City Mantua is a large Market place, wherein the Jews have
their shops, and sell all manner of wares, for all traffic is in their hands,
growing rich by the poverty of the Citizens; and being so much favored by the
Duke, as they dwell not in any several part of the City, but where they lift,
and in the very Marketplace; neither are they forced (as in other parts of
Italy) to wear yellow or red caps, whereby they may be known, but only a
little piece of yellow cloth on the left side of their cloakes, so as they can
hardly be distinguished from Christians, especially in their shops, where they
wear no cloakes. Such be the privileges which the Jews have gotten by
bribing (especially in the Dutchey of Sauoy) through the insatiable avarice of
our Christian Princes. Near this Marketplace is the large Church of Saint
Andrew, and the Senatehouse, in which they show two statuaes of Cupid (whereof
one is ancient, and of much greater value then the other), and a very long
Unicorns horn, and a pair of Organs of Aliblaster, besides Jewels, and
vessels of gold and silver. Not farrethence is the third Marketplace of
Justice. To conclude, at the gate of Saint Francis Church is the head of
Virgil, which the Neapolitans say (as in the description of that City I
formerly said) was stolen from the Sepulcher of Virgil, upon the Mount
Pausilip. In the Palace called dellaragione, is another statua of Virgil,
sitting at a Table of brass, as if he were writing, and crowned with Laurel.
I said formerly, that there is a passage from the Lakes into the River Po, and
so by water to Venice, and the Duke, to take his pleasure upon the water, has
a baot called Bucentoro, because it will bear some two hundred, and it is
built in the upper part like a banqueting house, having five rooms (with
glased windows) wherein the Duke and his Train do sit; and these rooms are
supported upon a boat, the Mariners that row the same, sitting under the said
rooms, the first and largest room whereof was fifteen walking paces long,
with benches on both sides; the second was eight paces long, the third five,
and the fourth likewise five paces long; the fifth was a Gallerie over the
other rooms forty paces long, and open, to which they mounted by stairs out
of the first room. And this boat does not only much differ from our Kings
barges, as well for the bigness as the rich furniture, but also is flat in the
bottom, the waters being still and calm on which it passes. These rooms
according to occasions have more or less rich hangings, when the Duke either
goes out to disport himself, or when he takes any iourny therein, (as often he
does.)

It is unlawful to wear a sword without license of the Magistrate, either at
Milan, Cremona, Mantua, or almost in any City of Italy; only at Venice and
Paduoa, and the Cities of that State, strangers may wear Swords, and only the
wearing of Pistols or short gunnes is forbidden. At Mantua I paid three reali
each meal, and being to depart thence. I was forced to take a Bill of the
Customers, by which they signify to the Guard at the gate, whether the
passenger be to go on horseback, on foot, or by coach, and what tribute he is
to pay; for which Bill a footeman paies 3. soldi, another passenger six. Thus
the Princes of italy having small Territories, do not only burden their
subjects with taxes, but all strangers, and strictly take account from the
exacters thereof.

Being to go from hence to Paduoa, we went out of the gate Saint Ceorge, and I
hired a horse from Mantua to the Castle Este for eleven lires. The first day
we passed by a Forte of the Venetians most strongly fortified upon the
consines of that State, which Fort lies upon the River Athesis, and is called
Lignaco, and rode some twenty miles through a Plain tilled after the manner of
Lombardy to Monteguiara, where I paid forty soldi, (that is two lires) for my
supper. The next morning I rode nine miles to the Castle Este, whence is the
Family of the Dukes of Ferraria, long flourishing, but now extinct. From thence
I passed by boat 15 miles to Paduoa, and paid 22 soldi for my Paduoa.
passage. This day when I returned to Paduoa, was the 14 of December, after the
new style, in the year 1594, which city and the rate of vittles there, I have
formerly described,

CHAP. IIII. Of the Sopulcher of Petrarch at Arqua. Of my journey to Vicenza,
Verona, Brescia, and Bergnmo, in Italy), then passing the Alps, to Chur,
Zurech, Solothurn, Geneua, and (in my return thence) to Berna ( in
Sweitzerland), thence to Strasburg ( in Germany), and to Chalon, to Paris, to
Roan, and to Diepe ( in France), and finally of my passagety (...) Land, to
London ( in England).
Whilst I expected the commodity of the Spring for my journey homewards, I
went to Venice to receive money there, and retaining a sufficient proportion in
my hands, I thought to make over the rest to Paris by bills of exchange, but
France having been now long wasted with civil war, I could not find one
Merchant of Venice, who had any the least Traffic at Paris. Therefore
persisting still in my obstinate purpose to return by France, I thought at
least to procure the change of this money to Geneua: And so only out of my
desire to see the City of Geneua, I resolved again to pass over the Alps
into Sweitzerland, though I had formerly seen those Towns. Then I bought an
Hungarian horse for twenty Crowns of a Dutch Gentleman newly arrived in these
parts. And while I prepared all things necessary for my journey, and expected a
sit season of the year, it came in my mind to see the Monument not far
distant of the famous Poet Francis Petrarch, and being willing to give my horse
rest, I went on foot with certain Dutch Gentlemen thirteen miles to Arqua. By
the way we did see a most fair Monastery Praia, and the Baths of Abano, the
water whereof does boil with such heat, as it would fetch off the skin being
touched.

At Arqua is the sepulcher of Fetrarch, of red marble spotted, and it has this
inscription in Latin:

To the worthy man F. P. a Laureat Poet, his son in Law Francis Lus-debro
Sauo of Milan, for their inward conversation, love, affinitte and his
succession, left this memory. Under that followed these verses:

Frigida Francisci lapis hic tegit ossa Petrarchae,
Suscipe virgo parens animam, sat virgin parce,
Fessaque iam terris, caeli requiescat in Arce.
This stone does Francis Petrarches bones enclose,
Take my soul Virgin, spare it Virgins son,
Tired on earth in heaven let it repose.
Then followed letters raced out.

MCCC (...) XX. XVIIII.

Then followed the third inscription in Latin, with his Image.

To Francis Petrarch, Paulus Valdezucus admiring his Poems, and succeeding him
in the possession of his house and fields, made this Image in the year
MDXCVII. the Ides of September.

There is also a Fountain, vulgarly called the Fountain of Petrarch, upon
which these verses are written.

Fonti numen inest, hospes venerare liquorem,
Vnde bihens cecinit digna Petrarcha Deis.
Some god dwells here, worship the sacred Spring,
Whence Petrarch drinking, heavenly Rimes did sing.
Petrarch dwelt at Arqua, and here in the same house wherein they say he dwelt,
the history of Petrarches life is painted, where the owner of the house showed
us some household stuff belonging to him, and the very skin of a Cat he
loved, which they have dried, and still keep. Here I did see his Study, (a
pleasant room, especially for the sweet prospect) and likewise a fair picture
of Lucretia ready to die. No situation can be imagined more pleasant, then that
of Arqua, lying in the mouth of Mountains abounding with Olive trees, and
opening themselves upon a fruitful plain on the East and North sides. This
plain yields nothing in pleasantnes, or in fruitfulnes to that of Capua,
famous for the corrupting of (...) Army. But it is a (...) work to praise the
Euganian hills, which so many Poets and Writers have magnified.

Upon Friday the third day of March (after the new style) in the beginning of
the year 1593, according to the Italians (beginning the year the first of
January) of the Ar. 1595.
end of the year 1594, according to the English (beginning the year upon the
twenty five of March) I turned my face to journey toward my dear Country.
And the first day I rode eighteen miles to Vicenza, through a most pleasant
plain tilled after the manner of Lombardy (where one and the same held yields
plenty of corn, and has Elm trees growing in the furrows, which support the
vines; so that one field gives bread, wine, and wood for to burn By the way my
curiosity made me turn aside two miles out of the way, that I might see a
wonderful Cave, and a most pleasant parlor at Costoza, in the house of Cesario
Irento a Gentleman of Vicenza. The Cave was large, and fit to receive diverse
bands of soldiers. The Parlor was called the prison of AEolus god of the
Winds; because there were certain mils, which in summer time draw much wind
out of hollow Caves, and disperse the same through all the chambers of the
Paliace refreshing all that dwell there with a most pleasant cool air. And
upon this Parlor this verse of Virgill was written:

AEolus hic clauso ventorum (...) cere regnat.
AEolus here in the winds prison reigns:
The City of Vicenza is a fair City compassed with a wall of brick: but the
building Vicenza.
howsoever it be very stately, is not like to that of other Cities in these
parts, in this one point, namely, that the second story of the houses hangs
over the streets, and being supported with arches, gives the passengers
shelter from rain. Here I did see a Theater for Plays, which was little, but
very fair and pleasant. In the market place there is a stately Palace, and
the monastery of Saint Corona belonging to the preaching Friars, is fairly
built, and has a rich Library; and the Friars keep for a holy relike the
Thorn wherewith Christ was crowned: The City is subject to the Venetians, and
is seated in a plain, having mountains somewhat distant on the North and
South sides. Here I paid forty soldi for my supper, and eighteen soldi for
three measures of oats, called quarterolli, and for the stable (so they call
hay straw and the stable room, and so I will hereafter call it) I paid twenty
soldi. Here I hired a horse for fifty six soldi, for a foote-man that had
attended me hither, and was to return to Paduoa.

From Vicenza I rode thirty miles to Verona, in a most pleasant plain (tilled
after the Verona.
manner of Lombardy) lying on my left hand toward Italy, farther then I could
see, and having fruitful nils on my right hand toward the Alps, abounding
with vines, growing low upon hort stakes, and yielding rich wines. I entered
Verona on the East side, by the Bishops gate called Porta del'vescono. They
write that the City was of old called Berona, by the name of the Founder
thereof; but the Friar Leander of Bologna writes that the City was built by the
Tuseans, and had the name of the Family Vera, and was after rebuilt by the
Galli Cenomani. This most fair City is built in the form of a Lute, the neck
whereof lies toward the West, on which side the River Athesis (running toward
the East) does not only compass the City, but runs almost through the center
of the body of this Lute, so as the less part of the body lies on the North
side of the River. The banks of Athesis (vulgarly called (...) Adice) are
joined together with three bridges of stone, and one of marble, and are adorned
on both sides with many ruins of an old Theater, and old triumphall arches The
City is compassed with a wall of brick, and is seated toward the South upon
the end of a large slony plain, and toward the other sides upon pleasant
hills, rising toward the distant mountains. It is not built with the houses
cast out toward the streets, and supported with Arches to avoid rain, as
other Cities are in those parts: but the building of the houses is stately, and
the Cathedral Church is remarkable for the antiquity, as likewise the Church
of Saint Anastatius for the great beauty thereof; and toward the walls the
ground lies void of houses, as the manner is in strong Towns. It has a pure
air, and is ennobled by the ciuility and ancient Nobility of the Citizens,
who are endued with a cheerful countenance, magnificent minds, and much
inclined to all good literature.

Verona was a free City under the Empire, about the year 1155, till the Family
of the Scaligeri growing great in the City, about the year 1259, did by little
and little invade the freedom of the City, and made themselves Lords over it.
At last Anthony Scaliger killing his brother Bartholmew (partner with him of
that Lordship) about the year 1381, was driven out of the City by Vicount John
Galeatius, the first Duke of Milan, and he being dead, William Scaliger, helped
by Francis Carrariensis, drove the Garrilon of Milan out of the City, in the
year 1404. But the said Francis killing the said William by poison, and the
Family of the Scaligers being then so wasted, as scarcely any one was to be
found of that name; the Venetians took occasion by this detestable treason of
the said Francis, to make the City subject to them: but their Army being
defeated by the French in the year, 1509, by a composition made between the
French King and the Emperor Maximilian, the City became subject to the said
Emperor, till the Venetians recovered the same out of his hands in the year
1517, under whose subjection the City to this day flourishes, in great
abundance of all things.

On the North-side of the City without the walls, is the mountain Baldo,
hanging over the City, and famous for the great plenty of medicinable herbs,
and upon the side of this mountain, within the walls, are no buildings, but
only a strong Fort.

On the south side lies the way to Mantua (23 miles distant,) and upon the same
side lies the foresaid stony plain, five miles long, and ennobled with many
skirmishes, battles, and victories. In this plain the Consul Caius Marius
defeated the Cimbri, and Odoacer King of the Heruli (who destroyed the Western
Empire) was defeated by Theodoricus King of the Ostrogothes, and the Dutch
Emperor Arnolphus Duke of Bauaria, was defeated by Hugh of Burgandy, then
possessing Italy. Upon the same South side within the walls, is a fair market
place, and the Palace of the Venetian Governor (which Governor in Italy is
vulgarly called Il Podesta.) And necre the walls on this side, lies a stately
Monument of an old Amphitheater, at this day little ruined, vulgarly called
Harena, and built by Luc: Flaminius, (though others say it was built by the
Emperor Octauius.) It passes in bigness all the old Amphitheaters in Italy,
and the outside thereof is of Marble, and the inner side with all the seats,
is of brick. It is of an ouall form, and the inner yard is sixety three
walking paces long, and forty eight broad, where the lowest seats are most
narrow, whence the seats arise in forty four stairs or degrees (howsoever
others write that there be only forty two degrees), and they so arise, as the
upper is still of greater circuit then the lower. And the shoppes of the
Citizens built on the outside, under the said increase of the inner circuit,
have about fifty two walking paces in breadth, which is to be added to make the
full breadth of the inside. It has eighteen gates, and between every Arch
are very fair statuaes, and the seats within the same, are said to be
capable of twenty three thousand one hundred eighty and four beholders, each
one having a foot and a half allowed for his seat. Each one of us gave two
gagetti to the keeper of this monument. Alboinus King of the Lombards, was
killed by his wife at Verona. In the Monastery of Saint Zeno is a Monument
erected to Pipin, son to Charles the Great, and between this Monastery and
the next Church, in a Church yard under the ground, is the Monument of Queen
Amalasaenta.

Barengarius King of Italy, was killed at Verona; and this City braggeth of two
famous Citizens, namely, the old Poet Catullus, and Guarinus, a late writer.
The territory of this City is most fruitful, abounding with all necessaries
for life, and more specially with rich Wines, particularly the Retian wine,
(much praised by Pliny, and preferred to the Wine of Falernum by Virgill),
which the Kings of the Goths were wont to carry with them as far as Rome.
It is of a red color and sweet, and howsoever it seems thick, more fit to be
eaten then drunk, yet it is of a most pleasant taste. The Lake Bennaeus is
much commended for the store of good Carpes, and other good fish: besides this
territory yields very good marble. Here I paid forty soldi for my supper, and
sixteen soldi for the stable, (that is for hay and straw) and eighteen soldi
for three measures of Oats. Certain Gentlemen bearing me company from Paduoa
to this City, and being to return thither, did here each of them hire a horse,
for three lires and a half to Vicenza, where they were to pay for their horse
meat.

From hence I rode fifteen miles to the Castle Peschiera, built by the old
Lords of Verona, and seated upon the Lake Bennacus. vulgarly called Il Lago di
Gardo, where they demanded of me two quatrines for the passage of a bridge: but
when I showed them my Matricula, that is, a paper, witnessing that I was a
scholar of Paduoa, they dismissed me as free of all Tributes. And in like sort
by the same writing, I was freed at Paduoa from paying six soldi, and at Verona
from paying eight soldi. I rode from this Castle seven miles to a Village,
seated upon the same Lake, famous for the pleasant territory, and the
abundance of good fish: and here I paid twenty soldi for my dinner, and eight
soldi for my horse meat. All my journey this day was in a most sweet plain,
rising still higher with fair distances, so as the ascent could hardly be
seen.

After dinner I rode eighteen miles to Brescia, which City flourished under
thelold Brescia'.
Emperors of Italy, then was subject to the Lombards and tyrant Kings of
Italy, and they being overcome, to Charles the Great, and French Governors;
then to the Western Emperors of Germany, and to the Italian family of the
Berengarij. And it obtained of the Emperor Otho the privilege to be a free
City of the Empire, till being wasted by the factions of the Guelphi and
Gibellini, the Scaligeri, a family of the same City, made themselves Lords
thereof, whom the Vicounts of Milan cast out of the City: and when Phillip
Maria Duke of Milan oppressed the City, and would not be induced to ease the
same of his great impositions, they yielded themselves in the year 1509, to
the French King, who had defeated the Venetian Army. Then by the French Kings
agreement with the Emperor Maximiltan, the City was given into the Emperors
hands; whose Nephew the Emperor Charles the fifth, restored the same to the
French King Francis the first, who likewise in the year 1517, gave the same
into the hands of the Venetians. The most fruitful territory of Brescia, has
mines of Iron and brass, and I think so many Castles, Villages, and Houses,
so little distant the one from the other, can hardly be found else where. The
Brook Garza runs through the City, which is of a round form, and is seated
for the most part in a plain, and toward the North upon the side of a
mountain, where a Tower is built, which has many houses adioining, and in
this Tower or Castle the Venctian Governor dwells, who takes an oath that he
will never go out of the same, till a new Governor be sent from Venice. The
Cities building is of brick, the streets are large, and are paued with flint.
Boniface Bembus, was a Citizen of Brescia, and the Brescians; as also the
Citizens of Bergamo, are in manners and customs more like the French their old
Lords, then the other Italians farther distant from France, and the very weomen
receive and give salutations, and converse with the French liberty, without any
offense to their husbands, which other Italians would never endure. Here I paid
forty soldi for my supper, and forty soldi for four measures of oats and for
the stable.

From hence I rode thirty two miles to Bergamo: and as the territories in this
part of Bergamo.
Italy (lying upon the South sun, which beats upon the sides of the hills and
mountains, with great reflection of heat, and upon the other side defended
from the cold winds of the North and East, by the interposition of the Alps)
are singularly fruitful and pleasant; so for the first twenty miles of this
days journey, they seemed to me more pleasant then the very plain of Capua,
yielding plenty of corn, and of vines growing upon Elmes in the furrows of
the lands, which Elmes are planted in such artificial rows, as the prospect
thereof much delights the eye. And the other twelve miles were yet more
pleasant, being tilled in like sort; and toward my iournies end, yielding most
large and rich pastures. The City Bergamo after the Roman Empire was extinct,
first obeyed the Lombards, then the French; and following the fortune of
Brescia, was sometimes subject to the Vicounts of Milan, and other Princes
(inuading their liberty which they had under the Empire) and other times was
subdued by diverse of their own Citizens, and being oppressed by the Dukes of
Milan, they yielded themselves in the year 1428, to the Venetians, whose Army
being deicated the next year by the French, this City likewise submitted it
self to them, and they being cast out of Italy, it was subjected to the
Sfortian Family, Dukes of Milan, and they being extinct, and the Emperor and
French King making war for the Dukedeme of Milan, this City in the year
1516, returned under the power of the Venetians, who at this day enjoy the same
in peace.

The City is seated upon a mountain, upon the south side whereof a Fort is
built, and under the mountain toward the East, are two large suburbs, full of
fair houses and Churches. Near the market place in the Church of Saint Mary,
is a stately sepulcher of marble, and in the monastery of the preaching Friars,
is a rich Library. These Citizens speak the Italian tongue, but more rudely
then any other of Italy. Here I paid four lires for my supper and horse-meat,
and twelve soldi for my breakefast.

From hence I took not the right way to Geneua, but declined to the way of
Chur, as well because it was more safe from robbery, as to be freed from all
dangers, by ventering again to pass through the state of Milan. When I came
from Paduoa, I was not curious to find out companions for this my long journey,
as well because I hoped to find some by the way, as for that I being now used to
converse with any Christian strangers, little cared to be solitary by the way:
but deceived of this my hope to find company, I passed all alone, not so much
as accompanied with a foote-man, over the high Alps, which I think very few
have done besides my self.

From Bergamo I rode nine miles to Trescher, where I first entered the mouth of
the Alps, and thence I rode nineteen miles to Lover, passing by many very
pleasant lakes, and by the way I paid sixteen gagetti, that is, thirty two
soldi for four horse shoes. Being to pass from hence over the steep and
snowy Alps, I caused my horse to be shod with eight sharp and three blunt
nails, for which I paid six soldi, and for my supper twenty eight, and for
three measures of oats twenty four, and for the stable eighteen soldi. The
second day I rode thirty two miles to the village Edoll, through high
mountains, and there I paid three lires for my supper and horse-meat. The
third day in the morning I rode ten miles to a village Auryga, over a most high
and steep mountain of the same name; and now I began to freeze, for cold,
though before I entered the Alps, I could hardly endure the heat of the Clime.

Hence I went forward one mile to a little Brook, which divides the territory
of the Vene: ians, and the Grysons (which (...) free people confederate with
the Cantons of Sweitzerland), and five miles further to Villa, where I paid
twenty six soldi of Venice for my dinner and horse-meat; and it being now the
time of Lent, they gave us flesh to eat, whereof I was glad as of a dainty I
could not get in Italy, neither would they gratify the Italians their
neighbors, in providing any thing else for them; so as they were forced to eat
flesh without any scruple of conscience, which this people of the reformed
religion would little have regarded. After dinner I rode ten miles to
Poschiano, through a most pleasant valley, compassed on all sides with
mountains, where I paid two berlinghotti (or two lyres of Venice) for my
supper and breakefast, (for all passengers use to break their fast in going
over the Alps) and one Berlinghotto for five measures of oats, and for the
stable. The fourth day in the morning for twelve miles I ascended the mountain
Berlina, and after rode thirteen miles to Lasagna, through a valley covered with
snow; where I paid four batzen for my supper, and as much for my breakefast,
and six batzen for two measures of oats, and two batzen for hay, straw, and
stable room.

I formerly said that I bought a horse at Paduoa, and he being a stoned horse,
and those of the territory of Venice and all Lombardy using to ride upon Mares,
which they put in the same stable with horses, it hapened at Verona, that the
Hostler let my horse loose, that the rascal might make himself sport with his
covering of the mares, which for that time I knew not, but after manifestly
found, since ever after he was (contrary to custom) very troublesome to me,
with neighing and coruetting, when soever (...) by any mares. And in this days
iourny (as when soever I passed the narrow ways of steep mountains) he was
most troublesome to me: so as this people of the Alps commonly using Mares for
their carriages, whenever I met them, I was sorced not without danger to
light from my horse, and though I held him by the bridle, yet he was so fierce,
as I could hardly keep him from falling down most steep mountains, or from
being drowned in the snow, which made me repent the buying of him, though
otherwise he was richly worth my money.

The buildings of the Grisons are of free stone, but low; and for three parts
of the year, the houses are covered with snow, and the windows thereof are
glased and large, and for three parts of the year they only open a little
quarry of glass, and presently shut it again: and all the windows for the
most part are continually covered with windows of wood, lest the heat of the
stoaue should go out, or any cold enter into the same.

The fifth day in the morning I rode twenty four Italian miles, (which the
Grisons account four miles) to the Town Lanzi, and having passed three high
mountains, and after entering into a plain, upon the next ascent of the
mountains, I might first discern the opening of them toward the North, and
then began to descend the Alps into Germany. In this passage of the Alps, I
did many times observe mountains of snow to fall from the high mountains into
the valleys, with such noise as if it had thundered: and this noise many times
preserues passengers from being over whelmed with the same, falling many times
into the very high ways.

Out of the wood near Lanzi, in the twilight of the evening; I did hear more
then a hundred Woolues howling, and because it was toward night, I had hired a
Country Churl to guide me unto the Town, who trembled for fear, and desired
me to make ready my Carbiner to shoot at them: for he said nothing terrified
them more then the smell of powder; I wished him to be of good cheer, because
the Woolues seemed busy about a prey, and the Town was near at hand,
promising that I would not forsake him, but if need were, let him ride behind
me: but fear giving him wings, so as he went as fast as my horse could trot;
within short space we came to Lanzi, where I paid sixteen batzen for my
supper, breakefast, and horse-meat.

The sixth day in the morning I rode fifteen Italian miles, (which the Grysons
call two miles) to Chur (a City, and the seat of a Bishop) through little
mountains covered with snow. The head of the River Rheine is distant from this
City as far as a footman may go in half an hour; and it lies toward the
south. The City lies in length from the Church on the North-side, toward the
South, and having spent an hour in viewing the same, I rode further four
miles of Sweitzerland, through mountains covered with snow, to Walstat; where
I paid five batzen for my supper, and (to gratify my Dutch consorts) four
batzen for drink after supper, vulgarly called Schlaffdrunke, that is, the
sleeping cup, and three batzen for my horse-meat. The seventh day in the
morning I passed two miles, (I mean always the miles of the Country) by boat
upon the Lake Walsea (that is the walled sea, because it is compassed with
mountains) and I rode two most long miles more, over hills to the little City
Rabesuele, and for the passage of my self and my horse over the Lake. I paid
seven batzen, and for oats for my horse (while I expected consorts) I paid
three creitzers. The foresaid little City, is confederate with the Sweitzar
Cantons; and here I paid eighteen batzen for my supper, with extraordinary
fare, and my breakfast and horse-meat. The eight day in the morning, after I
had ridden four hours space (for the Sweitzers miles are so long, and of so
uncertain measure, as they use to measure their iournies by hours riding, not
by miles); I wondered to hear that we had ridden but one mile. Our way was
through pleasant hills planted with vines, growing upon short stakes, as the
Dutch use to plant them. Here we dined in a village, and throughout all this
territory I paid about seven batzen a meal. After dinner having in three
hours ridden three miles, my horse weary of this long journey without so much
as a days rest, began to faint, so as I was forced in a village to give him
some two hours rest, and some prouender; and my way hitherto was through
pleasant hills, in like sort planted with vines on my right hand toward the
East, and by the side of the Lake Zurechzea, on the left hand toward the West.
And the pleasantness of this Village seated among hills planted with Vines on
the East side of the said Lake, made me as willing as my horse to rest there.
The same evening I rode further one mile to Zurech, which city I formerly
described in my former passage through Sweitzerland.

I formerly said, that for the vnpossibilitie to exchange my money from Venice
to Paris, I was forced to exchange the same to Geneua. For which cause, and out
of my desire to view that City, famous for reformation of Religion, after some
few days I took my journey thither, turning out of my high way. The first day
in the morning, through a way most pleasant for the variety of Plains, Hills,
Orchards, Woods, and Gardens, (wherein I passed by an ancient Castle of the
Counts of Habspurg), I rode in eight hours space to a Village, where I lodged,
and paid a frank and a half (French money) for my supper and horse-meate.
The second day in the morning, through a plain Heath, Woods, and hilly ground
for pasture, I rode in four hours space to a Village, and there (as in the
rest of this journey), I paid about seven batzen of Dutch money for a meal.

After dinner through like way, I rode in three hours space to Solothurn an
ancient City, and one of the Sweitzers Cantons, called in Latin Solidurum, and
it has the Solothurn.
name in both tongues, as the Tower of the Sun, or as consisting only of
Towers, whereof there be many. One Tower thereof is of great antiquity, and
upon it these verses in Latin are written:

Ex this nihil est Sollduro antiqi ius vno
Exceptis Treueris quarum ego aicta soror.
What Is older among the Celts then Solidure.
Nothing but Treir: whose sister Iam sure:
They will have this City built in the time of the Patriarch Abraham.

The third day in the morning I rode in four hours space to Arberg, by the
side of a great River called Ar, passing twice over it by two bridges. After
dinner I rode in four hours space to Morton, through pleasant miles of Corn
and Woods, and Pastures, and by the side of the Lake Mortonzra. Not far hence
Charle, Duke of Burgunay was defeated by the Sweitzers in the year 1476, and
there in a field lie the bones of the soldiers there killed. The Burgundians
were thrice beaten in one day, and here in the last battle Duke Charles also
was killed. The fourth day in the morning I rode in three hours to Bitterline,
through fruitful Corn fields and pastures, and after dinner in four hours
space I rode to Milden, and about the midst of the way did see the ruins of
the ancient City Auenza, or Auenticum, which Julius Caesar utterly raced, and
Corn was now sowed within the old circuit of the City, whereof no memory
remained, but one ruinous tower and a statua: but they say, that the Husbandmen
tilling the ground, do many times dig up old Roman coins of silver and gold:
Not far thence toward the West, lie the snowy Mountains, which divide the
Territories of Burgundy and Sweitzerland.

The fifth day in five hours space I rode to Losanna, through Mountains
covered Losanna.
with Snow and thick Woods. This City is subject to Berna (being one of the
Sweitzers Cantons), but the Citizens speak French. It is seated on the North
side of the Lake of Losanna (of old called Lacus (...)), which is compassed
with Mountains continually covered with snow, which open themselves on the
Eastside toward Italy. On the Eastside of the City is the head of the River
Rhodanus, which fulles into this Lake, having so clear a color, as it seems
not at all to mingle with the standing water of the Lake. From hence I rode by
the West side of this Lake, and in two hours space came to Morgen, which Town
is also subject to Berna.

Then I rode four miles in four hours space to Geneua, having the sandy
bank of the said Lake on my left hand toward the East, and most pleasant
Hills planted with Geneua.
Vines on my right hand toward the West; and by the way I did see a Village
ruined in time of war, nothing there standing but a pillar erected in honor
of the Papists Mass. Geneua is seated on the South side of the Lake, right
opposite to Losanna, seated at the North end thereof. The East side of the Lake
lies toward Sauoy and Italy; and the West side toward France, on which side
also the high way lies into Sweitzerland. The lower part of which City,
vulgarly la bas rue, is seated in a plain, and the rest upon a Hill. The
buildings are fair, and of freestone. This City being consederate with some
of the Sweitzer Cantones, and more strictly with Berna, has defended the
freedom of the Citizens, and the profession of Reformed Religion for many
years with great courage and piety, and through many miseries and practices
to subduethem, against the pretended rightes of the Bishop, and the Duke of
Sauoyes ambition, and hatred he bears to the Reformed Religion. The lower part
thereof on the North side, lies close to the South side of the Lake, where is a
little haven for Galleys, which they have built to keep free the passage of
the Lake. And on the same side is a strong Fort, and there the River Rhodanus,
coming out of the Lake enters the City, and runs through the lower part
thereof, having two bridges for passage. The Duke of Sauoy, who has long
watched to surprise this City, possesses the East side of the Lake: but the
City is careful not to suffer him to build any Galleys thereupon; and upon
the least rumor of building them, armeth their Galleys to burn the same.
Therefore the way into Sauoy lying upon the East South East side of the City,
in a Plain between Hills and Mountains, the City has built a Fort of
little circuit, but great strength, with fortifications of earth, some Musket
shot without the walls upon that way, and therein continually keeps a
Garrison. Not far thence the River Arba, flowing from the Eastern
Mountains, does beyond the City fall into Rhodanus. At the South Gate is a
public Churchyard for burial, and an Hospital or Pest house, which are both
without the walls. On the same side within the walls, is a pleasant walk
upon Hills, where of old a pillar was erected, with this inscription:

To the Emperor Caesar M. Aurelius Antoninus Pius, by Foelix Aug. greatest
Bishop with Tribunal power, Consul, etc.

On the West side of the City without the walls, little Mountains lying not
far distant, might seem dangerous for the encamping of enemies, save that on
the one side they are compassed with the Territory of Berne, confederate with
the City, and on the other side with the River Rhodanus, so as the enemies
passage to them is very difficult. This City was of old repaired by the
Emperor Aurelius, and Julius Caesar makes mention of this City in his first
book of the Gauls war, so as the antiquity thereof cannot be doubted.

Here I had great contentment to speak and converse with the reverent Father
Theodore Beza, who was of stature something tall, and corpulent, or big boned,
and had a long thick beard as white as snow. He had a grave Senators
countenance, and was broad faced, but not fat, and in general by his comely
person, sweet affability and gravity, he would have extorted reverence from
those that least loved him. I walked with him to the Church, and giving
attention to his speech, it happened that in the Church porch, I touched the
poor man's box with my fingers, and this reverend man soon perceived my
error, who having used in Italy to dip my fingers toward the holy water
(according to the manner of the Papists, lest the omitting of so small a matter
generally used, might make me suspected of my Religion, and bring me into
dangers of greater consequence), did now in like sort touch this poor man's
box, mistaking it for the Font of holy water. I say, he did soon perceive my
error, and taking me by the hand, advised me hereafter to eschew these ill
customs, which were so hardly forgotten.

When I had taken counsel with my friends, if it were safe for me to go the
right way from Geneua to Paris, they being of great experience, dissuaded me
from that journey, which could not but be dangerous, the Peace being scarsely
concluded, and the Country being full of bands of Soldiers returning to their
own home, which council after I found good by Experience, the mother of
fools. And when they perceived that I was obstinately purposed to pass
through France into England, they advised me rather to pass into France by
the Dukedom of Loraine, which for the time, was more free from the tumults of
war, whose council I thought good to follow, so as I was now to return to
Strassburg in Germany, almost the same way I came.

Thus after noone I left Geneua, and rode that day four miles to Morgen. The
second day in the morning I rode in two hours space to Losanna, and in five
hours space to Milden, where I paid eight batzen for my dinner and
horse-meate. After dinner in four hours space I rode to Bitterline, and paid
fourteen batzen for my supper and horse-meate. The third day in the morning I
rode one mile (as they call it) in four hours space to Morton, and in three
hours space to Berne, one of the Sweitzers Cantons, through sandy fields of
Corn, and many Woods. At Geneua many French Gentlemen and Students coming
thither for the liberty of their religion, did speak pure French, and from
that City all the people spoke a barbarous French till I came near Berne,
where they first began to speak the Sweitzers language.

Being to describe Berne, give me leave first for Travelers sake to mention
what I have Berne.
read in some Authors; that in the Territory of Lucerna (which I never viewed,
and who are earnest Papists, and so may justly be suspected in like reports)
there is a wonderful Lake, upon the bank whereof they say Pilate does once in
a year walk, anired in Judges robes, and that whosoever then sees him, does
die the same year. The most fair City Berne has the name of Bears in the
Dutch tongue, because Berthold Duke of Zeringen, being to build the City, and
going fourth to hunt, thought good to give it the name of the first beast he
should meet and kill. And there being a Wood of Oaks in the very place where
the City was to be built, the workmen cutting the same for the building of
the City, did sing this Rhyme in Dutch:

Holtz lass dich hawen gern: Die stat muss heissen Bern.
Wood let us willingly cut thee: this City must Bern named be.
They write, that the ground whereupon the City is built, was of old called
the Sack, and that the City thereupon was built in form of a sack. This
most fair City is not of any great antiquity; for Berthold the founder
thereof died in the year 1175. It is built upon a little Mountain, yet seems
to be seated in a Valley, because it is compassed with greater Mountains. The
little Mountain whereupon it is seated, is narrow, and the full breadth thereof
is within the walls, neither is it much longer then the City, lying in length
from the West to the East, in which length it has three fair and broad
streets, and is fortified round about with the Valleys of this little
Mountain. The houses are uniformly, and very fairly built of free-storie,
having the first upper rooms of the houses cast out toward the streets, and
supported with arches, under which they walk dry in the greatest rain. Round
about this little Mountain the Citizens have their gardens from the fall of
the same to the lowest Valleys, and upon the South-East by South, is a most
fair Church, and very pleasant for the light somnesse thereof, and on every
side there is a pleasant place for walking. On the South side without the
walls the River Arba runs from the West to the East, and is passed by a
bridge at the East end of the City, whence it turns toward the North, and
so makes the City almost an Island. Here I paid fourteen batzen for my supper
and horsemeate. The fourth day in the morning, I rode three miles in six
hours space (through fruitful fields of Corn and pasture) to Solothurn. And
by the way I observed a monument of the English defeated by the Sweitzers, with
this in scription in Dutch; Ritterlich erschlagen die English guckler Anno
1425, arm Iucke: That is; The English Iuglers Knightly beaten in the year
1425, poor Knaves.

The English Histories make no mention of any war with the Sweitzers. Semler
a Sweitzer Historian in his first book fifty fourth leaf writes, that Leopold
Duke of Austria, drew the English against the Sweitzers, and that they did much
hurt by wasting the Territories, as well of Austria as of Sweitzerland, but that
they being overcome in some battles, did after the wasting of these Countries
return home in the year 1376, and this he calls the first English war.
Also Semler in his first book the leaf 273 writes, that the English (as it
seems called from the French war) did at the instance of Duke Leopold
besiege Strassburg in the year 1365: but the Emperor Charles the fourth
coming with an army against them, that they retired. But neither do the
words of Semler agree, since he calls the first attempt the first English
war, and after mentions another of former time neither do the years set
down by Semler agree with the years of this monument, neither seems it by
the French Histories, that the English had any leisure to make war upon the
Sweitzers in the year 1365, and less in the year 1376. To conclude, it
appears as well by the English as French Histories, that the English
Conquerours in France, had so weighty a war lying there upon them in the
year 1425, set down in this monument, as it is not credible they could at
that time turn their forces any other way. Only the most approved French
Writers witness, that the English and French having made a truce for eighteen
months in the year 1443, it seemed good to the leaders on both sides, that
the soldiers hating rest and peace, should be drawn out to some foreign
war, and that the English serving under Lewis the Dolphin of France, the said
Lewis in the year 1444 making war upon the Sweitzers, killed therein 4000 of
them: but the victory was so bloody of this battle, fought in the territory
of Bazel, as he that had the victory, lost some 5000 men of his own, and that
the Emperor Frederick the third coming against him, he drew his men back.
For my part I leave the credit of this monument to be tried by the consent of
Historians, and return to my journey.

The fifth day in the morning, I rode four miles to the Town Ottmersea, and
in the afternoon, through a stony Plain of Corn and some Woods, I rode four
miles to Besa. The sixth day in the morning I rode five miles, through the like
Plain, to Gerzen, and in the afternoon, through a woody heath Plain, and
toward my iournies end through fruitful fields of Corn, I rode four miles
to Strassburg. And in all this journey I paid about seven batzen for each
meal. From Solothurne to Strassburg some reckon senentene miles, others twenty
two miles; for the Dutch reckon the miles diversely, according to the length of
them in their own Country, and in these parts they use to distinguish their
iournies by hours riding, not by miles. Not far from the foresaid Town
Besa, lies the City Bazell, which I have described in my former journey
through these parts, But to gratify those who love to search antiquities, give
me leave to say, that Augusta Rauracorum (so called for distinction from
Augusta Vindelicorum) a City of great antiquity, and at this day become a
poor Village, lies distant from Bazell some mile toward the Mountain Iura,
and that near this ancient City are many old, monuments of the Romans, and
many buildings under the earth, which my self being less curious, did not
see; and that the Husbandmen there, dug up lately a coin of gold, and sold
it for copper, which was after valued at nine Crowns of the old Romans.

I say nothing of Strassburg, which I have in the foresaid place formerly
described, only I will say, that I had the good fortune there, to find a
French Gentleman, the Governor of Monwick with his train, in whose company I
rode thither. (...) a fruitful Plain of Corn four miles to Sauerne, in
which City the Papisticall Chanons of Strassburg have long fortified
themselves under the protection of the Duke of Loraine, against their Lords the
Senators of Strassburg, and have appropriated to themselves great part of the
revenues of that Bishoppricke, lying under their power. After dinner I rode
three miles through Hills yet covered with snow, to Villa Noua. Concerning my
expenses, I spent each day little less then a French Crown, namely, two
franckes for my supper, and commonly three French soulz for my breake-fast, and
one franck for my horsemeate.

The second day I rode one mile to the confines of the Empire, and the Dukedom
Monwick.
of Loraine and some three miles further to Monwick, where so much salt is
made, as the Duke of Loraine yearly receives sixty thousand French Crowns for
the same. The third day through a dyrtie way and fruitful fields of Corn, I
rode five miles to the City Nanzi, where the Duke of Loraine keeps his Court,
and when I was entering Nanzi.
the Gate, the Captain of the Guard drew toward me, to know my name and
Country. I not ignorant that the Family of Loraine (usurping great power in
France, under the pretense to defend the Roman Religion) bare no good will to
the English at that time, answered, that I was a Polonian, he inquired many
things of the Kingdom, King and Queen of Poland, and perceiving that I
answered him directly, he whispered something with some chief men of the
Guard about my confidence, and so turning again to me, bad me lift up my hand,
(for so the French use to take oaths.) I was much afraid lest I should be
forced upon this oath to confess my Country which I had dissembled: but when
I demanded the cause; he told me, that many places being infected by the
Plague, I was to swear, that I came not from any of them, which (to be freed
from my former fear) I did gladly assure him upon my oath. The City is
strongly fortified, save that the South side, where the circuit of the City
was enlarged, was not yet compassed with walls, neither were the houses on
that side yet built. The houses are fairly built of free stone. The Dukes
Palace was built four square, with a large inner Court all of free stone, and
with a high Gallerie toward the said Courtyard, and there I had the
opportunity to see the Duke, and the Princes and the Princesses his children.

Finding not here any company for my journey into France, which I hoped to
find at Metz, and thinking it not convenient to stay longer then I must Metz.
needs, in a place for the time ill affected to the English, I rode the fourth
day eight French miles to Metz. In the time of the Emperor Charles the fifth,
the French took this City from the Empire, and at this day it was held for
Henry the fourth King of France by a Garrison of his men; and every one now
talking of Peace made in France, yet it was not then proclaimed in these parts,
nor upon any of the confines of France. My self after few days stay, finding
no consorts for my journey into France, was admonished by some honest Gentlemen
in this City, that this journey would be very dangerous to me, in respect
that the army being broken up, all France would be full through all parts of
scattering troops of Soldiers, returning to their own homes. But when they
perceived that I was obstinate in my purpose to pass through France into
England, they persuaded me at least to sell my Horse, and go on foot; for
they said, the booty of a good Horse would surely cause me to be robbed by
those, who might perhaps let me pass quietly on foot, disguised in poor
apparel; for they seeing me well mounted, would surely set upon me, and
twenty to one kill me as well because they that rob in France do commonly kill
them they rob, as because they would imagine me to be a soldier, either on
the Kings, or on the Leagers side, and in that case, if I were on their own
side, would kill me, for fear of being forced to restitution; and if I were on
the adverse part; would think me well killed as an enemy. Besides that, the
Marshals of the Kingdom at the end of a Civil war, used such severity of
justice to suppress all disorders, as they would surely kill me, lest I
should complain of them. Whereas if I passed on foot, they were like either
to let me go in peace, or at least to be content with my money, without
offering further violence to me, whom they would judge to be of some base
condition. This their counsel I approved, and (howsoever unwillingly) sold my
Horse for sixteen French Crowns. In this City I paid a franck each meal.
It is a fair City and well fortified, and it is seated upon a Hill, in a fat
soil fruitful of Corn, and the River Mosella running from Nancey in a
Plain, passes close by the West Gate of the City, where it is to be passed
by a covered bridge.

Being to take my journey toward Paris on foot, I hired a poor man to guide
me to Chalons, and to carry my cloak, and my little baggage. The first day
after dinner we went two French miles, by the bank of the said River, through
a dyrtie way, and a Country fruitful of Corn, but having no Woods, not so
much as a tree, and came to a poor Village. By the way I passed by Pontmolin,
where of old was a fair bridge to pass over Mosella, the ruins whereof at
this day are called Arches de Joy. In this my journey to Paris, I spent each
day for my diet about twenty four soulz. The second day we went two miles to
Pont, and five miles to Toul, where I paid two testoones and a half for a
pair of shoes. Our way was very dyrtie, through fruitful fields of Corn,
and we often heard the cries of the Country people, driving their cattle to
fortified places, upon the seeing of some scattered troops of Soldiers, which
made us much afraid, and that not without just cause: but God delivered us
from this danger. The third day I being so weary as I could not go on foot,
hired for one Frank two post horses (returning homeward) for me and my guide to
ride 2 miles, and after 2 horses for three frankes for us to ride three miles
to Saint Aubine. The fourth day I hired two horses for us for a French Crown,
and we rode five miles to Bar in a fair way, through Pastures, and Hills
planted with Vines yielding a rich Wine, and fruitful fields of Corn. And
this day we passed by the Village Longeuille, which the Country people had
fortified in this civil war, to defend themselves from being spoiled by
sudden invasions, though otherwise they were each night forced to lodge some
Troop or other. Having dined plentifully at Bar, and being refreshed with
excellent wine, in the after noone we went four miles through the like way to
the Village Ampton Cour, where a French Gentleman dwelt, who the same day had
there proclaimed the Peace. For now we had passed the confines of Loraine, and
this was the first Village of France, in the Province of Champaigne. The fifth
day being (after the new style) the first of May, in the year 1595, we went
on foot nine long French Anno. 1595.
miles to Chalons. At the end of the first two miles, we came to the first
house, standing alone, and called la rouge maison, that is, the red house,
inhabited only by an old woman, who would give us nothing to eat or drink,
and in all the rest of the way we did neither see Village, nor house, nor so
much as a tree. The fields were plain, and all the Province (according to the
name) was a Champion Country, and seemed apt to bear great store of Corn,
but now in the time of Civil war, they lay vnploughed, and the Husbandmens
houses were fallen to the ground. Yea, we could not find so much as water to
quench our thirst, so as my guide was forced to drink the standing water lying
in the cartruts of the high way, and my self to quench my thirst, did chew the
crust of a brown loaf which he had given me, whereby I kept my mouth moist,
casting the crust away when I had chewed it.

We had now scarce entered France, when suddenly the mischief fell upon me,
which my friends at Metz had foretold me. When I had passed half this days
journey, I met with some dozen horsemen, whose Captain demanded of me my name
and Country. I answered, that I was a Dutch man, and the servant of a Dutch
Merchant, who stayed for me at Chalons, whether I was then going. He (as it
seemed to me) thinking it dishonorable to him, if he should himself assault a
poor fellow, and a stranger, did let me pass, but before I came to the
bottom of the hill, I might see him send two horsemen after me, who wheeling
about the mountains, that I might not know they were of his company, suddenly
rushed upon me, and with fierce countenance threatening death, presented their
Carbines to my breast. I having no ability to defend me, thought good not to
make any the least show of resistance, so they took my sword from my guide,
and were content only to rob me of my money. I formerly said, that I could not
find at Venice any means to exchange my money to Paris, the long Civil war
having barred the Parisians from any traffic in foreign parts, and that I
was forced to exchange my money to Geneus. This money there received, I had
quilted within my doublet, and when I resolved to go on foot to Paris, I made
me a base cover for my apparel, which when they perceived, they took from me
the inward doublet wherein I had quilted the gold, and though they perceived
that under my basecouer, I had a Ierkin and hose laid with gold lace, yet they
were content to take only the inner dublet, and to leave me all the rest of my
apparel, wherein I do acknowledge their courtesy, since thieves give all
they do not take. Besides, they took not only my Crowns but my sword,
cloak, and shirtes, and made a very unequal exchange with me for my hat,
giving me another deep greasy French hat for it.

One thing in this misery made me glad. I formerly said, that I sold my horse
for 16. French Crowns at Metz, which Crowns I put in the bottom of a wooden
box, and covered them with a stinking ointment for scabs. Six other French
Crowns, for the worst event, I lapped in cloth, and thereupon did wind diverse
colored threads, wherein I sticked needles, as if I had been so good a husband,
as to mend my own clothes. This box and this ball of thread, I had put in my
hose, as things of no worth; and when in spovling me they had searched my
pockets, they first took the box, and smelling the stink of the ointment,
they cast it away on the ground; neither were they so frugail to take my bal of
thread to mend their hose, but did tread it likewise under their feet. Then
they rode swiftly to their companions, and I with some spark of joy in my
greater loss, took up the box and ball of thread, thinking my self less
miserable, that by the Grace of God I had some money left, to keep me from
begging in a strange Country.

This Tragedy thus acted, I and my guide (very sad because he despared of my
ability to pay him his hire) went forward our journey, he wondering that I
was no more dejected in the danger I had passed, and for my miserable want of
money, thinking that I had never a penny left, whom he did see so narrowly
searched, and yet perceived that I was in some sort merry. At last we did see
the City of Challons not far distant, and upon our left hand was a fair
spring, which had seven heads, to which we went to drink, being both very
thirsty. Here I put into the water the hat which the thieves had given me, by
unequal exchange for mine, being greasy to the very top, and deep according
to the French fashion, and filling it with water thrice, drunk it up greedily.
Then I filled it the fourth time, and broke into it the crummes of the brown
loaf, the crust whereof had to that time kept my mouth with some moisture,
which I devoured, and thought I had never eaten better brewesse; but three
days ficknesse of vomiting and looseness made me repent this intemperance.

Thence we went to Chalons, where my guide brought me to a poor Alehouse,
and when I expostulated the wrong he did me; he replied, That stately Innes
were not for men who had never a penny in their purses: but I told him, that I
looked for comfort in that case rather from Gentlemen then Clownes. Whereupon
he willingly obeyed me, and with a dejected and fearful countenance, brought
me to the chief Inn, where he ceased not to bewail my misery, and to recount
my Tragedy as if it had been the burning of Troy, till the very Host
despairing of my ability to pay him, began to look disdainefully upon me. The
next morning when he being to return home, and taking his leave of me, I
paid him his hire, which he neither asked nor expected, thinking that I had
not one penny, and likewise paid my Host for my supper and lodging, he first
began to talk like a mad man, and coming to himself, professed that he knew
not how I should have one penny, except I were a Iugler, or an Alchumist, or
had a familiar spirit. Then confounded between wonder and joy, he began to
triumph with the servants, and would not depart, till he had first drunk a
quart of Wine.

The building of Chalons was low and base being of Timber and Clay, and this
City has no beauty but in the large Marketplace and strong Fort. On the West
side Chalons.
without the walls, are pleasant Islands, whether the Citizens use to pass by
boat, and to walk there for recreation. I formerly said that I spent in this
journey some forty two soulz by the day for my diet, after which rate I paid
here, and if extraordinarily I called for wine, I paid two soulz and a half
for a measure little bigger then our English pint.

From hence to Paris I passed in a long wagon of Paris, and paid two French
Crowns for my place therein The first day we passed in like way to the former,
and in the same Province of Champaigne, fourteen miles to Sizan, and did
scarce see two poor Villages by the way; but I was told, that some half a
mile out of the high way, was the castle Chastilton, whereof the Admiral of
France killed in the Massacre of Paris, and the Gentlemen of his Family have
their name. The second day we were carried 12 miles to Nangi, being as vet not
freed from the cries of poor people, driving their cattle from Troops of
Soldiers, but for my part I made the proverb true that the passenger having
nothing, sings before the thief. Yet was I not without fear of a greater
mischief then robbing, by the loss of my life, having no money to redeem it
from the cutthroat soldiers.

The third day we were carried ten miles in Champaigne, through a Champion
Country lying wast, and 4 miles more to Paris, through a fruitful plain of
corn, and pleasant hills planted with vines. This Country wherein Paris is
seated, is compailed with the rivers of Seyne, and Matrona, and Orsa, and is
properly called the Island of France. The Parisians have their name either from
Paris of Troy, or of the Parrhasij, a people of Asia, which Paris.
did accompany Hercules, or of the Temple of Isis neete them (according to the
Greek language), for the statua of Isis was at Saint German, till it was taken
away in the year 1514, and a Cross was set up in the place thereof by the
Bishop of Molun. The City has the name of Lutetia in Latin, either of dirt,
for the Fens adioining, or in the Greek tongue of Mortar there dug out,
because all the floares are of plaster, and the houses plastered over. And some
say that it was of old called the City of Julius Caesar, who built great part
thereof. It lies in the elevation of the Pole forty eight degrees, and the
chief part thereof, namely, the Island or greater City, is seated in a fenny
ground. For the River Seyne has often ouerflowed Paris, and broken down the
bridges. In the time of King Phillip Augustus, the waters rose to the statuaes
without the Cathedral Church of Saint Mary, on the North-side thereof, as
appears by an inscription. Also in the year 1373, for two months space, they
so ouerflowed the City, as they passed in boats the streets of Saint Denis
and S. Antoine. To conclude, omitting many ouerflowings mentioned in Histories,
it appears by an inscription in the valley of Misery, that in the year 1496,
there was a great inundation. The City of old was all in the Island, and when it
could not receive the multitude increased, the City was enlarged to both sides
of the continent, and first that part of the City called La ville, then the
third part called the University, were esteemed suburbs, till after they were
joined to the City. For the Kings Court and the City still increased with
buildings, so as the Subburbes were greater then the City; whereupon King
Charles the fifth gave them the same privileges which the City had, and
compassed them with walls, whereof the ruins yet appear. And new Suburbs
being afterward built, King Henry the second in the year (...), made an
Edict, that the houses vnpersected should be pulled down, and that no more
should afterward be built. The River Seyne running from the South, and
entering at the South Side, diuides the City into two parts, the greater part
whereof toward the East and North, lies low in a plain, and is vulgarly
called La ville. The less lying toward the South and West, upon a higher
ground, is seated between hills, and is called the University. Between those
two parts lies the third, namely the Island, called the City, which is seated in
a plain, and compassed on all sides with the River Seyne, running between the
Ville and the University. And this part was of old joined to the University,
with two bridges, and to the Ville with three bridges: but now a sixth called
the new bridge, does moreover join the Island as well to the Ville as to the
University. The part of the City called the Ville, is compassed on the south
and west sides with the River Seyne, and upon the East and North sides with
walls, rampires, and ditches in the form of half a circle. The second part of
the City called the University, is compassed on the East and North sides with
the River Seyne, and upon the South and West sides with walls, which they write
to have the form of a hat, save that the long suburbs somewhat alter this
form. For my part it seemed to me that joined with the Island, it had also the
form of another half circle, though somewhat less then the former. The third
part called the Island or City, is compassed round about with the River Seyne,
and upon the South-east side is defended from the floods of the River by four
little Islands, which are marked in the map with black ines, and lie like
Rampires diuerting the stream from beating on the City. To this Island they
pass on both sides by bridges, and in respect of the Bishops Palace, and he
Kings greater Palace, it may be called the heart of the City. The old walls of
the Ville, were first of less circuit then now they are; for new walls were
built, which also included the Suburbs, and the inner wall is of unpolished
stone, the outer wall is of earth, compailed round about with ditches, which
near the River are broad and full of water, but further off toward the North
and East, are narrow and altogether dry. But the old walls are either
demolished, or converted to the supporting of private houses. The University is
compassed with like walls, and because it is seated upon high ground, the
ditches are altogether dry. And the walls of earth as well of the Ville as the
University, are so broad as three or four may walk together upon them. And
round about the City (I mean the Ville and University compassing the Island)
are many rampires upon the wall like so many Forts. The Island or City was of
old compassed with walls, wherewith the greater Palace lying toward the North,
at this day is compassed. Paris in general is subject to the King, so as it
has under him a peculiar jurisdiction, and in spiritual matters it is subject
to the Bishop. In the time of King Lewis the eleventh, one hundred and four
thousand Citizens were numbered able to bear arms in the year 1466, and King
Charles the fifth in the year 1371, gave the Citizens the rights and
privileges of Gentlemen. King Phillip Augustus in the year 1090, made
Shiriffes to govern the City with consular authority; and he gave the City for
Arms a ship adorned with Lillies, he paued the streets with flint, and
compassed the City with walls. The Parisians have raised many seditions: The
first in the year 1306, against rich men raising the rents of houses. The
second with the King of Nauar and the English, against the Dolphin. The third
in the year 1383, against the Kings Treasurers, which Charles the sixth
(returning with his Army out of Flanders) did severely punish. The fourth
between the factions of Orleans and Burgundy. The fifth most pestilent and
longest, with the Guisians against the last King of Valois.

The building of the City is for the most part stately, of unpolished stone,
with the outside plastered, and rough cast, and the houses for the most part
are four stories high, and sometimes six, besides the roof which also has
glass windows. The streets are somewhat large, and among them the fairest is
that of Saint Dennis, the second Saint Honere, the third Saint Antoine, and the
fourth Saint Martine. And in the Island the ways to these streets are fairest.
The pauement is of little, but thick and somewhat broad stones. But in the
mean time the streets of the Ville, either for the low situation, or by the
negligence of the Citizens, are continually dirty and full of filth. The three
parts of the City, namely, the Ville, the Island, and the University, being
joined together, are of a round form, (which of all others is most capable)
save that the half circle of the Ville, is greater then the other half
circle, which is compassed as it were with the two horns of the former. And
the whole circuit of the City without the walls (excluding the suburbs) is said
to be of six miles. The market places which are in the streets, are vulgarly
called, Carrefours, as being fouresquare, and having passage to them on all
sides, and they are eleven in number, namely, four of the Butchers, (which
upon a sedition raised by them, were divided into four tribes), the fifth the
shambles upon the mount Saint Genouefa, the sixth built for the poor which
have no shops, and for the weomen which sell linen, which is vulgarly called,
La lingeria, well known for the cosinages of these linen sellers; the seventh
of the brokers, vulgarly called, La Fripperie, the eight and chief, is in the
Island, called Marshes, because of the Fenny soil: the ninth is for fishes of
the River, seated near the tenth, being the little bridge of Saint German of
the University: the eleventh is without the gate for hogs. There be
fourteen fountains, besides the fountain of the Queen, and that of the
Innocents, built of stone. The Ville has eight Hospitals, the University
four, and the Island two.

The description of Paris.


(A) the Gate Saint Antoine, (B) the Bastile, (C) the gate of the Temple, (D)
gate of Saint Martin, (E) gate of Saint Denis, (F) gate Mont-martre, (G) gate
Saint Honor, (H) New gate, (I) Le L'ouure, (K) gate Saint Victoire, (L) gate
Marcell, (M) gate of Saint James, (N) gate Saint Michaell, (O) gate Saint
Germain, (P) gate Bussia, (Q) gate Nella, (R) Cathedral Church, (S) Church
Saint Bartholmew, (T) the greater Palace, (V) Pont denostredame, (W) Pont Au
change, (X) Pont aux musniers, (Y) Petit pont, (Z) Pont Saint Michaell, (XX)
Pont neuf.

I will begin the description of the City, with the first part thereof, called
La ville, which has seven gates from the South east to the North-west. I will
not speak of the old or inner gates of the old City, which gates since the
building of the new walls are called false gates, as serving for no use: Only I
will say that they were of the same number, and so called, as these new gates
are; and that King Francis the first for comeliness sake caused them to be
demolished. The first of these seven gates, lies toward the South-east, and is
called (A) Saint Antoine. By this gate I entered the City, when I came from
Chalons, and without this gate I did then see the Kings Palace, not far
distant from Paris, and most sweet for the seat and building, called Bois du'
Saint vincent, and then I passed the bridge called Calantoine, being without
this gate, where the River Matrona falls into the Seyne, and so entered Paris,
by the gate, and the Church and fair street of Saint Antoin. Near this gate,
Francis the first built a fort. As I came in, on the left hand, was the Tower
(B) called the Bastile, well known by that name, which was begun to be built
in the year 1369, by Hugho Ambriet Provost of Paris; and he being condemned to
perpetual prison for imputed heresy, it came to the Kings hand. On the same
side is the Kings storehouse for brass Ordinance, near the Monastery of the
Celestines, in whose Church there be many marble sepulchers: and among the
rest, one erected to Lewis of Orleans, (slain by the Duke of Burgondy) and to
his Duchess Valentina, (daughter to the Duke of Milan) by King Lewis the
twelfth, with learned Epitaphs. On the same side is the Church of Saint Paul,
the House of the Queen, the house of the Provost of Paris, the public
Senate House, and the place called the Grieve, famous by the capital punishment
of offenders. For in this part of the City called Ville, there be three places
for the execution of Justice, (the other two parts having not one place) namely
this of the Grieve, and that of the Temple, lying on the left hand of the gate,
called Temple, next adioining to this, and the third called Luparia, lying on
the left hand of the scuenth gate, called the new gate. And from these three
places the dead bodies are carried out of the gate of Saint Martin, to be
buried upon Mont-falcon. And give me leave out of order to remember you, that
Pierre Remy, Treasurer and governor of France, under King Charles the fair,
repaired this Mont-Falcon, and that his enemies then wrote upon the Gallows
standing there, this time in French;

Ence gibeticy, ser a pendu Pierre Remy.
Upon this gybet here you see, Peter Remy hanged shall be.
And that according to the same he was in the time of Phillip of Valois hanged
there, for the ill administration of his office. On the right hand as you come
in by the same gate of Saint Anthony, is a place for Tylting, called
Tournelles. Not far thence at Saint Catherines Church in the Scholars valley,
is an inscription, witnessing that a house was pulled down to the ground, for
an arrow shot into the Church, when the Rector of the University was there at
Mass, in the year 1404, there being at that time a great sedition raised
between the City and the University, about a scholar denled with dirt, and
that this house by permission of the University was built again in the year
1516. Also as you come into this gate, on the right hand, in the Monastery
Saint Anthony, a dried Crocodill is hung up, which a French Ambassador at
Venice, left there for a monument in the year 1515. And there is a sepulcher
of the daughters of King Charles, being of black marble, with their statuaes
of white marble. Near that lies the Church yard of Saint John for public
burial, made in the yard of the house of Peter (...), which was as pulled
down to the ground in the year 1392, because the Constable of France was
wounded from thence. The second gate toward the East, is the gate of the (C)
Temple, near which is the fort called Le Rastillon, on your righthand as you
come in, and this fort, or some other in this place, was built by Francis the
first. On the lefthand as you come in, is the house of the Templary Knights,
like a little City for the compass and from it this gate has the name. And
when this order of Knighthood was extinguished; their goods were given to the
Order of Saint John. The Church of this house is said to be built like that of
Jerusalem, and there be the monuments of Bertrand and Peter, (Priors of
France,) and the Table of the Altar is curiously painted; and here Phillip
Villerius, Master of the Knights of Saint John, was buried in the year 1532,
to whom a statua of white marble is erected. The third gate is called (D) Saint
Martine, and it lies toward the North-east, without which gate is the Suburb
of Saint Laurence, so called of the Church of Saint Laurence. The fourth gate
is called (E) Saint Denis, and without the same is the Hospital of Saint
Lazarus, and the foresaid Mount Falcon; and when King Henry the fourth besieged
this City, he did much harm to the same, from some high places without this
gate. On the left hand as you come into the broad and fair street of Saint
Denis, lies a Castle which they say Julius Casar built, and the same Castle was
of old the chief gate of Paris, whereupon Marcellinus calls the whole City the
Castle of the Parisians. And upon the righthand is the Nunnery of the daughters
of God, which use to give three morsels of bread and a cup of wine to condemned
men going to execution. Not far thence is the large Church yard of the Holy
Innocents, which King Phillip Augustus compassed with walls; and there be many
fair sepulchers: and they say that bodies buried there are consumed in nine
days. The fifth (F) gate lies toward the North, and is called Mont-Martre, so
called of a mountain of the same name, lying without that gate, and having the
name of Martyrs there executed. And Henry the fourth besieging the City,
mounted his great Ordinance in this place. The sixth (G) gate Saint Honor,
has a suburb, in which is the market place for swines flesh, and upon the
right hand as you come in, hard by the gate, is an Hospital for three hundred
blind men.

The seventh (H) and last gate, lies upon the Seyne toward the North-west, and
is called the new gate: and within the same about a musket shot distance, is
the (I) Kings Palace, which may be called the less Palace, in respect of the
greater, seated in the Island, and this little Palace is vulgarly called, Le'
leuure.) This Palace has only one Court yard, and is of a quadrangle form,
save that the length somewhat passes the breadth, and the building being of
free stone, seems partly old, partly new, and toward one of the corners, the
Kings chambers (vulgarly called Il Pauillon) are more fairly built then the
rest. Without the said new gate, some half musket shot distance, is the Kings
garden with the banqueting house (vulgarly called Les Tuilleries). And now the
civil wars being ended, the King began to build a stately gallery, which
should join together this garden and the foresaid Palace of the King, and I
hear that this Gallery is since finished. And the hall ioining this gallery
with the Palace, does pass the stately building of the rest of the Palace,
being beautified with many stones of marble and of porphery. I say that this
Gallery leads from the Palace over the walls of the City, and the ditch thereof
(being near the river and so full of water), and after being supported with
two or three Arches, reaches to the same garden; and all the way without the
walls, from the Palace to the said Garden, being compassed with walls on both
sides this gallery, the Garden seems to be so much increased.

On the left hand, as you come into the foresaid new Gate, lies the Tower
Luparia, and Alencon house, and Burbon house, and the Coining house, and upon
the right hand the chief Coining house, lying upon the River Seyne. To
conclude, of the streets of this part of the City called Ville, the chief is
S. Antoine; the second of the Temple; the third S. Martine; the fourth S.
Denis; the fifth Mont Martre; the sixth S. Honor; (all so named of their
Gates) and the seventh Luparia, upon the bank of the River Seyne. And amongst
all these, the most fair are that of S. Antoine, S. Denis, S. Honor, and S.
Martine, so called of their Gates. A. E. G. D.

The second part of the City, called the University, has the River Seyne on
the East and North-sides, and is compassed with walls on the South and West
sides, and has seven Gates. The first (K) Gate S. Victoire, lies on the South
side upon the River, and has his Suburb, with a stately Monastery. And from
the Hill adjoining to this Gate, the Army of King Henry the fourth besieging
the City, much pressed the same, having their Cannon planted near the
Gallows. On the right hand as you come in, toward the River, lie the Tower
Nella, the upper, the College of the: Cardinal, the College of the good
boys, the College and the Church of the Bernardines, which Pope Benedict the
twelfth built, and the Cardinal of Telouse increased with a Libraty, and with
maintenance for sixteen Scholars to study Divinity. Also there lie the house
of Lorayne, the great Schools of four Nations, the Market place for River
fish, and the Castle, and the little bridge which the Provost of Paris built,
to restrain the Scholars walking by night, in the time of King Charles the
fifth. The second gate is called (L) the Port of Marcellus, or of the Stews,
and it has a Suburb, where in the Church of Saint Marcellus, Bishop of Paris,
and canonized for a Saint, (which Rowland Count of Blois, nephew to Charles the
Great, did build); Peter Lombardiu Bishop of Paris was buried, in the year
1164; and behind the great Altar, in a window, is the Image of Charles the
Great. On the right hand as you enter the said Port, by the Mount of S.
Genouefa, lie the College Turnonium, the College Bonae Curiae, the College
of the Dutch, the College of Navarra, and the College Marchieum, and the
College Laudunense and on the left hand the College of the Lombards, the
College Prellaum, famous for Peter Ramus, who was Master of that College, and
was there killed in the massacre. The third Gate of (M) S James, lies on the
South-west side, where King Francis the first built a fort; and without this
Gate is a suburb, in which is a Church yard of the Monastery of Saint Marie, at
the very entry whereof, is a most ancient Image of the Virgin, painted with
gold and silver, with an inscription upon it. In the street of Saint James,
the Jesuits had their Colleges, till for their wicked acts they were banished
the City and Kingdom. And since their restitution I think they now enjoy the
same. On the right hand as you enter this Gate, lie the College Lexouiense,
the College of Saint Michael, or Cenate, the College Montis Acuti, (which
built in the year 1490, maintains certain poor Scholars, called Capeti),
the College of S. Barbera, the College of Rheines, the school of Decrees,
the College Bellouaccuse, the College Triqueticum, the College Cameracense,
and the College Carnouallense. On the left hand lie the College of the bald
men, the College of Sorbona, (which Robert of Sorbona a Divine, and familiar
with King Saint Lewis, did institute, and the same in process of time became
of great authority in determining questions of Divinity), the College of
Master Geruasius a Christian, the College Plexourense, and the College
Marmontense. The fourth (N) Gate of the university is called Port Michaell,
where Francis the first built a Fort, and before the gate is a Monastery of the
Carthusians, where a statua of black marble is erected to Peter Nauareus, and
there be two statuaes of white marble, without any inscription. On the right
hand as you enter this gate, lie the College Cluniacense, the Palace of the
Baths, (which they say was built by Julius Caesar, and is so called either of
the bounds of the Tributes, or of the Baths of Julian the Apostata, the waters
whereof are drawn from a Village adioining), and the College of eighteen,
and upon the left hand the College of Hericuria, the College of Justice, the
College of the Treasurers, the College Baionium, the College Scensa, and the
College Turonense. The fifth Gate on the West side is called (O) Saint
Germain, and without the gate is a suburb, (all suburbs are vulgarly called
Faulxbourg), which is large, and was pulled down to the ground in the civil
war. And there King Henry the fourth lay encamped, when he besieged the City.
In this suburb is the monastery of Saint Germain, not inferior to any in
wealth, and endowed with great privileges and jurisdiction, where the old
Kings Childebert the second, and Ckilperit the fourth, and Clotharius the
second, lie buried; and there is a chest of silver, the gift of King Eudo. On
the right hand as you come into this Gate, in the Minorites Cloister, are the
sepulchers of the Queens and Princes, whereof one being of black marble, with
white statuaes, is the fairest: (my memory herein may fail me, that there is
another Cloister of Minorites without the gate of Saint Marcellus). Also there
lie the College Brissiacum, and upon the left hand the house Rothomagensis,
the College of Burgondy, the house of Rhemes, the College Mignonium, the
College Praemonstratense, and the College Dinuellium. The sixth Gate is
called (P) Bussia, and upon the right hand as you come in, lies the College
Anthunense, and upon the left hand lies the house Niuernensis. The seventh and
last Gate of the University, lies toward the northwest, and is called (Q)
Nella, and without the same is the meadow of the Clerks. On the right hand as
you come in this gate, lie the house Nella. the College of Saint Denis, and
the house of the Augustines, wherein is the sepulcher and lively Image of
Phillip Comineus. And upon the left hand, lie the lower Tower Nella, and the
Western bank of the River Seyne.

These are the fairest streets of the University, the first of Saint Victoire,
the second of Saint Marcellus, the third of Saint James, the fourth of Saint
Germain, the fifth of the Celestines, upon the bank of the River, the sixth of
the mountain of Saint Genouefa, the seventh of Saint Michaell, and the eight
of the Augustines, upon the bank of the river Seyne.

The third part of the City is the Island, compassed round about with the River
Seyn. It had of old four Gates, upon the four bridges, but seems to have had
no gate upon the fifth bridge, called Pont aux musniers, (which in this
description I reckon to be the third gate). In the upper part of the Island
toward the South-east, is a fenny market place; called the Marsh, that is, the
Fen. Near that lies (R) the Cathedral Church of the blessed Virgin, which King
Phillip Augustus began to build in the year 1257, the foundations being before
laid by an uncertain founder, and it is reputed the chief among the miracles
of France. It is supported with one hundred and twenty pillars, whereof one
hundred and eight are less, and twelve very great, being all of free stone.
The Chauncell is in the midst of the Church, which has (...) walking paces
in length, and sixty paces in breadth, and all the Chauncell is compassed with
stone, wherein the Histories of the old and new testament are engraven. It has
forty five Chapels in the circuit thereof, which are shut up with grates of
Iron. In the Front it has two double doors, with fair statuaes of twenty
eight Kings. Upon the sides are four Towers or belfreyes, thirty four Cubits
high. The greatest bell called Marie, requires twenty four men to ring it,
and the sound thereof in fair weather may be heard seven leagues of. In a
Chapel toward the South, are the statuaes of King Lewis the fat, and of his
son Phillip, with the Image of a hog, because he died with a fall from his horse
stumbling upon a hog. On the North side is a mark, that the ouerflowing of the
River Seyne passed the outward statuaes from that of Phillip Augustus. King
Phillip of Valois having gotten a victory against the Flemings in the year
1328, offered his Horse and armor to the blessed Virgin, and gave the Chanons
an hundred pounds yearly rent, to whom for that cause a Horse-mans statua is
there erected. Also there is a Giantlike statua, erected to Saint Christofer,
in the year 1413, by Antony Dessars Knight.

In the lower part of the Island toward the North-West, the Church of (S) Saint
Bartholmew is seated, which was built by King Phillip the fair, and after was
turned from the Kings Chapel to a Monastery by King Lotharius, in the year
973, and then became a parish Church, whereof the King (in respect of the old
Palace) was the chief Parishioner, and I think is so still. It became most
famous, in that the bell of that Church was sounded upon the very day of Saint
Bartholmew, in the year 1572, to give a sign to the Regalists and Guisians,
that they should kill those of the reformed Religion, whom they had drawn to
the City under pretense of love, and could not otherwise have overcome, as
they found by experience of their valor.

Near that, lies the Kings greater (T) Palace, wherein the old Kings kept
their Court; but it has since been used for the Courts of justice, and
pleading of Lawyers. In the great Hall hanges up a dried Crocodil, or a Serpent
like a Crocodil. There be the painted Images of all the French Kings from
Pharamund. There is a statua of a Heart, with the head and neck of Gold, set
there in memory of the Treasurers, who in the time of King Charles the sixth,
turned the money in the Exchequer into that form, lest it should be wasted.

Here was painted upon the wall near the Tower, upon the top of the stairs of
the great Hall, the Image of Engueranus Morignon, Earl of Longauille, and
ouerseer of the building of this Palace, under King Phillip the fair, with
this inscription:

Chascun' soit content de ses biens,
Qui n'a suffisance iln' a riens.
Be thou content with the goods thee befall,
Who has not enough, has nothing at all.
This was spoken like a Philosopher: but the same man under Lewis Hatinus was
hanged for deceiving the King, and this his Image was broken and kicked down
the stairs.

In the Hall of the Palace is a Marble Table, at which Kings and Emperors
were wont to be feasted. The Chamber of the Palace where verbal appeals are
decided, is called, The golden Chamber; and it is adorned with stately and
fair arched roofes carved, and pictures, and there the Image of a Lion, with
the Head dejected, and the Tail drawn in, remembers the Pleaders of their
duty.

Lewis the twelfth did build with Regal expense this Chamber, and another
called the Chamber of Accounts (vulgarly la chamber des comptes.) In this
Palace the Chapel built by Saint Lewis, lies upon an arched Chapel, which
has no pillars in the midst, but only on the sides; and they say, that the
true Images of Christ and the blessed Virgin, are upon the lower door. And in
this Chapel, the relics are kept, which Balduinus the Emperor of
Constantinople engaged to the Venetians, and the King of France redeemed out of
their hands. In the very Hall of the Palace, round about the pillars, are
shops of small wares or trifles.

Right against the Gate of the Palace, stood the house of John Chastell, which
was pulled down in memory of a young man his son, brought up among the
Jesuits, and a practiser of their wicked doctrine, who attempting the death of
King Henry the fourth, did strike out one of his teeth.

I have said formerly, that this Island was joined to the Ville by three
Bridges, and to the University by two Bridges, and at this time is joined to
them both, by the sixth Bridge. The first (V) Bridge toward South-East, leads
to the street of Saint Martin, and is called pont de nostre Dame, that is the
Bridge of our Lady, and it was built of wood in the year 1417, having
threescore walking paces in length, and eighteen in breadth, and threescore
houses of brick on each side built upon it. But this bridge in the time of
Lewis the twelfth falling with his own weight, was rebuilt upon six Arches of
stone, with threescore eight houses all of like bigness built upon it, and was
paued with stone, so that any that passed it, could hardly discern it to be a
Bridge. The second Bridge of the Broakers (vulgarly (W) Pont au Change) is
supported with pillars of wood. The third Bridge of the Millers (vulgarly
called (X) Pont aux Musniers) lies toward the North-West, and leads to the
street of Saint Denis, which they say did fall, and was rebuilt within three
years then past. By these three Bridges the Island was of old joined to the
Ville. The fourth Bridge lying on the other side of the Island toward the
South, leads into the street of Saint James, and is called (Y) le petit pont,
that is, The little Bridge, being rebuilt or repaired of stone, by King Charles
the sixth. The sifth Bridge is called (Z) Saint Michell, and lying toward the
South-West side, leads into the street of Saint Michell, and has a pleasant
walk toward the foresaid Bridge of the millers, on the other side of the
Island, and built upon pillars of wood, was repaired in the year 1547, and
adorned with brick houses. By these two Bridges the Island was of old joined to
the University. Since that time after the end of the Civil war, a new
Bridge has been lately built on that side of the Island, which lies toward the
North-West, and it is called (XX) pont neuf, that is, The new Bridge, joining
the Island both to the Ville, and to the University. The chief streets of the
Island are the very Bridges, and the (...) ways leading to the Cathedral
Church, and to the greater Palace.

The Church (or the little City compassed with walls in respect of the
Church) of Saint Denis (the Protecting Saint of the French) is two little miles
distant from Paris. Hither I went passing by the Gate of Saint Denis, lying
toward the North East.

Thence I passed upon a way paued with Flint, in a large Plain toward the
East, having Mount Falcon on my right hand, whether I said, that they use to
draw the dead bodies of those that are beheaded in the Ville, and the next way
to this mount is to go out by the Gate of Saint Martin. And upon my left hand
I had the Mountain of the Martirs vulgarly called Mont Martre, and the next
way from the City to this Mountain is to go out by the Gate Mont Martre.

Upon this Mountain they say, that the Martyrs Dennis Areopagita, and
Rustieus, and Eleutherius, were beheaded in the time of Domitian, because they
would not offer sacrifice to Mercury. And they constantly believe this
miracle, that all these three Martyrs carried each one his head to the Village
Catula, which now is called Saint Dennis. And I observed by the way many
pillars with Altars, set up in the places where they say the Martyrs rested
(forsooth) with their heads in their hand, and at last fell down at Catula,
where this Church was built over them, and likewise a a Monastery, by King
Dagobertus, who also lies there buried, and has a statua in the Cloister of
the Monastery.

Here are the Sepulchers of the Kings, among which that of King Francis the
(...) is somewhat more stately then the other, being of white Marble, with the
statuaes of that King and his Queen Claudia there buried with him. That of
Lewis the twelfth and his Queen, is of white Marble, but less fair; and the
third erected to Charles the eight, in a Chapel of the Church, is of black
Marble, with some statuaes of brass. To conclude, to every three or four of
the rest of the Kings, one poor monument is erected. Neither are these
sepulchers of the Kings (in my opinion) any thing stately or answerable to the
fame. But at the entrance of the Chauncell, the representation of Christ
buried, and of the three Kings or Wisemen, and of the shepherds, and others
there engraven, seemed to me (who have no skill in that Art) to be of much Art
and beauty. I have read other Itineraries, which relate, that here are bells
of most pure Metal, that the doors are of Brass gilded over, that the Table
of the high Altar is of Gold, that here is a Cross of Gold, offered by King
Dagobert, that the bodies of the Martyrs are laid in a coffin of Gold, that the
roof of the Church is partly of silver, and that there is a Crucifix of Gold
before the Altar. But I should think, that these old ornaments are taken away,
and not to be seen at this day.

Having viewed Paris, I desired to see the French King Henry the fourth, and
his Court; and because I lately had been robbed as well of my cloak as of my
Crowns, here I bought for some two French Crowns an old cloak, among the
Brokers in the Market place, called the Fripperie. So I took my journey
toward the Court, and went by boat upon the Seyne (which boat daily passes
from Paris toward the South) nine leagues to Corbeuile, and four leagues to
Melune, having on both sides pleasant Hills planted with Vines, and I paid
seven soulz for my passage. Then I went on foot four miles over a Mountain
paued with Flint to the Kings Palace, called Fontain-bleau, Fontain-bleau.
that is, the Fountain of fair water. Beyond the same Mountain this Palace
of the King is seated in a Plain compassed with Rocks. And it is built (with
Kingly Magnificence) of Freestone, divided into four Court-yards, with a
large Garden, which was then somewhat wild and unmanured. At this time the
Civil war being ended, the King began to build a Gallerie, the beginning of
which work was very magnificent.

The next day after I had seen the King, I returned on foot eight leagues to
Sone. Here I found Posthorses returning to Paris, and hiring one of them for
twenty soulz, I rode eight miles through fruitful fields of Corn, and
pleasant Hills planted with Vines, and so returned to Paris, entering by the
Gate of Saint Victoire in the University.

Now my Crowns which I had saved from the foresaid thieves, were by little and
little spent, and I, who in my long journey had never wanted money, but had
rather furnished others that wanted with no small sums, was forced to treat
with unknown Merchants, for taking money upon exchange. But howsoever I had in
other places dealt with noble Merchants, yet here I found my self to be
fallen into the hands of base and costiue Merchants, who perhaps having been
deceived by English Gentlemen, driven by want to serve in the wars of France,
had not the least respect of me for my misfortune among Thieves, nor yet for
our common Country. It happened, that at this time there were in Paris two
English Knighis brethren, namely, Sir Charles and Sir Henry Dauers, who for an
ill accident lived then as banished men. And to them I made my misfortune
known, who like Gentlemen of their quality, had a just feeling thereof,
especially for that they were acquainted with Sir Richard Moryson my brother,
and they would willingly have lent me money.

But I will tell a truth well known. These brothers upon good bonds were to
have received some thousands of Crowns a few months past in the Temple Hall
(which is one of the Innes of Court of London, for those that profess the
English Law). This being made known by one of the debtors, the Queen
confiscated those Crowns, as belonging to banished men. Whereupon these
Knights being to attend the French King to Lions in his war upon Sauoy, were
much driven to their shifts, to get money for that journey. Yet did they not
cast off all care to provide for me, but with great importunity persuaded a
starueling Merchant, to furnish me with ten French Crowns. When I had received
them, I spent some few days in refreshing my self at Paris.

They account forty eight miles from Paris to Roane, whether I went by boat,
and paid a French Crown for my passage. The first day we passed eighteen
miles to Poissy, a most fair and famous Nunnerie, and toward the evening we
passed by the Kings Palace S. Germain. The next day we passed twenty leagues
to Andale, and by the way passed by a bridge, dividing the County of France
from the Duchy of Normandy, and did see the Palace Galeon, and a most fair
Monastery. Then we passed four miles by water to Port S. Antoine, and one
mile by land. Then we hired another boat, in which we passed five leagues to
Roane, and I paid for this passage three soulz. This our way was by pleasant
Islands, having on both sides pleasant Hills planted with Vines and fruit trees.

The City of Roane is seated on the North side of the River Seyne, partly in a
Plain, Roane.
partly upon sides of Hills. The building is for the most part of Freestone,
brought from the City Cane; and upon a Hill toward the North without the
walls, the Fort S. Cateline was seated, when King Henry the fourth besieged
Roane, and then the Fort much anoyed the quarter of the English auxiliarie
forces: but now this Fort was altogether demolished.

Concerning expenses of diet in these parts, I spent at Paris in the Innes
fifteen soulz each meal, and at Roane twelve soulz, and at some Innes by the
way fifteen soulz: but whosoever pays for his supper has nothing to pay for
his bed. But before the late Civil war, they paid no more at Roane then
eight soulz for a meal. Passengers, who stay long in the City, use to hire a
chamber, which at Paris is given for two French Crowns by the month, if it be
well furnished, and otherwise for less. They that at Paris hier a chamber in
this sort, use to buy their meat in Cooks shops, and having agreed for it,
the Cooks bring it to their chamber warm, and with pleasant sauce. And surely
all things for diet were cheaper at Paris, then they use to be at London, and
since they use to buy small pieces of meat, a solitary passenger shall in
that respect spend the less. Other passengers agree with some Citizen for diet
and chamber, which may be had at Paris in convenient sort for one hundred and
fifty French Crowns by the year; and at Roane for one hundred and twenty:
but before the last Civil war, it might have been had for one hundred, or
eighty, and sometimes for sixty French Crowns. At Roane I now paid for my
supper twelve soulz, and the next day eleven soulz for my dinner.

The night following we rode fourteen leagues to Diepe, in a most pleasant
way, divided into enclosed Pastures, yielding great store of Apletrees, not
only in the hedges, but also in the open fields. About midnight we took some
rest and meat in a poor and solitaire Inn of a Village, but with such fear,
as we were ready to fly upon the least noise. From Roane to Dieppe I hired a
horse for thirty soulz, and in this last Inn I paid twelve soulz for my
meat, and five soulz for my horsemeate.

Dieppe is a pleasant City, and the greater part thereof (especially la Rue
grande, that is the great street) is seated in a plain upon the Haven, but it
is compassed with Mountains, Dieppe.
and is divided into two parts by an Arm of the Sea. The greatest part of the
building, is of Timber and Clay, like our building of England.

I had spent at Paris most part of the ten Crowns I there received, and when I
came from Roane, I perceived that I should presently fall into want of money.
Being in these straites, I went to the younger Paynter (one of the English
Posts passing between London and Paris, and now returning in my company to
London), and to him in few words I made my case known, who willingly yielded
to bear my charges to London, having me still in his company for a pledge.

At Dieppe I paid fifteen soulz for each meal, and ten soulz for my license
to pass over Sea, and five soulz of gift to one of the Officers, and ten
soulz for my part of a boat, hired to draw our ship out of the Haven of Dieppe.

After we had failed fourteen hours, upon Tuesday the thirteenth of May
(after the old style) in the year 1595, early in the morning, we landed in
England at Dover, and I paid a French Crown for my passage in the ship, and
six English pence for my passage in a boat from the ship to that Port of
blessed England. But we were fearce landed, when we were cited to appear
before the Mayor and his Assistants. Where for my part the more poor I was in
apparel, the more frowardly I behaved my felt toward them, (as many good
minds are most proud in the lowest fortunes), so as they began to entreat me
rudely, as if I were some Popish Priest, till by chance a Gentleman one of the
Majors Assistants asking my name, and being familiarly acquainted with my
brother, by private discourse with me, understood that I had been robbed in
France; whereupon he gave his word for me unto the Mayor, and so walked with
me to our Inn. There he showed so much respect and love to me, and after my
refusal of money from him, so frankely gave his word for me to the English
Post, as he was not only willing to furnish me with what money I would, but
himself and the Dutch Gentlemen my Consorts in that journey, much more
respected me, though poorly apparelled, then they had formerly done. As Soon
as I came to London, I paid the ten French Crowns due by my bill of exchange
to the foresaid French Merchant, and not only paid to the English Post the
money he had disbursed for me by the way, but gave him six French Crowns of
free gift, in thankfulness for this courtesy. At London it happened, that (in
regard of my robbing in France) when I entered my sisters house in poor habit,
a servant of the house upon my demand answered, that my sister was at home:
but when he did see me go up the stairs too boldly (as he thought) without a
guide, he not knowing me, in respect of my long absence, did furiously and
with threatening words call me back, and surely would have been rude with me,
had I not gone up faster then he could follow me, and just as I entered my
sisters chamber, he had taken hold on my old cloak, which I willingly flung
of, to be rid of him. Then by my sisters embraces he perceived who I was, and
stole back as if he had trodden upon a Snake.

The third Book.
CHAP. I. Of my journey to Stoade through the United Provinces of Netherland,
and upon the Seacoast of Germany: then to Brunswick and (the right way) to
Nurnburg, Augspurg, and Inspruck (in Germany), and from thence to Venice in
Italy, and so (by the Mediterranean Seas, and the Islands thereof) to Jerusalem.
In which journey I slightly pass over the places described in my former
passage those ways.
FRom my tender youth I had a great desire to see foreign Countries, not to
get liberty (which I had in Cambridge in such measure, as I could not well
desire more), but to enable my understanding (which I thought could not be done
so well by contemplation as by experience; nor by the ear or any sense so
well, as by the eyes. And having once begun this course, I could not see any
man without emulation, and a kind of virtuous envy, who had seen more Cities,
Kingdoms, and Provinces, or more Courts of Princes, Kings, and Emperors, then
my self. Therefore having now wandered through the greatest part of Europe, and
seen the chief Kingdoms thereof, I sighed to my self in silence, that the
Kingdom of Spain was shut up from my sight, by the long war between
England and Spain, except I would rashly cast my self into danger, which I
had already unadvisedly done, when I viewed the City and Fort of Naples, and
the City of Milan. And howsoever now being newly returned home, I thought the
going into more remote parts would be of little use to me, yet I had an itching
desire to see Jerusalem, the fountain of Religion, and Constantinople, of old
the seat of Christian Emperors, and now the seat of the Turkish Ottoman.

Being of this mind when I returned into England, it happened that my brother
Henry was then beginning that voyage, having to that purpose put out some
four hundred pounds, to be repaied twelve hundred pounds upon his return from
those two Cities, and to lose it if he died in the journey. I say he had thus
put out the most part of his small estate, which in England is no better with
Gentlemen's younger sons, nor so good, as with bastards in other places,
as well for the English Law most vnmeasurably favoring elder brothers, as (let
me boldly say it) for the ignorant pride of fathers, who to advance their
eldest sons, drive the rest to desperate courses, and make them unable to
live, or to spend any money in getting understanding and experience, so as they
being in wants, and yet more miserable by their Gentry and plentiful
education, must needs rush into all vices; for all wise men confess, that
nothing is more contrary to goodness, then poverty. My brother being partner
with other Gentlemen in this fortune, thought this putting out of money, to be
an honest means of gaining, at least the charges of his journey, and the
rather, because it had not then been heard in England, that any man had gone
this long journey by land, nor any like it, excepting only Master John Wrath,
whom I name for honor, and more specially he thought this gain most honest
and just; if this journey were compared with other base adventures for gain,
which long before this time had been, and were then in use. And I confess,
that this his resolution did not at the first sight dislike me. For I
remembered, that this manner of gain, had of old been in use among the
inhabitants of the Low Countries, and the Seacoasts of Germany (and so it is
yet in use with them.) I remembered, that no mean Lords, and Lords sons, and
Gentlemen in our Court had in like sort put out money upon a horserace, or
speedy course of a horse, under themselves, yea upon a journey on foot. I
considered, that those kinds of gaining only required strength of body,
whereas this and the like required also vigor of mind, yea, that they often
weakened the body, but this and the like always bettered the mind. I pass
over infinite examples of the former customs, and will only add, that
Earls, Lords, Gentlemen, and all sorts of men, have used time out of mind to
put out money to be repaied with advantage upon the birth of their next
child, which kind of gain can no way be compared with the adventures of
long iournies; yea, I will boldly say, it is a base gain, where a man is so
hired to that daliance with his wife, and to kill a man, so he may get a boy,
as if he were to be encouraged to a game of Olympus.

Being led with these reasons, I liked his counsel, and made my self his
consort in that iourny. And I had now given out upon like condition money to
some few friends, when perceiving the common opinion in this point to be much
differing from mine, and thereupon better considering this matter, and
observing (as a stranger that had been long out of my Country) that these
kind of adventures were grown very frequent, whereof some were indecent, some
ridiculous; and that they were in great part undertaken by bankerouts, and men
ofbase condition. I might easily judge that in short time they would become
disgraceful, whereupon I changed my mind For I remembered the Italian Proverb,
La bellezza di putana, la forza del'fachino, etc. nulla vagliano, that is, the
beauty of a Harlot, the strength of the Porter, and (to omit many like) Music
it self, and all virtues, become less prized in them, who set them out to
sale. Also I remembered the pleasant fable, that Jupiter sent rain upon a
Village, wherewith whosoever was wet became a fool, which was the lot of all
the Inhaitants, excepting one man, who by chance for dispatching of business,
kept within doors that day; and that when he came abroad in the evening, all
the rest mocked him, as if they had been wise, and he only foolish: so as he
was forced to pray unto Jupiter for another like shower, wherein he wetted
himself also, choosing rather to have the love of his foolish neighbors, being
a fool, then to be despised of them, because he was only wise. And no doubt
in many things we must follow the opinion of the common people, with which it
is better (regarding only men) to be foolish, then alone to be wise. I say
that I did for the aforesaid causes change my mind; and because I could not
make that undone which was done, at least I resolved to desist from that
course. Only I gave out one hundred pound to receive three hundred at my
return among my brethren, and some few kinsmen and dearest friends, of whom I
would not shame to confess that I received so much of gift. And lest by
spending upon the stock, my patrimony should be wasted, I moreover gave out to
five friends, one hundred pound, with condition that they should have it if I
died, orafter three years should repay it with one hundred and fifty pound
gain if I returned; which I hold a disaduantageous adventure to the giver of
the money. Neither did I exact this money of any man by suit of Law after my
return, which they willingly and presently paid me, only some few excepted,
who retaining the very money I gave them, deal not therein so gentleman-like
with me, as I did with them. And by the great expenses of my iourny, much
increased by the ill accidents of my brothers death, and my own sickness,
the three hundred fifty pounds I was to receive of gain after my return; and
the one hundred pounds which my brother and I carried in our purses, would not
satisfy the five hundred pound we had spent, (though my brother died within
the compass of the first year); but I was forced to pay the rest out of my
own patrimony.

Gentle Reader I will no longer trouble thee with these trifles: only in the
behalf of them, who for a reasonable gain, and upon long iournies, and not
upon ridiculous adventures, have put out their money in this sort. Give leave to
me (howsoever I desisted from that course) to add this; All manners of attire
came first into the City and Country from the Court, which being once received
by the common people, and by very Stage Players themselves, the Courtiers
justly cast off, and take new fashions, (though somewhat too curiously); and
whosoever wears the old, men look upon him as upon a picture in Arras
hangings. For it is prouerbially said, that we may eat according to our own
appetite, but in our apparel must follow the fashion of the multitude, with
whom we live But in the mean time it is not reproach to any, who of old did
were those garments, when they were in fashion. In like sort, many daunces and
measures are used in Court, but when they come to be vulgar and to be used upon
very stages, Courtiers and Gentlemen think them uncomely to be used; yet is it
no reproach to any man who formerly had skill therein To conclude, (that I may
not trouble you with like examples, which are infinite), I say that this manner
of giving out money upon these adventures, was first used in Court, and among
the very Noble men; and when any of them showed thereby extraordinary strength,
the most censorious approved it, but when any performed a long iourny, with
courage and discretion, no man was found who did not more or less commend it,
according to the condition of the journey performed. Now in this age, if
bankerouts, Stage Players, and men of base condition, have drawn this custom
into contempt: I grant that Courtiers and Gentlemen have reason to forbear it,
yet know not why they should be blamed, who have thus put out their money in
another age, when this custom was approved. A man may justly say it is great
injustice, that our actions should be measured by opinion, and not by reason;
but when a man leaves any custom that has been approved, left he should
oppose himself to the common people, a monster of many heads, the most envious
has nothing whereat they may justly carpe. And if any measure may be imposed
to detracters, surely they must spare them, who undertake long voyages, full of
great dangers who do not put out their money in Tauernes, or at feasts to any
man without distinction, but dispose of their money with their friends upon
reasonable adventure of gain, (which in absence they cannot otherwise dispose
to profit): Finally who being not rich by patrimony, take these iournies only
for experience, and to be enabled to that expense, do condition this
reasonable gain. I say the detracters must spare these, and distinguish them
from others, who make cursorie iournies, without any desire to better their
understanding thereby, and more from those, who in these courses rather make
trial of their bodies strength, then of their minds ability. And most of all
from those, who expose themselves to the scorn of men, by base and ridiculous
adventures, or that little differ from selfe-murtherers, in undertaking
desperate actions for gain.

In the same year 1595; wherein (some few months past) I returned into England
from my former journey, I now set forth again toward Jerusalem, and upon the
twenty Anno 1595.
nine of November (after the old style), I and my brother consort of my
journey, went by water twenty miles (which are seventeen miles by land) from
London to Grauesend, in a boat with two Oars, for which we paid two shillings
six Pence. At last the wind serving us, upon the seventh of December in the
evening, we set sail at an ebbing water, and upon the eighth of December in
the afternoon, having passed the River Thames, we cast anchor, upon the shore
of England, right before the Village Margets.

Then in the twilight of the evening, we put to Sea, and the ninth of December
entering the narrow Sea of Zealand, upon our call a boat came out of Vlishing to
us, in which we went thither, leaving our ship, which went forward to
Midleburg, and each man paying a doller for his passage. The eleventh of
December we walked on foot one mile to Midleburge, where being invited by our
friends (as we were at Vlishing) we supped on free cost. The twelfth day we
passed by Sea in two hours space to Armuren, where we cast anchor not without
fear of Spanish Pirates, who coming with small boats out of the Castle Wouda,
did then many robberies upon this Sea. The thirteenth day in the morning, we
sailed nine miles to the Island Plat, where a Man of war, sent out by the
States against these Pirates, did lie at anchor, under the guard whereof we also
lay at anchor the night following. The fourteenth day in the morning, having
always a fair wind, we sailed eight milcs to Delphs haven in Holland, where
we left our Bark, and each man paid twelve stiuers for his passage, and my
self gave three stiuers to a Mariner that had attended me. From hence my
self and three consorts, hired a Wagon for 18 stiuers to the Hage, where I
paid for my supper a Flemish guilden and seventeen stiuers. The fiftenth day
of December (which after the new style was Christmas day, that Feast by the old
style falling on the twenty five of December) my self and three consorts
hired a Wagon for two guldens, for two long miles to Leyden. From Leyden at a
set hour every day, boats pass to all the next Cities, and we entering the
boat that went for Amsterdam, paid each of us 6 stiuers for our passage.
First, we passed five miles upon the Lake called Harlam Meare, which Lake is
much subject to Tempests. Our boat was then drawn by force of hands over a
Damme into a Channel of water, in which we passed two miles, and so came to
Amsterdam. The boats are thus drawn out of the Lake into the Channel, by a
privilege granted to Harlam, because that City had spent much money in the
works for conueyance of waters. And this was granted to them, to the end,
that this passage being shut up to Barks of greater burden, the Merchants
wares passing by land, should be forced to come by Harlam. We lodged in a
English Merchants house at Amsterdam, and paid eight stiuers for each meal.

The seventeenth of December we entered a little ship, to sail out of Holland
into West-Freesland: but being almost frozen in with ice, after we had sailed
two days and a night (with great danger) through huge pieces of ice, and were
the second night also compassed therewith, and had been forced to lie at anchor
a good space, we hardly arrived the third day at Horn in North- Holland, which
City is five miles distant from Amsterdam and each man paid ten stiuers for
our passage, and two stiuers for the use of a little cabin in the ship. The
ninteenth day we would needs go on foot two miles (as long as ten English
miles), to Enchnsen, because they asked four guldens and a half for a Wagon.
And in the mid way it happened that we light upon a sledg, which we 4 consorts
hired for 20 stiuers, and therein we were all carried, but for my part I paid
5 stiuers more for the carriage of my necessaries. And we could not sufficiently
marvel at our first setting forth, that the Villages should be so frequent, in
such an obscure Country, as we could hardly see how they were parted one from
the other, for half the way at least. From hence we sailed with a very fair
wind, in three hours space two miles to Stauern, a Village seated in West-
Freezland, and each man paid ten stiuers for his passage, four for his supper,
and four for beer.

The next day we passed on foot one mile of Freezland, (which miles are
exceeding long) to Warcome, and we hired two Clownes for two guldens, to carry
our necessaries, which Clownes drinking stoutly all the night, we were forced
beyond our bargain to pay for their intemperance, which wrong we could not
avoid, though we much repined at it. Early in the morning we passed by water
one mile over a Lake to Bolsworth, and each man paid two stiuers and a half
for his passage, and eight stiuers and a half for his dinner. In the
afternoon we hired a boat for three miles to Lewerden, and each man paid six
stiuers for his passage, and thirty four stiuers for his supper and
breakefast, with wine. The next day in the morning, we might have passed to
Groaning, in a common boat, each man paying twelve stiuers: but because the
covetous Mariners had ouerloaded it, and the winds were boisterous, we four
consorts hired a private boat for seven guldens and a half. The first day we
passed by water five miles, to Kaltherberg, that is, the cold Inn, with a very
fair wind; but so boisterous, as we were in no small fear. Here each man paid
twelve stiuers for his supper, and seven stiuers for his drink, while in good
fellowship we sat at the fire after supper. The next day we passed in the same
boat two miles to Groaning, in a great tempest of wind; besides that in the
midst of the Lake we lost our Rudder, being thereby in great danger, had not
the waves of the water (by Gods mercy) driven it to us. Here we paid eight
stiuers each man for a plentiful dinner, but without wine. In the afternoon
we passed by water two miles to Delphs I Will, and each man paid forty stiuers for
the hier of the boat, and twenty four stiuers for supper and breakefast, and
fire in our private chamber.

From hence we sailed with a most fair wind, in two hours space two miles to
Emden, the first City of the German Empire, seated in East- Friezland, and each
man paid six stiuers for his passage, and as much for his dinner. In the
afternoon we passed in a boat hired for four guldens (whereof each man paid
ten stiuers for his part) three miles to a little City Lyre, and by the way
passed by the Fort Nordlire, in which the Earl of Emden held his Court. We
rested at Lyre this night and the next day, being Christmas day by the old
style, and each man paid sixteen stiuers for each supper, and eight stiuers
for one dinner. The Spanish Garrisons daily sent out free-booters into these
parts, with the permission of the Earl of Emden, (for his hatred to the
Citizens of Emden, who lately had shut him out of their City); and of the Earl
of Oldenburge (for his hatred against the Citizens of Breme). Therefore we
being here many passengers, did at last obtain of the Earl of Emden, that we
might hier his soldiers to conduct us safely for some few miles. To these
soldiers we gave twenty one dollers, yet when at the three miles end we came
to the Village Stickhausen, and were now in the greatest danger, they (as hired
to go no further) would needs return, till each of us gave them a German
gulden, to conduct us only to the next village, being the confines of the
Counties of Emdens and Oldenburg. To which they were persuaded, not so much by
our prayers as by our reward, and once by the way, to make show of danger (as
it seemed to me lest we should repent us of the money we had given them, they
rushed into some old houses, with such a noise, as if they would have killed al
they met, but no enemy appeared, and if they had lurked there, I think they
would not have fought with the Earls soldiers who favored them, as on the
other side, if they had assaulted them, I doubt whether our mercinary soldiers
would have lost one dram of blood for our safety. As long as these soldiers
were with us, we partly went by water, (each man paying 3. stiuers for his
passage) and partly on foot. They being now dismissed, we went on foot a Dutch
mile, in the Territory of the Earl of Oldenburg, to the Village Aopen, where
each man paid four stiuers for his dinner. In the afternoon, we being many
consorts, hired diners wagons, paying for each of them twenty five stiuers to
Oldenburg, being four miles, and we came thither by nine of the clock in the
night, and there each man paid fifteen groates for his supper and breakefast.
The second day in the morning we went four miles to Dolmenhurst, and each man
paid two copstucks for his Wagon. Then six of us hired a Wagon one mile to
Breme for three copstucks, where each man paid fourteen lubecke shillings for
his supper and breakefast.

From hence eleven of us hired two Wagons to Stoade, for which each of us paid
thirty lubecke shillings. The first day we went four miles to a poor Village,
where each of us paid five lubecke shillings for our suppers. And having rested
here somefew hours upon straw, we went before the break of day three miles to
Foard, and making no stay there, passed three miles further to Stoade.

Hence five of us hired a Coach for five dollers, to Luneburg ten miles
distant, and the first day in the afternoon we went three miles to
Alte-kloster, that is; the old Cloister, which was seated in the Bishoppricke
of Breme, and the next day one mile in the same Bishoppricke, and six in the
Duke of Luneburgs territory, and so we came to Luneburg; but the horses being
weary, and the iourny long, we came so late in the night, as we were forced to
lodge without the gates, where each man paid five lubecke shillings for his
supper, three for his breakefast, and five for beer. The next day we entered
Luneburge, where each man paid four lubecke shillings and a half for his
dinner.

From hence four of us hired a Coach for seven dollers to Brunswicke, being
sixteen miles distant, the Coachman paying for his horses meat, and we for his
own meat. The same day in the afternoon, we passed five miles in six hours
space to Sawerburg, where each of us paid (for our own supper, with our part
of the Coach-mans supper) seven lubecke shillings. The second day in the
morning we passed four miles to Owsen, where each man paid in like sort five
lubecke shillings for our dinner. In the afternoon we passed three miles to
Gethurne, where the Duke of Luneburg has a Castle (which the Dutch call
Schlosse); where for ours and the Coach-mans supper and breakfast, we four
English consorts paid a doller and twelve stiuers. The third day in the
morning, we passed four miles to Brunswicke, where in like sort we four paid
for our own and the Coach-mans beuer, supper, and dinner, two dollers and a
half.

From hence six consorts of us hired a Coach forthirty dollers to Nurnberg,
forty eight miles distant, and the coachman paid for his horse-meat, and we
for his own meat, which hereafter divided among us I will reckon in our
seureall expenses. The first day at ten of the clock beginning our journey, we
passed through fruitful hills of corn one mile, where we left on our left hand
Wolfenbeyten, (a City where the Duke of Brunswicke keeps his Court), with a
Village belonging to his brother the Bishop of Ossenbruck. And there we met
with certain of the Dukes hors-men, who kept the ways safe from thieves, and
at their request we bestowed on them an Ort or fourth part of a doller. Then in
the like way we passed two miles and a half to Rauchell, where each of us paid
for ours and the Coach-mans supper five filuer groshen. The second day in the
morning we passed three miles and a half to Halberstatt, where each man paid
in like sort for ours and the Coach-mans dinner half a doller. Our iourny this
day was through fruitful hills of corn, not enclosed, and groves and woods in
a fruitful and pleasant Country. The Duke of Brunswicke is called the
Administrator of the Bishoppricke of Halberstatt, and has the rents thereof.
After dinner we passed one mile to Ermersteben, subject to the Duke of
Brunswicke, through a plain more pleasant then the former, having no
enclosures, but being fruitful in corn, and full of Villages; where we four
English consorts paid twenty three silver groshen for our own and the
Coach-mans supper. I have omitted the quality of the soil, in places which I
have formerly discribed, which now I mention again, because this is the first
time I passed from Brunswicke to Nurnburg. The third day in the morning we
passed in a dirty way (but through most pleasant hills, and fruitful of corn,
but having no woods, nor so much as a tree,) two miles to Mansfield.

The Counts of Man field well known Captains in the wars of the
Low Countries and Hungary, have their name from this Castle and Village, and
this territory, (having besides some twelve Castles) being not sufficient to
maintain the great number of them, they were forced to seek advancement by
the wars. The Citizens of Mansfield were of old very rich by the Mines of
this territory, but at this time they had scarce bread to eat, the Counts
having engaged these mines to the Fugari of Augsburg, and to some Citizens of
Nurnburg. Some of these mines yield gold, but so sparingly, as it scarce quits
the cost. Others yield silver, and the very mines of Copper in each hundred
yield twenty lot (that is half ounces) of silver. Of these mines some are two
hundred Clafters (that is fathoms) deep under the earth. And these mines of
the mountain are borne up with pillars and buildings of wood under the earth,
lest it should fall upon the workmen. They say that these mines yield yearly
one hundred and forty thousand dutch guldens, besides the expenses. At this
time three officers lived in the Castle, who received the profits of the mines
for those to whom they were engaged, whereof one received five parts, the other
three, the third only one part. Moreover here be wonderful stones in the
quarries, which broken into never so many parts, have still the lively figure
of diverse things. Our Host showed us some of them, which had throughout the
figures of diverse fishes in a Lake adioining, this stone of one fish, that of
another, and so of all the kinds. And he showed us one that had throughout the
figure of Christ crucified, another that had the figure of the Popes triple
Crown, and another that had the lively figure of Luther. Surely the Germans
are accounted no iuglers, nor liers; and if they would have deceived us, yet I
cannot see how our eyes should be deceived, seeing many of them broken, and
still having the same figure. This poor Village (yet pleasant for the seat) was
of old a City, and at this time the houses were covered (as they be in many
parts of Germany) not with tiles of brick, but with like pieces of wood. Here
each of us paid a quarter of a doller for our own and the Coach-mans dinner.

In the afternoon we passed a dirty way; but through fruitful corn fields,
four miles to Sangerhausen, where each of us in like sort paid the fourth part
of a doller and a grosh for our supper. This being the first Village of the
Province Thuring, belongs to the Elector of Saxony. The fourth day in the
morning we passed through most pleasant and fruitful hills of corn, adorned
with some pleasant woods, (which in higher Germany are of fur, that is green
all winter,) four miles in the territory of the Elector of Saxony, to a
Country Inn; where having nothing but eggs for our dinner, we paid jointly
ten silver grosh. After dinner we passed in the same Electors territory, and
through the like soil (or Country) three miles and a half to a Country
Inn, where we had to supper a pudding as big as a man's leg, and gross meat,
and straw for our beds; and jointly paid fourteen grosh. The fifth day early
in the morning we passed-through the like way, but more pleasant for the plenty
of Vines, two miles to the City of Erfurt, where we four English consorts with
our Coachman paid jointly a doller and twenty one grosh for our dinner, with
sower wine of the Country. This City is seated in a plain, and is a free
City, but not an imperial City, and paies some tribute to the Bishop of Metz,
and to the Saxon Duke of Wineberg. It is large, being a Dutch mile in compass,
but the houses are poorly built of timber and clay, having the roofes covered
with tiles of wood, and they seem to be built of old. It has forty two
Churches, but only sixteen are used for divine service: namely, eight for the
Papists, (among which are the two Cathedral Churches, under the power of the
Archbishop of Metz,) and eight for the Protestants or Lutherans. This is the
chief City of Thuring, and of old here was an University, but time has
dissolved it. After dinner at the first going out of the City, we ascended a
very high mountain, whereupon is a pleasant wood of fur. Then we passed by
the beautiful little City of Armstat, I call it beautiful, for the seat in a
firtile soil, having dry and pleasant walks, and for the plenty of
fountains and groaues, and for the magnificence of the Castle, wherein the
Count of Schwartzburg keeps his Court, finally for the uniform building of
the City, which some fifteen years past was burnt to the ground, and was
since rebuilded, and so coming from Erfurt, we passed three long miles to the
Village Blaw, subject to the Count of Schwartzburg; where jointly we paid
fourteen grosh for our supper. The sixth day we passed three miles through
woody mountains, to the Village Fraw-im-Wald, (that is, our Lady in the
wood), which Village is subject to the said Count; and here we paid jointly
thirty seven grosh and a half for our dinner. After dinner we passed three
miles through mountains covered with snow, and woods of fur to Eysfield,
subject to the Saxon Duke of Coburg. For this wood of Thuring, (vulgarly called
Thuringwald) has many Lords, namely, the Elector of Saxony, the Saxon Dukes of
Wineberg and Coburg, and the Count Schwartzburg The Duke of Coburg has in this
place a fair Castle, and we paid jointly for us four and the Coachman sixty
four grosh for our supper and breakefast. The seventh day in the morning we
passed three miles over dirty mountains, and fruitful in corn, to Coburg
seated in the Province of Franconia. They say this City was of old called
Cotburg, that is, the City of dirt, and the dirty streets well deserve the
name. Here one of the Dukes of Saxony called of Coburg kept his Court, and our
Host told us that his Duchess for adultery was then bricked up in a wall, the
place being so narrow, as she could only stand, and having no door, but only
a hole whereat they gave her meat. The building of the City was very base of
timber and clay. Here we five paid sixteen grosh for our dinner. In the
afternoon we passed two miles, to the Town Clawsen, through fruitful hills of
corn, and in a most dirty way, where we five paid forty nine grosh for our
supper; and the Town is subject to the Popish Bishop of Bamberg. The eight day
we passed four miles to Bamberg, through a fruitful plain of corn, and
pleasant hills planted with vines, and in a most dirty way. This City is the
seat of the Bishop of Bamberg. By the way we passed by a Ferry the River
Manus, running to Franckfort. Here we five paid thirty seven grosh for our
dinner. In the afternoon we passed through a wood of fur in a sandy soil,
and then through fruitful fields of corn and pleasant hills, three mile unto a
Village subject to the Margraue of Anspach, (from which a City subject to the
Bishop of Bamberg, is not far distant, for the Princes dominions in these
parts are mingled one with the other); and here we five paid fifty five grosh
for our supper. The ninth day we passed three miles through a sandy and barren
plain, and woods of fur always green, to a Village subject to the said
Margraue, where we five paid forty grosh for our dinner. In the afternoon we
passed three miles, through the like way, to Nurnburg, and being now free from
paying for our Coachman, each of us paid here six batzen each meal, and four
creitzers each day for our chamber. This City I have formerly discribed, and so
pass it over.

Here we hired a Coach, being seven consorts, for twelve Dutch guldens, to
Augsburg, being nineteen miles distant. The first day after breakefast we
passed through Nurnburg wood two miles, and in the said Margraues territory
(who is of the Family of the Electors of Brandeburg,) four miles to Blinfield;
and each of us paid ten batzen for our supper, and four batzen for a banquet
after supper. The second day in the morning we passed four miles to the City
Monheyme, subject to the Phaltz-graue of the Rheine, and here each of us paid
half a gulden for his dinner. By the way, in this mornings journey, we did see
Weyssenburg, a free but not imperial City, protected by Nurnburg. The Margraue
of Anspach, Lord of this territory, has a Fort built upon a Mountain, that
hangs over this free City, which when he did build, the Citizens complained to
the Emperor; and they say that how soever they brought the Emperors Mandate
to desist from the work, yet he would not obey the same. The rest of our
iourny to Monheyme, was in the territory of the Baron of Papenheym, in a dirty
way, through many woods. And in a village subject to that Baron, we had a guide
and two fresh horses for our Coach, and for them our Coachman paid six
batzen. After dinner we passed three miles through a wood, and fruitful hills
of corn, to the City Donwerd, being a fair imperial City, which I have
formerly described, and here each man paid six batzen for his supper. Now we
were come out of Franconio, and began to enter into Suenia. The third day we
passed three miles, through fruitful fields of corn, and woods of fur, to a
Village, where each man paid eight batzen for his dinner. In the afternoon we
passed through likeway, three miles to Augsburg, where each man paid seven
batzen for each meal. I pass over this City, which I have discribed before.

Here we agreed with the Carrier of Augsburg, who by course that week went to
Venice, that each of us should pay him seventeen Crowns, (each Crown worth
twenty two batzen), and that he not only should find every man a horse, and
pay for the horses meat, but also should pay for our diet. And here I gained
this by my Dutch Language, that making the bargain with him for one of my
Countrymen, who could not speak Dutch, when we came to Venice, and he having
no money, could not pay the Carrier, I had no remedy but to pay those Crowns
for him, to which the Law would have compelled me, as the maker of the
bargain, if I had not rather chosen willingly to do it. See how ignorance may
sometimes advantage, and skill may prejudice a man.

We began this journey in the afternoon, and the first day through a Heath,
and in the Territory of the Duke of Bauaria from the very Gates of Augsburg,
we rode six miles to an Inn near Landsperg. The second day in the morning,
through fruitful Hills and Woods of Fur, green at this time of the year,
we rode four miles to Schongaw, and after dinner through Mountains covered
with snow, four miles to Amberg. The third day in the morning we rode two
miles to the Village Warten kerken, and after dinner six short miles to
Seyfeld, and in the midest of the way a Bridge diuides the Dukedom of Bauaria
from the County of Tyrall. At Seyfeld there is a Church built in memory of a
Gentleman, swallowed up by the gaping earth (as they say) because being to
receive the Sacrament, he demanded in scoff a great piece of bread. The
fourth day in the morning, we rode three miles to Inspruck, the chief City
of Tyrall, subject to the Family of Austria, where being at the top of the
Alps, the Mountains began to open toward the South, and our mornings
journey was in a pleasant Plain between the highest Mountains. Passing this
plain, they showed us upon a high Mountain (so high as we could scarce
discern the things they showed, though of great bigness); I say, they showed
us the statua of the Emperor Maximiltan, proportionable to his body, and a
great Crucifix erected by him upon this occasion. One day when he hunted, and
wandering from his company, lost himself, so as he had no hope to get out of
those most thick woods, and most high Mountains, there appeared to him a man,
or (as they said) his good Angel, who led him through wild vast Woods, till
he came in safety, and then vanished away, in memory whereof, they say the
Emperor erected these monuments.

In this City of Inspruck, and in the Cathedral Church thereof, is the
Sepulcher of the said Emperor, and there be many Images partly of Brass,
partly of Marble erected Inspruck.
to the Archdukes of Austria, and eight of Brass erected to the
Arch-Dutchesses. Among them was the sepulcher of Philippina, a Citizens
Daughter of Augsburg, whom the Archduke Ferdinand (lately buried, and lying in
a Chapel without any sepulcher as then erected to him) took for his Wife,
but with a coucnant (as they say) that her children should not inherit as
Archdukes of Austria.

From hence we rode in the afternoon between Mountains, descending into
Italy, and lying toward the South Sun, four miles and a half of most
pleasant way to Lueg. The fifth day we passed the Mountain Bremer, and rode
two miles and a half to Sterzen, subject to the Cardinal of Brixia, one of
the Family of the Archdukes of Austria at Inspruck. The Mountain Bremer is
more then a Dutch mile high, yet nothing steep; this way from Augsburg to
Venice, being for the most part through pleasant Vallyes, in the midst of
Mountains, and so winding over the Mountains, as the passage is very easy.
Here my brother Henry falling sick, I dealt with the carrier, that we paying
him three guldins and a half for the common charge of his companies supper, he
would there stay for us till the next morning, and this likewise I obtained of
our consorts with more ease, because they were to diet at the Carriers charge.
The sixth day we rode three miles to a Village not far distant from Brixia,
where the said Cardinal held his Court, this way being all through woody
Mountains. After dinner we rode three miles in the said Cardinals Territory,
(through Mountains, and Hills planted with Vines, and lying toward the South
Sun) to Clausy. The seventh day we rode four miles (in a straight way
between Rocks with pleasant Orchards of Pomgranats, and other Italian
fruits, lying on both sides) to (...), which the Dutch call Pozen. And after
dinner we began to leave the Alps on our back, and rode three miles to
Newmart, through Woods of Fur, in a Plain more and more enlarging it self,
and planted after the Lombard fashion, with Elm trees set in the surrowes of
Corne-fieldes, and Vines growing up high upon the Elmes. The eighth day we
rode by the bank of the River Athesis to Trent, three miles in the County
Tyroll, within the Dutch Empire, and one Dutch mile in Italy.

The City Trent is seated in length from a Mountain on the East side, to
another on the West side, and the River Athesis (which the Dutch call Esh)
runs by the City Trent.
on the North side. The City is famous by a late Council held there, and the
Archduke of Austria at Inspruck has his Officer there, to gather Tributes
belonging to him. And the Cardinal Madrucci (lame of an arm and foot, but
reputed eloquent) has some privileges in this City for the administration of
Justice, and otherwise: for the command of the City belongs to the Family of
Madrucci, being Gentlemen. After dinner we entered the Mountains again, where
we walked over a way paued with Flint (which the Dutch call Plat) and did
lead our horses in our hands, the way being very slipperie, and so we rode one
most long Dutch mile to Bersena. The ninth day we rode three most long miles to
Bergo, I mean Dutch miles, for I had no other companions but Dutch, who reckon
the way after their own miles. This day we passed infamous places for
robberies, especially one, where 5 ways lead to 5 wooddie Mountains; and
here we did see thieves, being our selves in safety, they having no means to
come to us, in a Plain so covered with snow, that our Horses were vpto the
saddles therein, and could hardly pass the high way. After dinner we rode two
most long Dutch miles to Griguo. The tenth day we rode two Dutch miles to
Primolano, the first Village in the State of Venice: but from the foresaid
confines of the Empire to this place, all the Territory belonged to diners
Gentlemen, neither subject to the Empire, nor to the State of Venice, but
living free, only acknowledging to hold their land from the Archdukes of
Austria. Also beyond Primolane (subject to the State of Venice), there is a
Fort built between a narrow passage of two Mountains, which Fort is very
little, but hangs over the high way, being built on the side of a Mountain,
and this Fort is kept by Dutch Soldiers. It has no Gate, but they that will
go forth, must be let down by a rope, and they that will enter it, must in
like sort be drawn up. Moreover before dinner we rode from Primolano; one
Dutch mile to Carpanella, and at our setting forth from Primolan, we passed
over a Bridge, under which was little water for the present: but when the snow
melts from the Mountains, or any great rain falls, the waters there are high
and violent, and some month past, when the Carrier of Augspurg and his
consorts could no way pass the same, they told us, that an English Gentleman
impatient of delay, and trying to pass the same, was drowned, and that his
body was found after somefew days, when it had been spoiled of a gold chain
and store of Crowns, they being unknown who got this booty, and that he was
at first buried in a Chapel, but after taken up by the Priests, and buried in
the high way, when they heard he was an Englishman, and thereupon suspected him
to be an heritike. For the building of this bridge each of us paid two
creitzers in the next Village. In our mornings journey the way was narrow,
between Mountains, and we might see and hear Mountains of dissolved snow,
drawing with them huge stones, to fall with great noise into the high way
before us, and into other adjoining Vallyes. After dinner we rode through a
plane tilled after the manner of Lombardy, three Dutch miles and a half, to
the Castle Franco. The twelfth day we rode three Dutch miles to the City
Treuigi, through a like Plain. After dinner (for I have formerly described
Treuigi) we rode two Dutch miles, or ten Italian miles, through a like Plain
to Mestre. From hence we passed by water to Venice being five miles, first in a
Ditch, each man paying one soldo for his passage, then in other boats over the
Lakes wherewith Venice is compassed, each man paying three soldi for his
passage. I omit to speak any thing of Venice, which I have formerly described.

We being now to take our purposed journey into the Turks Dominions, thought
it best, first to go to Constantinople, where the English Ambassador giving
us a Ianizare Our journey from Venice to Jerusalem.
for our guide, we hoped the rest of our journey would be pleasant, and void of
all trouble. For this Ianizare, as well for their wonted faithfulness to those
that give them wages, as for the account he was to make of our safety to the
said Ambassador, no doubt would have been a faithful guide to us. But when we
inquired of the way from Raguza to Constantinople by land, all the Posts and
Messengers passing that way, told us, that the war of Hungary made all those
parts full of tragedies and misery. Then we thought to go by Sea to
Constantinople: but when we heard that no ship would be had in three months
at least, that long delay was hateful to us. Too late, after my return, by
experience in my journey, and conference, I found a third way, namely by Sea
from Venice to Zant, and from that Island (taking the Council of the English
Merchants there) to Petrasso, (seated upon the Corinthian Creek of the Sea, in
Peloponesus, a Province of Greece, called by the Turks Morea), then to take a
Ianizare from the English Consul there residing, and with him to pass by land
to Athens, and by Sea in little Barks from thence to Constantinople. The
fourth way was not unknown to us, namely, to go by Sea to Cyprus (as we
did), and in the same ship to have passed to Scanderona, and there taking a
Ianizare from the English Factor, maintained there by our Merchants of Haleppo,
to have passed under his conduct by Sea to Jerusalem. Or else to have gone from
Scanderona to Haleppo, and there taking a Ianizare of the English Consul, and
obtaining letters from the Italians, to recommend the care of us and our
safety to the Guardian of the Monastery of the Latin Church in Jerusalem
(which our Merchants would easily have obtained for us) to have passed from
thence by land to Jerusalem. But when we imparted at Cyprus this our purpose
to the Consorts of our journey from Venice thither, who were then hiring a
Bark to pass from Ciprus to Ioppa, whence they had but forty miles to
Jerusalem, they were very desirous of our company, and with great earnestness
gave us confidence, that they would procure the said Guardian and Friars at
Jerusalem to do us all courtesy in their power, and so persuaded us to commit
our selves to their company and protection. I will add for the instruction of
others, that the said Ianizare uses to be hired for eight Aspers a day, and if
he take this charge of any man's safety from an Ambassador, or any Christian
Officer of account, he will easily save a man more then his wages, in
governing his expenses, and keeping him from those extortions, which the Turks
use to do upon Christians, as also from all their injuries. But I return to
the purpose; We lying at Venice, and while our health was yet sound, and our
Crowns unspent, desiring with all possible speed to finish our voyage into
Turkey, did by good hap light upon French consorts for our journey, namely, two
Franciscan Friars, one Eremitan Friar, and two honest young Frenchmen, both
Citizens of Bloys in France, and one of them a Burgers son, the other a
Notarie of the City, and lastly a Flemming or Dutchman, Citizen of Emden in
East Freezeland. This Fleming was a fat man, borne to consume victuals, and he
had now spent in his iourny to Venice thirty pound sterling, and here for his
journey to Jerusalem had already put into the ship full Hogs-heads of Wine, and
store of all victuals, when suddenly he changed his mind, for fear of a great
Rhume wherewith he was troubled, or being discouraged with the difficulty of
the journey, and would needs return to Emden, with purpose (if he were to be
believed) to return the next Spring to some place near Jerusalem, in an
English ship, which he thought more commodious. He professed, that he had put
much money out upon his return, and since he was old, and very sickly, and
after so long a journey, and so much money spent, would needs return home, I
cannot think that he ever undertook this journey again.

Many Papists think they must have the Popes License to go this journey, and
Villamont a French Gentlemen writes, that otherwise they incur the censure of
the Church, and affirms that the Pope writ under his license these words; Fiat
quod petitar, that is, let that be granted which is craved, and under the
remission of his sins, Fiat Faelix, that is; Let him be made happy: And he
adds, that he was forced to take as much pains, and to spend as much, and to
use as much help of the Popes Officers, for the obtaining of these two suits,
as if he had been a suter for a Bishoppricke. But I know many Papists, that
have gone from Venice to Jerusalem, who either cared not for this license, or
never thought upon it; and how soever it may give some credulous men hope of
fuller indulgence or merit, surely it will serve them for no other use. Among
our consorts I never heard any mention thereof, neither did the Friars at
Jerusalem inquire after it. When I first began to think of undertaking this
journey, it was told me that each Ascension day, a Venetian gally was set forth
to carry Pilgrims to Jerusalem. But it seems that this custom is grown out
of use, since few are found in these days who undertake this journey, in
regard of the Turks imposing great exactions, and doing foul injuries to
them. For the very Friars, which every third year are sent into those parts,
to do divine duties to the Papist Merchants there abiding; (the Friars
formerly sent being recalled), use to pass in no other then common Merchants
ships.

In the end of March we had the opportunity of a ship passing into Asia, (which
at that time of the year is not rare). This ship was called the less Lion,
and the Master, (whom the Italians call Patrono) was Constantine Coluri a
Grecian, (as most part of the Mariners are Greeks, the Italians abhorring
from being sea men): Concerning diet, some agreed with the Steward of the ship
(called Ilscalco) and they paid by the month four silver crowns, (each
crown at seven lyres), and I marked their Table was poorly scrued. For our
part we agreed with the Master himself, who for seven gold crowns by the
month paid by each of us, did courteously admit us to his Table, and gave us
good diet, serving each man with his knife and spoone, and his forke (to hold
the meat whiles he cuts it, for they hold it ill manners that one should touch
the meat with his hand), and with a glass or cup to drink in peculiar to
himself. He gave us wine mingled with water, and fresh bread for two or three
days after we came out of any harbor, and otherwise biscuit, which we made
soft by soaking it in wine or water. In like sort, at first setting forth he
gave us fresh meats of flesh, and after salted meats, and upon fasting days
he gave us eggs, fishes of diverse kinds, dried or pickled, sallets, sod Rice,
and pulse of diverse kinds; Oil in stead of butter, Nuts, fruit, Cheese, and
like things. Also we agreed that if our journey were ended before the month
expired, a rateable proportion of our money should be abated to us. Each of us
for his passage agreed to pay five silver crowns of Italy. And howsoever, I
think they would not have denied us wine, or meat between meals, if we had
been dry or hungry; yet to avoid troubling of them, my self and my brother
carried some flaggons of rich wine, some very white biscuit, some pruines and
raisins, and like things. And to comfort our stomachs in case of weakness,
we carried ginger, nutmegs, and some like things; and for remedies against
agues, we carried some cooling sirops, and some pounds of sugar, and some
laxatiue medicines. Also we carried with us two chests, not only to lay up
these things, but also that we might sleep and rest upon them at pleasure, and
two woollen little mattresses to lie upon, and four quilts to cover us, and to
lay under us, which mattresses and quilts we carried after by land, or else we
should have been far worse lodged in the houses of Turks: besides that many
times we lay in the field under the starry cannopy. In stead of sheets we used
linen breeches, which we might change at pleasure.

Howsoever all Nations may use their own apparel in Turkey, yet the clothes of
Europe, and especially the short clokes, are most offensive to them, so as the
wearer provoke them thereby to do him injuries. Therefore my self and my
brother bought each of us a long coat, of as course stuff as we could find,
and a long gown of a course and rough frize. Our swords, daggers, and European
garments, we left in our chests, with a Flemmish Merchant lying at Venice, to
be kept against our return and howsoever he falling banckerout, left the City
before that time, yet our goods were by the public Officer laid apart, and
readily delivered to us at our return.

Whereas we left our swords at Venice, know that no Turks, (and much less
Christians) carry any Arms, except when they go some journey, and that we
were not ignorant, that howsoever Christians may defend themselves from thieves
by the high way, yet it was hard to distinguish between the Turks violent
extortions, with the injuries of them, and the Ianizares by the high ways, and
flatrobberies by thieves, and that whosoever should draw a sword or a knife
against these men, or any Turk scoffing and defpising him, should be sure to
die an ill death by public Justice (which notwithstanding I know not how any
man carrying Arms could have the patience to endure). Therefore since the
Turks iournying in great troops, were sufficiently armed against thieves, and
in all events are unfaithful fellow soldiers to a Christian ioining with
them, (excepting the Ianizares, who how soever they make a show of fear of
thieves, that they may seem better to deserve their wages, yet have seldom or
never been assaulted by them). For these and other reasons we left our swords
at Venite, (which reasons it would be tedious to urge), and chose rather
unarmed then armed to suffer injuries, which there cannot be avoided.

My self and my brother Henry, (who died this year in the month of July)
spent four hundred and eighty pounds sterling, in this journey from England to
Jerusalem, and thence to Haleppo; and in my particular journey (after his
death) to Constantinople, and return into England. If any say we spent
lauishly, let him know that my dearest brothers death, and my necessary stay
thereupon, and a desperate sickness into which I fell upon grief, very much
increased the said expenses. Add that I being pressed with these miseries, had
now spent all the money we brought in our purses, and then suffered great
loss, by the money taken upon exchange to be paid in England, and being weak
after my sickness, was forced much to increase my charge, by taking a servant
to wait upon me. From which extraordinary mischiefs, God deliver all that
undertake this journey, and yet I am deceived if the ordinary burdens will not
seem more then enough heavy to them.

But I return to the relation of my journey. It is the Mariners fashion that
being to go to Sea, they will affirm they set sail presently, that the
Merchants and passengers may bring their goods on board, which done, they will
not easily take them out again, though that ship after long delays should go
last out of the Haven. Therefore we kept our goods in our lodging, still
inquiring after the Scriuano, who dwelt hard by us; and when he professed
seriously, that he would take ship the next day, then we presently shipped
our provisions. So on Friday the 19 of April (after the new style) in the
year 1596, we together with the Patron (our Master) went aboard. And the
Patron returned that night to Venice, but we lodged in the ship. The Patron
Anno 1596.
had some monethspast promised me and my brother, that we should set our chests
(upon which we were to rest) above the hatches, hard by the stern, where (the
ship being great) we had commodity to set them in a place covered over the
head, but open on the side toward the prowe, and this place was close at the
other end, lying at the very door of the Patrons cabin, where he slept, and
laid his private goods. And this place seemed to me very pleasant, and fit to
rest in, since we were covered from rain; and the winds blew commonly upon the
stern, while we were at sea, (for we sailed commonly with a fore wind, the
winds being more constant in that sea; at set seasons of the year, then in our
seas), and for the time of our abiding in Havens, and otherwise in that calm
sea, if the winds were contrary, yet in summer time, and in a clime so near
the AEquinoctial line, we could receive no hurt, but rather pleasure by their
coolness. Besides, being thus parted from the Mariners, we were free from
lice, and all filthiness, wherewith the Frenchmen our consorts were much
annoied; who slept under the hatches, and that the rather, because they wore
woollen stockings, we silk, (drawn over with linen); and they slept in
their apparel, we only in our doublets, and linen breeches and stockings;
which doublets of ours were lined with taffetie, wherein lice cannot breed or
harbor: so as howsoever I wore one and the same doublet till my return into
England, yet I found not the leaft vncleanlinesse therein. And give me leave to
joy in my good fortune, (as the common sort speak). Namely that the taffety
lining of my doublet, being of green color, which color none may wear upon
great danger, but only they who are of the line and stock of Mahomet, (of
whom I could challenge no kindred), yet it hapened that by sleeping in my
doublet as well by land as by sea, no Turk ever perceived this my error.
Neither did I understand by any Christian, no not by our English Merchants at
Haleppo, in what danger I was for the same, till I came to Constantinople,
where our English Ambassador told me of the strict Law forbidding the use of
this color; and that a poor Christian some few days before had been beaten
with cudgels at Constantinople, and was hardly kept from being killed, because
ignorantly he wore a pair of green shoostrings. Whereupon I was yet in fear
when all danger was almost past, yet would I not cast off my doublet, but only
more warily kept the lining from sight, till I entered the Greek ship wherein I
passed thence to Venice, and so was free from all danger.

I return to my purpose. The Patron of our ship (as I said) returned to
Venice; but we stayed in the ship, to dispose all our provisions fitly for the
journey. The next day, being the twentieth of April (after the new style), the
Patron, Scriuano, and all the Merchants came aboard, and the following night
being clear, our ship was drawn out of Malamocco the Venetian Haven, by
little boats fastened to the ship by ropes, and making their way with oars,
(for great ships use no sails to go out of this Haven.)

Upon Sunday the 21 of April, in the year 1596, being thus put to sea, we
set April, Anno 1596.
sail with a fair wind. Then all falling on our knees, we prayed unto God
for a happy Voyage, kneeling above the hatches, but praying every man
privately and silently to himself. Some write, that in the Ships of Venice,
they use to pray publicly in Latin every day after the Roman fashion; and some
days to celebrate Masses: but in this our ship the Patron and most of the
Mariners were Greeks, and only the Scriuano (that is, Scribe) with some
Merchants were Italians, and of the Roman Religion. Therefore every day a Bell
was rung at prayer time, but each man prayed privately after his own manner.
There were besides in the ship many Eastern Christians, of diverse Sects and
Nations, and Turks, and Persians, yea, very Indians worshipping the Sun, all
which, at the ringing of this bell to prayer, went under the hatches. My self
and my brother willingly prayed with them above the hatches, after the foresaid
manner, whereof we thought no scruple of conscience to be made, since Greeks
prayed with us, as well as Italians and French, whose difference in Religion
was well known to themselves, so as this our private prayer was void of all
dissimulation. And we were glad that no profession of our Religion was imposed
upon us, in regard of our consorts, with whom we were to go to Jerusalem, and
of the Italians, who after our return might perhaps meet us in Italy.

Prayers being ended, they used a cerimony, which I liked well: for the
sub-Patron giving the sign with his silver whistle, all the Mariners
bareheaded, and turning their faces to the East, cried with a loud voice Buon'
viaggio, Buon' viaggio, (that is, a good voyage), and the same sign given, did
cease, and again cried so three times. Upon Tuesday, the Patron with the
Scriuano standing by him, stood upon the Castle of the ship, and made a solemn
Oration to the sub-Patron and the Mariners, standing upon the lower hatches,
whom he admonished how they should behave themselves, and especially to
refrain from swearing, blasphemy, and sodomie, under great penalty. Then he
wrote the names of the Mariners, and gave every man his charge. And lastly
turning himself to the passengers, exhorted them to behave themselves modestly.

And I must truly witness, that the Patron, the Scriuano, and the sub-patron,
used all passengers courteously, yet so kept their grauitic, as they had due
respect at all times, particularly at the Table, where they did first set
down, others expecting till they came, then the Friars did sit down, and
lastly the Laymen in due order. Neither do any sit or walk upon the highest
hatches, save only they who did eat at the Table of the Patron, but the rest
and all the Eastern people (whom he never admits to his Table) were on the
middle Hatch, or at the Prow.

Upon Wednesday in the morning, we did see upon the shore of Italy, the
Mountains of Ancona, which are two hundred Italian miles distant from Venice.
Upon Thursday, the five and twenty of April, we sailed by the Island or
Mountain Poma (or Pamo), seated in the midst of the Gulf of Venice, which
was a high Rock, rising sharp at the top, and uninhabited, where in the
Autum they take Faulcons: and we sailed by the Island Saint Andrea, (distant one
hundred miles from Ancona) on the North side, and the shore of Italy on the
South side. And the same night we sailed by the Island Ischa, and the next
morning being Friday, by the Islands Buso, Aulto, Catsa, and toward the
evening, by the Islands Cazola, Augusta, and Palaofa: for in this Gulf of
Venice be many Islands, whereof the most are subject to Venice, and the rest to
Raguza, and other Lords, and some toward the North-shoare to the great Turk.

Here great store of Dolphines followed our ship; and the voice of the
Mariners (as they use to do), and they playing about us, did swim as fast
as if they had flowne. Then we did see the Island Liozena, being all of
Mountains, subject to Venice, and inhabited by Gentlemen, where the Venetians
had built a strong Fort upon the Haven for their Galleys. And after five miles
we did see the Island Curzola, subject to Venice, and having a Bishop. And the
wind being high, we cast anchor near Curzola, but the wind soon falling,
we set sail again.

From the fix and twenty of April, to Thurseday the second of May, the
South-East wind (which the Italians call Syrocco) did blow very contrary unto
us. The third of May being Friday, toward the evening, we were driven upon the
Northern shore, and did see the Fort Cataro, built on a Mountain upon the
continent, against Turkish Pirates, and distant eighteen miles from Raguza, the
chief City of Selauonia, which is free, yet pays tribute to the Venetians
and Turks, their powerful neighbors. Not far thence the Turks also had a
Fort, built against the Venetians. Raguza is some Raguza.
one hundred miles distant from the Island Andrea, and some four hundred miles
from Venice.

Upon Saturday we sailed by the Promontorie of Saint Mary on the North side,
and Otranto a City of Apulia in Italy on the South side, seeing them both
plainly: for now we were passing out of the Gulf of Venice, into the
Mediterranean sea, by this Straight, some sixty miles broad, and some two
hundred miles distant from Raguza.

Here we did overtake a ship of Venice, called Ragazona, and that we might
enjoy one another company, the Sea being calm for the time, our ship being
the less (yet of some nine hundred Tons), was fastened to the Stern of the
other ship by a Cable, and toward the evening upon the Greek shore toward
the North, we did see Vallona.

Now we were come forth of the Adriatique Sea, otherwise called the Gulf of
Venice, which has in length some six hundred Italian miles, and the breadth
is diverse, sometimes two hundred miles, sometimes less, between Ancona and
the opposite Haven Valdagosta seventy miles, and in the Straight we now passed
sixty miles broad. On Sunday the fifth of May we did see the Mountain Fanon,
(and as I remember an Island) three miles distant from the Island Corfu, and upon
the Greek shore beyond the Island, we did see the most high Mountains called
Chimerae, inhabited by the Albanesi, who neither subject to the Turks nor
Venetians, nor any other, do upon occasion rob all; and the Venetians, and the
Kings of France, and especially of Spain, use to hire them in their wars.
The sixth of May we sailed by the Promontory, called the Cape of Corfu (the
description of which Island I will defer till my return this way.) On Tuesday
the seventh of May, we sailed by the Island Paro very near us, and the Island
Saint Maura joined by a bridge to the continent of Epirus, and subject to the
Turks, and the Island Ithaca (vulgarly called by the Italians Compare) also
subject to the Turks, and famous for their King Ulysses, and some four miles
distant from the Island Cepholania, which toward evening we did see, being
distant some one hundred miles from Corfu.

On Wednesday early in the morning, we entered a narrow Sea, some two
Cephalonia.
miles broad, having Cephalonia the less on the North side, and the greater
Cephalonia on the South side, and we cast anchor near a desert Rock (where
of old there was an University), and many of us, in our boat (sent with
Mariners to cut wood, and take fresh water), did go on land in the greater
Cepholania, to refresh our selves, and to wash our bodies in the Sea water: but
we durst not go far from our Mariners, lest the inhabitants of those
woodie Mountains should offer us violence. Both the Islands are subject to
Venice, and abound with wines and small Currends, and in time of war the
Inhabitants retire to a Fort, built there by the Venetians, to be safe from the
Turks. The Venetians every third year choose some of their Gentlemen, to be
sent hither for Governor and Officers.

The same Wednesday the eight of May, toward the evening, we set sail, and
before dark night passed by the Promontary, called the Cape of Cepholania, and
did see on the North side the Islands Corsolari some ten miles distant, where
the Navy of the Pope, King of Spain, and Venetians confederate, having Don
John of Austria, base brother to King Phillip of Spain for their General,
obtained a noble Victory in the year 1571 against the Navy of the Turks, the
Christians hiding there many of their Galleys, that the Turks coming out of
the Gulf of Corinth (now called the Gulf of Lepanto) might despise their
number, and so be more easily drawn to fight. In the mouth of the said Gulf,
upon the West shore, is the Castle of Toran (or Torneze) seated in
Peloponesus, a Province of Greece, which the Turks call Morea, and in the
bottom of the Gulf, Petrasso is seated in the same Province, and Lepanto in
the Province of Achaia, and of these Cities this Gulf of Corinth, is in these
days called sometimes the Gulf of Lepanto, sometimes the Gulf of Petrasso.
In the City of Petrasso the English Merchants live, having their Consul, and
they traffic especially for Currands of Corinth. Near Cepholania great store
of Dolphins did again swim about our ship (which they say do foretell, that
the wind will blow from that quarter, whether they swim, and the same day
in the maine Sea, greater Dolphins, and in greater number, did play about our
ship.

On Thurseday in the morning we did leave on the South side the Island Zante,
subject Zante.
to the Venetians, and seventy miles distant from Cephalania (the description
of which Island I defer to my return this way), and so we sailed close by the
shore of Peloponesus (or Morea) on the North side.

Peloponesus is almost an Island, joined on the North side to Achaia by a narrow
neck of land, which many of old have attempted to cut, and to make that
Province an Island, and it contains large Counties or Territories of Greece:
We sailing along the South side of this Province, did see the Cities, Coron,
Modon, and Nauarin, and somewhat lower toward the South, was a little Island
called Striualli, which is barren and inhabited by Grecian Monks called
Caloiri, who came out to us in a boat to beg alms, and the Patron of our
ship in honor of our Lady (or Virgin Marie) of Striualli, saluted the Island
with some pieces of Ordinance. Upon Friday the tenth of May we sailed by the
foresaid City Modon, seated in Greece, and one hundred miles distant from the
Island Zante. The eleventh day in the morning we sailed by the Promontory called
the Cape of Modon, and within six hours sailing, were out of the sight of any
part of Morea.

But in the evening we came to the Cape of S. John the first Promontory of the
Island Candia.
Candia, distant some one hundred and fifty miles, (I always understand
Italian miles, being now amongst the Italians) from Modon, the foresaid City
of Morea, and these high Mountains of Candia were yet covered on the top with
snow. We sailed on the South side of Candia, and toward evening passed by the
middle part of the Island, and the thirteenth day by nine of the clock in the
morning, we sailed by the Cape of Solomon, being toward the East the furthest
part of Candia, (the description of which Island I defer to my coming back
that way.)

At this time our Mariners, as well Greeks as Italians, were greatly offended
with one of our French Consorts, a Lay man, because at dinner time, according
to the negligent fashion of the French, he turned the clean side of his
trencher upward: for of all men the Mariners, and of all Mariners the Greeks
and Italians are most superstitious; and if any thing in the ship chance to be
turned vp-side down, they take it for an ill sign, as if the ship should be
overwhelmed. Otherwise I never observed, that either the chief or inferior
Mariners ever used the least disrespect to any passenger, being rather loving
and familiar to them in conversation. And I remember that my brother Henry
using to walk upon the highest hatches, the Patron, and Scriuano, and others,
did with smiling observe his fast walking and melancholy humor, yet howsoever
it was troublesome to them, did only once, and that courteously reprove him, or
rather desire him that he would have respect to the Mariners, who watched al
night for the public safety, and were then sleeping under the hatches. Always
understand that a man may not be so bold in another man's house as in his own,
and may yet less be bold in a ship of strangers; and that an unknown
passenger must of all other be most respective. And whereas Mariners are held
by some to be theeuish, surely in the Haven at the iournies end, (where thieves
easily find receivers), it is good to be wary in keeping that belongs to you:
but at sea no place is more safe then a ship, where the things stolen, are
easily found, and the offenders severely punished.

On Sunday the nineteenth of May, we came to the first Promontory of the Island
Cyprus.
Cyprus, toward the West, and after eight hours sailing, we came to the old
City Paphos (or Paphia), now called Baffo, and the wind failing us, and gently
breathing upon this Castle of Venus, we houered here all the next night,
gaining little or nothing on our way. This place is most pleasant, with
fruitful hills, and was of old consecrated to the Goddess Venus, Queen of
this Island; and they say that Adamants are found here, which skillful Iewellers
repute almost as precious as the Oriental. A mile from this place is the Cave,
wherein they faigne the seven sleepers to have slept, I know not how many
hundred years. The twenty one of May toward the evening, we entered the Port
of Cyprus, called Le Saline, and the two and twentieth day obtaining license of
the Turkish Cady to go on land, we lodged in the Village Larnica, within a
Monastery of European Friars. Here some of us being to sail to Ioppa, and
thence to go by land to Jerusalem, did leave the Venetian ship, which sailed
forward to Scanderona. The Turks did conquer the Island Ciprus from the
Venetians, in the year 1570, and to this day possess it, the chief Cities
whereof are Nicosia, (seated in the midst of the Island) and Famogosta (seated
in the furthest part of the Island toward the East). The Turkish Basha, or
Governor, uses to choose Famogosta for his seat, (though Nicosia be the
fairer City), because it has a good Haven, and a most strong Fort, which the
Venetians built. The Island lies two hundred and forty miles in length from the
west to the East, and has some eighty miles in breadth, and six hundred miles
in compass. This Island is said to be distant some four hundred miles from the
Island of Candia, (which is some two hundred and thirty miles long: but I speak
of the next Promontories in both of them), and from Venice some two thousand
two hundred and twenty miles, from Alexandria in Egypt, some four hundred and
fifty miles, from Alexandretta (at this day called Scanderona), the Haven of
Caramania, eighty miles, from Tripoli of Syria, ninety miles, and from Ioppa a
Haven in Palestina, about two hundred and fifty miles, speaking of the
uttermost Promontories on all sides.

This Island yields to no place in fruitfulness or pleasure, being enriched
with Corn, Oil, Cheese, most sweet Porkes, Sheep, (having tails that weigh
more then twenty pound) Capers (growing upon pricking bushes) Pomegranats,
Oranges, and like fruits; Canes or Reeds of sugar, (which they beat in mils,
drawing out a water which they sees to make sugar), with rich wines, (but
gnawing or burning the stomach) odoriferous Cipres trees, (whereof they make
siers,) store of Cotton, and many other blessings of nature. Near the
Promontory Del'Gatto, so called of Cats that use to kill Serpents, they take
Falcons, which Hawks the Governors are commanded to send to Constantinople.
They sow corn in the month of October, and reap it in April. I know not
how it comes to pass, that in this Island of Venus, all fruits taste of salt,
which Venus loved well. And I thought that this was only proper to the place
at which we landed, where they make salt, till many Ilanders affirmed to me,
that the very earth, the sweet herbs, the beasts feeding there, and the
fountains of waters, had a natural saltnes. The houses are built after the
manner of Asia, of a little stone, one roof high, and plain in the top, which
is plastered, and there they eat and sleep in the open air.

By the assistance of a Venetian Merchant, seven of us hired a ship of a Greek
dwelling in Cyprus, for twenty eight zechines to Ioppa (now called Iaffa, or
Giaffa), with condition that he should stay at Ioppa fifteen days to expect
our return from Jerusalem, and should thence carry us to Tripoli in Syria. The
most part of these zechines we left in the hand of the Venetian Merchant, to
be delivered to the Master of this ship at his return, if he brought our
testimony under our hands, that he had performed all covenants with us: for
we also conditioned with him, that he should stay longer then fifteen days
at Ioppa (if need were) for our return, we paying him a zechine for every day
above fifteen, which he should stay there for us. We might have hired a ship
or Bark for ten zechines directly to Ioppa, without these conditions of
staying there, and carrying us to Tripoli. And because the Turkish Governors of
Cities use to impose great tributes upon Christians driven into their Havens,
and sometimes by tricks of fraud to bring them in danger of life, only to
spoil them of their money, some of our Consorts would have added another
condition, that the Master should not carry us to any Port, but that of Ioppa,
had not the rest judged it unreasonable, to tie him for performance of that,
which was only in the power of God, according to the winds, which might force
him to take harbor. My self did familiarly know an English Gentleman, who
shortly after coming to Scanderona, and there taking ship to pass by this
shore to Ioppa, and so to Jerusalem, if an honest man had not forewarned him,
had by the treason of a Ianizare in the way bin sold for a slave to the inland
Turks, whence he was like never to be redeemed, being far removed from
Christians, who only trade upon the Coasts. And he was so terrified with this
danger, as he returned into England without seeing Jerusalem, to which he had
then a short journey, only carrying with him a counterfeit testimony and seal
that he had been there, because he had put out much money upon his return.

I formerly said, that we lodged at Cyprus in a Monastery, whence being now to
depart, the Friars of our company, and also the Laymen, gave each of us eight
lires of Venice to the Guardian of the Monastery, and one lire to the Friar
that attended us, in the name of gift or alms, but indeed for three days
lodging and diet.

Upon Friday the twenty four of May, we seven Consorts (namely, two
Franciscan Friars, one Erimitane Friar, and two Lay men, all Frenchmen, and my
self and my brother) hired a boat in the Haven for four lires of Venice, to
carry us to the Cyprian Bark we had hired, and we carried with us for our
food, a cheese costing four Aspers, a Jar of Oil costing six Aspers, and a
vessel of Wine (called Cuso, somewhat bigger then an English barrel, and full
of rich Wine, but such as fretted our very intrals) costing one Zechine, and
four soldi of Venice, and two Turkish aspers; and eggs costing twenty three
aspers, beside Biscuit which we brought out of the Greek ship. In twilight (for
the nights use not here to be dark) we set sail, and were forced to go back
toward the West, along the shore of Cyprus, to the Promontory called Capo di
Gatti, that is, the Cape of Cats, that we might from thence (according to the
Mariners experience) fetch a fair wind. So we sailed that evening thirty
miles (of Italy I mean) and the next day twenty miles to a Village of Cyprus
called Lemisso (where Christians ships use to put in.) Here we cast anchor, and
all the six and twenty day of May expected a wind, which we got at midnight
following. Ioppa is no more then two hundred fifty miles from Cyprus, and may
easily be run in two nights and a days sail with a fair wind, yet how
soever the wind was most favorable to us, we could see no land till Wednesday
thetwenty nine of May, at which time we found our selves by the ignorance of
the Mariners to be upon the Coast of Egypt, near the City Damiata, which we
might see seated upon the bank of Nilus, and they said it was some six miles
from the Sea. Now our Mariners seeing the shore, knew better to direct our
sailing, and the night following we lay at anchor near this shore. Upon
Thursday we coasted the land of the Philistines, and first did plainly see the
City Gaza, and after thirty miles sail the City Ascolon, near which we
cast anchor for that night.

Upon Friday being the last of May, after two miles sail, we entered the Haven
of Ioppa. From hence we sent a messenger hired for fourteen meidines, to the
Subasha Ioppa.
of Ramma, entreating him that he would give us leave to pass to Jerusalem,
and send us a soldier to protect us. The foresaid shore of the Philistines,
seemed to be a wild narrow and sandy plain, near the sea, with mountains
pleasant and fruitful, toward the East upon Palestine. The City of Ioppa,
mentioned in the scriptures, had some ruins of walls standing, which showed the
old circuit thereof, but had not so much as any ruins of houses; only we did
see the exactors of tribute come out of two ruinous Towers, and some ragged
Arabians and Turks, lying (with their goods) within certain caves, who also
slept there, or in the open air. These goods are daily carried hither and from
hence, upon the backs of Cammels, whereof we might see many droues laded both
come and go. For this cause we would not land, but thought better to lie in
our ship, especially since the place affoorded no entertainment for
strangers, and our Mariners brought us eggs and fruits, and we had with us
wine and biscuit, which notwithstanding we did hide, left the Arabians or Turks
should take it from us, if they came to our Bark. The Haven is of little
compass, but safe for small Barks, and was of old compassed with a brick
wall, the ruins whereof still defend it from the waves of the sea. The
situation of Ioppa is pleasant, upon a hill declining toward the sea, and the
fields are fertile, but were then untilled. Here the Prophet Jonas did take
ship, as it were to fly from God, and the Machabei (as appears in the first
book and twelfth chapter) here burnt the ships: and the Apostle Peter lodging
in the house of Simon, was taught the conversion of the Gentiles by a vision;
and here he raised up Tabitha from death, as the Holy Scriptures witness.

Upon Monday the third of June, at nine of the clock in the morning, the
Subasha of Ramma sent us a Horseman or Lancyer to guide us, and with him came
the Atalla, (that is, interpreter, whom the Italians call Drogomano, who was a
Maronite Christian, that used to guide strangers) They brought us Asses to ride
upon, (which they use there in stead of Horses, excepting only the soldiers),
and with them came a Muccaro (so they call those that hier out Asses, Mules, or
Cammels). We presently landed about noone, and when my brother leaped upon
land, and according to the manner, bended down to kiss it, by chance he fell,
and voided much blood at the nose: and howsoever this be a superstitious sign
of ill, yet the event was to us tragical, by his death shortly after
happening. Here for our carriage (namely our shirts, for the rest we had left
in the Bark;) we jointly paid five meydines for cafar, (that is Tribute) and
the Officers of Ioppa extorted from each of us for his person, half a Spanish
Reale; neither would they be pleased, till each of us gave them two meydines in
gift. Then we jointly gave fix meydines to our Muccaro for his dinner, and
five of free gift. Our Asses had pannels in stead of saddles, ropes for
bridles, and ropes laid cross the pannels, and knotted at the ends in stead of
stirrups. The same Monday in the afternoon, we rode ten miles to Ramma,
through a most pleasant plain, yielding time and hysope, and other fragrant
herbs, without tillage or planting, growing so high, as they came to the knees
of our Asses. By the way on our left hand, not far out of the high way, lay
the ruins of the City Lydda, where Saint Peter cured one sick of Lydda.
the palsy; and Saint George is said to have suffered martyrdom, and that his
head is yet kept in a Greek Church. We also passed by a Village, having a
moschee or Turkish Church; and being full of pleasant Orchards of Figge-trees,
Oliue-trees, Pome-granates, (bearing buds of flesh color, and being like a
Barbery tree, by little and little covered with a green rind) and many kinds
of fruits; the abundance whereof in these parts, we might easily guess, when
we bought in the Port of Ioppa more then a thousand Abricots for six Aspers,
at which time, left we should surfeit on such daintaies, (the intemperate eating
whereof we had read to have often killed many Europeans) we durst not eat them
raw, but Iod the most part of them. Now upon the third of June they had almost
gathered in their Harvest, and all the fields were full of Cotton, growing like
Cabbage two foot high, and yielding a round Apple, out of which they gather
the Cotton. This Cotton is sowed in April, and gathered in September, and great
quantity thereof is carried from hence into Europe.

At Ramma we were brought into a house, where Pilgrims use to be lodged, and
it Ramma.
was of old great and strong, but at this time more fit to lodge beasts then
men. Some say it was the House of Joseph of Arimathia, others say it was
Nicodemus his house, and there was a fountain of water, and a Court yard to
walk in, but the rooms were full of dust, and we hardly got straw to lie
upon. There were yet some marbles and ruins of building, that showed it to
have been a fair house. The Maronite Christians brought us victuals, and they
sold us a pound of biscuit for six meidines, twelve eggs for one meidine, a
Cheese for one, Rice for two, some two English quarts of wine for five, a salet
for one, and twelve Cakes, (they having no leauened bread) for four meidines.
We that were Laymen gave each of us six Zechines, and each of the Friars
five, into the hands of our Interpreter, to be given to the Subasha for
tribute, or rather for our safe conduct. I know that favor is done to Friars,
especially by these Ministers belonging to Monasteries, and we committed the
ordering of our expenses to one of the Franciscan Friars, who had best
experience, so as it may be the Interpreter restored to the Friars their money,
or part of it: but I am sure these my eyes did see them pay so much. One in the
name of the Subasha, brought us for a present some flaggons of a medicinal
drink, made of cooling herbs, and sold in the Tauernes, as we sell wine. We
jointly gave five meidines to a watchman, appointed to keep our door, and
protect us from wrong, who being a man of very great stature, was called
Goliath, and he walked all night at our gate, where he did sing or rather houle
with his hoarce voice continually. Some write that there is only due, one
Zechine to the Subasha, another to the Captain of the Arabians, and twenty
five meidines for Cafar (or Tribute), and half a Zechine to the Muccaro, who
let out their Asses to Pilgrims, and that the guide deceiues the Christians of
all the rest. I am sure that the guide being of experience, delivers the
Christians from many injuries offered them by the Arabians and others, for
which favor they cannot sufficiently require him; and if any deal sparingly
with him, he complains of them to the Guardian of the Monastery at Jerusalem,
who never suffers him to be sent away discontented, neither wants he power
himself to deceive the Christians at his pleasure, if he bear that mind. At
Ramma we jointly gave one Zechine to our Muccaro, of whom we hired our Asses.

And the fourth of June, having him only to conduct us, we took our ioutney
before day toward Jerusalem, being thirty miles distant, (I mean of Italy).
As we rode before day, our Muccaro warned us to be silent, lest we should waken
the Arabians, Turks, or Thecues, who then slept, and were like if they awaked
to offer us violence, or at least to extort some money from us. The Arabians
are not unlike the wild Irish, for they are subject to the great Turk, yet
being poor and far distant from his imperial seat, they cannot be brought
to due obedience, much less to abstain from robberies. After we had rode ten
miles, we did see upon a hill not far distant, on our right hand, the ruins
of the House (or Palace) of the good Thief crucified with our Savior, which
ruins yet remain, and show that the house was of old stately built; as The
house of the good thief.
if he had been a man of some dignity, banished for robbing of passengers: and
when he was brought to the Magistrates hand, had been condemned to death for
the same. From hence to the very City of Jerusalem, the Mountains or Rocks
do continually rise higher and higher, till you come to the City, our way
hitherto having been in a pleasant plain, rich in corn and pasture. These
mountains which we after passed, seemed stony and barren, but yielded fragrant
herbs, and excellent corn growing between the great stones, and some
valleys were pleasant, as the valley of hieromia, (as I think the Prophet),
where of old was built a stately Church, which as then stood little ruined; and
near it is a pleasant fountain, where the passengers use to drink and to
water their Asses. They say that the said Prophet was borne there, and that the
place was of old called Anatoth. I said that excellent corn grows between
the great stones of these Mountains or Rocks, neither are they destitute of
Vines, and many fruits. In the said valley of Hieromy, certain Arabians which
seemed to be mowers of corno, flew upon us like fierce dogs, yet our Muccaro
sent them away content with the gift of a biscuit, and in like sort in another
narrow passage of the mountains, he paid some meidines for cafar, which he
never demanded of us, being content with the money we had paid him at Ramma.
Upon a high Rock we did see the ruins of the Castle Modon, where the
Machabees were buried. Then wediscended Modon.
into the Valley of Terebintho, (so called of a Tree bearing a black fruit like
an Olive, and yielding a kind of oil), where we passed over a Torrent by a
bridge of stone, and David and Goliath.
this is the place famous for the victory of David against Goliath.

We had now some two miles to Jerusalem, yet in the very Haven, we wanted
little of perishing. For it happened that a Spachi (or Horseman under the
great Turks pay) riding swiftly, and crossing our way, suddenly turned toward
us, and with his spear in his rest, (for these horsemen carry spears and
bucklers like Amadis of Gaul) he rushed upon us with all his might, and by the
grace of God his spear lighting in the pannell of the Ass, never hurt the
Frenchman his Rider, but he did much astonish both him and us, till our
Muccaro enquiring the cause of this violence, he said, why do not these dogs
light on foot to honor me as I pass; which when we heard, and knew that we
must here learn the virtue of the beasts on which we rode, we presently
tumbled from our Asses, (for we had no other stirrops then knotted ropes), and
bended our bodies to him. Neither did we therein basely, but very wisely: for
woe be to that Christian who resists any Turk, especially a Soldier, and who
bears not any injury at their hands. We had but one mile to Jerusalem, when we
did sec large ruins (on this West side of the City) of an old City or Village.
Somewhat after noone the fourth of June, we entered Jerusalem upon the West
side, at the Gate of Ioppa, (written Iaffa, Giaffa, and Zaffa, by diverse
Nations). At this gate we stayed, till two Friars came out of the Latin
Monastery, and likewise the exactors of Tribute came to us, and to them we
paid each man two zechines for tribute due to the great Turk, or at least
extorted from us, which done, the two Friars being Italians, did lead us to the
Monastery of the Latins.

CHAP. II. The description of the City of Jerusalem, and the territory thereof.
I Am unskillful in Geography, and much more in the Jerusalem.
making of Mappes: but according to the faithful view of my eyes, I will first
draw the situation of Jerusalem, and after explain it, as well as I can. And
first I think good to profess that by my iourny to this City, I had no
thought to expiate any least sin of mine; much less did I hope to merit any
grace from God; but when I had once begun to visit foreign parts, I was so
stirred up by emulation and curiosity, as I did never behold any without a kind
of sweet envy, who in this kind had dared more then my self. Thus affected, I
thought no place more worthy to be viewed in the whole world, then this City,
where howsoever I gave all divine worship to God, and thought none to be given
to the places, yet I confess that (through the grace of God) the very places
struck me with a religious horror, and filled my mind prepared to devotion,
with holy motions. In like fort I profess, that I will faithfully relate the
situation of the City, and the description of the monuments made to me by the
Friars, making conscience not to add or detract, but as near as I can to use
their own words. Yet do I not my self believe all the particulars I write
upon their report, neither do I persuade any man to believe them. But for many
monuments, the scripture gives credit to them, and it is not probable in so
great difference and emulation, (whereof I shall after speak) of Sects of
Christians there abiding, and being most apt to note errors one in another,
that any apparent fictions could be admitted: as on the contrary, it is most
certain, that some superstitious inventions (wherewith all the sects are more
or less infected) have in time obtained, to be reputed true, and religiously
to be believed. Howsoever he that conferres the situation of the City and of
the monuments, with the holy Scriptures, and with the old ruins of Rome, and
other Cities, shall easily discern what things are necessarily true or false,
and what are more or less probable.

And it will notoriously appear, that the City is now seated in the same
place, in which it flourished when our Savior lived there in the slesh.
Neither let any man object to me the prophecies of the fatal and irreparable
ruin thereof, which all Divines understand of the Temple to be utterly
demolished; and for my part, I would rather admit (if necessity require) any
figurative speech, then I would be so wicked or so blockish, as not to believe
the holy Scriptures, or that which I did see with these eyes. Upon the West
side, the City could never have been more enlarged then now it is, since Mount
Caluerie (without all doubt) was of old without the walls, which now is
enclosed within them, so as rather it appears the City has been so much
enlarged on that side. In like sort on the East side, the City is so compassed
with the Valley of Iehosephat, and the famous Mount Oliuet, as it appears the
City could not that way have been larger then now it is. On the North side I
did never read nor hear any, that described this City to have been larger
then now it is, yet in respect of huge ruins still remaining there, upon a
large Plain of the highest part of the City, if any should confidently
affirm that they belonged to the old City, for my part I could not gainesay
it. From the Plain of this highest part of the City it declines by little and
little (if you except some little Hills within the walls) from the North to
the East (where the Temple of Solomon is seated upon the lowest part of Mount
Moriah) and likewise it declines from the North to the South Gates, whereof the
one is called Sterquilinea, of the filth there carried out, the other
Praesentationis, because the Virgin Mary entered there, when she presented
Christ to the Priest in the Temple, which gates (as the whole City) are seated
upon Mountains, yet lower then any other part of the City. Upon the higher
part of Mount Sion, on the same South side toward the West, lie many ruins of
houses, and it is most certain, that the Tower of David, and other famous
houses there, which are now without the walls, were of old enclosed within
them, and that the City extended somewhat further toward the South, then now
it does. Yet the Hill of Sion is so compassed with known Valleys, and those
Valleys with high Mountains, as this extent could not be great.

Jerusalem was of old called Moria (where they write that Adam was created of
red earth), and is seated upon Mount Moriah, upon the top whereof toward the
North-west is Mount Caluery (where they say that Abraham was ready to sacrifice
his son Isaac, and where without doubt our Savior Christ suffered), and in
the lowest part of this Mountain, the Temple of Solomon was seated. The City
was after called Salem, and thirdly, Iebus, and fourthly Jerusalem, and at this
day the Turks have named it (...). It is compassed with stately walls (the
like whereof I did never see) of red and black stone more then an Elle long,
and about half an Elle broad. I call them stately, for the antiquity, wherein
for the most part they much excel the Roman walls. I numbered seven Gates. The
first of Damasco, (of old called the Gate of Ephraim) on the North side. The
second of Saint Stephen on the East side (which of old had the name of the
beasts for sacrifice brought in that way.) The third the golden Gate, also on
the East side (which at this day is shut and bricked up.) The fourth the Gate
of presentation on the South Side, leading into the Temple of Solomon, but at
this day shutvp. The fifth Sterquilinea also on the South side, so called of
the filth there carried out. The sixth, the Gate of Syon also on the South
side, near that part of Mount Syon, which at this day is without the walls,
but this Gate has been newly built. The seventh of Ioppa toward the West also
newly built. In general, the Gates are nothing less then fortified, only as
it were to terrify the Christians, who enter at the Gate of Ioppa, they have
braggingly fortified the same, and planted great Ordinance upon it. And
howsoever the City seems strong enough against sudden tumults, yet it is no
way able to hold out against a Christian Army well furnished, neither do the
Turks trust to their Forts, but to their forces in field.

The houses here, and in all parts of Asia that I have seen, are built of
Flint stone, very low, only one story high, the top whereof is plain, and
plastered, and has battlements almost a yard high, and in the day time they
hide themselves within the chamber under this plastered floare from the Sun,
and after Sunne-set, walk, eat, and sleep, upon the said plastred floare,
where as they walk, each one may see their neighbors sleeping in bed, or
eating at table. But as in the heat of the day, they can scarce endure to
wear linen hose, so when the Siren or dew falls at night, they keep
themselves within doors till it be dried up, or else fling some garment over
their heads. And with this dew of the night all the fields are moistened, the
falling of rain being very rare in these parts toward the Equinoctial line,
and in this place particularly happening only about the month of October,
about which time it falls sometimes with great force by whole pales full. The
houses near the Temple of Solomon, are built with arches into the street,
under which they walk dry, and covered from the Sun, as like wife the
houses are built in that sort, in that part of the City, where they show the
house of Herod, in both which places the way on both sides the street is
raised for those that walk on foot, lying low in the midst for the passage
of laded Asses. In other parts the City lies uninhabited, there being only
Monasteriesof diverse Christian Sects, with their Gardens. And by reason of
these waste places, and heaps of Flint lying at the doors of the houses, and
the low building of them, some streets seem rather ruins then dwelling
houses, to him that looks on them near hand. But to them who behold the City
from eminent places, and especially from the most pleasant Mount Oliuet
(abounding with Olives, and the highest of all the Mountains), the prospect of
the City, and more specially of the Churches and Monasteries (which are built
with elevated Globes covered with brass, or such glistering metal) promises
much more beauty of the whole City to the beholders eyes, then indeed it has.
The circuit of the walls contains some two or three Italian miles.

All the Citizens are either Tailors, Shoomakers, Cooks, or Smiths (which
Smiths make their keys and locks not of Iron, but of wood), and in general
poor rascal people, mingled of the scumme of diverse Nations, partly Arabians,
partly Moors, partly the basest inhabitants of neighbor Countries, by which
kind of people all the adjoining Territory is likewise inhabited. The Jews in
Turkey are distinguished from others by red hats, and being practical, do live
for the most part upon the seacoasts, and few or none of them come to this
City, inhabited by Christians that hate them, and which should have no
traffic, if the Christian Monasteries were taken away. Finally, the
Inhabitants of Jerusalem at this day are as wicked, as they were when they
crucified our Lord, gladly taking all occasions to use Christians despitefully.
They esteemed us Princes, because we wore gloves, and brought with us shirts,
and like necessaries, though otherwise we were most poorly appareled, yet when
we went to see the monuments, they sent out their boys to scorn us, who
leaped upon our backs from the higher parts of the street, we passing in the
lower part, and snatched from us our hats and other things, while their fathers
were no less ready to do us all injuries, which we were forced to bear
silently and with incredible patience. Hence it was that Robert Duke of
Normandy, being sick, and carried into Jerusalem upon the backs of like
rascals, when he met by the way a friend, who then was returning into Europe,
desiring to know what he would command him to his friends, he earnestly
entreated him to tell them, that he saw Duke Robert carried into heaven upon the
backs of Devils.

The description of the City and the Territory.


Now follows the explication of the City described: and first the small Line
drawn within the present walls on the West side of the City, shows the old
walls thereof, before Mount Caluery was enclosed within the walls by the
Christian Kings, for now there remain no ruins of the old walls, this line
being only imaginary.

(1) Mount Sion without the walls, for part of it is yet enclosed with them.

(2) The fair Castle, which was built by the Pisans of Italy, while yet they
were a free State, and the building is not unlike to the Italian Castles. It
was now kept by a Turkish Agha and Garrison, having great store of short Iron
Ordinance of a huge boar, lying at the Gate for terror of the people. I
remember that when we walked (after Sun set) upon the top of the Latin
Monastery (as those of Asia walk upon their houses), this Agha sent a soldier
to us, commanding us to go from beholding the Castle, or else he would shoot
at us, whom we presently obeyed. Thus they suspect Christians, and suffer them
not to enter this City with Arms, but narrowly search their baggage.

(3) The Gate of Ioppa ( Zaffa, or Griaffa) in some sort fortified, where for
terror to the Christians, they have planted some Ordinance, for the other
Gates have none, neither are fortified at all, and all the Christians enter at
this Gate.

(4) The Gate of Mount Sion, no whit fortified, and newly built (as it seems)
by the Turks, as also that of Ioppa is.)

(5) The ruins of the house or Palace of the High Priest Caiphas, where they
show a place with a pillar, upon which the Cock crowed when Peter denied
Christ; and a place where the fire was made, at which Peter warmed himself;
and a tree in the place where he denied Christ; finally, a narrow prison, in
which Christ was shut up till the day brake, and so he was led to Pilate. And
the Sect of the Armenian Christians keeps this monument.

(6) The old Monastery of the Latin Christians, called il Santo Cenacolo,
which the Turks have taken from the Christians, and turned to a Mahumetan
Mosche or Church, and no Christian may enter this place, kept by the Santons or
Turkish Priests, except he will give an unreasonable reward, which given, yet
he is not free from danger, if other Turks see him enter. Here Christ did wash
his Apostles feet, did eat his last Supper with them, did appear to them
after his Resurrection, the doors being shut, and again after eight days
appeared to Thomas doubting. Here the holy Ghost descended upon the Apostles,
and the Apostle Matthew was chosen by lot. The Italian Monastery (noted with
the figure (33) has all these representations painted, and to these pictures
the Pope has given as large indulgences for Papists, as if they had seen the
other places, from which the Turks keep them as unwashed dogs. The
Sepulcher of David is not sarre from this place, kept by the Turks, forbidding
entry to the Christians. And here they show the ruins of the Tower of David,
or of his Palace, on the South side of the Churchyard given to Christians of
Europe for burial, in the same place where David of old drove out the
Iebuzites. In like sort on the South side of this old Monastery, is the place
where they say the Virgin Mary died. (7) Here they show a place where the Jews
strove in vain to take the body of the Virgin Mary from the hands of the
Apostles, as they carried it to be buried in the Valley of Iehosophat.

(8) The Cave wherein they say Peter used to bewail the denying of Christ.

(9) Here they say the Apostles hid themselves, whilst Christ suffered on the
Cross.

(10) Here they show the field Acheldamus, bought by the Jews for a burial
place, with the thirty pence Judas brought back to them. And here looking into
a huge cave of the Mountain, we did see infinite whole bodies imbalmed of dead
men, and standing upright. And this place is given for burial to the
Christians of Asia.

(11) the Gate Sterquilinea, at which the filth of the City is carried out,
and cast into the Brook Cedron. And Christ betrayed by Judas, was brought into
the City by this Gate (as they say), which Gate is old, and nothing less then
fortified.

(12) The Gate by which the Virgin Marie entering into the outer Temple, is said
to have offered Christ then an Infant to the hands of Simion, which Gate they
say, in honor of our Redeemer, was shut up by the Christian Kings, and so
remains to this day. (13) The outer Temple where they say Christ was exhibited
to Simion, and the Italians call it the Temple of the Presentation.

(14) In this large circuit compassed all with walls, of old the Temple of
Solomon stood. At this day it was ouer-growne with grass, and in the midst
thereof the Turks had a Mosche for their wicked worship of Mahomet, neither
may any Christian come within this circuit, much less into the Mosche, either
being a capital offense, which they say some curious Christians had tried with
loss of life, after they had been drawn to enter into it by some Turks vain
promises.

(15) The golden Gate at which Christ entered on Palme-Sunday, shut up by the
Christian Kings, and so remaining.

(16) Probatica Piscina without the Gate of the Temple, where the Angel
troubling the waters, the first diseased man that entered them was healed. It
was at this time dried up.

(17) The beautiful Gate where Peter and John made the man walk, who was lame
from his mothers womb.

(18) Salomons house, of old having a Gate leading into the Temple, and it is
now inhabited by the Turkish Cady, who has an Episcopal office. Here I did
see pleasant Fountains of waters, and did look into the circuit where the
Temple stood, through an Iron grate, when the said Magistrate called us before
him. And I remember we were bidden put off our shoes before we entered in to
him, where he sat upon a Carpet spread upon the ground, with his legs
crossed like a Tailor, and his shoes of (as the Turks use.)

(19) This Gate of old had the name of the Droues of cattle brought in for
sacrifices: but at this day is called the Gate of Saint Stephen, because the
Jews drew out that Protomartyr by this Gate, and so stoned him.

(20) Here they say was the house of Anna, wherein she bare the Virgin Marie.

(21) The Gate of Damasco, of old called the Gate of Ephraim.

(22) The house of Pontius Pilate, in which the Turkish Sangiaco (who is the
military Governor of the City and Province) did then dwell, so as no Christian
might come into the house without giving a reward. The Friars say that in this
house are heard noises, whippings, and sighs, nightly to this very time, and
each man the more superstitious he is, the more incredible things he tells
thereof. They say that the stairs upon which Christ ascended, when he was
brought to Pilate, were long since carried to Rome, and these be the stairs
which I said the Romans call Holy (vulgarly Scale Sante), and do worship with
great superstition. They be of marble, but for my part let every man believe as
he list, whither they were brought from thence, and be the same stairs that
Christ ascended or not. Only I am sure that here they show the place void in
the very street, where stairs have been of old; yet must I needs say, that
marble stairs ill befit the poor building of this house. Here the Soldiers
spoiled our Redeemer of his garments, and in scorn attired him with purple.

(23) The Arch of Pilate, which is a gallery of brick, built over the street,
from one wall to another, whence Pilate showed Christ to the people, saying;
behold the man, do with him what you will.

(24) Here they say the Virgin Mary fell down fainting, when Christ was led to
Mount Caluary.

(25) Here they say that Christ fainting, the Jews took his Cross, and laid
it upon Simon of Cyren. (26) The Palace of King Herod.

(27) Here they say Christ uttered these words; Daughters of Syon weep not for
me, weep for your selves, etc.

(28) Here they say the rich glutton dwelt, and not far hence they show the
house where Mary Magdalen washed Christ's feet with her tears, and dried them
with the hairs of her head.

(29) Here they say Veronica dwelt, and that this woman gave her white
hand-kercher to Christ when he did sweat blood, who wiping his face therewith,
left the lively print of it therein: about which hand-kercher the Romans and
the Spaniards contend, both saying that they have it, and showing it for an
holy relike to the people.

(30) The Gate of old called Judicial, now not extant, by which Christ was led
to Mount Caluary to be crucified, for this mountain now enclosed within the
walls, was then without the walls. And the way from the house of Pontius Pilate
(noted with the figures 22) to this gate, is called the dolorous way by the
Italian Christians, because Christ was led by it to his passion. (31) The
prison from whence the Angel brought Peter, breaking his chains, and opening
the iron door, and it is seated under the ruins of the Palace, which since
that time belonged to the Knights of Jerusalem.

(32) The Church which the Christians built over the Sepulcher of Christ, of
which I will after write more largely, making a rude Map thereof, as I have
done of the City.

(33) The Monastery of the Franciscan Friars, in which we did Iodge, being
seated on the highest part of Mount Caluary, which since has been called the
Mount of our holy Savior. And this is called the new Monastery, in respect of
the old (noted with the figure 6) and only has the monuments of the old
painted, to the visiting whereof, the Pope has given large indulgences. The
Franciscan Friars conducting us, showed us some other monuments within the
walls. And not far from the gate of Syon, (noted with the figure 4) they
showed us (34) the house of the High Priest Anna, where Christ was examined by
the Pharisees, and there they showed us an Olive tree, (which must needs be
old), to which they say Christ was bound. (35) The Church of the Apostle Saint
James, whom the Spaniards call Saint James of Gallicia, and worship for their
protecting Saint, who was called James the greater, and they say was here
beheaded. This Church is stately built, for the poverty of the Armenians, who
built it, and maintained there an Archbishop, to keep it, and to perform
there the rites of their religion.

(36) The place where they say Christ appeared to the three Mary's dwelling
together, upon the very day of his resurrection, where the Christians built
three Churches, which the Turks have converted to 3 Moschees, yet bearing no
reverence to the place, because they believe not that Christ died, and much
less believe that he rose again.

(37) The house of the Evangelist Saint Mark, mentioned in the twelfth Chapter
of the Acts. This is the house of Mary the Mother of John, surnamed Mark,
whither Peter came when the Angel delivered him out of prison, into which
Herod had cast him, (noted with the figure 31). At this day there was an
obscure Church, kept by the Syrian Priests.

(38) Here they show the Iron gate, which Peter found miraculously opened, and
by the same entering into the other City, came to the house of Saint Mark.

We going out at Saint Steuens Gate toward the East, descended into the valley
of Iehosaphat, and here they say (39) the bridge stood, by which the Queen of
Saba passed over the Brook Cedron, and that the Cross of Christ was made of
the wood of this bridge.

(40) In this place they say the Protomartyre Saint Steven was stoned. (41)
This small line without the Eastern gates, shows the bed of the brook Cedron,
(or Kidron) which is very narrow, having not at this time one drop of water, so
as we passed over the stony bed with dry feet. But of old when Jerusalem
flourished, and had many conduits of water drawn to it, then it is probable
that it was filled with water. And at this day, when any rainefals, the water
runs swiftly from the mountains on the North side, according to this black
line, through the most pleasant valley of Iehosaphat. This valley extends it
self on both sides of this brook, some two Italian miles in length, but is
very narrow, and it has on the West side the walls of the City, where Salomons
Temple stood upon the lower part of the Mount Moriah, and it has upon the East
side the most high Mount Oliuet, and it has on the North side mountains
somewhat (but not far) distant from the City, and upon the South Side
mountains a little more distant. Many interpret the Prophet Ioell, in his
third Chapter and second verse, as if Gods Tribunal at the day of judgment
should stand in this valley, and thereupon the Jews when they die in remote
parts, will be brought to be buried in this valley, for the expedition of their
trial. But the best Divines do teach, that the word Iehosaphat signifies the
Judgment of the Lord, and that the Prophet may be interpreted figuratively,
namely, that as the Lord often defeated with great slaughters the enemies of
his Church in this valley, so in the day of judgment he will strike the wicked
with like confusion.

(42) Beyond the Brook is a stately Sepulcher for the most part under the
earth, into which we descended by some fifty stairs, and about the middle
descent, on the left hand toward the City, under an Altar, lie the bodies of
Joseph, and Ioachimus, and on the right hand the body of Anna (namely, of the
Husband, Father, and Mother of the Virgin Marie.) In the bottom is a Church,
in the middle whereof, under a stone raised some few feet from the ground,
they say the Apostles buried the Virgin Mary. This Church (so they call all
places where they have Altars to sing Masses) is very dark, having no light
but by one window or vent, made through the earth, and upon this monument lies
part of the bed of the Brook Cedron On the right hand the Turks (who greatly
reverence the monuments of Christ while he lived), have made themselves an
Oratory. But for the monument it self, the Franciscan Friars of the Latin
Church have alone the privilege to keep the same, and the Altar thereof, for
their singing of Masses.

(43) Here is a Cave, at the foot of Mount Oliuet, in which they say Christ
used to pray, and did sweat blood.

(44) Here they show a place where they say (believe it who list), that S.
Thomas after the Virgins burial, did see her both in body and soul assumed
into heaven, and that she casting her girdle to him, gave it for testimony
thereof, that all others might believe it. In my opinion they did well to make
Saint Thomas see it, for otherwise he would never have believed it.

(45) The place where they say the Virgin was wont to rest, when she visited
the places frequented by her Son in the time he lived here, and where she
beheld the stoning of Saint Stephen, and prayed for him.

(46) The stone where Christ, leaving Peter, James, and John, said, that his
soul was heavy unto death, and went aside to pray, warning them to watch.

(47) Here is a little circuit enclosed with a low wall, where they report the
Garden to be, at the foot of Mount Oliuet, where Christ used to pray, and was
betrayed by Judas with a kiss.

(48) The place where they say, the Village of Getsemany was of old seated.
Round about this place the Turks do bury their dead (as they do also in a
field on the North side without the walls); for they never bury within
Cities, excepting only the monuments of their Emperors.

(49) Here they say Saint James the less did lie hidden, till he heard that
Christ was risen again the third day after his Passion.

(50) Here be two old Sepulchers, almost of a round form, built of Freestone,
or rather cut out of the living stone, whereof the one is called the Sepulcher
of Absolon, the son of David, the other of King Manasses (or as others say,
of the King Ezektas.) And considering the antiquity, they seem no Plebean
Sepulchers, but stately and fit for Princes, being four Else from the ground
in height.

(51) Here is the top of Mount Oliuet, the highest of all the Mountains that
compass Jerusalem, and here, in a Chapel, they show in stone the print of
Christ's feet when he ascended into Heaven. And this Chapel is kept by a
Turkish Zanton, that is a kind of their Priests, and the Turks give such
reverence to the monuments of Christ living on earth, as they are much offended
with Christians, if they creep not on their knees, and with their shoes off
to this and like monuments. To the keeper hereof we gave a few meidines for
reward.

(52) Here they say Christ did weep over the City and rich Temple of Solomon,
and in this place is the fullest prospect to view the City and Temple.

(53) Here they show the ruins of the house, wherein the Apostles assembled
did write the Creed.

(54) Here they say Christ taught his Disciples to pray in the form ever since
received, and here was a Church built by the Christians of old.

(55) Here they say Christ foretold the signs of the day of Judgment.

(56) Here they say the Angel foretold the Virgin she should die at three
days end.

Upon Thursday the sixth of June, we being to go to Bethania, hired each of us
an Ass for four meidines, that place being scarce two Italian miles from the
city. Of our company we were four Laymen, and because the Friars our
consorts pleaded themselves to be free from such expenses, we were content to
yield to them, and gave jointly into the hands of the Friar our guide two
zechines, wherewith he was to give small rewards, and to pay the Muccaro, who
furnished us with Asses: for we meant not to eat till our return, the place
being no further distant, and there being no dwellings, but only the ruins of
houses. What our guide spent I know not; for he never offered to give us
account, and because he was a Friar, we would not trouble him in demanding
it. We went out by the Gate Sterquilinea (noted with the figure (11) on the
South side.

(57) First, we came to the Fountain Siloe, to which Christ sent the blind man
to wash his eyes, and there we found Turkish women washing, who beat us away
with stones.

(58) Here they show a monument of the Prophet Elia, but what it was I remember
not.

(59) Here they show a Fountain, where they say, the Virgin washed Christ's
clothes when he was an infant.

(60) The Mount of Offense, opposite to Mount Sion, which Mount lies beyond the
Brook Cedron, and extends Eastward toward Bethania, and upon the top
thereof they show the ruins of the Palace which Solomon built for his
Concubines and of the Altar, upon which he sacrificed to Idols. Between this
Mount and that of Mount Sion. they show the Valley of the sons of Hinnon
toward the West, and there they show a place, wherein the Jews offered their
children to the Idol Molech, (that is, Saturn); yet we read, that this
Valley lies by the entry of the Eastgate, Ieremtah, chap. 19. verse. 2.

(61) Here they say, the Prophet Isaiah was cut in pieces with a Saw, at the
command of King Manasses.

(62) Here is a bridge over the Brook Kedron, or Cedron of one Arch, and built
of stone, whereby they pass when the bed of the Brook is filled with water,
which now we passed dry footed. And here they show a place, where they say
Christ fell upon the stones of the bed where the brook should run, when he
being betrayed by Judas, was drawn into the City in a great press of the
Jews. And upon these stones are the prints of hands and feet (as they say,
his.)

(63) The way leading to Bethania over Mount Oliuet.

(64) The place where they say Judas hanged himself, and burst; after he had
betrayed his Lord. Not far hence they show a fig tree, which they say
Christ cursed, because it had leaves without fruit.

(65) Here descending from Mount Oliuet toward the East, we did see far off
the valley Jordan, to which the Mountains decline by little and little. And
now we were come to Bethania, where we did see the House of Simon the Leaper,
not yet ruined, and inhabited by a Moore, to whom we gave a few meidines.

(66) Here they show stately ruins of a Palace, which they say belonged to
Lazarus. And not far thence is a Chapel, built over the stately sepulcher
of Lazarus, the key whereof the Friars our guides had with them. For the Turks
putting great religion in reuerencing this place, have an Oratory near it, and
enter into the Sepulcher by another way. Here they say Christ raised Lazarus
out of his grave. At our going forth, we were forced to give some few meidines
to certain Turks and Arabians, (I know not whether they had the Place in
keeping, or no).

(67) The House of Mary. (68) The House of Martha her sister.

(69) The stone upon which they say Christ did sit, before he did see the
sisters of Lazarus bewailing his death, and it is some half mile from Bethania.

(70) This small line shows the bed of the River Jordan, running through a
most pleasant valley, which River we did see some ten Italian miles distant. On
the Northside of Jerusalem, (I cannot say whether beyond Jordan or no), we did
see many Towers, having globes of glistering metal, and that very distinctly,
the day being clear: also we did see the walls of a City near the River
Jordan, and they said, that it was Ieriche. Further toward the North they
showed us from far off a place, where they say our Savior was baptized by
John. And they affirm upon experience had, that the water of Jordan taken in a
pitcher, will very long keep sweet, and that it corrupted not, though they
carried it into foreign parts. This water seemed very clear, till it fell
into a Lake, where they say Sodom with the other Cities stood of old, before
they were burnt by fire from Heaven. And the day being clear, we did plainly
see, and much marvel that the clear and silver stream of Jordan, flowing
from the North to the South, when in the end it fell into the said Lake, became
as black as pitch.

The Friars our guides seriously protested, that if any living thing were cast
into this Lake of Sodom, it could not be made to sink, whereas any heavy dead
thing went presently to the bottom. Also that a candle lighted cannot be
thrust under the water by any force, nor be extinguished by the water, but that
a candle vnlighted will presently sink. I omit for breuities sake, many
wondrous things they told us, of the putrefaction of the air, and other
strange things with such confidence, as if they would extort belief from us.
We had a great desire to see these places, but were discouraged from that
attempt, by the fear of the Arabians and Moors: for they inhabit all these
Territories. And I said before, that the Arabians, howsoever subject to the
Turk, yet exercise continual robberies with all liberty and impunitie, the
Turks being not able to restrain them, because they are barbarous, and live
far from their chief power, where they can easily fly into desert places.
Yet these Barbarians do strictly observe their faith to those that are under
their protection. And all the Merchants chuseone or other of the Arabian
Captains, and for a small pension procure themselves to be received into their
protection, which done, these Captains proclaim their names through all their
Cities and Tents (in which for the most part they live), and ever after will
severely revenge any wrong done to them, so as they pass most safely with
their goods. All other men they spoil, and make excursions with their leaders,
and sometime with their King, to the sea side, as far as Ioppa, and much
further within Land, spoiling, and many times killing all they meet.

When we returned from Bethania, we declined to the North side of Mount Oliuet,
and came to the ruins of (71) Bethphage, where Christ sent for the Colt of an
Ass, and riding thereupon, while the people cried Hosanna to the Highest, and
laid branches and leaves under his feet, did enter into Jerusalem. Upon Friday
the seventh of June to wards the evening, we took our journey to Bethlehem
Judah, and we four lay consorts, (the Friars by our consent still having the
privilege to be free from these expenses) delivered jointly four zechines to
the Friars ours guides, for our charges, whereof they gave us no other account,
then they did formerly, yet they only disbursed some small rewards, since we
went on foot, and were otherwise tied to satisfy the Friars of the Monastery,
under the name of gift or alms, for our diet there: but since they used us
friendly, we would not displease them for so small a matter.

We went out of the City by the gate of Ioppa, on the West side, and so along
(72) this line passed by a paued causey beyond Mount Sion, and then ascended
another Mountain to Bethlehem.

(73) Here they show the Garden of Vvia, and the Fountain wherein Bersheba
washed her self, which at that time was dry. And from the place where the
Tower of David was seated upon Mount Sion, (noted with the figure 6), is an
easy prospect into this garden.

(74) Here they show the Tower of Saint Simion.

(75) Here is a Tree of Terebinth, which bears a fruit of a black color,
like unto an Olive, yielding oil; and under this tree they say the Virgin did
rest, when she carried Christ to be presented in the Temple. For which cause
the Papists make their beads of this tree, and esteeming them holy, especially
when they have touched the rest of the monuments, they carry them into Europe,
and give them to their friends, for great presents and holy relikes.

(76) Here they show a fountain called of the Wisemen of the East, and they
say that the star did here again appear to them, after they came from Herod.

(77) Here they show the ruins of a house, wherein they say that the Prophet
Habakcuk dwelt, and was thence carried by the hairs of the head to feed
Daniel in the Lions Den at Babylon.

(78) Here they show the Fountain of the Prophet Elias, and the stone upon
which he used to sleep, upon which they show the print of his head, shoulders,
and other members, which prints have some similitude, but no just proportion of
those members. From a rock near this place we did see at once both Jerusalem
and Bethlehem.

(79) Here they show a Tower and ruins, where the Patriarck Jacob dwelt, and
here again we did see both Cities.

(80) Here is an old stately Sepulcher, in which they say Rachel, Jacobs wife
was buried. It is almost of a round form, built of stone and lime four foot
high, having the like cover above it, borne up by four pillars. There be two
other Sepulchers, but nothing so fair, and all three are enclosed within one
wall of stone.

(81) Here they show the Fountain, for the water whereof David thirsted, yet
would not drink it, when it was brought with the hazard of blood.

(82) Here the City Bethlehem is seated, which then was but a Village; having
no beauty but the Monastery.

(83) Here the Monastery is seated, large in circuit, and built rather after
the manner of Europe, then Asia, which the Italian Franciscan Friars, (called
Latins, and more commonly Franckes) do possess: but other Christian sects
have their Altars in the Church by special privilege, and the Turks
themselves coming hither in Pilgrimage, do lie within the Church: for the
Turks have a peculiar way by a door of Iron, (made of old, and kept by them)
to enter into the Chapel, where they say Christ was borne. This Monastery
seems strong enough against the sudden attempts of the Turks or Arabians, yet
the Friars in that case dare not resist them, living only in safety by the
reverence which that people bears to this place, and by the opinion of their
own poverty. The greater Church is large, and high, in which I numbered twenty
four pillars, but my consorts being more curious, observed that the pillars
were set in four ranks, every rank having eleven pillars seven foot distant
one from the other, whereof many were of porphery, and had beautiful spots The
highest roof of the Church on the inside, is painted with Histories of the
Scripture, with a rich painting that shines with gold and glass as if it were
enameled, (called in Italian Alla Mosaica), and the pauement is rich, with
stones of marble, porphery, and Iaspar.

From the less Church called of Saint Katherine, we entered a Cave under the
earth, where the Friars gave every one of us a lighted wax candle in his hand.
Let them place what religion they will therein, I am sure the Cave was so
dark, as we could not have passed it without a light. In this Cave we did
first see the bones of the Infants killed by Herod, then the Sepulchers of
Eusebius, and of Saint Jerome in his Chapel, for they hold that he long dwelt
there. Then they did lead us into a more dark place, where they say he did
live an austere life fifty years space, and translated the Bible out of Hebrew
into Latin, and wrote many volumes. But the place seemed to me more fit to
dull the brain, then to yield such fruits of wit, by reason it was dark, and
dug deep under ground.

From this Cave we ascended by ten marble stairs into a Chapel, all covered
with marble, and lying in length from the West (at which end we entered) to the
East. And from this West end, as well Turks as Christians of all sects, go
upon their knees to Christ's birth.
the Eastern end, and there kiss a marked stone in the pauement, in which
very place they say the Redeemer of the World was borne. By this stone on the
South Side lies a little Chapel, having two doors only divided with a
pillar. In which Chapel at the right hand or West Side, is a manger, raised
from the ground, and all of marble, in which they say Christ was laid after his
birth: and in the wall they show a stone having (as they say) the lively
picture of Saint Hierome. In the said little Chapel on the left hand or East
side, they show a place, where they say Christ was circumcised, and shed the
first drops of his precious blood for the saving of mankind: And there they
fhewed another place, where they say the Wisemen of the East adored Christ,
and offered to him their gifts. The walls of both Chapels, the pauements, and
all things, are covered with marble. The roof on the inside, is painted with
the foresaid rich pictures, glistering likeenamelled work. To conclude, all
things are stately and rich, and remain so under the Turkish tyranny, yet more
rich in the Chapel of Chrsts birth, then in the greater Church, where all
things then began to fall to ruin, because the Turks believe not that Christ
died. The Turks do so reverence this monument of Christ's birth, as they
creep groueling upon hands and knees to kiss the said stone; yet in the mean
time they despise the monuments of his death, because they believe not that he
died.

From hence going Back the same way we entered, they show upon the right hand,
a hole in the highest roof of the Church, by which they say the star that
conducted the Wisemen, fell from above into the bowels of the earth. Can he
forbear laughter who considers the bigness of the stars, yea, even of Comets,
as some write that was, specially finding no mention of this falling of the
star to be made in the holy scriptures. The City or Village of Bethlehem, is
distant from Jerusalem some five miles, (in Turkey I always understand Italian
miles), and we came hither from the Western gate of Jerusalem, through a fair
way, and mountains planted with Vines, Olives, and fruitful Trees. Bethlehem
is seated upon Mountains, and has pleasant hills on the East and South-sides,
a pleasant plain on the North-side, ending in great mountains toward
Jerusalem.

(84) As we went out of Bethlehem to visit the Monuments, here they showed us
the field, in which the Angel made known the birth of Christ to the
Shepherds, and the Cave wherein they did lie by day, to shun the heat of the
Sun.

(85) Here they say the Patriarch Lot planted the first Vine.

(86) Here beyond pleasant Hills, we did distinctly see the Plain of Jordan,
and the dead Sea, with the situation of Sodom and Gomorra.

(87) Here they say Bethalia was seated of old.

(88) Here we did see the ruins of a house, in which, they say, Joseph the
Virgins Husband did dwell.

(89) Here they say the Virgin hid her self from the tyranny of Herod.

(90) Here they say that King Solomon had his Garden. The Franciscan Friars
sent out of Italy each third year into these parts, did courtcously intertaine
us at Bethlehem, and at our first coming, in imitation of Christ, they washed
our feet. It happened that my brother fell sick here of an Ague, and so when
our consorts upon Saturday in the evening returned to Jerusalem, we were
forced to stay here that night. But the next day in the evening we came to them
at the Monastery of Jerusalem. And because they made haste to return homeward,
we went forth the next day, being Monday the tenth of June early in the
morning to see the Mountains of Judea. And that day it happened, that I was
troubled with looseness of body, whereof I made good use, as I shall hereafter
show, which makes me name it.

We went out of the City at the Gate of Ioppa on the West side, and upon our
right hand they showed us (91) this place, where they say that Solomon was
anointed King.

(92) Thence we went right forward to a Fountain in the Desert, where they
say, Phillip the Apostle did interpret the Scriptures to the Eunuch of Candace,
Queen of Ethropii, and baptized him.

(93) Here they say is the Desert, in which John Baptist preached, and they
showed us his Cave cut out of a Rock, and a long stone therein, upon which he
used to lie, and a pleasant spring issuing out of the Rock, where he used to
drink, and another stone upon which he used to sit.

(94) He e we came to the Mountains (or Mountanous places) of Judea, and here
they say the Prophet Zacharias dwelt, where a woman of the Moors kept the
Church of old built there.

(95) From hence a Musket shot, or little more, is another house, which, they
say, belonged to Zacharias, and in one of these houses, he pronounced the Song,
Blessed be the Lord God of Israel, etc. And when the Virgin visited Elizabeth,
the Babe here sprang in her womb; and the Virgin here pronounced the Song, My
soul does magnify, etc. And John Raptist was borne here.

(96) From this place, they say, the Tree was taken, upon which the Cross of
Christ was made, and Greek Friars keep the Church that was here built. This
place is two miles distant from Jerusalem, whether we returned the same way we
came out, and entered the City by the West Gate of Ioppa.

The Church built upon Christ's Sepulcher of old by the Christians at Jerusalem,
is formerly noted by the figure (32); and we entered the same upon Tuesday the
eleventh of June toward the evening, at which time the Turkish Cady sent us
his Officer to open the door of it, to whom we paid for tribute after the door
was opened each of us nine zechines, and besides gave the Officer or Ianizare a
small reward for himself. But it is the custom, that he that has once paid
this tribute, may any time after enter this Church, without paying any thing,
if he can watch the opportunity of other Christians entering the same.

The rude, but true figure in plain of Christ's Sepulcher and the Church built
over it at Jerusalem.


(a) By this one and only door being of brass, and on the South side of the
Church, entrance is given into the said Church. They say there was of old
another door not far from this toward the East, but now it was not extant.

(b) This mark shows where the Belfrey stands, which is of ancient building,
and now in great part was ruined, while the Turks admit no use of any Belles.

(A) A Marble stone called the stone of Unction, where they say the body of
Christ was imbalmed, before it was buried. And it is compassed with grates of
Iron, having above it nine Lamps continually burning, maintained by the nine
Sects of Christians.

(B) The Sepulcher of Godfrey King of Jerusalem, to which other less
Sepulchers are adjoining, erected to Kings and Queens of his Family. And this
Sepulcher has this Epitaph in Latin:

Here lies worthy Godfrey of Bullon, who conquered all this Land to the worship
of Christ, whose saul may it rest in peace. Amen.

(C) The Sepulcher of Baldwine his brother, and successor in the Kingdom, with
this Epitaph in Latin:

King Balduinus another Judas Machabeus, the Hope of his Country, the Life of
the Church, the strength of both.

These verses added:

Quem for midabant, cui Dona, Tributa ferebant,
AEgipti caesar, Dan, ac homicida Damascus.
Whom Egypt, Dan, Damascus homicide,
With gifts and Tributes gladly pacifide.
(D) Here is Mount Caluary, and the stairs to ascend thereunto, the walls of
all the building upon it, the Altars, and the pauements, all shine with Marble,
the roof on the inside glisters with the foresaid rich painting, which seems
to be enameled. And diverse Altars are proper to diverse Nations or Sects, for
their Rites of Religion. To these Altars upon the Mountain, we ascended by
some twenty stairs; and there they showed us three holes, wherein the three
Crosses of Christ and the two thieves were erected. And at the figure (1)
(where they say the Cross of Christ stood) they showed us stones rent, or the
rending of the Mountain, when Christ died. Under this Mountain in the corner
toward the door of the Church, they bade us look in at a little window, and
there they showed us a scull, which they say was the scull of Adam, of which
they say the Mountain was called Golgotha. (2) Without the door of the Church
we ascended to a Chapel above this Mount, where they showed us an Altar, upon
which they say Melchisedeck offered sacrifices. (3) Also a Chapel, where they
say Abraham would have offered Isaac. (4) The Altars of Mount Caluary. (5) A
place in the way to the Sepulcher, where they say, that Christ laid down his
Cross, and where the Virgin Marie and John the Enangelist stood while he was
crucified.

(E) Here they show a stone, which they call Noli me tangere, that is, Touch me
not; because Christ appearing here to Marie Magdalen, used those words. (6) And
in this place they say Marie Magdalen stood.

(FFF) Here is a retreat of certain Chambers and Chapels, under the keeping
of the Latin or European Friars. For they continually send two or three of
their Friars to be locked weekly within this Church for the performance of
the Rites of their Religion, whom they recall at the weeks end to their
Monastery in the City, sending new in their place to attend that service. And
this retreat has only a door to pass into the Church, but none into the
street.

(G) The Chapel of Apparition, so called, because they say Christ there
appeared to the Virgin Marie after his Resurrection.

(H) The pillar of whipping, so called, because they say, Christ was bound to
it, when he was beaten with rods.

( h) This Altar they call the Altar of the holy Cross.

(I) A most narrow prison, in which they say Christ was shut up for a little
time.

(K) The Chapel where they say, that the Soldiers divided Christ's garments.

(L) Here we descended some fifty stairs into a cave under the earth, which
they have made a Chapel, and here they say, the Empress Helena found the
Cross of Christ, and thereupon built this Chapel, in which they say, four
pillars many times make a sound of groaning and sighing, and they show the very
place where the Cross of Christ, and where the Crosses of the two thieves were
found.

(N) After Christ was beaten, they say he was forced to sit here, till they
crowned his head with Thorns.

(P) The Chauncell of the Church.

( p) A hole in the pauement of this Chauncell, which the Greeks (having the
Chauncell to keep) hold to be the midst of the World.

( q) This place lies open over head, having the Sepulcher on the West side,
and two little Marble walls raised some two foot on the North and South
sides, within which walls the place is paued with Marble. The walls are so
high, as a man cannot conveniently sit upon them. And in this place they use to
pray, before they enter the Sepulcher.

( r) The outward Chapel or Porch of the Sepulcher, (as I may so term it)
where the Angel is said to have appeared to the women. And therein lies a
foure-square stone, fitted to the little door of the Sepulcher, upon which
stone roled from the door, they say the Angel did sit, after Christ was risen.

( ss) These be seats on both sides of this outward Chapel, in which seats
they use to pray. ( t) In this Chapel (so they call the Sepulcher it self),
and under the stone noted with black, they say the body of Christ was laid.
And this stone is raised as high as an Altar, and covered with Marble, as all
the walls be. The little door by which they enter this Chapel or Sepulcher,
is scarce 3 foot high, and a broad, so as they enter it with difficulty,
bending down their bodies, as if they crept into a cave. The very stone
covering the Sepulcher (or place where Christ's body did lie) is somewhat raised
from the ground, and has seven foot in length, and some six in breadth. This
Sepulcher lies under the first Globe of the Church, as the Chauncell lies under
the second, and it lies under the middle of that Globe; neither has the Church
any window, but the Globe hanging over the Sepulcher, is open in the roof, and
so gives light to all the Church. And in the very Sepulcher, the burning
Lamps give light, besides that the doors lie open. And because rain must
needs fall from the open Globe, the Sepulcher has a cover borne up with
pillars of Marble, and laid over with Lead to receive the rain. The Sepulcher
within and without is beautified with marble, and was cut out of a Rock before
the Church was built. The Franciscan Friars are for the most part Italians, but
are vulgarly called Francks, of the French who are in league with the Turkish
Ottoman, and they have the privilege of singing their Masses in the Sepulcher
(not of free grant, but because they are best able to pay for their,
privileges); yet it is free for any of the Christian Sects to come into the
Sepulcher. They say, that from the situation of this Sepulcher, the custom
came among Christians, to be buried with their feet and face toward the East,
as expecting the resurrection.

(V) A Chapel kept by the Sect of the Gofti.

(X) The Sepulchers of Joseph of Arimathea, and of Nicodemus.

(Y) The Chapel of the Iacobites.

(Z) The Chapel of the Abissines.

(X) The Chapel of the Armenians.

(X X) The Chapel of the Georgians.

Some write, that this Church has the form of a Cross, and if the retreat or
chambers of the Italian Friars with the Chapel of Aparition on the North
side, and the two Towers of the Belfrey on the South side, be jointly
considered with the Church, (which seem rather-fastned thereunto then of the
same building), a superstitious man may faigne to himself the figure of a
Cross; but shall reuer plainly demonstrate it to others. Above the roof of
the Church on the outside, are two fair Globes, whereof the greater covered
with lead, lies over the Sepulcher, and the less, all made of stone, is over
the Chauncell. And this greater Globe, on the inside of the Church is
beautified with engraven. Ceder trees, and borlie up with pillars of Marble,
and the less has fair pictures of the foresaid rich painting; shining like
enameled work. The breadth of the Church under both Globes, contains seventy
paces, and the length 140 paces and in general as well within as without it
retains only the shadow of the old magnificence.

We entered the Church on Tuesday in the afternoon, and were locked there in
all the night following, and almost all the next day, to fulfill our devotions.
But I formerly said, that the Italian Friars have chambers of retreat within
the Church, in which we did eat and rest at our pleasure. Yet these chambers
and the like retreats (wherein the Priests of other Sects with their wives,
children and family do lodge, and eat, and perform the rites of their
Religion), have not any one door into the street, but all enter the Church,
and go forth by the foresaid only door of the Church toward the South, and
the key of this door is kept by the Turks; who open it at set times, to admit
strangers, and once every week, to let the Friars return to their
Monasteries, and to receive new Friars into the Church, which are sent from
thence, to perform the feuerall rites of Religion. And this door has a grate
or little window, at which the enclosed Friars may talk with their friends
without, and receive meat sent them from their Monasteries.

Nine sundry Sects of Christians have their Monasteries within this City, by
whom Nine Sects of Christians.
the great Turk and his officers have great profit, and the Turks them selves
repute all the monuments and places holy, which Christ in his life frequented
but this monument of his death, and other like they despise, and keep them
only for their profit. From the said Monasteries, Friars are weekly sent to
perform their several rites, and at the weeks end they are recalled to the
Monasteries, and new sent in their place, which custom I think they take from
the Jews. For when David divided the twenty four Families of the sons of
Aaron into twenty four courses, that each of them might one after the other
in due order perform the holy offices in the Temple, Josephus writes, that
these courses, or Families in order one after the other lived in the Temple
from Sabbath to Sabbath, to perform those duties.

Of these nine Christian Sects, each has privileges to keep this or that
monument within the City, and in the field, in which places they perform the
rites of their Religion. And according to the number of the Sects, they
maintain nine Lamps continually burning in the foresaid common Church upon
the stone of Unction, as many upon the Sepulcher, and as many upon Mount
Caluarie. The nine Sects are thus called; Franks (namely, the Italians),
Georgians, Greeks, Sorians, Costi, Abissines, Armenians, Nestorians, and
Maronites.

The Religion of the Frankes (namely, Papists) is so well known, as I will
omit it here, and refer it to his due place. I will only say, that they have
the keeping of the 1. The Frankes.
Sepulcher, the Chapel of A parition (and therein of the pillar of whipping)
and of one Altar upon Mount Caluarie, for the performance of their rites.

The Georgians are a warlike Nation, inhabiting Media, and the Caspian
Mountains, 2. The Georgians.
and have their name of Saint George, whom they have chosen their protecting
Saint. They have a King, and making war valiantly sometimes upon the Turks,
sometimes upon the Persians, could never be conquered by either. Yea, if they
be oppressed by either, they easily find help from the other, out of their
mutual hatred. Therefore they pay no tribute to the Turks, but by singular
privilege freely enter into Jerusalem armed, and with banner displaied.
Neither dare the Turks offer them the least injury, lest when they return
home, they should revenge it upon the Turks lying near them. Their very women
are warlike, like the Amazons, and carrying bows, show valor both in
countenance and behavior. The men wear long hair on their heads and beards,
save that they all are shaven like Clerks upon the Crown of the head, the
Laymen in a foure-square, the Priests in a round form. They expressly follow
the Religion, Rites, and Ceremonies of the Greeks, and in their Divine service
use the Greek tongue, otherwise speaking their own language (as I think
Caldean.) These in the Church of Jerusalem have the keeping of Mount Caluary,
and the Altar there built over the place, where they say the Cross of Christ
stood, and in the City they keep the house of the High Priest Annas.

Of the Greeks Religion I must speak at large in his due place. Now I will
only 3. The Greeks.
say, that in the Church they keep the Chauncell, and therein show a hole in
the pauement compassed with Marble, which they say is the very middle point of
the world. Against which opinion I argued with them, and objected, that the
earth is round, and that in a Globe the center is in the midst, all centers
in the outside being but imaginary, and to be placed wheresoever the measurer
will. Also that in measuring (after their manner) the outside of the earth,
Palestina was far distant from the Equinoctial line, which divides the
World into equal parts. And if Palestina were just under that line, yet that
all the countries having the same Meridian, should be the midst of the World,
as well as Palestina. They answered, that David says in his Psalms; In the
midst of the World I will work their salvation. To which I replied, that the
midst of the World was there taken for the face, and in the sight of the
World, so as none should be able to deny it. Whereupon they grew angry, and
said, that the Scripture must be believed, in spite of all Cosmographers and
Philosophers. It had been vain to dispute further with them, there being not
one learned man among these Greeks at Jerusalem. And to say truth, (if you
except the Greek Islands under the Venetians), they have few or no learned men.
For my part, I never found in all the vast Empire of Ottoman any learned
Greek, but only one, called Milesius, who was after made Patriarch of
Constantinople. And these Greeks, as in this point, so in all other, follow
the literal sense of the Scriptures. For which cause they also believe the
corporal presence of Christ in the Sacrament. And whereas Saint Paul says,
Let the Bishop be the husband of one wife, etc. they so interpret it, as if the
Priests wife die within few days after his marriage, yet he may never marry
again.

The Sorians are so called of Syria, in which Province they live, having their
own 4. The Serians.
Patriarch, neither could they ever be brought to consent to the Roman faith:
for whatsoever the Romans challenge due to the Seat of S. Peter, that they say
rather belongs to them, in respect Saint Peter was Bishop of Anttoch. They
agreed with the Greeks in many things, they deny Purgatory, they fast four
Lents in the year, they permit their Priests to marry, they use the Greek
tongue in their Divine service, and otherwise speak their own language (which
I take to be the Arabian tongue.) In Jerusalem Church they keep the Sepulchers
of Joseph of (...), and of Nicodemus, and in the City they keep the house of
Saint Mark, noted with the figure (37.)

The Costi are Egyptians, dwelling about Numidia. They retain the heresy of
5. The Costi
Arrius, and follow the Ceremonies of the Abissines. This I write upon the
report of the Italian Friars, who are to be blamed if it be not true. These in
the Church keep the Chapel, wherein Godfrey and his Regal Family lie
buried, and the Cave under Mount Caluerie, where they say the scull of Adam
lies, and have also their proper Altar upon Mount Caluarie.

The Abissines inhabit the South parts of Africa, and they are subject to their
King 6. The Abisines.
Preti-Giani. They received the Christian faith of the Eunuch baptized by
Phillip, and themselves are baptized not only with water, but with the sign
of the Cross printed in their flesh with hot Iron, gathering that fire is as
necessary to Baptism as water, out of those words of S. John Baptist; I
baptize you with water, but he shall baptize you with the Spirit and fire. Also
they use the Jews and Mahometans circumcision, like wary Notaries, who fearing
to fail in their assurance, never think they have used words enough; yet do
they greatly hate the Jews, and think their Altars defiled, if they do but
look upon them. They give the Sacrament of our Lords Supper to very children,
and they (as all the rest excepting the Franks, that is, Papists), give it in
both kinds. When they sing Mass or Psalms, they leap and clap their hands,
and like the Jews use Stage Players actions. They use their own, that is, the
Egyptian tongue, in Divine service, and observing a Lent of fifty days at one
time, do greatly maccrate their bodies. In the Church they keep the Chapel
adjoining to the Sepulcher, and the pillar where they say Christ was crowned
with Thorns.

The Armenians are so called of the Province Armenta, which they inhabit, and
7. The Armenians.
they call their chief Bishop Catholicon, whom they reverence as another Pope.
They disagree with the Greeks, and rather apply themselves to the Franks, yet
they keep not the Feast of Christ's birth, but fast that day. They keep the
Roman Lent, but more strictly, abstaining from Fish, and very Oil (which they
use for butter), but upon some Holy Days in that time, they eat flesh. They
mingle no water with the Wine of the Sacrament, as the Papists do, but with
them, they lift up the bread, (yea and the Cup also) to be worshipped. Of old,
with reservation of customs, they joined themselves to the Roman Church; but
finding the Pope to give them no help against their enemies, they quickly fell
from him. The very Lay men are shaued like Clerks upon their heads, but in the
form of a Cross, and their Priests keep the hair of their heads long, in
two tusts, placing therein great Religion. In the Church they keep the pillar,
where they say the garments of Christ were parted, and lots cast upon his
Coat, and in the City, the place where they say Saint lames was beheaded, and
the house of the High Priest Caiphas, upon Mount Sion.

The Nestorians are so called of the Monk Nestorius, who infected the
Persians, The Nestorians.
Tartars, and Jews, with his heresy. They give the Sacrament of the Lords
Supper in both kinds, and that to children as well as men. They use the
Caldean tongue in divine service, and otherwise the Arabian. In the Church they
keep the prison, wherein they say Christ was shut up.

The Maronites inhabit Phanicia, and the Mount of Libanus, and they use the
Syrian 9. The Maronites
tongue in their divine service, namely, (as I think) the Arabian. And they
said, that these men for poverty were lately fled from Jerusalem. Some make
mention of a tenth sect, namely, the lacobites. (named of Jacob, Disciple to
the Patriarch of Alexandria), who live mingled among Turks and Tartares,
inhabiting partly Nubia in Afrike, partly the Provinces of India. I remember
not to have seen any such at my being there, neither yet to have heard any
mention of them; yet others write that they admit circumcision as well as
baptism, and besides print the sign of the Cross by an hot Iron, in some
conspicuous part of their body, that they confess their sins only to God,
not to their Priests, that they acknowledge but one nature in Christ, that in
token of their faith they make the sign of the Cross with one finger, and
give the Sacrament of our Lords Supper in both kinds, yea, to Infants, as well
as to those who are of full age.

I cannot omit an old Spanish woman, who had for many years lived there,
locked up in the Temple, lodging every night at the door of the sepulcher, and
having her diet by the Friars alms. She said that she came to Jerusalem to
expiate her sinnesby that holy pilgrimage, that she had then been there seven
years, and in that time had always lived in the Church, and that she would
not refuse any opportunity to go back into Spain, but otherwise would die
there, and thereby thought to merit much of God. Neither do I think she lost
the hope of this vain merit, since it was not easy to find a man who would
carry an old woman, and bear her charges so long a journey.

The stone of unction in the Church, is common to all the nine Christian sects,
neither do the Keepers of any other monuments refuse any Christian to enter
into them, but only by privilege keep their Altars private to themselves.
Most of the sects have their Monasteries in the City, and (as I formerly said)
each of them has the privilege to keep some monuments, as well within as
without the walls. But some of the sects only come to Jerusalem at solemn
feasts, and dwelling near the City, easily maintain a Friar or two, to keep
their monuments, and so are freed from the necessity of building a monastery in
the City.

Upon Wednesday the twelfth of June toward evening, the Turks did open the
Church to let us out, and each of us Laymen gave the chief Turk thirty
meidines, and the Doore-keeper twenty of free gift; and for the wax candles
burnt the night before in the Church, each gave sixty meidines to one of our
Italian Friars. This done, we returned to the Monastery, where we lodged, with
great joy that we were presently to go back to Ioppa.

I formerly said that the Franciscan Friars with whom we lodged, were of
Europe, whether at three years end they were to be recalled, and some fifty
new Friars to be sent hither in their place, which still each third year use
to be changed. And these Friars are called the Family of Frankes, for the great
Turk permits them as French to live there, and forbids the coming of any
Spanish or Roman Friars: yet are they for the most part of Sicily, Naples, or
Rome; but denying their Country, affirm that they are Venetians, and if they
were known to be subjects to Spain or Rome, they should incur great danger.
Of them some few are indeed Venetians, and at this time some two were
Frenchmen. All these live of the aims of the Merchants in the East of their
Religion, who for the most part are Italians, and especially Venetians: yet
has the Monastery also some rents of Lands given to it of old in Sicily and in
Spain; and from thence they bring with them every third year at their first
arrival, a present of great value to the Turkish Ottoman. I said formerly,
that of old the Venetians yearly sent a gally to carry Pilgrims to the Holy
Land, till the Christians were so oppressed by exactions of the Turks, as they
rarely undertook that journey, and so the Venetians also left that custom.
From that time this Family of Frankes, (so these Friars are called) uses to
pass in a Venetian ship to Cyprus, and from thence to Ioppa, in the Holy Land,
hiring there a Grecian bark to that purpose; and in like sort the old Family
upon the arrival of the new, returns into Italy. And as soon as this family
arriueth, they disperce themselves, the greater part abiding at Jerusalem and
Bethlehem, and some single men or couples being sent to do the office of
Priests at Cayro (or Babylon) in Egypt, at Haleppo in Asia, (where most part of
their Merchants reside) and at Scanderona, (of old by all, and still by
Christians called Alexandretta). These Friars thus dispersed, are not only
maintained by the Merchants to whom the are sent, but they also send from them
large alms to the rest at Jerusalem, and they often change places, that all
may equally bear these burdens.

We being now to take our journey from Jerusalem, many Christians and Jews
brought us diverse toies, to buy and carry with us, being of no worth, save
only that they were far fetched, namely, beads for Papists to number their
prayers, and also crosses, both made of the earth whereof they say Adam was
formed, or of the Olive trees of Mount Oliuet, or of Terebinth, (under one of
which trees they say the Virgin Mary rested, when she carried Christ an Infant
to be presented in the Temple,) and round stones called Cornioli, of yellow
color, and others of white, called the Seawater of India. Also girdles of the
Virgin Mary, and glistering stones of little price (as all the rest are.) Among
which they attribute to the stone of Indea, the virtue to provoke urine, to the
Eagle stone called Aquilina, the virtue to expel poison, to facilitate the
birth of children, to heal the falling sickness, to restore woemens milk,
and so to diverse stones, diverse and incredible virtues. Besides, our Franciscan
Friars gave each to his friend and the Guardian to us all, Agnos Dei, Dust and
little stones taken from the foresaid monuments, for a great treasure to be
carried to our friends at home. Moreover they gave to each of us freely and
unasked (as it seems of custom) as well to us Laymen as to the Friars, a
testimony under the seal of the Monastery, that we had been at Jerusalem, and
for better credit, they expressed therein some markable signs of our faces and
bodies.

Now there remained nothing but the Epilogue of the Comedy, that we should make
some fit present to the Guardian of the Monastery, in satisfaction for our
diet, and the courtesy of the Friars toward us, which my self and my brother
thought very fit to be done: but two of the Friars our consorts, either wanting
money, or used to eat of free cost, did not only refuse to give any thing,
but persuaded the French Laymen to join with them in denial thereof. The
third Friar our consort, and for his experience used by the other as a
conductor, hearing this, did vehemently reprove them, using these words in
French; Que voules vous doncques payer en blanch? (that is, what will you then
pay them in white?) which phrase they use when a man requites a courtesy in
words, or fair written promises, not really. They on the other side, no less
angry, answered that it was unfit and irreligious for Friars to extort gifts
from Christian Pilgrims. My self and my brother laughed to our selves hearing
this difference, for we found now, and had often heard, that these Friars were
most deate Hosts, and that as they in England, who refer their payment to
pleasure, are always ouer-paid, so these Friars asking nothing for diet, yet
under the title of gift or alms, expect more then any the most greedy Host
could demand: yet lest we should provoke them, either to hinder our departure,
or to do us any shrewd turn, as they most easily might do: yea, left they
should surmise my self and my brother to be authors or partners of this
conspiracy, I persuaded the French Laymen our consorts, that howsoever the
Friars still remained obstinate to give nothing, yet we four should present
the Guardian some six zechines. This effected, the Guardian, dismissed us for
good sons, yet in truth we were well contented with this fair occasion to
restrain our gift, which howsoever it were far from bounty, yet was it free
from base sparing, since we gave at Bethlehem for our diet another present to
those Friars, and while we visited the monuments of Jerusalem, being daily
abroad, and commonly dining in Villages, we were only beholding to these
Friars for some ten suppers, besides that we had always professed poverty
(most safe to strangers). To which may be added, that in this Province,
(whether for abundance of all things, or want of money) all things were sold at
cheap rates for when we went out to see the mountains or hill Country of
Indea, and dined in a Village, I remember we bought twenty eggs for a
meidine, and a pound of mutton for five meidines, four cakes for one, and a
hen for two meidines and a half. In the Monastery they gave us enough of
mutton: hens and sallets, and of good wine, but some what sharp; and the
Friars our consorts did eat continually with the Friars, and we Laymen by our
selves, the Friars only once inuiting us to eat with them in the public
Refectory.

If this discourse makes any surmise that we did some things against our
conscience while we lived in this Monastery, let him read the four and
twenty Precept of Dissimulation in the Chapter of Precepts, the third Part,
and the first book, wherein I have explaned my opinion of the outward
reverence of the body showed in time of the Papists Divine service. And for the
rest, let him know, that I now confess (as I did formerly) that we therein
erred, that we did not first go to Constantinople or Haleppo, from whence
having a Ianizare to guide us, chosen by our Ambassador or Merchants, we might
have escaped many of those troubles, which now we endured being alone, and that
with no greater charge then now we were at, since these troubles increased our
charge; and might also easily have obtained any courtesy at these Friars
hands, or at least have seen Jerusalem safely, though they were ill affected
to us. But since many things diuerted us from this course, and now we were
fallen into these Italian Friars hands, we thought best to bring our selves out
of this danger by discretion and moderation in our deeds and words. Also I
confess, that in those days my conscience was not so tender, as since (by the
grace of God) I have found it, yet was it never so insensible, as it could have
passed over the worshipping of an Idol, or the denying of my faith. If I had
here gone to Mass, it would seem no wonder to our English Gentlemen, who
have lived any time in Italy; and I am confidently of opinion, that no man
returns home with more detestation of the Papists Religion, then he who well
instructed in the truth, has taken the liberty to behold with his eyes their
strange superstitions, which one of experience may well see, without any great
participation of their folly. For my part, as I had always been unwilling to
be present at their Mass, so I abhorred: from the receiving of the Lords
Supper with them. And this was the highest mischief, which we could be forced
to incur at Jerusalem. Now for the Communion of our Lords Supper, except it
be in great sickness and danger of death, they never impose it so earnestly on
any man, as he may not with discreet answers put it off till another time,
without all suspicion of contrariety in Religion. For their Masses, they never
sing or mumble them, but in the mornings, and that fasting. Now we came the
fourth of June in the afternoon to Jerusalem, and the fifth and sixth days we
went abroad before full day, to see the Monuments, and returned not to the
Monastery till night, at which time the greatest offense to our conscience
that could happen, was to hear them sing Psalms in their Chapel. Upon
Friday the seventh of June we took our journey to Bethlehem, where my brother
falling sick, we had scarce leisure to satisfy our curiosity, much less to
be present at any unpleasing rites of their Religion. Upon Saturday, the eight
of June, our consorts returning to Jerusalem, we took, occasion by my
brothers sickness to stay at Bethlehem, and came not to Jerusalem till Sunday
at night. On Monday the ninth of June we visited the Mountains or Hill
Country of Judea, at which time my brother was so ill disposed, as our
Consorts themselves doubted his death, and for my part, I was all the day
troubled with a weakness of body. And because the greatest danger of our
participating with them in their Rites, was like to be, when we should be
locked with them in the Church of the Sepulcher, which only remained to be
seen by us, I made such use of this my brothers and my own weakness, as
increasing their opinion of his danger, and my self taking many occasions to
make them think my sickness the greater: it happened that in the evening, our
Consorts burning with desire of returning homeward, appointed the next day for
the visiting of the Sepulcher: but I in respect of my own and my brothers
weakness, desired to have it deferred some few days, till the very Friars
our consorts, impatient of delay, and yet unwilling to incur the blame of
leaving us behind them, made free offer to us of that which we most desired,
saying, that in their chambers within the Church, they had beds for us to rest
upon, and that they would provide us meat, and all necessaries, which we could
have staying in the Monastery. We gladly took this condition, and so being
locked up in the Church of the Sepulcher upon Tuesday the eleventh of June in
the afternoon, after we had satisfied our curiosity, we laid us down upon
the beds, and only forbearing meat for avoiding of suspicion, we rested there
till Wednesday the twelfth of June in the afternoon, when we came forth, and
returned to the Monastery. The thirteenth day we had no thought but of making
us ready for our return, and the next day early in the morning, we departed
from Jerusalem. So as in all this time, the Friars themselves our consorts, had
no leisure to be at a Mass, but only the Sunday when we were at Bethlehem,
and in the Church of the Sepulcher, when upon pretense of sickness we rested
on our beds. Otherwise we professed our selves Catholics, as the Papists will
be called, yet enemies to the King of Spain, as the enemy of our Queen and
Country. And when our superstitious consorts, being now to leave Jerusalem, had
gathered great heaps of stones from the monuments, to carry into their
Country, and had received of the Guardians gift, for great treasure, holy
beads, Agnus Dei, and like trash, we so refused to take any such burden, as
still we bewailed our mistortune, that we being not to return the right way
home, as they did, but to pass to Constantinople, could not carry such
relics with us, left they should fall into some Turks hands, who might abuse
them. And when our consorts at Bethlehem printed the sign of the Cross with
ink and a penknife upon their arms, so as the print was never to be taken
out, we would not follow them in this small matter, but excused our selves,
that being to pass home through many Kingdoms, we durst not bear any such
mark upon our bodies, whereby we might be known. Besides, it was some
advantage to us, that the Frenchmen our consorts were of their Kings party,
and professed no less hate against Spain then our selves.

To conclude, the Friars of our consorts told me and my brother, that the
Guardian would make us Knights of the Sepulcher, so we would crave that honor,
which was never granted to any but them that craved it, in which case they
offered to be intercessors for us. I well knew that they had offered this
honor (as they termed it) to a Plebean Frenchman our consort, and had heard,
that the Friars used this art to get money from Pilgrims, making no difference
to whom they gave this title. And for my part, I never affected titles,
thinking better to be of an interior condition with plenty, then of high
degree with want. Therefore I so answered them, as giving due thanks for their
courtesy, yet I professed, that if I were worthy of that title, I might not
crave it, nor receive it offered, in respect of the oath imposing military
duties upon me, and the profession of service to the King of Spain, the
public enemy of our Country; besides that, I should be tied thereby, to hate
and prosecute all of the reformed Religion, which many of my friends and
kinsmen professed. It is true that if we had had a Ianizare to guide and
protect us, we might have lodged in Terusalem with some Christian, who would
have showed us the monuments, without troubling the Italian Friars, And it is
well known, that the great Turk gives liberty to all Religions. But the
other Sects of Christians being poor, and these Friars being full of money, as
well the Christians as Turks depend greatly upon them, so as if they would,
they might easily have brought us into danger, neither could we have had such
convenient diet and lodging with any other as with them. And howsoever by our
Merchants help we might have obtained letters from the Italian Merchants at
Haleppo, for our entertainment and good usage in this Monastery, yet since for
the foresaid reasons we had at Cyprus committed our selves to the protection of
the Friars our consorts, we had now no means but honest dissembling to free
our selves from danger. For it had been easy for these Friars secretly to have
drawn us into danger of life, and we knew that Papists make no conscience, or
rather think it meritorious to use like practices against those of our
Religion. And if they would not practice against our lives, yet we knew that
they might have cast us into many dangers, both here and in our return through
Italy, if we should have provoked them to wish us ill. Therefore this our
foresaid dissembling may well be excused, especially since thereby we did not
in any sort wound our consciences to my best remembrance.

Now that this dissembling might prove more profitable and honest, it behooued
us thoroughly to know our consorts, and so to apply our selves to them. Of which
the two French Laymen were young, and of no experience in the World; and one of
the Friars was more simple then simplicity it self, so as small art was
required to deceive these. The second Friar had been a Soldier in the war
of France, and had made himself Friar after the peace, only to escape the
private revenge of some, whose friends he had killed, for they never seek
revenge of those that put on a religious habit, and to gain this man's love,
it was sufficient to use good fellowship toward him. The third Friar had a
sharp wit, joined with the wisdom of experience, so as all the rest chose him
for their guide, and to govern their expenses. And because he might easily
incense our consorts, and the Friars at Jerusalem against us, we thought good
to gain his good will, by all good respects to him; so as howsoever we were
not ignorant to manage our own affairs, yet ioining our selves to the rest,
we made him also governor of our expenses, to witness our confidence in his
love, and cared not to bear some loss, so we might bind him to us under the
title of friendship, which we easily effected with him, being of a courteous
disposition. To conclude, I did often experience his good will, and howsoever I
found him lovingly and courteously to make us respected, as well of our
consorts as the Friars at Jerusalem, yet I perceived by many and clear
arguments, that he thought us to differ from him in religion. For in particular
when I refused (for the foresaid reasons, and with due modesty) the Friars
offer to make me Knight of the Sepulcher, he smiling, said to me, (alluding to
my name) in the French tongue; Enverite vous estes fin, etc. That is, in truth
you are crafry as your name imports, but I will endeavor to make the Guardian
interpret your excuse to the best. Besides his friendship, it was no small
advantage to us, that our stay at Jerusalem was so short, as the time permitted
them not to inquire after our religion. By the aforesaid art we freed our
selves from all danger, yet would I not advise any by imitating us to incur
the like, who can have the foresaid better commodities of performing this
journey, since it would be hard for any so to disguise their condition, who
have not first had good practice and acquaintance with Friars in Italy, as my
self had. Besides that, all our skill was sharpened to greater wariness, by a
late Tragical example of others, the memory whereof was daily and hourly
before our eyes.

For we beheld upon the wall in the chamber where we lodged, the names written
of Henry Bacon, and Andrew Verseline, (two English Gentlemen), of Abraham
Serwenterb Frederichson, and Henry Vonwildt, Peterson Van Narden, (two
Flemmings), whose names were written there upon the foureteenth of August,
1595, and lay before us, both sleeping and waking, warning us like so many
prodigies or visions to take wary beed to our steps. These four coming in
company to Jerusalem, had been received into this Monastery, and when they had
seen the monuments within and near Jerusalem, they went to Bethlehem, where
it happened that upon a health drunk by the Flemmings to the King of Spain,
which the English refused to pledge, they fell from words to blows, so as two
of them returned wounded to the Monastery of Jerusalem. Then these Italian
Friars, (according to the Papists manner, who first make the sick confess
their sins, and receive the Lords Supper, before they suffer Physician or
Apothecary to come to them, or any kitchen physic to begluen them): I say the
Friars pressed them to confess their sins, and so to receive the Lords
Supper, which when they refused to do, it was apparent to the Friars, that
they were of the reformed Religion, (whom they term heretics): Whereupon the
Friars began to neglect them (I will not say to hate them): and while the two
which were wounded stayed for recovery of their health, and so detained the
other two with them; it happened that the third fell sick. So as none had
their health now, but Master Verseline, who lovingly and like a servant more
then a friend, provided all necessaries for his companion Master Bacon, till at
last himself also fell sick, and was the first of them that died. Then within
eight days space, all the rest died, either for that they were neglected by
the Friars, (which I think sufficient in that Country to cast away any in
their case), or by their too much care, namely by poison (as some suspect): for
the Friars have one of their order, who is skillful in physic, and has a
chamber furnished with cooling waters, sirops, and other medicines most fit for
that Country. When they were dead, the Friars gave into the Turks hands, the
bodies of the two Flemmings and Master Verseline, (who had little store of
crowns, which belonged to the great Turk, as heir to all strangers), and the
Turks permitted them to be buried upon Mount Syon without the walls, in the
Church yard proper to the Christians of Europe: But Master Bacon, ouerliuing
the rest, and now seeing his life to depend upon the Friars care of him, showed
a Nouice Friar long bracelets of pieces of gold twined about his arm, and
promising to give them all to him, and greater rewards if he would go with him
into England, so as he would take care of him in his sickness, he had
persuaded the young Friar to go with him into England, and to promise him
faithful service there: yet when this Nouice at his confession made this
known, and after verified as much to the Guardian and chief Friars, I know
not whether the hope of this booty made him die sooner, but I am sure he lived
very few days after. And give me leave to tell the truth, these Friars either
to gain his money, (which was due to the Great Turk), or for fear that
inquisition should be made by the Turks after the cause of his death,
appearing by manifest signs upon his body (as others suspected and reported),
I say these Friars buried this Gentleman in a yard of their Monastery secretly,
which if the Great Turk or any of his Magistrates had known, no doubt they
would gladly have taken this occasion to extort much money from the Frires,
since by the like forged accusations, they use sometimes to oppress them; the
very Turks having at other times themselves buried dead bodies within the
circuit of the Monastery, and after caused them to be dug up, as if they had
been casually found; and then crying that their Ottoman was deceived, put the
Friars to pay large ransomes for redeeming of their lives. And let no man
wonder that these hungry Governors of Cities and Provinces in Turkey, should
use like frauds to entrap Christians, (as they do very frequently,) since they
buy their Offices, and many times are recalled, before they be warm in their
seats, if any man at Constantinople offer larger sums for their employment.

So as this one Province of Palestine, and one City of Jerusalem, (though
having small or no traffic), has had in one years space four Zaniacci, the
old being recalled to Constantinople, as soon as his successor had outbribed
him there. And this is one of the greatest mischiefs in this Empire, since
starueling flies suck much more, then those that are fully gorged. The
foresaid Zaniacco is chief Governor for military and civil affairs of all
Pallestine, and lies at Jerusalem in the house of Pontius Pilate. His
Substitute or Liefetenant is called Catake, who cast one of our consorts for a
time into prison, because he complained of the Turkish exactions, and his own
poverty. The third Magistrate is called Cady, who gouernes Ecclesiastiall
matters, and dwelt in Salomons house (as they call it) at Jerusalem, near the
yard of the old Temple of the Jews, (in which now a Turkish Mosche was built);
and of this man we had our leave to enter the City, and to see the sepulcher,
and being called before him, we were commanded to put off our shoes, he
sitting cross legged (like a Tailor) on the ground upon a Turkey Carpet. The
fourth Magistrate was called Agha, who kept the Castle of Jerusalem, and when
we walked one evening on that part of the roof of our Monastery, whence we had
the fairest prospect into the City, he sent a messenger to command us to retire
from beholding the Castle, or otherwise he would discharge a piece of Ordinance
at us.

CHAP. III. Of our journey from Jerusalem, by land to Haleppo, by Sea to
Tripoli in Syria, by land to Haleppo and Scanderona, and of our passage by Sea
to the Island Candia.
Upon Friday the fourteenth of June, in the year 1596 we went out of
Jerusalem, and by the same way, and in the same June 14. Ann. 1596.
manner as we came, rode back to Ramma, delivering to our guide as many
zechines as before, to pay for the Turkish exactions, and to our Muccari for
their Asses which we had hired. Neither did any memorable thing happen to us by
the way, save that when we came near to Ramma, and by chance rode over the
place of burial for the Turks, where some women were then mourning for their
dead friends, they thinking it a reproach that we should ride over their graves,
did with enraged countenances fling stones at us, till we appeased them by
dismounting from our Asses. The fifteenth of June we came back to Ioppa, where
our guide gave three meidines to a Ianizare, that he would beat with a
cudgel certain Arabians, who had offered us wrong by the way, which he did
readily and roundly. Then without delay we went aboard our little Greek Bark,
which (according to our bargain at Cyprus) stayed here for our return. For
the Master thereof was further tied to transport us from hence to Tripoli in
Syria, neither had he yet received full payment for transporting us hither, the
money being left in Cyprus with an Italian Merchant, who was to pay it him at
his return, if he brought a testimony under our hands, that he had performed
his bargain to us. This condition we made prouidently, and by advice of
experienced men, for otherwise the Master of our Bark, upon any profitable
occasion, would have left this port before our return from Jerusalem, and we
should hardly have found another Bark here, in a place not much frequented
with ships. Besides that the restraint of the money, not to be paid but upon a
testimony brought under our hands, was a good caution, that he should not use
us ill, nor any way betray us. The sixteenth of June upon Sunday by twilight of
the morning, we set sail from Ioppa, and coasting the shore of Asia, had the
land so near us every day, as we might easily distinguish the situation of
the Cities and Territories. And first we passed by the City called Caesaria
Philippi, seated in a Plain, and Casaria.
twenty five miles distant from Ioppa, which of old was a famous City, but
now for the most part ruined, and become an infamous nest of Turks, Moors and
Arabians. Here Christ raised to life the daughter of Iairus, and healed the
woman, which for twelve yeetes had a flux of blood. And here Saint Peter did
baptize the Centurion Cornelius, and Saint Paul in the presence of Foelix
disputed with Tertullus. Here Titus the son of Vespasian landing, when he
came to destroy Jerusalem, cast great multitudes Antipatris.
of Jews to wild beasts to be devoured. In the right way to Tripoli,
Antipatris was not far distant, which Herod did rebuild, and thither the
soldiers did lead Saiint Paul, by the command of the Tribune Lysias, but we
could not see this Village. Next, we did see the Pilgrims Castle, now called
Tortora. Then we sailed by the Promontory (hanging far over the Sea) of the
Mountain Carmelus, made famous by Carmel.
the aboade of the Prophet Elias. Then we passed within sight of the old City
Ptolemais, after called Achon and Acri, seated in a fair plain within a
Creek of the sea of Achon.
the same name, and compassing the City. And such afaire plain lies all along
the Coast from Ioppa to Tripoli. This City was famous by the armies of Europe,
passing to conquer these parts, and at this day it has a large circuit,
compassed with walls, and a commodious Haven, and is thirty five miles distant
from Caesaria. From hence salling twenty miles, we passed by the City Tyrus,
then called Sur, the ruins whereof Tyrc.
witness the old magnificence. The seat thereof seemed most pleasant, being
built upon a low Rock, in the form of a Peninsule, which Rock was part of a
high Promontory hanging over the sea. And it may appear how strongly it was
fortified of old by Quintus Curtius, relating the difficulties with which
Alexander the Great took and subdued the same. When we had sailed some ten
miles further, we did see the ruins of Sarepta, where the Prophet Eleas lodged
with a widow, in the time of a great Sarepta.
famine. After we had sailed some twenty miles further, we did see and passed
by the City Sydon, now called Saetta, seated on the North side of a Promontory,
and lying Sydon.
toward the West and South, to the very sea side. These most pleasant
Territories are inhabited by wicked people, but God sent us a fair wind, by
which we escaped from them, into whose Ports if we had been driven, they would
have taken all lust and unjust occasions to extort money from us, if they did
us no worse harm. Mention is often made in the Holy Seriptures of Sydon, Tire,
and these Territories, as well in the old as new Testament, the particulars
whereof I omit. Here first we did gladly see the hills and high tops of Mount
Lybanus, being a very pleasant and fruitful mountain, Lybanus.
the wines whereof are carried as far is Haleppo. The Castle Barutti is some
two miles distant from the Promontory of Saetta, and it is seated upon the
North-side of Barutti.
a hill, hanging over the sea. Here they say that Saint George delivered the
Kings daughter, by killing a Dragon: And to this place, as also to Tire and
Sydon, there is great concourse of Merchants, who have their chief traffic
at Damaseus, and especially at Haleppo. From hence we passed ten miles to
Biblis; then after ten miles sail, we passed by Biblis.
(...), and again after ten miles sail by a Promontory, which the Italians
call Capo Peso.

Lastly we passed ten miles sailing by a most pleasant plain, and so upon
Thursday the seventeenth: of June landed at Tripoli of Syria, (so called for
difference from Tripoli.
Tripoli in Afric), The Haven is compassed with a wall; and lies upon the
west side of the City, whereif were many little Barks, and some Ships of
Marsiles in France. The Haven is fortified with seven Towers, whereof the
fourth is called the Tower of Love, because it was built by an Italian
Merchant, who was found in bed with a Turkish woman; which offense is capital
as well to the Turk as Christian, if he had not thus redeemed his life. Upon
the Haven are built many storehouses for Merchants goods, and shops wherein
they are fet to sail. The City of Tripoli is some half mile distant from the
Haven, to which the way is sandy, having many gardens on both sides. In this
way they show a pillar fastened upon a hill of sand, by which they say the sand
is enchanted, lest it should grow to ouerwhelme the City. Likewise they show
other pillars, under which they say great multitudes of Scorpions were in like
sort enchanted, which of old wasted all that Territory; and they think that if
these pillars were taken away, the City would be destroyed by the sand and
Scorpions. The length of the City somewhat passes the breadth, and lies from
the South to the North, seated upon the side of an hill, so cut by nature as it
conueyes a brook into the streets. Upon the West side of the City, toward
the South corner, is a Castle upon a high hill, which the French men built of
old to keep the Citizens in subjection, and therein the Great Turk to the
same end keeps a garrison of Soldiers, under his Agha or Governor of the
City. Upon the East side are two bridges over the foresaid brook, whence many
pleasant fountains spring, which running from the South to the North, pass
through the streets of the City, and then water the gardens. Beyond this
brook are fruitful hills, and beyond the hills Mount Lybanus lies; so high as
it hinders all further prospect, which mountain is very pleasant, abounding
with fruitful trees, and with grapes yielding a rich wine. Upon the North side
without the gates, are many most pleasant gardens, in which they keep great
store of silke-wormes: for the Turks sell their raw silk to the Italians, and
buy of them the stuffes wouen thereof. The building of Tripoli and of these
parts; is like to that of Cyprus and Jerusalem. The street that leads to the
way of Haleppo; is broad, the rest narrow, and the air and waters are
unhealthful Mount Lybanus (as I formerly said) is incredibly fruitful, and
the plain of Tripoli reaching ten miles, is more fruitful then can easily be
expressed, bearing great store of pleasant fruits, whereof one among the rest
is called Amazza-Franchi, that is kill Frankes (or French), because the men of
Europe died in great numbers by eating immoderately thereof. The plain of
Tripoli did of old yield two hundred thousand crowns yearly to the Count
thereof, as Historians write. And how soever the old traffic of Tripoli, is
for the most part removed to Damascus and Haleppo, yet the City of Tripoli
still yields four hundred thousand crowns yearly to the Great Turk.

It may seem incredible, but it is most certain, that here and throughout
Syria, they have sheep of such bigness, as the very tails of them, hanging in
many wreathes to the ground, do weigh twenty five pounds, and many times
thirty three pounds.

A Christian who uses to entertain the French, did very well entreat us here:
and when I did see a bed made for me and my brother, with clean sheets, I
could scarcely contain my self from going to bed before supper, because I had
never lien in naked bed since I came from Venice to this day, having always
slept by sea and land in my doublet, with linen breeches and stockings, upon a
mattresse, and between couerlets or quilts, with my breeches under my head.
But after supper all this joy vanished by an event least expected: For in this
part of Asia great store of cotton grows (as it were) upon stalks like
Cabbage, (as I formerly said in my journey from Ioppa to Jerusalem); and these
sheets being made thereof, did so increase the perpetual heat of this
Country, now most unsupportable in the summer time, as I was forced to leap
out of my bed, and sleep as I had formerly done.

My Host told me a strange thing, namely that in Alexandria of Egypt, seated
upon one of the mouths of the River Nilus, there was a Doue-cote, and that
also at Cairo (or Babylon,) far within the Land of Egypt, there was another
Doue-cote; and because it much concerns the Merchants, to have speedy news of
any commodity arriving, he assured me that they used to tie letters about the
necks of the Doves at Alexandria, and so to let them loose, which Doves having
formerly bred in the Doue-cote at Cayro, did fly thither most swiftly, and the
Keeper of them there taking the Letters they brought, used to deliver them to
the Merchants. This I believed not, till I came to Haeleppo, and telling it for
a fable to the English Merchants there, they seriously affirmed the same to be
true: Moreover the Host of Tripoli told me news from Constantinople, namely,
that the Greeks had burnt great part of the City, (which he thought to be
false, and only invented to oppress them in other parts); and that the
Ianizaries had raised a great tumult against the Subasha of the City, who used
great severity toward them, by restraining them from drinking wine, and from
keeping harlots; and that some one hundred of these seditious Ianizaries were
drowned in the Heaven, and the rest were daily sought out to be punished.
Moreover that Halil Basha the Admiral of Turkey, was parted from
Constantinople with sixty Galleys, having taken many Greek and Armenian
Christians by force, to row in his Galleys; besides that, for want of
Mariners, he had left there twenty Galleys, which were prepared to keep that
narrow sea. Finally, that the Great Turk was presently to go with his Army
into Hungary, but was not yet departed from the City.

Now the Frenchmen our consorts went aboard a ship of Marsiles to return into
France. But my self and my brother being to go by Land to Haleppo, agreed to
give our Muccaro nine piastri, for two Asses to ride upon, and their meat; and
for three tributes (called cafarri) which he was to pay for us by the way,
(coming to some twenty meidines). They call him Muccaro, who lets out Mules,
Asses, or Horses; and they call him Malem, who conducts the Merchants goods.
Moreover we were forced to give a suger-loafe to the value of a Zechine, to the
Governor of the City, and a Piastro to the Scribe or Clerk of the City, for
the privilege to go without a Ianizare to conduct us, (so they pretended,
omitting no occasions to extort from Christians). But we couenanted not to pay
the nine piastri to our Muccaro, till our journey was ended, only giving one
piastro into his hands for earnest, and pretending that we would pay the rest
at Haleppo, where we were to receive money; left they thinking that we had
store of crowns with us, should practice any treason or oppression against us.
This Piastro we gave him in hand, to buy meat for his beasts, and the other
eight we paid after at Haleppo, and besides gave him of free gift a zechine for
his faithful service to us by the way. We were to take our journey with the
Carauan going from Tripoli to Haleppo. The Turks call a Carauan the company of
Merchants, passengers, and driuers of loaded Camels, keeping together, for
safety against Thieves, and using to lodge in the open field. For in Turkey
they make iourneies in great troops, neither did I ever see any ride alone,
but only a horseman of the Army, and that very rarely.

Upon Saturday the two and twenty of June, we went out of Tripoli at the North
Gate, and passed over a Bridge of the foresaid Brook, and from eight of the
clock till Noone, we passed along the Sea-shoare, and over high Mountains,
then over an untilled Plain, seeing not one Village, nor so much as the least
house by the way. Then at last coming to a little shade of Fig Trees, we
rested there the heat of the day, and fed upon such victuals as we had, while
our Muccaro and the rest gave meat to their beasts. At three of the clock in
the afternoon we went forward in the like way, and late in the evening we
came to a Village, near which we lodged in the open field, in a pleasant plot
of grass, near the bank of a River, planted with some trees. Upon Sunday we
rose early, and for two hours space passed a Promontory of the Sea; then
turning toward the Land, we passed through wild and untilled Hills and
plain fields, and at Noone we rested under the shadow of some Brambles,
refreshing our selves with meat and sleep, and giving meat to our Asses. At
three in the afternoon we went forward, and passed by the Castle Huss, in
which some say Job dwelt, and which they say was possessed by the French, while
they had the Kingdom of Jerusalem. Huss.
Also we passed by a Monastery of Saint George, then possessed by Christian
Friars, and seated in a pleasant Valley, yielding trees of Figs and Olives. And
toward evening, we encamped (as I may term it) in the open field at the foot
of a high Mountain. They say Job did of old possess this Territory, and that
not far hence in the way leading to Damascus, there is a City now called
Hemps, and of old called Huss, which the Christian Inhabitants to this day call
the City of Job, and the Valley not far distant the Valley of Huss, and the
Turks have built a Mosche or Church in this City, which they think to be
built upon the very ruins of the house wherein Job dwelt, and that his body
was carried from hence to Constantinople. Others object, that according to the
Scriptures, Job could not dwell here, because they write, that he dwelt among
the Idumeans, and was robbed by the Sabeans. I dare not affirm that he dwelt
here, but I dare boldly say, that I know more then Socretes did, even two
things, whereas he knew but one: first, that the Arabians to this day make
excursions into these parts, robbing the Carauans that go from Haleppo to
Tripoli, so as if Job were alive, and had an hundred thousand head of cattle,
they were as like to rob him here, as in any other place. Secondly, I know that
we passed a sad night in this place, and never had more need of Job his
patience then here.

For it happened that one of the women (which the leaders of the Carauan use to
have for their attendance) lighting a fire to make ready their supper, by
chance some spark or flame brake out of the stones wherewith it was compassed,
and set the dry herbs of the field on fire, which being neglected at the
first, did spread it self for a great compass Whereupon the Governor of the
Province dwelling upon the Mountain, and beholding the fields on fire, sent to
us one Ianizary, armed only with a cudgel, who fell upon the men of our
Carauan, being some hundred in number, beating them with his cudgel, till they
fell upon the fire with the upper long garments they use to wear, and so
extinguished it. In the mean time my self and my brother went aside, lying
out of his sight, by the advantage of a high ground between him and us, where
we were astonished to see one man armed only with a cudgel to beat a
hundred men (and the very Zantons or Priests) armed with swords and many
Calliuers. The fire being put out, we thinking all safe, joined our selves to
the company again, but soon espied our error: for the Ianizare drove us all
before him like so many Calves, to appear before the Governor, and satisfy
him for this damage. And if at any time we went slowly, he wheeled his cudgel
about his head, and crying Wohowe Rooe, presently struck them that were next
him. My brother and my self treated with him by the way, to give him a reward
that he would dismiss us: but when he gave this warning, we were the first to
run from him, with laughter to see our men thus driven like beasts, and
commending to our selves the honesty of the man, who first gave warning before
he struck. Then presently as soon as we did see the Gentleman pacified, we
returned again to him, with our Muccaro to interpret our words, and told him,
that we were the servants of a Christian Merchant, and had no goods in the
Carauan, nor any thing to do with them, and offering him a reward, so he would
let us return. For we knew that the Turks would take any occasion to oppress
us as Christians, and that the Governor would have dealt worse with the
Carauan, if he perceived that Christians were with them. Thus we often sled
from him when he gave the said sign of anger, (for howsoever we offered him a
gift, yet we could not otherwise escape his blows), and often we returned to
him being pacified offering him a gift to dismiss us, which at last we
obtained, giving him a zechine. When we were dismissed, we were in no less
fear of some violence, while we returned alone and unarmed, to the place
where our baggage lay: but going forward between hope and fear, at last we
came safe thither, and there hid our selves til our consorts should return,
who after an hours space returning, told us, that the chief of the Carauan,
being the cause of the fire making, had paid ten piastri for the damage: and
the Governor swore, that if the fire had gone over the Mountain into the
plain field of Corn, he would have hanged us all upon the highest trees, on
the top of the Mountain. This Tragedy ended, we refreshed our selves with
meat and sleep.

Upon Monday early in the morning, we set forward, and spent eight hours in
ascending the Mountain, which was very high, but the way easy, with many
turnings about the Mountain, which of it self without manuring yielded many
wild, but pleasant fruits, seeming to pass in pleasantness the best manured
Orchards. Upon the top of the Mountain we met some horsemen of the Army, not
without fear of some violence to be offered us, till we understood that they
were sent out to purge the high ways of thieves. They were armed with Lances,
Shields, and short broad Swords, so as a man would have said, they had been the
Knights of Amades de Gaul. Neither is it improbable, that those fictions came
from the horsemen of Asia, since we did see some mile from Tripoli, a Bridge
called the Bridge of Rodomont, and a Fountain near Scandarona, called the
Amazons Fountain, and many like monuments in these parts. When we had passed
the foresaid high Mountain, we came into a very large and fruitful Plain of
Corn, which was yet vncut-downe. Here we refreshed our selves and our beasts
with meat, resting near a Fountain (for the Turks require no better Inn
for their beasts and themselves, then a Fountain of clear water.) After
dinner we went forward in this Plain, and did see some Villages, which in this
vast Empire are very rare, and near one of these Villages we did sit down at
night, supping and resting in the open field. Upon Tuesday early in the
morning, we took our iourny, and for six hours passed in the same Plain,
having not so much as the shadow of one tree, and came to the City Aman (which
in the Scripture the second of the Kings, the seventeenth Chapter, is called
Hamath) being some three days journey from Damasco. Hamath.
This City is of large circuit, and pleasantly seated upon two Hills, (for
the third Hill of the Castle has nothing but ruins), having a River running
by it, and abounding with Orchards of Palms and fruitful trees, and near the
same were six Villages in sight. Here we rested part of this day, and the next
night, the Master of our Carauan having business in the City, neither imported
it where we lodged; for they have no public Innes, nor beds in any house, nor
Cooks, but every man buys his meat, and can dress it. But to the end we
might be ready to go early with the Carauan in the morning, most of us lodged
in poor houses of the Suburbs. My self and my brother being to sleep in the
yard upon our own quilts, and the yard declining from the house to the
bottom, where our beasts were tied, we laid our selves down upon the top of
the Hill, but in the morning found our selves tumbled down between the feet of
the Asses and Camels, when I could not remember the English Innes without
sighing. This City has great traffic, and abounds with necessaries to
sustain life, and here our Muccaro bought for us, sower Curds (vulgarly caled
Mish Mash) for two meidines, a cheese for six, three hens for three
meidines, twenty eggs for four meidines, Cucumers for three, milk for five,
Aqua vitae (which they call Harach, and drink as largely as Wine) for ten
meidines, four pounds of wine for one zechine, Biscuit (for the Turks have no
other bread but cakes baked on the harth) for thirty meidines, which things we
provided for our Supper, and to carry with us by the way, yet might we have
bought, and did buy most things by the way, excepting Wine and Bread, which are
hardly found, and must be carried by those that will have them. The guide of
our Carauan was detained here by his business most part of the next day, being
Wednesday, and in the mean time it fortunately happened, that a Turkish Basha,
returning with his train from his Government, and being to go our way,
rested here, so as his company freed us the rest of our journey from fear of
thieves.

Upon Wednesday in the afternoon we setforward, in the company of this Basha,
and iournied all night in this Plain, wherein there was not the shadow of one
tree, and at eight of the clock the next morning, we did sit down in the open
field, resting under the ruins of old walls. Here the Ianizaries of the Basha
inquired curiously after the condition of me and my brother, so as our Muccaro
advised us to give them half a piastro, which they receiving, promised to
defend us from all injury, but in the mean time they did so swallow our wine,
as when it was spent, we were forced to drink water, to which we were not
used. Upon Thursday at three of the clock in the afternoon, we set forward,
and about midnight we came to the City Marrha, where our Muccaro and diverse
others paid each of them ten meidines for cafar or tribute, and at the City
Gate a man was hanged in chains (also the next day we did see another
impalled, that is sitting and rotting upon a stake fastened in the ground, and
thrust into his fundament and bowels.) Upon Friday before day we set forward,
and passing a stony barren way, but full of Walnut trees, upon which many birds
did sit and sing, we came in four houers space to an Hospital, which they
call Caon, and it was stately built of stone, in a round form, with arches
round about the Courtyard, under which arches each several company chose
their place to eat and rest, both which they must do upon the ground, except
they bring Tables and beds with them. Neither were any victuals there to be
sold or dressed, but every man bought his victuals in the Village adjoining,
and dressed it after his manner. The same Friday at four in the afternoon,
we went forward, and riding all night, did upon Saturday early in the morning
sleep an hour in the open field, while meat was given to our beasts.

Then going forward, we came by Noone, the same day being the nine and twenty
June 29. Haleppo.
of June, (after the Popes new style, which I have followed hitherto, being in
company of Italians and Friars), to the famous City of Haleppo, where the
English Merchants living in three houses, as it were in Colleges, entertained
my brother and me very (...). And George Dorington the Consul of the English
there, led us to the house, wherein he lived with other Merchants, and there
most courteously entertained us, with plentiful diet, good lodging, and most
friendly conversation, refusing to take any money for this our entertainment.
And howsoever we brought him only a bill of exchange for one hundred Crowns,
yet when we complained to him, that we now perceived the same would not serve
our turns, he freely lent us as much more upon our own credit. Yea, when
after my brothers death my self fell dangerously sick, and was forced to go
from those parts before I could recover my health, so as all men doubted of my
return into England, yet he lent me a far greater sum upon my bare word,
which howsoever I duly repayed after my coming into England, yet I confess,
that I cannot sufficiently acknowledge his love to me, and his noble
consideration of poor and afflicted strangers.

The City Haleppo is said to have the name of Halep, which signifies milk,
because the Province is most fruitful, or of the word Aleph, as the chief
City of Syria, and to have been called of old Aram Sohab (mentioned the second
of Samuel, the eight Chapter and third verse), or at least to be built not
far from the ruins thereof. The Traffic in this place is exceeding great,
so as the goods of all Asia and the Eastern Islands are brought hither, or to
Cayro in Egypt. And before the Portugals found the way into East India, these
commodities were all brought from these two Cities. And the Venetians and some
free Cities of Italy solly enjoyed all this traffic of old. But after that
time, the Portugals trading in East India, served all Europe with these
commodities, selling them, yea and many adulterate Druggs; at what price they
listed, cutting off most part of this traffic from the Italians. At last the
French King making league with the great Turk, the Merchants of Marsiles were
made partners of this traffic, and in our age the English, under the Reign
of Queen Elizabeth, obtained like privilege, though great opposition was made
against them by the Venetians and French Merchants. And the Turkey company in
London was at this time the richest of all other, silently enjoying the safety
and profit of this traffic, (understand that when I wrote this, the traffic
into the East Indies was nothing at all or very little known to the English or
Flemmings.

This City lies within Land, the Port whereof (called Alexandretta by the
Christians, and Scanderona by the Turks) I shall hereafter describe. The
building of this City (as of all houses in Syria) is like to that of Jerusalem,
but one roof high, with a plain top plaistered to walk upon, and with Arches
before the houses, under which they walk dry, and keep shops of wares. The
City is nothing less then well fortified, but most pleasantly seated, having
many sweet gardens. The air was so hot, as me thought I supped hot broth, when
I drew it in; but it is very subtle, so as the Christians coming hither from
Scanderona, (a most unhealthful place, having the air choked with Fens),
continually fall sick, and often die. And this is the cause, that the English
Factors employed here, seldom return into England, the twentieth man scarcely
living till his prentiship being out, he may trade here for himself. The
Christians here, and the Turks at the Christians cost, drink excellent wines,
where of the white wines grow in that territory, but the red wines are brought
from Mount Libanus. Moreover all things for diet are sold at cheap rates, and
indeed the Turks want not good meat, but only good Cooks to dress it. The
English Merchants can bear me witness, that these parts yield sheep, whereof
the tail of one wreathed to the ground, does weigh some thirty or more pounds,
in fat and wool. In one of the City gates, they show the Sepulcher of Saint
George, where the Turks maintain Lamps continually burning: for among all
the Christian Saints, they only reverence Saint George. In a garden of the
suburbs I did see a Serpent of wonderful bigness, and they report, that the
male Serpent and young ones, being killed by certain boys, this she Serpent
observing the water where the boys used to drink, did poison the same, so as
many of the boys died thereof; and that the Citizens thereupon came out to
kill her, but seeing her lie with her face upward, as complaining to the
Heavens that her revenge was just, that they touched with a superstitious
conceit, let her alone: finally that this Serpent had lived here many ages, and
was of incredible years. Moreover they show a well near to the City, in which
they report, that a chest of treasure was of old cast, so as it might be seen
by passengers, and that some attempting to take it out, were assaulted and
affrighted with Devils.

In this City my self and my brother Henry lay sick some few days, but by
the help of a Jew Physician, we soon recovered our health, and for fear of
wanting money, and especially out of our desire to return home, we made too
great haste to begin our journey for Constantinople. If we would have
expected eight days, the Cassenda, (so they call a troop of Horsemen,
guarding the great Turks treasure), was in that time to go for
Constantinople, in whose company we might safely and swiftly have performed
this journey, namely in sixeteene days, whereas those who followed the slow
pace of Cammels, scarcely arrive there in thirty days. But this Province being
extremely hot in this time of summer, and we being scanted of money for our
long journey, all mention of longer staying was most unpleasing to us. Moreover
Master George Dorington, (never to be named by me without mention of love and
respect), did at this time send a Carauan, (that is, Camels loaded with goods)
of his own to Constantinople, and being to make a present to a Cady, returning
from his government to Constantinople, that he would take his Carauan into his
protection, and to pass in his company, and lovingly making offer to us, to
recommend us in like sort with his goods to the same Cady, we were easily
persuaded to take this journey presently, in the company of his servants, and
of a courteous English Merchant, called Master Jasper Tyant, being then to go
for Constantinople. This our conclusion proved greatly to the loss of Sir John
Spencer, Merchant of London, whose goods these were which Master Dortngton sent
with us. For my brother dying by the way, and the great Turk being heir to
all Christians and strangers, dying in his Empire, the Turks either thought,
or fraudulently pretended that these goods belonged to my brother, and so took
them into the great Turks storehouses, and kept them there, till they had
unjustly extorted good sums of money from Master Dorington, besides the great
loss which was sustained by the servants and Camels hired in vain.

Being now to enter this journey, we hired for seventy one piastri, a Camel to
carry our victuals, an ambling Mule for my brother, and a horse for my self,
and so much we presently gave into the hands of our Muccaro, with covenant that
he should pay for the meat of the beasts. Moreover we presently laid out one
hundred and twenty piastri for diverse necessaries, namely, two long chaires,
like cradles covered with red cloth, to hang on the two sides of our Camel,
(which chaires the Turks use to ride in, and to sleep upon Camels backs, but
we bought them to carry victuals), for biscuit, and a tent wherein we might
sleep, and for like provisions. But behold, when all this money was laid out,
and the very evening before the day in which we were to begin our journey, my
brother Henry fell sick of a flux. Being amassed with this sudden chance, we
stood doubtful for a time what to do, til the consideration of the great
sums of money we had laid out, and of the difficulty to get more, made us
resolve to take this fatal journey, yet with this purpose, when we came to
Scanderona, some four days iourny distant, to go no further, except in that
time he recovered his health, propounding this comfort to our miserable estate,
that there we might have commodity of convenient lodging with an Englishman,
there abiding factor for our Merchants.

Upon Thursday the last of June, (that I may now follow the old style, taken
here The last of June.
from the English, and generally used in Turkey, among the very Christians,
howsoever hitherto I have followed the new style, taking it from the Venetian
ship in which I came, and from the Friars at my abode in Jerusalem); I say
the last of June we went out of Haleppo, passing over stony hills, and by the
Village (...), where the Jews say the Prophet Jeremy was buried. Then riding
forward all that night, at last we sat down at eight of the clock in the
morning, and pitched our Tents near a Village, where I did see a pillar
erected to Pompey, and here we rested and refreshed our selves the heat of the
day. This kind of iournying was strange to us, and contrary to our health: for
we began our journey at four in the afternoon, to shun the heat of the day
past, and rode all night, so as we not used to this watching, were so sleepy
toward the Sunnerise, as we could not abstain from nodding, and were many
times like to fall from out horses. To which mischief we could find no other
remedy, then to ride swiftly to the head of the Carauan, and there dismounting,
to lie down and slumber, with our horses bridle tied to our legs, one of us
by course walking by us, to keep us from injuries, and to awaken us when the
last Camel passed by, lest we should there be left a pray to thieves. And we
having some two hundred Camels in our Carauan, did in this sort pass the
sleepy hours in the morning, till seven or eight of the clock, at which time
we used to pitch ourtents, and rest. Moreover this greatly afflicted us, that
spending the morning till ten or eleven of the clock in pitching our Tent,
preparing meat, and eating, we had no time to rest, but the extreme heat of the
noone day, which so pierced our tents, that we could no more sleep, then if in
England upon a Summers day we had lien near a hot sea-cole fire. And how
soever we lessened this heat, by flinging our gowns over our Tent, between
the sun and us, yet for my part I was so afflicted with want of sleep, and
with this immoderate heat, as I feared to fall into a Lunacy, what then should
a man think would become of my sickly brother in this case?

Upon Friday the first of July, toward evening, we took up our Tents,
supping while our Muccaro loaded our beasts, then we rode over Mountains all
night, and the next morning again pitched our Tents near a poor Village. And
our Muccaro bought us some fresh victuals in the Village, according to the
manner of Turkey, where the very Cities yield no Innes. Upon Saturday toward
evening, we set forward, and rode that night over a large Plain, and next day
after Sunne-rise we came to Antioch, a city of Asia, famous for the
Patriarchate, and by Histories sacred and Antioch.
profane. Upon the east side, and upon the top of a high Mountain, lie great
ruins of the old walls and houses, whence the seat of the city declineth to
the Plain on the West side. In which Plain our Carauan rested the heat of
this day, near the pleasant and large Fountain of water, wherein the
Scriptures record so many to have been baptized together, as first in this
place the faithful had the name of Christians. This Fountain has fair
building, and seems of old to have been very stately, and here we pitched our
Tents in the midst of the Gardens of this Plain within the walls. For
howsoever the ruins of the walls show, that of old the circuit of the city
was very large, yet scarce the hundredth part thereof was now filled with
houses. Upon the West side without the walls, the city is all compassed with
a River, and a great Fen, and upon the East Side with Mountains, which
situation makes it naturally strong. Here first wretched I perceived the
imminent danger of my most dear brothers death, which I never suspected til
this day, much less had any just cause to fear it. A Turk in this Carauan
troubled with the same disease of a Flux, went to the ground more then twenty
times each nights journey, and yet lived; whereas my brother only three or
four times descended from his Mule to that purpose, which filled us with good
hope. But here first I learned by miserable experience, that nothing is worse
for one troubled with the Flux, then to stop or much restrain the course
thereof. For my brother stopping this natural purge, by taking Red wine and
Marmelat, experienced men did attribute (all too late) his death to no other
thing. I could not hire a horse-litter by any endeavor of our Muccaro, nor for
any price, though I offered an incredible sum for that, or like commodity to
carry him, and we thought it very dangerous to stay here among the Turks,
after our Carauan departed, especially since Scanderona was but five and twenty
miles distant, where we should have the commodity to lodge with an
Englishman, and so to get all necessaries for his recovery. Therefore upon
Sunday in the evening, we put all our provisions in one of the foresaid
covered chaires or cradles, carried by the Camel, and made my brother a bed in
the other cradle, where (as we thought) he might commodiously rest. And I
promised the Muccaro half a piastro for every time my brother should descend
from the Camel to ease himself, for we were to ride before with the
horsemen, and he was now to come behind with the Camels. So we set forward,
and my self twice in the night, and once toward morning, left the horsemen,
and rode back to my brother, to know how he fared, and when he gave me no
answer, I returned to the horsemen, thinking that he slept. Then toward
morning I was so afflicted with my wonted desire of sleep, as I thought an
hours rest worth a Kings ransom. Therefore my self and Master Jasper Tyrant
our loving consort, rode a good pace to the Village Byland, Byland.
where we were to pitch our Tents, that we might make all things ready to
receive him.

But within short space our Muccaro running to our Tent, and telling me, that
he had left my brother ready to give up his last breath in the first house of
the Village, seemed to say to me. Go quickly and hang thy self. With all
possible speed I ran to this house, embraced my dying brother, and confounded
with sorrow, understood from his mouth, how far the events of our nights
journey had been contrary to our hope. For whereas my self advised him to
leave his Mule, and lie in the chair upon the Camels back, he told me that he
was shaken in pieces with the hard pace of the Camel. And whereas I had
offered the Muccaro half a piastro, for each time he should light to ease
himself; he told me that he had often asked this favor of the Muccaro, but
could never obtain it, he excusing himself by fear to be left behind the
Carauan, for a prey to thieves. And whereas the Camels hinder parts being
higher then the fore parts, I had laid my brothers head toward the hinder
parts, and raised it as high as I could with pillowes and clothes, for his
better ease, it happened (which I being ignorant of the way could not foresee)
that we all the night ascending mountains, his feet were far higher then his
head; whereupon he told me, that most part of the night he had lien in a
trance, which was the cause that he could not answer me, at such times as I
came to inquire of his health. Thus mischief lighted upon mischief, to make
my wretched state most miserable: Why should I use many words in a case, from
the remembrance whereof my mind abhors. Therefore I will say in a word; My
most dear brother Henry upon Monday the fourth of July, (after the old style),
the year of our Lord 1596, and of his age the seven and twentieth, died in my
July 4. Anno 1596.
arms, after many loving speeches, and the expressing of great comfort in his
Divine meditations.

The Turks presently snatched all things that were his, as belonging to the
Great Turk; yea, my self cast his shirts, with many other things of good
value, and whatsoever I could see that was his, out of the Tent into the Turks
hands, and as a man half out of my wits, could endure to see nothing that
might renew the bitter remembrance of him. The Turkish Officers in the Great
Turks name seized upon all the goods of Sir John Spencer, which Master
Dorington sent with us, as if they had belonged to my brother, neither could
they be released, without great bribes, after the contrary was proved.
Presently I sent for the English Factor lying at Scanderona, who scarcely
obtained with the paying of five zechines, to have my brothers body buried in
the open fields: besides, the Ianizares, Turks, and Moors, came in several
swarms to me in this miserable case, threatening to hinder his burial, or to
dig him up after he was buried, except I would satisfy their insatiable
extortions. And had not the foresaid English Factor taken upon him to satisfy
these people, and taken up my purse full of zechines, which I cast among them
in a rage, surely for my part I had willingly given my self and all that I had
with me, to them for a prey. One thing above measure afflicted me, (which I
think Job himself could not have suffered), namely, that while my self and
my brother were in our last embraces, and mournful speeches, the rascal
multitude of Turks and Moors, ceased not to girne and laugh at our sighs and
tears; neither know I why my heart strings brake not in these desperate
afflictions: but I am sure from that day to this I never enioied my former
health, and that this hour was the first of my old age.

Toward the evening the same fourth day of July, we descended with the said
English Factor, (taking care to have our baggage carried) from the mountains
toward Scanderona, Scanderona.
little distant from this place, in the furthest Northern part of the valley
upon the seashore. From hence Jasper Tyant our loving consort in this misery,
returned back to Haleppo; but my self not knowing what to resolve, nor having
power to think of disposing my self, remained at Scanderona in the English
Factors house. The next night while I lay waking. I heard multitudes of
Woolues, (as I thought) howling upon the mountains of Byland, and in the
morning I understood by the English Merchant, that a kind of beast little
bigger then a Fox, and ingendered between Foxes and Wolves, vulgarly called
Iagale, used to range upon these mountains in troops, and many times to
scratch the bodies of the dead out of their graves; whereupon I hired an Ass
to carry me, and a Ianizare to accompany me, and went to see the place of my
brothers burial, from which part I thought to hear those howlings: And there
beyond my expectation, I found that they had scratched up the earth almost to
his body, and the Turks made no doubt, but that these beasts hiding themselves
from day light, would according to their manner, return the next night to
devour his body. Therefore I hired many poor people to bring stones, whereof
I made such a pile round about his body, as I preserved that prey from their
cursed jaws, which done, I returned to Scanderona (so called by the Turks,
which the Christians call Alexandretta.

This is a poor Village, built all of straw and dirt, excepting the houses of
some Christian Factors, built of timber and clay in some convenient sort, and
it lies along the sea-shoare. For the famous City of Haleppo having no other
Haven, the Merchants doc here unload their goods, but themselves make haste to
Haleppo, staying as little here as possibly they can, and committing the care
of carrying their goods thither upon Camels to the Factors of their Nation,
continually abiding here. The pestilent air of this place is the cause that
they dare not make any stay here: for this Village seated in Cilicia (now
called Caramania), is compassed on three sides with a Fenny Plain, and the
fourth side lies upon the Sea. In the way to Haleppo (as I remember) toward
the East, there is in this Plain a Fountain of clear water, some mile
distant from this Village; and howsoever all other waters falling out of the
Fen are most unwholesome, yet the goodness of this Fountain is so much prized,
as the Merchants use to carry their meat thither, and eat there under a
pleasant shade. Not far from this Fountain, there stands an old Castle at
the foot of the mountains, which they call the Castle of Penthesilea, Queen
of the Amazons. On the same side, beyond the Fen, is a most high mountain,
which keeps the sight of the Sun from Scandarona, and being full of bogges,
infects the Fenny Plain with ill vapors, and beyond this mountain, my
dearest brother lies buried. On the other side toward the North (as I
remember) in the way leading to Constantinople, the like Fenny Plain lies, and
the mountains, though more remote, do bar the sight of the Sun, and the
boggy earth yielding ill vapors, makes Scanderona infamous for the death of
Christians.

On the same side, Asia the less stretches it self into the sea toward the
West, and in the next shore thereof, is a pleasant Village, now called Bias,
which of old was called Tarsus.
Tarsus; where Saint Paul was borne, being six miles from Scanderona, and
seated in the same Province of Cilicia, and abounding with fruits,
silke-wormes, and al things necessary to sustain life.

Scanderona on the South side toward Palestina is also compassed with the like
fenny Scanderona
Plain, but far more large then on the other sides. Finally, on the West
side, toward the Sea and Italy, is a safe Haven in the furthest part of the
Mediteranean Sea, toward the East. And into this Sea the Prophet Jonas was
cast, and preserved miraculously by a Whale, was in this part cast upon the
shore, they say, that the Owes of the Sea do here much increase the
malignitie of the air, yet the Sea men use to sleep in their ships, and
seldom to come on land, till the Sun be risen above the mountains hiding it,
and has drawn up the ill vapors. The foresaid mountains of Cilicia are held
for part of Mount Taurus, which in Scythia is called Caucasus, and in these
parts Amanus. I have formerly said, that these parts near the Equinoctial
Line have seldom any rain, but the earth is commonly moistened with the dew
falling after Sunne-set. But while I stayed here, a great tempest fell of
thunder, hail, and rain upon the seventh of August, and the rain did not
fall by drops, but by pailefuls, as we read it falls, but much more
violently, toward West India, and near the Equinoctial Line, and as no
violent thing is perpetual, so this tempest soon passed.

Shortly after I came to this unhappy Village Scanderona, the grief of my mind
cast me into a great sickness, so as I, who in perfect health had passed so
many Kingdoms of Europe, at this time in the very flower of my age, first
began to wax old. This sickness brought the first weakness to my body, and
the second, proceeding of another grief after my return into England, took
from me all thought of youthful pleasures, and demonstratiuely taught me,
that the Poet most truly said, Cura facit canos, that is, Care makes
gray headed.

While I languished here in a lasting sickness, it happened that upon occasion, I
looked upon the two testimonies, given to my brother and my self at Jerusalem,
of our having been there, and I was not a little astonished, to see that they
being both at the same time cut out of the same skin of parchment, and written
with the same hand and inck, yet that of my brother was in all parts eaten with
worms, when mine was altogether untouched. And after I did more wonder, that
to this day the same Testimony given to my brother is no more eaten with
worms, then at that time it was, and mine still remains unperished.

My foresaid sickness was so vehement and so long, that all men doubted I
would never recover so as my friends in England, after they had heard of my
brothers death, were advertised within few weeks that my self also was dead.
But for my part, though my nightly dreams, that I was walking in the caves and
sepulchers of Italy, might have somewhat discouraged me, and though I had no
other Physician, then the Barber-Surgean of a ship, yet could I never doubt of
recovering my health, but my mind still presaged that I should return home.
Yet when diverse times I began to (...), and presently by the heat of the
clime, and ill air of the place, had been cast down again, I resolved to
follow their counsel, who persuaded me to try if the air of the sea would
strengthen me. Therefore my dear friend Master George Dorington having sent me
one hundred zechines for my expenses, the great sums of money which I had
being all spent, by the accidents of my brothers death, and my sickness (the
particulars of which expense I omit, because in this grief and weakness I
had no mind to note them, only for a taste remembering, that I paid a piastro
each day to a poor man, who continually cooled my heat with a fan.

Master Dorington, I say, having sent me money, and I having provided all
necessaries Octo. 19. An. 1596.
for my journey, at last upon Thursday, the tenth of October (after the new
style) and in the year 1596, I was carried aboard a French Ship of Marsiles,
partly by the help of Porters, partly in a boat, being so weak as I could
not stand. This ship was called John Baptist, and the Christian name of the
Master was Simon, with whom I had couenanted, that I paying him thirty piastri
(or ducats) for my self and my servant, he should set us on land in some good
Haven of the Island Candia, and if it were possible, in the chief City
thereof, called Candia, and lying on the North side of the Island, whence I was
now resolved to take my journey to Constantinople, leaving all thought of going
by land. Upon Friday the eleventh of October, we sailed prosperously: but
after, the winds grew so contrary, as we were driven to the South of Candia.
Therefore the French Mariners murmuring against us, as heretics causing their
ill passage, and there being no hope left with those winds to set us on land
at Candia the chief City, the Master of our ship sent us in his boat with
some few Mariners which he least esteemed, that we might sail to land, being
fifty miles distant.

Thus upon Thursday the three and twentieth of October, having sailed eight The
Island of Candia.
hours in great danger, toward the evening we landed under a Promontory of
Candia, where there was neither city, village, house, nor cottage, so as
plenty of rain falling that night, yet we were forced to lie in an open boat,
where my companion (or servant) not knowing our danger slept soundly, but my
self durst never close mine eyes, fearing lest these Mariners (being
Marsilians, who at that time little loved the English), should offer us
violence to gain our goods. This consort (or servant of mine was an English
man, and by profession a Cook, and was come into these parts to serve Master
Sandy, who being sent from London to be the English Consul at Haleppo, as he
passed from Constantinople thither, died in Asia Minor, of the same disease
whereof my brother died, and in the same month. This servant being (after his
Masters death) to return into England, I took to attend me, that I might by
his company avoid solitude, and mittigate some part of my sorrow. He was no
sooner entered into the French ship, but he presently fell sick, and not able
to serve himself, could not give me the expected comforts, much less do me
any service, but greatly increased my charge, spending all upon my purse, and
much troubled me, having not himself the least skill in any foreign language,
so as he recovering not till we came to Venice (where being among Christians, I
had small use of his help), he was rather a burden then a comfort to me.
When I was to enter the French ship, I laid in provisions of Hens, Eggs,
Damask Prunes, and other things: but my languishing stomach not desiring not
being able to digest any other then salt meat, these provisions fell to the
share of my sick servant, and my self being nothing but skin and bone, as one
that languished in a Consumption, my blood and humors renewed with these salt
meats, could not but weaken my future health, so as I having been always very
lean, after (by decay of natural heat) became very fat, and having lost the
retentiue faculty of my stomach, so as I continually cast all that lay upon it,
so soon as in the morning I came into the air, I had no remedy against this
weakness, but the taking of Tobacco.

The French Mariners, who brought us to the shore of Candia, parted from us
on Friday the twenty five of July (after the new style) early in the morning,
and when I The Island of Candia.
had well rewarded them for their pains; then first they showed me above the
wild Rocks, called Calisminiones, a Monastery of the Greeks, some three miles
distant, and called Santa Maria Ogidietra. We being left alone, and staying
there fasting till noone, at last espied, and called to us two men passing by
upon the Mountains, but they thinking us to be Pirates, fled away as fast as
they could. Presently behold, my man coming out of the Wood, and bringing with
him an Ass, which he had found there, who persuaded me to lay my baggage on
that beast, and so to walk softly toward the Monastery. I willingly tried my
strength, and leaning upon our two swords for want of a staff, and yet often
falling, went forward like a snaile, till despairing of going further, I fell
upon the ground. After an hours space, a Shepherd passing by, and I showing
him gold, and naming Monastery, which word he understood, he swiftly ran to the
Monastery, and telling the Monks (called by the Greeks Caloiri) our state and
condition, they presently sent a servant to us, who in the Italian tongue
telling us the great danger wherein we should be, if we stayed upon those
Mountains till night, advised us to make haste to the Monastery. Thus driven
with fear, and encouraged by his company, I tried again to go forward, and
with great trouble passed one mile over the Mountains. For leaning, as I said
on two swords, and upon the passage of any steep Mountain, by reason of the
lightness of my head, creeping upon hands and feet, with great difficulty I
went so far. And now being not able to go any further, no not to save my
life, behold a boy, who came to water his Assears Fountain adjoining, to whom
the servant of the Monks gave a piastro, and so whether he would or no took
his Ass, and set me upon it, and so at last we passed the other two miles
(longer then three English miles) and came to the Monastery. The Caloiri or
Monks received us courteously, and gave us such victuals as they had, namely,
Pomegranates, Olives, Bread, and sharp Wine, which were no good meats for
sick men, having fasted almost two days. Also they conferred lovingly with
us, but still desiring us to keep aloof from them. At bed time they gave us a
straw mat, to lay upon a plastred floare for our bed; but we were better
provided of Matterasses and quilts of our own, and though lying upon the
ground, yet slept soundly, because we were in safety.

The Italians in regard of their clime, are very curious to receive strangers
in a time of plague, and appoint chief men to the office of providing for the
public health, calling the place where they meet, the Office of Health. Also
without their Cities (especially in the State of Venice) they have public
houses, called Lazaretti, and for the most part pleasantly seated, whether
passengers and Merchants with their goods, must at their first ariuall retire,
till the Prouiders for Health have curiously inquired, if they come from any
suspected place, or have any infectious sickness. And here they have all
things necessary in abundance, but may not converse or talk with any man, till
they obtain the grant of free conversation (called la prattica), or if any man
speak with them, he must be enclosed in the same house, and because they stay
forty days there, for the trial of their health, this trial is called
far'la Quarantana. Moreover, they that go by land in Italy, must bring a
Testimony of Health called Boletino, before they can pass or converse. The
Venetians are more curious in this, then any other using this trial when there
is no Plague, I know not for what reason, except it be that the City of
Constantinople is seldom or never free of the Plague, whence many of their
ships come, or for that some mystery, for the good of traffic, or of the
Commonwealth, lies hidden under the pretense of this custom. For no man dares
enter the City, and converse there, till he have gotten license of these
Prouisors, neither dare any Merchant dispose of his goods, till they are
brought to this house, and there searched by the Officers, if they see cause.
This Preface I make, because the Island of Candia is subject to the Venetians,
and the Prior of this Monastery would in no sort give us free conversation,
till by Letters we had signified our state to the Prouisors of health,
residing at the chief City Candia, and til they should send some answer back
unto us. In the mean time they shut us up in a garden house, where we had
pleasant walks, and store of Oranges and like fruits, and the Country people
bringing us Partridges and many good things to eat, and my man having skill to
dress them, and the Monks furnishing us with such necessaries as we could
not otherwise buy, we wanted here no conuentence, to make the time of our abode
seem shorter, but only good beds. Thus I was forced to write this following
Letter in the Italian tongue, and to send a messenger with it to Candia the
Chief City.

All'Illustrmo and Excellmo Sigr il Sigr Nicolao Donati, Proueditore and
Inquisitore Generale nel regno di Candia.
mio offerumo:
SA Sigria Illustrma se degna intendere, ch'io Fynes Morysoni Inghlese, con
vn'mio luome, si siamo partiti a li tree di questo mese, d'Alessandretta, per
venir'a la volta di Candia: Et che in quel'paese tutti i contorni sono sani,
come porta la mia Patente netta, sigillata col'solito sigillo di San' Marco. Il
Patron'della Naue Francese, in chi di la e imbarcato (...) non mantenendoci la
suoa parola di metterci in terra in qualche buona villa di questa Isola, ci
mando con la suoa fregata a Calisminiones, doueti lascio'soletti. Di la' con
gran'disagio (domandando la strada da i villani) arriuammo a i vinti cinque del
present, a San' Maria Ogidietra: dove i. Frati, fin'che conoscano la volonta
di vostra Eccellenza, non ci vogliono dar'prattica in moda nessuno; Et in quel'
mentre c'hanno rinchiso in vna casa a part. Il viaggio mio e di passar'piu
inanzi fin'a Constantinopoli, per i fatti dell' Illust mo Ambasciatore
d'Inghilterra. Il perch humilmente suplico che suoa Eccellza se degna d' hauer
rispetto d' vn'pouero forestiero, anche natiuo d'vna Natione molto affectionata
a la suoa: et che (per suoa gratia) mi manda libera prattica, accio che io
possa seguitar'il mio viaggio, che di qua, oltre il rincrescimento della
solitudine, anche ogni cosu mi da noia. Con questo assicur andomi che vostra
Eccellza haura compassione d'vn suo seruitore, con disagi grandissimi per mar'
and per terra battuto, priegho Iddio per l' accrescimento del suo honor. Et le
bascio humilmente le mani.

Da San' Maria Ogidietre, ai vinti cinque d'Ottobre (all' vso nuouo) l' An.
1596. Divos. Sigria Illustma Humilmo seruire Fynes Morysoni.


Of these Letters I received the following answer.

Al molto magco Sigr il Sigre Fie Morysoni, suo come fratello.
Molto magco Sigr come fratello. Per le vostre lettre scritte alli 2^, del
present (al vso nuouo) all illmo Sigr Generali, et da ss. ss. Eccellza ma^date
qui all'officio nostro, habbiamo veduto il suo bisogno, and desiderando
fauorir'et agiutarla in questaoccasione, con il riguardo anco della salute
pubca, Mandiamo duoi stradiotti per accompagnarla con il suo huomo, et condurla
di qua, dove sara ben'trattata, and li si dara commodita, di poter, con
l'occasione di qualche vassello, seguitar' il suo viazzo, vsate prima le debite
ca^tele, per assicuration' delle cose di questo off. Pero, S. S. senza
pratticar' altrte, seguitara questa guida che le mandiamo, and vegnera di qua
con animo consolato di trouar' Christiani and amici, obedendo per adesso, and
esseguendo l' ordine da noi dato a detti stradiotti, come cirendiamo certi che
fara. Et. a. V. S. c' offeriamo.

Di Candia. Alli 20. a'Ottobre (all' vso vecchio) 1596. Periera con essa, la
suoa feed, sine patente.

Div. S come fratlli li proueditori alla Sanita'.




These Letters follow translated into English.

To the most Illustrious and most excellent Lord, the Lord Nicholas Donati
General, Preuisar and Inquisitor in the Kingdom of Candia,
my most respected
MOst Illustrious, etc. Your Excellency may please to understand, that I Fynes
Morison an Englishman, with my servant, the third of this month set sail from
Alexandretta, to sail into Candia, and that those parts are free from all
infectious sickness, as appears by my testimoniali sealed with the wonted
seal of Saint Mark. The Master of the French Ship in which I passed, broke
his covenant with me, in that he did not land us in the Haven of Candia, the
chief City of this Kingdom; but sent us in his boat to the wild Promontory
Calisminiones, landing and leaving us there, in a place altogether
disinhabited. From thence we asking the way of the Country people, did with
much trouble at last come to the Monastery Saint Maria Ogidietra, upon the five
and twenty of this present (after the new style), where the Friars, till they
may know the pleasure of your Excellency, will in no sort give us liberty to
converse; but in the mean time have shut us up in a solitary garden house. My
journey lies further to Constantinople, for the affairs of the Lord
Ambassador of England there abiding: Wherefore I humbly pray that your
excellency will vouchsafe to have favorable respect of a poor stranger, borne
of a Nation well affected to that of your Excellency, and that by your favor
license may be sent me freely to converse, and to take my journey to the City
of Candia, since my solitary living here, all delay, and many other things in
this place, are irksome unto me. Thus assuring my self that your Excellency
will have compassion of his servant, tired with many misfortunes by Sea and
Land, I beseech God for the increase of your honor, and so humbly kiss your
hands.

From San' Maria Ogidietra this five and twenty of October (after the new
style) in the year 1596. Your Excellencies humble Servant. Fynes Moryson


The Letters sent me in answer thus follow;

To the noble Gentlemen Master Fynes Moryson, dear to us as a brother.
NOble Sir, dear to us in place of a Brother. By your Letters dated the five
and twenty of this month (after the new style) and directed to the Illustrious
Lord General, and by his Excellency sent to our Office; we have understood
your request, and desirous to favor you in this occasion, with due respect to
the public health, we have sent you two Horsemen, who shall guide you and your
servant hither, where you shall be courteously received, and shall not want the
opportunity of a Bark, to finish your journey, after we have taken due order
according to our Office) for the preserving of the public health. Therefore
without conuersing with any man, follow these guides we have sent you and come
hither with a cheerful heart, as to Christians and friends. But fail not to
follow the order which we have given to these guides, whereof we doubt not, and
so tender our selves to you.

From Candia the twenty of October (after the old style) in the year 1596.
Bring with you the testimony of your health.

Yours in place of brethren the Prouisors for health.




This testimonial above mentioned, I took from the Venetian Consul (who knew
my disease free from all infection) when I parted from Alexandretta, fore
knowing the necessity thereof. The foresaid two horsemen being arrived, which
with great courtesy were sent to conduct me, I parted from the Monastery to go
in their company to the City of Candia, eight and thirty miles distant, being
to pass almost the whole breadth of this Kingdom in the very middle part
thereof. The breadth of the Island contains five and forty miles, the length two
hundred and thirty miles, and the circuit. (as Ortelius writes) five hundred
and twenty, (others say six hundred or seven hundred miles) the ancient and
modern writers reckoning diversely. This Island is distant from the Cape of
Otranto in Italy, five hundred miles; (others write five hundred and thirty):
From Alexandria in Egypt four hundred and fifty miles (others write five
hundred), from the next shore of Affricke two hundred and fifty miles, from
Ioppa in Palestine six hundred and sixty miles, (others write six hundred and
forty): from Tripoli in Syria seven hundred miles, from the Island Cyprus four
hundred miles, from Venice 1500 miles, and from Constantinople seven hundred
and twenty miles.

We began our journey in the afternoon, and as we rode, our guide showed us
not far out of the high way, the Monument famous for the love of the Kings
daughter Ariadne to Thesius, called the Laberinth of Crete, (for so Candia was
called of old, The Laborinth.
and Saturn the first King thereof, begat Radamanthus, Minos, and Sarpedon, of
Europa the daughter of Agenor, as they write). Also our guides told us that not
far out of the way to the city Candia, there was a monument of the cave of
Minos, which the Candians call the sepulcher of Jupiter: but my former
adversities had taken from me my wo^ted desire to see antiquities, so as we
kept the high way, and passing that day by a City of the Jews, lodged that
night at a Village, not in any Inn, but in the very Church, upon straw and our
own bedding, being content with such victuals as our guides brought us,
namely, cheese, fruits, and good wine. It is probable, that if we had had free
conversation, we might perhaps have found good lodging in the Village, yet did
we justly doubt thereof, because we could buy no better meat, nor get any
prouender for our beasts. The next day in the morning we set forward, and came
to a pleasant village, where we dined in a fair Church, but could get no meat
for our horses, except they would have eaten pomegranates or like fruits.

The same day in the afternoon, we came to the City of Candia, where we stayed
at The City Candia.
the gate, till we knew the pleasure of the Prouisors for health. They could
not be ignorant that our sickness was free from all infection, yet imagining
(as after I perceived) that we should be Merchants, and have some rich lewels,
they sent us to the Lazaretto, where in a weeks space, when their spies
(according to their manner) had inquired after our state, and found that there
was no hope of gain by our imaginary lewels, and it then falling out, that
other Merchants being landed with goods, were to be lodged in our chamber; at
last the General Sigr Nicolao Donato (called General for his commanding in
the war, and Prouisor of health by the said Office, and chief inquisitor for
Religion, which Office is sparingly executed in the State of Venice, yet being
not the chief Commander of the Island; for Il Sigr Marc' Antonio Venerio, was
then Liefetenant to the Duke of Venice in this Island, with limited authority as
the Duke himself has). I say this general Prouisour for the health, sent
unto us a Gentleman of that office, Il Sigr Vicenzo Cornaero (who used us nobly
and courteously) and the Scriuano, (that is, Clerk or Secretary) of that
office, called Il Sigr Giouanni Papadapolo with authority to give us free
conversation. These Gentlemen (according to the custom, such as the state of
no passenger can be hidden from them) caused ropes to be hanged acrosse our
chamber, and all things we had, yea, our very shirts, to be severally taken
out, and hanged thereupon, and so perfumed them with brimstone, to our great
anoyance, though they well knew we had no infectious sickness, which done,
they gave us freedom to go into the City, and wheresoever we would. To the
Scriuano I gave a zechine, desiring him to take it in good part, as the gift
of a poor gentleman, and nothing less then an Indian Merchant, as they
suspected. This house called Lazaretto, was built of free stone, with Cellers
for the laying up of goods, and had pleasant walks both in the yard and garden,
and the Keeper of this house had furnished me with a bed and all necessaries,
and for the seven days past, had bought us our meat in the City, which he
would likewise have dressed, but that my servant was a Cook, and for this
service he had done, I gave him also a zechine.

Then we went into the City, and lodged with an Italian, who had often brought
us meat and necessaries to the Lazaretto, and with him my self and my servant
had convenient beds, and plentiful diet, for which I paid six lyres each day.
But the horsemen who conducted us to Candia came often to me, and for that
service I gave to each of them a zechine, and by them I understood the prices
of the Market for diet. So as all the Candians speaking Italian, as well as
their natural Greek tongae, and I finding the rate of our expenses to be
excessive, I determined to hier a chamber, and to buy my own meat in the
Market. But it happened, that at the same time an English Merchant landed, who
was a Factor to buy Muskedines of Candia (whereof, and especially of red
Muskedint, there is great plenty in this Island), and this Merchant called
Richard Darson, being well acquainted with the best courses of living in Candia,
had hired a little house, and a woman to dress his meat, and at my entreaty
he was content to give us a chamber in his house, and to hier us two beds, that
so we might diet together, where he used us very courteously, and our diet was
as plentiful as before, at a far lower rate, dividing our expenses into three
parts, whereof he paid one, and myself two, for my own and my seruante diet.
There was at that time great dearth of Corn, so as white bread was hardly to
be got, though the Italians, making their meals for the most part of bread,
use to have it very white and good. Here we bought a Bocale of rich Wine,
containing two English quarts and a half for a lire of Venice; a Pigion for 7
soldi; a Partridge for a lire, or 16 soldi; a pound of veale for 7 soldi, of
mutton for some 5 soldi, and we had plenty of fruits for a small price. The
Beef in Italy uses to be lean, and is seldom eaten, and such beef they had
here; for by the Law, called Foscherini, it is commanded, that no man shall
kill a beef, till it be unfit to draw in the Plough, and to do like service.
Here I paid four lires for a pair of shoes, the rest of my expenses I omit
for brenitie sake, those sufficing, to give a passenger some guess at what
rate he may live. Only I will add, that the work of Porters and laboring
men, as well in Italy as here, is had for small wages, because there is great
number of poor people, and they abhor from begging, so as one soldo contents
a Porter for bringing your victuals from the Market.

When I went to Jerusalem and sailed by the Island of Candia, I made some
mention thereof, and I have now formerly set down the length, breadth, and
circuit, and the distance thereof from other Provinces, and have showed that
Candia is subject to the Venetians, and have also named the chief Governors
thereof for that time. I will now briefly add, that this Island is defended by
a Venetian Garrison against the Great Turk, to whom all the adjacent Countries
are subject. That it has great plenty of red Muskedines, where with England
for the most part is served. That it has great plenty of all kinds of Corn,
of all manner of Pulse, of Oil, of all kinds of flesh, of Canes of sugar, of
Honey, of Cedar trees, of all colored Dyings of Cypres trees, (where of many
sweet smelling Chests are made, and carried into foreign parts), and of all
necessaries for human life. Neither is any venomous beast found in this Island,
but it has store of medicinable herbs, especially upon the famous Mountain
Ida.

The Cities of this Island were of old one hundred, and in the time of Pliny
forty; but at this day there be only three, namely, Canea at the West end
of the Island, near which lies the Fort Sonda, with a Haven capable of a
thousand Galleys. The second called Retbino by the Italians, seated on the
South Side of the Island, (upon which side the Italians add a fourth City
called Settia), and the third called Candia, the Metropolitan The City Candia.
City of the Island, which is fair and large, built of stone, with a low
roof, after the manner of Italy, and the streets thereof are fair and large.
It is strongly fortified (as need requires) by the Venetians against the
Turks, and to that purpose has a strong Castle. From this City a large and
pleasant Plain leads to the foresaid cave of Mines, (which the Candians call
the Sepulcher of Jupiter), near which is the most famous Mountain Ida, which
they hold to be seated in the midst of the Island, being higher then any of
the other Mountains thereof, and it abounds with Cypres trees. Finally, I
remember, that when I lodged in the Monastery San' Maria Ogidietra, the Caloiri
(or Monks, who for the most part are unlearned, and till the ground, and
labor like laimen), assured me that each measure of corn sowed in their
fields the year past, had yielded ninety five measures.

CHAP. IIII. Of my journey from Candia (partly by land, partly by Sea) by the
sea shoares, and by the Islands of the AEgean Sea, Pontus, and Propontis, to the
City of Constantinople. And of my journey thence by Sea to Venice; and by Land
to Augsburg, Nurnberg and Stood (in Germany.) And of my passage over Sea into
England. And of my journey through many several Shares, of England, Scotland
and Ireland.
Upon Monday the twenty of December (after the old style) December 20.
at three of the clock in the afternoon, we went aboard a little Greek Bark
loaded with Muskedines, and with tons of Lemons Juice (which the Turks drink
like Nectar), and with Onions, and ready to sail for Constantinople, where I
paid for my passage five zechines, and as much for my servant. The night
following was very bright with Moone-shine, yet we stayed all the night in the
Haven (compassed with walls), either because the Governor of the Castle would
not let the Bark go forth, till the Master had satisfied him, or because the
Master pretending that cause of stay, had some business to dispatch. The next
morning early, being the one and twenty of December, we set sail, and the
same day we sailed close by the Island Zantorini, more then one hundred miles
distant Zantorini.
from Candia. They report, that this Island; and another of the same name (both
of little circuit) were in our age cast up in the midst of the Sea, with an
eruption of flames and of Brimstone, and that they are not inhabited, but are
commonly called the Devils Islands, because many ships casting anchor there, and
fastening their Cables upon land, have had their Cables loosed by spirits in the
night, and so suffered shipwreck, or hardly escaped the same. The night
following we sailed in the midst of many Islands which made that Channel very
dangerous, and for my part I was more afraid of the danger, because our
Candian Merchant growing acquainted with an harlot in the ship, was not ashamed
to have the use of her body in the sight of the Mariners that watched, and
much blamed him for the same. Upon Wednesday the two and twenty of December,
we sailed by the Island Paros; celebrated by Poets for the fine Marble Paros.
Naxos.
growing there, and so we came to the Island Naxos; two hundred miles distant
from Candia. Naxos and the adjacent Islands had their own Duke of old, but now
are subject to the Turk, as the other Islands be for the most part. And our
Mariners dwelling in this Island, and landing to see their wives, we also
landed with them, where I did see upon a Hill like a Peninsul near this chief
Village, two Marble images erected to Thesius and Ariadne. Here I observed,
that when any stranger or Inhabitant lands, the beggars flock to the doors of
the houses or Innes where they eat, and having formerly observed in the Greek
Church at Venice, that when they gave their Alms to beggars, they not only
suffered them to touch their garments with their lousie rags, but also took
them familiarly by the hands, I knew not whether I should attribute this
fashion to their charitable affection in time of their bondage, or to their
seldom feasting, and the multitude of beggars.

In the evening we loosed from Naxos, and sailing over a channel no less
dangerous then the former, for the multitude of Islands, upon the three and
twenty of December we passed close by the shore of the Island Zio, called
Chios of old. It is inhabited Zio.
by Greeks (as the other Islands are) and is famous for the pleasantness and
fertiltie of the situation and soil. It yields great store of Mastick, and
the country people keep flocks of rain Partridges; as of Hens other where.
They brag, that Homer lies buried upon the Mountain Helias, and this Island
has Saint George for their protecting Saint, and bears his Cross in their
Flags, as England does. Here we might distinctly see the shore of Asia, in
that part, where of old the seven Churches stood not Seven Churches.
far distant, to which Saint John writes his Revelation. And the Island
Pathmos is not far distant, where Saint John lived in exile. Toward the
evening we cast anchor Pathmos.
near the Island Metelene, which is seated (as Zio) in the Egean Sea, and is no
less pleasant Metelene.
and fertile. Of old it was called Lesbos, then Issa, and after Pelasgia, and
therein were borne, Pythagoras, the Poet Alceus, Antimenides, Theophrastus,
Phanius, Arion, and Tersandrus, and the famous woman Poet Sapho, Zio is distant
one hundred and forty miles from Naxos and Meteline, ninety miles from Zio.

The four and twenty of December, (being Christmas even, after the old style
used among the Greeks, and in all Turkey), early in the morning we weighed
anchor, and with a fair but gentle wind, sailed close by the shore where the
City of Troy stood Troy.
of old, seated in a plain, and upon pleasant hills near the Sea, and at this
day the ruins of Illium the Castle of Priamus are seen upon a hill, and the
ruins of the walls in the plain, yet show the circuit of the City. The Poets
said truly;

Hic seges est vbi Troia fuit,
Corn grows now where Troy once stood.
Yet the plowed fields have very many ruins of buildings. On the North side of
these Trojan ruins, a neck of Land lies toward the Sea, where they say the
Greeks encamped, and left their fatal Trojan Horse. Right over against this
Land lies the Island Tenedos, scarce ten miles distant, in the Haven whereof we
cast anchor for an Tenedos.
hour, under a little Castle, and this Tenedos is sixty miles distant from
Metelene. From hence sailing some eighteen miles, we passed by two necks of
Land, one of Greece on the West Side, the other of Asia the less, (now called
Natolia) on the East Side, and after twelve miles sail, we entered the
straight of Hellespont, now called the two Castles, Sestes and Abydes.
the description whereof I will defer till my return this way.

The Greek Mariners have a custom here to demand a gift of all Merchants and
passengers in their ship, for joy of their happy voyage, and they say, (which I
believe not) that if any refuse, they tie a rope to his feet, and draw him up
to the top of the maste, till he yield to this custom: but howsoever, we all
obeyed this ridiculous custom, not to offend them who had used us well.

This channel running from the black sea, called Euxinus, into Propontis, and
so by Constantinople to these said two Castles, and from hence into the AEgean
sea, from the North toward the South, is always contrary to those that sail
from the mediteranian sea to Constantinople, especially after they enter this
straight of the two Castles, and near Constantinople it runs with such force
toward the South, as they that sail to the City, (whereof we had experience)
with the best winds, yet sail very slowly. This violence of the Channel is
attributed to great Rivers violently falling into the black Sea.

The foresaid Christmas even we landed at Gallipolis a Greek City, seated in
Thrace, Gallipolis.
having the name (as it seems) from the French, and eight and twenty miles
distant from the two Castles. On Saturday the five and twenty of December,
being Christmas day, after the old style, we set sail; but the winds drove us
back to the Haven of Gallipolis, where being detained some few days, though I
stayed in the ship for fear of some fraud from the Turks, yet once I went on
Land with our Mariners. The City lies in length upon the shore of Propontis,
from the South to the North, and it has without the walls toward the West,
great number of Wind-mils, the buildings are of slint or little unpolished
stones, one or two stories high, and the roof is low and tiled, (not plain
and plastered to walk upon, as they be in Syrea and Cyprus); and this roof is
so low as it has no windows, so as the buildings of these parts are very like
those of Italy. The Haven is on the East side, and upon the opposite shore of
Asia toward the East, are the ruins not far distant of Nice, a City of
Bithinia, famous for the holy Council held there of old. Upon Saturday the
first of January, we sailed sixty miles in this straight of Propontis, to the
Island Marmora, not without fear of Turkish Pirates, Marmora.
the Haven of Camera being near us, where the great Turks Galleys lie. By the
way they showed me a Castle toward the East, upon the shore of Asia the less,
which they say stands upon the confines of the Trojan Dominion, and thereof
has the name to this day. The Island Marmora is so called (as I think) of
themarble wherewith it abounds. The second of January we set sail from
Marmora, and being by contrary winds driven back (as I think, or little
advanced) we came to the Island Aloni some ten miles Aloni.
distant from Marmora (and so called of the form of a yard, in which Oxen used
to grind Corn, or beat it small.) After the beginning of the new year
(which the Greeks, as most of Europe, begin the first of January) the first
Wednesday (being the Ianua. 1. Anno 1597.
fourth of that month), the Grecian Mariners have a custom retained from old
times, to baptize the Sea, (as they term it), which done, they think the
Floods and Winds to grow more calm then formerly. The Island Aloni has a Port
on all sides compassed with Islands, and that very large and safe, where while
we passed some stormy days, we heard of many Barks and Galleys cast away.
While I walked here upon the shore, a wild-headed Turk took my hat from my
head (being of the fashion of Europe not used there), and having turned it, and
long beheld it, he said (to use his rude words) Lend me this vessel to ease my
belly therein; and so girning flung it'on the dyrtie ground, which I with
patience took up. These and like wrongs of speech, even threatenings of blows
I sometimes endured in Turkey, but never had the disaster to have any blow
given me by any of them, which many good Christians notwithstanding have
suffered and daily suffer, and my self if they had fallen to my share, must
have suffered with patience, except I would by resistance have incurred
shameful and cruel death. On Thursday the thirteenth of January, at last we
set sail with a fair wind, and after twenty miles sailing we passed by the
City Palormo seated upon the shore of Asia the less, and famous for the
white Wine it yields (the best that ever Palormo.
I tasted), and having sailed ten miles further, we sailed by the City
Heraclea, seated on Heraclea.
the shore of Greece (whereof in my return this way I shall have cause to
speak more at large.)

Toward evening we thought we were come to one of the corners of
Constantinople, called the seven Towers, yet by reason of the foresaid swift
channel running from the black Sea full against us, with a most fair wind we
could not land in the Haven of Constantinople till midnight, having that day
sailed one hundred and twenty miles in all from the said I Will Aloni. This
voyage was more tedious to us, in that howsoever landing we had sometimes good
diet, yet while we were at Sea, we had no good victuals in the ship. For the
Greek Mariners feed of Onions, Garlike, and dried fishes, (one kind whereof
they call Palamides, and the Italians call Palamite) and in stead of a banquet,
they will give you a head of Garlic roasted in the ashes, and pleasantly call
it a pigeon. With this and Biscuit they content themselves, and these we were
forced to eat, having omitted to provide any dried or salt meats at Candia,
because we hoped to find those in our Bark, and knowing that it was in vain
to provide any fresh meats, because they would not suffer a fire to be made in
so small a Bark, wherewith we might dress them. But after we had eaten Biscuit
and dried fishes, we had an unknown comfort or help to digest them. For in
our private cabin, we had the head of a tun of Muskedine lying under our heads
when we slept, in stead of a bolster, and our ship being bound on the upper
part of the sides with bundles of Reeds, to beat off the force of the waves,
we taking one of the long Reeds, found means to pierce the vessel, and get
good Wine to our ill fare, and drunk so merrily, that before we came to our
iournies end, our former Reed became too short, so as we were feign to piece
it with another.

Having cast anchor (as I said) in the Port of Constantinople, behold, as soon
as day Constantinople.
began to break, many companies of Turks rushing into our Bark, who like so
many starued flies fell to suck the sweet Wines, each rascal among them
beating with cudgels and ropes the best of our Mariners, if he durst but
repine against it, till within short space the Candian Merchant having
advertised the Venetian Ambassador of their arrival, he sent a lanizare to
protect the Bark, and the goods; and as soon as he came, it seemed to me no
less strange, that this one man should beat all those Turks, and drive them
out of the Bark like so many dogs, the common Turks daring no more resist a
soldier, or especially a Ianizare, then Christians dare resist them. And the
Seriant of the Magistrate having taken some of our Greek Mariners (though
subject to the State of Venice) to work for their Ottoman in gathering stones,
and like base employments, this Ianizary caused them presently to be released,
and to be sent again into their Bark, such is the tyranny of the Turks
against all Christians as well their subjects as others, so as no man sayleth
into these parts, but under the Banner of England, France, or Venice, who being
in league with the great Turk, have their Ambassadors in this City, and
their Consuls in other Havens, to protect those that come under their Banner,
in this sort sending them a Ianizare to keep them from wrongs, so soon as
they are advertised of their arrival.

My self lodged in the house of Master Edward Barton, the English Ambassador,
who gave me a Ianizare to guide and protect me, while I went to view the City,
round about the whole circuit whereof I went on foot and by boat in four
hours space, the form of the City being triangular, and containing nine
miles by Sea toward the North and East, and five miles by land toward the
West. I profess my self to have small skill in the art of Geography, yet will
I adventure (though rudely) to set down the form and situation of this City,
so plainly, as I doubt not but the Reader may easily understand it, howsoever
in the same (as in other cities formerly described) I acknowledge that I use
not the rule of the scale, in the distance of places, nor other exquisite rules
of that Art, having no other end, but to make the Reader more easily understand
my description.

The description of the City of Constantinople, and the adjacent Territories
and Seas.


The great lines or walls show the form of the City, and the single small
lines describe the Teritory adjoining. (A) In this Tower they hang out a light
of pitch and like burning matter, to direct the Sailors by night, coming to
the City, or sailing along the coast out of the Sea Euxinus (which they say is
called the Black Sea of many shipwracks therein happening.) And this Tower is
sixteen miles distant from the City.

(B) Here is a marble pillar erected upon a Rock compassed with the sea, which
they call the pillar of Pompey, and therein many passengers (for their memory)
use to ingraue their names. And here are innumerable flocks of Sea foul and of
many kinds, wherewith he that is skillful to shoot in his Piece, may
abundantly furnish himself.

(C) Here is the Euxine or black Sea.

(D E) Here lie two strong Castles, one in Europe, the other in Asia, some
eight miles distant from the City, built to defend the Haven from the assault
of the enemies by Sea on that side, and the Garrison there kept, searches the
ships coming from the City, that no slaves or prohibited goods be carried
therein, neither can any ship pass unsearched, except they will hazard to be
sunck. Finally, the great Turk sends his chief prisoners to be kept in these
strong Castles.

(F) Here great ships use to cast anchor at their first arrival, till they be
unloaded, and here again they ride at anchor to expect winds, when they are
loaded and ready to depart.

(G) All along this bank and the opposite side for a large circuit, the
greatest ships use to lie when they are unloaded, and they lie most safely and
close by the shore, fastaned by cables on land.

(H) Here lies the old City built by the Genoesi of Italy, called Gallata by
the Turks, and Perah by the Greeks (of the situation beyond the Channel) It
is now accounted a Suburb of Constantinople, and is seated upon a most
pleasant hill, wherein for the most part live Christians, as well subjects as
others, and the Ambassadors of England, France, and Venice, only the Emperors
Ambassador must lie within the City, more like a pledge of peace, then a free
Ambassador, and very few Turks live here mingled with the Christians. The
situation of Gallata (as I said) is most pleasant. Formerly the Ambassadors of
England were wont to dwell upon the Seashore in the Plain, and their Palace
is not far distant from this note (K): but Master Edward Barton the English
Ambassador at this time dwelt upon the top of the hill, in a fair house
within a large field, and pleasant gardens compassed with a wall. And all
Gallata is full of very pleasant gardens, and compassed with pleasant fields,
whereof some toward the land furthest from the Sea, are used for the burial
of Turks.

(I) Here a little Creek of the Sea is compassed with walls and buildings,
within which the Galleys of the great Turk lie in safety, and there be fit
places to build Galleys, and storehouses for all things thereunto belonging.

(K) Here is the chief passage over the water called Tapano, where a man may
pass for two aspers. All along this Sea bank lie very many great Gunnes (as
upon the Tower Wharfe at London), and here the fishers land, and sell their
fish.

(L) Here the Megarenses of old built Chalcedon, a City of Bethinia, famous
for a Council held there, by the ruin of which City, Constantinople
increased. At this day there is only a Village, or rather some scattered
houses, and it is commonly called Scuteri, or Scudretta.

(M) Here the Great Turks mother then living, had her private Garden.

(N) Hither the Heir of the Empire is sent, as it were into banishment, under
pretense to govern the Province Bursia, as soon as he is circumcised, and so
being made a Musulman (that is, a circumcised Turk) first begins to draw the
eyes of the Army and Ianizares toward him.

(O) Here is the Palace or Court of the great Turk, called by the Italians
Seraglio, and vulgarly Saray, and it was of old the Monastery of Saint Sophia.
Mahomet the second first compassed it with walls, and the buildings together
with the large and pleasant gardens are some three or four miles in circuit. I
entered the outward Court thereof by a stately Gate kept by many Ianizares
called Capigi of that office. The court yard was large, all compassed with
building of free stone two stories high, with a low and almost plain roof
tyled, and without windows, after the manner of the building of Italy, and
round about the inside, it was cast out with arches like the building of
Cloisters, under which they walked dry in the greatest rain. And in this
Court is a large pulpit or open room, where the great Turk vieth to show
himself to the Ianizares to satisfy them when they make any mutiny.

(P) Here is a banqueting house, vulgarly called Chuske, the prospect whereof
is more pleasant then can be expressed, beholding four Seaes at once, and the
land on all sides beyond them.

(Q) Here is the Church of Saint Sophia, opposite to the Court Gate, of old
built by the Christians after the form of Salomons Temple, and endowed with
the annual rent of three hundred thousand Zechines, now made a Mosche or
Mohammedan Church. And howsoever the Turks cannot endure that unwashed
Christians (so called by them, because they use not Baths so continually as
they do) should enter their Mosches, or pass over their Sepulchers, yet my
self entered this Church with the Ianizare my guide, trusting to his power to
defend me, yet he willed me first to put of my shoes, and according to the
Turks custom to leave them in the porch, where they were late till we
returned. The Church is of a round form, and built of brick, and supported
with fair pillars, and paued with Marble (over which the Turks laid Mats to
kneel, and prostrate themselves more commodiously upon them.) The roof is
beautified with pictures of that rich painting, which the Italians call alla
Mosaica, shining like enameled work, which now by antiquity were much decayed,
and in some parts defaced. Round about the Church hung many Lamps, which they
use to burrie in the time of their Lent (called Beyram), and every week upon
Thursday in the evening, and Friday all day, which they keep holy after their
fashion for their Sabbath day. Round about the upper part of the Church are
large and most fair Galleries. And here I did see two Nuts of Marble of huge
bigness and great beauty. Moreover I did see the great Turk when he entered
this Church, and howsoever it lie close to the Gate of his Palace, yet he came
riding upon a horse richly trapped, with many troops of his chief horsemen,
standing in rank within the Courts of his Palace, and from the Court Gate to
the Church door, between which troops on both sides, he passed as between
walls of brass, with great pomp. And when a Chaus (or Pensioner) being on
horseback did see me close by the Emperors side, he rushed upon me to strike
me with his mace, saying, What does this Christian dog so near the person of
our great Lord? But the Ianizare, whom our Ambassador had given me for a Guide
and Protector, repelled him from doing me any wrong, and many Ianizares
(according to their manner) coming to help him, the Chaus was glad to let me
alone, and they bade me be bold to stand still, though I were the second or
third person from the Emperor. Near this Church is the stately Sepulcher of
Selymus the second, and another Sepulcher no less stately, and newly built for
Amurath lately deceased, where he lay with those male children round about him,
who according to the manner were strangled by his Successor after he was
dead. Not far thence is the Market place having some one hundred marble
pillars about it, and adorned with a Pyramid or pinnacle, erected upon four
Globes, and with a pleasant Fountain of water, together with other ornaments
left (as it seems) by Christian Emperors.

(R) The wonderful Mosche and Sepulcher of Solomon, numbered among the miracles
of the World.

(S) Two houses for the same use, as the Exchange of London, where the
Merchants meet, namely, for the selling of fine wares, but no way to be
compared to the same for the building. They are called the great and the less
Bezestan, and use to be opened only certain days of the week, and for some
six hours, at which times small and more precious wares are there to be sold,
as Jewels, Semiters (or Swords), set with Jewels, but commonly counterfeit,
pieces of Velvet, Satin, and Damask, and the like. And the Market place is
not far distant, where Captives of both sexes are weekly sold, and the
buyers if they will, may take them into a house, and there see them naked, and
handle them (as we handle beasts to know their fatness and strength.)

(T) Here is a Fort that is fortified with seven Towers, called by the Turks
Iadicule, and by Christians the seven Towers, where a garrison of Soldiers is
kept, because the Emperors treasure is there laid up, and chief Prisoners use
to be kept there. The treasure is vulgarly said to be laid up there, but the
great Turk seldom goes thither; and since it is true, that where the treasure
is, there is the mind, I think it probable (which I have heard of experienced
men) that most of the treasure lies in the Seraglio, where the great Turk
holds his Courr.

(V) Here be the ruins of a Palace upon the very walls of the City, called the
Palace of Constantine, wherein I did see an Elephant, called Philo by the
Turks, and another beast newly brought out of Affricke, (the Mother of
Monsters) which beast is altogether unknown in our parts, and is called
Surnapa by the people of Asia, Astanapa by others, and Giraffa by the Italians,
the picture whereof I remember to have seen in the Mappes of Mercator; and
because the beast is very rare, I will describe his form as well as I can. His
hair is red colored, with many black and white spots; I could scarce reach
with the points of my fingers to the hinder part of his back, which grew
higher and higher toward his foreshoulder, and his neck was thin and some
three else long, so as he easily turned his head in a moment to any part or
corner of the room wherein he stood, putting it over the beams thereof, being
built like a Barn, and high (for the Turkish building, not unlike the building
of Italy, both which I have formerly described) by reason whereof he many times
put his nose in my neck, when I thought my self furthest distant from him,
which familiarity of his I liked not; and howsoever the Keepers assured me he
would not hurt me, yet I avoided these his familiar kisses as much as I could.
His body was slender, not greater, but much higher then the body of a stagge or
Heart, and his head and face was like to that of a stagge, but the head was
less and the face more beautiful: He had two horns, but short and scarce
half a foot long; and in the forehead he had two bunches of flesh, his ears
and feet like an Ox, and his legs like a stagge. The Ianizare my guide did
in my names and for me give twenty Aspers to the Keeper of this Beast.

(W X) Here be two Castles or Forts, divided by the Hollespont, one seated in
(...), the other in Asia, whereof I made mention in my sailing to
Constantinople, and of which I shall speak more largely at my going from this
City.

Constantinople built (six hundred sixty three years before Christ was
borne), by (...) a Lacedemonian, was first called Bizantiam, till Constantine
the Great in the year of the Lord 315, did rebuild it, after it had been
destroyed by the Emperor (...), and called it by his name. The Turks under
Mahimet the second, first took this City, in the year 1453, from the
Christians, with destruction of great multitudes of them, and at this day it is
called (of the great circuit) Stimbals by the Graecians, and Stambalda by the
Turks. It is seated in Thrace (also called Romania) and is built in form of a
Triangle, whereof two sides toward the North and East, lie upon two seas, and
the third side toward the West, lies upon the continent of Greece. For many
causes this City is famous, and in two respects may be justly preferred to any
other in the World known to us, namely for the pleasantness of the situation,
and the largeness and safety of the Haven. The form thereof formerly set
down, does in part show the pleasantnes of the situation, but the
fruitfulness of the fields, the sweetness and beauty of the flowers, and the
variety and goodness of the fruits cannot sufficiently be praised. The fishes
in the winter season flying from the cold of the Euxine or black Sea, falldowne
in great numbers into the Sea Propontis, passing close by the walls of the City,
and again in Summer time, not enduring the heat of the Mediterianean sea,
return back in like numbers the same way. This City has a thousand pleasant
creekes of the Sea within sight. To conclude, the Country is no less pleasant
then the Inhabitants are wicked.

The Haven will receive an huge number of ships, and upon both the banks of
the City and Gallata, ships of 300, (...) or greater once unloaded, may so
lie with their cables fastened on the Land, as they (...) from the ships to
Land without (...) and for the excellency of the Port, the City itself is
called the Port by the Turks, and Ovid calls it the Port of two Seas, for the
two channels of Propontis, and the Euxine Sea. Of old the City had eleven gates
called, Aurea, Pargea, Romana, Carthasez, Regia, Caligaria, Kilma, Harmagona,
Phara, Theodosia, and Spilica. At this day the slender wall of brick toward
the Sea, has thirteen gates not worth the naming. The wall toward the Land
is of brick, and is said to have been much ruined in the year 1509, by an
Earthquake; yet still on that side are three walls which are broad enough for a
cart to pass, of which the outmost toward land is little higher then the
foundation of the second, nor that much higher then the foundation of the
third, the fields on that side being plain, yet in like sort rising higher and
higher as they be nearer to the walls of the City, save that near the foresaid
Palace of Constantine, some hills lie without the walls.

This City (as Rome) is said to contain seven Hills or mounts within the walls,
whereof some to me seemed imaginary, but I will reckon them as they do, and
first begin with the hill, upon which stand the ruins of Constantines
Palace. The second has the stately Mosche (or Turkish Church) built upon the
Palace, which of old belonged to the Grecian Patriarch. Upon the third stands
the stately Mosche and most richly built Sepulcher of Mahomet the second; with
an Hospital built by the same Emperor, where all Turkish Pilgrims have their
lodging and diet freely for three days, and it has one hundred and fifty
chambers built for the poor of the City, and the yearly rents thereof are
valued at two hundred thousand zechines, yea the Court or Seraglio of the Great
Turk paies each day an hundred Aspers to this Hospital. The Sepulcher of
Selimus takes up the fourth hill, and the sepulcher of Bajazet, the fifth hill.
Between the fifth and the sixth hill, is the old Palace of the Great Turk,
(which the Italiatis call Seraglio vecehio), where the Concubines of the
deceased Emperor, and the present Emperors sisters and a great number of his
concubinet, (for the fairest and dearest to him are taken to live in his
Court), are kept by Ennuches within this old Seraglio, which is of great
circuit, containing many houses and gardens compassed within one wall. Upon the
sixth hill stands the foresaid wonderful Mosche and Sepulcher of Solomon,
noted with the letter (R). Lastly, the seventh hill contains the chief
Palace of the Great Turk, and the Church Saint Sophia, now made a Mosche
noted with the Letters O. Q.

The tops of the Sepulchers and Mosches, being of a round form and covered
with brass, and the spacious gardens of Cypress and Fur trees, make show of
more beauty and magnificence to the beholder from any high place, or without
the walls, then in deed the City has. The Sepulchers are no doubt very stately
built, having upon the top one two or more round globes covered with lead or
brass. On the inside they seem like lightsome Chapels with many windows,
and they being built in a round form, the dead Emperor is laid in the
midst or center of the Sepulcher, in a chest or coffin raised some three foot
from the ground, having the Tulbent which he wore upon his head in his life
time laid upon his Tomb, being see forth with the Jewels he most esteemed,
(which Tulbent is made of some twenty or more yards of pure and fine white
linen, foulded in many foulds, in the form of a half globe). Next the
Emperor lies the Sultana or Empress, in her Coffin, (so they call his
Concubine, Mother of his Heir and Successor), provided always that she have
had a letter of dowry by which she is made his wife; for otherwise she is not
buried with him. And round about the Emperor and Empress in Coffins lower
then theirs, lie the bodies of his male children, which (according to their
manner) are strangled by his Successor as soon as he was dead, and upon their
Coffins likewise their Tulbents are laid severally. These children are laid
in little Coffins of Cypresle: and this middle part wherein the dead bodies
lie, is compassed with a grace, so as between the bodies and the windows
there is a gallery round about, which is spread with Turkey carpets, and upon
them the Priests that keep the Sepulcher, do lie by night, and sit cross
legged by day, neither is the room at any time without some of these Keepers,
so as the Emperors are attended even after death.

The buildings of the City have no magnificence, being partly of a matter like
brick, but white, and (as it seems) vnhardned by fire, partly of timber and
clay, excepting some few palaces which are of free stone, but nothing so
stately built as might be expected from the pride and riches of the great
Turks chief servants. And these houses (as those of the adjacent territories
of Europe) are built only 2 stories high, with a low roof without any
windows, after the manner of Italy, whereas the houses of Asia have a plain
and plaistered roof to walk upon, especially in Asia the greater. The
streets of this City ar narrow, and shadowed with pentises of wood, and upon
both sides the way is raised some foot high, but of little breadth, and paued
for men and women to pass, the midst of the street being left low and
vnpaued, and no broader, then for the passage of Asses or beasts loaded. In
many places of the streets lie carcases, yea sometimes the bodies of dead men,
even till they be putrified, and I think this vncleanlinesse of the Turks (who
otherwise place Religion in washing their bodies, and keeping their apparel,
especially their Tulbent pure and clean) is the chief cause that this City,
though most pleasantly seated, yet above all the Cities of the world is
continually more or less infected with the plague. They say, that Job, famous
for his piety and patience, is buried in this City: but I did not see his
monument, and think it probable, that the same and all like Christian
monuments, were defaced by the Turks when they took the City.

The worthy English Ambassador, Master Edward Barton most courteously
entertained me with lodging and diet so long as I stayed in this City, so as
for them I spent not one Asper: but I pass over the due praises which I owe to
the memory of this worthy Gentleman, being hereafter to speak more of him, I
will only add, that I attended him once to the great Turks Court, and when I
had nothing satisfied my curiosity in viewing the City by occasions casually
happening, that he commanded a Ianizare to guide me round about the same,
till I had taken full view thereof. And with this guide the first day I viewed
the foresaid monuments within the walls, and the second day compassed the
City without the walls, beginning at the passage over the water called
Tapano, and noted with the letter (K), and so passing by water (in a boat,
vulgarly called Pyrame, and hired for forty aspers) to the Castle of the seven
Towers, noted with the letter (T), then passing by land to the Palace of
Constantine, noted with the letter (V.)

And by the way as we passed by land, an old woman meeting us, and taking me
for a Captine to be sold, demanded my price of the Ianizare; who for mirth
entertained her offer to buy me and another Gentleman, servant to the
Ambassador, whom he had sent to bear me company: but because I was very
slender and lean after my long sickness, he could not induce her to give more
then one hundred aspers for me, though she offered four hundred aspers for the
other Gentleman in my company, as the Ianizare told me in the Italian tongue,
when he had entertained this discourse with her to pass away the time in our
long walk. From the foresaid Palace of Constantine we hired a boat for eight
aspers, and so by water returned to the passage Tapano, from whence we set
forth, having gone by land and water the full circuit of the City, being nine
miles by water, and five by land. Thence we returned to the Ambassadors
house, where I gave the Ianizare my guide fifty aspers for his pains.

A Venetian ship called the great Lion was now ready to set sail from
Constantinople to Venice, which commodity of my speedy return I thought good
to take, and having agreed with the Patron or Master of the ship, and being
promised by the chief of the Mariners (whom I had bound unto me with some
curtisies) that they would without fail call me before they were to set sail,
I passed the time in the sweet conversation of this worthy Ambassador, more
securely then I should have done, til one evening I heard a great piece of
Ordinance discharged, and thereupon suspected (as indeed it fell out) that
this ship ready to set sail, gave this warning piece to call aboard the
Mariners and passengers. And so I made all the haste I could to the water
side; but when I came thither, saw that my labor was in vain, the ship being
under sail, and gone out of the Haven. My self, my servant, and a Gentleman,
the Ambassadors servant, and sent by him into England with letters to the
Queen from the great Turk, being thus left behind, presently took one of the
Ambassadors Ianizares for our Guide, and upon the last day of February (in
the end of the year 1596 according to the English computation, or in the
beginning of the year 1597, according to the computation of most Kingdoms,
beginning the year Ann. 1597.
the first of January) hired a boat (called Pyrame) for one thousand Aspers to
Gallipoli, in hope to overtake the great ship sailing slowly, before it could
pass the straight of Hellespont. And the same evening in which the great ship
set sail, we in our little boat sailed by the shore of Thrace forty miles
to Selebris, a town of Thrace, not without great fear and far greater
danger of being cast away. For when we found Selebris.
the little boat unfit to pass the great waves of the Sea (though much calmer
then other Seas), and therefore willed our Mariner to sail close by the
shore, he told us, that there was greater danger from thieves upon the shore,
then from the waves of the sea, and so easily persuaded us to imitate the
Prophet David, committing our selves rather to the hands of God by sailing in
the deep, then into the hands of men by coasting the shore. When we had
passed the dark night without sleep in this obscure harbor, the next morning
early being Tuesday, and the first of March, we sailed twenty miles to Erylis,
seated upon the same shore of Thracia, not without extreme Erylis.
danger of being cast away, which we often and justly feared, and our Ianizare
no less, who either for fear, or repentance of his sins, shed abundance of
tears. Erylis was of old called Heraclea, famously known by having been the
seat of the Greek Patriark and many Christian Emperors. Here we left the boat
which we had hired at Constantinople, having found it unfit for this passage:
but howsoever we had hired it to Gallipoli, yet the Mariner would remit
nothing of the couenanted price. From hence to Gallipoli we hired for eight
hundred aspers a greater Bark called Cayke. The second of March,
notwithstanding the rage of the winds and the waves, we set sail, and landed
at the Island Marmora after fifty miles sail, in which Island I had formerly
been, Marmora
and to the mention thereof formerly made, let me now add, that it is
inhabited only with Greeks, and these Greek; fearing lest our Ianizare (after
their manner) would pay them nothing for our necessaries, and he being a young
unexperienced man, and so not carrying himself with such authority as other
Ianizares do, we could not get lodging nor diet in any house, til at last our
selves promising to pay honestly for all we took, we were received into a house
(where as we were wont) we slept upon our own bedding, they having no
convenient beds, and we paid for two Eggs one asper; for a Caponet five and
twenty aspers; for our fire five and twenty aspers; and for the use of the
house five and twenty aspers; as likewise in other places where we landed, we
paid commonly sixteen aspers or there-abouts, each night for our lodging, and
the use of the house. The third of March we set sail after midnight, and
having sailed sixty Gallipolis.
miles, came before break of day to Gallipolis, and the same day hiring a boat
with two Oars for two hundred aspers, we passed eight and twenty miles, and
found the great ship of Venice at anchor, but not daring to go aboard in the
night, we slept in our little boat fastened to the shore, with no little
inconvenience, because it rained all night. The fourth of March we gave the
Ianizare our guide three hundred twenty eight aspers for his pains, and to
bear his charges back, which was a small sum for so great a journey: Yet after
some repining he was satisfied therewith, because he served the English
Ambassador. Then we went aboard the Venetian ship, called the great Lion, and
when I remembered, that the ship wherein I sailed from Venice to Jerusalem was
called the little Lion, I was stirred up to give praise and humble thanks to
the great Lion of the Tribe of Judah, who through so many dangers preserved me
in this voyage. This Venetian ship was forced here to expect the pleasure of
the Turkish Searchers and Customers, namely, at the two Castles upon the entry
of the Straight Two Castles
of Hellespont, whereof I made mention in my sailing from Candia to
Constantinople, and in the description of that City have noted them with the
letters (W) and (X). For the ships that come from Constantinople, use to be
detained here some three days, to the end that in case they carry away private
men's slaves, the Masters may have time to follow after them; and in like case
if they carry away any prisoners or offenders, the public Magistrates may
have means to bring them back. Besides, these searchers and Customers look,
that they carry no prohibited wares, neither can the ship, nor any passenger be
suffered to pass these Castles, except they bring the Pasport of the great
Turk, which the chief Visere or Basha uses to grant unto them. Thus when no
ship without the knowledge of the chief Visere can either pass these Castles
leading to the Mediteranean Sea, or the two Castles above leading into the
Euxine Sea, noted with (D E), surely these four Castles are the greatest
strength of Constantinople by Sea.

I said, that these Castles, where we found the Venetian ship, are in the
description of Constantinople noted with the letters (W) and (X), and they are
now commonly called the Castles of Gallipolis: but of old that noted with the
letter (W) was called Sestos, being a City in Thrace, in which the most fair
Hero was borne and dwelt; and the other noted with the letter (X) was called
Abydos, being a City of Asia the less, in which Leander dwelt, famous for his
love to Hero, and these Castles are divided by the Hellespont some two miles
broad, at least so narrow, as Leander is said often to have swomme over it to
his beloved Hero. The Castle of Sestos more specially is seated in a most
fertile soil; for Nairo, the next adjoining town, yeeldes excellent Wines and
all necessaries to sustain life plentifully. Howsoever the ships ought, and
use to be stayed here for three days, yet a very fair wind blowing, and all
duties being performed, the Patrons of the ships by a large gift to the
Officers, sometimes obtain leave to depart sooner. They say, that each
passenger by Pole pays here one zechine for tribute: but perhaps this belongs
only to Merchants, for my self, my servant, and the English Gentleman in my
company, having given between us one zechine to the substitutes of the
Venetian Bailiffe (so their Ambassador is called), we were dismissed upon their
motion, yet we moreover gave forty aspers to a Ianizare, and fifty aspers to
a Chiauslar for the fees of their offices.

It being unwholesome to sleep above the hatches of the ship at this time of the
year (though in summer time I made choice to sleep so, when I sailed from
Venice to Jerusalem), we three, namely, my self, the English Gentleman and my
servant, gave for each of us three zechines to the Pilot to be partners with
him in his cabin, which by his Office he had proper to himself in the Castle
of the ship; and to the Patron or Master of the ship for our diet, we paid each
of us after the rate of five zechines and a half by the month, as well at
Sea, as in Harbors; and for our passage we jointly paid ten ducats of Venice,
(so as I still paid two parts of three in all expenses); besides that, we
brought with us some hundreds of Eggs, and a vessel of excellent Wine of
Palormo, which our Ambassador at Constantinople gave us.

Upon Monday the seventh of March (after the old style used in Turkey by all
Christians and others) in the afternoon we set sail, and passed the straight
of Hellespont, and the same night sailed by the foresaid Island of Tenedos. This
Sea is called Pontus of the adjacent Province of Asia the less, named Pontus,
which Province contains Tenedos.
Colchis (famous by the old Argonauticall expedition), Capidocia, and Armenia.
The eight of March, early in the morning, we did see tha Island Lemnos (famous
for a kind Lemnos.
of earth there dug, and in Latin called Terra Sigillata) upon our right
hand, and the Metelene. Zio. Smirna.
Islands Metelene, and Chios (now called Zio), and the City Smyrna (upon the
continent of Asia the less) upon our left hand, (to omit Ephesus, not far
distant upon the same continent.) And being now entered into the AEgean Sea (now
called Archipelagus of fifty Islands standing like Arches, and not far
distant one from the other, which are called Cyclades, or Sporades), the ninth
of March, having now sailed eighty miles, and being to sail by the Island
Saint George of Skyra, the winds were so contrary, as we were forced to
strike sails, and lie at hull (that is, tossed to an fro by the waves.) The
Andros.
same day we set sail, and left the Island Andros (one of the Cyclades) and the
Island Tyno (subject to the Venetians) on our left hand, or toward the East,
and the Island Negropont (lying close to the continent of Attica, and right over
against the ruins of famous Athens.
Athens) on our right hand, or toward the West. The tenth and eleventh of
March, we sailed 100 miles in the same Sea full of Islands, and sailed by the
Islands Gia and Makarone. But toward night contrary winds rising high, and we
fearing to be cast upon some shore of many adjacent Islands, again we struck
sail and lay at hull, tossing to and fro, but making small or no progress.
The twelfth of March, early in the morning, we set sail, and sailed by the
Island Milo (of old called Miletum), where Saint Paul landed, Acts 20. 15), and
a near Island Sdiles (of old called Delos, and most famous for the Oracle of
Apollo), and the Promontory of Morea (of old Delos.
called Peloponesus, containing many Provinces of Greece), which promontory is
called Capo Malleo. The thirteenth of March, having sailed one hundred and
ninety miles, we passed by the Island Cerigo, not subject to the Turks (as most
of the Islands are), but to the Venetians, who in a Castle on the South side
keep a Garrison of soldiers. It is one of the Cyclades, seated at the
entrance of the Archipelagus toward the South, scarce five miles distant from
Morea (the foresaid continent of Greece) and some one hundred and fifty miles
from Candia, the chief City of the Island Candia, and was of old called
Scotera, also Porphoris, of that precious kind of Marble there dug, and also
Citherea, of which as her chief Citherea
seat Venus is often so called. And to this day there are seen the ruins of
a Temple dedicated to Venus, and of a Palace belonging to Menelaus the husband
of Helena. From the thirteenth to the seventeenth of March, the winds were so
contrary or scant, as we only sailed one hundred and twenty miles, and took
harbor in the Island Zante, subject to the Venetians (whereof I made mention in
my voyage from Venice to Jerusalem.) Here some English Merchants continually
reside, and the Haven Zante.
being commodious, and most ships that trade in these Seaes using to put into
this Harbor, the goods that are diversely transported thence, are vulgarly, but
falsely, esteemed the native commodities of the Island. It has scarce sixty
miles in circuit, and the Mountains round about upon the Seaside, enclose a
pleasant and fruitful Plain. The Haven is like an half Moon increasing, and
the chief Town called Zante, lies in a little Plain upon the innermost part
thereof in length. The buildings of the houses are two stories high, with a
tyled, but low roof without any windows (according to the building of Italy)
but are poor and base for the matter, so as the only beauty of the Town
lies in the Castle built at the East end upon a high Hill, being of a large
circuit, and containing many houses and Churches within the walls thereof. In
which Castle the Governor (called il Podesta) and the other Venetian inferior
Magistrates dwell, and give Law to the people of that Island.

The Turkish Pirates of Saint Mauro in Morea, having lately set upon and taken a
huge Venetian ship, did lade seventeen of their little barques with the most
precious goods thereof, namely, clothes of Gold, Damasks and Grogerans, to the
value of a thousand thousand zechines (as the report went), and setting the
ship on fire, took away the mariners for slaves. And the very time of my
being in this Island, seven Turkish Galleys lay upon this coast, and robbed all
the Venetian ships falling into their hands, so as howsoever they had peace
then with the Turkish Ottoman, yet their ships durst not stir out of this
haven. Whereupon they having now occasion to send out ships for Corn, the
Magistrate forced the Master of an English ship then harboring there, to wast
these ships, though much against his will, when there were some 20 Venetian
ships in the same Haven, whereof diverse were of 400 or 500 tuns. Also at this
time it happened, that a Spanish ship of Catolonia was driven into this Harbor,
and the Magistrate calling our Merchants before him, would have forced them to
give caution, that the English ships then lying there, should not assail the
same, though between England and Spain war had now long time bin proclaimed:
but they contesting against this course as injurious to them, yet could not be
dismissed, till they gave their words, that our ships should not assail the
same by day or night, so long as it lay in this Haven. And this Spanish ship
for long time not daring to go forth, at last upon occasion of Venetian
Galleys landing there, was wafted by them, and so escaped. Upon the robbing and
burning of the foresaid Venetian ship by Turkish Pirates, the Venetian Baliffe,
(so they call their Ambassador) lying then at Constantinople, had obtained the
great Turks Mandate, that these Pirates galleys being burnt, they should
presently be sent in bonds to his Court, and this Mandate was brought by a
Chiauss, (or Pencioner) who came in the same ship with us, whereupon the
Pirates being more enraged against the Venetians, did at this time take and
spoil another Venetian ship of some four hundred and fifty Tons, called the
Syluester, and not content with the most rich booty, did cast into the Sea many
Mariners yielding to mercy, and could hardly be persuaded by the intercession
of Turks passengers in the same ship, to spare the lives of some twenty chief
Mariners yet alive, and to forbear the burning of the ship. The Italians of
best judgment, did not expect that the great Turk would duly punish these
outrages, but rather were of opinion that himself and his chief Visere would
draw the greatest part of the prey to their own hands, and that the Turkish
Governors enticed by like participation, would endeavor to free these Pirates,
and do their best to nourish them, yea, that this very Chiauss now sent with a
Mandate to suppress them, would be induced by bribes, to return to
Constantinople, with relation that the Pirates could not be found, so they did
(as no doubt they would) for a time hide themselves, and in conclusion, that
the Venetians after having spent much money in obtaining new Mandates for their
apprehension, should find no other remedy, but to repel force by force.

Upon Wednesday the thirtieth of March, (after the old style) in the beginning
of March 30. Ann. 1597.
the year 1597, we set sail, but by contrariety of winds, were again driven
back into the Haven of Zante. Upon Friday the first of April after dinner,
again we set sail, and the second of April sailing by the Island Cefalonia,
(whereof I spoke in our voyage Cefalonia. Corfu.
from Venice to Jerusalem), we cast anchor in the outward Haven of the Island
Corfu, because the Master of our ship was sick, and this his sickness
increasing, we set sail to return back to the chief City of that Island, the
Haven whereof we entered the sixth of April. From Zante to Cefaloniae are
seventy miles, and from thence to Corfu are 120 miles.

This Island Corfu inhabited by Greeks is very fertile, yielding plenty of
fruits, corn, wines, and Currands, and this Haven is fortified with two Forts
cut out off a Rock, namely, the old and the new Fort, (which is more then a
mile in circuit), both being very strong and held vnexpugnable, so as this
Island is worthily reputed one of the chief Keys of Christendom. The Master
of our ship having recovered his health, we set sail upon Tuesday the twelfth
of April, and returned again to the foresaid outward Haven of Corfu Island,
where an old woman a passenger died, and her kinsemen carried her body to be
buried on Land. Here again we were forced to stay; the winds being contrary.

Atlast upon the nineteenth of April toward evening, with a fair wind we
joyfully set sail, and the twentieth day we sailed over the straight Sea,
between Greece and the Province of Apulia in Italy. Upon Friday the two and
twentieth of April toward the evening, having sailed some two hundred miles
from the said straight, we were carried by the shore of the City Raguza, with
a fair gale of wind, and had the Raguza.
wind been never so contrary, yet our Master knowing some late difference
risen between the Raguzeans and Venetians, would not willingly have landed in
that Haven. The blame of which difference some imputed to the Raguzeans, in
that they favored the Scocchi, a Neighbor people upon the shore of
Sclauonia, who being subject to the Emperor and Christians, yet robbed all
kinds of ships passing these Seas, and had lately spoiled and burnt a Venetian
Gally in the Port of Rouinge. But other alleged a more probable cause thereof,
namely, that some Venetian Gentlemen for some venerious in solencies there
committed, had Iately been slain in a tumult. Raguze of old called Epidaurus,
and the chief City of Selauonia, is four hundred miles distant from Venice,
built at the foot of an high mountain, upon the Sea shore, and has great
traffic by those Seas, and huge ships, which the Kings of Spatne have often
hired, and joined to their Navy. The government is popular, and this City to
the wonder of many, does to this day maintain the liberty, though it be seated
between the very jaws of the two powerful States of the great Turk and
Venetians, to one of which all other near Towns Islands and Countries are
subject. For the Venetians are loath to drive them being Christians to such
despair, as they might be forced to yield themselves to the great Turk, and
the City is very strongly fortified toward the sea, whence the Venetians can
only assail them: besides, that they pay great customs of their traffic to
the State of Venice, for which reason that State attempts nothing against the
freedom of the City. Again, the Turks knowing that if they should besiege
the City by Land, the Citizens would with all their best moueables fly into
Italy by Sea, and receiving also a great yearly tribute from the traffic of
this City, (where the great Turk has his own Officer called Chiaussagha to
gather the same,) are also content not to molest them by war, especially
since they know that the Pope, the King of Spain, and the State of Venice,
would assist the Raguzeant against them, and no way endure that the Turkish
Ottoman should make himself Lord of that Haven.

Upon the three and twenty of April toward evening, we sailed by the little
Island Augusta, (being yet of a good large circuit, and populous, and subject to
the Raguzeans, but the Coast is dangerous for ships arrival, by reason of the
Rocks called the Augustines,) and by the little Island Corsolavi. Some Islands
in this Sea are subject to the Raguzeans, and some near to the Northern
continent, have the Great Turk for their Lord, but the rest are subject to the
Venetians, and are very many in number, but little, and good part of them
little or not at all inhabited. The Italians our consorts, told us of an Island
not far distant, called Pelaguza, and lying near the continent of Italy,
upon the Coast whereof the famous Turkish Pyrate of Algier, (a Haven in Africa)
was lately wont to houer and lie hidden, and made rich booties of the Venetian
and Italian Merchants. Upon Sunday the four and twenty of April, we had in
sight, and little distant, the little Islands, Catza and Lissa, and in the
afternoon on our left hand toward Italy the Island Pomo, and in the evening
toward Dalmatia, two Islands, and upon the continent the City Zaga, being some
two hundred miles distant from Venice. And the night following we sailed over
an arm of the Sea some thirty miles broad, lying between Dalmatia and
Istria, called Il Cornaro, which we passed without any Il Cornaro.
appearance of danger, though otherwise it be generally reputed so dangerous,
as the Venetians offended with any Mariner, use this imprecation; Maledetto
sia il Cornaro che t'ha lasciato passare; that is: Cursed be the Cornaro for
letting thee pass. Upon Monday the five and twenty of April, as we sailed by
the Coast of Istria, one of the Mariners aged, and (as we thought) honest, and
of some authority among the rest, privately admonished me, that I should safely
lock up our goods in our chests, left the inferior Mariners should steal our
shirts, or any other thing they found negligently left, which they used to do,
especially at the end of any voyage. Upon Tuesday the six and twenty of April,
we cast anchor beyond Pola, in the continent of Istria, a City now ruined, and
upon the seven and twenty day we entered the Haven of Rouinge in Istria, subject
to the Venetians, where the ships use to take a Pilot for their own safety, or
else are tied so to do by some old privilege of that City. Here the Prouisors
for health gave us liberty of free conversation, (as they had formerly done at
Zante), seeing no man in our ship to be sick or sickely. And I did not a
little wonder, when I observed each second or third person of this City to halt
and be lame of one foot, which made me remember the Citizens of Islebe in
Germany, and in the Province of Saxony, where almost all the men have wry
necks; whereof I knew the cause, namely because they used daily to dig in
mines, with their necks leaning on one side: but of this common lamenes of the
Inhabitants in Rouinge, I could not learn any probable cause, except it were
the foul disease of lust, reigning in those parts, which I rather thought
likely, because the lamenesse was common to weomen as men.

Now the sailing in our great ship was like to be more trouble some, dangerous,
and slow, whereupon five of us joining together, did upon the thirtieth of
April (after the old style) hier a boat of six Oars, for seven Venetian
Ducats to Venice, where we Venice.
arrived the next day toward evening, and stayed in our boat upon the wharfe
of the Market place of Saint Mark, till the Prouisors of health sitting in
their Office near that place, came unto us, and after some conference,
understanding that we and our ship were free of all infection or sickness,
gave us free liberty of conversation. We stayed three days at Venice to
refresh our selves, and paid each man three lyres for each meal in a Dutch
Inn.

Then having received money of a Merchant, I went to the Village Mestre, and
there bought of Dutchmen newly arrived in Italy, two horses for my self and my
man, the one for thirty, the other for twenty ducates. These horses I sold at
Stood in Germany after my journey ended, at, or about the same rate. He that
has the Dutch tongue, and either knows the ways of Germany himself, or has
consorts skillful therein, being to travel from Stood, or those parts into
Italy, shall find more profit in buying a horse in those parts of Germany, for
so he shall save great sums usually paid for coches, and at the iournies
end, or rather by the way toward the end of his journey, may in Italy sell
his horses with good profit. In the Village Mestre, each of us paid each meal
fifty soldi, that is, two lires and a half.

From hence we took the right way to Augsburg in Germany, to Nurnberg,
Brunswick, and to Stood, an old City lying on the Northern Sea of Germany. The
particulars of which journey I here omit, having in my journey to Jerusalem
passed the very same way from Stood to Venice.

So as it shall suffice to add some few things in general. Within the
confines of Italy, each man of us paid for each meal forty, and sometimes
fifty Venetian soldi, and for hay and stable for his horse commonly at noone
four soldi, at night twelve soldi, and for ten measures of oats given each
day to each horse fifty soldi.

After we entered Germany, each man paid each meal commonly twenty creitzers,
at Inspruch twenty four, and sometimes twenty six creitzers, for hay six
creitzers a day, or there-abouts, and for ten measures of oats, serving one
horse for a day we paid fifty creitzers. In the middle Provinces of Germany,
each of us paid for each meal commonly sixteen creitzers, that is, four
batzen, and in the parts upon the Northern sea some four Lubeck shillings.
And from the City Armstat (seated between Augsburg and Nurnberg) to the said
Northern sea side, we had a new measure of oats called Hembd, one of which
measures was sold for some ten Lubeck shillings, and served three horses for
our bait at noone, and another was almost sufficient for them at night.

From Stood seated upon the German Sea, we passed in a boat to the outmost
Haven, where we went abroad an English ship upon the fourth of July (after the
old style) being Tuesday. The sixth of July early in the morning we set sail,
and the eight of July we came upon the most wished land of England, and cast
anchor near Orford, a Castle in Suffolk. Upon Saturday the ninth of July
(after the old style) we landed at Grauesend and without delay with the
night-tide passed in a boat to London, where we arrived on Sunday at four of
the clock in the morning, the tenth of July, in the year 1597, July 10, an.
1597.
our hearts beingfull of joy, that our merciful God had safely brought us
thither. This early hour of the morning being unfit to trouble my friends, I
went to the Cock (an Inn of Aldersgate street) and there apparrelled as I
was, laid me down upon a bed, where it happened, that the Constable and
watchmen (either being more busy in their office then need was, or having
extraordinary charge to search upon some foraine intelligence, and seeing me
apparrelled like an Italian) took me for a Jesuit or Priest (according to
their ignorance; for the crafty Priests would never have worn such clothes as
I then did. But after some few hours when I awaked, and while I washed my
hands, did inquire after my friends health, dwelling in the same street, the
Host of the house knowing me, dismissed the watchmen that say to apprehend me,
and told me how I had been thus mistaken.

CHAP. V: Of the journey through England, Scotland and Ireland.
HE that desires to see the Cities and Antiquities of England, Scotland and
Ireland, let him read the Chapter of the usual manner of all kingdoms to
journey, and to hire Coches and horses, and also the Chapter, wherein these
Kingdoms are Geographically described out of Camden, or if he list, rather let
him read Camden himself of this point: and lastly let him in the same last
named Chapter peruse the diet of these Kingdoms, and the entertainment in
Innes; Touching the distances of places by miles: first, for England he shall
easily find a little printed book particularly setting down the same. For
Scotland I will briefly set down my journey therein. And for Ireland, the
Cities being rare and far distant, he must have a guide, who may without
great trouble inquire them out. Only give me leave for the help of strangers
to add this one thing, namely, how they being curious to search antiquities,
and loath to omit the light of things worthy of observation, may to this purpose
best dispose of their iournies, which all other men may fit to their ends and
purposes. First, let them pass out of Normandy to Rhye, an English Haven in
Sussex, then let them visit such of the five Kentish Ports as they please, let
them see Canterbury, famous for the Seat of the Metropolitan Archbishop; then
the Castle of Quinborrough, in the Island of Shoppey, and the Regal Navy; then
let them pass by Rochester (a Bishops Seat), the Regal Palace at
Greenewich, and Depford the Nauall storehouse, and not far thence see the
broken ribs of the ship, wherein famous Sir Francis Drake compassed the
World, and so let them come to London. When they have viewed the Monuments of
London and Westminster, and seen the Kings Court, they may take a cursory
journey to view such antiquities in Middlesex, Surry, and Barkshire, as upon
the reading of Camden they shall most desire to see, and especially all, or the
chief Palaces of the King. Again, from London they may take a cursory
journey to see the University of Oxford, and so by Worcester return to London.
In their journey to the confines of England and Scotland, they may see the
University of Cambridge, and view the most choice antiquities mentioned by
Master Camden in Harfordshire, Northamptonshire, Lincolnsheire, Yorkshire,
Durham and Northumberland.

My self upon occasion of business in the month of April, and the year
1598, took a journey to these said confines, namely, to Barwick, a Town then
very strongly April. Ann. 1598.
fortified by the English, to restrain the sudden incursions of the Scots, and
abounding with all things necessary for food, yea with many dainties, as
Salmons and all kinds of shellfish, so plentifully, as they were sold for
very small prices. And here I found that for the lending of sixty pound, there
wanted not good Citizens, who would give the lender a fair chamber and good
diet, as long as he would lend them the money. Being to return from Barwicke, I
had an earnest desire, first, to see the King of Scots Court. So from hence I
rode in one day forty miles to Edenborrow the chief City of that Kingdom.
And in this said days journey after four miles riding I came to Aton, a
Village where the Lord of Hames dwelles, whose Family was powerful in those
parts. After sixteen miles more I came to Dunbar, which they said to have been
of old a Town of some importance, but then it lay ruined, and seemed of little
moment, as well for the poverty, as the small number of inhabitants. After the
riding of eight miles more, on the left hand toward the West, and something
out of the high way, the pleasant Village Hadrington lay, which the English, in
the reign of Queen Elizabeth, took, and kept against the French, who drawn
over in the time of faction, kept the Town of Dunbar, and fortified the same.
When I had ridden five miles further, I came to the ancient and (according to
the building of that Kingdom) stately Palace of the L. Seton, beautified with
fair Orchards and Gardens, and for that clime pleasant. Not far thence lies
the Village Preston-graung, belonging to the Family of the Cars, powerful from
these parts to the very borders of England within land. After I had ridden
three miles more, I came to the Village Fisherawe, near which beyond a Brook
lies the Village Musselborow in a stony soil, famous for a great Victory of
the English against the Scots. On the left hand toward the West, and something
out of the high way, the Queen of Scots then kept her Court (in the absence of
the King) at the Village Dawkeith, in a Palace belonging to the Earl of
Murray.

From the said Village Fishrawe, I rode the rest of the way, being four miles,
and so Edenborow.
in one days journey (as I said) came to Edenborow, seated in Lodouey, (of old
called Fictland) the most civil Region of Scotland, being hilly and fruitful
of corn, but having little or no wood. This City is the seat of the King of
Scotland, and the Courts of Justice are held in the same. Of old according to
the changeable fortune of war, it was sometimes in the possession of the
Scots, sometimes of the English inhabiting this Eastern part of Scotland, till
the English Kingdom being shaken with the invasions of the Danes, at last
about the year 960. it became wholly in the power of the Scots. This City is
high seated, in a fruitful soil and wholesome air, and is adorned with many
Noblemens Towers lying about it, and abounds with many springs of sweet
waters. At the end toward the East, is the Kings Palace joining to the
Monastery of the Holy Cross, which King David the first built, over which, in
a Park of Hares, Conies, and Dear, an high mountain hangs, called the chair
of Arthur, (of Arthur the Prince of the Britanes, whose monuments famous among
all Ballad-makers, are for the most part to be found on these borders of
England and Scotland). From the Kings Palace at the East, the City still
rises higher and higher toward the West, and consists especially of one broad
and very fair street, (which is the greatest part and sole ornament thereof),
the rest of the side streets and allies being of poor building and inhabited
with very poor people, and this length from the East to the West is about a
mile, whereas the breadth of the City from the North to the South is narrow, and
cannot be half a mile. At the furthest end toward the West, is a very strong
Castle, which the Scots hold vnexpugnable. Camden says this Castle was of old
called by the Britains, Castle meyned agnea, by the Scots; The Castle of the
Maids or Virgins, (of certain Virgins kept there for the Kings of the
Picts), and by Ptolomy the winged Castle. And from this Castle toward the
West, is a most steep Rock pointed on the highest top, out of which this
Castle is cut: But on the North and South sides without the walls, lie plain
and fruitful fields of Corn. In the midst of the foresaid fair street, the
Cathedral Church is built, which is large and lightsome, but little stately
for the building, and nothing at all for the beauty and ornament. In this
Church the Kings seat is built some few stairs high of wood, and leaning upon
the pillar next to the Pulpit: And opposite to the same is another seat very
like it, in which the incontinent use to stand and do penance; and some few
weeks past, a Gentleman, being a stranger, and taking it for a place wherein
Men of better quality used to sit, boldly entered the same in Sermon time, till
he was driven away with the profuse laughter of the common sort, to the
disturbance of the whole Congregation. The houses are built of unpolished
stone, and in the fair street good part of them is of free stone, which in
that broad street would make a fair show, but that the outsides of them are
faced with wooden galleries, built upon the second story of the houses; yet
these galleries give the owners a fair and pleasant prospect, into the said
fair and broad street, when they sit or stand in the same. The walls of the
City are built of little and unpolished stones, and seem ancient, but are very
narrow, and in some places exceeding low, in other, ruiued.

From Edenborow there is a ditch of water, (yet not running from the Inland,
but rising Lethe.
ofsprings) which is carried to Lethe, and so to the Sea. Lethe is seated upon
a creek of the Sea, called the Frith, some mile from Edenborow, and has a most
commodious and large Haven. When Monsieur Dessy a Frenchman, did fortify
Lethe, for the strength of Edenborow, it began of a base Village to grow to a
Town. And when the French King Francis the second had married Mary Queen of
the Scots: again the French, (who now had in hope devoured the possession of
that Kingdom, and in the year 1560. began to aim at the conquest of England)
more strongly fortified this Town of Lethe: but Elizabeth Queen of England,
called to the succor of the Lords of Scotland against these Frenchmen, called
in by the Queen, soon effected that the French returned into their Country,
and these fortifications were demolished.

Erom Leth I crossed over the Frith, (which ebs and flows as high as
Striuelin) to the Village King-korn, being eight miles distant, and seated in
the Region or Country called Fife, which is a Peninsule, that is, almost an
Island, lying between two creekes of the Sea, called Frith and Taye, and the
Land yields corn and pasture and seacoales, as the Seas no less plentifully
yield (among other fish,) store of oysters and shel fishes, and this Country
is populous, and full of Noblemens and Gentlemen's dwellings commonly compassed
with little groves, though trees are so rare in those parts, as I remember not
to have seen one wood.

From the said Village King-korn, I rode ten very long miles to Falkeland, then
the Kings House for hunting, but of old belonging to the Earls of Fife, where
I did gladly see I ames the sixth King of the Scots, at that time lying there
to follow the pastimes of hunting and hawking, for which this ground is much
commended; but the Palace was of old building and almost ready to fall, having
nothing in it remarkable. I thought to have ridden from hence to Saint
Andrews a City, seated in Fife, and well known as an University, and the seat
of the Archbishop: But this journey being hindered, I will only say, that the
Bishop of Saint Andrews, at the intercession of the King of Scotland James the
third, was by the Pope first made Primate of all Scotland, the same Bishop and
all other Bishops of that Kingdom having formerly to that day been
consecrated and confirmed by the Archbishop of York in England. Likewise I
purposed to take my journey as far as Striuelin, where the King of the Scots
has a strong Castle, built upon the front of a steep Rock, which King James
the sixth since adorned with many buildings, and the same has for long time
been committed to the keeping of the Lords of Eriskin, who likewise use to
have the keeping of the Prince of Scotland, being under years. And from thence
I purposed to return to Edenborow, but some occasions of unexpected business
recalled me speedily into England, so as I returned presently to Edenborow, and
thence to Barwicke, the same way I came.

I add for passengers instruction, that they who desire to visit the other
Counties of England and Ireland, may pass from Edenborow to Carlisle, chief
City of Comberland in England, and so between the East parts of Lancashire and
the West parts of York, and then through Darbyshire, Nottinghamshire,
Warwickeshire, Staffordshire, and Chesshire, may take their journey to the City
Westchester, whence they shall have commodity to pass the Sea to Dablin in
Ireland, and while they expect this passage, they may make a cursory journey
into Flintshire, and Caernaruenshire in Northwales, to see the antiquities
thereof, or otherwise may go directly to Holy Head, and thence make a shorter
cut to Dublyn in Ireland. From Dublyn they may pass to see the Cities of the
Province Mounster, whence they may commodiously pass to the South parts of
Wales, and there especially see the antiquities of Merlyn, and so taking their
journey to the West parts of England, may search the antiquities of these
several Counties, and easily find commodity to passeinto the West parts of
France: And all this circuit beginning at London, may (with ordinary favorable
winds according to the season of the year) be easily made, from the beginning
of March, to the end of September. Always I profess only to prescribe this
course, to such as are curious to search all the famous monuments and
antiquities of England, mentioned in Camdens complete description thereof.

CHAP. VI. Of the manner to exchange Moneys into foreign parts, and the diverse
moneys of diverse parts, together with the diverse measures of miles in sundry
Nations, most necessary for the understanding of the former iournall.
THE Travelers most commodious course, is to deliver into the hands of some
Merchant those kinds of gold or silver coins, which are of greatest value in
those parts to which he takes his journey, with covenant to deliver him by his
Factor the same, both in the Species or kind, and in the number, or to send
them in that sort to him by a trusty messenger. But the first course is not in
use, besides that, it is a difficult task, to find such diverse kinds in any
particular place, except it be from the Exchangers and Usurers, who use not to
serve another man's turn for profit or otherwise, without their own gain; and
being most expert in such affairs, are like to draw all the hoped profit to
themselves. And the second course threatens many dangers, by robberies, by
confiscations of the transmitted Coins, and by the doubtful credit of the
messengers. Particularly in England and France, he that is known to carry
great sums of money about him, shall run great danger to be robbed, and in
England the Law forbids any Traveler upon pain of confiscation, to carry more
money about him out of the Kingdom, then will serve for the expenses of his
journey, (namely, above twenty pounds sterling). As likewise in France, the
like Law restraines the exporting of money, allowing an Horseman from Lions to
Rome, eighty crowns, from Turine to Rome fifty, and no more, for his expenses;
all greater sums found about him, being subject to confiscation: yet I
confess that many wary Travelers have exported greater sums out of England
into France, and out of France into England; and thereby with these hazards,
have made great gain: But upon the confines of Italy, and the several
principalities thereof, yea, at the gates of each City in Italy, most crafty
Officers so curiously search into the breach of these Paenall Statutes, and so
narrowly pry into all men's carriage, never wincking at any delinquent, as
there is no hope upon breach of the Law to escape the penalty: for these
searchers are tied to more strict attention in this business, that (according
to their Office) they may beware least their Princes be defrauded of their
Tributes. And since very Jewels, and the least toys carried about passengers,
are subject to frequent Tributes (according to the frequent Principalities)
these good fellows leave nothing unassayed, in the wished discovery of these
frauds, yea, where they have no just suspicion of fraud; yet cease they not to
trouble passengers in this kind, till they have extorted some bribe or gift
from them. Behold here a two horned danger, (as I may term it of the captious
argument, called Dilemma) which travelers cannot possibly escape in Italy, who
carry about them Jewels or great sums of money, where they are in danger of
confiscation, if they hide them warily, and of thieves, if they show them, and
pay due tributes for them. For thieves (namely, men banished for notorious
crimes) lie continually upon the confines of Princes (very frequent in Italy),
and more specially of the Kingdom of Naples and of the Popes territory. In
Germany, Bomerland, Sweitzerland, the Low Countries, Denmark, Poland, and
Turkey, passengers may carry sums of money about them with more security,
neither have I there observed any great danger therein, so that the passenger
affect not solitariness, and be so wary as not to boast of his plenty.

Touching the diverse kinds of Coins to be transported, I forewarne the Reader,
that the gold Coins of England and of France, and as well the silver as gold
Coins of Spain, are in general spent abroad with greatest gain: but even
the gold and silver Coins of other Princes, are rarely current out of their
own Dominions, and can hardly be exchanged among Merchants without some loss.
Again, that he who exports any gold coins, must take care to have them of
just weight, for such he may disburse with gain, but shall bear loss in
others that are lighter, because they want the help of their Princes
Prerogative, where no man can be forced to receive them. Now I will briefly
show, which kinds of foraine coins are most valued in diverse states. In
England the gold and silver coins of Spain and French Crowns are highly
valued. In Scotland the same coins, and as well in Scotland as Ireland;
moreover, the gold and silver coins of England are valued. For Germany: at
Stood the English angels, and all the gold coins of England, France and Spain
are most esteemed: but if you pass into the upper parts of Germany, you must
for your expenses there change these coins at Stood into the Rhenish gold
guldens, and silver dollers of Germany. But at Vienna and the confines of
Hungary, the Hungarian ducats are most current. In Bohmerland the Rheinish gold
guldens, the silver dollers of Germany, and the Hungarian ducats. In
Sweitzerland, first, the French Crowns of gold, then the gold guldens and
silver dollers of Germany. In Denmark the silver and gold coins of England.
At Dantzk in Prussen, and throughout all Poland, the gold coins of England,
and the gold guldens and silver dollers of Germany, and especially Hungarian
ducats. In France upon the Sea coasts, the Angels and gold coins of England
are current: but for your journey further into the land, you must change them
into French Crowns, and the silver coins of that Kingdom, and the gold
coins of Spain are very current in all the Cities even within the land. In
the Low Countries, all coins are current, they being most cunning exchangers,
and wanting many things, yet drawing to them abundance of all foreign
commodities, so as they have skill to draw gold out of the dung (as he said of
Ennius.) Yet they most esteem the coins of England, Spain, and France. In
Turkey the gold zechines of Venice are most current, and preferred even before
their own Sultanones of gold. The coins after them most esteemed and to be
spent with most gain, are the silver ryals of Spain (which the Italians call
Pezzi d'otto, and Pezzi di quattro, pieces of eight, and pieces of four, and
the Turks call piastri, and half piastri.) In Italy generally the gold coins
of Spain are spent with most advantage. In the next place, and more
particularly at Venice and Naples the French Crowns are esteemed, but in Italy
more then any other place; you must have care they be of just weight. In
general, all gold coins may be put away with gain at Venice, but they being
in other parts of Italy less valued, or not current, he that travels higher,
must change them there into silver Crowns of Italy, and least the weight of
them should be burdensome, and he should chance to fall into the hands of
thieves (called Banditi, banished men), he shall do well to carry no more about
him then will suffice for the expenses of his journey, and to deliver the rest
to some Venetian Merchant of credit, taking his bills of exchange, or letters,
by which he may receive them in any other City or Cities, as his occasions
require.

But in respect of the foresaid difficulties to export coins In specie, that
is, in the kind, the Traveler shall do better who takes the second and most
usual course, taking care to have his moneys delivered to the exchangers (or
Merchants) by the hands of some trusty friend, to be exchanged over (according
to the exchange variable in respect of the time, and the place to which it is
to be made) and sent to him in foreign parts for his expense (by several
sums, and at set times of the year.) This exchange is so variable upon many
usual accidents, as a constant manner of so unconstant a thing cannot be
prescribed. But the rate and course thereof may be inquired in the Burse (or
public meeting place for the Merchants.) For the alteration thereof is weekly
made known particularly to the Merchants, that by letters they presently may
certify the same to their several Facters beyond the Seas. Now this daily
alteration of the exchange comes, partly of the quantity of moneys for the
present to be exchanged to the Princes or Merchants uses, and of the greater or
lesser number of those that desire moneys in exchange. For when small sums
are to be exchanged, either by the Prince for payment of his Army, or by the
Merchants for their traffic, and when many desire moneys upon exchange, then
the rate thereof is raised, and the Traveler made a Motion that some of this
House might be sent to their Lordships with request that the said Mr Popham
being a Member of this House might forthwith be remanded and restored to this
House again, which some thought not needful to be done before the Election, and
others again denying that he or any other could be Chosen Speaker except he
were present himself. The Clerk was Commanded to read the said Precedent again
of choosing Mr Onslow in the said eighth year of her Majesty's Reign (which said
Precedent see on Monday the 16th day of this instant foregoing) and thereupon
that course being agreed upon to be followed, the said Mr Treasurer and others
were sent up to the Lords to demand the restitution of the said Mr Popham, and
brought Answer again that their Lordships had resolved he should be sent down,
the rather because he was a Member of this House, and this House possessed of
him before he was Solicitor, or had any place of Attendance in the Upper
House. Upon relation whereof a Motion was presently made, that it was not meet
or convenient to choose a Speaker by persons that were not of the House, and
withal it was thought of some that diverse persons being newly returned in the
places of others yet living, were not, or ought not to be accounted Members of
this House. Whereupon to avoid length of Argument and the impediment of the
Election, the said Mr Treasurer by the Assent of the House pronounced an
Admonition, that all such as were newly returned in the places of others yet
living should forbear to repair to the House till their case were further
considered. Then immediately Mr Anderson the Queens Sergeant at Law, and Sir
Gilbert Gerard Knight her Highness Attorney General, brought from the Lords the
said Mr Popham her Majesty's Solicitor General, one of the Citizens for the
City of Bristol, and restored him to this House as a Member of the same, and so
departed. And then was a Motion made by Mr Lewkenor for Prayer to be used
before the Election, that it might please God both in that and in the residue
of the Proceedings of this House, to direct them with his Holy Spirit; and a
form of Prayer was then read to the House by the Clerk. And then afterward the
House proceeding to the Election of a Speaker, the said Mr Treasurer first
speaking did for his own part name and commend the said Mr Popham, alleging
many good reasons and causes moving him thereunto, but still leaving
nevertheless liberty without prejudice to the residue of the House to name whom
they would or thought good. And thereupon the whole House with full consent of
Voices agreed upon the choosing of the said Mr Popham; who standing up and much
disabling himself in dutiful and reverend wise, and alleging for himself many
reasonable causes and excuses, besought them humbly to proceed to a new
Election, whereof the House did not allow; and so then was he forthwith by the
said Mr Treasurer and Mr Comptroller brought up and placed in the Chair, and
order thereupon given that the House should the next day Assemble together,
both to understand her Majesty's Pleasure for presenting of the Speaker, and
also to determine of the case of the said persons newly returned into this
House in the places of others yet living.

On Thursday the 19th day of January the House again Assembled, the Speaker
Elect sitting in the Chair.

The matter began to be debated touching the said Burgesses, of whom question
was made the day before; and the Case was opened by Mr Norton a Citizen of
London to the effect following, viz.

That there be Members of this House absent in her Majesty's Service, as in
Embassage, or in her affairs in Ireland, in whose place new be returned.

Item, some persons be sick of durable Diseases, as Agues, etc. and new be
returned in their places.

Item, one Mr Flowerden was the last Session Burgess for Castle-Rising in
Norfolk, and in the Vacation was sick: Upon suggestion of which sickness a Writ
went to choose a new. Whereupon Sir William Drewry is Chosen and returned for
Castle-Rising, who now appears, and Mr Flowerden also. In the same Vacation
one Beamond a Citizen for Norwich is sick of the Gout, upon suggestion whereof
a Writ went out to choose a new for Norwich; Mr Flowerden is chosen, returned
and newly sworn for Norwich. Vide March 18th Saturday postea.

The Questions are whether such as be returned in places of persons sick, or of
persons absent in the Queens Service, be Burgesses, and the old discharged. Mr
Norton thought the old Burgesses remained, and that the said causes of sickness
and service are good excuses for their absence, but no causes to remove them
and to choose new. And for this he alleged diverse Precedents, as of Doctor Dale
Ambassador in France, and of Sir Henry Sidney Deputy of Wales, who having been
formerly both of them Members of the House of Commons, and absent by reason of
both their said Employments, yet when their case was once made known unto the
House and there questioned, they were still retained as Members of the said
House, and no new chosen, or admitted. But however although such absent Members
by reason of sickness or Foreign Employment might be removed, yet that ought
not to be done upon a suggestion in the Chancery, but by the Judgment of the
House of Commons upon information thereof.

Mr Sergeant Flowerden, Mr Robert Snagg, Mr Seintpoole, and Mr Sergeant
Fleetwood Comptroller argued to the contrary, and said, that in all these cases
new are to be chosen, and the old discharged. And that it needs not to have
discharge by the Judgment of the House, but it suffices to make suggestion in
the Chancery, and to procure a Writ thereupon for a new Election. And to
question this was to discredit the Lord ly, to be paid, at sight, at vsance,
at half vsance, and at double vsance; which word vsance being not English, I
take to be borrowed of the Italian word vsanza, signifying a manner or custom.
The word (at sight) imports present payment; at half vsance a fortnight after
the date; at vsance; a month; at double vsance, two months. And thus to him
that goes from London to Hamburg in Germany, it is all one, whether his bill of
exchange be paid at sight; or at half vsance, since hce can hardly arrive
there in less space then a fortnight. But touching the exchange from London to
Venice farther distant, by the word vsance three months are signified, and by
double vsance six months. The Turks Empier is so far distant, and the
journey sare so uncertain, as our Merchants use no certain rate of exchange
thither, neither indeed use they to give any bills of exchange, but only
letters of credit, to receive set sums of money, or at large, as much as the
traveler shall want, (of which third kind of receiving money in foreign
parts, I shall hereafter speak.) By the foresaid bills of exchange, according
to the foresaid opportunities, the traveler commonly loses, and sometimes
gains. For my self am familiarly acquainted with a Merchant, who took up one
hundred pounds at London, to be paid by his Factor at Stood in Germany, which
Factor again took up the same hundred pounds at Stood, to be paid by his
Master at London, and at four months end, he paid the same, having by these
bills of exchange made use thereof all this time, without one penny loss. But
in general, when great quantity of money is to be made over to any place
from London, the traveler shall lose after five in the hundred by the year;
and when small quantity is to be made over, he shall lose after the rate of
fifteen in the hundred by the year, and ordinarily he shall lose about the
rate of ten in the hundred by the year.

By reason of the aforesaid uncertainty in receiving money by bills of
exchange, as well by the slow sending of them, as by the delay which Factors
use to make in paying them, as also by the usual negligence of the travelers
friend, who is to make over his money, or by his want of ready money at the time.
I say for this uncertainty, lest the traveler should lose the season of the
year fit to take iourneys, by the expecting of his money, a third course of
receiving money in foreign parts has grown in use; namely, that the traveler
should take with him letters of credit, from some Merchant of great trade to
his Factor, to furnish him from place to place of money, either according to
his want, or for a certain yearly sum. I confess it is a more frugall
course, that he should first pay his money at home, and after receive it beyond
the Seas, then that he should first receive it there, and after repay it at
home: but I would advise him to make over his money after the foresaid manner
by bills of Exchange, and withal to carry these letters of credit for
abundant caution of all events, so as upon any cross accident, he may rather
incur a small loss of money, then the unrecoverable loss of time. Yet even
in money taken by letters of credit, reckoning the time of the repaiment,
Merchants use not to exact greater gain, then ten in the hundredth by the
year, especially if they be honest men, or have any bond of friendship with
the traveler, or his friends at home, and be confident of repaiment, without
any doubt, arising either by the travelers sickness or by his friends ill
keeping of their credit.

It remains that I add somewhat in general out of my experience, of the rate
at which my self received money by the foresaid bills of exchange, or letters
of credit. And first I will confess my negligent omission, in noting the rates
of my exchanges, whereof (as a matter of moment) I much repent me; but for this
reason the Reader must bear with me, if I set the same down more briefly then
were fit for his instruction. Our of England into Scotland, and Ireland, a
Traveler shall have many opportunities to carry moneys Inspecie, (that is, in
kind), or to exchange them without any loss. The exchange out of England, to
Stoade or Hamburge in Germany, uses to bear this rate, for a pound, (or
twenty shillings sterling) to receive there five and twenty Hamburge shillings
and six pence. My self delivered forty pounds in England, and after the rate
of twenty four Hamburg shillings and eight pence, for each English pound, or
at the rate of an imperial doller, vallued at four shillings six pence
English, I received at Stoade forty nine Hamburg pounds six shillings and eight
pence. Hereof I kept in my purse ten dollers, (that is, two Hamburg pounds and
fifteen shillings), the rest I left in a Merchants hands, who sent me at
diverse times to Leipzig, first nine and thirty dollers, (that is, ten Hamburg
pounds fourteen shillings and six pence), and at another time threescore
dollers, (that is, sixteen Hamburg pounds ten shillings) and the third time
seventy dollers, (that is, nineteen Hamburg pounds five shillings) These
joined together with two shillings, paid to the Carrier for my letters, make
the foresaid sum of forty nine Hamburg pounds six shillings eight pence,
received upon bill of exchange for my forty pound first paid in London. Again,
I took up an Stood from an English Merchant, seventy dollers upon my letters
of credit, and rating each doller at four shillings eight pence English, I
gave him a bill of sixteen pound sterling, to be paid him by my friend in
London. From these parts in Germany, a Traveler must carry with him the
foresaid kinds of moneys most current in Germany, when he takes his journey to
the upper parts of Germany, to Bohemia, and to Sweitzerland, or the confines of
Hungary. The exchange out of England into the Low Countries, usually rateth an
English pound sterling, first paid in England, at four and thirty Flemmish
shillings, wanting two stiuers, to be paid after in the Low Countries. In
Denmark Travelers seldom make any long abode, and the trade of our Merchants
is more rare in that Kingdom, wanting native commodities; so as there is no
usual exchange from London thither. From London to Dantzk in Prussen, the
exchange of an English pound sterling, first paid in London, uses to be rated
at four and twenty Hamburg shillings and six pence, to be paid there. My self
by letters of credit received fifty dollers at Dantzk, and after the rate of
four shillings six pence English for each doller, I gave my bill for the
payment of eleven pound five shillings English, to be repaied by my friend at
London. And at Dantzk the same Merchant for the same fifty dollers gave me one
and thirty Hungarian ducats of gold, and foureteen grosh in silver, being the
fittest money for my journey to Crakaw in Poland, and to Vienna in Oestreich
(or Austria). Out of England to Venice in Italy, the exchange of four
shillings and six or eight pence English, uses to be rated at a Venetian
Ducket. My self took no bills of exchange from England to Venice, but had
letters of credit, to receive money of a Venetian Merchant, to be repaid in
London upon my bill, after the rate of four shillings three pence for each
Venetian ducket. And at first being to take my journey for Rome and Naples, I
took up two hundred silver crowns, most fit for that journey, which at Venice
were rated at two hundred five and twenty ducats, and nineteen grosh, and I
gave my bill for three and fifty pound sterling, twelve shillings and six
pence English, to be repaied by my friend in London. Then I retained with my
self as many of those crowns, as were necessary for my journey, leaving the
rest in the hands of a Venetian Merchant, who gave me a bill to receive so many
crowns In specie, (that is, in kind) at Florence, where I purposed to make my
abode for some few months. Out of England into Turkey, I formerly said that
for the uncertainty of the journey, upon the great distances of places, there
is no certain value of exchange, neither use our Merchants to send bills of
exchange thither, but to give letters of credit, first to receive money there,
either at large according to the passengers wants, or for a certain yearly
sum, to be after repaied in England, upon the passengers bill. And the
Merchants there, for each zechine of gold of Venice, delivered at Haleppo, use
to exact nine or ten shiliings English, to be repaied in London, to the
passengers great loss, which he that will avoid, may exchange his money to
Venice, and there receive zechines of gold, or silver moneys of Spain, to
carry with him In specie, (that is, in kind). From London into France, the
exchange of six shillings English, uses to be rated at threescore French
soulz, or three French pounds, which make a common French crown (but a French
crown In specie, and of just weight, is valued there at threescore and four
soulz, (as in England an Angel of gold is worth more then ten shillings silver
among the Exchangers, though in expenses it is giueri out for no more then ten
shillings) and not only bills of exchange into France are given at the foresaid
rate for moneys first received in England: but he that has a merchant to his
friend or acquaintance, may easily compound to receive money, first, in France
upon his letters of credit, and to repay it in London after the rate of six
shillings English, for sixty French soulz.

To this I will add two general cautions, most necessary for travelers;
first, whereas in Germany and Italy, the Territories of absolute Princes are
frequent, and of small extent, and each of these Princes does coin small
pieces of brass money, it behooves the passenger to take heed, that he spend
each Princes brass moneys within his Territory, or else that upon the confines
he change them into brass moneys current in the next Territory; which if he
neglect, the subjects of the new Prince, howsoever they be neighbors to the
former Prince, and may daily change these coins for their own, yet they will
not receive them without great gain, they being of themselves little worth,
and only by the prerogative of each Prince, current among their own subjects.
Secondly, the passenger must take special care, to leauea faithful friend at
home, to pay the bills readily, which he sends over to his Merchant, for so
doing, he shall never want in foreign parts (at least among Christians, and
known places of traffic), yea, out of his good report he shall be
furnished with more money, then is warranted by his letters of credit: but on
the contrary, if his friend deny or delay paiments, he shall not have credit
to borrow a penny upon his occasions, more then that for which the Factors
shall have warrant by bills of exchange, or letters of credit; and if he fall
into any misfortune, he shall not find a friend to deliver him from penury and
shame.

These things being said in general, nothing remains now, but to set down
the particular moneys of several Kingdoms, and the value of them, at the time
when I lived beyond Seas, which value is subject to change, at the pleasure of
each absolute Prince. And in this discourse I think most fit to begin with the
moneys of England, being more familiarly known unto me.

Being to write of the Standard, weight, and value of English moneys, I think
fit Of the diverse Moneys of England.
first to give some few admonitions to the Reader.

First, that the purest gold contains four and twenty caracts in the ounce,
and four grains make a caract.

Secondly, that the purest silver contains twelve ounces in each pound Troy
weight: And that Edward the first, King of England, keeping the Feast of
Christ's Nativity at Barwich, in the year 1300, did upon Saint Steuens day
decrie the value of base silver moneys, and after did altogether forbid the use
of them, and shortly after commanded sterling money to be coined, so called of
the Easterlings, who first coined silver money of that Standard, which is of
eleven ounces two penny weight.

Thirdly, that the English pound, as well of gold as silver (meaning the pound
of the Ballence, not the pound of twenty shillings commonly spent) contains
twelve ounces Troy weight. And that each ounce of silver is worth five
shillings of the current money, and each ounce of Angel gold is worth three
pound five shillings (or sixty five shillings) of Queen Elizabeth's silver
money, and each ounce of Crown gold is worth three pound (or sixty shillings)
of the same coin.

Fourthly, that the Mint-Master gave account before the Queens Examiners for
the money they coined, as well by the tale (or number of the pieces) as by the
sheere: for it being not possible to coin moneys of the just prescribed
weight, yet the Mint-master was held to have performed his contract with the
Queen for the standard prescribed by her, so the silver were not more then 2
penny weight in the ounce heavier or lighter, then her standard prescribed: and
in like sort for the coining of gold, a certain proportion of some eight
grains in the ounce, was allowed to the Mint-Master in this account by the
sheere.

Fifthly, that 20 penny weight makes an ounce, and 24 grains make a penny
weight.

Now I return to the discourse in hand. Queen Elizabeth in the year 1600,
contracted with the Mint-Master, that of gold of the standard of twenty three
caracts three grains and a half, he should coin pieces of Angels, half
Angels, fourth parts of Angels, pieces of an Angel and a half, and of 3 Angels.
Now this Angel was of three penny weight and 8 grains, and this gold was
commonly called Angel gold Also she contracted with him, that of gold of the
Standard of twenty two caracts, he should coynepieces of twenty shillings,
and pieces of ten shillings, and pieces of five shillings; and the piece of
ten shillings was three penny weight fifteen grains. And this gold called
Crown gold, was almost two caracts baser then the former, and two caracts
after the rate of this standard, are worth five shillings of Queen Elizabeth's
silver. Lastly, she contracted with him, that of silver of the standard of
eleven ounces two penny weight, he should coin shillings, half shillings,
fourth parts of shillings, and pieces of two pence, and of one penny, and of
half pence. And the shilling was four penny (or ninety six grains) weight.
The same Queen not long before her death, reduced her silver to the Standerd
of eleven ounces, which was two-penny weight baser then the former in each
ounce, and the Mint Office was said to have gained thereby one halfepenny in
each ounce, or about five in the hundredth.

King James in the year 1604 published a Proclamation, whereby new pieces of
gold were to be coined, of a standard uniform to the standards of other
Nations: for it appears by the Proclamation, that the gold coins of England,
were not of a just proportion between gold and silver, according to the
proportion used by all Nations, so as the English coins of gold, being given
in England for less, then indeed they were worth, it came to pass, that they
were transported into foreign parts, where they were esteemed at higher rate;
which mischief his Majesty desired to take away by this uniform standard,
published in the same Proclamation; for the better understanding whereof, this
following Table was joined to the same.

It is to be remembered, that the pound weight English, being twelve ounces
Troy, does ouer-poix the pound weight of Scotland four penny weight, and mine
grains ENglish: Whereupon this Table is made to distinguish every several
pieces of Gold and Silver Coin, according to the true weight of both Nations.

English Weight.
B.
Pennyweight 20. Grains 24. Mites 20. Droits 24. Periots 20. Blancks 24.
Pieces of Gold. of xx.s. 06 10 16 18 10 Of these 37.li.4.w. make a pound weight
Troy. x.s. 03 05 08 09 05 v.s. 01 14 14 04 12 12 iiij.s. 01 06 09 08 10 ij.s.
vj d. 00 19 07 02 06 06 Pieces of Silver of v.s. 19 08 10 08 Of these 3. li.
2.s. make a pound weight Troy. ij.s. vj.d. 09 16 05 04 xij.d. 03 20 18 01 10
vj.d. 01 22 09 00 15 ij.d. 00 15 09 16 05 j.d. 00 07 14 20 02 12 ob. 00 03 17
10 01 06

Scottish Weights,
C.
Deniers 24. Grains 24. Primes 24. Seconds 24. Thirds 24. Fourths 24 Pieces of
Gold of xx.s. 07 21 07 01 09 19 A Of these 36.li. 10.3.d.q. make 12. oz.
Scottish. Or 48 li. 3.s. 8.d. x.s. 03 22 15 12 16 21 v.s. 01 23 07 18 08 10
iiij.s. 01 13 20 14 16 08 ij.s.vj.d. 00 23 15 27 04 05 Pieces of Silver of v.s.
23 15 22 05 00 13 B Of these 3.li. 10.d.q. or 4.li. 1.s. 1.d.ob.di.q.di di.q.
ij s vj.d. 11 19 22 14 12 06 ^/^ xii.d 04 17 13 20 0^ vi.d. 02 08 18 22 00 12
ii d. 00 18 22 07 08 04 i d. 00 09 11 03 16 02 ob. 00 04 17 13 20 01

King James in the year 1609, contracted with the Mint-Master, that of gold of
the Standard (...) three and twenty caracts, three grains and a half, he
should coin pieces of thirty shillings, called Rose Ryals; pieces of fifteen
shillings, called Spur Ryals. And the foresaid Rose Ryall was nine penny weight
and five grains. Also he contracted with him, that of gold of the Standard of
two and twenty caracts, he should coin pieces of twenty shillings called
Unites; pieces of ten shillings, called double Crowns, pieces of five
shillings, called Brittan Crowns, pieces of 4 shillings, called Thistle
crowns, and pieces of 2 shillings 6 pence, called half Brittan crowns; and
lastly, that all these pieces should be proportioned to the foresaid Table.
But the first Standard of this year 1609 was lighter then the Standard of the
year 1600 by ten pence in each Angel, and the second standard of the year
1609, was lighter in like proportion, then the second standard of the year
1600. Moreover, the Goldsmiths of this time said that of old a wedge of gold
(or any gold vncoined) being brought into the Mint, was coined there for six
silver shillings in each pound of gold, whereas at this time the Mint exacted
thirty silver shillings for the same, whereupon the Merchants carried their
wedges for the most part into Flaunders to be coined, and few of them being
brought into England, the Goldsmiths could not procure any of them for the
exercise of their trade, but were forced to melt coined gold and silver for
that purpose. In the same year 1609, the King contracted with the Mint-master,
that of silver of the standard of 11 ounces, he should coin diverse pieces
above mentioned in the former Table, according to the rule therein prescribed.
To conclude, Caesar in his Commentaries, mentions brass coins of the
Brittans, but the Kings of England have now for many ages, cast out of England
all use of brass or copper moneys, using none but coins of gold and silver,
and that of a pure allay. Of the diverse moneys of Scotland.


King James in like sort as he did for the English coin, did also join to his
foresaid Proclamation the foresaid Table of the Scottish weights, whereby the
correspondencie of the Scottish money to the English, and the just value,
weight and pureness thereof may be distinguished; to which end I have also
formerly joined those tables.

The Scots also coin a silver money of 13 pence half penny, and another piece
of half the same value, and both these pieces of money are of the same pureness
and value with the English silver. And the Scots of old called 20 English
pence, a pound, as we in England call 20 silver shillings a pound. And in like
sort thirteen pence half penny English, was by the Scots called a Mark, as
in England thirteen shillings four pence is so called. Also the Scots have of
long time had small brass coins, which they say of late are taken away,
namely, Bahees, esteemed by them of old for 6 pence, whereof 2 make an English
penny; also Placks, which they esteemed for 4 pence, but 3 of them make an
English penny; also Hard-heads, esteemed by them at one penny halfepenny,
whereof eight make an English penny.

The Irish Histories report, that a Bishop, Justice of Ireland under John King
of England, Of the diverse moneys of Ireland.
did coin moneys in Ireland, of the same pureness and weight with the English.
And the Irish had a Mint-house at the beginning of Queen Elizabeth's reign.
But in our memory the Irish have not enjoyed any privilege of coining moneys,
but have continually received them from the Mint of England. And for the most
part of Queen Elizabeth's Reign, they had the same coin with the English,
save that the Irish shillings were stamped with a Harp, the Arms of the
Kingdom, and being called Harpers, were only worth 9 pence English. But civil
war having set all Ireland in a combustion, the same Queen more easily to
subdue the rebels, did take silver coin from the Irish, some few years before
her death, and paid her Army with a mixed base coin, which by Proclamation was
commanded to be spent and received for sterling silver money (for no pieces of
gold were at any time expressly coined for the Irish. And this base mixed
money had 3 parts of copper and the fourth part of silver, which proportion of
silver was in some part consumed by the mixture, so as the English Goldsmiths
valued a shilling thereof at no more then 2 silver pence, though they
acknowledged the same to be worth 2 pence half penny. At last the civil war
being appeased immediately before the Queens death, King James her successor
in the year 1605 took away this mixed coin, and restored their old silver
harpers to the Irish. Moreover in the happy beginning of King James his Reign,
the Irish had the under written old coins, which Sir George Carey Knight, at
that time Lord Deputy, and yet continuing Treasurer at wars for that Kingdom,
did so gather up, as at this day none of them are to be found. These coins
were thus called; First, they had silver groats, called broad faced groates,
which of old were coined for four pence, though some of them were now worth
eight pence. Also they had silver groats, called crosse-keele groats, stamped
with the Popes tripple Crown, likewise coined for four pence, but being of
more value. And these groats were either sent hither of old by the Popes, or
for the honor of them had this stamp set upon them. Lastly, they had silver
groats of like value, called Dominus groats, of the Kings of England, then
called Domini (that is, Lords) of Ireland. Also they had Rex groats, so called
of the Kings of England, after they had the style of Kings of Ireland, which
were coined for four pence, but by the mixture of copper were only worth two
pence. Also they had white groats, which were coined for four pence, but of
such base allay, as nine of them were given for an English shilling. They had
little brass pence, and pence of a second kind, called Harpers, being as big
as an English shilling. They had also brass farthings, called smulkins,
whereof four made a penny. Lastly, there were lately found brass coins by
plowing up the earth, whose stamp showed, that the Bishops of Ireland had of
old the privilege of coining. And of all these moneys aforesaid, some were
coined at London, some at the Mint at York, and some at the Mint at Bristow in
England.

Being to write of the diverse moneys of Germany, I think fit first to set
down some Of the diverse moneys of Germany.
Laws of the Empire about coining of moneys. In the Diet (or Parliament) at
Augsburg in the year 1551. it was decreed by the Emperor, together with the
Electors, Princes, States, the Counselors of those that were absent, the
Ambassadors, and Substitutes; that in the greater pieces of coins to that
piece included, which is worth six creitzers, the Mint-masters, of a mark of
Colen pure silver, should make eight gold guldens and a half, with half a
creitzer (the gold gulden being esteemed at seventy creitzers) making in
silver ten guldens, twelve creitzers and a half, (the silver gulden being
esteemed at sixty creitzers.) And that hereafter in the sacred Empire, the
under written pieces of moneys should be coined; namely, the great silver
piece, and two halfes of the same, answering in value to a gold gulden. Also
pieces of twenty creitzers, twelve, ten, six, three, and one. Also that the
States, according to the conditions of their Countries, should coin for common
use certain pieces of small moneys, with pence and half pence. That the
Rhenish guldens of the Electors, and the guldens answerable to them, should be
worth seventy two creitzers. And that all dollers being worth sixty six
creitzers (and so half dollers) should be admitted by the Counselors, but for
the rest, that they should certify the Emperor the true value of each, to the
end he might prescribe how each coin, according to the value made by them,
should be received and spent or prohibited. And left the Empire should by
frauds suffer loss, in the carrying out of uncoined silver, and bringing in
of foreign moneys, it was in the means time decreed, that no man should carry
out of the Empire any uncoined silver, and that those who had the Regal
privilege of coining, should not fell the same to any other, but vseit
themselves, with this condition, that hereafter, of a silver mark of Colen
weight, they should make ten silver guldens, with twelve creitzers and a half
(the gulden being esteemed at sixty creitzers), so as in that sum there
should be found a silver Mark of the said weight, excepting always the
charges of coining for the smaller pieces of moneys. And this to be done upon
penalty of losing that privilege. Moreover, it was decreed, that upon pain
of burning, all men should abstain from clipping, and washing of coins, or
any abasing of them with like frauds. Lastly, it was decreed, that the States
having the privilege of coining, should not hereafter, upon penalty, bring
any dollers, guldens, groshes, or half, or fourth parts of groshes to the
mint, excepting those who had mines of their own, who were not sorbidden to
coin as much gold and silver as they had in their own mines, so they coined
according to the foresaid decree; and that no other should coin any other
gold, then according to the value and weight used by the Emperor, and the
Princes of the Empire upon the Rheine. In the Dieta at Spyre, in the year
1557, it was decreed, that hereafter the stipends should be increased to the
Assessors of the Imperial Chamber, so as a Gulden having been given hitherto
for 16. Batzen, or sixty four Creitzers, should hereafter be paid from the
Callends of April, in the year 1558, for seventy seven Creitzers.

Likewise in the Dieta at Augsburg, in the year 1558, it was decreed, that the
following stipends should be paid to the Judge and Assessors of that chamber.
Namely, that the Judge, being an Earl, or Baron, should have 2000. guldens,
and if he were a Prince, his stipend should be increased. That an Assessor
being an Earl or Lord, should have seven hundred guldens, a Doctor licentiate,
or a gentleman, should have five hundred Guldens, an Advocate in Exchequer
causes, should have three hundred guldens, each Gulden being esteemed at
sixteen batzen, till agreement were made for equal money in the Empire. The
Princes and diverse States, and free Cities, have from old times by the gifts of
Emperors, the privileges of coining. The Electors and Princes of Austria, do
stamp their Coins upon one side with their own Image, having the imperial
apple over their heads, and upon the other side with their own arms: but the
Coins of other Princes and free Cities, are stamped with the Imperial Eagle.
The Coins that are not of just value, are prohibited by Imperial Edicts, but
the greatest gain which the Princes and Cities make by their Privilege, is by
the coining of small brass pieces, which pieces are not of any value out of the
Territory where they are coined, and cannot be spent upon the confines without
loss. As these privileges of Coining are derived from the Emperors, so were
they subject to the Emperors ceusure, while their power was yet unbroken. For
I find these words, under the Emperors name, in the abstract of the Imperial
laws, (vulgarly called Keichs Abscheydt.) Let every one which has the
privilege of coining, send their Counselors to me at Nurnberg, etc. In the
mean time let coining cease in all places, upon penalty of losing that
privilege. In the same Book by an imperial Edict, with the consent of the
Princes and States, in the year 1559, the weights and stampes of all Coins
are prescribed, and it is decreed, that none should coin more small moneys
then for the necessity of their Subjects, and that these moneys increasing,
they should presently be forbidden to coin any more. By like Edicts diverse
Coins are either decried for the value, or altogether taken away, and the
bringing in of foreign moneys, and transporting the Coins of Germany, are for
the time forbidden. Otherwise each Prince may convert foreign moneys into the
Coins of Germany for the use of his subjects. The transporting of uncoined
Gold or Silver into the Low Countries is there forbidden for the time. Great
punishments are decreed therein, to be inflicted on those, that use frauds to
abase the Coins. Likewise it is decreed, that Goldsmiths should not use any
coined moneys in the exercise of their Art, except uncoined wedges were not to
be had, in which case they are restrained to melt no more covne then necessity
requires. Lastly, therein decrees are made, that for the time none should sell
or lay to gage their privilege of coining, and that hereafter like privilege
should not be granted to any, without being subject to the prescribed laws,
and that a silver mark should be worth fourteen half ounces, (which weight
the Germans call Loath, being half an ounce); and that Gold-smyths offending
herein, should be punished, according to the quality of the fraud.

Now I will set down the diverse moneys of Germany, with the several values of
them. And first I will forewarne the Reader, that most reckonings of Germany
are made by common silver guldens, yet is there no such coin in the Empire;
and these Guldens are esteemed at fifteen batzen in Germany, near the value
of three shillings four pence English. Also that in reckoning of payments, the
Germans use to make them by marks of Colen and Lubecke, yet is there no such
money at all coined. Now I return to the purpose. The Gold Rhenish Guldens of
Germany, are almost of the same standard with the Crown Gold of England: but
the difference of the value shall Generally.
hereafter appear. The Gold Ducket of Hungary, is of the purest gold of twenty
four Caracts, and it is two penny weight and six grains, (for I will apply
all values to the English Coins); and in England they are worth seven
shillings and two pence. The silver Doller of the Empire (called Reichs Doller)
is of the standard of ten ounces or thereabouts, and is eighteen penny weight
sixteen grains. And at this time in England a Doller is worth four shillings
and five pence, which of late, before the reducing of our money, was given for
four shillings four pence. The Phillips Doller, is of the standard of nine
ounces ten penny weight, and it is an ounce half quarter weight, and at this
time in England it was worth four shillings ten pence.

At Stoade, Hamburg, and Lubecke, the Gold Rhenish Gulden was worth eight and
At Stoade and those parts.
twenty silver Misen Grosh, and a half, and a fourth part of a Grosh. And the
Imperial Doller was worth four and twenty Grosh. The same Rhenish gold
Gulden, was worth six and thirty Lubecke shillings and a half, and the
Imperial Doller was worth three and thirty Lubecke shillings, though in all
reckonings it were accounted but two and thirty shillings. A common silver
Gulden was worth eight and twenty Lubecke shillings. A French Crown of Gold
was worth four and forty. An English Angel of Gold was worth two Dollers,
with the fourth part of a Doller and two Lubecke shillings, (or otherwise it
was worth twelve Flemmish Shillings, and four Lubecke shillings). Seven
Lubecke shillings and a half, made an English Shilling sterling, and six
Lubecke shillings made a Flemmish Shilling, and likewise a shilling of Hamburg.
The Hamburgers coined a piece of Gold called a Portegue, which was worth
foure-pounds and eight shillings of Hamburg, or three and thirty Marks of
Lubecke, (a Mark being esteemed for two shillings eight pence of Hamburg). At
Stoade the silver shilling of England was worth seven stiuers, and the Groates
of England, being of the same standard, yet were current for two stiuers and a
half, because seven stiuers in that money could not be divided into three
equal parts. Whereupon it fell out, that he who bought any thing for an Hamburg
penny, if he paid three English groats, had an English shilling given him
back, and so had the thing bought for nothing. At Emden upon the confines of
the Empire and the Low Countries, a At Emden.
silver Gulden of Emden was worth twenty stiuers, an Imperial Doller five and
forty (which since that time is worth seven and forty) a Doller of Emden was
worth thirty stiuers, (for Princes and Cities coin gold and silver Guldens,
which often in their value differ from the Imperial, as likewise Dollers In
specie, (that is, kind) differ in value from Dollers, as they are esteemed in
contracts), a French crown was worth three Flemmish Guldens and six stiuers.
Now six stiuers (as also six Lubecke shillings) make one Flemmish shilling.
At Breme and Oldenburg, they have these small moneys At Breme, Oldenburg, and
those parts.
current, namely, Groates, and pieces (of the stamp) called Copstucks, and a
Doller was there worth four copstucks and a half, ot five and fifty Groats. A
French crown was worth six Copstucks, and one Copstucke was worth ten stiuers,
or twelve groats or there abouts. A Groat was worth little more then an English
penny. A Sesling was worth half a Lubecke shilling, and they have also half
Seslings in these parts. At Brunswicke a Doller was worth six and thirty Maria
Grosh, which are of equal value with four and twenty silver Misen Grosh, and
also nine Maria Grosh; make eight At Brunswicke.
Lubecke shillings. The same Doller was worth eighteen spitz-groshen, whereof
each was worth two Maria Groshen. Here also I changed six Dollers into five
Rhenish Gold Guldens and nine Grosh. At Magdeburg, Leipzag, Misen, and in all
the Electorate of Saxony, and in the Neighbor Territories, to the confines of
Bohemia, a Doller was At Misen and those parts.
worth sour and twenty silver Groshen, which are as much worth as eighteen
spitzgroshen, or as six and thirty Maria Groshen. A Rhenish Gold Gulden was
worth seven and twenty silver Groshen, and the silver Phillips Doller, was of
the same value. A common silver Gulden was esteemed at one and twenty silver
Groshen, a French Crown at three and thirty, a Spanish pistolet at two and
thirty, an half Milreise at six and thirty, the short and long Crusado, at
five and thirty, the Hungarian Ducket at thirty silver Groshen. The Rose Noble
was esteemed at three Dollers and a half, the English Angel at two Dollers,
and little more then an Ort, or fourth part of a Doller. And the silver Grosh
is worth more then two pence, less then 2. halfepenny English. And for the
small Coins, a Grosh was worth four drier, and one drier was worth two
Dreyhellers, and one Dreyheller was worth a pfenning and a half, and twelve
pfenning made a Grosh, and two schwerdgroshen made one schneberger. In
general, through all the upper parts of Germany, a doller was esteemed at
eighteen In upper Germany
batzen, a silver Gulden at fifteen, a Phillips doller at twenty, a Rhenish
Gold Gulden at twenty, a French Crown at four and twenty and a half, a Gold
Crown of Italy was esteemed at Heidelberg and at Strassburg at four and
twenty batzen, at Augsburg a silver Italian Crown at two and twenty batzen and
a half. And the silver Grosh of Misen being carried out, and current in all
Germany, a Rhenish gold Gulden through higher Germany was worth seven and
twenty silver Misen Grosh, a silver Gulden there (as in Saxony) was esteemed at
one and twenty Grosh. The Batz is worth three English pence, and four
Creitzers make a Batz, four pfenning make a Creitzer, and three Creitzers make
a Zweluer, and twenty zweluers make fifteen batzen, which is a common silver
Gulden.

More particularly know, that in all Princes Territories, new and diverse small
moneys are found. At Nurnberg eight pfund (that is, Pounds) with twelve
pfenning, make a silver Gulden, thirty pfenning make one pfund, two haller make
one pfenning, five pfening make one finfer, seven pfening make a Maria Grosh,
thirty six Maria Grosh make a silver gulden. In Austria two haller make one
pfening, four pfening one creitzer, seven Creitzers and a half make a
shilling, eight shillings make a silver Gulden. At Augsburg seven haller make
one creitzer, eight pfening make one Bemish, three creitzers make one plappart,
twenty plappart (as also six and twenty Bemish with 2 pfening) make a silver
Gulden. In Franconia, six pfening (whereof twelve make nine pfening of Misen)
make one gnack. In Sueuia and Bauaria toward the Rheine, three Creitzers make
one shilling, or one plappart, and twenty plappart make a silver gulden. At
Lindaw, and from thence to Costnetz, three pfening of Costnetz make one
creitzer, twelve pfening make a batzen, and there be also half batzen. From
thence to Basil, these moneys are spent before named. At Strasburg and Spira,
four pfening of the Phaltz, (that is, Palatinate) make one Creitzer, and at
Heydelberg, and so to Francfort, two Strasburg pfening, make one Creitzer. At
Francfort seven and twenty weispfening make a silver Gulden, and eight haller
make a weispfening. At Wien (that is, Vienna) and upon the confines of Hungary,
four pfening make a creitzer, thirty pfening (or seven creitzers and a half,)
make a shilling, and one shilling makes a pfund (or pound).

Always let the Reader understand, that the value of these moneys is subject
to change in diverse Provinces, and more at diverse times. And let him know, that
an Imperial In general.
Doller is now in Germany worth nineteen batzen, which at my being there was
given for eighteen batzen; and that a Phillips doller is now worth twenty two
batzen, which then was given for twenty, and that a Rhenish Gold Gulden is now
worth three and twenty batzen, which then was given for twenty. Likewise that
in the Territory of the Elector of Saxony, a doller is now worth six and
twenty Misen Grosh and a half, which then was given for four and twenty. Also
that the great Coins of Germany, are now worth more in England, then they were
at that time, in respect of our silver somewhat debased. And if any object,
that our English coins of silver are now worth more in the Low Countries, then
they were at that time when they were more pure, let him know, that all great
Coins, as well of silver as Gold, as well foreign as domestical, have since
that time been increased in value in the Low Countries; yet he that will
change an English Angel into dollers, or great silver Coins in the
Low Countries, shall gain no more at this time then formerly, since now they
esteem a doller at seven shillings six pence, which formerly was given for
five shillings four pence, and all the gain which this raising of the Coins
seems to promise a passenger, is by changing his great Coins into stiuers and
small brass moneys, which being of none or small value in themselves, are
despised by Merchants, who are to receive great sums. But I will refer the
change of the value of Coins in the Low Countries, to the proper place, and
return to the value of Coins, increased in Germany: Wherein no man is to
wonder, that the great Coins still remaining of the old standard, yet are
given for more of their own small moneys, then formerly they were, since
diverse reasons thereof may be readily brought. Either for that the Merchants,
being to receive great sums, desire rather with loss to receive great
Coins, then with gain to receive the base, and brass Coins. Or perhaps for
that the small Coins are now either more abased, or altogether made of brass:
And most of all, for that foreign Merchants do more carry out the moneys of
Germany for their wares, then any native commodities thereof, so as the
increased value of Coins in Germany, turns only to the loss of strangers,
and to the gain of the Empire.

Bohemia now long subject to the Family of Austria, having long held the
dignity of Diverse moneys of Bohemta.
Emperors, does admit all the great Coins of Germany, in the same value as
the Germans held them. And as well the Bohemians, as the Hungarians, in the
year 1551 gave consent, that thenceforward their moneys should be made
agreeable to those of the Empire, in weight, matter, and value. Touching the
small moneys in Bohemia, and upon the confines of Hungary and Poland, I
remember that three potschandels or pochanels made one creitzer, and nine
creitzers with a pochanell made four weissgrosh, and that thirty Grosh of
Morauia (or weissgrosh) made a doller. And that in Bohemia they had a kind of
Grosh, which answered in value to the Grosh of Polonia. Lastly, that Merchants
reckoned two hallers for a pfenning, and six pfenning for a grosh, and sixty
grosh for a shocke, and forty grosh for a mark.

The Commonwealth of the Sweitzers consisting of diverse Cities and Villages,
Diverse moneys of Sweitzerland.
and Territories, does also admit diverse moneys. The privilege of Coining is
granted in common to Zurech, Basil, and Schaphusen, and each of these Cities
has his peculiar mynt, with Officers to ouersee that the moneys stamped with
the marks of the Cities, be of just weight, and due mixture: but each of these
Cities has their peculiar moneys. They of Basil, with the Neighbor towns of
Alsetz, do coin a piece of money, which of a Crow stamped upon it, is called
Reppen Muntz, whereof five and twenty pound Troy weight, (called in Latin,
Assis) make a common gold gulden, esteemed at sixty creitzers. They of
Schaphusen, do coin money of the same mixture and value, together with the
usual money of the Empire. They of Zurech coin dollers and half dollers,
after the value of those in the Empire; but they have a less money of their
own, whereof forty pounds Troy weight, (called in Latin Assis) make a common
gold Gulden. They also coin Batzen, whereof sixteen make a gold Gulden. More
particularly to explane the value of these moneys: Six Rappen of Basil, make a
plappart or three creitzers, and twenty piappart or sixty creitzers, make a
common Gulden. And as I formerly said in the discourse of German moneys, from
Lindaw to Costnetz, three pfenning of Costnetz make a Creitzer. Now I add that
the money of Schaphusen and Costnetz is spent to the confines of Schaphusen,
and the money of Basil is spent from thence to Basil. At Zurech six pfenning
make a shilling, (worth a penny English), and three pfenning make a Sicherling.
Two great finfers of Basil, and one little finferlin, make a batz of Basil, and
in like sort five finferlin make a batz, and five finfers make two batzen, and
these moneys are spent to Strassburg, and so to Spire in Germany. Bern,
Frtburg, and Solothurn, have a peculiar money, whereof two and forty pounds
Troy weight (in Latin Assis) and twice four ounces (in Latin Trientes) make a
gold Gulden. Besides they (and especially those of Solethurn in great quantity)
coin a piece of money, which the Sweitzers call Dickenpfenning, and the French
call Testoome, but it is less worth by the tenth part then the Testoone of
France. Those of Bern did first coin Batzen, so called of a Bear, the Arms
of the City, (for the words Baren, and also batzen, signify Bears in the
Sweitzers tongue), and the Cities of Sueuia, imitating them, drew the same
money and word into Germany. At Bern sixteen batzen are esteemed for a rhenish
gold Gulden. The money of Lucerna, is like to that of Basil, but only six
ounces Troy weight more base, and fifty of these moneys make a Rhenish gold
Gulden. As the French gold is spent with gain in Sweitzerland, so in all
places upon these confines of France, the French silver Coins called Francks
are commonly spent. In the Cantons dwelling scattered in Villages, (namely, the
Sweitz, those of Vnderuald, the Tugians, those of Glarona, and Abbatiscella), a
pound is a doller. In Rhaetia (or the Grisons) the Bishop and the Citizens of
Chur coin money, and the Abbot of Disent has an old privilege of coining.
And here sixty creitzers make a common gulden, four Angster make a Creitzer,
and twelve Angster make a Behmisch. But in this Province confining upon the
State of Venice, the Lires or Berlingots, and the gagets of Venice, are
vulgarly spent, and I remember that when I came out of the state of Venice into
this Province, I spent Crowns of Italy; and I find in my notes, that at
Lasagna I changed a silver crown for eight and twenty batzen: but since seven
batzen of Germany make two lires of Venice, and a gold crown of Italy, is
there given for eightlires; I think that either it was a gold crown that I
changed, or that the batzen of this Province are of less value then those of
Germany. For a gold crown of Italy, and the French crown are both of a value,
and I said before, that at Strassburg I changed each of these Crowns for four
and twenty batzen: yet to the contrary I find, that passing forward in this
Territory of the Grisons, I exchanged at Lanzi a silver crown of Italy for
seven and twenty batzen, and that three batzen were there esteemed at
fourteen creitzers, which in Germany are only worth twelve creitzers. So as
I am doubtful, and cannot determine the value of the Italian coins, in the
small moneys of the Grisons.

In the foresaid Imperial Dieta (or Parliament) held at Augsburg, in the year
1551. Of the diverse Coins of the Low Countries.
these words are added to the Imperial Edict. We will that this our Edict shall
be propounded to our Hereditary States of the Low Countries, and we will take
care that they apply themselves thereunto, as much as they possibly can. The
States of the Low Countries, coin diverse pieces of gold, as Archiducall Angels
and Crowns. And the Angel is of the standard of twenty two Caracts, and of
three penny weight seven grains. Also they coin gold Lions, called Riders,
whereof each is worth four Flemmish Guldens and a half. The Noble of Gant, is
of the same standard with the French Crown, and in England it is worth
thirteen shillings four pence. They spend commonly Phillips dollers, the
value whereof I have set down with the moneys of Germany. To conclude, they
coin any piece, of which they can make gain, yea, the Merchants report, that
they coin the great moneys of Spain, England, and all Dominions, stamped with
the same Image and Arms, and for such utter the same in their traffic with
the Indians. But they coin little gold or silver of their own, having a
singular Art to draw all foreign coins when they want them, by raising the
value, and in like sort to put them away, when they have got abundance thereof,
by decrying the value. And when their Exchequer abounds with any money, and
they are to pay their Army, then they increase the value thereof; but having
abundance of the same coin, and being to receive their revenues, then they
decry the value thereof. And while they thus raise the value of foreign great
coins, in their small moneys, it falls out, that they have plenty of gold and
silver, with the only loss of base stiuers and brass moneys. And indeed, as
well the art, as industry of this Nation, has in our age become wonderful to
all other Nations. For they have no woods, yet by the commodity of their rivers
and ditches, they are become terrible to their enemies in the strength of their
Navy. They have not corn to suffice their own wants, yet by fetching it from
other parts, they relieve therewith all Nations that want corn. Of late, when
they had no skill in traffic, the Italians trading at Antwerp, did rashly
take their children to write their letters, and be their cashiers, and they too
late complain, that when these children grew to age, they did not only take
all foreign traffic from them, and send them back into Italy, but also
followed them thither, and living dispersed through all the Cities of Italy,
and spending at a low rate, did also draw all that traffic to themselves. In
like sort they have no mines of gold and silver, yet by their singular wit, and
rare industry, do abound both with gold and slluer. To conclude, as they are
most practical in all kinds of business, so are they most subtle in the art
of the mynt, and money matters. But I will return to the moneys of the
Low Countries. At this day the English Angel being esteemed at five Flemmish
guldens and two blancks, two English Angels (or twenty shillings) are there
worth sour and thirty Flemish shillings, wanting 2 stiuers, and a hundredth
pounds Flemish make sixty English pounds sterling. Two English shillings are
three shillings four pence. Flemish, and make a Flemish silver gulden, twenty
Flemish shillings make a Flemish pound, twenty stiuers make a Flemish gulden,
six stiuers make a Flemish shilling, two blancks make one Flemish stiuer and a
half, four orkees (or doights) of brass make a Flemish stiuer. A French
crown was given for three Flemish guldens, and four stiuers. (but in Holland
only three stiuers, and in some places but two stiuers more then three
guldens.) An Imperial doller was given for forty five stiuers, a Spanish
pistolet for three flemish guldens, and two or three stiuers, a gold Rhenish
gulden for two Flemish guldens and nine stiuers, and a Phillips doller of
silver for two Flemish guldens and eight stiuers, or very little more.

The mark of Denmark was esteemed at 16 Lubock shillings, and two shillings
Of the diverse moneys of Denmark
of Denmark made one Lubeck shilling, and thirty three Lubeck shillings were
given for an Imperial Doller, yer two and thirty of Lubect, or sixty four
shillings of Denmark made a common Doller in contracts. The gold of England was
commonly spent in Denmark, and they esteemed an English Angel at two Dollers,
and little more then the fourth part of a Doller; and they esteemed the English
Rose Noble of that time at three Dollers and a half (which coin they had
almost drawn altogether into Denmark, by the exacting the same for the
tributes of ship-masts, and other Merchandises, passing the narrow straight of
their Sea.

The Polonians coin gold Ducats of the same value with the Hungarian Ducats
Of the diverse moneys of Poland.
(whereof I have spoken among the moneys of Germany), and these Ducats at this
day are given for seventy Polish grosh, which of late were worth no more then
sixty five. Venceslaus King of Bohemia was crowned King of Poland about the
year 1300, who first brought silver money into Poland, namely, Bohemian
groshen (I mean those of silver, not the white grosh), which to this day are
current in Crakaw, and those parts. For before that time the Polonians did
traffic with little pieces of vncoined silver, and with exchange of skins and
other commodities. At this day the Polonians, as well as the Germans, make all
contracts by silver guldens, but have no such coin stamped. Thirty Polish
grosh make a silver gulden, and a doller at this day is worth forty Polish
grosh, at the least, which not long since was worth no more then thirty five
grosh, but to this day in contracts thirty six Polish grosh make a doller,
howsoever a doller in specie (that is, in kind) be worth forty grosh at the
least. Three Pochanels make a Creitzer, and seven pochanels make a Polish and
Bohemian groshen of silver. At Danske in Prussia (of old a Province of Germany,
but lately annexed to the Crown of Poland) they coin Hungarian dukets of gold
(as they do in Poland), and they have two coins of gold, called Milreis, and
half Milreis. And I received of a Merchant there, each Hungarian ducket, and
each half milreis, for a doller and a half with one sesling, and each milreis
for three dollers and two seslings. And thirty six Polish grosh did there
make a doller. But I remember, that I did there change an Hungarian ducket for
fifty six Polonian grosh, which value passes the former about a grosh and a
half. For a sesling (...) Hamburg makes a Danish shilling, and that is little
more worth then a half Polish grosh. The Muscouites Empire lies upon this
Province, and therefore I will add a word of their coins. They make all
contracts by a money called Rubble, which is altogether imaginary, for they
have no such coin, and it is esteemed in England at thirteen shillings four
pence sterling, and in the Muscouites money, it is rated at thirty three
altines and two Diagoes. And six single or three double diagoes make one
altine.

The Italian Crown of gold, and the Spanish pistolet, and double pistolet
(being Of the diverse moneys of Italy. In general.
there current), are of the same standard, allay, and value, with the after
mentioned French Crown, save that the double pistolet contains two French
Crowns. The Venetian zecchine is of the same standard, finenesse, and value as
the Hungarian ducket, above mentioned in the moneys of Germany. The Popes
giulij of silver, and so likewise the poali, are of the same standard finenesse
and value with the English six pence, but the lire of Venice being worth about
nine pence English, is of a little baser standard. The Spanish coins of silver
are current in Italy, and they are called Pezzi d'otto, pieces or rials of
eight, and they be of the standard of 11 ounces and two penny weight, and are
three quarters of an ounce and a half weight, and in England each of them is
worth four shillings four pence half penny, this Spanish money being two and
twenty pence in each twenty shillings English, more worth then the English
silver. All Crowns of gold are current in Italy, and all at one rate,
excepting the French Crowns, which at Venice and Naples are esteemed somewhat
higher then other, though in all the other Cities of Italy, it is more
commodious to spend Spanish pistolets or crowns, then French crowns. In
general, the Italian silver crown, given for seven lires of Venice, is worth
almost five shillings English, and the Italian gold crown vulgarly called
d'oro, given for seven lires, and about fifteen sols of Venice, is worth
almost five shillings six pence English, and the gold crown, vulgarly called
d'oro in oro del sole, given for eight lires, and some odd sols of Venice, is
current in England for six shillings. To conclude, greater sums paid in
little brass moneys, are in Italy delivered by weight, not by tale or number.
And more particularly to explain the values of moneys. At Venice a zechine of
Venice is given for ten lires, and At Venice.
ten or twelve sometimes more sols. A double pistolet of Spain, called
Dublon', is there given for seventeen lires. A French crown is given for
eight lires, and eight, or sometimes ten sols. An Italian crown of gold is
there given for eight lires, and some for seven lires sixteen sols (for the
weight of Venice being heavier then in other parts of Italy, the light crowns
are less esteemed.) The Spanish piastro of silver is given for six lires, the
silver ducket for six lires and four sols, the silver crown for seven lires,
the iustino for two lires, the mutsenigo for a lire, and four sols. Besides,
the Venetians have silver pieces of 4 lires, of eight soldi (or sols), and of
six soldi, and a piece of two soldi called Gagetta, which are of a baser
standard. Touching the brass moneys, twenty soldi make a lire, two soldi or
three susines make a gagetta, two betsi or three quatrines, make a soldo or
marketta, and four bagatines make a quatrine. In the Dukedom of Ferrara, the
silver crown is spent for seven lires of Venice, and in the At Ferrara.
money of the Dukedom twelve bolignei make a Venetian lire, three susines make
a boligneo, and two bolignei make one amoray, seven make one Saint Georgio,
four make one caualot, four and a half make one berlingasso, nineteen make
one carli, and ten bolignei make one bianco, and two brass quatrines make a
sufine, six make a boligneo, seven make a gagetta of Venice. At Bologna, a
silver crown is given for ten. At Bologna.
poali, and a French crown of just weight for thirteen poali. The poalo, and
the giulio in other parts of Italy are both of one value, but here the giulio
is given for six bolignei and four brass quatrines, or for forty brass
quatrines, and the poalo is given foreight bolignei, or for forty eight brass
quatrines. Also he that changes any crown, shall have more gain, if he
change it into bolignei (which are good for expenses there), then if he change
it into poali (because the poali are current in other parts, but the bolignei
only in the territory of Bologna.) At Pesaro, and in the Dukedom of Vrbino, a
gold crown is spent for twelve poali, and fifty two brass quatrines make a At
Pesara.
poalo: but if you will change your gold crown into brass quatrines, which
are not (...) out of the Territory, you may have 182 quatrines for the crown,
which make fifteen poali, which is a fifth part more then it is worth in
silver. At Ancona, At Ancona.
and in the Marci of Ancona, a gold crown is given for eleven poali and a
half, or in the value of twelve poali, if you receive it in brass quatrines,
and there sortie quatrines of brass make a giulio, forty three make a poalo.
A silver crown is given for ten poali, and if you receive brass quatrines for
poali, they will give seven baocci more, and ten baocci make a poalo. At Rome a
gold crown is sometimes given for eleven poali and a half, sometimes for
twelve, sometimes for twelve and a half, according At Rome.
to the abundance and want of gold, and all gold crowns are of one value. And
a silver crown is given for ten poali or giulij, and ten baocci make one
giulio or poalo, and four brass quatrines make a baocco. Lastly, at Rome more
then any other where, he that changes crowns into quatrines, which cannot be
spent out of that State, shall in appearance make great gain: but in the Market
those which sell, use to look into the buyers hands, and if he have quatrines
therein, they hold the thing to be sold at a higher rate, if he bring silver,
they sell cheaper. And I remember, that the Gentlemen of Rome refusing to take
quatrines for their rents, the people, when the Pope came abroad, falling on
their knees before him, in stead of asking his blessing, did with humble cries
crave a remedy for that oppression. At Naples a gold Spanish crown, or a At
Naples.
French crown of just weight, was given for thirteen carlini, an Italian gold
crown for twelve carlini and a half, a silver crown for ten carlini, and
nine carlini make eight reali, or giuli, or poali, and five carlini make one
paraque, and forty brass quatrines make one carlino, ten quatrines make one
sequin, three quatrnies one turnas, and two cauali make one quatrine. In the
Dukedom of Florence, a gold crown is given At Fiorenza.
for twelve giulij (or reali, or poali, for they be all of one value) and for
half a giulio more. And a silver crown called Piastro (which is most
commodious to be carried for expenses in all Italy, and especially here) was
given for ten giulij and a half. Touching smaller monys, ten brass deners
make a quatrine, three brass quatrines make a soldo, five quatrines make a
baello (or creitzer, which is a little coin of silver), and eight baelli make
a giulio or carlino, and forty giulij make twenty shillings sterling English.
At Genua and in Liguria, a gold crown of just weight (as well Spanish, as In
Liguria.
French, Venetian, Florentine, Neapolitan, and that of Genoa) is given for
four lires and a half of Genoa. A silver crown there called ducaton, is
given for three lires of Genoa, fifteen soldi or bolinei, and somewhat more.
And a chanfron of Naples for one and thirty soldi. Fifteen lires of Genoa
make twenty shillings sterling English, twenty soldi or bolinei of Genoa make
a lire of Genoa, and twelve soldi of Genoa make a lire of Venice, seven soldi
and a half of Genoa make a reale, four soldi make a caualotto, six quatrines
make a soldo, or bolineo, and two deners make a quatrine. Also at Genoa they
coin a silver piece of eight reali, which is given for three lires and one or
two soldi. Likewise they coin a piece of four reali, and another of two
reali. Also they coin silver pieces, of one, two, and four lires, and a
silver piece of ten soldi or bolinei. Lastly, they coin brass pieces of four
soldi, called caualotto, of one soldo or bolineo, of eight deners, of four
deners, and of one denere. In the Dukedom of Milan, a gold crown of Italy
being of just weight, is given for one hundred twenty At Milane
one soldi. A Spanish dublon of just weight, is given for two hundred and sixty
soldi, and more sometimes. A dublon of Milan for two hundred and fifty soldi,
a light gold crown for one hundred and seventeen soldi, a silver crown
called ducaton for one hundred and fourteen soldi. And twenty soldi make a
lire, two lires of Genoa make about three lires of Milan, four brass
quatrines make a soldo, nine soldi make a bianco, ten quatrines make one
parpoyolle, forty quatrines make a terso. My self at Milan changed a gold
crown for six lires and six soldi, and at Marignano, hiring a horse for six
lires, and giving a gold crown, I received back eight soldi. In Piemont, a
French crown is given for ten florines somewhat more, a silver crown for
eight florines. And twelve grossi make a florine, four quatrini make a grosso,
four soldi In Piemont.
make a bianco, seven quatrines make a soldo, six soldi and six quatrines
make a florino, twelve quatrini make a caualotto, and four caualotti make a
florino. Lastly, in the Dukedonie of Mantua, a zecchine of Venice is given for
eight lires and twelve soldi, a gold crown of Mantua for seven lires, a silver
crown for six lires and four soldi. At Mantua
Four trantis make a soldo, two soldi make a parpayollo, six soldi make a
Barbarino, ten soldi and a half make a giulio, twelve soldi and a half make a
Spanish riall, 20 soldi make a lire, 2 trantis make a susine, and 3 deners of
Mantua make a trantis.

The great Turk coins a piece of gold called Sultanon', and it is of the same
standard, The diverse moneys of Turkey.
finenesse, and value with the Hungarian ducket, above mentioned among the
moneys of Germany. In Afric, those of Barbary have a gold Ducat, commonly
current among Christians, which is so rare in Turkey, as I do not remember to
have seen any piece there of spent there. Neither have the Affricans any mines
of gold, but they carry salt to Ganger, and thence bring this gold. And this
Barbary duckat of gold is of the standard of three and twenty caracts, and the
fourth part of a grain, and three penny weight wanting two grains, and at
this day in England it is given for nine shillings two pence sterling, which of
late was worth no more then eight shillings four pence sterling. To conclude,
the gold zechine of Venice, and the Spanish pieces of silver, of four and
eight Reali, and the very silver of Venice, are so commonly spent in Turkey, as
the gold and silver of Turkey seems despised, or at least is seldom spent.
But because this vast Dominion has large circuit, it will not be amiss to
name the moneys current in diverse places. And first I forewarne the passenger,
that in all places, he is in danger, who shows his money, but most of all
among the Turks, where to be rich, is more dangerous then the greatest crime
can be objected, either in respect of the covetous Judge in public, or the
rauinous nature of each man in private, neither does any thing more provoke the
Turks to lay snares for the un wary passenger. So as howsoever it be not
improuidently done, to carry sums of gold or silver by sea, and in Barks of
Christians; yet I would advise a passenger to be wary how he show them among
Christians, and much more among Turks, and advise him rather to make show, to
draw his money from a little purse, hiding his greater store, then in payments
to pull it out by heaps. The Greek Island Zante, subject to the Venetians,
has Venice. At Zante.
money, and a gold zechine was given there for eleven Lires, and two gagets.

Likewise the Greek Island Candia, subject to the Venetians, has the moneys of
Venice, At Candia.
where a gold zechine was given for eleven lires, and to the Turks (landing
there) at a higher rate. The silver crown called piastro, was there given for
six lires, and about four soldi. And here I found a silver piece, which I
never found to be spent in the State of Venice, namely, a perper, worth eight
soldi, and eight baggatini of Venice.

The Greek Island Cyprus, subject to the Turks, spends the Venetian gold and
silver At Cyprus.
lires, but receives not the pieces of eight soldi, nor the lesser moneys of
Venice, neither are the Venetian lires current any further then this Island,
though perhaps they may be spent with some loss upon the Coast adjoining. At
Cyprus the gold zechine was given for eleven lires of Venice, and for 120,
aspers of Turkey; and the silver crown called piastro, or a piece of eight
Reali Spanish, was given for seventy Aspers, and the gold Sultanon of Turkey,
was of the same value with the zechine of Uenice: yet the very Subjects more
willingly received the zechines. The Turkish Asper is a little piece of silver,
which at Haleppo in Syria was worth some three farthings English: and eight
aspers at Cyprus made one scahy (a Turkish money which the Italians call Seya)
being esteemed at little more then six pence English, and fifteen scahy made
a zechine, twelve scahy made a French or Spanish Crown, ten scahy made a
piastro or Spanish piece of eight Reali. And sixteen brass Mangouri made one
silver Asper, neither can any money of Cyprus be spent in Palestine without
loss.

At Jerusalem and through all Palestine, and those parts, the gold zechines of
Venice At Jerusalem.
are more esteemed (as in all Turkey,) then any other pieces of gold, and the
very Turks more willingly receive them then the Turkish Sultanons. At
Jerusalem a zechine was given for five and forty meidines of Cairo in Egypt,
the Spanish piece of eight Reali called plastro, was given for eight and twenty
meidines; and half a piastro at the same rate, neither have they any Aspers
there, but these meidines only, where of each is worth three Aspers, so as the
five and forty meidines given for the zechine, are worth 135, Aspers, and the
eight and twenty meidines given for the piastro, are worth eighty four aspers.
The gold crowns of France and Spain, are not spent here without loss, but
the silver ducats of Italy are commodious to be spent here. At Tripoli in
Syria, and at Haleppo, and in the territories adjoining, the foresaid silver
aspers At Tripoli.
are commonly spent. The gold zechine of Venice is there worth ninety meidines,
and the Spanish piastro worth sixty; but these meidines of Tripoli, differ from
the other of Cayro in Egypt, for those of Tripoli are each worth one asper and
a half, but those of Cayro are each worth three Aspers. At Constantinople all
contracts are made by aspers, howsoever the foresaid pieces of gold and silver
be there also current. And in small At Constantinople.
contracts they pay aspers by the weight, because they cannot easily number
them, but in great contracts they reckon by Asses loades of aspers, as the
English do by hundred and thousand pounds. Lastly, at Constantinople, I
exchanged gold zechines each at 125, aspers, a French Crown at one hundred
aspers, and a doller of Germany at 75, aspers.

The gold French Crown is of the standard of two and twenty caracts, and is
two Of the diverse moneys of France.
penny weight, four grains and a quarter. The silver piece called Quart
d'escu, that is, the fourth part of a crown, is of the standard of eleven
ounces, and is six penny weight four grains, and is worth two Venice Lires,
or eighteen pence sterling English. The piece of Silver called Francke, is of
the standard of nine ounces ten penny weight, and eighteen penny weight
sixeteene grains, and is worth two shillings English. The French Crown is
exchanged for three Franckes, or for four Quarts d'escn, or for little more
then four testoones. For foureteen soulz and a half make a testoon, fifteen
soulz make a Quart d'esca, and twenty soulz make a francke, and sixty soulz
make a French crown, and twelve deniers make a soulz. Yet a gold French crown
In specie, (that is, in kind) is changed for sixty five soulz. As in like sort
in England, a French crown is worth no more then six shillings, and the
English Angel is worth no more then 11. shillings in common estimation, yet he
that brings a weighty a French crown In specie to the Gold-smyths, they will
give him six shilling six pence for it, and he that brings to them an old
Angel of gold, they will gine him 11. shillings and six pence, or more for it.
And in the last civil war, the value of the French crown was raised to 120,
soulz, till the King reduced the same to the old value after the war
composed. The same King Henry the fourth since that time raised the value of
gold crowns, to the end he might draw back his gold which was carried into
foreign parts. My self passing through Lorayne, before the French civil war
was fully appeased, did at Monwicke, upon the confines of Lorayne and German,
exchange a French crown for four franckes and nine grosh, and shortly after
coming to Shallons, exchanged a French crown for no more then sixty soulz, so
as I guess that either the Franckes of Lor aine differ from the Franckes of
France, or that the tumult of the war, and the making of peace shortly after,
made this difference.

Of the diverse measures of miles, through diverse parts of the world.

FVrther being to write of the diverse measures of miles, through the diverse
parts of The difference of miles.
the World, it seemed good to me to add the measure of miles, vulgarly
received, namely that five. Italian miles, or three French, or two and a half
English, make one Dutch mile, and that one Dutch mile and a half makes a mile
of Sweitzerland.

It remains now that according to my own experience, I should speak
something of the diverse kinds of miles. And in general, this my opinion has
respect to the difficult or easy passages of the way, since even in England,
the miles seem, and indeed are more short, near London, where the ways are
fair and plain, and frequently inhabited, as they seem, and indeed are more
long and tedious, through the desert places of the North, over mountains, and
through uninhabited and difficult passages.

The Romans of old held a thousand paces for a mile, and such are the miles of
Italy. Italian.


A common English mile makes one and a half Italian, but toward the North,
and in some particular places of England, the miles are longer, among which the
Kentish English.
mile (being a Southern County) is prouerbially held to be extraordinarily
long.

The Irish miles among the English, and the Irish-English are answerable to the
English; Irish.
howsoever for the solitary and disinhabited ways, and many foards often
ouerflowed they are more troublesome to pass.

In like sort the miles of Scotland, answer to the Northern miles of England,
save that the frequent climing of mountains, and the unbeaten ways, make them
seem Scottish.
longer, and indeed require more time for the passage.

Villamont a French gentleman in the book of his travels witnesses, that one
French French.
mile contains two Italian miles.

The common Germain mile, being for the most part in plains, makes more then
three English, or five Italian miles; but in some places the solitude of Woods,
and the German.
ascent of Mountains, make the miles of Germany seem much longer, and Sueuia
extraordinarily has long miles, though it be a plain Country. The miles of
Sweitzerland, being over continual Mountains, are so long, as passengers
distinguish their journey more by the spaces of hours, then by the distances
or numbers of miles. And I remember, that finding no horse to be hired, I went
on foot from Scaphusen to Zureth, which journey I was going ten hours, being
accounted but four miles. And in Rhaetia among the Grisons, upon the confines
of Italy, one mile is held for six Italian miles. And upon the foot of the
Alps toward the North, one mile is accounted for seven miles and a half of
Italy, where having a good horse, I could ride with an ordinary pace no more
then one Dutch mile in four hours space. By which appears, that the measure
of miles is very uncertain among the Sweitzers, who for the most part reckon
their iourneys by hours riding, or going with an ordinary pace, and not by
miles.

The miles of Bohemia and Morauia are no less tedious, and I remember, that my
Bohemia,
self passing there on horseback, did commonly ride no more then four miles
in a days journey. And howsoever the length of the Sweitzers and Bohemian
miles may in part be attributed to the climbing of Mountains, and bad ways,
yet no such reason can be given for the miles of Morauia, which Country is
either a plain, or little pleasant Hills, and the ways fair, and the
Country well inhabited.

The Low Country miles are of a middle length between the German and French
miles. But in the very Country of Holland they differ much one from another,
Flemish.
since four miles of great Holland make six miles of little Holland. And I
remember, that about the City Horn, I esteemed each mile longer then three
English. Also next to the Holland miles, those of Freesland are longer then the
rest.

A mile of Denmark is somewhat longer then three English miles, and answers
to Danish.
the common mile of Germany.

The miles of Poland generally are like the miles of Denmark, but they differ
Polonian
in length one from the other. For I remember, that in Prussia each days
iourny I passed by coach some seven miles, and in middle Poland nine or ten
miles, but in upper Poland toward Germany I commonly rode on horseback no
more then five miles or there-abouts each day, in my passage from Crakaw to
Morauia. In Russia among (...)
the Moscouites confining upon Poland, a mile is called a ferse, and answers
to five Italian miles, or one common mile of Germany.

In Turkey those that guide Christians, having the Italian tongue, do in my
opinion Turkish.
number the miles to them, much after the Italian manner.

THE REBELLION OF HVGH EARL OF TYRONE, AND THE APPEASING THEREOF; WRITTEN IN
FORM OF A IOVRNALL. PART II.
BOOK I.
CHAP. I. Of the Induction or Preface to my Irish Iournall, and a compendious
narration, how CHARLES BLOVNT, Lord Mountioy (my Lord and Master of happy
memory) was chosen Lord Deputy of Ireland; and of this worthy Lords quality,
as also of the Councels in generali, by which he broke the Kebels hearts, and
gane peace to that trenbled State. Together with his particular actions in the
end of the year 1599.
AT my return from Scotland about the month of September in the year 1598, I
retired my self to Healing (my dear Sister Faith Mussendines house, being
situate near the South bank of Humber, in the County of Lincoln.) In which
place (and my dear sister Jane Alingtons house near adjoining) whilst I
passed an idle year, I had a pleasing opportunity to gather into some order
out of confused and torn writings, the particular observations of my former
Travels, to be after more delibrately digested at leisure. After this year
spent in Country solace, the hopes of preferment drew me into Ireland. Of
which journey being to write in another manner, then I have formerly done of
other Countries, namely, rather as a Soldier, then as a Traueler, as one
abiding in Camps, more then in Cities, as one lodging in Tents, more then in
Innes; to my former brief discourse of the iourneys through England and
Scotland. I have of purpose added there, out of my ordinary course, the like of
Ireland, only for travelers instruction.

I am now to treat of the famous and most dangerous Rebellion of Hugh, Earl
of Tyrone, calling himself, The Oneale, (a fatal name to the chief of the
sept or Family of the Oneales), and this I will do, according to the course of
the former Part namely, in this place not writing Historically, but making only
a Iournall, or bare narration of daily accidents, and for the rest referring
the discourse of Ireland for all particulars to the several heads, wherein
each point is jointly handled, through all the Dominions of which I have
written. Only in this place for the better understanding of that which I
principally purpose to write, I must crave leave to fetch some short re
membrances (by the way of preface) higher then the time of my own being in
Ireland, in the Lord Mountioy his Government.

About the year 1169 (not to speak of the kind of subjection which the Irish
are Ann. 1169.
written to have acknowledged, to Gurguntius, and some Brittan Kings), Henry
the 2 being himself distracted with French affairs, gave the Earl of
Strangbow leave by letters Patents, to aid Dermot Morrogh King of Lemster,
against the King of Mead. And this Earl marrying Eua, the daughter of Dermot,
was at his death made by him heir of his Kingdom. Shortly after King Henry
himself landed at Waterford, and whilst he abode in Ireland, first Dermott Mac
Carthy, King of Corcke, and the South part of Mounster, and Dunewald Obzian
King of Limrick, and the North part of Mounster, then Orwark King of Mead; and
Roderick King of Connaght, (by singular privilege over the rest, called the
King of Ireland), and the above named King of Lemster yet living, did yield
themselves vassals unto King Henry, who for the time was saluted Lord of
Ireland (the title of King being first assumed by act of Parliament to King
Henry the eight many years after.) In the said Henry the seconds reign, Sir
John de Courcy with four hundred voluntary English soldiers sent over, did in
five battles subdue Vlster, and stretched the bounds of the English pale as
far as Dunluce in the most Northern parts of Vlster.

About 1204, John Courcy of English blood, Earl of Vlster and Connaght, did
rebel, and was subdued by Hugh Lacy. About 1210 the Lacies of English blood
rebelling, were subdued by King John, who after some three months stay
returned back into England, where the Lacies found friends to be restored to
their Earldom of Vlster. About 1291 O-Hanlon and some Vlster Lords troubling
the peace, were suppressed by the English Colonies. From 1315 to 1318 the Scots
made great combustions in Ireland to whom many Irish families joined
themselves, and both were subdued by the English Colonies. In the year 1339
general war was between the English Colonies Anno 1339
and the Irish, in which infinite number of the Irish perished. Hitherto
Ireland was governed by a Lord Justice, who held the place sometimes for few
years, sometimes for many. In the year 1340, John Darcy, an Englishman, was
made Justice for life, and the next year did exercise the place by his own
Deputy (which neither before nor after I find to have been granted to any, but
some few of the Royal blood.)

About the year 1341, the English-Irish (or English Colonies), being
degenerated, first began to be enemies to the English, and themselves calling a
Parliament, wrote to the King, that they would not endure the insolences of
his Ministers, yet most of the Justices hitherto were of the English-Irish (or
English, borne in Ireland.)

About the year 1361, Leonel, Duke of Clarence, was made Lord Lieutenant of
Ireland, and sometimes left his Deputy to govern it. This Duke being Earl of
Vlster and Lord of Connaglit by the right of his wife, came over with an Army
of some 1500 by pole, and quieted the borders of the English Pale in low
Lemster. Hereformed the English-Irish, grown barberous (by embracing the
tyrannical Laws of the Irish, most profitable to them, which caused them
likewise to take Irish names, and to vie their language and apparel.) To
which purpose good Laws were made in Parliament, and great reformation
followed, as well therein, as in the power of the English, for the leven years
of his Lieutenancy, and after, till the fatal wars of Turk and Lancaster
Houses. And hitherto most of the Justices were English-Irish.

About the year 1400, Richard the second, in the eighteenth year of his
Reign, Ann. 1400.
came with an Army of four thousand men at Arms, and thirty thousand Archen,
fully to subdue the Irish: but pacified by their submissions, and no act of
moment otherwise done, he returned with his Army into England. After, to
revenge the death of the Earl of March his Lieutenant, he came again with a
like Army: but was soddenly recalled by the arrival of Henry the 4 in England.
During the said Kings Reign, Ireland was governed by his Lord Lieutenunts,
sent from England, and in the Reigns of Hen. the 4, and Hen. the 5, by
Justices for the most part chosen of the English-Irish, only the Lord Scroope
for 8 years was Deputy to Thomas the second son to Hen. the 4, who was L.
Lieutenant of Ireland.

This I write out of the Annals of Ireland printed by Camden. In which, from
the first Conquest of Ireland, to the following wars between the Houses of
York and Lancaster in England, I find small or no mention of the Oneals
greatness among the Irish Lords. And I find very rare mention of any seditions
in Vlster, especially among the Northern Irish, so as that Province, from the
first Conquest to these civil English wars, does thereby seem to have been
one of the most peaceable and most subject to the English. Neither read I
therein, of great forces or sums of money lent out of England into Ireland,
(except voluntaries, and the cursary iourneys of King John and King Richard the
second); but rather that for the most part all seditions as well between the
English-Irish, and the mere Irish, as between the English-Irish themselves,
were pacified by the forces and expenses of the same Kingdom.

During the said civil war between York and Lancaster, for England, most
of the Noble Families were wasted, and some destroyed; whereupon the English
Irish, which hitherto had valiantly maintained their, Conquest, now began to
repair into England, partly to bear out the factions, partly to inherit the
Lands of their Kinsmen, of whom they were descended: And the mere Irish boldly
rushed into the possessions, which the other had left void in Ireland. And from
that time, under the government of English Liefetenants and Deputies,
seditions and murders grew more frequent, the authority of the English Kings
became less esteemed of the Irish, then in formertimes, and the English Pale
had sometimes larger, sometimes straighter limits, according to the diverse
successes of the Irish affairs at diverse times.

After the appeasing of the said bloody war, I find some 1000 men sent over
by Henry the seventh to suppress Perkin Warbeck, an English Rebel, and 500
men sent by Henry the eight to suppress the Geraldines of English race,
rebelling against him. Otherwise the said Annals mention no great or general
rebellion in Ireland, especially such, by which either much blood of the
English was spilt, or much of our treasure exhausted, till the happy reign of
Queen Elizabeth. For in this only age, Religion rather then Liberty first
began to be made the cloak of ambition, and the Roman Locusts, to maintain
the Popes usurped power, breathed every where fire and sword, and not only
made strong combinations against those of the reformed religion in all
Kingdoms, but were not ashamed to proclaim and promise Heaven for a reward,
to such cut throats as should lay violent hands on the sacred persons of such
Princes, as opposed their tyranny. Amongst which, this famous Queen being of
greatest power, and most happy in success against them; they not only lest
nothing unattempted against her sacred person, and her Crown of England, but
whither encouraged by the blind zeal of the ignorant Irish to Popery, or
animated by an old Prophecy.

He that will England win, Must with Ireland first begin.

Did also raise two strong and dangerous rebellions in Ireland, the one of the
Earl of Desmond, and the other of the Earl of Tyrone, (not to speak of the
troubles made by Shane Oneale, the easy settling whereof shall be only
mentioned in the treating of Tyrones Ancestors.) How beit the wonted general
peace seems to have continued till after the 19. year of the Queens reign,
being 1577: at which time the Lords of Conuaght, and Ororke, for their
particular, made a composition for their lands with Sir Nicholas Anno 1577
Malby, Governor of that Province, wherein they were content to yield unto the
Queen so large a rent, and such services, (both of laborers to work upon
occasion of fortifying, and of horse and foot to serve upon occasion of war),
as it seems the Popish combinations had not yet wrought in them any alienation
of mind from their wonted awe and reverence of the Crown of England.

Touching the rebellion of Gerald Earl of Desmond: John Gerald the son of
Thomas The rebellion of the Earl of Desmond.
(whose Progenitors of English race, had long behaved themselves valiantly in
subduing the Irish) had Kildare given him by King Edward the second, with title
of an Earl. And this Family of the Fitz Geralds, or Geraldens, (as they are
now called) long flourished, (not only keeping Ireland in obedience to the
King; but infesting the sea coasts of the Welsh, not yet united to the Crown
of England,) and never raised arms against England, till Thomas Fitz Gerald,
the son of Gerald Fitz Gerald, Earl of Kildare, and Lord Deputy of Ireland,
under King Henry the eight, (whom the King had called into England, and there
brought in question for his ill Government), hearing by light and fall rumor
that his father was executed, rashly took Arms against the King, inuiting the
Emperor Charles the fifth to invade Ireland, which he in the mean time wasted
with fire and sword. This Thomas and five of his Uncles were shortly after
hanged, the father being before dead of grief. But Queen Marie restored this
Family to honor and lands, though they never after recovered their former
dignity. Of these Geralds most of the greatest Lords in Mounster are descended,
(though for diverse causes, many of them have taken other Sirnames) and
particularly the Earls of Desmond.

Maurice Fitz-thomas a Geraldine was first created Earl of Desmond by Edward
the third. Of whose posterity many excelled in wealth, virtue, and honorable
reputation, far extending their power. But James invaded his Nephews
inheritance by force, and imposed heavy exactions on all depending upon him,
whose son Thomas following his fathers steps, was by the Lord Deputy
beheaded in the year 1467: his sons were restored, and the Earldom
remained in his posterity, till Gerald Earl of Desmond in the year 1578
rebelled against Queen Elizabeth. To whose aid certain Ann. 1578
bands of Italians and Spaniards, sent by Pope Gregory the twelfth, and Philip
King of Spain, landed at Smerwic, who besieged by the Lord Arthur Gray, then
Lord Deputy, in a Fort they had built, and called the Fort del ore, shortly
after yielded themselves, in the year 1583, and were put to the sword, as the
necessity of that State, and their manner of inuading the land, was then said
to require. And the Earl of Desmond flying into the Woods, was there in a
cottage killed, and his head cut off, (being, as they say, betrayed by his own
followers, wherein the Vlster men challenge an honor of faithfulness to their
Lords, above those of Mounster; for in the following wars none of them could
be induced by fear or reward, to lay hands on their reverenced Oneale.) Thus
with an Army of six thousand men, whereof some fourethousand were newly sent
over at diverse times, this Rebellion of Desmond in Mounster was soon appeased.
The Earldom of Desmond was by authority of Parliament adjudged to the
Crown, and made a County, with Sheriffs appointed yearly to be chosen by the
Lord Deputy.

Upon the attainter of the said Earl of Desmond and his confederats, all the
lands falling to the Crown, were in Acres of English measure about 574628
Acres:

Hereof great part was restored to the offenders, as to Patrick Condon his
Country, to the White Knight his Country, to some of the Geraldines, and to
other their confederats no small portions. The rest was divided into
Seigniories, granted by letters patents to certain English Knights and
Esquires, which upon this gift, and the conditions whereunto they were tied,
had the common name of Undertakers.

In Kerry and Desmond, by patent, to Sir William Harbert, to Charol Harbert, to
Sir Valentine Brown, to Sir Edward Denny, besides an uncertain portion to
George Stone and John Chapman and their heites, were granted 30560 Acres with
yearly rents five hundred four and twenty pound six shillings eight pence
sterling. In Limerick by Patent to Sir Henry Billinsley, to William Carter, to
Edmund Mannering, to William Trenchard, to Sr. George Bourcher, to Sr. George
Thornton, to Richard Fitten, to Robert Annesley, to Edward Barkley, to Sir
Henry Vthered, to Sir William Courtney, to Robert Strowde, and to their heirs,
were granted 96165 Acres, with rents nine hundred three and thirty pound four
shillings half penny, sterling. In Cork, by patent to Vane Beacher, to Henry
North, to Arthur Rawlins, to Arthur Hide, to Hugh Cuffe, to Sir Thomas Noris,
to Warham Sent-leger, to St Thomas Stoyes, to Master Spencer, to Thomas
Fleetwood, and Marmaduke Edmunds, and to their heirs were granted 88037 Acres,
with rents five hundred twelve pound seven shillings six pence half penny
sterling.

In Waterford and Tripperary by Patent to the Earl of Ormond, to Sir
Christopher Hatton, to Sir Edward Fitton, to Sir Walter Rawleigh, and to their
heirs were granted -- 22910 Acres with rent three hundred and three pound,
three pence sterling.

These Undertakers did not people these Seigniories granted them and their
heirs by Patent, (as they were bound) with well affected English, but either
sold them to English Papists, (such as were most turbulent, and so being daily
troubled and questioned by the English Magistrate, were like to give the most
money for the Irish land) or otherwise disposed them to their best profit,
without respect of the public good: neither did they build Castles, and do
other things (according to their covenants) for the public good, but only
sought their private ends, and so this her Majesty's bounty to them, turned not
to the strengthening, but rather to the weakening of the English Government in
that Province of Mounster.

Touching the Rebellion of the Earl of Tyrone, the worthy Antiquary Camden
mentions Tyrones Rebellion.
Neale the Great, tyrannising in Vlster, and great part of Ireland, before the
coming of Saint Patrick into that Kingdom, about the year of our Lord 431,
adding that this Family notwithstanding lived after more obscurely, not only
till the English entered to conquer Ireland, about the year 1169: but after
that, to the time that the Scots under Edward Bruce, attempted to conquer that
Kingdom, about the year 1318. In which turbulent time, Doneualdus O Neale
started up, and in his letters to the Pope styled himself King of Vlster, and
true Heir of all Ireland. Further, Camden adds, that after the appeasing of
these troubles, this new King vanished, and his posterity lurked in
obscurity, till the Civil wars of England, between the Houses of York and
Lancastar. The seed whereof was sown by Henry the fourth of Lancastar Family,
deposing Richard the second of York Family, and usurping the Crown, though
Henry the fourth and his son Henry the fifth by their valor so maintained
this usurpation, as no Civil war brake forth in their time, nor so long as
the noble Brothers of Henry the fifth, and Uncles to Henry the sixth lived.
After, between Henry the sixth of Lancaster Family, and Edward the fourth of
York Family, this bloody war was long continued, but ended in the death of the
next successor Richard the third, a double Usurper, both of the House of
Lancaster, and the Heirs of his Brother Edward the fourth of the House of
York. After, in the marriage of Henry the seventh with the Daughter and Heir
of Edward the fourth, both these Houses were united; and so this bloody war
well ended. From this time, behold the Pedigree of the Omales.

Owen Oneale.
Hugh mac Owen. Art mac Hugh. Neale Moore mac Art. Hugh Mac Neale Moore. Owen
Mac Hugh Neale Moore, offered to serve against traitor Hugh. Four sons,
Tirlogh, Hugh, Bryan, and Henry, living when Hugh Oneale rebelled.


Phileme Roc mac Art. Henry Mac Phelime Roc. Turlogh Mac Henry of the Fuse,
Rebel with Hugh. Five sons then living.




Henry Mac Owen Oneale married the Daughter of Thomas Earl of Kildare a
Giraldine. Con More (or Great) married the Daughter of Gerald, Earl of Kildare
his Mothers Niece, whose Father and himself waxing bold upon the power of the
Earls of Kildare, tyrannised over the people, and despised the titles of
Earls, Marquises, Dukes, or Princes, in regard of that of Oneale. Con,
Surnamed Bacco (or Lame), succeeded Oneale, who cursed his posterity, if they
should learn English, fow Corn, or build houses, to inuit the English. His
power being suspected of Henry the eight, and the Kings power, after the
suppression of the Earls of Kildare, being feared of him, who had rebelled
with the Earl, he failed into England, and renouncing the name of Oneale, and
surrendering his Inheritance held by the Irish Law of Tanistry (by which a man
is preferred to a boy, and the Uncle to that Nephew, whose Grandfather
ouerliues the Father, and commonly the most active Knave, not the next Heir,
is chosen), had his land regraunted to him from the King, under the great Scale
of England, as to his Vassal, with title of Earl of Tyrone. Thus in the three
and thirty year of Henry the eight, an Act of Parliament was made in Ireland,
with consent of the three Estates of that Kingdom, whereby the usurpation of
the title of Oneale was made capital to this Family, and King Henry and his
successors (the former style of Lords being changed) were styled Kings of
Ireland, and the Laws of England were received to be of force in that
Kingdom. Phelime Hugh eldest son. Turlogh Brasilogh. Six sons at least
then living, and able to serve the Queen.

Shane (or John) Oneale succeeding his Father, by killing his Brother Matthew,
and vexing his Father to death, was cruel and barbarous, and tyrannically
challenged the neighbor Lords to be his subjects, as Mac Gennys, Mac Guire,
Mac Mahown, O Realy, O Hanlon, O Cahon, Mac Brien, O Hagan, O Quin, Mac Cartan,
Mac Donnell Galloglasse. And when Henry Sidney expostulated this (being Lord
Justice in the absence of the Earl of Sussex, Lord Deputy), he offered to
prove by writings, that his Ancestors, had this authority over them, denying
that his Father had any power to resign his lands to the King; (which he held
only for life by Tanistry Law), without the consent of the people, being to
choose Oneale (that is, the chief of the name.) He made war against O Realy,
and imprisoned Collogh Mac Donnell. But when Thomas Earl of Sussex, L. Deputy
led the English forces against him, he by the counsel of the Earl of Kildare,
sailed into England, and submitted himself to Q. Elizabeth, and after for a
while conformed himself to obedience and civility. But when he tirannised
over the Irish Lords, and they craved succor of Henry Sidney Lord Deputy in
the year 1565, he leading an Army against him, seng Edward Randolph with seven
Companies of Foot, and a Troop of Horse by Sea to Derry and Loughfoyle, to
assault the Rebel on the back. Against whom the Rebel turning all his forces
was so defeated, as he fled for succor to the Scots, whose brother he had
killed, and they at first entertaining him well, after fell to words, and killed
him in the year 1567. After in a Parliament at Dublin, he was condemned of
treason, and his lands confiscated, and a Law made, that no man should after
that presume to take the name and title of Oneale. He had three sons, Henry,
Con, and Tirlogh, cast in prison by Hugh the Rebel.
Matthew Okelly till 15 years age reputed the son of a Black Smith at Dudalke,
given Con O Neale by a Smiths wife at her death. This Bastard he appointed to
succeed him by the Kings letters Pattents, at which time he was created Baron
of Dungannon: but he was killed in his Fathers life time by Shane, the
legitimate son of Con, whose bastard this Matthew was. Brian killed by
Odonnel, at the instance of Shane O Neale. Hugh preserved by the English from
Shane, married the Daughter of Tirlogh Linnogh Oneale, whom he put away by
divorce, and after proved an Arch-Rebell. This Hugh, son to the Bastard
Matthew, (borne of a Smiths wife, and reputed the Smiths son till he was
fifteen years of age) lived sometimes in Ireland, and Hugh Earl of Tyrone.
much in the Court of England, and was supported against Turlogh Linnogh
Oneale, with the title of Barron of Dungannon, by his fathers right. He had a
troop of horse in Queen Elizabeth's pay, in the late wars of the Earl of
Desmond, in which and all occasions of service he behaved himself so
valiantly, as the Queen gave him a yearly pension of one thousand Marks. He
was of a mean stature, but a strong body, able to endure labors, watching, and
hard fare, being with all industrious, and active, valiant, affable, and apt to
manage great affairs, and of a high dissembling subtle and profound wit. So
as many deemed him borne, either for the great good or ill of his Country. In
an Irish Parliament he put up his petition, that by virtue of the letters
Patents granted to his Grandfather, to his Father and his heirs, he might
there have the place and title of the Earl of Tyrone, and be admitted to this
his inheritance. The title and place were there granted to him, but the
inheritance (in regard the Kings of England by the attainder of Shane, were
thereof invested) was referred to the Queens pleasure. For the obtaining
whereof, Sir John Perrot then Lord Deputy, upon his promise of a great rent to
be reserved to the Crown, gave him his letters of recommendation into England,
where he so well knew to humor the Court, as in the year 1587 he got the
Queens Letters Pattents under the great Seal of England, for the Earldom,
of Tyr-Oen without any reservation of the rent he had promised to the I Deputy,
wherewith, though his Lordship were offended, in that the Pattent was not passed
in Ireland, and so the said rent omitted, yet in reverence to the great Lords,
who had procured this grant in England, he did forbear to oppose the same. The
conditions of this (...) were, that the bounds of Tyrone should be limited;
That one or two planet (namely, that of Blackwater) should be reserved for the
building of Forts, and keeping of Garrisons therein; That the sons of Shane
and Tirlogh should be provided for; and that he should challenge no authority
over the neighbor Lords bordering upon Tyrone, or any where out of that
County. And such were his endeavors in the Queens service, such his
protestations of faith and thankfulness, as Tirlogh Linnogh, by the Queens
intercession, was induced (upon certain conditions for his maintenance) to
surrender the County, and all command in those parts unto him. (...)

Cormoe preserved from Shane by the English, now rebelling with Hugh.

Neale Conuelagh. Turlogh Lynnogh took the title of Oneale after Shane: he was
aged, and so loved quietness, the rather for fear of the children of Shane
and of Matthew the Bastard. He was obedient to the Queen, but made war upon
Odonnel, and the Island Scots, of whom he killed in the field Alexander Oge, who
murdered Shane Oneale. Sir Arthur O Neale Knight, living in this Rebellion.
This Sir Arthur served the Queen against Hugh the Arch-Rebell, who had two of
his sons in prison, but two or three other sons were with their father at
Laughfoyle among the English.




The Spanish (forsooth) invincible Navy, sent to invade England, in the year
1588, being dispersed, and proving nothing lessethen invincible, many of them
were wrecked Ann. 1588.
on the Coasts of Ireland, whereof some were harbored by the Earl of Tyrone,
with whom since he was thought to have plotted the following mischiefs.

And shortly after (in the end of this year, or beginning of the next) Sir
John Perrot Anno 1589 Sir William Fitz-williams Lord Deputy.
being revoked, Sir William Fitz-williams, was sent Lord Deputy into Ireland. I
have heard that he having been formerly. Lord Deputy, when he returned and sued
for recompense of his service, a great Lord should answer him, that such
employments were preferments, and not services to challenge reward: And
therefore, it in this new employment any shall think that he followed this
counsel, seeking to make it a preferment to him and his family, I do not much
marvel thereat. This I write of hearesay, but as in the general relation
following, I purpose to write nothing which is not warranted either by
relations presented to the Queen, by the principal Councellers of Ireland, or
by Letters interchanged between the States of England and Ireland, or like
authentical writings; so for the particular of the above named Lord Deputy, if
perhaps some may think any thing observed by me to derogate from him, I
protest, that whatsoever I write is in like sort warranted, and may not be
omitted without the scandal of Historical integrity, being objections
frequently made by the Rebels, for excuse of their disloyalty, as well in all
their petitions, as treaties of peace: But howsoever I cannot but mention these
imputations, yet I advise the Reader to judge of them, as objections of the
Rebels, who in their nature are clamorous, and could no way make their excuse
so plausible, as by scandalizing the chief Governor. And I further protest,
that as I shall in the due place once mention an honorable answer of this L.
Deputy, to part of the chief complaints made by the Irish against him, so I
would most willingly, have inserted his full justification, if any such
memorial had come to my hands.

Sir William Fitz-williams, being Lord Deputy of Ireland, Sir John Norreys was
Lord President of Mounster, (who made his brother Sir Thomas his
Vice President), and Sir Richard Bingham was Governor of Connaght. This Lord
Deputy now again entering the government of Ireland, that Kingdom was in the
best estate that it had been in of long time, not only peaceable and quiet,
(so as any the greatest Lord called by letter or messenger, readily came to the
State there, and none of them were known to be any way discontented), but also
most plentiful in corn, cattle, and all manner of victuals. But within three
months after his taking of the sword, some Irish informed him, that the above
named Spaniards, last year wrecked on the Coasts of Connaght and Vlster, had
left with the Inhabitants, (in whose hands they fell) great store of treasure
and other riches. This the Lord Deputy (as the Irish say) did greedily seek to
get into his hands, but surely he pretended the Queens service, as may appear
by a commission, by which he first assaied to sease the same. This not taking
any effect, he took a journey himself into those parts, with charge to the
Queen and Country (as they said) and that in an unseasonable time of the
year, after Allhallontide. Where altogether failing of his purpose, he brought
thence with him as prisoners, two of the best affected Gentlemen to the State
in those parts, whom he deemed to possess the greatest part of those riches,
namely, Sir Owen mac Tooly (father in law to the Earl of Tyrone, who had long
enioied a yearly pension of one hundred pound from the Queen, and had kept
Odonnel in a good course of opposition against Tyrlogh Lynnogh Oneale) and Sir
John Odogherty, (of Vlster Lords best affected to the English.) Whereof the
first refusing (as they object) to pay for his enlargement, continued prisoner
til the beginning of Sir William Russels government, who in pity discharged
him, but the old gentlemen's heart was first broken, so as shortly after he
died. The second was released after two years restraint, not without paying
for his liberty, (as the Irish say). At this hard usage of those two Vlster
gentlemen, all the great men of the Irish, (especially in those Northern
parts) did much repine.

In the month of May 1590, the Earl of Tyrone came into England, where he was
after an easy manner restrained of his liberty, because he came without the
Lord Deputies Ann. 1590.
License, which fault repaired by his submission, he was freed of his
restraint. In the month of June, the Earl agreed before the Lords, to enter
bonds with good sureties of the Pale, to keep peace with all his Neighbors,
namely Sir Tirlogh Lynuogh (who since the renouncing the title of Oneale, and
yielding at the Queens intercession, the government of those parts to the
Earl, was Knighted); and at his return to put in pledges, to be chosen by the
Lord Deputy and Counsel, for more assurance hereof, and of his loyalty, as
also the performance of certain Articles signed by him: Provided that the
pledges should not lie in the Castle, but with some gentlemen in the Pale, or
Merchants in Dublyn, and might be changed every three months, during her
Majesty's pleasure.

The Articles were to this effect: To continue loyal and keep the peace: To
renounce the title of Oneale, and all intermedling with the Neighbor Lords:
That Tyrone should be limited, and made a shire or two, with Gaoles to be built
for holding of Sessions: Not to foster with any neighbor Lord, or any
gentleman out of his Country not to give aid to the Island and Irish-Scots, nor
take any of them: That if for his defense he needed forces, he shall leuy none
out of his Country without special license of the State, in which case he
might have English bands. To conclude, with the Lord Deputy within ten months,
about acomposition of rents and services to her Majesty for all his Country,
according to the above mentioned composition of Connaght, made in the year
1577. Not to impose any exactions without license of the State on his Country
above ordinary, except it be for necessary forces for his defense, and that
also with license: Not to make any roades into Neighbor Countries, except they
be within five days after a prey taken: That none of the Country receive any
stelths from Neighbour-Countreys, nor steal from them, but he to bring forth
the thieves, or drive them out of Tyrone: That he execute no man, except it be
by Commission from the Lord Deputy, under the broad seal for martial law, and
that to be limited. That his Troop of 50 horse in her Majesty's pay, be kept
complete for her service; and that besides he answer arising out at every
general hosting. That he meddle not with spiritual livings, nor lay any
charge on them. Not to maintain any (...) or Friars in his Country: Not to
have intelligence with foreign traitors. That he take no black rent of any
Neighbors. To cause the wearing of English apparel, and that none of his men
wear glibbes (or long hair): That he answer for his brother Tyrlogh Mac
Henry, Captain of the Fewes: That in time of necessity he sell victual to the
Fort of Blacke-water. These he promised to perform upon his honor before the
Lords in England, and that his pledges to be put in, should lie for performance
of them, to his power. And order was given, that all the Neighbor Lords should
be drawn to like conditions, that so they might not spoil Tyrone.

In the month of July 1590, Con mac Shane, (that is, the son of Shane O
neale,) accused Ann. 1590.
Hugh Earl of Tyrone, of many practices, to make himself great in the North,
and that after the wrecke of the above named Spaniards, he conspired with those
which fell into his hands, about a league with the King of Spain, to aid him
against the Queen. These Articles the Earl answered before the Lords in
England, denying them, and auowing the malice of Con to proceed of her
Majesty's raising him to be Earl of Tyrone, and Cons desire to usurp the name
of Oneale, as his father had done, which name be labored to extinguish. He
could have spoken nothing more pleasing to this State (as he well knew), and
therefore his answer was approved: But the event showed his dissembling; for
within two or three years, Sir Tyrlogh Lynnogh died, and then the Earl took
this title of Oneale to himself, (which was treason by act of Parliament in
Ireland,) still excusing himself subtly that he took it upon him, left some
other should usurp it, promising to renounce it, yet beseeching that he might
not be urged to promise it upon oath. Camden affirms that Hugh ne-Gauelocke,
bastard to Shane O neale, exhibited these Articles against the Earl, who after
got him into his hands, and caused him to be hanged, (hardly finding any, in
regard of the general reverence borne to the blood of the Oneals, who would
do the office of hangman,) and that the Queen pardoned the Earl for this
fact. I doubt not but he writes upon good ground, and I find good warrant for
that I write the same to be exhibited by Con mac Shane, and both may be
reconciled by the exhibiting of the petition by Hugh, in the name of Con.

Sure I am that the Earl durst never enter into rebellion, till he had gotten
the sons of Shane Oneale to be his prisoners. Two of them, in this time of Sir
William Fitz-williams his government, were now in the Castle of Dublyn, and if
they had been fastly kept, they being true heirs of Tyrone before their
fathers rebellion, would have been a strong bridle to keep the Earl in
obedience: But they together with Phillip Oreighly, (a dangerous practiser),
and with the eldest son and heir of old Odonnel, (both imprisoned by Sir
John Perrot, in his government), shortly after escaped out of prison, being
all prisoners of great moment, whose enlargement gave apparent ouerture to
ensuing rebellion. Neither did the Irish spare to affirm, that their escape
was wrought by corruption, because one Segar, Constable of the Castle of Dublin
by Patent, having large offers made him to permit the escape of Oreighly, and
acquainting the Lord Deputy therewith, was shortly after displaced, and one
Maplesdon, servant to the Lord Deputy, was put in his place, in whose time
those prisoners escaped To return to the orderly course of my relation.

The Earl on the last of August, and the same year 1590, did before the Lord
Deputy and Counsel of Ireland, confirm the above mentioned Articles, sent
thither out of England, faithfully promising by word and under his hand, to
perform then. But still he delaied and put off the performance, by letters
unto both States, entreating that equal security might be taken of Sir Tyrlogh
Lynnogh, and in general of all the bordering Lords, (which he knew at that
time most difficult to effect), and by many subtle shifts, whereof he had
plenty.

About this time Mac Mahown, Chiefetaine of Monaghan died, who in his life time
had surrendered this his Country, held by Tanistry the Irish law, into her
Majesty's Ann. 1590.
hands, and received a regrant thereof, under the broad seal of England, to
him and his heirs males, and for default of such, to his brother Hugh Roe mac
Mahowne, with other remainders. And this man dying without heirs males, his
said brother came vpto the State, that he might be settled in his inheritance,
hoping to be countenanced and cherished as her Majesty's Patentee, but he found
(as the Irish say) that he could not be admitted, till he had promised to give
about six hundred Cowes (for such and no other are the Irish bribes). After he
was imprisoned (the Irish say for failing in part of this payment), and within
few days, again enlarged; with promise that the Lord Deputy himself would go
to settle him in his Country of Monaghan, whither his Lordship took his
journey shortly after, with him in his company. At their first arrival, the
gentleman was clapped in bolts, and within two days after, indicted, arraigned,
and executed, at his own house, all done (as the Irish said) by such Officers,
as the Lord Deputy carried with him to that purpose. The Irish said, he was
found guilty by a Jury of Soldiers, but no gentlemen or freeholders, and that
of them four English soldiers were suffered to go and come at pleasure, but
the other being Irish kerne, were kept straight, and starued, till they found
him guilty. The treason for which he was condemned, was because some two years
before, he pretending a rent due unto him out of the Ferney, upon that
pretend, louied forces, and so marching into the Ferney in warlike manner,
made a distress for the same, (which by the English law may perhaps be
treason, but in that Country never before subject to law, it was thought no
rare thing, nor great offense). The greatest part of the Country was divided,
between four gentlemen of that name, under a yearly rent to the Queen, and
(as they said) not without payment of a good fine under hand. The Marshall Sir
Henry Bagnoll had part of the Country, Captain Henslowe was made Seneshall of
the Country, and had the gentleman's chief house, with a portion of land, and
to diverse others smaller portions of land were assigned, and the Irish spared
not to say, that these men were all the contriuers of his death, and that every
one paid something for his share Hereupon the Irish of that name, besides the
former allegations, exclaimed that their kinsman was trecherously executed, to
entitle the Queen to his land, and to extinguish the name of Mac Mahowne, and
that his substance was divided between the Lord Deputy and the Marshall, yea,
that a pardon was offered to one of the Jury for his son, being in danger of
the Law, upon condition he would consent to find this his kinsman guilty.

Great part of these exclamations was contained in a complaint exhibited,
against the Lord Deputy after his return into England, to the Lords of her
Majesty's Council, about the end of the year 1595, in the name of Mac Guire,
and Ever Mac Cooly (one of the Mac Mahownes, and chief over the Irish in the
Ferny.) To which Sir William Fit and Williams, then sick at his house, seen
his answer in writing. There first he auowes to the Lords, that the fact of
Mac Mahowne, was first adjudged treason in England, and that his calling in
question for it was directed from thence, and for the manner of proceeding
herein, not prescribed, that it was (...), and contrary to their calumnious
allegations, who complained against him. He further answered, that the most
part of the Country was not bestowed on the Marshall Sir Henry Bagnall, but
that seven of the chief in that Country had the greatest part of it, that
three hundred Freeholders were raised to her Majesty, with eight hundred pound
yearly rent, and that all the Country seemed then glad of his execution, and
joyfully received the English Laws. The rest of the complaint he denied, and
for the bribe of Cowes in particular, did (...) that Ever Mac Gooly, one of the
(...), offered him seven thousand Cowes to make him chief of the name, when he
might have learned, that his mind was not so poor, to prefer Cowes or any
bribes before the Queens service.

To return to our purpose, certain it is, that upon Mac Mahownes execution,
heartburnings and lothings of the English government, began to grow in the
Northern Lords against the State, and they shunned as much as they could, to
admit any Shiriffes, or any English to line among them, pretending to fear
like practices to overthrow them.

The sixteenth of July 1591, the Earl of Tirone wrote unto the Lords of
England, excusing himself, that Sir Tyrlogh Lynnogh was wounded by his men,
while he sought Ann. 1591
to prey his Country. In the same month he suffered his Country of Tyrone to
be made Shire ground, being by certain Commissioners bounded on every side,
and divided into and Baronies, and the Town of Dungannon made the Shier Town,
where the Goal should be. In the month of October he wrote again to the
Lords, justifying himself against the complaint of the Marshall Sir Heury
Bagnoll, auowing that he had not stolen his sister, or taken her away by force,
but that after her brothers many delays, she willingly going away with him,
he married her. And that he had no other wife, being lawfully divorced from
her, whom the Marshall termed his wife. He complained against the Marshall,
that he reaped the benefit of all that in Vlster, which by his endeauouris had
been brought to her Majesty's obedience. That he had obtained under the great
Seal a superiority over Vlster, which he exercised over him. About this time
the Northerno Lords are thought to have conspired, to defend the Romish
Religion (for now first among them Religion was made the cloak of Treason), to
admit no English Shiriffes in their Countries, and to defend their liberty and
rights against the English.

In the Month of August 1592, the Earl of Tyrone by his letters to the Lords
in Ann. 1592.
England, justified himself against the complaint of Sir Tyrlogh Lynnogh,
apparently showing that his son Con Oneale did not disturb the Commissioners
sitting in Monaghan, but that they, having one hundred Foot for their guard,
were afraid of two Horsemen; which they discovered. He wrote further, that he
had brought Odonnel into the State, (who since his aboue-mentioned escape out
of prison, had stood upon his defense), and that he would persuade him to
loyalty, and in case he were obstinate, would serve against him as an enemy.
And further craftily entreated the Lords, that he might have the Marshalls
love, that they being neighbors, might concur the better for her Majesty's
service, and that their Lordships would approve of his match with the Marshals
sister, for whose content he did the rather desire his love.

In the beginning of the year 1593, or about this time, a Northern Lord Mac
Guire, Ann. 1593.
began to declare himself discontent, and to stand upon his defense upon the
execution of Mac Mahowne, and the ielousies then conceived by the Northern
Lords against the English. This Mac Guire, Chiestaine of Fermannagh auowed,
that he had given three hundred Cowes to free his Country from a Shiriffe,
during the Lord Deputies Government, and that not withstanding one Captain
Willis was made Shiriffe of Fermannagh, having for his guard one hundred men,
and leading about some one hundred women and boys; all which lived on the
spoil of the Country. Hence this barberous Lord taking his advantage, set
upon them, and drove them into a Church, where he would have put them all to
the sword, if the Earl of Tyrone had not interposed his authority, and made
composition for their lives, with condition that they should depart the
Country. Whereupon the Lord Deputy Sir William Fitz Williams sent the Queens
forces into Fermannagh, won Mac Guires Castle of Exiskillen, and proclaimed
him Traitor. And the Irish auow, that the Lord Deputy there let fall threatening
speeches in public against the Earl of Tyrone, calling him Traitor.

These speeches coming to the Earls hearing, he ever after pretended, that
they were the first cause that moved him to misdoubt his safety, and to stand
upon his defense, now first combining himself with Odonnell, and the other
Lords of the North, to defend their Honors, Estates, and Liberties. When
Tyrone first began to plot his Rebellion, he said to have used two notable
practices. First, his men being altogether rude in the use of Arms, he offered
the State to serve the Queen against Tyrlogh Lynogh with six hundred men of
his own, and so obtained six Captains to train them (called by our men
Butter Captains, as living upon Cesse) and by this means (and his own men in
pay, which he daily changed, putting new untrained men in the room of others)
he trained all his men to perfect use of their Arms. Secondly, pretending to
build a fair house (which our State thinks a tie of civility) he got license
to transport to Dungannon a great quantity of Lead to cover the Battlements of
his house: but ere long employed the same only to make bullets for the war.
But I return to my purpose.

Sir Henry Bagnoll Marshall of Ireland, had formerly exhibited to the State
diverse articles of treason practiced by the Earl of Tyrone, who now would not
come to the State without a protection. To these articles the Earl answered by
letters, saying, that the Marshall accused him upon envy, and by suborned
witnesses, and that he together with the Lord Deputy, apparently sought his
overthrow. Further complaining, that the Marshall detained from him his sisters
portion, whom he had married, and that (according to his former complaint) he
usurped jurisdiction over all Vlster, and in particular exercised it over him.
Yet these articles of treason against the Earl were believed in England, till
he offered by his letters to stand to his trial either in England or Ireland.
And accordingly he answered to the said Articles before the Lord Deputy and
Council at Dundalke, in such sort as they who had written into England against
him, now to the contrary wrote, that he had sufficiently answered them.
Whereupon the Lords of England wrote to the Earl of Tyrone, in the month of
August of the following year, that they approved his answers, and that in
their opinion Ann. 1594
he had wrong, to be so charged, and that publicly before Judges, and
especially, that his answers were for a time concealed. Further, they
commended him for the token of loyalty he had given, in dealing with Mac Guire
to submit himself, exhorting him to persist in his good course, and charging
him (the rather for avoiding his enemies slander) not to meddle with
compounding of Controversies in Ulster out of Tirone, without the Lord Deputies
special warrant. At the same time their Lordships wrote to the Lord Deputy,
taxing him and the Marshall, that they had used the Earl against Law and
equity, and that he the Lord Deputy was not indifferent to the Earl, who
offered to come over into England to justify himself. Thus was the Earl
cleared in show, but whether through fear of his enemies, or the guiltines of
his conscience, he showed himself ever after to be diffident of his own
safety.

In the beginning of the year 1594 Mac Guire brake into open Rebellion, he
entered with forces into Connaght (where the Burkes and Orwarke in Letrim,
commonly called Orwarkes Country, for disobediences to the State, had been
prosecuted by Sir Richard Bingham, Governor of that Province.) This foretunner
of the greater conspirators (shortly after seconded by Mac Mahowne) was
persuaded to enter Connaught by Gauranus a Priest, whom the Pope (forsooth) had
made Primate of all Ireland, and was encouraged thereunto, by his ominating of
good success. But by the valor of Sir Richard Bingham the Governor, Mac
Guire was repelled, with slaughter of many of his men, among whom this
pretended Primate was killed.

Against this Mac Guire, the Earl of Tyrone served with the Queens forces,
and valiantly fighting, was wounded in the thigh, yet this Earl providing for
his security, about this time imprisoned the above mentioned sons of Shane
Oneale, who had escaped out of Dublin Castle, and if they had been there kept,
would have been a sure pledge of his obedience, neither would he restore them
to liberty, though he were required so to do, but still covering his
treacherous heart with ostentation of a fear conceived of his enemies, he
ceased not daily to complain of the Lord Deputies and Marshals envy against
him, and of wrongs done him by the Garrison soldiers. Thus the fire of this
dangerous Rebellion is now kindled, by the above named causes, to which may be
added, the hatred of the conquered against the Conquerors, the difference of
Religion, the love of the Irish to Spain (whence some of the are descended),
the extortions of Sheriffs and sub-Sheriffes buying these places, the ill
government of the Church among our selves, and the admitting Popish Priests
among the Irish, and many such like. And this fire of rebellion now kindled,
shall be found hereafter to be increased to a devouring flame, by slow and
slender oppositions to the first erruptions, before they had liberty to
combine and know their own strength; by not laying hands timely on suspected
persons of quality, to prevent their combining with the rest (especially in
Mounster, being as yet quiet): by intertaining and arming of Irish men (a point
of high oversight begun by Sr Ioh. Perrot, and increased by Sr Will. Fitz.
Williams, the present L. Deputy, who at the first sending of forces into
Formannagh, gave power to certain Irish men to raise companies, which they did
of their own Country men, so as this ill custom being after continued, it both
furnished the enemy with trained men, and filled our Bands with such false
hearted soldiers, as some doubted, whether we had not better have them enemies
then friends): By a Treaty entertained at the very entrance of the Rebellion,
before any blow was stricken, which made the Traitors proud, and daunted the
hearts of good subjects; By ensuing cessations, long cotinuing and giving
liberty to the Traitors to strengthen their combination, and to arm themselves
in foreign parts and at home, whereupon all idle and discontented people had
opportunity to draw into Tyrone, and the Traitor Earl of Tyrone had means to
oppress the bordering Lords of Countries adjoining, whereof many feeling once
his power, some for fear, some for love, joined with him. Besides that, the
Army in the mean time was not only an excessive charge to the Queen, but lay
idle, and in stead of hurting the enemy, oppressed the subject, thereby daily
driving many into Rebellion. Lastly (for I will not more curiously search the
causes, being not suitable to so brief a narration as I intend), the Rebellion
was nourished and increased by nothing more, then frequent Protections and
Pardons, granted even to those, who had formerly abused this mercy, so as all
entered and continued to be Rebels, with assurance to be received to mercy at
their pleasure, whereof they spared not to brag, and this heartened the Rebel
no less, then it discouraged the subject.

This present year 1594, about the month of August, Sir William Fitz-williams,
Anno 1594 Sir William Russel Lord Deputy.
the Lord Deputy being recalled into England, Sir William Russell took the
sword. About this time Vlster men in open hostility distressed her Majesty's
forces, and Tyrone (so I will hereafter call him, deserving no addition of
title), having long absented himself from the State, was undoubtedly reputed a
party in their rebellion, when his sudden and voluntary appearance before this
new Lord Deputy at Dublin, in the very first month of his government, made
many hope better of him. He most assuredly promised al humble obedience to the
Queen, as well before the State at Dublin, in his own person, as to the Lords
in England by his letters, and making his most humble submission to her
Maresty, besought to be restored to her former Grace, from which he had fallen
by the lying slanders of his enemies, not by any his just desert. The Marshall
Sir Henry Bagnoll was then ready to prove before the Lord Deputy Articles of
high treason against Tyrone, and to auow that he sent mac Guire with his
Primate into Connaght. That he had secret intelligence with the Traitors Mac
Guire and Odonnell, and had communicated counsels with them, and gave them aid
in the wasting of Monnaghan, and the besieging of Eniskellin, by his brother
Cormac mac Baron, and by Con his own base son; and that he by threats had
drawn the Captains of Kilulto and Kilwarny from their faith and allegiance
to the Queen. It was in Council debated, whether Tyrone should be stayed to
answer hereunto; and the Lord Deputy was of opinion he should be stayed: but
most of the Counselors, either for idle fear, or inclination of love to
Tyrone, thought best to dismiss him for that time, and the counsel of these,
as more in number, and best experienced in Irish affairs, the Lord Deputy
followed. This much displeased the Queen, since this Foxes treasonable
practices were now so apparent, and her self had forewarned, that in case he
came to the State, he should be stayed, till he had cleared himself of all
imputed crimes. And the Lords in England by their letters thence, sharply
reproved the Lord Deputy, for so dismissing him, which might give the Rebels
just cause to think that they durst not charge him with treason, for fear of
his forces, and their Lordships professed to doubt, that Tyrones performance
would not be such, as might warrant this act.

The Lord Deputy shortly after took the field, and leaving for martial causes
the Earl of Ormond, for civil causes the Lord Chanceller, to govern Lemster
and those parts in his absence, drew the forces into Fermannagh, that he might
relieve Enis-Kellin, and expel mac Guire out of his Country. This winter
following, it seems there was some negotiation on both sides about peace. For
in the month of February, the Lords of England wrote to the Lord Deputy, of
her Majesty's dislike of certain writings sent over from Odonnel and Sir
Arthur Oneale, namely that in their petitions, they included the pardon of mac
Guire, and Orwarke (commonly called Orurke). That they indented with the Lord
Deputy, that he should come to Dundalke within a month, and especially that
the Lord Deputy by Sir Edward More should desire a fortnight more for his
coming thither. Their Lordships also signified, that the Queen sent over 2000
old soldiers, which had served under General Norreys in Britanny; (giving
order that they should be divided into hundreds, and so many Captains) besides
that 1000. soldiers were levied in England, to be sent thither. And because
their Lordships judged, that all the practices of the Northern Lords, came out
of Tyrones school, (how soever he grossly dissembled the contrary), their
Lordships advised the Lord Deputy to offer Odonnel pardon, so as he would sever
himself from Tyrone: And that the rather, because he was put into rebellion by
Sir John Perrots imprisoning him without any cause.

Tyrone hearing that supplies of soldiers, and namely the old soldiers of
Britany, were coming for Ireland, and that Garrisons of English were to be
planted at the Castles of Ballishanon; and Belike, lying upon the Lake Earn,
thought it no longer time to temporise. Wherefore about this time of this year
ending, or the first entrance of the year 1595, he drew his forces together,
and in open hostility, suddenly assaulted the Fort of Black-water, built upon
the passage into Tyrone on the South side, and taking Ann. 1595.
the same, raced it, and broke down the Bridge. And now the Northern Rebels
with Banners displaied, entered the Brennye. Yet at this time Tyrone subtly
made suite for pardon, and promised the Treasurer at wars, Sir Henry Wallop,
that he would continue his Allegiance to the Queen. At this time likewise
Feagh Mac Hugh, Walter Reagh, and many Lemster men, began to enter into actions
of hostility against the English.

The Lord Deputy, who saw this storm of Rebellion would lie heavy on his L.
Deputy L. General together.
shoulders, in his letters to the I, ords in England had let fall a request,
that some olderperienced Commander might be sent over to him, for his better
assistance, meaning (no doubt) such a Captain as should be commanded by the
supreme authority of the Lord Deputy. But the Lords either mistaking his
intent, or because they so judged it best for her Majesty's service, sent over
Sir John Norreys, a great Leader, and famous in the wars of the Low Countries
and France, giving him the title of Lord General, with absolute command over
military affairs, in the absence of the L. Deputy. This great Commander was
not like to be willingly commanded by any, who had not borne as great or
greater place in the wars then himself. So as whether through emulation,
growing between him and the Lord Deputy, or a declining of his Fortune,
incident to the greatest Leaders, howsoever he behaved himself most valiantly
and wisely in some encounters against Tyrone, and the chief rebels, yet he did
nothing against them of moment. About the beginning of June, the L. Deputy and
the Lord General drew their Forces toward Armagh, and now Tyrone had sent
letters of submission to them both (entreating the Lord General more specially
for a milder proceeding against him, so as he might not be forced to a headlong
breach of his loyalty.) These letters should have been delivered at Dundalke,
but the Marshall Bagnoll intercepting them, stayed the messenger at the Newrye,
till the Lord Deputies return, at which time because in this journey Tyrone
had been proclaimed Traitor, he refused to receive them, in respect of her
Majesty's Honor.

Yet shortly after at Tyrones instance, Sir Henry Wallop Treasurer at Wars,
and Sir Robert Gardner chief Justice of Ireland, were by Commission appointed
to confer with him and his confederate Rebels. Tyrone in this conference
complained of the Marshall for his usurped jurisdiction in Vlster, for
depriving him of the Queens favor by slanders; for intercepting his late
letters to the Lord Deputy, and Lord General, protesting that he never
negotiated with foreign Prince, till he was proclaimed Traitor. His humble
petitions were, that he and his might be pardoned, and have free exercise of
Religion granted (which notwithstanding had never before either been punished
or inquired after.) That the Marshall should pay him one thousand pound for his
dead Sisters, his wives portion. That no Garrisons nor Sheriffs should be in
his Country. That his Troop of fifty horse in the Queens pay might be
restored to him. And that such as had preyed his Country, might make
restitution.

Odonnell magnifying his Fathers and Progenitors services to the Crown,
complained that Captain Boyne, sent by Sir John Perrot with his Company into
his Country, under pretense to reduce the people to civility, and being well
entertained of his Father, had besides many other injuries, raised a Bastard to
be Odonnel, and that Sir John Perrot, by a ship sent thither, had taken
himself by force, and long imprisoned him at Dublin. And that Sir William Fitz
Williams had wrongfully kept Owen O. Tool above mentioned seven years in
prison. His petitions were for pardon to him and his, and for freedom of
Religion. That no Garrisons or Sheriffs might be placed in his Country. And
that certain Castles and lands in the County of Sligo might be restored to
him.

Shane Mac Brian Mac Phelime Oneale, complained of an Island taken from him by
the Earl of Essex, and that he had been imprisoned till he surrendered to the
Marshall a Barrony, his ancient Inheritance. Hugh Mac Guire complained of
insolences done by Garrison soldiers, and by a Sheriff, who besides killed
one of his nearest Kinsmen. Brian Mac Hugh Oge, and Mac Mahowne (so the Irish
called the chief of that name suruiuing), and Ever Mac Cooly of the same
Family of Mac Mahownes, complained of the aboue-mentioned unjust execution of
Hugh Roe Mac Mahowne, in the Government of Sir William Fitz Williams.

The Commissioners judged some of their petitions equal, others they referred
to the Queens pleasure. But when on the Queens part, they propounded to the
Rebels some Articles to be performed by them, they were grown so insolent, as
judging them unequal, the conference was broken off, with a few days Truce
granted on both sides, when the Queen, for sparing of blood, had resolved to
give them any reasonable conditions.

This Truce ended, the Lord Deputy and the Lord General, about the eightenth
of July, drew the Forces to Armagh, with such terror to the Rebels, as Tyrone
left the Fort of Blackwater, burnt the Town of Dungannon, and pulled down his
House there, burnt all Villages, and betook himself to the Woods. They
proclaimed Tyrone Traitor in his own Country, and leaving a Guard in the
Church of Armagh, they for want of victuals, returned to Dublin, and by the way
placed a Garrison in Alonaghan. And when the Army came near to Dundalke, the
Lord Deputy according to his instructions from England, yielded the command of
the Army to the Lord General, and leaving him with the Forces in the Northern
Borders, returned to Dublin. The third of September Hugh Earl of Tyrone, Hugh
O Donnel, Bryan O Rourke, Hugh Mac Guire, Bryan Mac Mahowne, Sir Arthur Oneale,
Art Mac Baron, Henry Oge Oneale, Turlogh Mac Henry Oneale, Cormac Mac Baron
(Tyrones Brother), Con Oneale, Tyrones base Son, Bryan Art Mac Brian, and one
Francis Mounfoord, were for form of Law indicted, though absent, and condemned
iudicially of Treason in the County of Lowthe, near the Borders of the North.

From this time the Lemster Rebels began to grow very strong: for Feegh Mac
Hugh of the Obirns, and Donnel Spanniah of the Cauanaghs, when they were
declining, and in want of munition, were not prosecuted, but upon fained
submission were received into protection, and so had means to renew their
Forces, and supply their wants, so as this year, about this month of
September, they began to oppress all the subjects, from the Gates almost of
Dublin, to the County of Wexford (the most ancient English County, and ever
much cared for by the Queen), which they spoiled, wanting forces to defend it,
and so deprived the English soldier of great relief he might have found
therein. The like may be said of the Oconnors in Ophalia.

General Norris being left by the Lord Deputy on the Northern Borders, with
full command of the Army, the Winter passed without any great exploit. There
was in many things no small emulation between the Lord Deputy and him, and no
loss in Tyrones particular. The Lord Deputy seemed to the Lord General, to
be unequal and too tharpe against Tyrone, with whom he wished no treaty of
Peace to be hold, (which he wisely did, having experienced his false
subtlety, and knowing that he sought delays, only till he could have aid
from Spain.) But the Lord General (whether it were in emulation of the Lord
Deputy, or in his favor and love to Tyrone) was willing to reclaim him by a
Gentle course (which that crafty Fox could well nourish in him.) And it seems
some part of the Winter passed, while this project was negotiated between them.

For in the beginning of the year 1596, a Commission was procured out of
England, whereby her Majesty, though justly offended with Tyrone and his
associates, about Ann. 1596.
their demands, in the former conference with Sir Henry Wallop, and Sir Robert
Gardner, yet in regard of their letters of humble submission, since that time
presented to her, does signify her gracious pleasure to Sir John Noreis Lord
General, and Sir Geffry Fenton, her Majesty's Secretary for Ireland, giving
them authority to promise pardon of life, and restoring of lands and goods to
the said Lords, seeking with due humility her Royal mercy, and to hear them,
with promise of favorable consideration in all their complaints. And thus much
the Commissioners signified to Tyrone and Odannell, by Captain Sant Ledger, and
Captain Warren, sent of purpose unto them, with instructions dated the
eleventh of April, this present year 1596, and with reference of other
particulars, to a meeting appointed to be at Dundalke. The twenty of the same
month Tyrone at Dundalke before these Commissioners craved the Queens mercy on
his knees, signing with his hand a most humble submission in writing, vowing
faith in the presence of Almighty God, who sees into the secrets of all men's
hearts, and (to use still his own words) most humbly craving her Majesty's
mercy and pardon on the knees of his heart. His first petition for liberty of
Religion, was utterly rejected. For the second, touching freedom from
Garrisons and Sheriffs, he was answered, that her Majesty would not be
prescribed how to govern. In the third, interceding for Orelyes pardon, it was
disliked that he should capitulate for others, yet giving hope of his pardon
upon his own submission. For the fourth, concerning the Jurisdiction of
Armagh, the answer was, that her Majesty would reserve all the Bishops right.
For the fifth, concerning the freeing of Shane Oneales sons, it was referred to
her Majesty's further pleasure. Finally, he promised to (...) from aiding the
Rebels, and from intermedling with the neighbor Lords. To make his Country a
Shiere: to admit a Shiriffe. To renounce the title of Oneale. To confess (upon
his pardon) all his intelligences with foreign Princes, and all his past
actions, which may concern the good of the State. To rebuild the Fort and
Bridge of Blackwater, and to relieve the Garrison for ready money at all times.
To deliver in sufficient Pledges. To dismiss all his Forces, and to pay such
reasonable fine to her Majesty's use, as should be thought meet by her
Majesty. Hugh Odonnel at the same time did agree to diverse articles, for the
good of his Country, and made his like humble submission. The like did Hugh
mac Guire, Bryan mac Hugh, Ever Oge Roe mac Cooly, Bryan Orewark (called
Ororke), Shane Mac Bryan, Phillip O Reyly, and others. To each one was given
(under the Commissioners hands) a promise of her Majesty's pardon, upon putting
in of Pledges. And Proclamation was made to give notice hereof to all the
Queens subjects; that in the meanetime no acts of hostility might be done
against any of those, who had thus sub mitted themselves.

Thus the Vlster Rebels, by a submission too honest to be truly intended by
them, whilst Pledges were expected, and Pardons drawn, were freed from the
prosecution of the Queens Forces this Summer. And even at this time did Tyrone
solicit aid in Spain, and two or three messengers came secretly to the
rebels from thence, by whom many of them (as Ororke, Mac William, etc) sent a
writing signed, to the King of Spain, couenanting, that if he would send
sufficient Forces, they would join theirs to his, and if he would at all
relieve them, in the mean time they would refuse all conditions of Peace. But
Tyrone, though consenting, yet was too crafty to sign this Covenant, yea,
craftily he sent the King of Spaines answer to the Lord Deputy, whilst he
notwithstanding relied on the promised succors. I find nothing of moment done
this Summer by the Forces with the General, being restrained by the last
agreement at Dundalke; only about the end of August, he wrote out of Connaght
unto the Lord Deputy complaining of diverse wants, and desiring more Forces to
be sent him. To whom the Lord Deputy answered, that his Lordship had warrant
to supply some of his wants in the Country, and denied the sending of any
Forces to him, because himself was to go into the Field.

By this time the rebels of Lemster were (as I formerly mentioned) grown
strong, Feogh Mac Hugh breaking his protection entered into acts of hostility,
and he together with the O Mores, O Connors, O Birnes, O Tools, the Cauenaghs,
Butlers, and the chief names of Connaght, animated by the success of Vlster
men, combined together, and demanded to have the barbarous titles of O and Mac
together with lands they claimed, to be restored to them, in the mean time
spoiling all the Country on all sides.

About the month of January, Sir Richard Bingham, Governor of Connaght, who
had valiantly beaten Ororke out of his Country and prosecuted the Bourks, and
other Rebels, was called into England, upon complaints of the Irish, and Sir
Conyer's Clifford was sent to govern Connaght. This Gentleman complained off
by the Irish, was valiant and wise; but some of our English Statesmen thought
him too severe, and that he had thereby driven many into rebellion, howsoever
himself very well experienced in the Country, and those who best understood
the Irish nature, found nothing so necessary for keeping them in obedience, as
severity, nor so dangerous for the increase of murders and outrages, as
indulgence toward them. His answers to their complaints could not be so
admitted as for the time some discountenance fell not on him, which reward of
services he constantly bore, till in short time after, to his great grace, the
State thought fit again to use his service, in a place of great command in
the Army.

Sir John Norreys Lord General, Sir George Bourcher, Master of her Majesty's
Ordinance, and Sir Geffery Fenton her Majesty's Secretary for Ireland, being by
Commission directed to treat again with Tyrone, did by their letters dated the
twenty of January remember him of the favor he had received at the last
treaty at Dundalke, and charged him (as formerly he had been charged) with
high ctimes since that committed by him, to the violation of the Articles then
agreed on, therefore aduising him, that since they were for her Majesty's
service to draw to the Borders, he would there testify to them his penitencie
for offenses done since his pardon, by such an humble and hearty submission,
as they might recommend into England from him. Tyrone by his answer of the two
and twenty of January, acknowledged under his hand her Majesty's mercy
therein extended to him, and confessed offenses and breaches of the Articles
there signed, withal desiring them, to examine the wrongs and prouocations, by
which he had been driven thereunto, and protesting his sorrow for these
offenses. The same day he met the Commissioners near Dundalke, where he being
on the one side of the Brook, they on the other, he put of his hat, and
holding it with great reverence in his hand, said to them. That he was come
thither, not only to show his duty to them, as her Majesty's Commissioners,
but his inward desire to be made and continued a subject. When he would have
remembered the wrongs since his late Pardon provoking him to disloialtie, they
cut him off by remembering him of all the benefits, and that of his last pardon,
received from the Queen, which should have counterpoised his wrongs, and have
kept him in duty. He confessed this, with show of great remorse, and protested
before God and heaven, that there was no Prince not creature, whom he honored
as he did her Majesty; nor any Nation of people that he loved or trusted more,
then the English. Protesting further, that if her Majesty would please to
accept of him again as a subject, and to take such course as he might be so
continued, (thus still he reserved pretense of wrongs to shadow his future
disloialties), then he doubted not but to redeem all his faults past with some
notable services. Besides, he gave answers to diverse questions, and signed
them after with his hand. First, asked what messages and letters had passed
between Spain and him; he answered, never to have received any, but
encouragements from Spain, and assurances of an Army to aid him: that he
never had further contract with the Spaniards, and that he had sent the King of
Spaines letter above mentioned to the Lord Deputy and Counsel: that he never
received thence any money or ought of value, nor any of his confederates to his
knowledge. Only Odonnel had some fifteen barrels of powder, whereof he should
have had a portion, but never had it. Secondly, for the late Submitties,
Pardons, and Pledges, he undertook that with all speed the Pledges should be
sent to Dublin, with Agents to sue out the Pardons granted in the last Treaty
at Dundalke. Thirdly, for his making O kealy, he vowed that the Gentlemen of
the Country made him, and that he would hereafter never meddle in the causes
of the Brenny. Fourthly, for the Rebels of Lemster and the Butlers, he
answered, that he never had confederacy with any but Feogh Mac Hugh, and for
the Butlers, he never had any thing to do with them. Fifthly, for Agents in
Spain, he denied to have any, or to know any his confederates had. Sixthly,
for his jealousy of the State, he auowed it to be upon just causes, which he
would after make known. This done, he desired Captain Warren might come over
the Brook to him, and then by him he requested that himself might come over
to the Commissioners, in token of his faithful heart to her Majesty, which
granted, he with great reverence saluted them, and with hat in hand, lifting up
his eyes to Heaven, desired God to take vengeance on him, if (her Majesty
vouchsafing to make him a subject, and to cause the Articles of Dundalke to be
kept to him) he would not continue faithful, and desired never to see Christ
in the face, if he meant not as he spoke. He confessed, that the Spanish ships
lately arrived in the North, had brought Odonnel the Kings letter, signifying
that he heard the Earl of Tirone to be dead, and the Irish to have received a
great overthrow, desiring to be advertised of their State. And that Odonnel
before his coming had given answer, that if the King sent an Army, he would
take his part, and hoped the like of the other Irish. But at his coming, that
the Spanish Captain excusing that the King had not written to him, he only
told him, that promise had not been kept with him by the English, and therefore
he would not refuse the Kings promised aid. And with many execrations swore,
that the Captain left neither Munition nor Treasure with him, and that he
never received any thing from the King of Spain, but that letter ahoue
mentioned, which he sent to the Lord Deputy. And that he never wrote but three
letters into Spain, all about one time, and (as he thought) all intercepted.
Lastly, he vehemently denied to have incited any Mounster men to rebellion,
since his last pardon. So with like reverence as formerly, he took his leave.

Upon advertisement hereof into England, the Commissioners received ample power
to conclude all things with Tyrone. Thus much they made known to him by
letters, sent to him by his old friend Captain Warren, the ninth of March,
with instructions to appoint the second of April the day of meeting at
Dundalke, which Tyrone accepted, with show of joy to be received to her
Majesty's mercy, the sweetness whereof he had often experienced, and of fear to
be pursued by her forces, which he professed himself not able to resist. But
by his letters the fifteen of March, he made doubt of meeting, pretending that
his pledges were not changed according to covenant, nor restitution made him by
those that had preyed his Country, and that his confederates could not come so
soon. The Commissioners replied by letters the two and twenty of March, that
these were but delays, since the pledges at the meeting (upon his putting in
his eldest son for pledge) should be restored, and he in all things
reasonably satisfied, protesting that if he refused this occasion, they could
do no more for him, since her Majesty would be no longer abused by his fair
promises and delays: Adding, that he must conform himself to the directions
they had, and could not alter. Master Secretary wrote out of England unto the
Commissioners the two and twenty of March; That her Majesty was displeased to
have the treaty thus delayed, and charged to have the meeting in a Town, as a
submission of the Rebels, not in the field as a parley. That her Majesty
prepared for the war, resolving not to have any more treaties, if this took
not effect. Lastly, desiring them to acquaint the Lord Deputy with all their
directions, and the issues, and to excuse his not writing to his Lordship,
thinking that the Commissioners were not at Dublyn with him.

Upon the tenth of April, in the year 1597, the Commissioners again pressed
Tyrone by letters, not to slack his own greatest good by delays, and
appointed for An. 1597.
the last day of meeting, the sixteenth of that present month, and that his
confederats not able then to come, should draw after as soon as they could,
protesting that this was the last time that they would write unto him. Tyrone
on the seventeenth of April, sent his reasons of not coming: First justifying
his relaps into disloialty by the truce not observed to him, and because
restitution was not made him of preyes taken from him, which was promised. Then
excusing his not meeting, because his pledges, by the truce being from three
months to three months to be changed, were still detained, yea, his pledges
the second time put in, were kept together with the first; And saying, that he
durst not come to the Lord General, because many promises by him made, being
not kept, he knew it was much against his honorable mind, and so could not be
persuaded, but that the Lord General was ouerruled by the Lord Deputy, so as
he could not make good his promises without the Lord Deputies consent, who
showed malice to him, and was no doubt the cause of all the breaches of such
promises, as had been made unto him. Again, in regard he heard that the Lord
Bourgh was to come over Lord Deputy, who was altogether unknown to him, he
protested to fear that the acts of the Lord General with him, would not be
made good, wishing that rather the Lord General might be continued in his
command, for then he would be confident of a good conclusion. Finally, he
desired a meeting near Dundalke the six and twenty of April, but this
appointment for the day being against the last final resolution, and for the
place against her Majesty's directions, there was no more speech of this treaty.

In the mean time Sir William Russell Lord Deputy, by the managing of those
and like affairs, finding himself not duly countenanced out of England, in
the place he sustained, had made earnest suit to be called home, and
accordingly about the end of May he was revoked, and the Lord Bourgh, (so he
himself writes, others write Burke, and Camden writes Borough) came over Lord
Deputy. The ill success of the treaties (...). (...).
and small progress of the wars, together with this unexpected change of the
Lord Deputy, coming with supreme authority, as well in martial as civil
causes, brake the heart of Sir John Norryes Lord General, a leader as worthy
and famous as England bred in our age. Of late (according to vulgar speech) he
had displeased the Earl of Essex, then a great favorite in Court, and by his
merits possessed of the superintendency in all martial affairs: For Sir John
Norryes had embraced the action of Breast Fort in Britany, and the wars in
those parts, when the Earl himself had purpose to entertain them, and
prevailed against the Earl, by undertaking them with less forces, then the
Earl desired for the same. And it was thought that the Earl had preferred the
Lord Bourgh, of purpose to discontent him, in regard the said Lord Bourgh had
had a private quarrel with the said General in England, and that besides the
superior command of this Lord, (though otherwise most worthy, yet of less
experience in the wars then the General had), could not but be unsupportable
to him, esteemed one of the greatest Captains of his time, and yet having
inferior command of the Presidentship of Mounster in the same Kingdom.
Certainly upon the arrival of this new Lord Deputy, presently General
Norryes was commanded to his government of Mounster, and not to stir thence
without leave. When he came thither, this grief so wrought upon his high
spirit, as it apparently brake his brave and formerly undaunted heart, for
without sickness or any public sign of grief, he suddenly died, in the
embrace of his dear brother Sir Thomas Norreys, his vicepresident, within some
two months of his coming into Mounster.

The Lord Bourgh at his entry into the place of Lord Deputy, found all the
North in Rebellion, except seven Castles, with their Towns or Villages, all
but one lying toward the sea, namely Newry, Knockfergus, Carlingford,
Greene-Castle, Armagh, Dondrom, and Olderfleet. And all Connaght was likewise
in Rebellion, together with the Earl of Ormonds nephews the Butlers, in
Mounster.

In this month of May, Ororke was sent into England, by the King of Scots, and
there executed. This Ororke seems to have been expelled his Country, when
Sir Richard Bingham was Governor of Connaght, but those of his name, and the
chief of them, usurping the Country of Letrym, still continued Rebels.

Tyrone hitherto with all subtilty and a thousand sleights abusing the State,
when he saw any danger hanging over him, by fained countenance and false words
pretended humblest submission, and hearty sorrow for his villainies; but as
soon as opportunity of pursuing him was omitted, or the forces were of
necessity to be drawn from his Country, with the terror of them all his
loyalty vanished, yea, he failed not to mingle secretly the greatest Counsels
of mischief with his humblest submissions. And these courses had been
nourished by the sloth of our Leaders, the frugality of some of our
counselors, and the Queens inbred lenity: yet of all other, he had most
abused the late Lord Generals love to him, and his credulity, which specially
grew out of his love. Now of this new Lord Deputy, by letters he requested a
truce or cessation, which it seemed good to the Lord Deputy to grant for a
month, in regard of the conueniency of her Majesty's present affairs, not any
way to gratify the Rebel, for he had no purpose to entertain more speech of
his submission, or to slack the pursuit of him and his confederates, to which
he was wholly bent. He saw the lamentable effects, which these cessations,
together with protections, had hitherto produced, and among other evils, did
specially resolve to avoid them.

Therefore as soon as the month of truce was expired, the Lord Deputy as well
by his first actions, to give luster and ominous presage to his government, as
because he judged it best for the service to strike at the head, presently drew
the Forces toward Tyrone. The Irish, in a fastnes near Armagh, (so they call
straight passages in woods, where to the natural strength of the place is added
the art of interlacing the low bows, and casting the bodies of trees acrosse
the way) opposed the passage of the English, who made their way with their
swords, and found that the Irish resolutely assaulted, would easily give
ground. Then the Lord Deputy assaulted the Fort of Blackewater, formerly built
by the English upon the passage to Dungannon, whence the Eurle at his: first
entering into rebellion had by force expelled the English, as carefully as he
would have driven poison from his heart. This Fort he soon won, and repayring
the same, put a company of English soldiers into it, to guard it. But (...)
the Lord Deputy with the whole army were rendering thanks to God for this good
succesle; the (...) showed themselves out of the thick woods near adjoining
on the North-side of the Fort, so as the prayers were interrupted by calling to
arms. The English entered (...), and prevailed against them, driving them to
styeinto the thickest of their dens. In this conflict were killed Francis
Vaughan, brother to the Lord Deputies wife; and Robert Turnour, Seriant Mastor
of the Army, and two foster brethren to Henry (...) of Kildare, who with his
troop of Horse valiantly served upon the Rebel, and took the death of his
foster brethren so to heart, (after the education of the Irish) as he shortly
after died. Many also were wounded, among whom Thomas Walker was of chief name.

When the Lord Deputy first resolved to draw up to Blackewater, he sent
directions to Sir Conyers Clifford to come up with the Connaght forces by the
way of Ballyshainnon, and to meet him there, which he in like sort attempted,
but being over matched by the Rebels lying in his way, could not pierce so
far, but was forced to retire, and by that retreat won great reputation to
himself and the men under him: for having with him some six or seven hundred
foot only; of which part was of the old Britan Soldiers; and being assailed
by more then 2000. Rebels, during thirty miles march he valiantly repelled
them, and safely retired to the garrison.

The Lord Deputy leaning the Fort at the Blacke-water well guarded to the
charge of Captain Thomas Williams, withdrew the Forces toward the Pale. Now
the Rubels tossed between hope, fear, and shame, resolved to besiege the
Fort, and Tyrone thought his reputation lost, if he recovered it not, and so
with joint force they compassed and assay led the same. Whereof the Lord Deputy
being advertised, with all possible expedition gathered the forces, to lead
them to the relief of that fort, and the Rebels hearing of his Lordships
approach, quitted the siege of the Fort, and retired into their strengths.
Whereupon the Lord Deputy marched forward and having passed the Blackwater
Fort, and purposing to enter and pass the pace leading to Dungannon Tyrones
chief House, he fell suddenly sick, and being carried back in his horse
litter to Armagh; and thence to the Newry, died in the way, to the great joy of
the Rebels, dejected with his sharp prosecution and bold adventures, and to
the no less grief of the English, erected with hope of good success.
Howsoever many of good judgment held his purpose of passing to Dungannon very
dangerous, and altogether fruitless, since no garrisons being planted to gain
ground, no other issue could be hoped in the best event, then a brag of
courage in passing to Tyrones chief feate, which no other Deputy had yet
attempted. And as they greatly commended the Lord Deputies valor in these
actions, so they feared the engaging and loss of the Queens Army, by this or
some like bold attempt.

After his death, Sir Thomas Norreys, Lord President of Mounster, was under the
great seal of Ireland prouisionally made Lord Justice of the Kingdom, (as the
customeis Lord Instice
in such sudden changes) who repaired to Dublin, and there executed his place
for one month (as I think of September) and no longer, for he being sick and
cast down in mind by the great sorrow he had conceived for the late death of
his worthy brother, made great suite to the Queen and the Lords in England, to
be eased of this burden of being Lord Justice, and to have leave to retire
himself to his government of the Province of Mounster.

And so Adam Loftus Lord Chauncellor of Ireland, and Lord Archbishop of Dublin
Lord Lieftenant, and Lords Instices.
and Robert Gardner chief Justice of Ireland, by letters out of England, the
thirteen of October were made Lords Justices for the ciuell government, and
the Earl of Ormond with title of Lord Liefetenant of the Army, was authorized
to command in chief for all martial affairs. Tyrone after his old custom,
flies unto the Lord Lieftenant, with protestations of loyalty, and complains
of wrongs, enforcing his disloiall courses, which his Lordship aduertising into
England, received authority from thence, to treat with Tyrone about his
submission, having Sir Geffery Fenton Secretary of Ireland joined with him for
an assistant. Hereupon ensued a meeting at Dundalke on the 22 of December,
where Tyrone made his most humble submission in writing, acknowledging her
Majesty's great mercy in giving him and his Associates their pardons upon
former submissions, and upon the knees of his heart (as he writes) professed
most hearty penitencie for his disloialtie, and especially his foul relopses
thereinto, humbly befeeching the Lord Lieutenant to be a means to her sacred
Majesty for his pardon, withal making known his grieuances, which how soever
they could not justify his offense, yet might in some measure qualify the
(...) thereof. And till these might be booked, to be sent over with his
Submission, most humbly craving of his Lordship to grant a truce or cessation
of Arms for eight weeks following. And further, to the end it might appear
that his submission proceeded from his heart, promising that for the time of
this cessation, there should be no impediment given to her Majesty's Ministers
bringing victuals to Blackwater Fort, yea, that for a poor token of his
humblest duty, he would voluntarily give to the hands of the Captain forty
Beeues, and suffer the soldiers to cut and fetch in wood, or any other
provisions. For his performance whereof he offered presently to give Pledges
to his Lordship.

The same day he subscribed the following articles, propounded to him by the
Lord Lieutenant. First, he promises for him and his associates, faithfully to
keep her Majesty's Peace during the cessation. Secondly, that he will
presently recall all Vlster men sent by him into Lemster, leaving those who
should not obey his directions to the Lord Lieutenants discretion. Thirdly, it
any during the Truce shall break into Rebellion, he promises not to aid
them, so as none depending on his Truce, be in the meanetime taken in by the
State without his consent. Fourthly, he agrees to a general Liberty, of
buying necessaries for his men in the Pale, and for the Queens subjects in
Vlster, and nothing to be forceably taken on either side. Fifthly, that upon
pretended wrongs no revenge be taken, but restitution be made within ten days
after complaint. Sixthly, that during the Truce he shall have no intelligence
with the King of Spain, or other foreign Prince, but acquaint the State with
any message he shall receive, or project he shall hear. Seventhly, that he
shall presently draw a book of his grieuances, such as he can prove, without
mention of frivolous matters unworthy her sacred Majesty's view Eighthly, that
he will deliver into the Fortforty Beeues, and give safe conduct to her
Majesty's Ministers to vittaile the said Fort of Blackwater, and suffer the
soldiers to cut and fetch wood on the South Side of Armagh, and for all other
necessaries permit them to agree with the owners, so as they come not of
themselves into his Country, but have his men with them in company. Ninthly,
that any prey being tracked into his Country, he shall make restitution, and
deliver the thieves to be executed, and if any be stopped from following of his
track the stopper shall answer the goods so tracked; which course the Lord
Lieutenant promised likewise to hold toward him and his associates.

The four and twenty of December, Tyrone advertised the Lord Lientenant, that
he served the Fort with forty Beeues, but the Captain had refused ten of
them, wherein his discretion was taxed by the Lord Lieutenant, since they were
of voluntary gift. Yet Tyrone promised to send ten other of the best he had in
lieu of them.

The eighteenth of February Brian Oge Orwarke (commonly called Ororke) Lord of
Letrym (commonly called Ororkes Country) submitted himself in a great assembly
on his knees to her Majesty, before Sir Conyers Clifford Governor of
Connaght, subscribing further to these Articles. First, that he and his
followers promised in all humbleness to perform all duties to her Majesty,
as becomes good subjects. Secondly, that he will receive her Majesty's
Sheriffs, and yield them all due obedience. Thirdly, that he will pay to her
Majesty her composition or rent, and yield to her Highness all services,
according to his new Patent to be granted. Fourthly, that he shall send out of
his Country all strangers to their owned welling places. Fifthly, that he
will apprehend all Rebels, Thieves or Malefactors coming into his Country,
sending them and their goods to the Governor. Sixthly, that he will deliver
Pledges for his Sept (or Family) and the chief Septs with him, within twenty
days. Hereof Sir Conyers Clifford advertised the Lords Justices, praying that
in regard of the strength and fastness of Ororke Country, he might not be
discontented, with having Becues takes from him for relief of the Army,
without payment of ready money for them, since that course had already grieved
all the Submitties. Further, he showed that the Country of Ororke was most
necessary to be defended. For howsoever it was held by Sir Richard Bingham the
last Governor as by Conquest (upon expelling of the above mentioned Ororke),
yet then it was all waste, so as the Rebel could make little use of it whereas
now it was most replenished with cattle, and therefore like to be assaulted by
Tyrone and Odennel, incensed against Ororke by reason of this his submission.
Besides that, the Queens forces could lie no where so fitly for service, as
upon the Earne, nor there be relieved but by Ororke, nor receive relief with
his contentment but by paying ready money. Lastly, he showed that all the
people upon the Earne, and in those parts, excepting Mac William, had submitted
themselves to her Majesty, and delivered Pledges for their Loyalty, being glad
to live under her Majesty's Laws, and only terrified with the burden of
relieuing the soldiers, without payment for their cattle. Therefore he desired
that two of the privy Counsel might be sent over, to take knowledge of such
grieuances, as the Submitties should present unto them, and to take order for
their satisfaction. These goodly submission, had all the same issue, as
follows in that of the famous Faith-breaker Tyrone.

Since the last meeting of the Lord Lieftenant with Tyrone at Dundalke, his
Lordship had sent over into England Tyrones humble submission, and the Book of
his grieuances, and had received authority from her Majesty, to make a final
conclusion with the Rebels, and now at another meeting in Dundalke, on the
fifteen of March, the Lord Lieftenant signified to Tyrone, that her Majesty by
his humble submission had been induced again to receive him to mercy, and to
give him and all the Inhabitants of Tyrone her gracious pardon, upon conditions
following. First, that he renew his humble submission to the Lord Liefetenant
on her Majesty's behalf in some public place. 2. That he promise due
obedience of a Subject, and not to intermeddle with the Irish, nor his
adherents, not only hereafter, but now, leaving them to themselves, that they
may become humble suitors for their own pardons, in which case it is promised
them also. 3. That he dispierce his forces, upon receipt of his pardon, and
dismiss all strangers, Irish, Scots, or others. 4. That he renounce the name
and title of Oneale. 5. Not to intermeddle with her Majesty's Vriaghtes, (so
the Irish call the bordering Lords, whom the Vlster Tyrants have long claimed
to be their vassals). 6. That he build up again, at his own charges, the Fort
and Bridge of Blackewater, and furnish the soldiers with victuals, as formerly
he did. 7. That he deliver to the Lord Lieftenant the sons of Shane Oneale,
who were her Majesty's prisoners; till breaking out they fell into his hands,
and were imprisoned by him. 8. To declare faithfully all intelligence with
Spain, and to leave it. 9. That he receive a Sheriff for Tyrone, as all other
Countries do. 10. That he put in his eldest son for pledge, and at all times
come to the state being called. 11. That he pay a fine in part of satisfaction
for his ofsence, according to her Majesty's pleasure. 12. That he aid no
Rebel, nor meddle with the Inhabitants on the East side of the Ban, yet so as
he may enjoy any lands or leases he has there. 13. That he receive not any
disloyal person, but send such to the chief Governor.

To the first and second Articles Tyrone agrees, so as time might be giueu for
the other Lords his associates to assemble, that they might herein lay no
imputation on him. To the third he agrees, craving a general pasport for all
such strangers. To the fourth he agrees. For the fifth, he says that he
desires nothing of the Vriaghts, but such duties as they yielded, since his
Grandfathers time. To the sixth he agrees. The seventh he refuses, because he
had not those prisoners from the State. To the eight he agrees. To the ninth
he agrees, according to the statute appointing a gentleman of the Country to
be chosen, yet craving for (...) for a small time. The tenth be refuses, for
the pledges (in particular) (...) the eleventh he agrees to a (...) of five
hundred Cowes, yet praying the Lord Lieftenant to (...) to her Majesty for the
remittall thereof. To the twelfth he agrees (...) the last he agrees,
provided that he would deliver no man to the State, who came to him for cause
of conscience (...) Finally, in regard Odonnell and other of Tyrone (...), did
not then appear, and in that respect the Lord Liefetenant, had been pleased
to grant him further day (...) for tenth of April following, he promised upon
his (...), and by his hand writing, that in case they or any of them should not
then appear, and submit themselves; yet he at that time would (...)
submission, and humbly crave and receive her Majesty's gracious pardon, and go
(...) with all things requisite for a perfect conclusion, and to deliver in two
pledges of his faith, to be chosen out of a schedule presented to the Lord
Lieftenant, the same to be changed according to the agreement, and if the Mores
and Conners, for whom he had obtained protection, should violate this (...),
that he would no way give aid or assistance to them. Hereupon at the instance
of the Lord Liefetenant, the Lords Justices caused Tyrones pardon to be drawn,
and sealed with the great seal of Ireland, bearing Date the eleventh of April,
in the fortith year of her Majesty's Reign, and of our Lord the year 1598.

Tyrone received his general pardon; but continuing still his distoyall
courses, never An. 1598.
pleaded the same, so as upon his above mentioned (...), in September 1595. you
shall find him after (...), in the year 1600.

The Irish kerne were at the first rude soldiers, so as two or three of them
were employed to discharge one Piece, and hitherto they have subsisted
especially by treacherous tenders of submission, but now they were grown ready
in managing their Pieces, and bold to skirmish in bogges and woody passages,
yea, this year and the next following, became so disasterous to the English,
and successful in action to the Irish, as they shaked the English government
in this kingdom, till it tottered, and wanted little of fatal ruin. Tyrone
wanted not pretenses to frustrate this late treaty, and to return to his
formen disloyalty, and the defection of all other submitties depending on him,
followed his revolt.

First he sent aid to Phelim mac Feogh, chief of the Obirnes, the son of
Feoghmac Hugh, (killed in Sir William Russels time), to the end he might make
the war in Lemster against the English: And because the English Fort of
Blackewater was a great eye sore to him, lying on the chief passage into his
Country, he assembled all his forces, and assaulted the same. But Captain
Thomas Williams, with his company under him, so valiandy repelled the great
multitudes of the assaylants, with slaughter of many and the most hardy,
attempting to scale sort, (which was only a deep trench or wall of earth, to
lodge some one hundred Soldiers), as they utterly discouraged from assayling
it, resolved to besiege it a far off, and knowing they wanted victuals,
presumed to get it by famine.

This Captain and his few warders, did with no less courage suffer hunger,
and having eaten the few horses they had, lived upon herbs growing in the
ditches and walls, suffering all extremities, till the Lord Lieftenant in the
month of August sent Sir Henry Bagnoll Marshall of Ireland, with the most
choice Companies of foot and horse troops of the English Army, to victual
this Fort, and to raise the Rebels siege. When the English entered the Pace,
and thick woods beyond Armagh, on the East side, Tyrone (with all the Rebels
forces assembled to him) pricked forward with rage of envy and settled rancour
against the Marshal, assailed the English, and turning his full force against
the Marshals person, had the success to kill him, valiantly fighting among the
thickest of the Rebels. Whereupon the English being dismayed with his death,
the Rebels obtained a great victory against them: I term it great, since the
English from their first arrival in that Kingdom, never had received so great
an overthrow, as this commonly called, The defeat of Blackewater; Thirteen
valiant Captains, The defeat of Blackewater.
and 1500. common Soldiers, (whereof many were of the old companies which had
served in Brittany under General Norreys) were slain in the field. The
yielding of the Fort of Blackwater followed this disaster, when the assaulted
guard saw no hope of relief: but especially upon messages sent to Captain
Williams, from our broken forces retired to Armagh, professing that all their
safety depended upon his yielding the Fort into the hands of Tyrone, without
which danger Captain Williams professed, that no want or misery should have
induced him thereunto.

Shortly after Sir Richard Bingham (above mentioned) late Governor of
Connaght, and unworthily disgraced, was sent over to succeed Sir Henry
Bagnoll in the Marshalship of that Kingdom.

By this Victory, the rebels got plenty of Arms and victuals, Tyrone was among
the Irish celebrated as the Deliverer of his Country from thraldom, and the
combined Traitors on all sides were puffed up with intolerable pride. All
Vlster was in Arms, all Connaght revolted, and the Rebels of Lemster swarmed
in the English Pale, while the English lay in their Garrisons, so far from
assailing the Rebels, as they rather lived in continual fear to be surprised
by them.

After the last years nauall expedition out of England into the Islands,
certain old Companies of one thousand and fifty foot, drawn out of the Low
Countries, were appointed to Winter in the West parts of England, To these,
nine hundred and fifty new men were added this Summer, and the command of
these two thousand Foot, and of one hundred Horse, was given to Sir Samuel
Bagnol, who was appointed to go with them to Loughfoyle, in the North of
Ireland: but after the defeat of Blackwater, they were countermaunded to go
into Lemster, to strengthen the Queens Forces in the heart of the Kingdom.

The old Companies.
Sir Samuel Bagnol, Colonel 150 1050 Foot. Captain John Iephson. 100 Captain
Josias Bodley 100 Captain John Sidney 100 Captain Foulke Conway 100 Captain
Nicholas Pynner 100 Captain Edward Blaney 100 Captain Tobey Calfeild 100
Captain Austin Heath 100 Captain Owen Tewder 100 To these were added new men,
partly under old Captains, as Captain Francis Roe, Captain Charles Egerton,
Captain Ralph Bingley, and partlyvnder new Captains 950 Foot Besides, Sir
Samuel Bagnol the Colonel had the command of a Troop of Horse new raised 100
Horse

After the defeat of Blackwater, Tyrone sent Any Mac Rory O More, and one
Captain Tyrel (of English race, but a bold and unnatural enemy to his
Country, and the English), to trouble the Province of Mounster. Against whom
Sir Thomas Norreys Lord President opposed himself: but as soon as he upon
necessary occasions had with-drawne his forces to Cork, many of the Mounster
men now first about October 1598, brake into rebellion, and joined themselves
with Tyrones said forces, spoiled the Country, burnt the Villages, and pulled
down the houses and Castles of the English; Anno 1598
against whom (especially the femall sex) they committed all abominable
outrages, And now they raised James Fitzthomas a Geraldine to be Earl of
Desmond, (which title had since the wars of Desmond bin suppressed), with
condition, that (forsooth) he should be vassal to Oneale. The Mounster
Rebellion brake out like a lightning, for in one months space, almost all the
Irish were in rebellious Arms, and the English were murdered, or stripped and
banished. Thus having inflamed Mounster with the fire of Rebellion, and leaving
this sedition to be cherished and increased by this new Earl of Desmond, and
other Rebels of that Province; the Vlster forces returned back to Tyrone: The
infection which Mounster men had drawn from the corrupted parts in Rebellion,
did more and more spread it self, so as the old practices long held by the
Arch-Traytor Tyrone to induce them to a revolt, now fully attained their wished
effect. To the working whereof in the hearts of the seditious, there wanted not
many strong motives, as the hatred which the Geraldines bare to those English
Undertakers (of whom I formerly spoke, in Desmonds war), which possessed
their Ancestors lands; also the encouragement they received by the good
success of the Rebels, and no less the hope of pardon upon the worst event.
And to speak truth, Munster undertakers above mentioned, were in great part
cause of this defection, and of their own fatal miseries. For whereas they
should have built Castles, and brought over Colonies of English, and have
admitted no Irish Tenant, but only English, these and like covenants were in
no part performed by them. Of whom the men of best quality never came over,
but made profit of the land; others brought no more English then their own
Families, and all entertained Irish servants and tenants, which were now the
first to betray them. If the covenants had been kept by them; they of
themselves might have made two thousand able men, whereas the Lord President
could not find above two hundred of English birth among them, when the Rebels
first entered the Province. Neither did these gentle Undertakers make any
resistance to the Rebels, but left their dwellings, and fled to walled Towns;
yea, when there was such danger in flight, as greater could not have been in
defending their own, whereof many of them had woeful experience, being
surprised with their wives and children in flight. Among the Mounster Rebels
were the Vicount Mountgarret, the Earl of Ormonds near Kinsman, and the Baron
of Cahir, a Butler, and of the Earls Kindred. Both these pretended their
discontent and malice against the said Earl, for cause of their revolt. But
more dangerous causes were suspected, and excepta Royal Force were quickly
opposed to the Rebels bold attempts, a general revolt was feared.

May you hold laughter, or will you think that Carthage ever bred such a
dissembling faedifragous wretch as Tyrone, when you shall read, that even in
the midst of all these garboyles, and whilst in his letters to the King of
Spain he magnified his victories, beseeching him not to believe that he would
seek or take any conditions of Peace, and vowing constantly to keep his faith
plighted to that King, yet most impudently he ceased not to entertain the Lord
Lieutenant by letters and messages, with offers of submission. This he did,
but not so submissiuely as before, for now the Gentleman was grown higher in
the instep, as appeared by the insolent conditions he required.

Ireland being in this turbulent State, many thought it could not be restored
but by the powerful hand of Robert Earl of Essex. This noble Lord had from
his youth put himself into military actions of greatest moment, so far as
the place he held in Earl of Essex Lord Lieutenant.
Court would permit, and had of late years won much honor in some services
by Sea and Land, so as he had full possession of a superintendencie over all
martial affairs, and for his noble worth was generally loved, and followed by
the Nobility and Gentry. In which respects the Queen knew him fit for this
service. He had long been a dear favorite to the Queen, but had of late
lien so open to his enemies, as he had given them power to make his embracing
of military courses, and his popular estimation so much suspected of his
Sovereign, as his greatness was now indged to depend as much on her Majesty's
fear of him, as her love to him. And in this respect he might seem to the
Queen most unfit for this service. But surely the Earl was persuaded, that
his Houour could not stand without embracing this Action; and since he affected
it, no man durst be his rival. Besides that, his enemies gladly put for. ward
this his design, that they might have him at more advantage by his absence
from Court. Finally, the vulgat gave ominous acclamations to his enterprise,
but the wiser sort, rather wished then hoped happy effects, either to his
private or the public good, in regard of the powerful enemies he left in
Court, (whence all seconds were to come to him), and of his own distracted
ends (though inclined to the public good, yet perhaps, in aiming at the speedy
end of this war, and some other particulars, not fully concurring with the
same.)

The Earl of Essex, when he first purposed to intertaine the managing of the
Irish wars, advised and obtained, that two Regiments of old soldiers should
be transported out of the Low Countries into that Kingdom: namely,

The first Regiment.
Sir Charles Pearcy Colonel -- 200 1050 Foot. Captain Richard Moryson
Lieutenant Colonel -- 150 Sir Oliver Lambart -- 150 Captain Henry Masterson
-- 150 Captain Randal Bret -- 150 Captain William Turret -- 150 Captain
Turner -- 100 The second Regiment.
Sir Henry Dockwra, Colonel (and Conductor of all) -- 200 950 Foot. Captain
John Chamberlin Lieutenant Colonel -- 150 Captain Edmond Morgan -- 150
Captain Edward Michelburne -- 150 Captain Walter Floyd -- 150 Captain Garret
Haruy -- 150

These Regiments landed in Ireland before the Earls coming over, and were
then dispersed by the Earl into diverse Regiments of new men, to season them,
and to replenish them with sufficient Officers.

The Earls Patent was granted with title of Lord Lieutenant, and with more
ample authority, then many other Lord Deputies had formerly granted them: for
whereas others had power to pardon all Treasons, Felonies, and all offenses,
except such treasons as touched her Majesty's person, her heirs, etc, and the
counterfeiting of money. This exception was by the Earls importunity left
out, which he extorted with wise providence, since the Lawyers held all
Treasons to touch the Princes person. And whereas other Lord Deputies had power
to bestow all Offices excepting the chief reserved to the Queens gift, his
Lordship had power to bestow some of the chiefest, and to remove all Officers
not holding by Patent, and to suspend such as held by Patent. Besides his
Lordship had power in many things, which never had been formerly given to any:
as to make Martial Laws (he being Lord Martial of England), and to punish
the transgressors. And to let the lands of Tyrone and other Rebels named, to
any persons whatsoever, and to their heirs Males, reserving due rents to her
Majesty. To command the Ships already sent, and to be sent into Ireland,
except the Lord Admiral were sent forth to Sea, and commandment were given of
joining the said ships to his Fleet. And lastly to issue the Treasure
according to the two establishments, with liberty to alter that which was
signed by the Lords in England, with the advice and consent of the Counsel of
Ireland, so as he exceeded not the sum of the Establishments. He had an Army
assigned him, as great as himself required, and such for number and strength,
as Ireland had never yet seen.

The establishment was signed by the Queen the four and twenty of March,
being the last day (after the English account) of the year 1598. It contained:
first, the The Establishment.
pay of the chief Officers in the Army: the Lord Lieutenant General ten pound
a day. The Lieutenant of the Army three pound a day. The General of the Horse
forty shillings a day: the Marshall of the Camp thirty shillings a day: the
Sergeant Mayor twenty shillings a day: the Lieutenant of the Horse twenty
shillings a day: The Quartermaster twenty shillings a day: the Judge Marshall
twenty shillings a day: the Auditor General thirteen shillings four pence a
day: the Comptroler general of the victuals ten shillings a day: the
Lieutenant of the Ordinance ten shillings a day: the Surueyer six shillings
eight pence: two Clerks of Munitions each five shillings a day: four
Corporals of the field six shillings eight pence a day a piece: one
Commissarie of victuals eight shillings, and three other, each six shillings a
day: The Carriage Master six shilling eight pence a day: and twenty Colonels,
each ten shillings a day; whereof the total in the year amounts to thirteen
thousand one hundred twenty seven pound sixteen shillings eight pence.

It contained further the pay of thirteen hundred Horse, divided into six and
twenty Bands, each Band having a Captain at four shillings a day, a
Lieutenant at two shillings six pence a day, a Cornet at two shillings a day,
and fifty horsemen each at fifteen pence a day, whereof the total in the
year amounts to one and thirty thousand four hundred eight pound five
shillings.

It contained further the pay of sixteen thousand footmen, distributed into
one hundred and sixty Bands, each Band having a Captain at four shillings a
day, a Lieutenant at two shillings a day, an Ensign eighteen pence a day, two
Sergeants, a Drum, and a Surgeon, each at twelve pence a day, and ninety four
soldiers, and six dead paies (allowed to the Captain) at eight pence each by
the day; whereof the total in the year amounts to two hundred twenty eight
thousand two hundred forty six pound thirteen shillings four pence.

Lastly, it contained an extraordinary supply of six thousand pound to be
allowed by concordatum, for Spies, Guides, Messengers, Barks hiring, keeping
of Prisoners, buildings, reparations, rewards, and like charges; the total of
the Establishment by the year amounts to two hundred seventy seven thousand
seven hundred eighty two pound fifteen shillings.

Besides her Majesty was at great charge for many things not contained in the
establishment as follows. First for Officers general. The Lord Lieftenant
for his ordinary entertainment by the year, one thousand three hundredth
pound. His Lordships Band of Horse by the year, one thousand five hundred
thirteen pound two shillings six pence. His Lordships fifty footmen by the
year, six hundred eight pound six shillings eight pence.) Both these bands of
horse and foot being not of the Army, I take to be allowed him for his
followers, and the servants in his family, besides his company of horse and
foot in the Army); the Treasurer at wars by the year six hundred eight and
thirty pound fifteen shillings. The Marshall of the Army by the year one
hundred four pound eighteen shillings and nine pence. The Master of the
Ordinance for himself by the year four hundred fifty pound three shillings
four pence, and for Clerks, Gunners, and Ministers of the Ordinance by the
year, four hundred fifty nine pound five shillings ten pence. The
Muster-Master general by the year two hundred nine pound seventeen shillings
six pence. Secondly for chief Officers newly erected. The Governor of
Loghfoyle, by the year three hundred sixty five pound. The Governor of
Caricfergus by the year one hundred eighty two pound ten shillings. The
Governor of Dundalke as much. The Commander of the Forces at Rathdrum and
Wickelow as much. The Commander of the Forces in Ophaly as much. The Commander
of the Forces at Cauan as much.

These payments being made in sterling money, do amount to six thousand five
hundred fourscore ten pound nineteen shillings seven pence.

Observe that all these above named Officers (excepting the Muster-Master) as
also the Lieftenant of the Army, The General of the Horse, The Seriant Mayor,
And likewise the Governors of Provinces and Garrisons, have all beside their
fees, the command of a band of Horse, or of Foot, or of both. Thirdly for
Officers in the four Courts and certain Pattentees: In the Exchequer the
Earl of Ormond Lord Treasurer of Ireland has for his fee, forty pound. The
Treasurer at wars, threescore six pounds thirteen shillings and four
pence. The chief Baron threescore and eleven pound ten shillings, and in
augmentation fourscore eight ponnd seventeen shillings and nine pence. The
Chancellor fourteen pound. The second Baron four and thirty pound. The
Auditor General two hundred pound. The Surueyor General fourscore pound. The
Remembrancer forty pound. The Seriant at Law seventeen pound six shillings
and eight pence. The Attorney General one hundred forty nine pound six
shillings eight pence. The Solicitor one hundred forty nine pound six
shillings eight pence. The Escheator six pound thirteen shillings and four
pence. The second Remembrancer ten pound ten shillings. The chief Ingrosser
fourteen pound. The second Ingrosser nine pound six shillings and eight
pence. The chief Chamberlain thirteen pound six shillings and eight pence.
The second Chamberlain six pound thirteen shillings and four pence. The
Clerk of the first fruits ten pound. The keeper of the Records thirteen pound
six thillings and eight pence. The Usher of the Court three pound six
shillings and eight pence. The Clerk of the Common Pleas three pound six
shillings eight pence. The Transcriptor fifty three shillings four pence. The
Deputy Auditor eleven pound. The Vicetreasurers Deputy eleven pound. The
Somoniter one hundred six shillings eight pence. The Marshall of the Court one
hundred six shillings eight pence. A Messenger four and forty shillings five
pence farthing. Two Pursiuants each eighteen pound five shillings fee. In the
Kings Bench the chief Justice four hundred pound. The second Justice one
hundred three and thirty pound six shillings eight pence. The Clerk of the
Crown ten pound.

In the Common Pleas the chief Justice threescore seven pound ten shillings,
and in augmentation fourscore eight pound seventeen shillings nine pence
farthing. The second Justice forty pound, and in augmentation twenty pound. The
Prothonator ten pound. In the Chauncery. The Lord Chauncellor four hundred and
fifteen pound six shillings eight pence. The Master of the Roles fifty pound,
and in augmentation fourscore eight pound seventeen shillings nine pence. Two
Ministers each seven and twenty pound thirteen shillings four pence. The
Clerk of the Crown six pound thirteen shillings four pence and in
augmentation six and twenty pound thirteen shillings four pence. The Clerk
of the Hamper fourteen pound. Diverse Officers in the Star Chamber six and
fifty pound thirteen shillings four pence. Diverse Ministers of the Ordinance
holding by Patent one hundred thirty five pound thirteen shillings five pence
farthing. The Constable of the Castle of Dublyn and his warders with diverse
other Constables and Porters three hundred thirty five pound thirteen
shillings two pence farthing.

For Officers of the State: The Secretary one hundred six pound thirteen
shillings four pence. The Clerk of the Counsel threescore and two pound
thirteen shillings four pence. The Surueyer of the victuals one hundred forty
three pound six shillings eight pence. The King at Arms thirty five pound
six shillings eight pence. The Seriant at Arms eighteen pound two shillings
two pence half penny farthing. The Pursiuant at Arms thirteen pound six
shillings eight pence. The Irish Interpreter seven and twenty pound seven
shillings six pence. Officers about the Custom forty pound. For Creation
money to Noble men; the Earl of Ormond thirty pound. The Earl of Kildare
twenty pound. The Earl of Clanrickard forty pound. The Earl of Thomond twenty
pound. The Baron of Kaher fifteen pound. Diverse annuities and procurations two
hundred fourscore and nineteen pound nineteen shillings three pence half
penny. For Parchment, Paper, Ink, Bags, etc. In the Exchequer, Kings Bench,
and Common Pleas, two hundred fourscore two pound, ten shillings eight pence:
For other payments by warrant two hundred six and twenty pound two shillings
four piece In the County of Wexford, the Justice of the liberties twenty
pound. The Senescall five and twenty pound. The Receiver twenty pound. The
Marshall forty shillings.

The total of these being paid in Irish money, is four thousand six hundred
fifteen pound thirteen shillings half penny; which reduced to sterling
money, makes three thousand four hundred threescore one pound thirteen
shillings nine pence. Fourthly for Officers in Lemster, the Lieftenant of the
Queens County one hundred twenty one pound thirteen shillings four pence.
The Provost Marshall of the Army threescore and seventeen pound eleven
shillings three pence. The Provost Marshall of Lemster one hundred and two
pound thirteen shillings one penny half penny. These paid in sterling money,
amount to three hundred one pound sixteen shillings eight pence half penny.

Fifthly, for Officers in Mounster, the Lord President one hundred three and
thirty pound six shillings eight pence. His diet with the Counsel allowed at
his table, five hundred twenty pound. His Retinue of twenty foot with the
Officers, and of thirty Horse, eight hundred and three pound. The chief
Justice one hundred pound. The second Justice threescore six pound thirteen
shillings four pence. The Queens Attorney thirteen pound six shillings
eight pence. The Clerk of the Council twenty pound. The Clerk of the Crown
twenty pound. The Seriant at Arms twenty pound. The Provost Marshall two
hundred five and fifty pound ten shillgs. The total being paid in sterling
money, is one thousand nine hundred fifty one pound sixteen shillings eight
pence.

Sixthly, for Officers in Connaght, the chief Commissioner (or Governor) one
hundred poundshis diet with the Counsel at his table, one hundred fourscore
two pound ten shillings. An allowance to himself forty pound. The Justice one
hundred pound. The Queens Attorney twenty pound. The Clarke of the Crown
twenty pound. The Clarke of the Counsel twenty pound. The Seriant at Arms
twenty pound, the Provost Marshall two hundred threescore and four pound,
twelve shillings six pence. An increase of pay to the present chief
Commissioner, two hundred fourscore two pound ten shillings.

The total being paid in sterling money, is nine hundred forty nine li.
twelues. fixed.

Seventhly, certain bands of Irish kerne, five hundred threescore nineteen
pound eight shillings nine pence.

Eighthly, for warders in several Provinces, three thousand five hundred
threescore and seventeen pound two pence half penny.

Ninthly, for Commissaries of Musters, five hundred threescore seventeen pound
eighteen shillings four pence.

Tenthly, Pensioners of all sorts, as well recorded in the Office of Musters,
as those holding by Patent, and recorded with the Auditor, some holding for
term of years, some during life, some during good behavior, some during
pleasure, three thousand two hundred forty nine l nine d.

Lastly, Almes-men, fourscore eight l. nineteen s. four d. ob.

The total of the above named charge not contained in the establishment, is
twenty one thousand three hundred twenty eight l. eight s. seven d. ob.

Add to this the establishment, two hundred threescore seventeen thousand
seven hundred fourscore two pound, fifteen shillings.

The total of the yearly charge, is two hundred fourscore and nineteen
thousand, one hundred eleven pound three s. seven d. ob.

To which if you add the great charge of all sorts of Munitions, with the like
extraordinary expenses, and do also consider that the thirteen hundred Horse,
and sixeteene thousand Foot, by new supplies were made fully twenty thousand:
the heavy burden of this years war in Ireland will appear.

The Earl of Essex had in special charge from the Queen, to bend all his
forces against the chief Traitor Tyrone, (and the Vlster Rebels his
confederates), and withal to plant Garrisons at Loughfoyle and Balishannon, to
the end they might at the same time assail him (and them) at the back (both
which courses his Lordship had in all counsels persuaded, and often taxed the
omissions of them). Thus with happy acclamations of the people (who to so
worthy a General in the head of so strong an Army, did ominate nothing but
victory and triumphs), yet with a Sunshine thunder happening (as Master
Camden notes for an ominous ill token): This noble Lord (accompanied with the
flower of the English Gentry, and conducted on his way with many of the
Nobility), took his iourny from London toward Ireland, in the end of the
Month of March, and the beginning of the year 1599, and though crossed An.
15999.
with tempestuous weather, (wherein the Earl of Kildare, and some gallant
gentlemen accompanying him in a little bark, chosen of purpose for speed, were
unfortunately cast away), landed within few days at Dublin, where according to
the manner of other Governors, he received the Sword.

Upon his Lordships demand to be advertised from the Counsel of the present
state of that Kingdom, a Collection thereof, debated and agreed upon in
Counsel, and signed by the Counselors, was presented to his Lordship the
seventeenth of Aptill, being to this effect. First, for the Province of
Lemster, in the County of Dublin, all the Mountainers were in actual
rebellion, as Phelim Mac Feagh, and his brother Redmond, with their Sept (or
name) of the O'yrns, and Phelim Mac Feagh with his Sept of the Otooles, and
Walter Mac Edmond chief of the Galloglasses, with his Sept of Mac Donnels;
only two Castles, Newcastle and Wickloe, Sir Henry Harrington held for the
Queen, and all the rest of the Country continued loyal. The Rebels thereof
were in number four hundred eighty Foot, and twenty Horse. In the County of
Kildare James Fitzpierce a Geraldine, two Geraldines, base brothers to the late
Earl of Kildare, some of the Delahides, some of the Odempsies, and some of the
Eustaces (of which Sept was the late Vicount Baltinglasse attainted), all in
action of Rebellion, were in number ber two hundred and twenty Foot, and thirty
Horse. All the rest of the Country being wasted by the Rebels, yet held for
the Queen. In the County of Carlogh, being little and all wasted, the Castles
of Carlogh and Laughline, and her Majesty's house of Fernes, held by the
Queens Wards, and six Castles belonging to the Earl of Ormond, held for the
Queen; but the Cauanaghs, and Keytons, were in Rebellion. In the County of
Wexford being wasted, all the Castles held for the Queen, and Sir Thomas
Calclough, Sir Richard Masterson, and Sir Dudly Loftus, the only English there
inhabiting, held for the Queen. But Donnel Spaniagh (alias Cauanagh) with all
that Sept, the Omorroghs, Macony More, all the Kinsellaghes, Dermot Mac Morice,
and diverse others with their followers, were all in rebellion, and in those two
Counties the Rebels were in number seven hundred and fifty Foot, and fifty
Horse. In the County of Leax, called the Queens County, lately all English,
now usurped by the Rebels Owny Mac Rowry Omore, and all the Sept of O Mores,
and the chief of the Galloglasses in that County, of the Sept of Mac Donnel,
the Sept of O Dempsies (except Sir Terence O Dempsey) the Sept of O doynes
(except Teig Oge O Doyne), were al in rebellion, and the base son of the Earl
of Kildare, a Geraldine, lately came in upon protection. The Rebels were in
number five hundred seventy Foot, and thirty Horse. Master Hartpol, Master
Bowen, and Master Pygot, were the only English Inhabitants, by whom and some
others, certain Castles were kept for the Queen, besides the Fort of
Mariaborough kept by the Qeenes Garrison. In the County of Ophalye, called (of
Phillip King of England) the Kings County, lately English, the Fort of
Phillipstowne was kept by an English Garrison, Sir George Colley, Sir Henry
Warren, Mast. John Moore, and Mast. Phillips, held their Castles for the
Queen, the rest of the Castles were kept by the sept of the Oconners then
rebels, and all the land was wasted, the Sept of the Omollyes and Odonners were
likewise in rebellion, and they were all in number four hundred sixty and
eight Foot, and twelve Horse. In the County of Kilkenny, the Vicount of
Mountgaret, a Butler, of the Earl of Ormonds Family, and son in Law to
Tyrone, was in rebellion, with his brethren, and with some of his sons, and
with his followers, being in number one hundred and thirty Foot, and twenty
Horse, and held the Castles of Balliragge and Colekil; the rest of the Castles,
and the whole County were held by the Earl of Ormond for the Queen. In the
County of Mead, the son and heir of Sir William Nugent was in rebellion,
and the County lying in the heart of the Pale, was greatly wasted by the
Vlster Rebels, and many Castles lay waste without inhabitants, but no Rebels
possed either Town or Castle therein. In the County of Westmeath, lying for
the most part waste; the Omollaughlines, and the Magoghegines, many of the
Nugents, and the Geraldines were in rebellion, being in number 140 Foot, and
twenty Horse, besides Captain Tyrel (a Rebel of English race), who had of
Vlster men and other strangers two hundred Foot. In the County of Lowthe, Sir
Edward Moore and Sir Francis Stafford were the only English housekeepers, all the lands were wasted by the Vlster rebels; but the Lord of Lowthe, an
English-Irish Barron, and all the Towns and Castles stood firm for the
Queen. In the County of Lonford, all the Ofarrols were in rebellion, except
two chief men of that Family, and the Castle of Longford was held by an
English Ward, and the Rebels were in number one hundred and twenty Foot. The
whole number of the Rebels in this Province of Lemster was three thousand
forty and eight Foot, and one hundred eighty two Horse.

Secondly, for the Province of Vlster (consisting all of Irish Septs, except
the Scots possessing the Rowt and Glinnes), those of Lecale, and the little
Ardes held for the Queen, but ouerawed by Tyrone, were forced to give way to
him to tirannize in their Countries. Dundalke the frontier Town between the
Pale and Vlster, vnd Knockfergus (or Carickfergus) a frontier Town toward
Scotland, were kept by English Garrisons, as likewise the Newry, Carlingford,
Green Castle, and Narrow water (all near Dundalke), and the Castle of
Ballinecargie in the Brenny, the rest were all in Rebellion. Neale Brian
Fertough in the upper Clandeboyes, had in number eighty Foot and thirty
Horse. Shane Mac Brian in the lower Clandeboyes had eighty foot and fifty
Horse. The Whites Country (or the Duffery) had twenty Foot. Mac Arten and
Sleaght Mac Oneale had one hundred foot, and twenty horse. Mac Rorye Captain
of Kilwarlin had sixty foot, and ten horse. Cormack Mac Oneale, Captain of
Kilultogh had sixty foot and ten horse. Hugh Mac Murtagh bevond the Min water
had forty foot. Shane Mac Brian Carogh upon the Ban side, had fifty foot,
ten horse. Sir James Mac Surleyboy, and his Scots, possessing the Rowt and the
seven Glynnes, had foure-hundred foot, and one hundred horse. The Island of
Magee, belonging to the Earl of Essex, was altogether waste. Mac Guire in
Fermannagh had six hundred foot, one hundred horse. Mac Mahowne in Monaghan,
and Ever Mac Coolye in the Ferney, and others of that name in Clankaruil, had
five hundred foot, one hundred and sixty horse. The Oreylyes in the Brenny
(or the County of Cauan) had eight hundred foot, hundred horse. Ocane in his
Country had five hundred foot, two hundred horse. two Sir Art Oneale in
Sleught Art had three hundred foot, sixty horse. Henry Oge in his Country had
two hundred foot, and forty horse. Turlough Mac Henry Oneale in the Fues, had
three hundred foot, sixty horse. Ohagan in his Country had one hundred foot,
thirty horse. Oquin in his Country eighty foot, twenty horse. The
Donelaghes in their Country one hundred foot, sixty horse. Mac Can in
Clancan one hundred foot, twelve horse. Tyrone the Arch-traytor in Tyrone
seven hundred foot 200 horse. Carmack Mac Baron his brother, in his Country
had three hundred foot and sixty horse. Mac Gennis in Yuogh (or Mac Gennis
Country) had two hundred foot, forty horse. In Tyrconnel O donnels Country,
Sir John O dogherty for his Country had three hundred foot, and forty horse.
O donnels son in the Conologhs Country one hundred and fifty foot, and
fifty horse. Mac Swine for his Country five hundred foot, and thirty horse.
Oboyle for his Country one hundred foot and twenty horse. O Donnel himself in
the County of Donnegal two hundred foot, sixty horse. O Gallohore for his
Country (in which his chief house is Ballashannon) had two hundred foot,
forty horse. Sleught Rorie for his Country one hundred foot, and fifty
horse. The forces of the Rebels in Vlster are in all one thousand seven hundred
and two horse, and seven thousand two hundred and twenty foot.

Thirdly, for the Province of Mounster, In the County of Tipperary. The Lord
Baron of Cahir a Butler, with his brother and followers, had three hundred
foot twelve horse. Edmond Fitzgibbon called the White Knight (this nick name
given to one for his gray hears, coming as hereditarie to his posterity), in
his Country four hundred foot, thirty horse. Richard Pursell Baron of
Loughwey 200 foot, 6 horse. The Omulrians three hundred foot, six horse. The
Omaighirs sixty foot, three horse. The Okennydayes five hundred foot, thirty
horse. The Burkes in the Lord Burkes Country, two hundred foot, four horse.
In the County of Cork, James Fitz-thomas, the supposed Earl of Desmond, two
hundred and fifty foot, thirty horse. The Lord of Dewallough two hundred
foot, eight horse. Barry Oge, and the Lord Barryes brother in the Muskerye,
one hundred and twenty foot, three horse. Dauy Burke in the Carbrye five
hundred foot. In the County of Limrick, Pierce Lacy, with diverse septs, had
three hundred foot, and fifteen horse. In the County of Kerrie, the Lord Fitz
Morris, Thomas Oge, John Delahyde, with others, five hundred foot, thirty
horse. In the County of Desmond, called Oswylliuan Bear, and Oswilliuan Mores
Country, Dermod Mac Owen (usurping the name of Mac Arty Moore) had five
hundred foot, six horse. In the County of Waterford, the Rebels had two
hundred foot, and ten horse. In all the Rebels of this Province of Mounster
were strong five thousand thirty foot, and two hundred forty two horse. This
number the Earl of Ormond judged to be the least, and thought the horse one
hundred more in number. Observe, that all the Cities and Port-townes, and
almost all the Castles in this Province of Mounster, and many great Lords and
Gentlemen, held for the Queen.

Fourthly and lastly, for the Province of Connaught; In the County of
Roscommen, the Castles of Roscommen, Athlone, Tulske, Boil, and Ballinestawe,
were kept at her Majesty's charge, and the Rebels of diverse septs had five
hundred foot, fixtie horse. In the County of Sligo, O Connor Sligo, and diverse
septs of rebels, had three hundred foot, and thirty horse, and only the
Castle of Calony held for the Queen. Orworke in Leytrim (called Ororkes
Country) had six hundred foot, sixty horse, and not any Castle was kept for
the Queen. In the County of Maio, some three Castles lately held for the
Queen, but were thought to be rendered up to Mac William, who with his
followers had six hundred foot, sixty horse. In the County of Galloway, the
town of Galloway, of Atheurie, and the Castle of Milech, held for the Queen,
but many septs of the Country were in rebellion, who had some four hundred
ninety foot. In the County of Clare, the Earl of Thomonds brother (who first
was upon suspicion committed to prison by the said Earl, and after released),
with the Obryans, and Mac Marres, and other septs, had six hundred foot,
fifty horse, and not one Castle was there kept for the Queen. In all, the
rebels of this Province of Connaught were strong three thousand and seventy
foot, two hundred and twenty horse. And the Rebels in all the four Provinces
were strong eighteen thousand two hundred forty six foot, and two thousand
three hundred forty six horse.

The Earl of Essex in the month of April dispatched two letters to the Lords
in England; by the first whereof he advertised them of this strength of the
rebels; and by the second, that Tyrone had in counsel resolved, first, to
hearten his confederates, and strengthen them in their dependency on his
protection; then to make two heads against the Queens forces, the one in
Vlster, of some six thousand horse and foot, under his own command, and the
other in Connaght of some four thousand horse and foot under Odonnells
command: and further advertised their Lordships, that many in Mounster had
taken a solemn oath at a public Cross in that Province, to be steadfast in
their rebellion. And that no traitor sought pardon, but used such insolent
behavior, as might well show they had no such thought. That the minds of the
very subjects were so alienated from the English, as well for Religion as
Government, as some who could bring one hundred horse, and three hundred foot
into the field upon private revenge, would protest not to be able to serve the
State with six horse or foot. That every active borderer had a solliciter
with the Rebels, and almost every one of the greatest in the State had some
Rebel or other to his Client. Concluding, that small or no assistance could be
promised from the Irish, so as howsoever the Queens Army was great, yet he
durst boldly say, that the plaster would do no more then cover the wound.

After few days of rest, good part of the English forces being drawn
together, this noble Lord Lieutenant gave entrance to his first actions, from
which the progress commonly receives a kind of ominous luster or stain. And
therein he attempted not the head of the Rebellion, according to his own
advise in England, and the Queens express command, but was induced by some of
the Counsel in that State, aiming at their own private interest, more then
the public good, to lead his forces against some few Rebels in Mounster,
where he took the Castle of Cahir, belonging to Edward Butler, Baron of Cahir,
and making a great prey of the rebels cattle in those parts, he cast the terror
of his forces on the weakest enemies, whom he scattered and constrained to fly
into Woods and Mountains, to hide themselves.

The fifteenth of June, while the Lord Lieutenant was yet in this Mounster
journey, he received advertisement from a Captain, whom he had employed by sea
into the North, to spy out Tyrones actions, that two ships lately come from
Spain, had put confidence in Tyrone, who went from Dungannon to Loughfoyle
about that business, but they brought only munition, not any treasure. That
Tyrone had given forces to Brian Mac Art, son to Art Mac Baron, that he
might take pledges, and watch over Neale Mac Brian, whom he suspected, and had
charged Mac Genis to do the like over Mac Cartan, also suspected by him, so as
there was no possibility to parley with them, according to the instructions
given by his Lordship. That Tyrone kept his great pledges, Shane Oneales
sons, in an Island, within a strong fastness, but as yet had neither gathered
at home, nor received from foreign parts any treasure. That both Tyrone and
Odonnel had their Agents in the out Isles of Scotland, to solicit the
Redshankes to assist them for pay. That the King of Spain had promised them
aid of men, which they would not have landed in Vlster, but in some Port of
Mounster, or at Galloway in Connaght. That Scots daily carried Munition to
them, which traffic might be hindered by two Galleys with Oars, but no ship
using sails could stop their passage. That the gross of the Northern Rebels
in Vlster, and part of Connaght drawn together, would be nine thousand foot,
and one thousand four hundred horse. That they were confident to draw the
war into such a length, as should be unsupportable to the State of England.
To which end Odonnel had hired a Mass of Redshankes, who were to be cessed in
Connaght and Mounster, because Tyrone, having deadly fewde with some of the
chief Leaders, durst not trust them in Vlster. Besides that upon arrival of
foreign treasure, great multitudes of those Scots were like to flock unto
them. And to the same end Tyrone had made strong fastnesses or intrenchments,
as well upon the passages of Loughfoyle and Ballishanon, (where he left forces
to resist the English Garrisons to be sent thither), as at the Blackewater, and
Ballinemoyree, himself purposing to meet the English Army in the woods of
Ballinemoyree, between Dundalke and the Newry, where he hoped to make some of
the best to drop, and after to fall back at his pleasure to like fights of
advantage, which he had prepared at the Blackewater. So as the only means
suddenly to break those rebels, was to hier 4000. Redshankes, to break in
upon them, (by advantage of their rowing boats) into the heart of Tyrone,
between these intrenchments, where they might easily take from him all his
wealth, consisting in cattle, and there entrench themselves, and in despite of
all Tyrones forces, be supplied with all necessaries from the Scottish Islands.
And indeed to this purpose, the Lord Bourgh, if he had not been prevented by
sudden death, had contracted with those Scots, promising 4000. men for the
first months pay, 1200. pound, the chief Leader a Colonels pay, and certain
Captains the pay of a Captain of 100, men. After which month, their Septs
were to be cessed for their victuals, upon such countries, as they must have
fought with the Rebels for every morsel: Namely, the sons of Agnus mac Connell
with their Sept, upon the Route, the Glinnes, and North Clandeboy, who for the
pretense they had to inherit that Country, would prosecute James mac Surley,
the possesser thereof to the uttermost. Donnel Grome and his Sept, upon Yuogh,
being Mac Genis his Country. The Mac Lanes and their Sept, upon the South
Clandeboy, and the Duffren. All which Septs were to put in pledges to the Lord
Bourgh, not to prey any under the Queens protection, and to depart the
Kingdom, when his Lordship should please no longer to make use of their
service.

The five and twenty of June, during the said Mounster journey, the Lord
Liefetenant wrote unto the Queen this Letter following.

When this shall come to your Majesty's hands, I know not; but whenever it
has that Honor, give it leave (I humbly beseech your Majesty) to tell you,
that having now passed through the Provinces of Lemster and Mounster, and been
upon the Frontire of Connaght, (where the Governor and the chief of the
Province were with me); I dare begin to give your Majesty some advertisement of
the state of this Kingdom, not as before by hearsay, but as I beheld it with
mine own eyes. The people in general have able bodies by nature, and have
gotten by custom ready use of arms, and by their late successes boldness to
fight with your Majesty's troops. In their pride they value no man but
themselves, in their affections they love nothing but idleness and
licentiousness, in their rebellion they have no other end, but to shake off
the yoke of obedience to your Majesty, and to root out all remembrance of the
English Nation in this Kingdom. I say this of the people in general, for I
find not only the greater part thus affected, but that it is a general
quarrel of the Irish, and they who do not profess it, are either so few, or
so false, that there is no account to be made of them. The Irish Nobility and
Lords of Countries, do not only in their hearts affect this plausible
quarrel, and are divided from us in religion, but have an especial quarrel
to the English government, because it limitteth and tieth them, who ever have
been, and ever would be as absolute Tyrants, as any are under the Sun. The
Towns, being inhabited by men of the same religion and birth as the rest, are
so carried away with the love of gain, that for it, they will furnish the
rebels with all things that may arm them, or enable them against the State, or
against themselves. The wealth of the Kingdom, which consists in cattle,
oate-meale, and other victuals, is almost all in the Rebels hands, who in every
Province, till my coming, have been Masters of the field. The expectation of
all these Rebels is very present, and very confident, that Spain will either
so invade your Majesty, that you shall have no leisure to prosecute them here,
or so succor them, that they will get most of the Towns into their hands, ere
your Majesty shall relieve and reinforce your Army. So that now if your Majesty
resolve to subdue these Rebels by force, they are so many, and so framed to be
Soldiers, that the war of force will be great, costly, and long. If your
Majesty will seek to break them by factions amongst themselves, they are
covetous and mercinary, and must be purchased, and their Jesuits and
practicing Priests, must be hunted out and taken from them, which now do
sodder them so fast, and so close together. If your Majesty will have a strong
party in the Irish Nobility, and make use of them, you must hide from them all
purpose of establishing English government, till the strength of the Irish be
so broken, that they shall see no safety but in your Majesty's protection. If
your Majesty will be assured of the possession of your Towns, and keep them
from supplying the wants of the Rebels, you must have garrisons brought into
them, able to command them, and make it a capital offense for any Merchant in
Ireland, to trade with the Rebels, or buy or sell any arms or munition
whatsoever. For your good subjects may have for their money out of your
Majesty's store, that which shall be appointed by order, and may serve for
their necessary defense, whereas if once they be tradable, the Rebels will give
such extreme and excessive prices, that they will never be kept from them. If
your Majesty will secure this your Realm from the danger of invasion, as soon
as those which direct and manage your Majesty's intelligences, give notice of
the preparations and readiness of the enemy, you must be as well armed, and
provided for your defense: which provision, consists in having forces upon the
Coast, inroled and trained, in having Magazines of victual in your Majesty's
West and North-west parts, ready to be transported; and in having ships both of
war and transportation, which may carry and waft them both, upon the first
allarum of a descent. The enroling and training of your subjects, is no charge
to your Majesty's own cofers: The providing of Magazines, will never be any
loss, for in using them, you may save a Kingdom, and if you use them not, you
may have your old store sold, and (if it be well handled) to your Majesty's
profit. The arming of your Majesty's ships, when you hear your enemy arms to
the Sea, is agreeable to your own provident and Princely courses, and to the
policy of all Princes and states of the World. But to return to Ireland
again, as I have showed your Majesty the dangers and disaduantages, which your
servants and Ministers here shall and do meet withal, in this great work of
reducing this Kingdom. So I will now (as well as I can) represent to your
Majesty your strengths and advantages. First, these Rebels are neither able to
force any walled Town, Castle, or House of strength, nor to keep any that
they get, so that while your Majesty keeps your Army in strength and vigor, you
are undoubtedly Mistress of all towns and holds whatsoever. By which means
(if your Majesty have good Ministers) all the wealth of the Land shall be
drawn into the hands of your subjects, your soldiers in the winter shall be
casefully lodged, and readily supplied of any wants, and we that command your
Majesty's forces, may make the war offen sieve and defensive, may fight and be
in safety, as occasion is offered. Secondly, your Majesty's Horsemen, are so
incomparably better then the rebels, and their foot are so unwilling to fight
in battle or gross, (howsoever they be desirous to skirmish and fight loose);
that your Majesty may be always Mistress of the champion Countries, which are
the best parts of this Kingdom. Thirdly, your Majesty victualling your Army
out of England and with your Garrisons burning and spoiling the Country in all
places, shall starve the Rebel in one year, because no place else can supply
them. Fourthly, since no war can be made without Munition, and munition this
Rebel cannot have, but from Spain, Scotland, or your own Towns here, if
your Majesty will still continue your Ships and Pinaces upon the Coast, and be
pleased to send a Printed Proclamation, that upon pain of death no Merchant,
Townes-man, or other Subject, do traffic with the Rebel, or buy or sell in
any sort any kind of Munition or Arms, I doubt not, but in short time I shall
make them bankerout of their old store, and I hope our Seamen will keep them
from receiving any new. Fifthly, your Majesty has a rich store of gallant
Colonels, Captains, and Gentlemen of quality, whose example and execution is
of more use, then all the rest of your troops; whereas the men of best
quality among the rebels, which are their Leaders, and their horsemen, dare
never put themselves to any hazard, but send their Kerne, and their hirelings
to fight with your Majesty's Troops; so that although their common soldiers
are too hard for our new men, yet are they not able to stand before such
gallant men as will charge them. Sixthly, your Majesty's Commanders being
aduiled and exercised, know al advantages, and by the strength of their order,
will in all great fights beat the rebels. For they neither march, nor lodge,
nor fight in order, but only by the benefit of their footmanship, can come on,
and go off at their pleasure, which makes them attend a whole day, still
skirmishing, and never engaging themselves. So that it has been ever the fault
and weakness of your Maiestis Leaders, whenever you have received any blow.
For the rebels do but watch and attend upon all grosle ouersights. Now if it
please your Majesty to compare your advantages and disaduantages together, you
shall find, that though these Rebels are more in number then your Majesty's
Army, and have (though I do unwillingly confess it) better bodies, and
perfecter use of their Arms, then those men which your Majesty sends over;
yet your Majesty, commanding the walled Towns, Holds, and Champion
Countries, and having a brave Nobility and Gentry, a better Discipline, and
stronger order then they, and such means to keep from them the maintenance of
their life, and to waste the Country, which should nourish them, your Majesty
may promise your self, that this action will (in the end) be successful,
though costly, and that your Victory will be certain, though many of us your
honest servants must sacrifice our selves in the quarrel, and that this
Kingdom will be reduced, though it will ask (besides cost) a great deal of
care, industry, and time. But why do I talk of victory, or of success? is
it not known, that from England I receive nothing but discomforts and souls
wounds? Is it not spoken in the Army, that your Majesty's favor is diuerted
from me, and that already you do boadil both to me and it? Is it not believed
by the Rebels, that those whom you favor most, do more hate me out of
faction, then them out of duty or conscience? Is it not lamented of your
Majesty's faithfullest subjects both there and here, that a Cobham, or a
Kaleigh (I will forbear others for their places sake) should have such credit
and favor with your Majesty, when they wish the ill success of your
Majesty's most important action, the decay of your greatest strength, and the
destruction of your faithfullest servants? Yes, yes, I see both my own
destiny, and your Majesty's decree, and do willingly embrace the one, and obey
the other. Let me honestly and zealously end a wearisome life, let others live
in deceitful and unconstant pleasure; let me bear the brunt, and die
meritoriously; let others achiue and finish the work, and live to erect
Trophies. But my prayer shall be, that when my Soneraigne loses me, her Army
may not loose courage, or this Kingdom want physic, or her dearest Self
miss Essex, and then I can never go in a better time, nor in a fairer way.
Till then, I protest before God and his Angels, that I am a true Votarie, that
is sequestered from all things but my duty and my charge; I perform the
uttermost of my bodies, minds and fortunes abilitte, and more should, but that
a constant care and labor agrees not with an inconstant health, in an
unwholesome and uncertain clymate. This is the hand of him, that did live your
dearest, and will die,

Your Majesty's faithfullest servant Essex.


Toward the end of July his Lordp. brought back his forces into Lemster, the
soldiers being weary, sick, and vncredibly diminished in number, and
himself returned to Dublin. All that his Lordp. had done in this journey,
besides the scattering of the Rebels weak troops, was the taking of Cahir
Castle, and receiving the L. of Cahir, the L. Roche and some others into her
Majesty's Protection, who after his departure did either openly fall again to
the rebels party, or secretly combine with them. While his Lordp. was in this
iourny, some 600 men left in the Glinnes, by the unskillfulness of some young
Captains and soldiers, and the ill affection of some Irish Officers, received
a disgraceful blow from the Obirns, whereupon his Lordp. now severely punished
their fault, disarming the soldiers, and executing the tenth man, calling the
Captains to a Martial Court, and discharging them, and condemning to be shot
to death an Irish Lieutenant, who had parlied with the Rebels, and was thought
to have animated them. Then his Lordp. understanding that the Queen was much
offended with this Mounster iourny, he cast in his letters the fault on the
Counsel of Ireland, whose advise, by reason of their long experience in those
wars, he thought fittest to follow, at his first entry, but withal gave her
Majesty full assurance that he would presently lead the Army into Vlster
against Tyrone himself. Yet these letters were scarce delivered, when by
others he signified a necessity of a journey into Ophalia and Leax near
Dublin, against the Oconnors and Omores, whom he brake with ease, himself
leading some 1500 into Ophalia, and sending Sir Christopher Blunt the Marshal
into Leax with 1000 men under the command of Sir Charles Pearcy and Sir Richard
Moryson. Then at his return, taking a view of the Army, he found it so
weakened, as by letters signed by himself and the Counsel there, he desired
a supply of 1000 foot out of England, to enable him presently to undertake the
Vlster journey.

Thus resolved to march Northward, he commanded Sir Conyors Clifford,
Governor of Connaght to draw his forces up to Belike, that he might force
Tyrone to send some of his forces that way, while he assailed him on the other
side. Sir Conyers Clifford accordingly marched this way with one thousand four
hundred foot by Pole, and the Earl of Southamptons Troop of one hundred
horse, under the leading of Captain John lephson, with some other Irish horse:
and coming to the Curlew mountains he left the munition and carriages under
the guard of the horse, til he passing forward with the Foot had tried the
passage. He had not gone far, before Ororke and other rebels with him, upon
the advantage of Woods, Bogges, and a stony causey, assailed our men, who at
the first valiantly repelled them, till the rebels finding the munition our men
had about them beginning to fail, renewed the charge with greater fury then
before; at which time our men, discouraged with the want of powder, (almost all
they had about them being spent, and their store being behind with the
carriage), as also wearied with a long march they had made before the skirmish,
began to saint, and take themselves to flight, whom the rebels pursued, and
killed some one hundred and twenty in the place, among which the Governor Sir
Conyers Clifford, and a worthy Captain Sir Alexander Ratcliffe, were lost,
besides as many more hurt, whereof the greatest part recovered. And no doubt
the rest had all perished, if the Horse had not valiantly succored them. For
the Lord of Dunkellyn (who that day had most valiantly behaved himself) sent
word to Captain John Iephson of their distress, who presently charged upon
the causey, and to the very skirts of the Wood, with such resolution, as the
rebels either thinking Horse could not have served there, or expecting
advantages upon them in that boggy place, stood gaping on them, and gave way,
without any resistance for a good space, in which our men had leisure to retire
over a Ford, into the Plain, where the carriages were, and thence to the Abbey
of the Boil, being very near the place. Afterward the rebels began to charge
our Horse, but their powder being almost spent, Captain Iephson safely
retired, with the loss of some few horses. In a Consultation, some were
earnest to have marched forward the next day: but the Lord of Dunkellin, Sir
Arthur Savage, Captain John Iephson, and many of the best judgment,
considering the Governor was lost, our troops utterly dismayed, and Odonnel
come down with all his forces into those parts, thought fit our men should
retire to their Garrisons. So Captain Iephson all that night kept the Ford,
while our Foot in the silent night retired, and in the morning when they were
in safety, he with the Horse under his command went softly after them to the
Castle of Athlone. It is strange, the rebels then present being but some two
hundred, and most of our men being old soldiers, how this defeat could be
given, but small accidents in military affairs, are often causes of strange
and great events: for I have heard this mischance fully attributed to an
unorderly turning of the whole body of the Van; which though it were toward the
enemy, yet being mistaken by some common soldiers for a flight, it caused a
general rowte.

In the mean time the foresaid supply of one thousand foot was sent out of
England to the Lord Licutenant, according to his and the Counse is request. But
few days after, his Lordship signified by his letters into England, that he
could do no more this season of the year, then to draw thirteen hundred
Foot, and three hundred horse to the borders of Vlster. Whether he came about
the Ides of September, and Tyrone two days together showed himself and his
troops upon distant hills, to the English. Then Tyrone sent Hagan to the Lord
Lieutenant, to entreat a Parley between his Lordship and him; which his
Lordship refused, answering, that if Tyrone would speak with him, he should
find him next day in Arms, in the head of the Army. The next day, after a
light skirmish, one of Tyrones horsemen cried with a loud voice, that Tyrone
would not fight, but would speak with the Lord Licutenant, and that unarmed,
and both withdrawn aside from the forces. The next day, when his Lordship
marched forwards, Hagan met him again, and declared to him, that Tyrone
besought the Queens mercy, and that he would vouchsafe to speak one word with
him, which granted, he would in all humbleness attend his Lordship at the
Foard Balla-clinch, near the chief Town of the County of Louth. His Lordship
sent some before, to view the Foard, who found Tyrone there, and he assured
them, that howsoever the waters were something risen, yet they might easily
hear one another from each side. His Lordship being come thither, Tyrone
leaving a troop of horse upon a hill not far off, came down alone, and
putting his horse up to the belly in the water, with all humbleness saluted his
Lordship standing on the other bank, and there they passed many speeches. Then
Tyrone called his brother Cormack, Mac Gennys, Mac Guire, Ever Mac Couley,
Henry Ouington, and O Quin, to the Foard, the Lord Lieutenant having first
called the Earl of South-hampton, Sir George Bourcher, Sir Warham Sant Ledger,
Sir Henry Dauers, Sir Edward Wingfeld, and Sir William Constable, to come
down. Tyrone very Courtly saluted each one, and after short conference, it was
concluded, that the next day Commissioners, should meet to treat of Peace,
and they made a mutual Truce from that day for six weeks, and so from six
weeks to six weeks, till the Callends of May, with caution, that it should
be free to either side, upon fourteen days warning first given, to renew
the war. And if any of the Earl of Tyrones confederates should not assent
hereunto, he left them to be prosecuted, by the Lord Licutenant.

By this time the Queen had received his Lordships last letters above
mentioned, signifying that he could only for this winter, draw to the confines
of Vlster, with one thousand three hundred foot and three hundred horse; At
which time, to justify his resolution, he sent the judgment of the chief
Commanders of the Army, subscribed with their hands, dated the one twenty of
August, that for that time more could not be enterprised for these reasons;
that the Army was unwilling to be drawn toward Vlster, so as many ran away
from their Colors; that many were sick; that no Plantation could be made this
year at Loughfoyle, nor any course taken to divert Tyrones forces; that the
Connaght Army was defeated; that his Lordships Army had not above four
thousand able men at the most; that these were unable to stand against the
rebels, being six thousand shot, and lying within strong intrenchments; that
much less any strong Garrisons could be left in the North, and a safe retreit
made; And lastly, that those Garrisons, if they could be left there, would
more endanger the English (being continually to supply them with vittles in
winter time) then annoy the rebels. Her Majesty being highly offended, that so
royal an Army, maintained with her excessive charge, had in six months
effected nothing, and now gave no hope of any important service to be done
against the rebels, wrote a sharp letter to the Lord Lieurenant, and the
Counsel of Ireland, as follows.

Elizabeth Regina.

By the Queen.

RIght trusty and right well beloved Cosen and Councellor, and trusty and
welbe-loued We greet you well. Having sufficiently declared unto you before
this time, how little the manner of your proceedings has answered, either our
direction, or the worlds expectation. And finding now by your letters by Cuffe,
a course more strange if stranger may be, we are doubtful what to prescribe you
at any time, or what to build upon by your own writings to us in any thing.
For we have clearly discerned of late that you have ever to this hour
possessed us with expectations, that you would proceed as we directed you. But
your actions show always the contrary, though carried in such sort, as you
were sure we had no time to countermaund them.

Before your departure, no man's counsel was held sound, which persuaded not
presently the maine prosecution in Vlster, all was nothing without that, and
nothing was too much for that. This drew on the sudden transportation, of so
many thousands to be carried over with you, as when you arrived we were charged
with more then the list, or which we resolved, to the number of three hundred
horse; Also the thousand which were only to be in pay during the service in
Vlster, have been put in charge ever since the first journey. The pretense of
which voyage as appears by your letters was to do some present service, in
the Interim, whilst the season grew more commodious for the maine prosecution;
for the which purpose, you did importune with great earnestness, that all
manner of provisions might be hastened to Dublin against your return.

Of this resolution to defer your going into Vlster, you may well think that
we would have made stay, if you had given us more time, or it we could have
imagined by the contents of your own writings, that you would have spent nine
weeks abroad. At your return, when a third part of July was past, and that
you had understood our mislike of your former course and making your excuse of
undertaking it only in respect of your conformity to the Councels opinions,
with great protestations of haste into the North, we received another letter,
of new reasons to suspend that journey yet a while, and to draw the Army into
Ophalia. The fruit whereof was no other at your coming home, but more
relations of further miseries of your Army, and greater difficulties to
perform the Vlster war. Then followed from you and the Council a new
demand of two thousand men to which if we would assent, you would speedily.
Camden says only one thousand.
undertake what we had so often commanded. When that was granted, and your
going onward promised by diverse letters, we received by this bearer now fresh
advertisement, that all you can do is to go to the frontier, and that you
have provided only for twenty days victuals. In which kind of proceeding,
we must deal plainly with you and that Council, that it were more proper
forthem, to leave troubling themselves with instructing us, by what rules our
power and their obedience are limited, and to bethink them, if the courses
have bin only derived from their Counsels, how to answer this part of theirs,
to train us into a new expense for one end, and employ it upon another; to
which we could never have assented, if we could have suspected it should have
been undertaken, before we heard it was in action. And therefore we do wonder
how it can be answered, seeing yourattempt is not in the capital Traitors
Country, that you have increased our list: but it is true as we have often
said, that we are drawn on to expense, by little and little, and by
protestations of great resolutions in generalities, till they come to
particular execution. Of all which courses, whosoever shall examine any of the
arguments used for excuse, shall find, that your own proceedings beget the
difficulties, and that no just causes do breed the alteration. It lack of
numbers, if sickness of the army be the causes, why was not the action
undertaken, when the Army was in better state, if winters approach: why were the
summer months of July and August lost? if the spring was too soon, and the
summer that followed otherwise spent, if the harvest that succeeded was so
neglected, as nothing has been done, then surely must we conclude, that none
of the sour quarters of the year will be in season for you and that Counsel,
to agree of Tyrones prosecution; for which all our charge was intended. Further
we require you to consider, whether we have not great cause to think, that the
purpose is not to end the war, when your self have so often told us, that
all the petty undertakings in Lemster, Mounster, and Connaght, are but loss of
time, consumption of treasure, and waste of our people, until Tyrone himself
be first beaten, on whom the rest depend. Do you not see, that he makes the
war with us in all parts by his Ministers, seconding all places where any
attempts be offered: who does not see, that if this course be continued, the
wars are like to spend us and our Kingdom beyond all moderation, as well as
the report of the success in all parts has blemished our Honor,
andincouraged others to no small proportion. We know you cannot so much fail in
judgment, as not to understand, that all the World sees, how time is dallied,
though you think the allowance of that Counsel, whose subscriptions are your
Echoes, should serve and satisfy us. How would you have derided any man else,
that should have followed your steps? How often have you told us, that others
which preceded you, had no intent to end the war? How often have you resolved
us, that until Loughfeyle and Ballishannon were planted; there could be no
hope of doing service upon the capital Rebels? We must therefore let you know,
that as it cannot be ignorance, so it cannot be want of means, for you had
your asking, you had choice of times, you had power and authority more ample
then ever any had, or ever shall have. It may well be judged, with how little
contentment, we search out this and other errors: for who does willingly
seek for that, which they are so loath to find, but how should that be hidden
which is so palpable? And therefore to leave that which is past, and that you
may prepare to remedy matters of weight hereafter, rather then to fill your
papers with many impertinent arguments, being in your general Letters,
sauouring still in many points of humors, that concern the private of you our
Lord Liefetenant; we do tell you plainly, that are of that Council, that we
wonder at your indiscretion, to subscribe to Letters which concern our public
service, when they are mixed with any man's private, and directed to our
Counsel Table, which is not to handle things of small importance.

To conclude, if you will say, though the Army be in list twenty thousand, that
you have them not, we answer then to our Treasurer, that we are ill served;
and that there need not so frequent demands of full pay: If you will say the
Muster-master is to blame, we much muse then why he is not punished, though say
we might to you our General, if we would Ex Iureproprioiudicare, that all
defects by Ministers, yea though in never so remote Garrisons, have been
affirmed to us, to deserve to be imputed to the want of care of the General.
For the small proportion you say you carry with you of three thonsand five
hundred foot, when lately weaugmented you two thousand more. It is to Us past
comprehension, except it be that you have left still too great numbers in
unnecessary Garrisons, which do increase our charge, and diminish your Army,
which We command you to reform, especially since you, by your continual
reports of the state of every Province, describe them all to be in worse
condition, then ever they were before you set foot in that Kingdom. So that
whosoever shall write the story of this years action, must say, that We were at
great charges to hazard Our Kingdom, and you have taken great pains to
prepare for many purposes, which perish without understanding. And therefore
because We see now by your own words, that the hope is spent of this years
service upon Tyrone and O Donnel, We do command you and our Council, to fall
into present deliberation, and thereupon to send Us over in writing, a true
declaration of the State to which you have brought our Kingdom, and what be
the effects which this iourny has produced, and why these Garrisons which you
will plant far within the land in Brenny and Monaghan, as others whereof We
have written, shall have the same difficulties.

Secondly, We look to hear from you and them jointly, how you think the
remainder of this year shall be employed, in what kind of war, and where, and
in what numbers, which being done and sent Us hither in writing with all
expedition, you shall then understand Our pleasure in all things fit for our
service, until which time, We command you to be very careful to meet with
all inconveniences; that may arise in that Kingdom, where the ill affected
will grow insolent upon Our ill success, and the good subjects grow desperate;
when they see the best of Our preserving them.

We have seen a writing in form of a cartell, full of challenges that are
impertinent, and of comparisons that are needelesse, such as has not been
before this time presented to a State, except it be done now with a hope to
terrify all men, from censuring your proceedings. Had it not bin enough to
have sent Us the testimony of the Counsel, but that you must call so many of
those, that are of slender experience, and none of Our Counsel, to such a
form of subscription. Surely howsoever you may have warranted them, We doubt
not but to let them know, what belongs to Us; to you, and to themselves. And
thus expecting your answer, We end, at Our Manor of Nonsuch the fourtenth of
September, in the one and fortieth year of Our Reign, 1599.

The Lord Lieutenant being nettled, or rather galled with this letter resolved
to Lords Instices.
leave Adam Loftus the Lord Archbishop of Dublin, and Sir George Carry Treasurer
at Wars, to govern the Kingdom in his absence, and presently sailing into
England posted to the Court, where altogether unlooked for, he arrived the
eight and twenty of September, and presented himself on his knees to the
Queen, early in the morning, being in her private chamber, who received him
not with that cheerful countenance, which she was wont to show him, but after
a brief conference, commanded him to retire to his chamber, and there to stay,
until he knew her further pleasure; from whence his Lordships next remove,
was to the Lord Keepers house, in state of a prisoner.

The list of the chief Officers of the Kingdom, and the Army, and the
disposal of the forces made in September, 1599, when the Lord Lieutenant left
the Kingdom.
Officers and Governors.
Lord Lieutenant the Earl of Essex Lord President of Mounster void by the
death of Sir Thomas Norreys. Place of chief Commissioner of Connaght void or
prouisional. Lieutenant of the Army Earl of Ormond. Treasurer at Wars Sir
George Carey, The Marshals place of Ireland void. Master of the Ordinance Sir
George Bourcher. Marshall of the Camp prouisionally Sir Oliver Lambert.
Lieutenant of the Horse Sir Henry Dauers. Serieant Mayor Sir Arthur Chichester.

Colonels of Horse.
Sir William Euers.

Sir Griffin Markham.

Colonels of Foot.
Earl of Kildare. Earl of Thomond. Lord of Dunkellin. Lord Audley. Lord
Dunsany. Sir Edward Denny. Sir Matthew Morgan. Sir Charles Piercy. Sir Henry
Dockwra. Sir Christopher Saint Laurence. Sir John Bolles. Sir Edward Harbert.
Sir Charles Wilmott. Sir Henry Power. Sir Arthur Savage.

Four Corporals and a Prouost-Marshall of the Army.

The disposal of the forces.
Horse in Mounster.
The Earl of Thomond, 25. Sir Anthony Cook, 50. Sir Warham Saint Ledger, 25.
Captain Thomas White, 50.

Foot in Mounster.
Earl of Thomond, 200. Master Treasurer, 100. Sir Henry Harington, 100. Sir
Henry Power, 200. Sir Edward Denny, 150. Sir Anthony Cook, 100. Sir Charles
Wilmott, 150. Sir Francis Barkley, 100. Sir John Dowdal, 100. Captain William
Power, 150 Captain Clare, 150. Captain Brown, 100. Captain Kearnys, 100.
Captain Bostock, 100. Captain Brook, 100. Captain Rande, 100. Captain
Flower, 100. Captain Diggs, 100. Captain William Tirwhit, 150. Captain
Parken, 100. Captain William Hartpoole, 100. Captain Francis Kingesmil 100.

Horse in Connaght.
Earl of Clanrickard, 50. Provost Marshall, 10. Sir Theobald Dillon, 15.
Captain George Blunt, 12.

Foot in Connaght.
Earl of Clanrickard, 100. Lord of Dunkellyn, 150. Sir Arthur Savage, 200. Sir
Thomas Bourke, 100. Sir Gerrald Haruy, 150. Sir Hugh O Connor, 100. Sir
Theobald Dillon, 100. Captain Badbye, 150. Captain Richard Pluncket, 100.
Captain Mostian, 100. Captain Tibot ne long, 100. Captain Walter Floyd, 150.
Captain Thomas Roper, 150. Captain Oliver Burke, 100. Captain Thomas Burke,
100. Captain David Bourke, 100.

Horse at Carickfergus.
Neale Mas Hugh, 30.

Foot at Carickfergus.
Sir Arthur Chichester, 200. Sir Richard Percy, 150. Captain Eington, 100.
Captain Norton, 100.

Horse at the Newry.
Sir Samuel Bagnol, 50.

Foot at the Newrie.
Sir Samuel Bagnoll, 200. Captain Edward Blaney, 150. Captain Freckleton,
100. Captain Josias Bodley, 150. Captain Francis Stufford, 100. Captain Toby
Cawfeild, 150. Captain Leigh, 100.

Foot at Dundalke.
Captain Egerton, 100. Captain Bingley, 150. Captain Basset, 100.

Foot at Atherde.
Sir Garret Moore, 100. Captain Roe, 100.

Horse at Kells and Nauan.
Lord of Dunsany, 50. Sir Garret Moore, 25.

Foot at Kells and Nauan.
Lord Audley, 200. Lord Dunsany, 150. Sir Fulk Conway, 150. Sir Christopher
Saint Laurence, 200. Sir Henry Dockwra, 200. Sir John Chamberlain, 150.
Captain John Sidney, 100. Captain Ralph Sydley, 100. Captain Roger Atkinson,
100. Captain Heath, 150. Captain Nelson, 100. Captain Hugh Rely, 100.

Horse at Trym.
Sir Grisson Markham, 50.

Foot at Trym.
Sir Charles Piercy, 200. Captain Roger Orme, 100. Captain Alford, 100.

Foot at Leax and the Barow side.
Sir Warham Saint Ledger, 150. Sir Francis Rush, 150. Captain John Fitz-Piers,
150. Master Hartpoole, 10.

Foot at Eniscorthy.
Sir Oliver Lambert, 200. Sir Richard Masterson, 150.

Horse in and about the Nasse.
The Earl of Kildare, 50. Captain Richard Greame, 50. Captain Thomas
Gifford, 2. Captain George Greame, 12. Captain Thomas Lee, 12.

Foot in and about the Nasse.
Earl of Kildare, 150. The Earl of Southampton, 200. Sir Matthew Morgan, 150.
Sir Thomas Loftus, 100. Captain Walter Mac Edmond, 100 Captain Edward Loftus,
100. Captain Thomas Williams, 150. Captain Thomas Lee, 100. Captain William
Eustace, 100. Captain Esmond, 150. Captain John Masterson, 100. Captain
Else Flood, 100. Captain R. Treuor. 100.

Foot at Mullingar.
The Lord of Deluin, 150. Captain Thomas Mynne, 100. Captain William
Stafford, 100. Captain Lionel Ghest, 100. Captain William Winsor, 100.
Captain Thomas Cooche, 100. Captain Garret Dillon, 100.

Foot in Ophaly.
Sir Henry Cooly, 20. Sir Henry Warren, 100. Sir Edward Fitzgerald, 100. Sir
George Cooly, 20.

Horse at Kilkenny.
The Earl of Ormond, 50. Sir Oliver Lambert, 25. Sir Walter Butler, 50. Sir
Cristopher Saint Laurence, 30. Captain Garret Fleming, 25. Captain William
Taffe, 50.

Foot at Kilkenny.
The Earl of Ormond, 200. Sir Carew Reynel, 150. Sir Henry Follyot, 150.
Captain Richard Croft, 100. Captain Henry Sheffeild, 100. Captain Nicholas
Pinner, 100.

Foot at Ballymore, and O Carrols Country.
Captain Francis Shane, 100. Captain Edward Lister, 100. Sir Charles O
Carrol, 100.

Horse and Foot at Newcastle.
Sir William Warren, 50 horse. Sir William Warren, 100 foot.

Foot at Athboy and Phillipstown.
Sir Richard Moryson, 200. Sir George Bourcher, 100.

Foot at Dublin.
Sir Henry Foulkes, commanding the Lord Lieutenants Guard, 200.

Horse at Fingall, and the Nauan.
Sir William Euers, 100. The Earl of Southamptons troop, commanded by
Captain John Iephson, 100. Sir Henry Dauers, 100.

Horse in the County of Dublin.
Sir Hen. it Harrington, 25. Sir Edward Herbert, 12. Sir Gerald Aylemer, 13.
Morrogh Mac Teig Oge, 10.

Foot undisposed.
Sir John Talbot, 22.

Total of Horse, one thousand two hundred thirty one.

Total of Foot, fourteen thousand four hundred twenty two.

The foresaid Lords Justices being left to govern Ireland, upon the Lord
Lieutenants sudden departure, did easily rule the unwieldy Helm of this
Kingdom so long, as the Sea was caline, by the continuance of that truce
formerly mentioned to be made, between the Lord Lieutenant and Tyrone, which
was then concluded for six weeks, and so from six to six weeks, till the
Calends of May, except either of them should give fourteen days warning of
their purpose to break the same. But about the beginning of December, Tyrones
party entering into acts of hostility, the Lords Justices sent Sir William
Warren, to expostulate with him the cause of this breach. He answered, that he
had not broken the Truce, having (according to the condition thereof) given
them fourteen days warning. And that he had so done, because the Earl of
Essex being imprisoned in England, in whom he had placed all the confidence of
his life and estate, he was resolved not to rely on the Council of that
Kingdom, who had formerly dealt deceitfully with him therein. Finally, that he
could not now renew the truce, though he never so much desired it, since he
had already sent Odonnel into Connaght, and diverse of his confederates into
other parts to renew the war.

Thus much their Lordships advertised into England, by letters full of
diffidence, professing that they feared the rebels would presently assault the
English Pale. Likewise some ill affected to the Earl of Essex, advertised,
that among the Rebels a common rumor was spread, and that no doubt from Tyrone,
that England would shortly be in combustion within it self, which increased
the suspicions already conceived of the foresaid conference had between the
Earl and Tyrone, to the great prejudice of the Earl being in durance.

Now her Majesty receiving these aduertisements, and further understanding,
that the rebels daily increased in number and courage, that the mere Irish
aspired to liberty, and that the English Irish, if perhaps well affected, yet
were daunted by the ill success of the Queens affairs, (whose great
expenses, and Royal Army they had seen vanish into smoke), and were besides
exasperated with an old grief, to be excluded themselves from the Government,
while English Deputies were daily sent to command them. And having
intelligence, that Tyrone full of pride, did every where bost himself as
Champion of the Iish Liberty and Romish Religion (every where receiving to his
protection, and cherishing all seditious persons, helping the weak with
succors, confirming the diffident with strong hopes), and that he was grown
confident to root out the English Government, as well by former successes, as
by the succor of the King of Spain, (who already had sent him some munition
and a little money, with bragging promises of greater supplies), and by the
fair promises and large indulgences sent from the Pope, with a Crown of
Phoenix feathers (perhaps in imitation of Pope Urban the third, who sent John,
the son to King Henry the second, then made Lord of Ireland, a little Crown
wouen of Peacocks feathers.)

Her Majesty (I say) having these aduertisements, and finding thereby, that it
was high time, to make strong opposition to this rebellious monster, made
choice of Charles Charles Blonnt, L. Mountioy, L. Deputy.
Blonnt, Lord Mountioy to be Deputy of Ireland, whom her Highness had the last
year purposed to employ in that place: At which time, the Earl of Essex,
though linked in near friendship with him, yet secretly opposed this her
Majesty's determination, alleging that the Lord Mountioy had small experience
in martial affairs, save that he had gained in the small time he served in
the Low Countries, adding that he was too bookish, and had too few followers,
and too small an estate, to embrace so great a business. So as the Earl not
obscurely affecting this employment himself, (to the end he might more
strongly confirm that dependancy which all military men already had on him)
and his enemies willingly giving second to this his ambition, (that by his
absence they might have better advantages to hurt him, and to benefit them
selves), at that time the said Earl easily drew this fatal government on his
own shoulders, which was one of the first steps, and not the least cause of
his ruin.

Being now to write of this Honorable Lord Mountioy, my deceased Lord and
Master, I do faithfully profess, and pray the Reader confidently to believe,
(which I hope most easily to obtain of those, who best know me), that as in
the duty of a servant I will not omit any thing I remember, which may turn to
his Lordships Honor, so in my love to truth, I will be so far from lying and
flattering, as I will rather be bold modestly to mention some of his defects,
whereof the greatest Worthies of the World cannot be altogether free. To which
I will only add, that as I esteem lying and flattery by word of mouth, among
the living, to be infallible notes of basenesle and ignorance, so I judge these
vices infamous and sinful, when they are left in print to deceive posterity.
Since the first may detect falsehood by inquiring the truth, but the latter have
no means to rectify their misinformed judgments.

Thus I return to proceed in my former narration; and first I will delineate
(after my best skill) the true portraiture of this worthy Lords body and mind,
then I will collect the Councels, by which he tamed this Monster of Rebellion;
and lastly, I will descend by order of time to his Lordships particular
actions. But ere I take my pensill in hand to figure this Noble Lords person, I
must acknowledge my weakness such, as I cannot fully apprehend his complete
worthiness, and therefore desire, that those of greater judgment to discern
the same, will impute all defects to the unskillfulness of the workman, and that
with others, to whom his Lordship was less known, my, rude Pen may not
derogate any thing from his due praise Again, give me leave to remember, that
which I received from his mouth, that in his childhood when his Parents would
have his picture, he chose to be drawn with a Trowell in his hand, and this
Mot; Adreadificandam antiquam Domum, To rebuild the ancient House: For this
noble and ancient Barrony was decayed, not so muchby his Progenitors
prodigality, as his Fathers obstinate addiction to the study and practice of
Alchumy, by which he so long labored to increase his revenues, til he had
almost fully consumed them. Now to the purpose, let us observe how he fulfilled
this ominous presage, in rebnilding that Noble House, till by his untimely
death, the same was fatally eclipsed again.

He was of stature tall, and of very comely proportion, his skin fair, with
little hair on his body, which hair was of color blackish (or inclining to
black), and thin on his head, where he wore it short, except a lock under
his left ear, which he nourished the time of this war, and being wouen up,
hid it in his neck under his ruff. The crown of his head was in his latter
days something bald, as the forepart naturally curled; he only used the Barber
for his head, for the hair on his chin (growing slowly) and that on his
cheeks and throat, he used almost daily to cut it with his sizers, keeping it
so low with his own hand, that it could scarce be discerned, as likewise
himself kept the hair of his upper lip something short, only suffering
that under his hither lip to grow at length and full; yet some two or three
yecres before his death, he nourished a sharp and short pikedeuant on his
chin. His forehead was broad and high; his eyes great, black, and lovely; his
nose something low and short, and a little blunt in the end; his chin round;
his cheeks full, round, and ruddy; his countenance cheerful, and as amiable
as ever I beheld of any man, only some two years before his death, upon
coffeehouse, his face grew thin, his ruddy color failed, growing somewhat
swarthy, and his countenance was sad and dejected. His arms were long, and of
proportionable bigness, his hands long and white, his fingers great in the end,
and his legs somewhat little, which he gartered ever above the knee, wearing
the Garter of Saint Georges order under the left knee, except when he was
booted, and so wore not that Garter, but a blew ribben in stead thereof above
his knee, and hanging over his boot.

The description of his apparel may be thought a needelesse curiosity, yet
must I add some few words thereof, be cause having promised the lively
portraiture of his body, as well as his mind, the same cannot otherwise be so
lively represented to the imagination, besides that by his clothes, some
disabilities of his body to undertake this hard war may be coniectured, and
especially the temper of his mind may be lively shadowed, since the Wise man
has taught us, that the apparel in some sort shows the man. His apparel
in Court and Cities was commonly of white or black Tafetaes or Sattens, and he
wore two (yea sometimes three) paires of silk stockins, with black silk
Grogran cloakes guarded, and ruffes of comely depth and thickness (never
wearing any falling band) black beauer hats, with plain black bands, a
taffaty quilted wastcoate in summer, a scarlet wastcoate, and sometimes both in
winter: But in the Country, and specially keeping the Field in Ireland (yea,
sometimes in the Cities), he ware Ierkins and round hose (for he never ware
other fashion then round) with laced panes of russet Cloth, and clokes of the
same cloth lined with Velvet, and white Beuer hats with plain bands, and
besides his ordinary stockings of silk, he wore under boots another pair of
Woollen or Wosted, with a pair of high linen bootehose, yea three wastcotes in
cold wether, and a thick ruff, besides a russet scarf about his neck thrice
folded under it. So as I never observed any of his age and strength to keep
his body so warm. He was very comely in all his apparel, but the Robes of
Saint Georges order, became him extraordinarily well.

For his diet, he used to fare plentifully, and of the best, and as his means
increased, so his Table was better served, so that in his latter time, no Lord
in England might compare with him in that kind of bounty. Before these
wars, he used to have nonrishing breakefasts, as panadoes, and broths; but in
the time of the war, he used commonly to break his fast with a dry crust of
bread, and in the Spring time with butter and sage, with a cup of stale beer,
wherewith sometimes in Winter he would have sugar and Nutmeg mixed. He fed
plentifully both at dinner, and supper, having the choicest and most (...)
meats, with the best wines, which he drunk plentifully, but never in great
excess; and in his latter years (especially in the time of the war, as well
when his night sleeps were broken, as at other times upon full diet) he used
to sleep in the afternoones, and that long, and upon his bed. He took Tobacco
abundantly, and of the best, which I think preserved him from sickness,
(especially in Ireland, where the Foggy air of the bogs, and waterish foul,
plenty of fish, and generally all meats with the common sort always unsalted
and green roasted, do most prejudice the health), for he was very seldom
sick, only he was troubled with the headache, which duly and constantly like
an ague, for many years, till his death took him once every three months,
and vehemently held him some three days, and himself in good part attributed,
as well the reducing of this pain to these certain and distant times, as the
ease he therein found, to the virtue of this herb. He was very neat, loving
clenlinesse both in apparel and diet, and was so modest in the necessities of
nature, as my self being at all hours (but time of sleep) admitted into his
chamber, and (I think) his most familiar friends, never heard or saw him use
any liberty therein, out of the privilege of his private chamber, except
perhaps in Irish iourneys, where he had no withdrawing room.

The tender using of his body, and his dainty fair before the waries, gave
Tyrone occasion, upon hearing of his coming over, to jest at him, as if all
occasions of doing service would be past, ere he could be made ready and have
his breakfast, but by woeful experience he found this ieasting to be the
laughter of Salomons Fool. His behavior was courtly, grave, and exceeding
comely, especially in actions of solemn pompes. In his nature he loved private
retiredness, with good fare, and some few choice friends. He delighted in
study, in gardens, an house richly furnished, and delectable for rooms of
retrait, in riding on a pad to take the air, in playing at shouelboard, or at
cards, in reading play-bookes for recreation, and especially in fishing and
fishponds, seldom using any other exercises, and using these rightly as
pastimes, only for a short and convenient time, and with great variety of
change from one to the other. He was undoubtedly valiant and wise. He much
affected glory and honor, and had a great desire to raise his house, being
also frugall in gathering and saving, which in his latter days declined to
vice, rather in greedy gathering, then in restraining his former bounties of
expense. So that howsoever his retirednes did alienate his mind from all
action, yet his desire of Honor and hope of reward and advancement by the
wars, yea of returning to this retiredness after the wars ended, made him
hotly embrace the forced course of the war; to which he was so fitted by his
wisdom, valor, and frugalitie, that in short time he became a Captain no
less wise, wary, and deliberate in counsel, then cheerful and bold in
execution, and more covetous in issuing the public treasure, then frugall in
spending his own revenues. And his care to preserve his Honor, and maintain
this estate, made him (though coldly) intertaine the like forced course of a
State Counselor at home after the wars. To the mannaging of which affairs,
he was no less enabled by the same valor, wisdom, and many other virtues,
had not the stream of his nature, prevailed to withdraw him from attending
them, further then to the only obtaining of these his own private ends. But
surely these dispositions of nature (besides others hereafter to be mentioned),
and these his private ends, made him of all men most fit for this Irish
employment, wherein the Queen and State longed for an end of the war, and
groned under the burden of an unsupportable expense.

Touching his affecting honor and glory, I may not omit, that his most
familiar friends must needs observe, the discourses of his Irish actions to
have been extraordinarily pleasing to him: so that, howsoever he was not prone
to hold discourses with Ladies, yet I have observed him more willingly drawn
to those of this nature, which the Irish Ladies entertaining him, then into any
other. And as he had (...) that commendable, yea necessary ability of a good
Captain, not only to fight and manage the war well abroad, but to write and
set forth his actions to the full at home, so I have seldom observed any
omission of like narrations in him, whereof he used to delate the more
weighty seriously, and to mention the smallest, at least by way of a jest:

Touching his studies or Bookishnesse, (by some imputed to him in detraction of
his fitnes to embrace an active employment), he came young and not well
grounded from Oxford Vniuer sity; but in his youth at London, he so spent his
vacant hours with scholars best able to direct him, as besides his reading in
Histories, skill in tongues, (so far as he could read and understand the
Italian and French, though he durst not adventure to speak them), and so much
knowledge (at least in Cosmography and the Mathematikes) as might serve his
own ends; he had taken such pains in the search of natural Philosophy, as in
diverse arguments of that nature held by him with scholars, I have often heard
him, (not without maruelling at his memory and judgment) to remember of
himself the most material points, the subtilest objections, and the soundest
answers. But his chief delight was in the study of Divinity, and more
especially in reading of the Fathers and Schoolmen: for I have heard himself
profess, that being in his youth addicted to Popery, so much as through
preiudicate opinion no Writer of our time could have converted him from it, yet
by observing the Fathers consent, and the Schoolemens idle and absurd
distinctions, he began first to distaste many of their opinions, and then by
reading our. Authors, to be confirmed in the reformed doctrine, which I am
confident he professed and believed from the heart, though in his innated
temper he was not factious against the Papists, but was gentle toward them,
both in conversation and in all occasions of disputation. And I will be bold to
say, that of a Layman, he was (in my judgment) the best Divine I ever heard
argue, especially for disputing against the Papists, out of the Fathers,
Schoolmen, and above all, out of the written Word, (whereof some Chapters were
each night read to him, besides his never intermitted prayers at morning and
night). Insomuch as I have often heard him, with strange felicity of memory and
judgment, discover the Papists false alleagings of the Fathers, and Texts, or
additions, and omissions in them, and to urge arguments strongly, and (as much
as beseemed him) schollerlike, as well in discourses with Jesuits and Priests
in Ireland, (more specially at Waterford, where he made the very seduced Irish
ashamed of them); as upon diverse occasions with other Papists his friends.

Further, in his nature he was a close concealer of his secrets, for which
cause, least they should be revealed, and because he loved not to be importuned
with suites, a free speaker, or a popular man, could not long continue his
favorite: He was sparing in speech; but when he was drawn to it, most
judicious therein, if not eloquent. He never used swearing, but rather hated
it, which I have seen him often control at his Table with a frowning brow,
and an angry cast of his black eye. He was slow to anger, but once provoked,
spoke home. His great temper was most scene in his wise carriage between the
Court factions of his time: He was a gentle enemy, easily pardoning, and
calmely pursuing revenge; and a friend, if not cold, yet not to be used much
out of the high way, and something too much reserved toward his dearest
Minions; besides that, the strength of his judgment made him so confident, as
they had more power in seconding his Counsels, then in diuerting or altering
them. To his servants he was mild, seldom reproving them, and never with ill
words: for his look of displeasure was sufficient to check them, and the best
sort nearest him, did so well know him, as they served and observed him, as
much almost by his looks as his words. He made no servant partner of his
secrets, further then his place necessarily gave him knowledge thereof, neither
could any of them lead him, or if any did, it was more by art to know his
humors, then power to sway them. I cannot say that he was bountiful to them,
some of their places drew profit, which could no more be stopped, then the
Miller can stay the draining of his water through his damme gates; otherwise
his gifts to them were rare and sparing, so as if it were above an hundred
pound, it was no morsel for a servant, yet still he kept their hopes so
green, as might continue their diligence, and at his death he gave a thousand
pound by will, to be divided by his executors discretion among them. They who
had his care, might easily season him with good or ill opinion of his servants
and strangers, by reason he drank in their speeches, without uttering them,
only his judgment was excellent, to discern the truth of the relation,
as well out of the informers passions, as observing the others actions. He kept
his word in public affairs inuiolably, without which he could never have
been trusted of the Irish: but otherwise in his promises, he was delatory and
doubtful, so as in all events, he was not without an evasion. Lastly, in his
love to Weomen, (for as wanton peace succeeds bloody war, so in the last
period of his life, after the Irish wars, grief of vnsuccessfull love
brought him to his last end): He was faithful and constant, if not transported
with self-love more then the object, and therein obstinate.

This worthy Lord Mountioy was he, whose known valor, sound wisdom, grave
constancy, and singular temper, two old Counselors of Ireland well observing,
did on their death bed, (as it were by divining faculty) pronounce to be the
man, by whom Tyrones fatal rebellion (in which their thoughts and endeavors
had long been wearied) was to be suppressed, if ever the English were to
recover the helm of that government. Neither did their presage deceive us
herein: for like another Fabius, he did by the ensuing deliberate and slow
counsels, restore his Countries declining power.

1. He entertained and cherished (especially at his first entering the
government, when he was yet unskillful in the affairs of that State and war)
all active spirits, whose endeavors he saw like to be of good use in that great
action; and this he did, rather with a pleasing familiarity, then with any
large bounty.

2. The hearts of the English common soldiers broken with a current of
disasterous successes, he heartned and encouraged, by leading them warily,
especially in his first actions, being more careful, that our men should not
be foiled, then that the rebels should be attempted with boldness. To this
end also, and that he might be ever at hand, as well to encourage and direct
them fighting; as to second them by any accident dismayed, he bravely
adventured his person, more then in the opinion of Military wise men, a
General should ordinarily hazard himself (howsoever I must confess, the
nature of the Irish fights, maintained upon passages, by sudden eruptions of
hidden rogues, does more expose the General to these dangers, then any other
war.) And such was his forwardness, as his Lordships servants may without
offense boldly say, they were a small part of this great action. For howsoever
we had neither stipend in the wars with the soldier, nor pensions with them
after the war ended, yet by reason of this our Lords extraordinary
forwardness to put himself into danger, and for that the Rebels use most
commonly to assault-vpon Woody paces; and difficult passages, where every man
must needs be in danger, and they most who ride in the best troop, it could
not be but that we should have our share in the adventure of our persons. And
lest I should sceme to arrogate that to my self and my fellows, which is not
due to us, the event may clear this point. Since in this short war (not to
speak of many less dangers), my Lord himself had his horse shot under him,
his Galloglasse carrying his helmet, had the same bruised with the grasing of a
bullet upon it, yea, his Lordships very Grayhound, likewise using to wait at
his stirrup, was shot through the body. Among his Lordships Chaplains, Doctor
Lattwara was killed, and Mast. Ram had his horse shot under him. Among his
Lordships Secretaries, Master Cranmer was killed, and my self had my thigh
bruised with a shot I received in my saddle. Among the Gentlemen of his
Lordships Chamber, Master Chidley had his horse killed under him, Master Done
was shot in the leg, and Master Saint John, a Gentleman attending near his
Lordship, was killed. I have heard a pleasant report of a General in our age,
who on the contrary was so sparing to hazard himself: as a Gentleman his
follower, hearing some marvel at a cold piece of service performed by his Mast
merrily replied for his own excuse, that he went to follow his General, and not
to go before him. But I will boldly say, that if our noble. Lords followers did
well attend his person, they found danger enough without seeking it. But enough
(and I fear too much) of this point, I will now return to this worthy Lords
Counsels, by which he effected this great work.

3. The Rebels being swollen to the height of pride by their full numbers, and
much more by continual success in their actions, he proceeded in like sort
with them, as formerly with his own men, at the first warily tasting them with
light skirmishes, yet he so prudently and bravely pursued his attempts, as he
still carried what he atempted.

4. The wise distribution of the forces auailed him much: for first he planted
Garrisons upon the chief rebels Countries, as likewise he compassed Tyrone on
every side with them, which kept the rebels at home, so as they could not
second one another, for fear of loosing their own goods.

5. And whereas other Deputies used to make some two or three iournies in a
Summer against the rebels, and then did lead a great Army with them. And
whereas this kind of service never tooko any good effect, as well because the
bruit thereof came long before to the rebels, as because these great forces
could not long be kept together. So as the rebels hearing the bruit of any such
iourny, took victuals with them for certain days, and assembling
themselues-together, did lie upon the bogs and hard passages, where without
danger to themselves, they were able to annoy, the greatest Army could be led
against them. This noble Lord Mount-ioy on the contrary (as I said) by
Garrisons keeping them at home, himself kept the field with some thousand foot
and two hundred horse (whereof my self have many times observed the greater
part to be English Irish), and not only was able to affront Tyrone himself
(specially since the Garrisons lying upon his Country drew toward him at the
same time, on all sides together), but also (by reason of his singular secrecy,
in keeping his purposes unknown, and casting out false reports of them to
deceive the rebels) had the opportunity to assail and spoil any one of the
rebels on the sudden, while he kept all the rest like dared larkes in
continual fear, as well of himself, as of the Garrisons adjoining.

6 Again, where other Deputies used to assail the rebels only in Summer
time, this Lord prosecuted them most in the Winter, being commonly five days
at least in the week one horseback, all the Winter long. This brake their
hearts; for the air being sharp, and they naked, and they being driven from
their lodgings, into the Woods bare of leaves, they had no shelter for
themselves. Besides that, their cattle (giving them no milk in the Winter)
were also wasted by driving to and fro. Ad that they being thus troubled in the
Seed time, could not sow their ground. And as in Harvest time, both the
Deputies forces, and the Garrisons, cut down their Corn, before it was ripe,
so now in Winter time they carried away, or burnt, all thest ores of victuals
in secret places, whether the Rebels had conveyed them.

7 Again, he had a special care to cut down and clear the difficult
passages, that so our forces might with more safety meet together, and upon
all occasions second one another.

8 For protections and pardons (the easy obtaining whereof had formerly
encouraged the rebels, as well to enter into rebellion, as to break their faith
after submissions, in hope to be again received to mercy), although it was
necessary for the State in this general rebellion, like a mother, to open her
bosom to her children, lest being driven to despair, they should plunge
themselves into all mischiefs, yet he never received any to mercy, but such as
had so drawn blood on their fellow rebels, and were themselves made so poor,
as there was small danger of their relaps. To which end he forbad al
conferences and parleys with the rebels, by pretense whereof many treacherous
plots had formerly been drawn, by the false-hearted subjects, and many
corruptions had been practiced by some covetous commanders. But to such as were
received to mercy, (that he might take away the diffidence they had long
conceived of the State), he kept his word inviolable.

9 And whereas these rebellious people, are by nature clamorous (which made
them tedious in complaints), and also use great oppression under the shadow of
Justice, (which made the^ continually importunc the Governors with petitions,
which being signed by them, gave those Irish Lords a shadow of authority to
oppress the people, by showing the Governors hand, and concealing the matter
to which he subscribed. This worthy Lord Deputy, for their encouragement in
the first, used singular patience in hearing their tedious complaints, and for
the second, gave them such delatory ansivers, as might well hearten them in
obedience, but could no way strengthen their tyranny over the poor people.

10 To conclude, nothing furthered this noble Lord more in his designs, then
his singular temper, not so much in secrecy, and in sparingnesse of speech
(though many great Captains have hindered their proceedings by letting fall
rash speeches), as more specially in Court factions: for he used in such sort
the familiar love of the Earl of Essex, in his doubtful courses, as he not
only kept him from intertaining dangerous counsels, so long as he lived with
him in England, but demeaned himself toward his enemies with such moderation,
as he little provoked their envy, yea, rather gained an inclination of their
good affection toward him. So as they at this time governing all the affairs
in England, were ready to give all possible seconds to his ends, which (as I
formerly showed) did aim at nothing but the speedy end of this war, By
these counsels this worthy Lord restored the declining State of Ireland, from
the desperate terms wherein he now found it.

I have before set down, in the Earl of Essex his Government, the power of
the rebels, through all the Provinces of Ireland, and have showed, that at his
Lordships leaving that Kingdom, the same was nothing abated, and from that
time, the rebels were The Rebels strength.
in all parts increaled. The Mountain rebels in the County of Dublin, then 480
foot 20 horse, now by the going out of the Walshes and Harrols were increased
100. In the County of Kildare, the rebels then in number 220 foot, and 30
horse, were now more then doubled, by the going out of the Briminghams, all the
Leynaghs, and many of other Septs. In the two Counties of Catherlough and
Wexford, the rebels then 750 foot and 50 horse, were now increased an hundred.
In the County of Ophaly, five strong Castles then held by the English, were now
betrayed, and above 468 foot, and 12 horse then were in rebellion, but now Mac
Coughlan was gone out with 200 more, and the Oaoines with 100 more, were now in
rebellion. In the County of Mead the rebels were increased in number 150; by
the Delahides, the Rochfords, Hussies, and Daeies. And beyond the River, Capt.
John O Roly, having then 100 foot in her Majesty's pay, well armed, was now
revolted. In the County of West-Meath, the rebels then 140 foot and 20 horse,
were now increased 100 at least, by the revolt of the eldest son of William
Nugent, second brother to the Lord of Deluin, with diverse of the Pettyes and
Daitons. In the County of Longford, the rebels then 120 foot; were now
increased 180: so the rebels in Lemster being then in the whole number 3048
foot, and 182 horse, were now increased 1280, and made in all 4510.

For the Province of Mounster, Tyrone in his present iourny thither, taking
pledges of almost all the Irish Lords and Gentlemen, he number of the rebels
were now there increased beyond estimation.

For the Province of Connaght, the rebels were increased three hundred, by the
revolt of O Conner Sligo, besides the uncertainty of Tybot ne Long, who had one
hundred Irish men in her Majesty's pay.

So as at this time, I may boldly say, the rebellion was at the greatest
strength. The mere Irish puffed up with good success, and blouded with happy
incounters, did boldly keep the field, and proudly disdain the English
forces. Great part of the English-Irish were in open action of rebellion, and
most part of the rest, tempofised with the State, openly professing obedience,
that they might live under the protection thereof, but secretly relieuing the
rebels, and practicing with them for their present and future safeties. Among
the English, the worthy Generals of this age, partly by this fatal war,
partly by the factions at home, were so wasted, as the best judgments could
hardly find out any man fit to command this Army (...) hiefe. The English
common soldiers, by looseness of body, the natural sicknosse of the Country,
by the poverty of the war, in which nothing was to be gained but blows, and
by the late defeates, wherein great numbers of them had perished, were
altogether out of heart. The Colonels and Commanders; though many in number,
and great in courage and experience, yet by these considerations of the Armies
weakness, were somewhat dejected in mind. Yea, the very Counselors of State
were so diffident, as some of them in late conferences with Tyrone, had
descended (I know not upon what warrant) to an abject. Entreaty for a short
cessation. Not to speak of the General distraction of the hearts of all men
in England, and much more of the soldiers, by the factions of this age between
the worthy Earl of Essex now imprisoned and his enemies, able to ruin a great
Kingdom much more to divert the success of any great action. And the general
voice was of Tyrone among the English, after the defeat of Blackwater, as of
(...) among the Romans, after the defeat of Cannas; Thou know how to
overcome: but thou know not how to use victory. To conclude, not only the
remote parts, but the very heart of the Kingdom now languished under the
contagion of this rebellion, Leax and Ophalia being possessed by the O Mores,
and the O Conners; and the Glynnes or Mountainous, Country on the South-West
side of Dublin, being in the hands of the (...) and O (...) and more remotely
of the Cauanaghs), who nightly made excursions to the very Gates of the City,
giving alarm of war to the long gound Senate, and (as it were) to the chair
of Estate. In this miserable estate was Ireland, when the Lord Mountiey, like a
good Planet, with a fortunate aspect began to shinethereon, whose happy actions
I will now set down particularly, yet as briefly as I can.

The tenth of January, toward the end of the year 1599, the Lords of England
signified An. 1599.
by their letters, to the Lord Archbishop of Dublin, and Sir George Carey
Treasurer at wars, which were then Lords Justices of that Kingdom, that from
that day forward, the entertainment due to them as Lords Justices, should
cease, and be conferred on Charles Blount Lord Mountioy, whom her Majesty had
made Lord Deputy.

And now Tyrone (who hitherto had contained himself in the North, only making
short excursions from thence into the Pale), being proud of victories, and
desirous to show his greatness abroad, resolved with his forces to measure the
length of Ireland, and to the end he might, by his presence strengthen, and
increase the rebellion in Mounster (which in absence by practices he had
raised), under the religious pretense of visiting a piece of Christ's Cross,
kept for a holy relike in the Monastery of the holy Cross in the County of
Tipperary, he entered this iourny about the twentieth of January. On the three
and twenty the rebels of the Brenny met him in the Cauan, from whence he
marched forward, taking the rebels of Lemster in his company, and leading with
him some two thousand five hundred foot, and two hundred horse, leaving the
rest of his forces, and the Gentlemen of the North to guard those parts. The
intent of his journey, was to set as great combustion as he could in Mounster,
and so taking pledges of the rebels, to leave them under the command of one
chief head.

This Month of January, her Majesty signed that warrant, which is vulgarly
called the great Warrant for Ireland, whereby authority is given to the Lord
Treasurer and Chamberlain of the Exchequer in England, that according to an
Establishment, after signed by her Majesty the first of February, and to begin
that day, (wherein the Army is reduced to twelve thousand foot, and one
thousand two hundred horse), they should pay to the Treasurer at wars for
Ireland such sums, as should be signed by six of the privy Counsel of
England, the Lord Treasurer, the Principal Secretary, and the Undertreasurer
always being three of them. Secondly, above the four thousand pound for
extraordinaries therein mentioned, to pay him such sums as should by the same
be signed. Thirdly, to pay in like sort according to an Establishment or list
of Officers and others not contained in the former Establishment, it not
exceeding yearly fifteen thousand pound, which List was then to be signed by
the Lords of her Majesty's Counsel. Fourthly, to pay in like sort diverse
Officers payable out of the revenues, in case the revenues extended not to pay
them. Fifthly, to pay in like sort all sums for reinforcing the Army, for
leauyes of men, for conducting, transporting, and victualling them at Sea,
according to the rates of the first Establishment.

The Establishment signed by her Majesty, the first of February, 1599.
The Lord Deputies entertainment to be paid according to the List after
following, which List was to be signed by the Lords. Officers of the Army:
Lieutenant of the Army per diem threell. Serieant Mayor per diem twentys.
Comptroler General of the victuals per diem tens. Four Commissaries of
victuals, whereof three at sixes: per diem, and the fourth at eights. per diem.
Twelve Colonels, each at tens. per diem. A Provost Marshall for Loughfoyle,
another for Ballishannon, each at four shillings per diem.

Summa per annum, four thousand four hundred fifty three pound.

The pay of three hundred horse, divided into six Bands, each Band consisting
of fifty, viz, the Captain four shillings per diem; Lieutenant two shillings
six pence per diem; Cornet two shillings per diem; and fifty Horsemen at
eighteen pence per diem a piece. The pay of two hundred Horse, divided into
four Bands, each Band consisting of fifty, viz. Captain foures. per diem;
Lieutenant twos. six d. per diem. Cornet twos. per diem, and fifty Horsemen at
fifteen d. a piece per diem. The pay of seven hundred Horse, divided into
fourteen Bands, each Band consisting of fifty viz. Captain, four shillings
per diem. Lieutenant, two shillings six pence per diem, Cornet two shillings
per diem. Fifty horsemen at twelve pence a piece per diem.

Summa per annum twenty nine thousand two hundred threescore thirteen pound.

The pay of twelve thousand footmen, divided into 120 Bands, each Band
consisting of a hundred heads, viz. Captain four s. per diem. Lieutenant two
shillings per diem, Ensign eighteen d. per diem, two Serieants, a Drum, and a
Surgion, at twelve d. a piece per diem, and fourscore fourteen Soldiers, and
six dead pays, at eight d. a piece per diem.

Summa per annum one hundred threescore eleven thousand one hundred fourscore
and five pound.

Extraordinaries, viz. for sending of letters, hyring of Barks, for passage of
packquets, for gifts and rewards, for espyes from abroad or at home, carriage
of treasure, victual, or munition, and the like, etc. for a whole year, four
thousand pound.

Summa totale per annum, two hundred eight thousand nine hundred and eleven
pound.

The Lord Mountioy hastened away from Court, did not stay for the Lords signing
of the above mentioned second establishment, as a thing of ordinary course
continued for many years, with little or no alteration. And being now in this
journey toward Ireland, the tenth of February he wrote to Master Secretary
from Daintrie, entreating him, that whereas her Majesty, not withstanding the
contrary opinion of all admitted to that consultation, had reduced the Army to
twelve thousand foot, and that he found by letters from the Counsel and
other Commanders in Ireland, a general concurring in opinion, that these forces
were not sufficient (especially since the Plantation of Loughfoyle and
Ballyshanon Garrisons were presently to be made, and that Tyrone was now Master
of the field, having led his forces in person as far as Mounster), he would
move her Majesty to give him power, to retain one or two thousand in List, of
those English, which otherwise he was to cast.

The above mentioned second Establishment, or List of diverse Officers and
Seruitors, not contained in the former Establishment, which list was signed by
the Lords the eleventh of February, the end of the year 1599.
THe Lord Deputies ordinary entertainment per mensem one hundred pound, per
(...)
annum thirteen hundred pound. To him for a Band of horsemen in his family
four pound four shillings per diem. To him for fifty footmen in his family,
eight pence a man per diem. The Treasurer at Wars per diem thirty five
shillings. The Marshall at five shillings nine pence per diem. The Master of
the Ordinance per diem three and twenty shillings eight pence. Note that the
above named, as also the chief Governors of Provinces vndernamed, had besides
in the Army the command of a Band of foot, or horse, or both. Diverse Ministers
of the Ordinance per diem twenty five shillings two pence. Mustermaster two
shillings eight pence per diem.

Summa per annum five thousand three hundred seven (...). seven shillings
eleven d.

The Lord President per annum one hundred thirty three (...).; his diet at ten
pound a week, and so per annum five hundred twenty pound. His guard of horse
and foot at thirty shillings seven pence halfe-penny per diem. Chief Justice
per annum one hundred pound. Second Justice sixty six pound, thirteen
shillings four pence. Queens Attorney thirteen pound six shillings eight
pence. Clerk of the Counsel twenty pound. Provost Marshall two hundred
fifty five pound ten shillings.

Summa per annum one thousand six hundred threescore seven pound eight
shillings two pence half penny.

Governor of Connaght per diem ten s., for increase per annum one hundred
(...). Chief Connaght.
Justice per annum one hundred pound: for his diet forty pound. Clerk of the
Counsel twenty pound, for his diet twenty pound. Provost Marshall one hundred
two pound thirteen shillings one penny halfpenny, besides twelve Horse out of
the Army.

Summa per annum five hundred sixty five pound three s. two pence halfe-penny.

Governor at Loughfoyle per diem four shillings four pence, besides his
entertainment Vlster
as a Colonel. Governor of Carickfergus and Dundalke no entertainment, but as
Colonels of the Army.

Summa per annum threescore pound sixteen shillings eight pence.

Governor of the Queens County at six shillings eight pence per diem.
Provost Lemstor.
Marshall of the Army per diem four shillings three pence. Provost Marshall of
Lemster five shillings seven pence per diem. And to both Prouosts, Horses to
be assigned out of the Army, at the Lord Deputies discretion.

Samma per annum three hundred one pound two shillings seven pence.

Warders in diverse Provinces three thousand thirty one pound seven pence
halfepenny. Pensioners, forty four, at four pound nineteen shillings two
pence per diem. Almesmen fourteen, at six pence Irish a piece per diem.
Commissaries of Musters, twenty, at six shillings eight pence a piece per diem.

Summa per annum three thousand one hundred twenty two pound five s. sixed.

Summa totalis per annum fourteen thousand fifty five pound four shillings
eight pence halfe-penny.

The same day this List was signed, being the eleventh of February, the Lords
by their letters to the Lord Deputy (being yet in England, but newly gone from
London, and in his way toward Ireland), appointed that the ships of Bristol,
which had transported one thousand two hundred foot from thence to Dublin,
should there be stayed, to the end they might transport a thousand men, which
were to be sent from Dublin, to meet with three thousand more sent out of
England, out of which the Garrison of Caricksergus was to be strengthened, and
a new Garrison planted at Loughfoyle.

The Lord Mountioy lying at Westchester for a passage into Ireland, and there
receiving notice, that the imprisoned Earl of Essex had signed a submission to
the Queen, whereupon her Majesty began to be inclined to show him mercy,
directed his letters thence the eighteenth of February to Sir Robert Cecill
Secretary of State, therein auowing, that as his love made him interessed in
that noble Earls fortunes, so he would thankefully acknowledge from him such
favor, as he should be pleased to show that distressed Earl, withal
protesting, that he would always be a free man, and slave to no man's humor;
but as he in this Irish employment expected all favorable seconds from him
(according to his noble promise, whereupon his hopes chiefly rerelied), so he
would ever be honest and thankful toward him in all occasions. And upon
these terms all exchange of good offices passed between this Lord Deputy and
Master Secretary, till the fatal death of that noble Earl of Essex hereafter
to be mentioned, and the Lord Deputies participation of that ruin, made him
change his style, and never to cease, till he had confirmed a near friendship
between himself and the Secretary, at least as entire, as greatness admits,
as hereafter shall be showed.

The twenty six of February, the Lord Deputy landed in Ireland, and there
received A new Lord President of Mounster.
the sword, and within few days, by warrant out of England, he granted her
Majesty's letters Pattents to Sir George Carew, to be Lord President of
Mounster, which place liad layen void some few months, from the death of Sir
Thomas Norreys. The 27 he received advertisement from the Earl of Ormond,
General of the English forces till his coming over, that Tyrone was in the
West part of Mounster, having about him not only his own forces, but those of
the Rebels of that Province, which were so great, as he had not hitherto power
to oppose them: but now having gathered all the Queens forces he could make,
purposed the next morning to set forwards toward him. The fifth of March his
Lordship received advertisement from other parts, that Tyrone could not escape
in his return to the North, but either over the River Shanon, which passage
the Earls of Thomond and Clanrickard might easily stop, or by the Westward
borders of the Pale, where if his Lordship would draw his forces to Athboye,
Mullingar, Ballymore, and Athlone, it was not possible for him to escape them.
That Tyrone had thus engaged himself, presuming on the corruption of the
State, and little expecting his Lordships so sudden coming over, so as if his
Lordship forgave him this fault, he was not like to catch him again in the
like, neither could any thing but want of intelligence, make his Lordship fail
in stopping the return of Tyrone, and his forces into the North. Aduising his
Lordship to be wary in crediting intelligences, which were commonly false, and
made of purpose, and to expect, that besides the known enemy, and a confused
war, he should find a broken State, a dangerous Counsel, and false hearted
subjects. The eight of March the Earl of Ormond sent advertisement, that
Tyrone purposed to pass the River Shanon. That he had written to the Earl of
Thomond to draw toward him, that they might oppose his passage, but that his
Lordship could not perform his order, by reason that the Mayor of Leymricke
would not afford him carriage for his victuals. That Tyrone in scattered
Troops and a cowardly manner, hastened his return, and that present day had
marched four and twenty miles, without any stay. That Sir Warham Sent Ledger,
and Sir Henry Power, joint Commissioners for governing of Mounster, with the
forces under their charge, had met near Cork with Hugh Mac Gwter, chief Lord
of Fermanagh (in the North) and that in the encounter Sir Warham, Sent Ledger,
and the said Mac Guire were killed. That his Lordship had burned all the Towns
where the Traitors might find relief, and that they used the same course
toward her Majesty's Subjects. The same day the Lord Deputy received further
advertisement from Mounster, that Tyrone was compassed in by the Earl of
Ormond, on the one side, and the Earl of Thomond on the other, and by the
Commissioners forces on the third side, (who ruled the Province after the death
of Sir Thomas Norreys, until a Lord President should be chosen, for he that
was newly sent over, was yet at Dublyn); that the Mayor of Lymbricke had
commandment to lay ships and boats, to hinder his passage by that Haven, as
likewise the Mayor of Galway to interrupt his passage by sea, and the Earl of
Clanrickard, to stop his passage by land through Connaght. So as how soever he
were five thousand strong in able men, besides many of baser sort, yet he being
far from any second of Vlster men, in whom the chief strength of the Rebellion
consisted, and no way able to return thither, his utter confusion was
confidently hoped. But these were only Irish oftentations of service, which
seldom use to take effect, and many times are not truly intended, as the
sequel will show.

And lest the Lord Deputy should expect faithful dealing of the English Irish
Subject in the other kind of service, by supplying the Army of necessaries, the
nobility and Gentry of the very English Pale, the same day exhibited a
petition to his Lordship, to prevent the opinion of disloialtie, upon refusal
of such supplies, by pretending of disabillitie upon the great spoils, which
as well the rebels, as the English soldiers had made upon all the inhabitants.

The Lord Deputy had written a former letter to Master Secretary, in excuse
of not reducing the Army from fourteen thousand foot to twelve thousand,
according to the new Establishment (as well because the same was to begin the
first of February, which his Lordship could not effect, since he arrived not
in Ireland until the twenty six of the same month, as also because the Army
was presently far divided, the greater part thereof being with the Earl of
Ormond, and for that, whenever they returned, the discharged Companies must
presently be reduced into some other, or else so many men and Arms should be
merely lost, as the Lords Justices had lately found by experience, when
determining to cast a Company of one hundred and fifty, being by Pole a
hundred, of the oldest and best soldiers, with purpose next day to deliver
them to other Captains, upon the diuulging thereof, only three of the whole
Company with their Arms could be found, to be so transmitted.)

To this letter formerly written, and persuading that the two thousand might
still be continued in pay, his Lordship received the following answer from her
Majesty, dated the fifteenth of March.

Elizabeth Regina.
ALthough we have upon your earnest request (in whose affection and duty we do
repose trust and confidence) yielded to the continuance of fourteen thousand
foot for some small time, both because we conceive, that according to your
reasons, it will give good assurance to the Plantation of Loughfoyle, and the
reduction of Lemster, and prevent the present terror, which this proud attempt
of Tyrones, to pass over all the Kingdom, has stricken into the hearts of
all our Subjects, and would increase, if we should presently have abated our
numbers: yet must welet you know, that we do expect at your hands, and do
determine, that as soon as the present bruites are passed, you shall diminish
the same by little and little hereafter, according to our first determination:
for we have had too good proof of that government, as not to know and
discern, that all the mischiefs of our service, have grown most by lack of
discretion and order, by vain iournies, whilst better opportunities have been
lost, by indiscreet carriages of all secret purposes, by placing Captains of
small merit or experience, and which is above all, by nourishing the Irish, who
are snakes in our bosoms, whilst we hold them, and when they are out, do
convert upon our selves, the experience and strength they have gotten by our
making them to be Soldiers. And therefore you shall understand now, that
although we have been content to grace some such as are of noble houses, and
such others as have drawn blood on the Rebels, with charge of Companies, yet
we find it now grown to a common opinion, that it is as good to be a Rebel as
a Subject: for Rebels find and feel it, that they shall be hired (even with
whole companies in our pay) only to forbear doing harm, and not for having
done any such service, as may make them irreconciliable. And further we see,
that others that are in pay in their own Country, are so far from doing
service on their neighbors, that are out, as when they tarry in for a show,
they are the chiefest means under hand, to help the rebels with such powder
and munition, as (to our no small charge) we put into their hands, to be used
against them. In this point therefore, we command you henceforth to be
considerate, and not to be induced to put such in pay, as spend our treasure
only to their own advantage, upon this supposition or brag of theirs, that
they must run to the enemies if they be not entertained: for when we consider
the effects that are derived from our charges, to have so many foot and horse
of the Irish entertained, only to save their own Cowes and Countries, we are
of opinion, so they went not with our Arms to the Rebels, that it were better
service for us, to save our treasure, then to pay for their bodies, seeing they
that live by the war better then they should do in peace, intend nothing
less then our service. And therefore we command you, not only to raise no
more, when these shall be decayed, but to keep them vnsupplied that are
already, and as they waste to Casse their bands: for we can never allow of this
entertainment of them. Whilst you are forced to keep the 2000. men for our
service, you may keep the Captains vncassed, but not give any warrant to them
to supply their Companies with any more Irish. We do also require you, that
you do seek by all means possible, where the Irish are entertained, to use
their service as far from their own Countries as may be; wherein we pray you
especially to take care in the Province of Connaght, where there are so many
Irish bands together, and rather to draw some of them to serve else where, and
send English in their stead. This shall serve for the present, to answer your
dispatch, wherein we do write to you, (whom we know to love our Commandments)
more directly in this point of our desire to have our charge abated, then we
do to you and the Counsel together, because we would have them apprehend,
(seeing you think such an opinion would be good), that our Army shall not be
so soon abated, as we hope you will; wherein notwithstanding we do refer
things to your discretion, whom we will trust with the charge of 2000. men,
seeing we have committed to you our whole Kingdom, etc.

His Lordship in a second dispatch to Master Secretary, had written, that
Tyrone having passed through the Pale into Mounster with some one thousand five
hundred horse and foot, of such sort as so many of the Queens worst men were
able to encounter them, was now in Mounster with an Army of 4 thousand in
reputation, and was there attended by the Queens Army of three thousand foot,
and three hundred horse, commanded by the Earl of Ormond; so as only the
dregs of the Queens Army were now near him; out of which notwithstanding,
he hoped to be able to draw one thousand five hundred foot, and three hundred
horse, and therewith to make head against Tyrone at his return: but in regard
the Plantation of Loughfoyle and Ballyshannon were presently commanded him,
whether Sir Henry Dockura was to ship three thousand out of England, and
another thousand were to be shipped from Dublin: these one thousand being part
of the men he was to draw against Tyrone be durst not lead them far from the
Sea, and so might perhaps be forced to loose good occasion of service, whereas
if these things had been left to his discretion, he would have deferred the
Plantation of Ballishannon to a time of more safety, and with these one
thousand men and their munition to be sent thither, would now attend Tyrone in
his passage with so great advantage, as he was not likely to find hereafter
and if he escaped, would presently have put himself in the head of the Earl
of Ormonds Troops, to prosecute him into the North, and would further have
advised Sir Henry Dockwra in his passage from Chester to Loughfoyle, to
descend at Carickfergus, and thence to take five hundred old soldiers, leaving
so many new in their room.

To this dispatch his Lordship received the Queens gracious answer, by a
letter dated the sixteenth of this month, wherein allowing his beginnings, and
approving his reasons: the forbearing presently to plant Ballishannon, and the
ordering of Loughfoyle Plantation, and the disposing of Garrisons aptly (for
the defense of such as in that case offered to return to due obedience), were
all freely left to his Lordships discretion, with promise to make good
construction of his actions, being confident that they had no other object, but
loyali service.

The Lord Deputy having drawn as many together as he could about Mullingar,
to lie for Tyrone in his return out of Mounster, received advertisement the
fifteenth of this present, that Tyrone hearing of his preparations to meet
him, had left a thousand Connaght rogues to assist Desmond, and some eight
hundred men with Richard Butler, and having made Captain Tirrell chief
commander of all the Lemster Rebels, was stolen out of Mounster with six
hundred in his company, and had passed the Enney, and so escaped into the North.

Whereupon the Lord Deputy the same day writ to the Earl of Ormond, to send
back from Mounster, the forces he had drawn thither out of Lemster, and with
all sent him her Majesty's letters, importing thanks for the service he had
done, and her desire that he would still hold the place of Lieutenant of the
Army. In the acceptance whereof, the Lord Deputy professed, that he should
esteem himself much honored, and would be ready, after putting off the
person which now was imposed on him, with much contentment to be commanded by
his Lordship.

The same time the Lord Deputy advertised Master Secretary, that his
intelligence had been so bad (not only in false reports of Tyrones purposes,
but also in the relation of the Forces he had with him to be far greater
then indeed they were, by which intelligence of false hearted subjects to
discourage the Queens Forces, the Rebels used to prevail more then by
fighting, and now hoped to discourage him at his first coming, from any
present attempt against Tyrones return), as in one and the same day he first
heard together of Tyrones looking back out of Mounster, coming into Leymster,
and passing over the Enney, and the next day being assured of his escape, he
then received the first intelligence (the former letters of the eight of March
being not till then delivered) that ever came to his hands from the Earl of
Ormond concerning Tyrone, who in this return had gone further in three days,
then at his setting forth in thirteen, having in one day marched twenty seven
miles, so speedily, as he could not overtake any of his troops with the
Queens forces, though he marched after him twenty miles in four hours;
adding his purpose to make present head toward the North, without which
diuersion (...) rebels, the (...) to be planted at Loughfoyle was like to run
a dangerous to tune. And withal sending some of Tyrones Mandates, by which he
summoned the (...) of Mounster to appear before him, and to join with him, of
which I have thought good, for the strangeness of the form, to insert this
one following.

O Neale commends him unto you Morish Fitz Thomas, O Neale requesteth you in
Gods name to take part with him, and fight for your conscience and right; and
in so doing, Oncale will spend to see you righted in all your affairs, and
will help you: And if you come not at Oneale betwixt this and tomorrow at
twelve of the clock, and take his part, Oneale is not beholding to you, and
will do to the uttermost of his power to overthrow you, if you come not to him
at furthest by Satturday noone.

From Knock Dumayne in Calrie, the fourth of February 1599. Oneale requesteth
you to come speak with him, and does give you his word that you shall receive
no harm, neither in coming nor going from him, whether you be friend or not,
and bring with you to Oneale Gerat Fitzgerald.

Subscribed O Neale.




The seventh of March the Lord Deputy was advertised, that Tyrone returned to
Dungannon his House the fifteenth day, and brought with him out of Mounster
four pledges of Desmonds faith unto him. That the Earl of Clanrickard had
sworn, so soon as the Lord of Dunkellyn his eldest son returned out of
England, to take no longer day then May next, to join with Tyrone, and enter
into action, (so the Irish term rebellion): and that Tyrone had called the
Lords of the North together, to consult about the opposition to be made against
the intended plancation of the English Garrisons at Loughfoyle.

The twentieth of March Master Secretary wrote to the Lord Deputy, that the
Earl of Essex, hitherto restrained in the Lord Keepers House, had found the
Grace with her Majesty, to be sent to his own house in London, yet with a
keeper; for Sir Richard Bakley, had the guard of him, with the keys of the
watergate and street door, and the Earl had the freedom of the whole House,
with a dozen servants to attend him, who might freely go in and out at
pleasure, and the Countess of Essex had liberty to come thither to him. And
the Lord Deputy still continued frequently to solicit the Secretaries favor
to this noble Earl, many times enlarging himself so far, as to justify the
Earls faithful endeauours in the maine point of the late Irish service, about
which he was most questioned. Insomuch as seeing the Earls actions in Ireland
to be narrowly sifted, he wrote not long after to the Secretary, expressly
auowing; That if the Earl of Essex had brought with him a far greater Army,
the estate of the year being as then it was, and he coming at that time of
the year when he did, yet during his aboade there, (which was from March to
September), there could no other consequence have justly been expected in that
so short time; but that the Rebels moved with the countenance and terror of
the Army, should generally (or for the most part) have sought her Majesty's
mercy, and making their submission, have been received upon pledges to
continue subjects, or else to have sought to have ruined them by planting
strong garrisons, which in most places must have been done by an Army, and
they being in several places, and many circumstances besides required
thereunto, the effecting thereof would have taken up as much time as he spent
here. And though the terror of the Army did not work the first effect, being
in the choice of the enemy, until by the second course they might be
constrained, that the fault was in their disposition, and not in the Earls
endeauours or power. And though the garrisons were not accordingly planted,
that as well the shortness of the time, as the Counsels to which the Earl was
tied at that time, might justly clear him of that default.

CHAP. II. Of the Lord Deputies particular proceedings in the prosecution of
the Rebels in the year 1600.
THe twenty four of March, being the last day of the former year, the Lord
Deputy signed the following List of the Army, to be a direction to the
Treasurer at wars, for the payment thereof, from the first of April in the
year 1600, so forward.

General Officers for the Army.
The Earl of Orn. and Lord Lieutenant of the Army per diem three pound. Sir
Oliver Lambert Sergeant Mayor per diem twenty shillings. George Beuerley
Controller of the victuals per diem ten shillings. Five Commissaries of the
victuals, whereof one per diem eight shillings, the rest six shillings a
piece.
Twelve Colonels at ten shillings a piece per diem.
Earl of Thomond. Lord Audley. Lord Dunkellin. Sir Henry Dockwra.
Sir Henry Poor, Sir Charles Percy. Sir Matthew Morgan. Sir Christop. St.
Laurence.
Sir Charles Willmot. Sir John Bolles. Sir Arthur Savage. Sir Richard Moryson.

A Provost Marshal of Ballishannon, and another of Loughfoyle, each at four
shillings per diem.

Companies of Horse.
The Lord Deputy, one hundred, at eighteen pence a piece per diem. The Earl
of Ormond fifty, at twelve pence. The Earl of Southampton one hundred, half
at eighteen pence, and half at fifteen pence. The Earl of Kildare fifty at
twelve pence. The Earl of Clanrickard fifty, at twelve pence. The Lord of
Dunsany fifty, at twelve pence. The Lord President of Mounster fifty, at
eighteen pence. Sir Garret Moore twenty five, at twelve pence. Sir
Christopher Sant Laurence twenty five, at twelve pence. The Lord Dunkellin 25
Sir Henry Harington 26 Sir William Warren 25 Sir Samuel Bagnal 50 Sir Edward
Herbert 12 Sir Oliver Lambert 25
Captain Wayman Provost Martial of Connaght 12 Captain Richard Greame 50
Captain Thomas Gifford 25 Captain Fleming 25 Captain Taffe 25
all 12 pence per diem.
Sir Richard Wingfield Marshall 50, whereof 20 at eighteen pence, and thirty
at twelve pence per diem.

Captain Thomas White 50 Sir Anthony Cook 50
at fifteen pence per diem.
Sir Henry Dauers 100 at eighteen pence. Sir Henry Dockwrra 50, half at
eighteen pence, haife at twelve pence. Sir Grif. Markam 100, half at fifteen
pence, half twelve pence.

Total of Horse 1200.

Companies of Foot. To be sent from Dublin to Loughfoyle in Vlster.
Sir Henry Dockwra Governor of Loughfoyle, and Colonel of the Army. 200 Sir
Matthew Morgan Colonel 150 Sir John Chamberlain 150
Captain Errington 100 Captain Heath 150 Captain Badbye 150 Captain Lister
100

To be sent out of England to the same place.
Sir John Bolles one of the Colonels of the Army 150. Captain Vaughan 150
Captain Thomas Coche 100 Captain Dutton 100 Captain Ellis Flud 150 Captain
Ralph Bingley 150 Captain Basset 100 Captain Oram 100
Captain Lionel Guest 150 Captain Leigh 100 Captain H. Clare 150 Sir John
Pooley 150 Captain Masterson 100 Captain Stafford 100 Captain Atkinson 100
Captain Hales 100 Captain Alford 100
Captain Pinner 100 Captain Orrel 150 Captain Sidney 100 Captain Windsor
100 Captain Sidley 100 Captain Digges 100 Captain Brook 100 Captain Rand
100 Captain Pluncket 100

Total of Loughfoyle Garrison divided into three Regiments under the Governor
Sir Henry Dockwra, and the two Colonels above named, Sir Matthew Morgan, and
Sir John Bolles, 4000.

Carickfergus Garrison. Foot.
Sir Arthur Chichester Governor 200 Sir Fulk Conway 150 Captain Laurence
Esmond 150
Captain Egerton 100 Captain Norton 100

Foot 700

Foot at the Newrie.
Sir Samuel Bagnol 200 Captain Blanye 150
At Carlingford Capt. Ferdinando Freckelton 100

Foot 450.

Foot in the Province of Connaght.
Sir Arthur Savage Governor 200 The Earl of Thomond 200 The Earl of
Clanrickard 100 The Lord Dunkellin, the Earls eldest son 200 Sir Thomas
Burgh his younger son 150
Sir Robert Louel 150 Sir Tibot Dillon 100 Captain Thomas Bourgh 100 Captain
Tibot Nelong 100 Captain Hugh Mostiun 100

Foot 1400.

Foot in the Province of Mounster.
Sir George Carew Lord President 200 The Lord Audley 200 Sir Henry Poor 200
Sir Charles Willmot 150 Sir George Carry Treasurer at wars 100 Sir Richard
Percy 150 Sir Francis Barkely 100 Sir Edward Fitzgarret 100 Sir John Barkley
200 Sir Gerald Haruy 150 Sir John Dowdal 100 Sir Richard Masterson 100
Captain Roger Haruy 150 Captain Thomas Spencer 150 Captain Flower 100
Captain Sheffeld 100 Captain George Kingsmell 100 Captain Garret Dillon 100
Captain Hugh Oreilly 100 Captain William Poor 100 Captain Saxy 100 Captain
Bostock 100 Captain George Blonnt 100

Foot 2950.

Foot in the Province of Leymster.
The Lord Deputies Guard 200 The Earl of Southampton 200 The Earl of Ormond
200 The Earl of Kildare 150 The Lord of Dunsany 150 The Lord Deluin 150 Sir
Grorge Bourcher 100 Sir Richard Wingfeild 150 Sir Christoper Sant Laurence 200
Sir Charles Percy 200 Sir Oliver Lambert 200 Sir Richard Moryson 200 Sir
Thomas Wingfeild 150 Sir Henry Warren 100 Sir Garret More 100 Sir Francis
Rushe 150 Sir Henry Follyot 150 Sir William Warren 100

Sir Thomas Loftus 100 Sir Oliner Saint John's 150 Sir Charles Ocarrol 100 Sir
Henry Dauers 200
Sir James Fitzpeirse 150 Sir Francis Stafford 200 Sir Henry Harington 100
Capt. Thomas Williams 150
Capt. Roe 100 Capt. Toby Cafeild 150 Capt. Josias Bodley 150 Capt. Francis
Shane 100

The total of the Foot 14000.

A list of such as the Lord Deputy could draw into the field to prosecute
Tyrone, all consisting of the companies lying in Lemster, and those of the
Newrie and Carlingford.
Horse.

The Lord Deputy 100. Sir Henry Dauers 100. Sir Samuel Baguol 50. The Lord
Dunsany 50. Sir Garret More 25.

Horse 325.

Foot.

The Lord Deputy 200. The Earl of Southampton 200. Sir Francis Stafford 200.
Sir Samuel B. guol 200. Sir Richard Moryson 200. Sir Henry Dauers 200. Sir
Charles Percy 200. Sir Oliver Lambert 200. Sir William Warren 100. Sir Oliver
Saint John's 150. Sir Henry Follyot 150. The Lord of Dunsany 150. Sir Garret
More 100. Sir Thomas Wingfeild 150. Captain Edward Blanye 150. Captain Josias
Bodley 150. Captain Ferdinand Freckelton 100. Captain Toby Cafeild 150.
Captain Francis Roe 100. Captain Thomas Williams 150. Foot 3200

Foot. Horse. Out of these taken to guard places til the return of the Army
810 20 Dead paycs allowed in each hundred of foot 9, and in each fifty horse
4 288 26 Total 1098 46 Foot. Horse. Deduct this 1098 out of the Foot, and 46
out of the Horse, and so remains for the Lord Deputies Armic in field 2102
279.

Out of this a further allowance (though uncertain) must be deducted for sick
and deficient men not mentioned formerly.

Observe that many Gunners, Canoniers, Armorers, and Clerks of the Ordinance,
some at four s. some at two s. per diem, and an Inginere at ten s. per diem.
That some sixteen Surgians, that chief at fiuel. the other dispersed in
Provinces and Garrisons at thirty or fortys a piece the week, and that the
Lord Deputies Doctor of Physic at fiuel the week, and his chief Chaplain
at the same rate, and some ten other Preachers dispersed, at thirty or forty s.
the week each are all paid by the defalcation of one pay in each company of
foot, and likewise of certain sures of apparel due to the same companies. And
that the Commissaries of the Musters (raised from five to twenty) at three s. 4
d. a piece per diem, are paid out of the Checques which themselves raise, and
one of them following the Army in field in each Province, the rest are
distributed to be resident in particular garrisons.

Having made distribution of the Forces for the present: It remain: I should
descend to the brief narration of the Lord Deputies particular Counsels, and
actions against the Rebels. About the beginning of April, it was determined in
counsel by the Lord Deputy and the general assent of the Counselors, that
the Ilander Scots should be hired to serve against James Mas Sorley. That Agnus
pretending right to his Country, was the fittest for that purpose, and upon
his refusal, Mac Alaine was thought fittest to be entertained for this
service. That the number of Scots should be 1500 or 2000 at most. That they
should not land till the end of August, and remain in pay as occasion should
serve, their pay being to each man a Cow for a month, or for the default of
Cattle, fixed by the day. And that they should land between the (...) and
Oldenfleet, except they thought some other place fitter. Two Inhabitants of
Caricfergus were appointed to treat with these Scots, and they were to have the
L. Deputies Letters to the Earl of Argile, and to the Queens Agent in
Scotland, for the furtherance of this business. But this Council took no
effect, by reason the course was disliked in England. In the same Council it
was propounded, how the Army should be employed till the Lord Deputies going
into the field, which in all probability could not be for some two months
after. And it was resolved to prosecute the Rebels at one instant, both on the
borders in the North, and in Lemster. For the North borders 650. foot, and 100.
horse, were to lie in garrison in Dundalke, 7 co. foot, and 50. horse at Ardee,
400. foot and 50. horse at Kelles, 1000. foot and 50. horse at the Newry, and a
hundred foot at Carlingford. If Tyrone drew not to a head, it was concluded
these garrisons were to infest the Fewes, Ferny, Obanlons Country, Mac Gonnis
his Country, and other parts of Monaghan, and the Cauan. If Tyrone drew to a
head, then it was concluded, his own troops were like to spoil these
Countries, and our men sent to Loughfoyle should plant themselves with more
case, and shortly be able to spoil both Tyrone and Odonnels Country. For
Lemster a thousand foot, and a hundred horse, were to draw into Ophalia, to
build up the Togher, to victual the Fort of Phillipstone, and to spoil the
Connors, Macgoghegans, Omoloyes, and Mac Coghlins. This done, it was concluded,
these forces should pass into Leex, thereto attend direction, or if that
passage were difficult, then to return the way they went, and by the way to
send for further direction. And to further the last prosecution, the O Carrols
were commanded at the same time to innade the Omoloyes, and the Lord of Delain,
and Sir Francis Shane were to meet, and join with the Lord Dunkellin in Mac
Coghlins Country, and thereto invade the neighbor Rebels.

The third of April the Lord Deputy advertised Master Secretary, that the
Queen had few Subjects in Ireland of any sort, who had not either some kind
of intelligence with Tyrone, or had not framed their hearts that way, whereof
the whole Pale made sufficient ouerture, by a petition lately delivered, and by
their contestation at the Counsel Table. That the old Earl of Clanrickard, at
Tyrones going into Mounster, had taken day with him till May next, to declare
himself on that party. But that the Lord of Dunkellin his eldest soon, hated
by his younger brother, whom the father esteemed much above him, gave him great
confidence of his firm alleagiance, who supecting his fathers disposition that
way, had taken occasion by repairing to Dublin, and after going for England, to
put himself as a gage and bridle to his fathers proceedings. Concluding, that
(...) the Lord Deputy had taken order for securing the Castle of Athlone, but
that all his hope of keeping the Province of Connaght in obedience, was in the
Lord of Dunkellins honesty. Neither was the Lord Deputy deceived in this worthy
Lord, who (...) during his fathers life, so from his death, (happening within
few months), to the end of the war, served the Queen as nobly, valiantly,
and faithfully, as any nobleman or gentleman in the army. The Lord Deputy
explaned the danger of the Irish Commanders and Companies, yet for the time
showed the remedy to be more dangerous then the disease, protesting that her
Majesty could not take a more unprofitable way to satisfy the Irish suitors,
then by giving them Companies. His Lordship further advertised Master
Secretary, that upon Tyrones retiring out of Mounster into the North, in manner
of a fearful flight, he the Lord Deputy had (...) In the Earl of: Ormond
such Companies as were not appointed for Mounster, and upon their arrival to
Athye had sent Sir Richard Moryson, to take possession of the government of
Leau, and Sir Oliver Lambert; to lead and bring back the forces sent with
victuals to relieve the Fort, called Mariabourg (of Queen Mary) seituate in
Leax, (otherwise called the Queens County) which fort being before in extreme
(...), now he had supplied for three months. That he had employed Brimingham,
(who had about that time submitted himself to the Queens mercy), to put in
some Cowes into the Fort of Ophaly: That he purposed to prosecute the Rebels in
Lemster with one thousand foot and a hundred horse; and to lodge the rest in
garrisons upon the North, so as on the sudden he might divert Tyrone from
resisting our present plantation at Loughfoyle. That he would presently send a
thousand old soldiers from Dublyn to Loughfoyle, and likewise with them such
as were to lie in garrison at Ballishannon, under the command of Sir Matthew
Morgan, but that, for some difficulties, they could not yet be settled there,
yet lying at Loughfoyle in the mean time, might do service, and always be
ready to be sent thither. That Tyrones confederates were discouraged at his
fearful retreat into the North, which could not have been greater, if he had
been broken with an Army. For after an unreasonable days march, hearing of
the Lord Deputies drawing toward him, within one hour of his sitting down,
he did presently rise again at seven a clock in the night, and being
assaulted by some of our scattered bands, still marched, leaving to the sword
as many of his men as were engaged, and leaving or leesing all his carriages,
so as now almost every day the heads of some rebels or others were sent him,
and many services were of late done, as therecouery of a prey by the garrison
at the Naas, with the killing of many Rebels, and the defeat of one hundred and
forty Rebels by Sir Francis Shane, whereof forty five were killed, and of them
some fourteen with his own hand. And the Rebels of Lemster daily made means
to be received to mercy. Only the Towns were the stores of the Rebels, and
stood so saucily upon their privileges, as a sharp rod and strong hand were
requisite to amend them. For which cause his Lordship advised, that the Castle
of Lymerik might be repaired, to bridle that Town, which seemed of more
importance, then any other City of that Kingdom whatsoever. That the
dispairing rebels were by Tirones cunning raised to some hopes, by two ships
lately come into the North out of Spain, which brought the rebels some
munition, and either assurance of great and present succors, or Tyrone at
least so used their coming to his purpose, as the rebels believed such
aussrance was given. Besides, many Priests came in those ships, of which one
termed himself the Popes Legate, and Ledger Ambassador for the King of Spain,
and Archbishop of Dublin, giving out that he was content to suffer death, if he
preached not in Dublyn before Michaelmas day. Whereupon the Rebels began to
auow themselves the King of Spaines subjects, and only the expectation of
Loughfoyle garrison, together with the doubt of these succors, kept the very
Pale from the boldness to profess the same. Lastly, his Lordship vehemently
complained, that her Majesty by absolute command disposed of charges in that
Kingdom, so as he could neither pleasure his own friends, nor reward her
Majesty's best servants; yea, that having already given the government of Leax
to Sir Richard Moryson, (a friend whom he confessed especially to love, and
whom he would undertake to beas worthy in his profession, as any of his time,
or any the Queen had in that Kingdom), now by the Lords Letters signifying
her Majesty's pleasure, he was forced to his friends and his own disgrace, to
confer the place on another: and in conclusion, besought her Majesty, in such
recommendations to leave them somewhat to his choice, promising to execute
them, or else to yield great reason to the contrary.

The sixth of April the Lord Deputy advertised Master Secretary, that the
Earl of Ormond was gone from Dublyn to his Country, having made great
complements of affection to her Majesty's service, yet it was apparent that
either he was grown weaker in judgment, or worse affected to the Queens
service, then was imagined in England, affirming of certainty that in the last
cessation he had thrice at least spoken very long with Tyrone, and at his last
being in Mounster, had once heard from him. And in general, that the subjects
were no better servants to her Majesty then the rebels, with whom they daily
practiced, and would give no assistance with bodies or goods to her Majesty's
service, yea, would (no doubt) quit their allegiance whenever they might do
it with safety. That every rogue asked a Company, and if he had one, then
sought a Regiment, but that (God blessing her Majesty's Army) he hoped shortly
to give law to their irregular humors.

The Province of Mounster (as I formerly said) was much confirmed in rebellion
by the Earl of Tyrone his last journey into those parts, where he strengthened
James Affairs of Mounster.
Fitz-thomas, (who by the Northern rebels sent thither from Tyrone, was
exalted to be Earl of Desmond in the year 1598. and was by a nicke-name
called the Suggon Earl), he combined with Florence mac Carty, (called by the
Irish, Mac Carty more, a name greatly followed there) and in like sort with
most of the great men of those parts, encouraging those whom he found willing
to persist, taking pledges of those he sususpected to be wavering, and burning
and spoiling those few, who did absolutely refuse to join with him, as the
Lord Barry with some others. And at this time another accident seeming of great
consequence, did much erect the hearts of the Rebels, and dismay the subjects
of those parts, which I will briefly set down. Sir George Carey having newly
received letters Pattents to be Lord President of Mounster, and resolving
presently to repair to his charge, departed from Dublin on his iourny
thitherward the seventh of April, and upon the ninth came to Kilkenny with the
Earl of Thomond in his company, and one hundred horse to attend him, where the
Earl of Ormond told them he had appointed to parley with some Rebels of those
parts, whereof Owny Mac Rory was the chief, and desired them to accompany him.
The tenth of April they rode out of Kilkenny with some twenty Horse of the
Earl of Ormonds followers, and some few others mounted upon hacknies, his
Lordship refusing to have the Lord Presidents Horse to guard him. So they rode
eight long miles to the place of meeting: and the Earl of Ormond left his
Company of two hundred Foot two mile short of that place. The Rebel Owny came
out of the Woods with five hundred men well Armed, and leaving his shot, and
the gross of his troop some Calieuers shot distant from the Earl, came up to
him with some choice pikes. After an hour spent, and nothing concluded, the
Lord President moved the Earl to return, but he would first speak with the
Jesuit Archer, and the Rebels calling him, his Lordship reproved Archer, and
called him traitor. In the mean time the gross of the Rebels had crept over
the shrubs, and compassed round the Earl and his company, which the Lord
President disliking, prayed the Earl to return: but as he turned about his
hackney, the Rebels took him prisoner, and Owny Mac Rory laid hands on the
Lord President, but the Earl of Thomond rushing upon him with his horse, made
him leave his hold, and they both escaped by the swiftness and strength of
their horses from the pushes of many pikes, wherewith the Earl of Thomond was
slightly hurt in the back. This treachery was said to be plotted by Owny and
Archer, and very few others, for if more had known it, many thought that the
Earl had such spies, and was so feared among the Rebels, as his Lordship would
have had notice thereof either for fear or love. But there wanted not others,
who thought the Earl was willingly surprised. Howsoever it were, the Rebels
did him no hurt in his person, only one of the Earls men was slain, five
were hurt, and fourteen taken prisoners. The Lord President with the one
hundred horse attending him, and six hundred foot, which he sent for out of
Mounster, kept the unsettled humors of those parts from present tumult, where
the Earls true followers wanting their head, and the ill affected now standing
in no awe of his power, were all at liberty. The Countess of Ormond was much
afflicted with her husbands misfortune, and with fear of her own and her
daughters estate. For diverse pretended to be heirs to the Earl; as Sir Edward
Butler his brother, and in respect his blood was attainted, Sir Walter Butler
the Earls Nephew, and for other reasons the Vicount Mount-Garret. And each of
these was likely to seek to have the Earls sole daughter in their hands,
besides that these controversies bred distracted humors among the Gentlemen
and others of those parts. The Lord Deputy hearing hereof, presently
dispatched Sir George Bourcher to command in chief, and Sir Christop. Saint
Laurence to assist him, in guarding the Countess, her daughter and the Earls
houses, with the forces appointed by the Lord Deputy for that service, namely,

The Earls Company of foot 200. The foot Company of Sir Christopher Saint
Laurence 200. The Earls troop of horse 50. Horse of Saint Laurence 25. Sir
George Bourchers horse 10.

Yet the Lord Deputy conceived the Earls surprise to be an evil more
spetious then material, seeing no reason, why the Counsels of the war should
stagger upon his well or ill doing For whereas some were of opinion, that he was
willingly taken, and would declare himself for Tyrone, his Lordship resolved,
that if he continued faithful, his Countries might easily be defended, if
otherwise, as easily wasted, since after the Garrisons should be once planted
at Loughfoyle, and those parts on the back of Tyrone, he should be able to
spare forces for any such service. And whereas many thought the news would
much amaze the Court of England, his Lordship on the contrary (since neither
the Lord President nor himself deserved any imputation for this event, the
parley being contrived without the Lord Presidents priuity, and both contrived
and executed, without making himself acquainted therewith) conceived, it would
make the Army both better, and more carefully seconded out of England. And
whereas it was thought, that this accident would erect the rogues spirits,
which before began to be dejected, and so hinder the submission of many, his
Lordship knowing that they would never be faithful to the State, till they
could not subsist against it, was of opinion, that till they were brought into
greater extremities, it would prove better, that they should stand out, then
come in.

His Lordship the fifteenth of April advertised Master Secretary of this
accident, and how he had sent forces to strengthen those parts, and had taken
special care for the safety of the Earls daughter and heir, and being loath
suddenly to give his opinion herein, only professed to think it strange, that
one so full of regard to himself in all his proceedings, should be so easily
overtaken. Then his Lordship gave confidence, that if the Butlers declared
themselves for Tyrone, as soon as Loughfoyle Garrison was planted at his
back, his Lordship doubted not to be able to meet the Lord President in
Kilkenny, and with their joint Forces to subdue the Rebels, and set those parts
in obedience.

At this time the Fort of Phillipstown in Ophaley (otherwise called the Kings
County) was to be victualed, and Any Mac Rory with the O Mores in Leax,
together with the O Conners in Ophaly, bragged that the Queens forces should
not be able to victual it. Now by the emulation of one of our chief
Commanders, against another preferred before him, and strengthened by the Court
factions of England, the said Commander had set out some weak Companies for
this service, to be led by the other, as in pre-eminence of his place, but a
near friend to the Lord Deputy, conceiving how much this first actions
success might add reputation, or give a blemish, both to his Lordship and the
Army, gave notice thereof, so as his Lordship offering the same Commander the
leading of those Companies, he refusing to go with them, manifested the
suspected emulation. Whereupon his Lordship caused fourteen strong Companies
to be allotted, and gave the command of them in chief to Sir Oliver Lambert,
who conducted the victuals, and led the men with such judgment and valor, as
being strongly fought with at the coming off, and especially at the going on,
yet they performed the service with great loss and discouragement to those
proud Rebels, and the fifteenth of April his Lordship advertised Master
Secretary of this good service.

The thirtieth of April the Earl of Ormond sent to the Lord Deputy from the
Woods the conditions, Any Mac Rory demanded under his own hand for his
liberty, which till then he could not get, because Any stayed for Tyrones and
his confederate advice, adding a postscript of his Lordships own hand; that
the letter was brought to him ready written, neither was he allowed any man of
his own to write for him. The insolent demands were these: First, that her
Majesty's forces should be removed from Leax, and the Garrisons delivered to
Oney Mac Roryes hands. Secondly, that pledges should be delivered him for
caution, that no garrisons should ever be planted there, which done, Any and his
followers would submit themselves. Thirdly, if pledges were not given, then the
Garrisons also in Ophaly should be removed, and every man left to shift for
himself. The postscript required, that upon such pledges delivered, a general
protection for six weeks should be sent to Onye Mac Rorye, and all his friends
in Lemster, whereupon answer should be returned, who desired the benefit
thereof, but during the said time of the protection, no forces of her Majesty's
should be sent against their confederates in Vlster and the North. The 5 of
May the L. Deputy drew into the North parts, to make Tyrone look toward him,
and so to give better facility to our men to settle themselves in garrison at
Loughfoyle. But before his departure from Dublin, for the better governing and
defending the Pale, his Lr. did by commission leave Sir H. Poor to command in
all martial affairs, and some of the Counsel to govern Civil matters
during his absence. And staying some few days at Tredagh, for the Companies
which had victualed Phillipston, and for the Garrisons of Kels and Ardee, as
also for victuals, he marched to Dundalke, whence taking that Garrison also
with him, he passed the pace of the Moyry on Whitsunday morning, and so came to
the Newry, where he understood, that according to his opinion, Tyrone turning
his forces from Loughsoyle, was come in great haste to Dungannon, had razed the
old Fort of Blackwater, burned Armagh, and had drawn his men into the strong
fastnes of Loughlurken, where with great industry the rebels had made
trenches, and fortified the place some three miles in length. His Lordship to
the former end advancing toward him, on the 16 of May, drew out of the Newrie,
and encamped in the way toward Armagh with 1500 foot, and some 200 horse. And
there having notice, that the rebels inquired after the time The fight at the
Moyry.
when the Earl of Southampton and Sir Oliver Lambert Sergeant Mayor were to
come to the Army, and with all hearing, that the said Earl and Sergeant Mayor
were that day arrived at Dundalke. His Lordship early in the morning on the 17
of May, sent Captain Edward Blany with 500 foot and 50 horse, to secure their
passage through the pace of the Moyrye, who marched from the Camp, and so
through the Moyrye to the Faghard, from which hill to Dundalke, there was no
danger. There he made a stand, and leaving his foot in two squadrons of 250
each, himself with the horse passed to Dundalke, and told the Earl of the
forces the Lord Deputy had sent to conduct him, assuring him further, that his
Lordship with the rest of the Army would meet him by two of the clock in the
afternoon, at the causey beyond the pace, from which the whole pace has the
name of the Moyrye. Hereupon the Earl having with him, besides this conuoy,
the foot Companies of Sir Oliver Lambert and Sir Henry Follyot, and some 50
horse of voluntary Gentlemen, marched to the Faghard where he commanded one of
the two squadrons above mentioned to march on, and after that the carriages;
then his Lordship with the horse followed, after whom the second squadron
marched, and last of all the two foot Companies of Sir Oliver Lambert, and Sir
Henry Follyot, Captain Blany commanding the vanguard, advanced toward the
Foure-milewater, being a Forde all environed with Woods, in the midst of this
dangerous pace called the Moyrye. And coming within half a mile of the same,
they discovered the rebels on both sides in the Wood, whereupon the Earl
directed the Vanguard to pass over the water, and to make good the rising of
the hill beyond it. When these came within a Musket shot, they perceived two
hundred foot of the enemy lodged beyond the water, in the most aduantagious
places. Then Captain Blany divided his men into three Maniples, sending 60 on
the right hand under Captain Henry Atherton, and as many on the left hand
under Captain Williams his Lieutenant, and keeping the rest in the midst
with himself. And so by the Sergeant Majors direrections, they gave the
charge. In the mean time the Lord Deputy being on the hill beyond the pace,
had sent his Vanguard consisting of two Regements, the one under Sir Charles
Percy, and the other under Sir Richard Moryson (two Colonels of the Army), to
advance toward the pace. And at this instant, when Captain Blany gave on upon
the Rebels, the said Lord Deputies vanguard appeared on the left side, within
two musket shot. After some vollyes on either side, the Rebels on the right
hand, and those right before Captain Blany quitted those places, and retired
through the woods to the Earl of Southamptons Rear, so as Captain Blany
passing the water, made a stand there, as he was appointed to do, till the
carriage and horse should be passed. And now the Lord Deputies Vanguard being
come to the passage of the said water, maintained a resolure skermish with the
Rebels on the left hand, and altogether secured the Earls troops on that
side. Therebels thus beaten on both sides, left some one hundred shot to
skirmish with the Lord Deputies vanguard, and all retired to the Earl of
Southamptons rear, and came desperately on our men, both with horse and foot.
But Sir Henry Follyot made a very good stand, and Sir Oliver Lambert, fearing
left our men should be distressed, the more to encourage them, took his
colors in his own hand and together with some 30 of the Earl of Southamptons
Vangards best men, sent back to the Rere, hastened toward the Assaliants, to
second the Earl, who at that time with some 6 horse did charge the assailing
Rebels, and beat them a musket shot back, still pursuing them, til they having
spent their powder, and thrown their staves, darts, and innumerable stones,
recovered the place, where Tyrone stood himself with some 220 horse and 200
foot in sight (besides a far greater number hid in the woods), which never
came unto this fight. When our men had thus gained much ground, the Earl
commanded them to march toward the Army, and presently Sir Richard Wingfeild
the Marshal of the army of Ireland came to the, with order from the L. Dep.
that since the repulsed rebels were not like to give any second charge, they
should continue their march, following his Lps. troops directly to the Newry.
In this conflict 2 of our men were slain, Capt. Atherton and Mast. Cheut were
shot, and some few hurt with swords and such weapons. On the rebels side there
were in all 1200 foot thus aduantagiously lodged, and 140 horse, and Tirone
himself confessed, that ten of his men died with ouertrauelling in this hasty
march, besides such as were killed, whose number could not certainly be
learned. The 21 of May, his Lp. was advertised from Sir Arthur Chichester,
Governor of Carickfergus, that the English sent to plant at Loughsoyle were
safely landed with small resistance, and had taken Newcastle belonging to Sir
John Odogherty, whose country they had spoiled and wasted, and that some of
them sent forth upon a draught, had taken good store of cowes, and killed some
of Odonnels people, and that they were now busy in fortifying about the
Derric, so as many of that country Southward did pass their cowes and
moueables into Scotland, depending specially upon the hopes of Spanish
succors. That Brian Mac Art a rebel bordering on Carickfergus, had left his
fastnes of Kilultagh, and now lay on the borders of Lecale, where he purposed
to assail him, the rather because he had sent 200 men to assist Tyrone: that
diverse Gentlemen and others did daily fly from the rebels, and resort unto him
with their goods, to the number of 1200 cowes, and more would come, but that he
doubted their faithfulness. That to free himself of the imputation to keep
James Mac Surley an enemy, till he had revenged on him his brothers death, he
had employed Colonel Egerton to inuit that rebel to submission, but received
only temporising answers; whereupon according to his Lps. directions, he had
written and sent a messenger of purpose, to the Lord of Clantyer an Ilander
Scot, to stir him up against James Mac Surley, wrongfully possessing his
rightful inheritance in those parts of Ireland, offering to join the Queens
forces under his command, to those powers he should bring, for recovery of
this his right, so as he would after yield due tribute and obedience to her
Majesty: but that upon the King of Scots late Proclamation, that al bearing
Arms should be ready to attend the King on the 17 of July next following, in
prosecution of the Ilander Scots (as was given out), refusing to pay tribute,
he feared that this Lord would be diuerted from embracing this business,
howsoever aduantageous to him. That he had received Con Mac Neale, the son of
Neale Mac Brian, and his horsemen, into her Majesty's pay, and would shortly
waste his fathers Country, whence Brian Mac Art and some 400 Bonnaghtes (or
hired soldiers) were maintained and fed. Finally, that he thought fit to
rebuild Olderfleete, and leave some in Ward there, because the Haven was
commodious to succor weather-beaten ships, going to supply the Garrison of
Loughfoyle with necessaries.

The 26 of May, the Lord Deputy received a letter from the Lords in England,
with full answer to his late dispatches. For the Earl of Ormonds detension,
they signified her Majesty's grief to be the greater, because any attempt made
for his recovery was like to prove his ruin, and that her Majesty had
written to the Countefse, to send the Earls young daughter and heir into
England. For Sir Arthur Oneales demands, upon his coming in to serve her
Majesty, in the first point concerning religion, her Majesty bare with it,
because she took it to proceed of his ignorance, not of presumption, only
wishing the L. Dep to let him see, that her Majesty pursued none in those parts
for religion, and so to satisfy him, but in no wise by any contract or
condition. Next for his andothers suits for land, and for entertainements,
because such ouertures were like daily to be made, by such as submitted
themselves, and protraction of sending to and fro, might lose many
opportunities. First, touching the suits for land, her Majesty's directions in
particular cases following, should be a rule to the Lord Deputy for his
graunts of that kind. And first for Sir Arthur Oneales demanding Tyrones
estate, that could not be granted him, by reason Tyrone, upon pretense of an
old inquisition, had extended the limits of his Country, and incroched far
into the South and East. But her Majesty was pleased to give him Tyrones
principal seats, reserving places for forts, and lands to maintain them, and
reserving all dependancy of the Vriaghtes (or neighbor Lords), also reserving
lands in Tyrone to reward the services of such Gentlemen as should serve under
Sir Arthur in these wars, which they should only hold of her Majesty by
letters Patents. For the rest Sir Arthur Oneale to be chief in Tyrone, as well
in superiority, as in revenue. Touching Neale Garues demands for O Donnels
estate, her Majesty's pleasure was to reserve some Ports and Castles, and some
lands to reward the services of that Countries Gentlemen, intending that these,
and more specially the Mac Swynes, should depend only upon her Majesty, and
have right to those lands by her letters Patents. Touching Mac Guires Country,
her Majesty directed like reseruations of land, for Fortes and rewards of
services, and generally in all grantes charged to reserve her Majesty's ancient
rights. Secondly, touching suitors for entertainements in pay, her Maiestes
pleasure was signified to allow one thousand pound a month, so long as the
Lord Deputy and the Counsel there should think fit, to be employed that way,
according to the Lord Deputies discretion. But their Lordships advised warily
to observe, and know, such as offered submission, because it had always been
the Arch-traitors practice, to let slip such as he could not defend, that they
might save their goods, and live upon her Majesty, without any intent to do
her service. Lastly, whereas the Lord of Dunkellin by his letters, in regard of
some restrictions, whereby he was disabled to serve her Majesty as he
desired, had made offer to resign the government he had in the Province of
Connaght. And forasmuch as the Queen was always unwilling to employ any great
Lord in his own Country, yet finding him placed in that government by the
Earl of Essex, had still continued him there, only out of her special favor
to him. And for that of late some insolences had bin offered to Companies of
the English, by the old Earl of Clanrieards soldiers in her Majesty's pay.
Their Lordships signified, that the Queens pleasure was, to accept the Lord of
Dunkellins resignation, in the fairest manner, and withal careful tendering of
his honor, aduising the Lord Deputy to inuit him to accompany his Lordship,
and serve in the Army under him. And Sir Arthur Savage then a Colonel of the
Army, and lying with his Company at Athlone, was appointed prouisionall
Governor of the Province of Connaght, except the Lord Deputy knew some
sufficient cause to the contrary. The Lord Deputy having attained his end of
drawing the Army into the North, by the safe landing and settling of Loughfoyle
Garrison, in the farthest North of Ireland, on Tyrones back. His Lordship the
twenty eight of May hearing that Tyrone had drawn back his men two miles
further into the fastness, and being informed that the Pace of the Moyrye, by
reason of much wet lately fallen, and the Rebels breaking of the causey, was
hard to pass, returned by Carlingford pace to Dundalke, and so to Dublin,
where he understood that the Rebels had in his absence burned the Pale, though
he left for defense of it 2000 foot and 175 horse in Lemster, but the damage
was not answerable to the clamor; for many private men have in England
sustained greater loss by casual fire in time of peace, then the whole Pale
had done by the enemies burning in war, and many private men in England have
in one year lost more cattle by a rot, then the Pale lost by this spoiling of
the rebels, of which they lamentably complained. Besides that indeed this
burning and spoiling of the very Pale, did further the greatest end of
finishing the wars, no way so likely to be brought to an end, as by a
general famine.

Give me leave to digress a little, to one of the fatal periods of Robert the
noble Earl of Essex his tragedy, (and the last but one, which was his death)
whereof the following relation was sent into Ireland. The fifth of June there
assembled at Yorkehouse in London, about the hearing of my Lord of Essex his
cause, eighteen Commissioners, viz. my Lord of Canterbury, Lord Keeper, Lord
Treasurer, Lord Admi- Lords of Worcester, Shrewsbury, Cumberland, Huntington,
Darby, and Zouch, Mast. Comptroller, Master Secretary, Sir Ihon Fortescu, Lord
Popham Chief Justice, Lord Anderson, Chief Justice of the common Pleas, Lord
Perian Chief Baron of the Exchequer: Justices, Gaudy and Walmesley. They sat
from eight of the clock in the morning, till very near nine at night, all at a
long table in chaires. At the Earls coming in, none of the Commissioners
stirred cap, or gave any sign of courtesy. He kneeled at the upper end of the
Table, and a good while without a cushion. At length my Lord of Canterbury
moved my Lord Treasurer, and they jointly my Lord Keeper and Lord Admiral,
that sat over against them, then was he permitted a cushion, yet still was
suffered to kneel, till the Queens Sergeants speech was ended, when by the
consent of the Lords, he was permitted to stand up, and after upon my Lord of
Canterburies motion, to have a stool.

The manner of proceeding was this. My Lord Keeper first delivered the cause of
the assembly, and then willed the Queens Counsel at Law, viz Sergeant,
Attorney, Solicitor, and Master Bacon to inform against him. The Sergeant
began, and his speech was not long, only a preface as it were to the
accusations. The sum of it was, to declare the Queens Princely care and
provision for the wars of Ireland, and also her gracious dealing with the
Earl before he went, in discharging ten thousand pound of his debts, and
giving him almost so much more, to buy him horses, and provide himself, and
especially in her proceedings in this cause, when as after so great occasion of
offense as, the consumption of a royal. Army, fruitless wasting thirty
hundred thousand (...) treasure, contempt, and disobedience to her express
commandment, she notwithstanding was content to be so merciful toward him,
as not to proceed against him in any of her Courts of Justice, but only in
this private sort, by way of mercy and favor.

After him the Attorney began, whose speech contained the body and substance of
the accusation, it was very sharp, and stinging, for besides the man, faults of
contempt and disobedience, where with he charged him, he did also shrewdly
infer a dangerous disposition and purpose, which was by many rhetorical
amplifications, agrauated to the full; he divided his speech into three parts,
Quomodo ingressus, Quomodo progressus, Quomodo regressus; In the ingresse, he
observed how large a Commission he stood upon, such a one as never any man had
the like before, namely, that he might have authority to pardon all Traitors
of himself, yea, to pardon treason committed against her Majesty's own
person, and that he might manage the wars by himself, without being tied to
the advice of the Counsel of Ireland, which clause he said was granted, that
he might at first proceed in the Northern iourny, which the Counsel of
Ireland (whose lands and livings lay in the South), might perhaps hinder, and
labor to divert him, to the safeguard of themselves. In the other two parts of
his speech were contained five special crimes, wherewith the Earl was charged,
viz. His making the Earl of Southampton General of the Horse. 2. His going to
Lemster and Mounster, when he should have gone to Vlster. 3. His making so many
Knights. 4. His conference with Tyrone. 5. His return out of Ireland, contrary
to her Majesty's command. These all saving the fourth, were recited by the
Lords in their censures, as the crimes for which he was censured by them. The
first was amplified, for that he did it contrary to her Majesty's mind,
plainly signified unto him in England, that he increased that offense, by
continuing him in that office still, when her Majesty by letters had expressly
commanded him to displace him; and thirdly, for that he wrote a very bold
presumptuous letter to her Majesty, in excuse of that offense, which letter was
afterward read. The second point of his Southern iourny was agrauated, in
that it was made contrary to her Majesty's advised resolution, agreed upon by
her Counsel, and approved by her martial men, as the only means to reduce
Ireland, and contrary to the Earls own project, yea, and that without the
advice of the Counsel of Ireland also, as appeared by a letter of theirs under
their hands, though now the Earl pretended their advice for his own xcuse,
whereupon followed the harro wing out, and the weakening of the royallest Army
that ever went out of England, the wasting of that huge expense, and the
overthrow of the whole action. The third point, viz. the making of Knights, was
urged to have been contrary to her Majesty's express commandment, a question
being once made, whether he should have that authority or no, because he had
abused it before, yet the same being at the last granted, with this limitation
given him in charge, that he should make but few, and those men of good
ability, whereas he made to the number of threescore, and those some of his
meniall servants, yea and that in a most unseasonable time, when things were at
the worst, which should have been done upon victory and triumph only. The
fourth point, namely, his conference with the Rebel, was agrauated, in that it
was an equal and secret conference, dishonorable to her Majesty, for him
that sustained her royal person, to confer in equal sort with the basest
and vilest traitor that ever lived, a bush Kerne, and base son of a
Blacksmith; suspicious also, in that it was private and secret, no man suffered
to approach, but especially no English man; the end of the conference most
shameful, that the wretched traitor should prescribe conditions to his
Sovereign; abominable and odious conditions, a public tolleration of
Idolatrous religion, pardon for himself and all the traitors in Ireland, and
full restitution of lands and possessions to all the sort of them. It was
added, that before this parley, a messenger went secretly from the Earls Camp
to the traitor, viz. Captain Thomas Leigh, if not sent by the Earl, at least
by his conniuency, at least by the conniuencie of the Marshall, whom the Earl
did not punish, Lastly, the fifth point was urged to be intollerably
presumptuous, contrary to her Majesty's express commandment in writing, under
the seal of her privy signet, charging him upon his duty not to return until
he heard further from her; that this his return was also exceeding dangerous,
in that he left the Army divided unto two diverse men, the Earl of Ormond, and
the Lord Chauncellor, men whom himself had excepted against, as unfit for such
a trust, and that he so left this Army, as that if God his providence had not
been the greater, the ruin and loss of the whole Kingdom had ensued
thereupon. This was the sum of the accusation, every part interlaced with
most sharp and bitter rhetorical amplifications, which I touch not, nor am
fit to write, but the conclusion was (whereby a taste of the same may be had)
that the ingresse was proud and ambitious, the progress disobedient, and
contemptuous, the regresse notorious and dangerous. Among other things the Lady
Rich her letter to the Queen was pressed with very bitter and hard terms: my
Lady Rich her letter he termed an insolent, saucy, malipert action. He proposed
also in the end a president for the Earls punishment (saying, he was feign to
seek far for one gentle enough): one William of Britten Earl of Richmond,
who refusing to come home out of France upon the Kings letter, was adjudged to
loose all his goods, lands, and chattels, and to endure perpetual
imprisonment. Master Attorney particularly said the following words, whereas
the Earl in his letter exclameth O tempora, O Mores (for so I think he
construed these words of his, O hard destiny of mine, that I cannot serve the
Queen and please her too)! let me also say with the Orator concerning him; Hae
Regima intelligit, hae Senatus videt, hic tamen viuit. In the end of his
speech, Now (faith he) nothing remains but that we inquire quo animo, all
this was done. Before my Lord went into Ireland, he vaunted and boasted, that
he would sight with none but the Traitor himself, he would pull him by the
cares out of his den, he would make the Earl tremble under him, etc. But when
he came thither, then no such matter, he goes another way, it appears
plainly he meant nothing less then to fight with Tyrone. This was the effect
of Master Attorneys part.

Master Solliciter his speech followed, which contained the unhappy success,
which ensued in Ireland after the Earls departure, whereby appeared how little
good the Earl had done, in that the Traitor was grown much more confident,
more insolent, and strongerthen ever he was before, as appeared principally by
his declaration, which he has given out since the Earls departure, vaunting
that he is the vpholder of the Catholic faith and Religion, that whereas it
was given out by some that he would follow the Earl of Essex into England,
he would perhaps shortly appear in England little to Englands good: many
things he added to that purpose.

After him Sir Francis Bacon concluded the accusation with a very eloquent
speech. First by way of Preface, signifying, that he hoped both the Earl
himself, and all that heard him, would consider, that the particular bond of
duty, which he then did and ever would acknowledge to owe unto the Earl, was
now to be sequestered, and laid aside. Then did he notably extol her Majesty's
singular grace and mercy, whereof he said the Earl was a singular work, in
that upon his humble suit, she was content not to prosecute him in her Court
of Justice the Star Chamber, but according to his own earnest desire, to
remove that cup from him, (those he said were the Earls own words in his
Letter), and now to suffer his cause to be heard. Inter priuatos partetes, by
way of mercy and favor only, where no manner of disloyalty was laid to his
charge, for (quoth he) if that had been the question, this had not been the
place. Afterward passing along most eloquently through the Earls journey into
Ireland, he came to charge him with two points not spoken of before. The first
was a Letter written by the Earl unto my Lord Keeper, very boldly and
presumptuously, in derogation to her Majesty, which letter he also said was
published by the Earls own friends. The points of the letter which he stood
upon, were these; No tempest to the passionate indignation of a Prince; as if
her Majesty were deuoid of reason, carried away with passion (the only thing
that ioineth man and beast together): Her Majesty's heart is obdurate, he would
not say that the Earl meant to compare her absolutely to Pharaoh, but in this
particular only, which must needs be very odious. Cannot Princes err: Cannot
Subjects suffer wrong? as if her Majesty had lost her virtues of judgment,
Justice, etc. Far be it from me (quoth he) to attribute divine properties to
mortal Princes, yet this I must truly say, that by the Common Law of England, a
Prince can do no wrong. The last point of that Letter, was a distinction of
the duty a subject owes to his Prince, that the duty of Allegiance, is the
only indossolueble duty, what then (quoth he) is the duty of gratitude? what
the duty of obedience? etc. The second point of Master Bacons accusation was,
that a certain dangerous seditious Pamphlet, was of late put forth into print,
concerning the first years of the reign of Henry the fourth, but indeed the
end of Richard the second, and who thought fit to be Patron of that book, but
my Lord of Essex, who after the book had been out a week, wrote a cold
formal letter to my Lord of Canterbury, to call it in again, knowing belike
that forbidden things are most sought after: This was the effect of his speech.
The spetiall points of the whole accusation were afterward proved by the
Earls own Letters, by some of her Majesty's Letters, and the Counsels, and by
the letter of the Earl of Ormond and others of the Counsel of Ireland, openly
red by the Clerk of the Counsel.

The accusation ended, the Earl kneeling, began to speak for himself, in
effect thus much. That ever since it pleased her gracious Majesty to remove
that cup from him (which he acknowledged to have been at his humble suit) and
to change the course of proceeding against him, which was intended in the
Star Chamber; he laid aside all thought of justifying himself in any of his
actions, and that therefore, he had now, resolved with himself never to make
any contestation with his Sovereign: that he had made a divorce betwixt
himself and the World, if God and his Sovereign would give him leave to hold
it; that the inward sorrow and afflictions which he had, laid upon his soul
privately, betwixt God and his conscience, for the great offense against her
Majesty, was more then any outward cross or affliction that could possibly
befall him. That he would never excuse himself neither a toto nor a tanto,
from whatsoever crimes of error, negligence, or inconsiderate rashness, which
his youth, folly, or manifold infirmities might lead him into, only he must
ever profess a loyal faithful unspotted heart, unfeigned affection and
desire, ever to do her Majesty the best service he could, which rather then he
would lose, he would, if Christianity and Charity did permit, first tear his
heart out of his breast, with his own hands. But this always preserved
untouched, he was most willing to confess and acknowledge whatsoever errors
and faults it pleased her Majesty to impute unto him. The first part of his
speech drew plenty of tears from the eyes of many of the hearers; for it was
uttered with great passion, and the words excellently ordered, and it might
plainly appear, that he had intended to speak no more for himself. But
being touched (as it seemed) with the ouersharpe speeches of his accusers, he
humbly craved of their Lordships, that whereas he had perceived many
rhetorical inferences and insinuations given out by his accusers, which might
argue a disloyal, malicious, wicked, and corrupt affection in him, they would
give him leave, not in any sort to excuse himself, but only by way of
explanation, to lay down unto them those false guides, which had deceived him,
and led him into all his errors, and so he entered into a kind of answering
Master Atturnies speech, from point to point in order, alleging, for the point
of his large Commission for pardoning treason against her Majesty's person,
that it was a thing he had learned of Master Attorney himself, only to meet
with the rebels curiosity, which had an opinion, that all treason in Ireland,
might be interpreted treason against her Majesty's person, and therefore would
trust no pardon without that clause. That in making the Earl of Southampton
General of the Horse, the deceivable guide which misled him, was an opinion
that her Majesty might have been satisfied with those reasons which moved him,
as also with those reasons which he had alleged in his letters, for
continuance of him in the place, but that after he perceived her Majesty's mind
plainly in her second letter, he displaced him the next day: For his journey
into Mounster, he alleged diverse things, principally that the time of the
year would not serve for an Vlster journey and then the advice of the Counsel
there, which he protested to allege, not to excuse himself, but rather to
accuse his own errors, and the errors of the Counselors in Ireland: and
whereas some of them to excuse themselves, and charge him the deeper, had now
written the contrary to the Counsel: he protested deeply that therein they
had dealt most falsely, and it seems (says he) that God his just revenge
has overtaken two of them already, the Earl of Ormond by blindness, and Sir
Warham St Ledger, by violent death. For his making of Knights, he alleged the
necessity and straights he was driven unto, that being the only way he had to
retain the voluntaries, the strength and pride of the Army; that he made but
two of his servants, and those men of special desert and good ability: that he
thought his service ought not to be any bar against them, for the receiving
thereward of their deserts.

But before he had thus waded through half his answer, my Lord Keeper
interrupted him, and told him, that this was not the course that was like to
do him good, that he began very well in submitting himself, unto her
Majesty's mercy and pardon, which he, with the rest of the Lords, were glad to
hear; and no doubt but her Princely and Gracious nature was by that way most
like to be inclined to him: that all extenuating of his oferice, was but the
extenuating of her Majesty's mercy in pardoning: that he with all the rest of
the Lords would clear him of all suspicion of disloyalty: and therefore
hemight do well to spare the rest of his speech, and save time, and commit
himself to her Majesty's mercy. And when the Earl replied, that it might
appear by that hedge which he diligently put to all his answers, that he spoke
nothing but only to clear himself from a malicious corrupt affection. My Lord
Keeper told him again, that if thereby he meant the crime of disloyalty, it
was that which he needed not to fear, he was not charged with it, as the place
and course taken against him might warrant; all that was now laid unto him,
was contempt and disobedience. And if he intended to persuade them, that he had
disobeyed indeed, but not with a purpose of disobeying, that were friuilous and
absurd.

Then my Lord Treasurer began to speak, and clearing the Earl from
suspicion of disloyalty, did very soundly control diverse of his other excuses.

After him Master Secretary, making a Preface why he spoke before his turn, by
reason of his place, took the matter in hand, and first notably clearing the
Earl from all suspicion of disloyalty, which he protested he did from his
conscience, and afterward often iterated the same, and preserved it unto him
entire, he spoke singularly for the justifying of her Majesty's special care
and wisdom for the wars in Ireland, in providing whatsoever could be
demanded by the Earl for that service before his going out; with supplying him
afterward with whatsoever he could ask, so it were possible to be given
him: in prescribing that course, which had it been followed, was the only way
to have reduced that Realm, and which being forsaken, was the only ruin and
loss of that royal army.

And as for all those excuses which the Earl alleged for himself, he
clearly cut them off, showing that his excuse of following the Counsel of
Irelands advice, was nothing, his commission being so large, that he was not
bound to follow them; and if he had been, yet were they a Counsel at his
command, he might force them to say what he list: his own letters which he
alleged, might be prouisionary, written of purpose then to excuse him now. To
be short, he greatly justified her Majesty's wisdom, in managing that whole
action, as much as lay in her, and laid the whole fault of the bad success in
Ireland, upon the Earls ominous journey (so he called it) into Mounster. And
thus in the behalf of her Majesty, he fully satisfied the Auditors. Master
Secretary gave the Earl his right always, and showed more courtesy then any,
yet said he, the Earl in all his journey did nothing else but make (as it
were) circles of errors, which were all bound up in the unhappy knot of his
disobedient return. Also he gave the Earl free liberty to interrupt him at
any time in his speech.

But the Earl being contented with the opinion of loyalty so clearly reserved
unto him, was most willing to bear the whole burden of all the rest of the
accusation, and therefore never used any further reply; only by reason of a
question or two, that were moved by my Lord of Canterbury and my Lord Admiral,
some little speech there was to and fro: My Lord of Canterburies question was
concerning the conditions of yielding unto Tyrone in tolleration of religion;
the Earl heartily thanked him for moving that doubt, and then protested, that
it was a thing mentioned in deed, but never yielded unto by him, nor yet stood
upon by the Traitor, to whom the Earl had said plainly; Hang thee up, thou
carest for religion as much as my horse. Master Secretary also cleared the
Earl in that respect, that he never yielded to Tyrone in that foul condition,
though by reason of Tyrones vaunting afterward, it might have some show of
probability. By reason of my Lord Admirals question, the Earl spoke somewhat
of his return, that he did it upon a false ground of hope, that her Majesty
might pardon him, as she did the Earl of Leicester in the like case, who
returned out of the Low Countries contrary to her Majesty's express Letter.
This I thought with my self, (quoth the Earl) if Leicester were pardoned,
whose end was only to save himself, why might not Essex be pardoned, whose
end was to save a Kingdom. But Master Secretary replied, that upon his
knowledge there never passed any letter from her Majesty, to forbid the Earl
of Leicesters return.

Judge Walmesley his speech was more blunt then bitter, Prisoners at our bars
(says he) are more graceless, they will not confess their faults. Again, he
compared my Lord his coming home, and leaving the army there, to a shepherd
that left his flock to the keeping of his dog.

In conclusion the Earl protested, that all he sought for, was the opinion of
a true and a loyal subject, which might appear by the speech, wherewith he
hedged in all his answers, namely, that he intended only to show those false
guides, which misled him, whether they were his own errors, or the errors of
his Counselors, whom he followed, that he yielded himself wholly to her
Majesty's mercy and favor, and was ready to offer up his poor carcass unto
her, he would not say to do (for alas he had no faculties), but to suffer
whatsoever her Majesty should inflict upon him, and so requested them all, to
make a just, honorable and favorable report of his disordered speeches, which
had fallen from him in such sort, as his aching head and body weakened with
sickness, would give him leave. This done they proceeded to the censure. My
Lord Keeper began with a good, powerful, and eloquent speech.

That by Justice and Clemency the Throne is established, as for mercy, her
Majesty had reserved it to her self; but for the satisfying of her Justice,
she had appointed them to enquire into the cause. That they were to enquire
only of those faults of contempts and disobedience laid unto the Earl, and to
censure him accordingly, and for her mercy, they had nothing to do with it,
only God was to work it in her Princely breast. In examining the Earls
faults, he laid these for his grounds, that the two grounds and foundations of
the Princes Scepter and Estate, are the reputation of a diligent and careful
providence for the preservation of her estate and Countries, and the obedience
of her Subjects; and he that should take either of these from her, should take
from her the Crown and Scepter. For the first, he notably showed at large, how
her Matesty had deserved it in the whole course of the Irish wars; for
obedience he showed the nature of it, consisting in precisely following the
straight line of the Princes commandment, and upon that strain he amplified
to the uttermost all the Earls contempts and disobediences, that her Majesty's
great mercy might appear the more clearly. Among the rest, (for he went
through them all in order) he answered thus to the pretense of Leicesters
president for excuse of the Earls return. In good things, the example is
better then the imitation of another, he that does well of his own head, does
best, and he that does well by imitation, does commendably in a less degree;
but in bad things, the proportion is otherwise, the example being naught, the
imitation is worse: Therefore if my Lord of Leicester did evil, in coming
over contrary to the Queens commandment, my Lord of Essex did worse in
imitating my Lord of Leicester, and is so much the more to be punished for it.
In the end, he came to the censure, which was this. If quoth he this cause had
been heard in the Star Chamber, my sentence must have been so great a sine,
as ever was set upon any man's head in that Court, and perpetual imprisonment
in that place which belongs to a man of his quality, that is the Tower; but
now that we are in another place, and in a course of favor, my censure is,
that he is not to execute the office of a Counselor, nor to hold himself for
a Counselor of Estate, nor to execute the office of Earl Marshall of England,
nor of the Master of the Ordinance, and to return to his own house, there to
continue a prisoner as before, till it shall please her Majesty to release both
this and all the rest.

After my Lord Keeper all the rest in order gave their censures, (amplifying
her Majesty's clemency and the Earls offenses), according to the manner in the
Starrechamber; but all accorded to this censure, (for so they called it, and
not a sentence), Master Secretary said, my censure is, that the Earl
deserves, etc. The greater part of the day was spent in the Lords censures,
who were many of them very long, only the noble men (not Counselors) were
short.

The Earl of Worcester cited these two verses;

Scilicet a Superis etiam fortuna luenda est,
Nec veniant, laeso numine, casus hahet.
Even for our fortune Gods may cast us down,
Neither can chance excuse, it a God frown.
The Earl of Cumberland said, if he thought that censure should stand, he
would crave longer time, for it seemed unto him somewhat hard and heavy,
intimating how easily a General Commander might incur the like; but (quoth
he) in confidence of her Majesty's mercy, I agree with the rest.

The Lord Zouch would give no other censure, but that which he thought the
Earl would lay upon himself, that was, that he wonld restrain himself from
executing his Offices, etc. and keep himself in his house, till her Majesty
shall release all.

They all seemed by their speeches to conceive a sure hope of her Majesty's
releasing this censure, and the Earl was reasonably cheerful, only his body
seemed weak and distempered with sickness, and now and then he showed most
manifest tokens of sorrow for his offense to her Majesty, by tears in his
eyes, (specially in the first part of his own speech, and when my Lord Keeper
spoke).

Now I return to the Irish affairs. Tyrone on the fifth of June wrote to the
Countess of Ormond, that he had written to Owny mac Rory, requesting him to
take pledges for the Earl her husband, and so to enlarge him, conditionally,
that he should swear to do henceforward no hurt or hinderance to any in
action with him. And further, that the young Lady his mistress, (meaning the
Earls daughter and heir) should in no sort be taken for a pledge, especially
because it was given out, that under that color, he sought to marry her to his
eldest son. Auowing lastly, that where it was said, that the Earl was
treacherously surprised, (which could hardly have been so proved, that Tyrone
and his rebellious confederates should have belceued it), he would in that case
not only take his favor from Owny, but procure the Earls enlargement without
any condition, though by his release all Ireland should be destroyed. To the
same effect Tyrone writ to the Earl of Ormond, whose Letter he sauced with
general complaints against the Earl, for the rigorous prosecutions he had
formerly made against him and his associates, but this letter being permitted
to be sent to Dublyn, the said point could not be thought void of that cunning,
wherein the writer excelled. A third Letter he wrote at the same time to Owny
mac Rory, making Owny himself Judge, whether he had treacherously taken the
Earl or no, aduising him to take the best pledges he could, (the above named
young Lady excepted); and for more security, to send them to be kept in Tyrone,
if he concurred with him in opinion, that his so doing would be more safe, then
if Owny himself should keep them in those parts. These Letters he dated
(forsooth) from his Camp near the Newry, so gallant was the Gentleman, now
the Lord Deputy was returned with his forces into the Pale, who otherwise never
appeared in Camp, but hid himself and his in boggy woods, and like fortified
passages.

The eight of June the Lord Deputy wrote to Master Secretary concerning the
state of Connaght, wherein nothing was surely the Queens, but Athlone by a
provident guard, and Galloway by their own good disposition, wishing that the
government of that Province might be conferred on the Earl of Southampton,
(to whom the Lord of Dunkellin would more willingly resign, and might do it
with greater reputation to himself, in respect of the Earls greatness), rather
then upon Sir Arthur Savage, (who notwithstanding upon the Queens pleasure
again signified, was shortly after made Governor of that Province). His
Lordship protested that it was such a place, as he knew the Earl would not
seek, but only himself desired this, because he knew the Earls aptnes and
willingness to do the Queen service, if he might receive such a token of her
favor, justly commending his valor and wisdom, as well in general, as in
the late particular service in the Moyry, when the Rere being left naked, he by
a resolute charge with six horse, upon Tyrone in the head of 220. Horse, drove
him back a musket shot, and so assuring the Rere, saved the honor of the
Queens Army. To which purpose, though not so amply, his Lordship also wrote to
the Queen.

At this time the County of Dublyn, on the South of the River Liffr, was in
effect wholly ouerrunne by the Rebels, the County of Kildare was likewise
possessed or wasted by them. The County of Mead was wasted, as also the County
of West Mead, (excepting the Barrony of Deluin,) and the County of Louth: So
that in the English Pale, the Towns having Garrisons, and the Lands from
Drogheda (or Tredagh) to the Nauan, and thence back to Trym, and so to Dublyn,
were only inhabited, which were also like to grow waste, if they were further
charged with the soldiers.

The fifteenth of June the Lord Deputy wrote to Sir Arthur Chichester,
Governor of Carickfergus, that he should not spare the subjects lately
submitting, who protected the rebels goods; that he should receive no more, but
such as would simply submit, and give good pledges, neither should give pay to
any, except he knew their service would be very beneficial to the Queen, that
he should continue to treat with the Ilander Scots, till advice came out of
England what course should be taken with them. That he should take in Shane
Oneale, with promise of lands and entertainment, and promise, that for preyes
he should take of the Rebels, if the English assisted him, he should have a
third part, and if he took them without the assistance of the English, he
should have three parts of four.

The nineteenth of June the Lord Deputy advertised Master Secretary, that he
was more troubled to govern the friends, then to suppress the enemies. That
finding the Army a mere Chaos, he had given it form. That finding it without
spirit, he had given it life. That in all attempts, he had preserved the whole
body of it, and every part from any blow, restored the reputation of it, and
possessed it with a disposition to undertake, and a likelihood to effect great
services. That he had omitted nothing, which might be performed by this Army,
in this estate, during this time. That the assurance the Irish had received of
succors from Spain, was the only fuel of the last blaze of this Rebellion:
Therefore praying that, except Master Secretary had some certainety that Spain
would not at that time assist the Rebels, the Army might by all means be
strengthened, which would be necessary if such assistance were sent, and would
make an end of the wars if none were sent. And howsoever that befell, yet for
prevention of Munition and such supplies to be furnished to the Rebels from
Spain, aduising that some few of the Queens ships might lie on the West, and
somewhat toward the North of Ireland: Adding that some little boats made both
to row and to sail, would bar the Ilander Scots from supplying the Rebels
with any munition: And that his Lordship to meet with the Earl of Ormond,
(lately set free by Any mac Rory, who had taken him Prisoner), that day took
his journey toward Carlogh, where he hoped to sound the bottom of the
conditions of his delivery, with the best course how to disintangle him, and by
his conference, to make a shrewd guess, how the Earl stood affected in these
doubtful times. His Lordship in his next Letters advertised into England, that
he was not privy nor consenting to the giving of pledges at the Earl of
Ormonds delivery; but since they were given, in regard of her Majesty's
extraordinary care for the Earls liberty, he did not show any manifest dislike
thereof; and now conceived the Earl did apprehend the indignity done to him by
those base traitors, and therefore had such a spleen against them, as he had
joined with him in diverse plots, as well to recover the pledges (wherein the
Earl protested to spare no money, if they were so to be redeemed; besides that
he and their Fathers protested, that their danger should not hinder them from
doing their uttermost service to the Queen), as also to work his revenge upon
the Rebels.

At this time Tyrone attending the garrison at Loughfoyle, and Odonnel starting
through Connaght into Thomond, and spoiling both Countries, Sir Samuel Bagnoll
drew out of the Newry into Monaghan, where he took a prey, and killed six
Commanders, and some sixty of the common rebels, only three of his being
stain, and twenty hurt.

The subjects of the Pale, (fearing belike to be complained on, for the small
assistance they gave to the Queens service), sent over the Lord of Howth, and
Sir Patricke Barnewell, to make first complaint, (after the Irish manner) of
the wrongs done them by the Army, never acquainting the Lord Deputy and
Counsel therewith. And notwithstanding their former unwillingness, to bear any
charge for the Queens service, now they were content, for these their Deputies
expense in England, to cesse every plow land at three shillings.

From the seventh of July to the twelfth, Sir Oliver Lambert with some troops
lay encamped at the Tougher in Ophalia, where he made a Causey, and built a
Fort, and thereleft a Guard to keep the passage always open, for the
victualling of Phillipstowne Fort, in which service the Earl of Southampton as
a voluntary, by his presence and valor much encouraged our men. At this time
many of the Rebels in Lemster, and the Northern borders, made suit to the Lord
Deputy to be received to mercy, with offer of large sums of money to the Lord
Deputy for their pardons, but his Lordship refused their offer, till they had
first done some service, and had drawn blood against some of their
confederates. Thus much his Lordship advertised into England, the sixteenth of
July, as likewise a good service presently done, and a great prey taken in the
Fuse by Sir Richard Moryson the Governor of Dundalke.

The same twelfth of July, his Lordship took his journey toward the borders
of the North, upon hearing that Tyrone was drawn into those parts. There his
Lordship intended to spoil the corn, as likewise in all other parts, when it
should be a little riper. Mac Mahowne, and Patricke mac Art Moyle, offered now
to submit, but neither could be received, without the others head. But Oconnor
Roe mac Gaire, for good respects of service, was at the same time received to
mercy. His Lordship hearing that Tyrone contained himself in his fastnes, and
being requited out of England to attempt something upon the Lemster Rebels,
left the Northern borders strongly guarded against any invasion, and left
order with the Counsel to hasten the general hoasting, and make ready all
provisions for a journey into the North, and leaving Dublyn the twelfth of
August rode to the Nasse, and so marched to the Fort of Phillipstowne in
Ophaly, with five hundred sixty foot and sixty horse, besides voluntaries in
his company.

In the way into Leax his Lordship took a prey of two hundred Cowes, seven
hundred garrons, and five hundred sheep, besides great store of small cattle.
The sixeteenth of August, his Lordship burning the Country and spoiling the
corn, marched toward the passage, (one of the most dangerous in Ireland),
where Sir Oliver Lambert with the Forces he had was to meet him. Both of them
fought all the way, and killed diverse rebels, whereof the Lord Deputy left
fifteen dead in the place, besides many hurt, they met together at noone. The
seventeenth day the army marched toward a fastnes, where the rebels had stored
great plenty of corn. At the entry there was a Foard, compassed in with woods,
and a bogge between them, where the rebels let the vanguard of the horse
pass; but his Lordship passing with a few gentlemen, and his own servants
before the vanguard of the foot, the rebels began the skirmish with him, and
the foot wings being slowly sent out, they came close up to him, the traitor
Tyrrel having appointed an hundred shot to wait on his Lorships person, with
marks to know him. In this skirmish we killed thirty five rebels, and hurt
seventy five; on our part two only being killed, and a few slightly hurt,
Captain Masterson dangerously hurt in the knee, and his Lordship having a very
good horse killed under him, and another killed under Master John Chidley a
gentleman of his Lordships chamber: But the best service at that time done, was
the killing of Owny mac Rory, a bloody and bold young man, who lately had taken
the Earl of Ormond prisoner, and had made great stirs in Mounster. He was
the chief of the O Mores Sept. in Leax, and by his death they were so
discouraged, that they never after held up their heads. Also a bold bloody
rebel Callogh mac Walter, was at the same time killed. Besides that his
Lordships staying in Leax till the twenty three of August, did many other ways
weaken them; for during that time, he fought almost every day with them, and as
often did beat them. Our Captains, and by their example (for it was otherwise
painful) the common soldiers, did cut down with their swords all the Rebels
corn, to the value of ten thousand pound and upward, the only means by which
they were to live, and to keep their Bonaghts (or hired soldiers). It seemed
incredible, that by so barbarous inhabitants, the ground should be so manured,
the fields so orderly fenced, the Towns so frequently inhabited, and the high
ways and paths so well beaten, as the Lord Deputy here found them. The reason
whereof was, that the Queens forces, during these wars, never till then came
among them. The Lord Deputy in his return the first day passed into another
part of the Country with the foot alone; for the horse not able to pass were
sent about, so as the rebels had the advantage they most desire, to fight with
our foot, without assistance of horse: yet all the rebels of Lemster here
gathered together, and fighting upon their natural ground, had been so
beaten, as that they suffered our men to pass without a blow. That night eight
heads were brought to the Lord Deputy, and with them one Lenagh a famous
rebel, taken alive, who was presently hanged on the same tree, where he
plotted all his villainies. Sir Oliver Lambert, with some troops marched into
Donnell Spagniahs Country, where he took 1000. Cowes, 500. Garons, great
store of sheep, and killed twenty rebels at the first entry, besides many
killed in a fight, which the rebels after maintained all the day and part of
the night. Sir Arthur Savage coming out of Connaght to meet the Lord Deputy,
fought long with the Rebels, spoiled the Country, and took a great prey, but
could not pass to his Lordship. In the Lord Deputies return out of Leax,
Redmond, Keating, and the chief of the Septs of the Kellies and Lalors were
received into her Majesty's protection, upon condition to set at liberty the
Earl of Ormonds pledges in their hands.

By this time his Lordship had received out of England gracious allowance of
his former Northern journey, with her Majesty's promise to reinforce the Army
with two thousand foot, and two hundred horse, against the next journey into
those parts, requiring him not to give any one man the command of both horse
and foot; and whereas all Companies were of two hundred, or one hundred
fifty, aduising to distribute some part into less numbers, that more
Gentlemen might be satisfied with commands, with the only increase of some
chief officers pay, and that his Lordship would be sparing to give pasports
for any to come into England, to trouble her Majesty with suits, and most of
all not to suffer able men to return out of Ireland, as they daily did, with
their Captains pasportes. And to the end the Commanders might not be idle,
her Majesty required, that all services done by them, might be certified
monthly into England. About this time the Earl of Southampton, leaving the
wars of Ireland, sailed into England. This Summers service made it appear,
that iourneys with a great Army did not so much good, as Garrisons lying upon
the Rebels, which upon any sudden service, might easily be drawn together in
competent numbers, and in the mean time kept the Rebels at home, from
seconding one another.

The Lord Deputy by his letters, during the foresaid iourny, explained to the
Lords in England, that he had been most careful not to increase her Majesty's
charge in any thing, the want whereof would not have made the rest of her great
expense to be unprofitable: and to the end the Commanders might not be thought
to lie idle, besides the good fortune that none of them had received any blow,
he particularly remembered many preyes taken, and services done, and for the
chief Garrisons on the North borders, advertised, that Sir Arthur Chichester
had laid all the Country waste within twenty miles of Carickfergus; that Sir
Samuel Bagnol at the Newry had done the like; that Sir Richard Moryson at
Dundalke had banished Turlough Mac Henry out of the Fuze into Monaghan, and yet
the two last, with most part of their Garrisons, had bin part of the Army in all
former iournies.

The twenty six of August his Lordship returned from this journey of Leax to
Dublin, and there received advertisement, that her Majesty could not refuse to
hear the complaints of the Pale, by the Deputies formerly mentioned to be
sent over, though she had sharply rebuked them, that they did not first
complain to the Lord Deputy, which they excused by experience, that like
complaints in Ireland had ever been vain. The chief complaints were these;
that the forces that should lie upon the borders, near the Rebels, were lodged
upon them. That the fetching of one barrel of powder, was often made a
sufficient reason to spoil them, by a company of horse and foot sent to
conuoy it. That the Clarkeship of the Counsel was sold, and then executed by a
Deputy, who for every small petition took great fees. That the spiritual
livings were given to ignorant and idle persons, being the chief cause of this
rebellion; scarce any Church standing for sixty miles between Dublin and
Athlone. That they were spoiled as much by the Army as Rebels, no soldier nor
Captain being punished, nor any order given for remedy taking effect. That
private Captains gave pasportes to run awaies, and her Majesty was deceived
by false Musters, so as the forces were weak to end the war, and they were
spoiled as much as if the number were full, requiring that some Gentlemen of
the Pale might be joined with the Commissaries, in taking the musters of
adjacent Garrisons. In the same letter her Majesty commanded the Lord Deputy
to signify to Sir Arthur O Neale, that she purposed to create him Earl of
Tyrone, and give him a portion of lands fit for an Earldom. And for Tyrone,
that the Lord Deputy should proclaim him Traitor, with promise of two thousand
pound to any should bring him alive, and one thousand pound to him that should
bring his head to any of her Majesty's Fortes or Garrisons. Lastly, her Majesty
gave letters of favor to the Deputies of the Pale, directed to the Lord
Deputy, to whom the complaints were wholly referred, it being her Majesty's
pleasure, that only before him, and by him, they should be heard and redressed.

Yet because the Lord Deputy was many ways taxed in these complaints, he did
expostulate in his next letters to Master Secretary, that he should be taxed
for those things, for which he expected approbation and thanks. The wisest
Counsels (said he) are uncertain, and the wisest men imperfect, and what shall
I look for, when out of my weakness (though free from wilfulness) I shall
happen to commit any error of consequence, seeing I am now charged with so
many matters, and those nothing belonging to me. His Lordship added, that in
his opinion, nothing had made the affairs of Ireland more unprosperous, then
that the State used to hear every man against and before the chief Governor,
so as he was driven to let matters go as they would, so as he might save
himself. Another discontented letter be wrote to the same effect, and to the
same person, but therein explained other grieuances, besides the former
complaints. And whereas the Lords of the Counsel had taxed him, for being
ruled by young counsel (whereby he understood his three most familiar friends
to be meant, namely, Sir Henry Dauers, Sir Richard Moryson, and Sir William
Godolphin) he boldly answered, that besides the Counselors of State, he used
the familiarity of none, which were not older then Alexander the great, when he
conquered the World. Lastly, he protested to Master Secretary, that he took
him for his chiefest friend, and knew that he had more power to do him good or
hurt, then any other, yet as he would not dishonestly lose him, so he would not
basely keep him, beseeching him to use his power, in mediating license unto
him, that he might come over for a short time, to kiss the Queens hand, for
touching other favors concerning the public, he would never acknowledge any
particular obligation to him, or to any other, since he made his demands as
he thought best for the service, but the granting or denying thereof, concerned
not him.

The Muster of the Army at Dundalke, before the sitting down at the Faghard
Hill.
Colonels of Regiments. In List. By Muster. Whereof Irishmen. Swords wanting.
Sick and hurt lying at Dundalk. Captain Berey. 472. The Lord Deputies Guard.
200 Targets 28 120 01 00 16 Pikes 32 Shot 60 The Marshall Sir Rich. Wingfield
150 Targets 4 96 10 30 06 Pikes 39 Shot 53 Under the Lord Deputy. 400. The
Sergeant Mayor Sir Oliver Lambert. 200 Targets 10 108 08 05 05 Pikes 46 Shot 52
Capt. Handserd. 100 Targets 1 79 20 10 06 Pikes 28 Shot 50 Capt. Fisher. 100
Targets 3 69 05 20 11 Pikes 21 Shot 45 Sir Christopher Saint Laurence. Sir
Christopher Saint Laurence. 200 Targets 10 141 113 14 12 Pikes 61 Shot 70 Sir
Henry Follyot. 150 Targets 6 90 15 10 09 Pikes 36 Shot 48 Earl of Kildare. 150
Targets 6 81 78 06 14 Pikes 35 Shot 40 Sir Fra: Shane. 100 Targets 00 55 47 04
08 Pikes 18 Shot 37 Sir Charles Percy 336. Sir Charles Percy 200 Targets 10 149
28 30 04 Pikes 54 Shot 85 Captain Williams. 150 Targets 00 90 06 03 10 Pikes
37 Shot 53 Captain Roe. 100 Targets 4 59 08 05 01 Pikes 25 Shot 30 Capt.
Stannton. 100 Targets 00 38 00 00 10 Pikes 18 Shot 20 Sir Richard Morison. 473.
Sir Rich. Moryson. 200 Targets 6 118 22 25 36 Pikes 44 Shot 68 Sir Hen. Dauers.
200 Targets 26 128 12 15 22 Pikes 37 Shot 65 Capt. Caufeild. 150 Targets 07 94
10 10 23 Pikes 32 Shot 55 Capt. Constable. 100 Targets 3 76 01 12 05 Pikes 25
Shot 48 Ca. Rauenscroft. 100 Targets 3 57 01 23 06 Pikes 24 Shot 30 Sir Thom.
Bourk 276. Sir Thom. Bourk. 150 Targets 06 85 82 26 14 Pikes 25 Shot 54 Lord
Deluin. 150 Targets 03 76 74 30 10 Pikes 30 Shot 43 Sir Henry Harrington. 100
Targets 03 40 37 08 12 Pikes 20 Shot 17 Sir Garret More. 100 Targets 07 75 13
02 08 Pikes 23 Shot 45 Sir Oliver Saint John's. Sir Oliver Saint John's. 150
Targets 10 95 24 15 05 Pikes 33 Shot 52 Sir Thom. Wingfeild. 150 Targets 05 102
25 20 13 Pikes 29 Shot 68 Capt. Billings. 100 Targets 03 59 01 04 15 Pikes 24
Shot 32 Capt. Treauor. 100 Targets 06 70 01 15 14 Pikes 23 Shot 41 The men of
Dublin. 50 Targets 03 44 40 00 01 Pikes 15 Shot 26 Sir S. Bagnol. 346 Sr S.
Bagnol with broken companies and his own. 200 Targets 18 200 20 30 00 Pikes 24
Shot 158 Capt. Esmond. 150 Targets 02 82 15 10 14 Pikes 28 Shot 52 Capt.
Freckleton 100 Targets 03 64 03 06 02 Pikes 15 Shot 46 Total 4150 Total 2640
702 388 315

The greatest part of the Army have neither Armours nor Murrions, neither are
here mentioned the sick and hurt in other places besides Dundalke, nor yet the
warders allowed out of some of these Companies.

The fourteenth of September his Lordship began another iourny into the North,
and the fifteenth encamped at the hill of Faghard, three miles beyond Dundalke,
and there his Lordship lay till the ninth of October, in such extremity of
weather, as would have hindered his passage, if the enemy had not withstood
him, his Lordships tent being (...) wet, and often blown down. Before his
Lordship came, Tyrone with his uttermost strength had possessed the Moyry,
being a strong fastness, as any the Rebels had, but his Lordship resolved to
march over him, if he stopped his way, and make him know, that his Kerne could
not keep the fortification against the Queens forces. Many skirmishes fell
out happily to us, and two several days the Rebels were beaten out of their
trenches with great loss, till at last, upon the eight of October, they left
the passage clear. Then after the army was a few days refreshed at Dundalke,
his Lordship marched the twenty one of October to the Newry, passing through
the Moyry, where he caused all the rebels trenches to be laid flat to the
ground, and the woods to be cut down on both sides of the Pace. At the Newry
for want of victuals, his Lordship stayed till the second of November, when he
set forward eight miles toward Armagh, and there encamped. The Rebels
horsemen showed themselves upon a hill; whereupon Sir Samuel Bagnols Regiment
having the Rear, and being not yet come into the Camp, was directed to march
toward them, there being a bog between us and them, but the Rogues quickly
drew to their fastnes. The next morning his Lordship rode some quarter of a
mile from the Camp, and viewed a place where Sir John Norreys formerly
intended to build a Fort, and liking his choice, set down there with the Army
to build the same. The place is a hill like a Promontory, all environed with
bogges, a River, and great store of wood. By it on the right hand over the
River and a great bogge, was a little firm ground, and then another bogge, and
over that a fair Country, with houses and much corn. His Lordship could by
no means send over any horse, but four miles about; wherefore he commanded a
regiment of foot to advance to the first piece of firm ground. and from
thence to send over the next bogge some few men, to bring in the Corn and
Timber of the houses, with directions to make their retreit to the gross, if
the enemies horses should fall down that way. On the left hand and before was
a bogge, over the bogge before a great wood, that continues through all this
fastnes, and over the bogge on the left hand a hill, where Tyrone all that day
and most of the time that the Army lay there, did muster himself and his men.
This day most of his horse and foot fell over, but far about on the right
hand, upon which, our straglers that went out retired to the firm ground, over
the first bogge, and there began between our foot and theirs, a very good
skirmish, till our men did beat them off, and brought with them great store of
Corn and wood, and killed diverse of them. In the mean time, their sconts on
the other side being somewhat busy with ours, Neal Oquin was taken prisoner,
being the chief favorite unto Tyrone. The next day we began to work, in
the building of the Fort, and to impeach our work, the rogues began to
skirmish with us on both sides, which was excellently maintained by some few of
our men, that we sent out: We saw many of them killed, and after understood
they lost a great number, whereof many were horsemen, of the best sort, that
had lighted to encourage their men to fight. They were then so well beaten, as
they would never after offer to meddle with us, till our return by
Carlingford. The ninth of November the Fort being finished, his Lordship called
it Mount Norreys, in honor of his Master, (so he termed him, under whom he
had served his apprentiship in the wars), and he left therein four hundred
foot, under the command of Captain Edward Blaney, with six weeks provision of
victuals.

The weather grew so extreme, as it blew down all our Tents, and tore them in
pieces, and killed many of our horses, so that the tenth day his Lordship
putting all the Army in arms, with all the Drums and Trumpets, and a great
volly of shot, proclaimed Tyrones head, (with promise of 2000. pound to him
that brought him alive, and 1000. pound to him that brought him dead), which
was done in the face of his own army, and so his Lordship marched to the Newry.
He had purposed to plant a garrison at Armagh 8. miles beyond Mount Norryes,
but the rebels Cowes had eaten up all the grass thereabouts, which should have
fed our horses, and the time of the year with the weather, was now
unseasonable for that purpose.

And whereas his Lordship was resolved to return into the Pale by Carlingford,
to discern whether that way or the way of the Moyry were more safe, that the
army might not run so continual hazards, this resolution was now confirmed
by Carlingford fight.
necessity, there being victuals at Carlingford, and none at the Newry or
Dundalke. The twelfth of November his Lordship came with the army to the narrow
water, whence he sent Sir Josias Bodley with three hundred choice foot to
possess a piece of ground, and keep the enemy from hindering our passage over
the water, the stream whereof he found so exceeding swift, that it was like to
be dangerous to venture our horses over. The first that tried was Doctor
Latware, his Lordships Chaplain, who only with his horse led by the boat side,
and with some thirty foot, went over; but his Lordship perceived so great
difficulty by his passage, that he passed the foot over as fast as might be,
sent Sir Henry Folliot to possess the pace of the Faddome, and made all the
Horse and our Garrons to go about that way. In the mean time we might see
the rebels forces draw over the mountains toward the pace of Carlingford, and
come close by our men that were first landed, yet they never offered any
skermish. That night we encamped directly over the narrow water, between the
pace of the faddome, and the pace of Carlingford, and having at midnight gotten
over for our men some vittels, that came by water from Carlingford, his
Lordship caused the same to be delivered before day, for the Army had fasted
two days, and after they had eaten but a little biscuit, and cheese or butter,
never men went on in a greater iollity. The thirteenth of November we were to
rise very early, for otherwise we could not pass our carriages by the sea
side, as we had determined, and by break of day the Scoutmaster brought word
that Tyrone with all his army was lodged in the pace, which is an exceeding
thick wood, at the foot of a great mountain, reaching down to the sea side,
between which and the sea, there is in most places as much space as seven may
march in rank, but in some places less, and in some none at full water, but
only there is a narrow deep high way through the wood.

Captain Thomas Roper with the broken Companies sent out of the Pale, went on
as a forlone hope, and that day by course it fell out, that Captain Benjamin
Berry, with the Lord Deputies Regiment under his command, had the vanguard, Sir
Christopher St Laurence, had the rear of the vanguard, Sir Richard Moryson had
the vanguard of the Rere, and Sir Samuel Bagnoll the rear of the rear, so
that we had but two bodies, a vanguard and a rere, thus subdivided. Captain
Treuor with as many as Captain Roper had in the point, led a forlorn rere.
Out of all the regiments his Lordship appointed three strong wings to go on
the right hand (for on the left hand was the Sea), commanded all by Captains;
the first by Captain Billings, the second by Captain Esmond, and the last by
Captain Constable.

The ground the rebels chiesely chose to make good, was a little Plain like a
semicircle, whereof the Sea made the Diameter, and a thick Wood the
Circumference. At the next corner to us, there ran into the Sea a River out of
the wood, being a Foard of good advantage to the enemy. All along the
circumference they had made diverse trenches, even close up to both the corners,
and at the furthest corner they had made a Barricado, reaching a good way into
the Wood, and down to the Sea. At the first they showed themselves horse and
foot upon this Plain: but when his Lordship commanded ours to give on (which
they performed presently and roundly), their horse drew off into the Woods, and
their foot into their trenches, and never shot, till the Vanguard was drawn
over the River, when from all parts they powered upon us great vollyes of shot;
but presently Captain Roper gave on the farthest trench on the right hand of
the corner, Captain Billings on the next with the wing he led, and Captain
Berry with the rest of the Vanguard gave upon the farthest corner, where the
Barricado reached from the Wood into the Sea. In some of them they made good
resistance, and many of them lost their lives with the Pike and the Sword. But
the last trench where they made greatest show of opposition, they did soonest
quit, though it were strongest for them, and to greatest purpose to arrest us:
the reason his Lordship conceived to be, that in that place they were furthest
from their retreat, and feared the forlorn Hope and Wing led by Captain
Billings might cut between them. When we had gained the trenches, the Vanguard
made a stand, in the Rere of which, to countenance them (if there had been
occasion), his Lordship stood with a troop of horse of voluntary Gentlemen,
and next to his Lordship (between the Van and next bodies of foot) Sir Henry
Dauers and his Lordships troops of of horse. At this time they entertained
skermish with all parts of our Army, but still falling toward the Rere, and at
this time his Lordships Secretary Master George Cranmer was killed, between
Sir William Godolphin and Mast. Henry Barkely, Master Ram his LordPs.
Chaplains horse was killed, and a Gentleman of his Lordships chamber, called
Master Done (that carried his cloak) shot through the leg. And I will not
forget one accident, that might have proved of great consequence: During this
stand, his Lordship road up to a little hill in the edge of the Wood,
underneath which our men were in skirmish with the rebels, beyond whom somewhat
more then a musket shot off, on the side of a hill, by a few little houses,
there stood in a troop some seven or eight horsemen on foot, with their
horses by them, at whom his Lordship caused his footeman to shoot (who always
carried a long piece with him), who (as within two hours after it was told his
Lordship by one that was at that time one of the number) killed the next man to
Tyrone, on whose shoulder at that time he leaned. Sir Henry Daners came unto
his Lordship, and desired he might take twenty of his own horse to fall into
the Rere, because he saw all the enemies horse fall thitherward, and that the
Irish horse only that day had the Rere. His Lordship gave him leave, and
withal sent young James Blount with 100 shot out of the Vanguard, Captain
Caufeild, and Captain Constable with as many more out of Sir Richard Morysons
Regiment, to reinforce the Rere, with whom the rogues continued a good
skermish, almost for half an hour, until their horse and foot coming on a
little plain, somewhat far from the skirt of the Wood, Sir Hen. Daners
charged home, and brake them, but in the beginning of the charge he was shot in
the thigh. After this charge they presently drew off their foot by the
Mountains, and their horse by the strand over against the narrow water. In our
Rere Captain Richard Hansard and Captain Treuer were sore hurt, and Sir
Garret Mores Ensign and Hugh hanlon killed, and in all we lost not twenty,
but above threescore were hurt. Of the enemy (as we heard then of certain)
there were fourscore killed outright, but within two days after his Lordship
understood by Maguire, that they lost two hundred. The Marshall and the
Serieant Mayor were always in the Van or Rere, as in either place the fight
grew hottest, and generally all the Commanders and soldiers served with
extraordinary forwardnes and alacrity. To conclude, by credible reports the
Rebels lost in this journey above 800. and Tyrones reputation (who did all
things by his reputation) was clean overthrown, so that from all places they
began to seek pardons or protections. On our part in the whole journey some
two hundred were killed and dead of hurts, and some 400. were hurt, which
shortly after recovered.

Give me leave to digress a little to continue the iournall of my travels, the
writing whereof has occasioned the relation of Irish affairs. When the Earl
of Essex went Lord Lieftenant into Ireland, the Lord Mountioy was first named
to that place, whereupon by my brother Sir Richard Morysons inwardnes with him;
I then obtained his Lordships promise to follow him into Ireland, in the place
of his chief Secretary. But this employment failing us both, I retired my
self into Lincolneshire, where I lived till his Lordship was the last spring
sent over Lord Deputy; and such was then my diffidence of vulgar reports, (for
I had no other knowledge of his Lordships employment), that I did not
certainly believe the change of the Deputy, till his Lordship was ready to
take his journey, which was besides extraordinarily hastened by the Queens
command, for the necessity of her affairs in that Kingdom: yet my letter
swifter then my self came to his Lordships hands; before his going; and from
him I received this honorable answer, that not knowing what was become of me,
he had already received three Secretaries, yet wished me to follow him, for he
would find out some fit and good employment for me. The indisposition of my
body by reason of an ague stayed me some few months in that Country; but in
July taking my iourny for Ireland, I came to Cambridge, whereas yet I was one
of the fellows of Peter-house. The Master and Fellows by special indulgence
had continued unto me my place, with leave to travel from the year 1589. to
this present July, in the year 1600. At which time being modest further to
importune so loving friends, and having the foresaid assurance of preferment in
Ireland; I yielded up my Fellowship, which in my former absence had yielded me
some twenty pound yearly. And the society (to knit up their loving course
toward me) gave me aforehand the profit of my place for two years to come:
For which courtesy and for my education there, I must ever acknowledge a strict
bond of love and service to each of them in particular, and to the whole body
jointly. From thence I went to London, and so to Westchester; and whilst I
staid there for a passage, I received another letter, by which I did gather
that his Lordship purposed to employ me in the writing of the History or
Iournall of Irish affairs. But it pleased God in his gracious providence,
(which I may never leave unmentioned) to dispose better of me. For staying for
a wind till the end of September, one of his Lordships three Secretaries,
(either to avoid the trouble and danger of the wars, or for other reasons
best known to him) came over, and told me that he had left his Lordships
service. Thus with better hope of preferment, I crossed the seas in very
tempestuous weather, (at our putting to sea the carcass of a broken ship
swimming by us, and at our entering the Port of Dublyn, another ship being cast
away in crossing from one shore to another, wherein a Bishop and his whole
family were drowned), After few days spent in Dublyn, I took my journey to
Dundalke, on the Northern borders, where my brother Sir Richard Moryson was
then Governor, and there I lodged till the Lord Deputies return with the
Army. And the thirteenth of November, being the day of Carlingford fight above
mentioned, whilst I walked in my brothers garden, I sensibly heard by
reuerberation of the wall, the sound of the vollies of shot in that skirmish,
though the place were at least six miles distant. In this fight the Lord Deputy
his chief Secretary George Cranmer (as is above mentioned) was killed, and his
Lordship having now but only one Secretary, did receive me the next day at
Dundalke into Cranmers place.

I return to the Irish affairs. At Dundalk his Lordship received a letter from
the Lord Admiral, signifying that he had earnestly moved her Majesty to give
him leave to come over for a short time, whose answer was, that there lived
not any man that she would be more glad to see then his Lordship: but that now
he had begun so worthily, and all things prospered under his work, she would
not give encouragement to the Rebels by his absence, whom his presence had so
daunted.

The List of the Army, and the distribution of the same into Garrisons in the
end of November.
Twelve Colonels of the Army.

The Earl of Thomond: Lord Dunkellin: Sir Henry Dockowra: Sir Arthur
Chichester: Sir Henry Power: Sir Charles Percy: Sir Matthew Morgan: Sir
Christopher Saint Laurence: Sir Charles Wilmot: Sir Arthur Savage: Sir Richard
Moryson: Sir John Bolles.

Foot at Carickfergus.

Sir Arthur Chichester Governor, 150. Sir Foulk Conway, 150. Captain Richard
Croftes, 100. Captain Charles Egerton, 100. Captain Gregory Norton, 100.

Horse.

Sir Arthur Chichester, 25. Captain John Iephson 100.

Foot at Mount Norreys.

Captain Edward Blaney Governor, 150 Sir Samuel Bagnol, 150. Captain Henry
Athyerton, 150.

Horse at the Newry.

Sir Samuel Bagnol Governor, 50.

Foot.

Sir Oliver Saint John's, 150. Sir Francis Stafford, 200. Captain Josias
Badley, 150. Captain Edward Treuer, 100. Captain Edward Fisher, 100. Captain
Rauenscroft, 100.

Foot at Carlingford.

Captain Richard Hansard, 100.

Foot at Dundalke.

Sir Richard Moryson Governor, 150. Sir Henry Dauers, 150. Captain Tobie
Cafeild, 150. Captain Ferdinand Freckleton, 100. Captain Ralph Constable, 100.

Horse.

Sir Henry Dauers, 50.

Foot at Arde.

Sir Charles Percy, 150. Sir Garret More, 100. Captain Thomas Mynne, 100.
Captain Thomas Williams, 150. Captain Francis Roe, 100.

Horse.

Sir Henry Dauers, 50. Sir Garret More, 25.

Foot at Ballymore.

Sir Francis Shane, 100. Captain Thomas Roper, 150. Captain Rotheram, 100.

At Mullingar.

The Lord of Deluin, 150 Foot. Sir Christopher Saint Laurence, 25 Horse.

At the Nauan.

Sir Thomas Maria Wingfeild, 150 Foot. The Lord Deputy, 100 Horse.

Foot at Drogheda.

Captain Billings, 100. Captain Linley, 100. Captain Iefferey Dutton, 100.
Captain Morice, 100. Captain Bentley, 100.

Foot at Trymme.

Sir Christopher Saint Laurence, 150. Sir Edward Harbert, 100. Captain
Yeluerton, 100.

Foot at Kelles.

The Lord of Dunsany, 150. Captain Hugh Orely, 100.

Horse.

Lord of Dunsany, 50.

Foot at Aboy, Clancary and the Castles of Ophalia.

Sir Henry Folliot, 150. Captain Lionel Guest, 150. oir Henry Warren, 100.

Foot in the Fort of the Dingon, and at the Nasse.

Sir George Bourcher, 100. The Lord Dunkellin, 150. Sir Henry Harrington, 100.
Captain Thomas Boyse, 100.

Horse at New castle.
Captain Daughtrey, 50. Sir Henry Harrington, 25.

At Athey, Reban, and the borders of Leax.

Sir Henry Poor, 150. Sir James Fitzpiers, 150. Master Marshel, 150. Captain
Philips, 100. Sir Thomas Loftus, 100 Foot.

The Marshall, 50 Horse.

Foot in the Forts, Sir Francis Rush, 150.
Foot in Occarrals Country, Captain Mollrony Ocarrol, 100.

Foot and Horse in Kilkenny.
The Earl of Ormond Lieutenant of the Army, 150. Captain Marbery, 100 Foot.
The Earl of Ormond, 50 Horse.

Foot and Horse in Kildare.
The Earl of Kildare, 150 Foot. The Earl of Kildare, 50 Horse.

Foot and Horse in the County of Waxford.
Sir Olin'r Lambert, 150. Captain John Master son, 100. Captain Esmond, 150
Foot. Sir Oliver Lambert, 25 Horse.

Foot at Dublin.
The Lord Deputies Guard, commanded by Captain Berry 150.

Foot and Horse in Connaght.
Sir Arthur Savage Governor, 150. The Earl of Clanrickard, 150. Sir Thomas
Bourk, 150 Sir Tibbot Dillon, 100 Captain Clare, 150. Captain Tibot Nelong,
100. Captain Thomas Bourgh, 100 Foot. The Earl of Clanrickard, 50. The Lord
Dunkellin, 25. The Marshall of the Province, 12 Horse.

Horse in the Pale at the Captains disposal near themselves, or

attending their persons.

Sir Edward Harbert, 12. Sir William Warren, 25. Sir John Barkley, 12. Captain
Rich. Greame, 50. Captain Garret Fleming, 25. Captain Pigot, 12. Captain
Darcy, 25.

At Loughsoyle a remote Garrison, under Sir Henry

Dockwra his command.

Sir Henry Dockwra, 50 Sir John Bolles, 50 Horse. Foot under 25 Captains,
2900.

In the Province of Mounster at the Lord

Presidents disposal.

The Lord President, 50. Sir Anthony Cook, 50 Captain William Taaf, 25 Horse.
Foot der 23 Captains 2800.

Total of Horse, 1198. Total of Foot, 14150.

From Dundalke, the Lord Deputy, with his servants and voluntary horsemen, rode
to Dublin the seventeenth of November. Within few days, upon Sir Arthur Savage
his intreatic to go for England, about his private affairs; his Lordship gave
him license, and appointed Sir John Barkely to supply his place of
Prouisionarie Governor of the Province of Connaght. At the same time his
Lordship wrote into England for authority to pass unto certain submitties
their Countries, with reservation of her Majesty's rights, and some other
conditions for her profit and service, more particularly on the behalf of
Connor Roe Mac Guyre, who being put from the Chiefery of his Country by Tyrone,
had quitted al his possessions and goods, to come to the Queens service, when
Tyrone had two of his sons for pledges, of which the elder lately escaping
from the rebels, had likewise submitted himself, and they both had served
valiantly in the late Northern journey; so as the father had his horse killed
under him, and the son killed three rebels with his own hand. And from
thence both going into Fermanagh, had drawn many of that Country to follow
them in the Queens service, diuerting all the Country from assisting Tyrone.
Besides that in a late skirmish, they had taken Cormock, Tyrones brothers
eldest son, a young man of the greatest hope in the North, whom the Rebels
purposed to create Oneale after Tyrones death, for which respect he was a
better pledge then any of Tyrones sons. This youth they had brought to the Lord
Deputy, with great hazard to conuoy him, and that when 3000. pound, and other
ample conditions were offered them for his ransom. In the same month of
November, many of the Northern Rebels with great troops, (among them a
Mounster man Piers Lacy of English race, a famous rebel), drew into the
Brenny, meaning to pass to the Shannon side, and so into Mounster, after they
had strengthened the broken rebels of the Pale with some assistance. But this
their passage was so stopped; as it took no effect. The sixth of December his
Lordship was advertised from an honorable friend in Court, that his late
proceedings were mentioned by all men with much honor, and most of all by the
Queen, who uttered to himself the most gracious and kind speeches of his
Lordship, and the most extolling his valor and worthy parts, that ever he had
heard her use of any.

Till this time, the rebels of the Mountains near Dublyn, called the Glinnes,
gave allarums almost every night in the Suburbs of Dublyn. But the time when
the insolency of some of them should be chastened, was now come. The Obirnes
having Phelim mac Feogh, the chief of their Sept, after the death of Feogh mac
Hugh, (formerly mentioned) inhabited the Glinnes bordering on the plains of
Dublyn, extending some four or five miles that way; and these being nearer
then the O Tools and other their confederates, were most insolent upon that
City, and the Counsel there residing, when the Lord Deputy was far off in
any service with the horsemen. Now his Lordship was purposed to scourge them,
and according to his singular secrecy, did so keep his Counsel from
divulging, and so cunningly masked his intent, as he came upon them; when they
were most secure. It was confidently given out, that his Lordship meant
presently to undertake some service against the OMores of Leax, and Oconnors of
Ophalia, and to that purpose meant to lie with his household at Monastreuen, a
great house kept by a Constable for the Queen: yea to make this project more
believed, his Lordship sent Arras hangings, and many provisions to that house.
And now the forces having been refreshed, his Lordship the twenty two of
December, being Monday, rode to the Nasse twelve miles distant from Dublyn,
where the rendeuous was appointed that day for the Lemster Garrisons, (for it
was fit those bordering on the North, should be left strong.) On Wednesday his
Lordship sent most of his household right forward to Monastreuen thirteen miles
distant; but himself with the rest of his servants and the forces, suddenly
turned on the left hand into the Glinnes, and after a day and nights tedious
march, over steep mountains covered with snow, he arrived on Thursday being
Christmas day, at Phelim mac Feogh his house, so suddenly as his wife and
eldest son were taken, and himself hardly escaped at a back window, and
naked, into the woods, where he kept a cold Christmas, while my Lord lived
plentifully in his house, with such provisions as were made, for him and his
Bonnaghs and kerne to keep a merry Christmas. To vent his anger, he daily
offered slight skirmishes upon advantage, but his heart was nothing eased
therewith, being continually beaten. His Lordship with the Queens Forces, lay
in this Country till about the twentieth of January: In which time his troops
spoiled and ransacked the Countries of Rannelagh and Cashay, swept away the
most part of their cattle and goods, burnt all their Corn, and almost all
their Houses, leaving little or nothing to relieve them; and to finish the
work, his Lordship planted two strong Garrisons upon them, the one at Wicklo
on the East side, (not able to come nearer, because a ship with our tools and
instruments was beaten back by ill weather, and could not arrive in time); the
other at Tullogh upon the west, so as they could not long hold from submitting
or flying, being thus hedged in.

This done, his Lordship came to Monastreuen, with purpose to undertake the
Mores and Connors. But having in few days settled a correspondency for
proceeding in that service, between our Forces in those parts, and the
neighboring septs of Odempsies, and some suspected subjects, of whose faith
till then his Lordship stood not assured, and discerning the Mores to be weak
in Leax, after the killing of their Chiefecashe Oway mac Rory, and the burning
and spoiling in the Leax journey, so as they had not means to keep their
Bonnaghs, and hearing that the Oconnors were fled far from that part of Ophaly,
so as neither of them could be found to make resistance to any reasonable
strong Forces. His Lordship leaving in these parts some few Companies to assist
the subjects, rode from Monastreuen the twenty nine of January to Abiconal,
nine miles, passing by the ruined City of Kildare, now altogether disinhabited.
The thirtieth we passed the Liffye, and came to Milhussy, one Master Hussyes
Castle, eleven miles, passing by some pleasant Villages, and by Menouth, a
fair house, belonging to the Earls of Kildare, now in the hands of the
Countess Mabell an old widow. The thirty one we came to Trym, eight miles,
champion ground. This is a pleasant town for seat, if the inhabitants were
suitable, through which the Boyne runs, and it has the ruins of a sumptuous
Castle. This place his LP. thought fittest for his present residence: for if
Captain Tirrel (now the chief rebel in Ophalia) should draw his force to the
South of the Country, from hence his Lordship might easily fall back on him. If
the rebels in the West desired to pass into Mounster (as they intended), then
our forces were so disposed, as they could not escape without fighting with us
upon diladuantage to them. And if neither fell out, then his Lordship purposed
to plant a Garrison at the Cauan in the Brenny, and to settle our above
mentioned Mac Guire in Fermanagh.

At this time his LP desired to have authority out of England, to pass
Tirconnel (the County of Odonel) to Neale Garue, reserving eight hundred Acres
about Ballishannan, and the fishing of the Erne to her Majesty. And such was
the opinion of the service his turbulent spirit could do the State, as he had
the grant of three hundred foot, and one hundred horse in her Majesty's pay, on
condition he should bring the men serviceable, and maintain them so, without
further charge to her Majesty.

From Trym, lying in East- Meathe, his Lordship the eleventh of February,
passing by the Barron of Trimblestones house, rode to the Lord of Deluins house
in West- Mead, eleven miles distant. The twelfth we passed ten miles further
to Molingar, the Shire town of West- Mead, compassed with bogges. Thence the
fourteenth, we went to Ballymore, Sir Frances Shanes house, ten long miles.
The sixteenth to Sir Tibbot Dillons house, seven miles. Thence the seventeenth
to Athlone, five miles, where the Governor of the Province of Connaght uses
to lie in a strong Castle belonging to her Majesty, which being situate in
Connaght, is divided from the Town by a River and a fair bridge of stone with
eight arches, lying in West- Mead. And all this Country is Champion, whereof
the greatest part lay waste. His Lord, returned back the eighteenth of February
to Sir Tibbot Dillons house, and the nineteenth to Danoar twelve miles (being
Brian Mac Gohagans Castle in West- Mead.

While his Lordship lay in this Castle, he rode forth the twentieth of
February, to view a strong hold, seated in a plain, and in a little Island,
compassed with bogges and deep ditches of running water, and thick woods, in
which fastness Captain Tirrel, with some of the boldest Rebels then lay. At
the first approach to the bogge, two shot of the Rebels came out, our horsemen
standing on a hill, moved continually, but my self being a raw soldier, stood
still, and because I had a white horse, I gave the Rebels a fair mark, so as
the first shot flew close by my head, and when I apprehending my danger, turned
my horse, the second flew through my cloak, and light in my padde saddle,
(which saved my life), and bruised my thigh. Presently his Lordship seat Sir
Christopher Saint Laurence, Captain Winsor, Captain Roper, and Captain
Rotheram, with wings of Foot into the Wood, to discover the fortified Island.
And on the other side sent Captain Leg to the same purpose. While these
skirmished with the rebels lying entrenched, Master Darcy riding by the skirt
of the Wood, was shot in the neck. The two and twenty day his Lordship drew
forth again, and we carried hurdles and fagots to pass into the Island, but
the water carrying them away, and his Lordships Guard being not well seconded
by the Irish, we came off with loss, and Captain Rotheram was shot.

Before I proceed, I must digress a little to other matters. In this Journey
(begun the twenty two of December) his Lordship received commandment to
pardon all such in Mounster as should require it, and should be commended by
the Lord President, with assurance that Spain was so entangled with the war
of Sauoy, as the Irish Rebels could at this time have small succor thence. His
Lordship writ to Master Secretary to procure him leave to start over into
England, to kiss the Queens hands, and to confer with him about the Irish
service, professing that he reputed him his honorable friend, and did much
disdain that humor in any subject (if any such were) which would think him
tied by any respect, from having his affection free to love him. In the
beginning of February, the Lord President of Mounster, excused himself to the
Lord Deputy, that he had made stay of some forces his Lordship had directed to
come from thence, because he had intelligence that some Northern Rebels were
sent to invade Mounster. But his Lordship knowing that he had stopped their
passage, and that they could not go with any great numbers; if perchance they
escaped, did again require that these forces might be sent unto him. At this
time, there was a plot for Tyrones head, the managing whereof was commended to
Sir Richard Moryson Governor of Dundalke, whether Sir William Godolphin was
sent with his troop of horse, to second this plot, which took not the wished
effect; the undertaker Henry Oge Oneale failing in his courage, or in his faith.

Now I will return to his Lordships actions while he lay at Maghogans Castle.
The same two and twentieth of February, his Lord received a packetout of
England, by which he understood that the Earl of Essex was committed to the
Tower for treason, which much dismayed him and his nearest friends, and wrought
strange alteration in him: For whereas before he stood upon terms of honor
with the Secretary; now he fell flat to the ground, and insinuated himself
into in ward love, and to an absolute dependancy with the Secretary, so as for
a time he estranged himself from two of his nearest friends, for the open
declaration they had made of dependancy on the Earl of Essex; yet rather
covering, then extinguishing his good affection to them. It is not credible
that the influence of the Earls malignant star, should work upon so poor a
snake as my self, being almost a stranger to him yet my neerenesse incloud to
one of his Lordships above named friends, made it perhaps seem to his Lordship
improper, to use my service in such neerenesse, as his Lordship had promised
and begun to do. So as the next day he took his most secret papers out of my
hand, yet giving them to no other, but keeping them in his own cabinet: and
this blow I never fully recovered: while I stayed in Ireland. In truth his
Lordship had good cause to be wary in his words and actions, since by some
confessions in England, himself was tainted with priuity to the Earls
practices, so that how soever he continued still to importune leave to come
over; yet no doubt he meant nothing less, but rather (if he had been sent for)
was purposed with his said friends to sail into France, they having prinately
fitted themselves with money and necessaries thereunto. For howsoever his
Lordship were not dangerously engaged therein, yet he was (as he privately
professed) fully resolved not to put his neck under the fyle of the Queens
Atturnies tongue. But his Lordships former service, and the necessity of his
future employment, together with his good success, so strengthened him, as
without great unthankfulness, and popular obloquy, he could not have been
questioned upon this weak ground.

The same twenty two of February, his Lordship in colmsell resolved to
proclaim, that all such as had any rebels goods, should discover them, or be
guilty of Treason: That none upon pain of death should parley with the
rebels: that the Country should bring in victuals to the Camp, which no man
(upon pain of death) should take from them without paying the price of the
market. And thus purposing to force the rebels out of the fortified Island, and
then to plant a garrison at the Abbey near adjoining; and to charge the new
submitted subjects to loyne with this garrison in the service as also to take
order for the safe victualing of the same when he should be gone, his Lordship
resolved the next day to make another attempt against the Island wherein Terril
lay, preparing all things to second the same, and taking order to bring
victuals to the Camp from all parts, and especially from Athlone by boats.

The twenty three of February, his Lordship drew forth to the Abbey, where he
had lodged four hundred soldiers, there he dined and proclaimed Terrils head
at two thousand crowns, and after dinner drawing to the Island, he divided the
forces, sending part to put boats into the water, and so to assail the Island,
and causing the rest to be led into the Woods to fetch out the rebels corn,
and to burn the houses, and such things for their relief, as they could not
bring away. The twenty four of February, being Shroue-tuesday, there fell a
great snow, so that we were forced to lie still, and the next night the Rebels
did steal away, leaving the Island to his Lordship, where the next day we
found much corn, some Murrions and Pieces, eight Cowes, and some garrons.

The twenty six, his Lordship drew the forces beyond the Island, into a pleasant
valley, wherein was a ruined house of Sir Edward Herberts, and the ground was
well plowed by the Rebels. Our men burnt houses and corn, and his Lordship
gave an Angel to a Soldier to swim over the water, and burn the houses in
another Island. Then we came to a river, which divides West Mead, and Orphaly;
into which country his Lordship sent diverse companies under Sir Christopher,
Saint Laurence, to spoil the same. The twenty seven, his Lordship rode six
miles to Sir John Tirrels, a strong Castle, we passed by the way Tirrels pace,
compassed with bogges and hilly woods. This Knight was a subject, and here his
Lordship rested the next day. The first of March his Lordship rode to
Klonegaue, the house of Sir Terrence Odempsey in Ophalia, being twelve miles;
in the first part whereof we passed a dangerous part of Tirrels fastness.

Here his Lordship received a gracious Letter from her Majesty, whereby she
made known unto him the Earl of Essex his death, and (to use her own words)
professed, that in regard of his approved fidelity and love, it was some
alleuation of her grief, to eiaculate the same to him. First, her Majesty
required him to look well in general, upon the dispositions of all his
Captains, whereof, some preferred by the Earl, might perhaps have hollow
hearts toward her service, for as she was pleased to pardon those, who by
his popular fashion and outward profession of his sincerity had been seduced,
and blindly led by him; so she was careful to sever the chafe from the
corn, and to deprive the malicious of means to prejudice her service.
Secondly, whereas the Secretary in his Lordships name had moved her Majesty,
that he might have warrant to come over; yet in regrad the Spanish ships had
not yet passed the narrow seas into Flaunders (whether surely they were sent,
and nothing less then for Ireland, howsoever the Traitor made use of like
rumors) her Majesty wished that he would conceal this his desire for a time,
with promise to call him home the next winter, and use his service near her
person.

The same time his Lordship received Letters from the Lords in England, giving
allowance in her Majesty's name, for the passing of Tirconnell to Neale Garne,
upon the above mentioned conditions; yet aduising that hereafter no Country
should so absolutely be passed, as all the inhabitants should depend upon one
man, which would still kindle new flames of rebellion. By the same Letters his
Lordship understood, that the supplies of money, victuals, and munitions, were
ready according to his demands. And their Lordships advised the plantation of a
garrison about Strangford, to prevent the assistance which the Scots gave to
the Rebels. The third of March his Lordship rode ten miles to Bally Britton,
Sir Henry Warrens house in Leax, which was kept for the Queen by a Constable
and Warders. In the midway we passed by Phillipstowne (otherwise called Dyngen)
a strong Fort in Ophalia (otherwise called the Kings County) and that day his
Lordship sent out many parties of soldiers into the woods, against Tirrell and
the Oconnors, scatteredly lurking in those parts.

Here his Lordship received from the Lords, directions to (...) the silver
money, and to proclaim a new coin, three ounces fine; which base money was
sent over, only to impouerish the Rebels (as was pretended) who made war
against the Queen with her own treasure; but in conclusion it was the undoing
of all the Queens servants there, for no man cared to lay it up, and all
things were bought at excessive rates, after the exchange in England once
failed. This exchange was proclaimed to be held at three Cities in England, and
four in Ireland; but by reason that great sums were coined by Rebels and
strangers, and for other abuses of the same, as namely of the Merchants, who
notwithstanding that the money was duly changed, did excessiuely raise all
prices, this exchange soon failed, and our hearts therewith: for we served
there in discomfort, and came home beggars, so that only the Treasurers and
Paymasters, (who were thereby infinitely enriched) had cause to bless the
Authors of this invention.

The fourth of March his Lordship rode five miles to Sir Edward Fitzgeralds
house, situate in Mead, in a pleasant and fruitful Country. The fifth of
March we rode ten miles to Mormeere, a very pleasant house, belonging to Sir
James Dillon, and thence the next day two miles further to Trym. Sir Richard
Moryson Gouernonr of Dundalke, had lately advertised his Lordship, that
Turloghmac Henry, Tyrones brother, Captain of the Fewes, had taken his oath to
him, before a Priest and upon a Mass book that he would submit himself to
her Majesty's mercy, without any conditions at or before St Patricks day next
following. And further had advertised that the Lord of Clancaruin humbly
desired to be received to mercy with him. For better ratifying hereof, the said
Sr Richard Moryson now brought the said Turlogh in person to his Lordship lying
at Trim. The fifteenth of March his Lordship drew to Arbrachin, the Bishop of
Meaths house, six miles distant, where his Lordship had appointed the
adioining garrisons to meet him the next day; and presently after their
arrival, his Lordship took horse toward evening, and thence we marched all
night, being very dark, and in the morning suddenly fell into the Ferney, the
possession whereof Ever Mac Cooly, one of the Mac Mabowns then usurped; and
there we burnt the houses and spoiled the goods of the Inhabitants, Sir Richard
Moryson Governor of Dundalke, with that Garrison, and Sir Oliver Lambert with
other troops, and Captain Thomas Williams with the forces of Ardee coming in
diverse ways, and meeting his Lordship in that Country, with small or no
resistance made by the rebels, to either party. The nineteenth we marched five
miles to Ardee, the twentieth seven miles to Mellisant, Sir Edward Mores house,
the twenty one two miles to Drogedagh, where his Lordship stayed till the
sixteenth of April, and so returned to Dublyn. At Drogedagh his Lordship
altered the list of the foot, the horse standing still as before.

The disposal of the foot into garrisons the 23. of March, 1600.
At the Newry under Sir Oliner St John's 750. At Carlingford Captain Hansard
100. At Mount Norreys under Sir Samuel Bagnoll 450. At Dundalke under Sr
Richard Moryson 400. At Arde a refreshing but no standing garrison 350. At
Luscanon 400. At Tullogh 350. At Wickloa 250 At the Nauan 300. At the Nasse
100. In Westmeath 450. In Ophalia 200. In Leax 300. At Athy 100. At Monastreuen
300.

In Connaght.

Sir John Barkely Deputy Governor 200. The Lord of Dunkellin now upon his
fathers death Earl of Clanrickard 150. More under four Captains 500.

Foot in Galloway and Odoynes Country.

Three Captains 400. Capt. Tho: Roper 150. At Rebon 150. In Ocarrols Country
100. In In (...) 150. At Dablyn the Lord Deputies guard 200. At Carickfergus
under Sir Arthur Chichester 550. Of new Companies 1150. being cast, and 50.
made over to (...) Garrison, remained 800. Of Sr Charles Percies Company, 100
were made (...) to other Captains, and 50 were added to Loughsoyle garrison.
These Companies together with the foot in (...) and at Loughsoyle, do make the
new list of foot 13250.

Her Majesty's charge in Ireland from the first of April in the beginning of
the year 1600. to the last of March in the beginning of the year 1601.
Her Majesty's allowances by establishment, and by her letters for increase
amount to two hundred seventy six thousand nine hundred and foureteen li, nine
s. four d. ob. qu. demi.

Hereof saved by the Lord Deputy his providence fifteen thousand two hundred
sixty two l. fix s. five d.

Saved also by Checks imposed on the Army, seventeen thousand twenty nine
pound sixteenes. nine d. ob.

So her Majesty's charge for the Army this year, besides munition and like
extraordinaries, amounts to two hundred thirty four thousand six hundred
twenty two li. five s. two d. qu. demi.

It remains briefly to collect (out of the Lord Presidents letters to the Lord
Deputy), the services done in Mounster the year 1600. now ended. About the
sixteenth Mounster.
of April, in the beginning of the year 1600. Sir George Carew Lord President
of Mounster departing from Kilkenny, where he had been some days detained by
the Earl of Ormonds surprisall at a parley with the rebels, came to Waterford.
And Thomas Fitz-Iames bastard son to James Fitzgerald late Lord of the
Decies, chief rebel in the County of Waterford fearing present prosecution,
made sure to be received to her Majesty's mercy, which the Lord President
granted, as well to draw from the titulary Earl of Desmond some part of his
strength, as to open the passage between Waterford and Yoghall by land,
formerly shut up, so as nothing could pass any way but by sea. The twenty
three of April at Dungaruen his Lordship received advertisement that Florence
mac Carty after many favors from the State, being wholly hispaniolised had
great power in Carbry and Desmond, and according to his plot with Tyrone at his
being there, was entered into open action, (so they term rebellion). That
Captain Flower Sergeant Mayor of Mounster, had hereupon entered Carbry with
1200 foot, and 100 horse, burning and spoiling the same, and killing many
rebels. That Florence had levied of the Prouincials and Bonnaghs (so they call
waged soldiers) 2000 foot, yet never attempted the English, till in their
return they came within five miles of Cork, where in a fastness the midway
between Cork and Kinsale, they assailed the English, and were beaten by them,
some 100. of the Rebels being slain, in which conflict Captain Flower had two
horses slain under him. The twenty four the Lord President came to Cork,
where he received the State of the Province by the relation of Sir Henry Pore
sole Commissioner for Mounster, (since the killing of his partner Sir Warham St
Ledger by Mac Guire, likewise killed in the fight) and understood the rebels to
be strong and masters of the field, supplied with all necessaries from the
Towns through the persuasion of Priests, and the covetousness of the
Townsmen. About this time Fitzgibbon called the White Knight, either ill used
by Tyrone at his being in Mounster, or fearing prosecution, submitted himself
to her Majesty's mercy. Likewise Florence mac Carty by persuasion of friends,
and upon safe conduct came to the Lord President, and protested loialty to her
Majesty, but refused to give his son for pledge, left his waged soldiers
should cast him out of his Country, till his Lordship threatened to lay aside
all other service sharply to prosecute him, whereupon he consented for his
pledge, but required to have the County of Desmond given to him and his (...),
with title of Mac Carty More, or Earl of Clanoar, with like high demands,
which being rejected, he desired leave to sue for these graces in England, with
promise not to serve against her Majesty's forces in the mean time, wherewith
the Lord President was satisfied, having no other end for the present, then to
make him stand neutrall, while the whole forces were employed against the
titulary Earl of Desmond, James Fitzthomas, called the Suggon Earl by
nickename. Now one Dermod Oconnor, having no lands, yet by marriage with the
daughter of the old Earl of Desmond and his great valor, had the leading of
1400. Bonnaghs. And because the Lord President hoped to ragine the rebels one
by another; at this time by the wife of the said Dermod and other Agents his
Lordship plotted with him, upon promise of great rewards to kill James the
titulary Earl of Desmond. And in like fore, one John Nugent a rebel, upon
promise of pardon and reward, did within few days undertake to kill John the
said Earls brother. About the beginning of May Redman Burke leading 500
Rebels, lost 120. of them while he adventured to take a prey in (...) Country
(...) being nourished by the Lord President, with hope to be Baron of Letrim,
drew his men out of (...) into Ormond, with purpose to lead them into
Connaght: And Tyrrell leader of the Northern men, stayed not long behind him,
pretending discontent against Dermod Oconnor, but indeed fearing some plot
against his head. It had been long rumored that the Lord President would take
the field the sixth of May, which made the rebels draw to a head and spend
their victuals; so as after ten days they were forced to disperse themselves.
The twentieth of May the Lord President took the field, and marching toward
Lymbricke, settled Warders in some Castles to secure the passage thither from
Kilmallock. At Lymricke his Lordship understood that John Nugent above named,
being ready (as he had undertaken) to kill John brother to the titulary Earl
of Desmond; was by accident hindered from discharging his Pistol, and being
apprehended, was put to death; but as well John as the titulary Earl his
brother, were so terrified herewith, as they durst never keep together, and
thought themselves least secure in the head of their own men from like
practices. The Lord President marched into John Burkes Country, and spoiling
the fame, forced him to seek her Majesty's mercy on his (...), which at last
he obtained, though with difficulty. His Lordship having gained here plenty of
grain for the Army, sent five hundred foot into Omulrians Country, who
spoiled the same, and killed many rebels. Then his Lordship returned to
Limricke without any loss, and in the beginning of June divided the Army into
garrisons not far distant, which his Lordship did though the time were fit for
service, that he might attend the plot with Dermod Ocannor for killing the
titulary Earl of Desmond, which could not well be done, except the rebels were
dispersed, who would keep together as long as the English Army was in the
field. Besides, his Lordship upon their breaking, took advantage to settle a
garrison at Asketon without any resistance. Dermod Ocannor took the titulary
Earl prisoner in the name of Oneale, pretending by a forged letter that he had
plotted his death with the Lord President, and presently sent his wife for the
money promised in reward, wishing the Lord President to draw his forces to
Kilmalloch, where he would deliver him the prisoner, which his Lordship did
accordingly the sixteenth of June, but the rebels having notice hereof, drew
together four thousand in number, stopped the passages, set the titulary Earl
at liberty, and besieged Dermod Ocannor in a Castle, till the Lord President
marching thither the 29 of June, forced forced them to leave the siege. His
Lordship kept the field, took the chief Castle of the Knight of the valley,
wherein were slain threescore warders, took other Castles, and did many good
services, the rebels in great number lying near him, but never (...) to fight,
by reason of the ielousies between them whereupon 2500. Connaght men were
suitors to his Lordship to return home without impediment from his (...). At
this time Ocannor Kerry yielded his Castle to the Queen, and was received to
mercy, and the Lord President at last granted a pass to the Rebels of
Connaght, but the Lord Burke not knowing thereof, for a private revenge set upon
them as they marched home (...) three score of them, besides many drowned. The
sixteenth of July the Lord President bestowed the Army in garrisons: The 23, of
July his Lordship (...) the (...) again; to relieve the men he had formerly
sent into Kerry, and marching thither, took (...) the chief house of the Lord
Fitz Morris, and many other Castles, for grief whereof the said Lord died,
yet leaving a son then as dangerous as himself. The Lord President returned
to Cork about the eighteenth of August, leaving Sir Charles Wilmot, Governor
of Kerry, a valiant Gentleman, a chief Commander under him, and in the first
rank of those instruments he used in all services, who in short time brought
most of the freeholders of Kerry to due subjection, and drove the titulary
Desmond out of those parts. All the garrisons in time of harvest, gathered as
much come as they could, and destroyed the rest, which made the rebels not able
to subsist the year following. Sir George Thornton hearing that the titulary
Earl of Desmond passed near Kilmalloch sent the garrison out, and Captain
Greame charging them with his troop of horse, killed 120. of them, in which
conflict the English got 300. garons laden with baggage, 150 pikes and pieces
with other weapons, and 40. horse, but the English had 16. horses killed in the
fight. The titulary Earl of Desmond, could never after draw 100. men together,
and was forced to fly into Tipperary with his brother John, Pierce Lacy an
Archrebel, and the Knight of the Glin, whence his brother John hasted into
Vlster for relief from Tirone. And in the end of this Summer upon the
departure of the Bonnaghs of Connaght and Vlster, and the good success of the
English, many of the Prouincials submitted themselves, yet sent to Rome for
dispensation of their so doing. About the midst of October James Fitzgerald
(who had long been imprisoned in the Tower of London, being the next and true
heir to the last Earl of Desmond, and released by the Queen with title of
Earl by letters Pattents sent to the Lord President and promise of a good
proportion of land to support his dignity at the end of the war, according to
his deserts in her Majesty's service, and in the mean time to live upon pay in
the Army) landed at Yoghal, and the eighteenth day came to the Lord President
at Mallogh, and was industrious in the Queens service. Desmod O Connor being
in Connaght, and hearing of the young Earl of Desmondi arrival, upon promise
of great services had the Lord Presidents protection to come unto him, but was
set upon by Tybot we long, his men defeated, he taken and hanged, whereupon
Tibet having then a Company in her Majesty's pay was cashered. Florence mac
Carty having all this while practiced underhand many things against the State,
and putting still off his appearance by delatory excuses, at last in October by
the desperateness of his estate was forced to submit, and obtained pardon upon
pledges of his loyalty. The (...) Earl of Desmond stealing back into
Mounster lived as a Wood-kerne, never having more then two or three in his
Company.

In November, Sir Charles Wilmot took the last and only Castle the Lord Mac
Morice had in Kerry, and his eldest son therein (betrayed by a Priest for
safety of his life) and great provisions laid up in that Castle. In these two
last months Sir Richard Percy lying in Garrison at Kinsale, twice passed into
the Country, and took preyes of five hundred Cowes, killing many rebels. In
December the Lord President had notice where the titulary Earl lurked, and
sentmen to surprise him: but he escaped in such haste, as he left his shoes
behind him. And now there was not a Castle in Mounster held for the rebels, nor
any company of ten rebels together, though there wanted not loose (...) bonds
dispersed in all corners, so as his Lordship had leisure to look into the
Corporate Towns, being aiders, abetters, and procurers under hand of this
rebellion, all the Queens treasure being spent in them by the soldiers, and
they underhand supplying the rebels with all necessaries, though at excessive
rates. The rebels fled outof Mounster into Tiperarie and Ormond, had hitherto
lived there among the Bullera being subjects, without any disturbance, the
rather for the Earl of Ormonds, mounting for the death of his most worthy and
virtuous Lady: but in January his Lordship sent some forces against them, who
killed many, and forced the rest to fly, where of some were drowned passing
the waters then very high, and some chief rebels were taken and hanged at
kilkenny. About the end of January, the Lord President sent (...) foot of the
Mounster List, to be disposed by the Lord Deputy, as he had direction to do.
His Lordship to settle the Country the better, refused to renew any protection,
so as all were forced to sue their pardons, and in two month a space before
the end of February, upon his Lordships recommendation, morethen fourethousand
Mounster men had their pardons, granted by the Lord Deputy, and passed under
the great Seal.

The second Book.
CHAP. I. Of the Lord Deputies particular proceedings in the prosecution of the
Rebels, and of the Speniards inuading Ireland, in the year 1601.
WHile the Lord Deputy lay at Drogheda (namely, from the the one and twenty of
March, till the sixteen of April, upon which day he returned to Dublin), his
Lordship assembled the Counselors of State to attend him there. And upon the
eight and twenty of March 1601, the Lord Deputy and Counsel wrote from
Drogheda (vulgarly called Tredagh) their joint letters to the Lords in England,
whereby they advertised, that the Lord Deputy having spent the greatest part
of Winter in the Irish Countries of Lemster, had by burning their Corn,
consuming their cattle, and killing many of them, so scattered their maine
strength, as certain of the chief had since submitted to the Queens mercy,
and the rest were severed into small companies, and unlike to draw to any
dangerous head; yea, Tirrel, in opinion the greatest among them (taken for
Tyrones Lieutenant in Lemster), being forced out of his greatest fastness, now
with a few base Kerne following him, was driven to wanderin Woods and Boggs,
seeking to escape into the North (as shortly after he did, notwithstanding that
certain English Companies were left to hunt him in his walks, and to stop his
passage.) That his Lordship desirous to be at hand, to watch all opportunities
of service upon the Northern borders, had pierced into the Fearny, and that
Sir Richard Moryson Governor of Dundalk with his Garrison had formerly wasted,
and now passed through the Fewes, and met his Lordship there, so as both these
Countries being spoiled, Ever Mac Cooly chief of the Fearny, and Turlogh Mac
Henry, Captain of the Fewes, had both been humble suitors for her Majesty's
mercy, and were commanded to appear shortly, and make their humble
submissions: which course likewise the septs of the Brenny were (...) to take,
for many of them chastised by the Army, and utterly discouraged, had already
diverse times offered most humble submissions. That his Lordship hereupon had
called the Counselors to Tredagh, there to consider of the circumstances and
conditions, to be observed in taking these (...), as also to deliberate how the
Army might be employed most to vex Tyrone, til the Summer came on, at which
time his Lordship purposed to dwell upon him, and put him to trial of his
uttermost fortune. That it was resolved in Counsel to accept the submissions
of the Chief of Fearny, and the Captain of the Fewes, above named, as
likewise of the septs of the Brennye (these three Countries being an hedge
between the English Pale, and the North, and yielding many commodities to
pass into Tirone with her Majesty's forces. That it was resolved to send Mac
Guyer into Fermanagh with 200 men to help him for a time, against the rebel
Mac Guyer (whom he and his son had already much impouerished), for he was
thought a fit instrument (in case he prevailed), as well to entangle Tyrone and
infest Ororke, as to help the Plantation at Ballishannon intended to be put in
execution about June following, when forage could be had for horses.

They further solicited by these letters for supplies of victuals, munition and
money, and that the victuals and munition should be addressed some part to
Dublin and Tredagh, but the greatest part to Galloway, being intended for the
forces to be planted at Ballishannon, and those to invade Tyrone that way; and
the rest to Carlingford, intended for the forces to invade Tyrone by the way of
the Newry, which invasion was purposed about the midst of June, when forage
might be had for the horse, and this they prayed, because the vnshipping and
reshipping of the victuals at Dublin, caused great expense of money, and waste
of the victuals.

Tirlogh Mac Henry Captain of the Fewes, and Ever Mac Cooly, of the Family of
the mac Mahownes, chief of the Fearny, did about this time declare themselves
to be subjects, and humbly made their submissions on their knees, signing
certain articles of subjection under their hands, and putting in pledges for
performance thereof. And the said Ever in particular confessed in the Articles
under his hand, that he was not Lord, but Farmer of the Fearnye, binding
himself to pay her Majesty his old rent. The one and thirty of March 1601,
her Majesty signed the following Establishment. An. 1601.


Officers General.
The Lord Deputy for his diet one hundred li. per mensem: a Band of Horse three
li. four s. per diem: fifty foot each at eight d. per diem: for allowance in
lieu of cesse, ten li. per annum, besides his Companies of horse and foot in
the Army. In all per diem twelve li. six s. six d. ob. qu. per annum, four
thousand four hundred forty four li. seventeen s. one d. ob. qu.

The Lieutenant of the Army, three li. per diem; one thousand fourscore
fifteen pound per annum.

The Treasurer at wars, thirty five s. per diem; six hundred thirty eight
li. fifteen shillings per annum.

The Marshall besides his thirty horse at twelve d. per diem without checque in
the Army, five s. nine d. per diem; one hundred four li. eighteen s. nine d.
per annum.

The Serieant Mayor of the Army, twenty s. per diem; three hundred sixty five
li. per annum.

The Master of the Ordinance, twenty six s. eleven d. per diem; four hundred
ninety one li. four s. seven d per annum.

Ministers of the Ordinance, twenty five s. two d. per diem; four hundred
fifty nine li. five s. ten d. per annum.

Muster-master General, eleven s. six d. per diem; two hundred nine li
seventeen s. six d. per annum.

Comptroler of the victuals, ten s. per diem; one hundred eighty two li. ten s.
per annum.

Five Commissaries of victuals, one at eight s., and four, each at six s. per
diem, thirty two s. per diem; five hundred eighty four li per annum.

Fourteen Colonels, each at ten s. per diem, seven li. per diem; two
thousand five hundred fifty five li. per annum.

Scout-master, besides six horse, each at twelve d. per diem, part of the
Army, six s. eight d. per diem; one hundred twenty one li. thirteen s. four
d. per annum.

Provost Marshall of the Army for himself and four horsemen, four s. three
d. per diem; seventy seven li. eleven s. three d. per annum.

Officers Provincial.
President of Mounster at one hundred thirty three li six s. eight d. per
annum; his diet and the Counsels at ten li. the week; his retinue of thirty
horse and twenty foot at thirty s. seven d. ob. per diem; three li. six s.
fix d. per diem; one thousand two hundred thirteen li. thirteen s. four d.
qu. per annum.

Provost Marshall in Mounster, fourteen s. per diem; two hundred fifty five
li. ten s per annum.

The Commander of the forces in Counaght at ten s per diem, with an increase of
one hundred li. per annum; fifteen s. five d. ob. qu. per diem; two hundred
eighty two li. ten s. per annum.

Prouosh Marshall in Connaght, besides twelve horsemen of the Army, five s.
seven d. ob. per diem; one hundred two li. fourteen s. one d. ob. per annum.

Commander of the forces at Loughfoyle, besides his pay of ten s. per diem as
Colonel, has three s. four d. per diem; sixty li sixteen s. eight d. per
annum.

Provost Marshall there, four s per diem; seventy three li. per annum.

Provost Marshall of Ballishannon, four s. per diem; seventy three li. per
annum.

Lieutenant of the Queens County, six s. eight d. per diem; one hundred
twenty one li. thirteen s. four d. per annum.

Provost Marshall in Lemster for himself and six horsemen, five s. seven d.
ob. per diem; one hundred two li. fourteen s. one d. ob. per annum.

Warders in Lemster per annum, one thousand three hundred ten li. nineteen s.
two peace.

Warders in Vlster per annum, eight hundred twenty one li. five s.

Warders in Mounster per annum, five hundred forty two li. eighteen s. nine d.

Warders in Connaght per annum, two hundred li.

Twelve hundred horsemen distributed into four and twenty Bands, the Captain
four s., the Lieutenant two s. six pence, the Cornet two s. per diem, and
three hundred horsemen, each at eighteened. per diem; on condition they be
English both horse and men, or else to have but twelve d. per diem. And 200
horsemen at fifteen d. per diem, and seven hundred horsemen at twelve d. per
diem. Per annum twenty nine thousand two hundred seventy three li.

Fourteen thousand footmen, distributed into one hundred forty Bands, the
Captain four s. Lieutenant two s. Ensign eighteen d. the day, two
Serieants, a Drum, and a Surgion, each at twelve d. a piece per diem, and each
soldier at eight d. per diem. Per annum one hundred ninety nine thousand seven
hundred fifteen li. sixteen s. eight d.

Pensioners in the Muster-booke, per annum one thousand eight hundred nine li.
fifteen s. ten d.

Pensioners by letters Patents per annum eight hundred seventy four li. five
s. nine pence, ob.

Thirteen Almesmen per annum eighty eight li. nineteen s. four d. ob.

Officers of the Musters which are payable out of the checkes, namely one
Muster-Master at six s. eight d. a Comptroller at ten s. and twenty
Commissaries, each at three s. four d. per diem. Per annum one thousand five
hundred twenty li. sixteen s. eight d.

Extraordinary allowance for Messengers, Espials, Post-barkes, rewards of
services etc. per annum, six thousand li.

Total of this Establishment per annum two hundred fifty five thousand seven
hundred seventy three li. fourteen d. qu. denny.

Memorandum, that the dead paies allowed to the Captains in each Company of
horse or foot, are herein contained, but the charge of munition, of leuying
horse and foot for reinforcing the Army, with many like charges, are not
herein contained.

The sixth of April 1601, his Lordship received advertisement from Captain Io
sias Badley, at the Nowry, that he, and Captain Edward Blony, Governor of the
Forte of Mount-Norreys, purposing to surprise Loghrorcan, could not carry a
boat, which they had provided to that purpose, but he carrying certain
fireworkes provided in case the boat should fail, went to the Fort, and
joining with Captain Blany, marched toward that Island, where they arrived by
eight of the clock in the morning, and leaning their forces behind a Wood,
they both went together to discover the Island, which done Captain Bodley made
ready thirty arrows with wildfier, and so they both fell down with one
hundred shot close to the water, where the shot playing incessantly upon the
Island, while the other delivered their arrows, suddenly the houses fired, and
burnt so vehemently, as the rebels lodging there, forsook the Island, and
swumme to the further shore. That after they (...) burnt to the ground, they
fired a great house upon their side of the shore, and killed there six Kerne,
(gaining their Arms) besides Churles and Calliachs, and after the burning of
other houses also, they brought away some Cowes and Sheep, with other pillage;
and they understood by a prisoner, that there were about thirty persons in the
Island, whereof only eight swumme away, (of which four were shot in the
water), so as the rest either were killed or lay hurt in the Island. Likewise
they understood by the said prisoner, that great store of butter, corn, meal,
and powder, was burnt and spoiled in the Island, which all the rebels of that
Country made their magasine. Further, that some forty kerne skirmished with
them at places of advantage, in their retreat for two miles march: but
howsoever the common opinion was, that the Rebels sustained great loss by this
service, yet of the English only two were slain and seven hurt.

The seventh of April Sir Henry Dockwra Governor of Loughfoyle wrote to his
Lordship, that he had taken the submission of Hugh Boy Boy, of whose service to
her Majesty, he was confident to make manifold good uses, as well for the
present settling Sir John Odogherties Country after his late death, as for
revealing the Rebels secret counsels well known to him. Among which, he
confidently anowed that the King of Spain had promised to invade Ireland this
year, with six thousand men, and to land at some Town in Munster, (swearing
that three of the chief Cities had promised to receive them:) Adding that
Florence Mac Carty had written to Odonnel, that he had submitted to the Queen
only upon necessity, and that upon the Spaniards coming he would join with
them. This Governor further advertised that Phelim Oge, chief of a contrary
faction in Odogherties country, desired to make his humble submission to the
Queens mercy upon these conditions: to leave of the name of Odogherty, and
obey any man, to whom her Majesty should give that Country. To pay all debts
his men did owe to any subjects. To discharge his soldiers. To return to the
owners twelve hundred Beeues he had cut for Odonnell. To make satisfaction for
a Bark coming to the Liffer, which his people had taken and spoiled: And to
yield up to him the Gonernor all the cattle should be found in his Country
belonging to Odonnell. Adding, that Sir John Bolles in a journey made upon
Ocane, had killed fifty of his people, had burned many houses and much corn.
And that the garrison of the Liffer had spoiled Tirconnel, had slain many, and
had brought away two hundred Cowes, and great booties.

The tenth of April Sir Oghy Ohanlon, a northern Lord submitted himself on
his knees to her Majesty's mercy at Tredagh, and signed certain Articles, for
the performance whereof he took his oath. And because these Articles (except
there fell out some special reason to leave out some of them, and to add
others) were the same to which all submitties at this time were tied, I will
once for all add the brief of them.

After his acknowledgement that Queen Elizabeth, by the Grace of God, Queen
of England, France, and Ireland, etc. Is the true absolute and Sovereign Lady
of this realm of Ireland, and of every part, and of all the people thereof,
with humble confession of his former disloyalty, and of his penitency, and
like profession that he had felt the weight of her Majesty's power. This done,
further to the example of all other offenders, he testified, that he made this
his humble submission and protestation of his penitency, his future loyalty and
endeavor to redeem his faults by his good services. Then he acknowledged under
his hand, that now before the Lord Deputy and Counsel, he takes a corporal
and religious oath for all and several Articles following; Namely, That he
will ever continue a loyal subject. That for performance thereof, and of all
the following Articles, he will put in sufficient pledges. That he does
renounce all manner of obedience to any foreign power or Potentate, depending
only on the Queen his Sovereign. That he renounceth all Rebels, and will not
aid them, but serve against them when he is commanded. That he will to the
utter most of his power withstand and confound any disloyal subject, or
foreign enemy attempting against the sacred person, or estate of her Majesty,
or the quietness of her faithful subjects, more especially, against the
Arch-traytor Tyrone, and the King of Spain supporting him. That he will come
to the State whenever he is commanded, neither will upon wrongs seek to
right himself, but will seek redress by course of Law. That he will reveal
all conspiracies of treason which he shall hear. That he will sue out her
Majesty's pardon within certain days, for him and his followers, and answer
for their good behavior. That he will book these followers within certain
days. That he will suffer all subjects safely to trade in his Country. That
he will extort no black Rents, or make other exactions on his people, but by
due course of a subject. For sincere performance hereof, he testified that he
had taken his corporal oath, upon his knees, before the Lord Deputy and
Council, (the same oath being solemnly ministered to him, and taken by him in
the said assembly) and did again vow the same upon his salvation, religiously
professing, that if he should break those Articles or any of them, he would
acknowledge himself not only to be worthy of all infamy and extreme
punishment; but ever after to be most unworthy to bear the name of a
Christian, or to enjoy the society of men, to which, as he had unfeignedly
sworn, so now in witness thereof, he did in this written form of submission
set to his hand, with addition of the day of the month, and of the year when
this act was done by him.

The sixteenth of April, the Governor of Loughfoyle by his letters entreated,
that a pardon might be parsed to Hugh Boy (which business the bearer had
undertaken to solicit) and that Neale Garue, to whom the Queen had granted
Odonnels Country, might be sent back from Dublin, because the Irish were
consident, that upon his arrival all the people of Tirconnell would flock
unto him. Further aduertising, that the garrison of the Liffer had burnt the
New-towne, and killed twelve kerne and thirty eight of other people, and had
brought back some three hundred Cowes. And that the garrison of Donnegall, had
burnt in Ocanes Country a great village, and many women, children, and Cowes,
with the houses, and had killed someforty kerne and churles.

The three and twenty of April, his Lordship kept S. Georges feast, at Dublin,
with solemn pomp, the Captains bringing up his meat, and some of the Colonels
attending on his person at Table. To which feast the Rebels were invited, whom
his Lordship lately received to mercy, under her Majesty's protection, till
their pardons might be signed, namely Turlogh Mac Henry, Captain of the Fewes,
Ever Mac Cooly, chief of the Fearney, Obanlon a Lord of Vlster, Phelim Mac
Feagh, chief of the Obyrnes, and Donnell Spaniagh, chief of the Cauanaghs in
Lemster. These were entertained with plenty of wine, and all kindness, his
Lordship assuring them, that as he had bin a scourge to them in rebellion, so
he would now be a mediator for them to her Majesty, in their state of subjects,
they standing firm and constant to their obedience. And no doubt, as there is
a secret mystery of State in these solemn pomps; and as his Lordship therein,
for his person and carriage, was most comely, and (if I may use the word)
Maiesticall; so the magnificence of this feast wrought in the hearts of those
Rebels, and by their relation in the hearts of others after submitting, (both
having first experienced the sharpness of the Queens sword,) such an awful
respect to her Majesty, and such fear tempred with love to his Lordship, as
much auailed to contain them in due obedience.

From the end of March to the beginning of May, upon the Lord Presidents
intercession by letters to the Lord Deputy, many pardons were granted for life,
land, and goods, to Chiefetaines of Countries, and Gentlemen in Mounster;
namely, to Mac Carty Reough, Chieftain of Carbery, and two hundred and ten
followers, as well men, as women and children: to Oswylliuan Bear, and some
five hundred twenty eight followers, as also to Oswylliuan Brantry: to John
Odoyre of Tiperary, and some one hundred fifty followers: to Fitz James
Gerrald, with some three hundred seventy followers and to Teig Mac Mereretagh
Obrian; in the County of Lymrick, with some two hundred twenty one followers;
and some others, which for brenity I omit. And it was concluded at the Council
Table, on the last of April, that the two following Prouisoes, should be
inserted in all pardons, (and charge was accordingly given to the Queens
learned Counsel, and to the Officers, and to his Lordships Secretaries, whose
hands al pardons passed, that the said Prouisoes should be continually
inserted) namely: First, in regard some notorious Rebels of the Pale might
pass as followers to remote Lords, that the pardon be not auailable to any,
but to the natural inhabitants, tenants, and known followers of the Lord so
pardoned. Secondly, in regard many Rebels taken, and to be judged according to
the Law, might by oucrsight be pardoned, prouiso was to be entered, that no
pardon should avail any, who were already in prison, or upon bail.

The second of May, his Lordship wrote to the Lords in England, that Mounster
was not only well reduced, but began to taste the sweetness of peace: that the
like might be said of Lemster, except the Mores and Conners, who were
scattered, and had sought, but could not obtain of him the Queens mercy. That
the Northern borders of Vlster were assured, namely; Ohanlons Country, the
Fewes, Clancaruill, the Ferney, most of the Galloglasses, and many of the Mac
Mahownes, and that a garrison was planted in the Brenny, and the Queens Mac
Gwyer settled in Fermanagh. That Sir Henry Dockwra at Loughfoyle, and Sir Arthur
Chichester at Carickefergus (commonly called Knockefergus) had made their
neighbors sure to the State, and both had done her Majesty excellent service.
That only Connaght, most easily to be reduced, was most out of order. That for
this reason he thought fit to plant Ballishannon garrison through Connaght,
which might be reduced with the very passing of the Army; and therefore had
persuaded the Magazin of victuals at Galloway, specially since from those parts
his Lordship might easily join with the Lord President, in case Spain should
invade Mounster. That in the mean time his Lordship would draw one thousand
foot out of Mounster, to serve in Vlster, and for a time borrow thence five
hundred Foot and fifty Horse for Connaght journey, the forces remaining being
sufficient to guard Mounster, and greater then he had left in Lemster, in the
peace whereof he might seem to have more proper interest. But if Spain should
invade Mounster, then all the Army was to be drawn thither, and great supplies
sent out of England, since the defection of the Irish was like to be great,
even of those who yet had never declared any malice against the State: yet that
his Lordship desired presently no supplies, in regard of her Majesty's
excessive charge, in leuying and transporting them, trusting that by the Rebels
forces diminished, occasion would be given to cast some of the Army, with which
cast Companies the defects of the standing might be supplied, wherein his
Lordship promised to proceed without preferring such, as quen with their blood
shed in his fight deserved advancement, or satisfying some worthy Commanders,
(whose entertainment he had rather lessened) or pleasuring those, who might
justly challenge preserment from him. Therefore praying, that her Majesty would
not command him to bestow new Companies (as of late she had done) upon such as
of late had been absent, and had only served at the loosing of the Kingdom,
so as they were least fit to be preferred before those who had hazarded their
lives in regaining it: Adding, that he writ not this, to uphold any private
dependency on himself, esteeming it a great vanity so to do, but only to
strengthen himself, so long and no longer then he should be employed in her
Majesty's service. That in stead of new supplies, he desired leave to
entertain some of the Irish Submitties in pay, by them to consume the Rebels,
and by the Rebels to diminish their number, since two things remained to settle
the Kingdom. First the ridding Ireland of the Swordmen, (to which end the
Irish affected some journey into the Low Countries or the Indies, which could
not make them any whit more able Soldiers then now they were, not add to
their knowledge of war fit for Ireland, which they now had; but three parts
of four were like never to return, if they were engaged in such a voyage).
Secondly, the making of the English owners fit to inhabit their lands, which
was most difficult, in regard of their poverty and of the great quantities of
lands they possessed, since in particular of some gentlemen of Leax and
Ophalia, each possessed as much land, as being well inhabited, would maintain
more men then all the Rebels of those Counties were in number.

About the tenth of May his Lordship gave warrant to pass the pardon of Phelim
mac Feogh Obirn, of the Glinnes, with his followers, and likewise of Phelim mac
Feogh O Tool of the Fartrey, with fifty six followers. And upon the humble
submission of Rossemac Mahowne, his Lordship granted him her Majesty's
protection, till he might sue out his pardon.

About this time his Lordship had advertisement from Sir Henry Deckwra
Governor at Loughfoyle: That he had taken in Odogherties Country, and secured
the passages into it, as well against Odonnell, as the false Inhabitants. That
he having gathered the forces to spoil Hughmac Hugh Duffes Country, the
project was frustrated by and Irishman stealing from the Army, and giving them
intelligence hereof, so as they drove the prey sarre often into remote parts.
That Neale Garue with Cormocke O Neale, dispatched lately from Dublin, were
arrived at Loughsoyle. That he the said Governor deferring the prosecution of
Ocane, because he had no Haven in his Country for the landing of Spaniards,
nor could escape from the English forces, though Spaniards should land, the
same time resolved to enter Hugh mac Hugh Duffes Country, as more fit to
receive foreign forces, and to supply them with victuals or other
necessaries. And to this end that he had assembled the forces to the Liffer.
That Shane mac Manus Oge Odonnell, commanding certain Islands in the Sen; did
there offer to submit, but upon such conditions as were unfit, yet the Irish
extolling his valor, and entreating for him, and Neaie Garue for the time
being content to spare him of the men allowed him, fifty foot and twenty five
horse, that he the Governor had further promised him, upon acceptable service,
to procure him as many more men in her Majesty's pay, whereupon he had taken
his oath of obedience, and had secretly sent word to his people to spoil Rory
Odonnels Country; (who then had him in no suspicion). This done, that he the
Governor suddenly entered Hugh Duffes Country aforesaid, and spoiled the
same, taking a prey of more then one thousand Cowes, with great numbers of
Garrons, Sheep, and Goats. That thence he marched into Fanaght, where (...)
Oge mac Swinedoe, Lord of the Do, met him on the borders, and delivering the
chief pledges of his Country for his and their loyalty, took his oath of
obedience to her Majesty. That hearing of Odonnels drawing into those parts,
he thence retired with great part of the forces, leaving Neale Garue with his
Irish and some English Companies for his assistance, to spoil and absolutely
waste Fannaght, to whom Mac Swine Fannaght Lord of the Country, presently
delivered pledges of his loyalty, taking his oath of obedience to her Majesty,
at which time likewise Mac Swine Bane, and O Boil, earnestly solicited the
Governor to be received to mercy. That Neale Garue by the keeping of
Tirconnell granted him at Dublyn for the time, till her Majesty might please to
pass the same to him by Letters Pattents, and by great gifts he had there
received, was puffed up with pride, desiring present possession of the
Country, and calling the people his subjects, and saying to the Governors
face, that he would punish, exact, cut, and hang them, as he list. But that he
had calmed him with severe speeches, and with charge not to meddle with any
man, or any part of the Country upon his alleagiance, since he had no right
but from her Majesty's bounty, not yet fully expressed, and that not
sovereign, but limited, so as might best stand with the peoples good, who
were not his but her Majesty's subjects. That he found him to be in his nature
proud, valiant, miserable, tyrannous, vnmeasurably covetous, without any
knowledge of God, or almost any ciuility, good to be used while he was
satisfied, (which he could hardly be, being like a Quince, requiring great
cost ereit be good to eat), or whilst he was kept under (which was the fitter
course to be held with him), yet that he thought him sure to the State, in
regard of the pledges he had given, but much more, because he could no way
better his estate by leaving the Queens service, nor be secure of any word
from Odonnell, whose brother he had killed. That Cormacke O Neale, being of
late come from Dublyn, could hitherto have done no service, but that he was of
reasonable esteem among the people of his Country, and was of a mild honest
disposition, willing to serve without grating beggary, or unreasonable demands,
yet was Irish and little less barberous then the better sort of wood kern.
That coming out of the woods without friend or kinseman, he could then give no
pledges, but his wife and children were since come to him, and within the
Governors power, besides that he seemed not to be inclined to treachery,
neither could mend his estate by leaving the Queens service, to which he came
in voluntarily, without calling, forcing, or composition, and therein remained
with his desires limited, and to be contented with reason. That Hugh Boy, was
subtle, wise, civil, a Papist, and aliened (but not deeply malicious) against
Odonnels person, yet firm in his allegiance, having come in with his Country,
and delivered his chief pledges, offering any other to be delivered upon
command; and having showed the passages into his Country, and himself
solicited and furthered the fortifying thereof, daily giving sure and
important intelligences, to the great furtherance of the service; besides that,
all his wealth lay within the power of the Queens forces. Lastly, that
between these submitties were factions and heart-burnings, which discreetly
measured, could not but advantage the service.

The fifteenth of May the Lord Deputy received (by the hands of Sir George
Carry, Treasurer at wars) a Ploclamation (signed by the Queen) to be
published, for making the new standard of mixed moneys to be only current in
this Kingdom, all other coyns being to be brought in to the Treasurer. And
likewise a letter from the Queen, requiring the Lord Deputy and Counsel to
further the due execution of the contents of this Proclamation, and by some
plausible graces, done in general to the subject, (in the establishing an
exchange of this coin into sterling money of England, and taking away the
impositions on sea coals transported into Ireland, and in particular to the
Captains of the Army, in allowing their dead paies in money, after the rate of
eight pence per dicm, and some like favors), inuiting all to swallow this
bitter pill, which impouerished not only the Rebels, but her Majesty's best
servants in this Kingdom, only enriching her Paymasters, sitting quietly at
home, while others adventured daily their bloods in the service.

The twentieth of May the Lord Deputy and Counsel advertised the Lords in
England, that they had given order to print 300. of the Proclamations for the
new coin, to be published through all parts of Ireland at one time. That they
had in Counsel agreed upon a general hoasting for this year, to begin the
last of June following. And in the mean time, while that was preparing, that
the Lord Deputy would draw the forces to Dundalke upon the Northern borders,
there to watch opportunities of service, and specially by his presence to
animate the new submitties, to attempt some thing against the Arch-traytor
Tyrone, and to put them in blood against him and his confederates. And that his
Lordship toward the time of the said hoasting, purposed to return to Dublyn,
and to the end he might find there all things in readiness for his intended
prosecution of Tyrone in his own Country, they besought their Lordships that
victuals and munition might with all possible speed be sent thither out of
England. The foresaid general hoasting is a rising out of certain foot and
horse, found by the subject of the five English shires and the Irish
Submitties, to assist the Queens forces, and these, together with some of the
English Companies, his Lordship used to lay in the Pale, for the defense
thereof, at such time as the forces were to be drawn into Vlster.

The rising out of the five English Shires and the Irish Submitties. Vizt. Of
the County of Dublyn. Besides sixteen Kearne.
Horse Archers Horse. Horse Archers Horse. In the Barrony of Balrothery. In
that of Newcastle, nil. 18 nil. 26 In that of Castleknocke. nil. 11 In that of
Cowlocke, nil. 30 In that of Rathdowne. 12 10

2. Of the County of Mead. Besides one hundred Kerne of the Pooles.
In the Barony of Dulicke. nil. 32 In that of Dunboyne. nil. 3 In the Barony of
Skrine, 24 30 In that of Decy. nil. 17 In that of Ratothe. nil. 13 In that of
Moyfewragh. nil. 4

horse Archers Horse. horse Archers Horse. In that of Lane. nil. 8 In that of
Slane. 6 11 In that of Nauan. nil. 48 In that of Fowere. 28 nil. In that of
Kenllas, alias Kells. 16 6 In that of Margallen. 7 (...)

Thirdly, Of the County of Westmeath -- 60. -- 2

Fourthly, Of the County of Kildare.

In the Barrony of Sualt. 8 14 In that of Kilkey. 1 12 In that of the upper
Naasse. nil. 13 In that of Ophaly. 1 2 In that of the nether Naasse. nil. 5 In
that of Counall. nil. 3 In that of Kelkullen. 8 2 In that of Clane. nil. 2 In
that of Narragh. nil. 2 In that of Okethy. nil. 5 In that of Rebau and Athy.
nil. 3 In that of Carbery. nil. 4

Fifthly, Of the County of Lowth.

In the Barony of Ferrard. 4 26 In the Towns of Lowth and of Dundalke. 16 6 In
that of Atherdy. 16 13

Summa 207 -- 374. Total both 581.

The rising out of the Irish Lords, and their Captains.

The Obyrnes, over whom after the death of Sir Henry Harrington, his son Sir
William Harrington, is Captain by the late Queens Letters Pattents, granted
to his father and him, Horsemen 12. Kerne 24.

The Cauanaghs having then no Captain over them. Horse 12. Kerne 30.

Other particular septs, besides those which were in rebellion. Horse 104.
Kerne 307.

Total, Horse 128. Kerne 361.

The project of disposing the Queens forces for the following Summers service.

Out of Mounster we thought fit to be spared, and to be drawn into Connaght
1000 foot and 50 hose, (since there should still remain in Mounster 1600 foot
and 200 horse, for any occasion of service.) Foot 1000. Horse 50.

In Connaght were already (besides Tybot ne longes Company. Foot 1150 Horse 74.

These to be placed as follows.

To keep at Galloway and Athlone in Connaght, foot 350.

To leave at the Abbey of Boil in Connaght under the command of the late Lord
of Dunkellen, now Earl of Clanrickard. Foot 1000 Horse 62.

These to further the plantation of Balishannon.

To leave at the Annaly in Lemster side of the Shannon, under the command of
Sir John Barkeley. Foot 800. Horse 12.

These fit to join with the vndermentioned forces of Westmeath, Kels, and the
rest upon the Northern borders, to stop the Vlster Rebels from coming into
Lemster; or if they should pass them, then to join with the forces of Ophaly,
and the rest southward. Tybot ne long, (the payment of whose Company had long
been stopped) was to be kept in good terms. Oconnor Sligo to be threatened,
that if he did not submit and declare himself against Odonnell before the
planting of Ballishannon, he should have no hope of mercy. The forces at the
Abbey of Boil were to infest Oconnor Sligo, and to keep Ororke from ioining
with Odonnell. Those at the Annaly, to infest Ororke, besides the above
mentioned, lying between any forces that might come out of the North into
Lemster, and to follow them if they should escape, it being likely that about
harvest time Tyrrell and the Oconnors will gather strength (if they possibly
can) to return and gather the Corn they sowed last year in Leax and Ophaly.
And thus are disposed the above said Foot 2150. Horse 124.

The Forces toward the South of (...) to lie thus;
In Ophaly. The Earl of Kildare (...) George Bourcher 100. Sir Edward (...)
Capt. Garrall 100. Sir Henry (...) 100. Foot In all 550. Earl of Kildare 25.
Sir Edward Harbert 12. Horse. In all 37. In Leax. Sir Henry Power 150. Sir
Francis Rushe 150 Sir Thomas Lostus 100. Foot. In all 400. Master Marshall 20.
Captain Pigot 12 Horse. In all 32. At Kilkenny. Earl of Ormond 150 Foot.
Earl of Ormond 50 Horse.

The Forces toward the North of Lemster to lie thus:
In Westmeath. Lord of (...) 150. Sir Francis Shane 100 Foot. In Kelles.
Captain Roper 150 Foot. Earl of Kildare 25. Sir Henry Harrington 25 Horse. At
Liseannon in the Brenny. Lord of Dunsany 150. Captain Esmond 150. Sir William
Warren 100. Sir Henry Harrington 100. Foot 500. Lord of Dunsany 50 Horse. At
Dundalke. Captain Freckleton 100. Foot. In the Moyry. Captain Hansard 100
Foot.

These of the North and the Garrisons at the Abbey of Boil, lic-sit for
correspondencie.

These of the South, together with the submitted Irish in Opprossery, and the
Odemsies, Omolyes, and Mac Goghlins, (...) for correspondency among themselves,
is also with the garrison at the Annaly. Also all these of the South and North,
lie aptly placed to answer one another upon occasion of service, and are in
number, those of the South, Foot 1100. Horse 119. Those of the North. Foot
1100. Horse 100.

Both of the South and North. Foot 2200, Horse 219.

Total, adding the forces above said drawn out of Mounster, and those being
in (...), (homely foot 2150. Horse 124.) Makes Foot 4350. Horse 343.

The Lord Deputies forces follow, wherewith he purposed to build a Fort at the
Moyry, and put men into it to keep that Pace. To plant a Garrison in Lecale of
500. foot and fifty horse. To give Sir Arthur Chichester the Gouernoun of
Knockfergus, two Companies for his better strength. To plant a garrison at
Armagh, and another at the old fort of Blackewater, and a little loope sconce
between them both. To see great store of (...) made in time of the year at
Armagh, and at Mount Norreis, for feeding of horses there in the winter
following. To lie all the summer close upon Tyrone, destroying the new Corn,
and spoiling the Country, and so to facilitate the planting of Balishannon,
and perhaps to pass into Tyrenes Country, the Garrisons of Knockefergus,
Locale; and Longhfoyle entering at the sametime on al hands; and there ordered
to meet him. And to draw toward winter to Athlone in Connaght.

The Lord Deputies said forces.
The Lord Deputy 200. The Marshall 150. Sir Oliver Lambert 150. Sir Christopher
St Laurence 150. Sir Er. Stafford 200. Sir Oliver St John's 200. Sir Henry
Folyot 150. Capt. Williams 150. Sir James Fitzpieree 150. Sir William Fortescue
100. Sir Garret Moore 100. Captain Oreyly 100. Captain Edward Blaney 150.
Captain Josias Bodley 150. Sir Henry Dauers 150. Captain Ghest 150. Captain
Roe 100. Capt. Masterson 100. Capt. Rotheram 150. Foot 2750. Lord Deputy 100.
Sir Henry Dauers 100. Sir Oliver Lambert (...). Sir Garret More 25. Sir Ghrist
S. Laurence 25 Captain Darcy 25. Hose (...).

The Companies intended to be left in the garrison to be planted this summer at
Lecaile.

Sir Richard Moryson the Governor 150. Captain Cawfield 150. Captain Treuer
100 Captain Constable 100. Foot 500. Sir Samuel Bagnol 50 horse.

The Carrison then being at Knockfergus.

Sir Arthur (...) the Governor 200. Sir Foulke Conway 150. Captain Egerton
(...). Captain Norton 100. Captain Billing 100. Captain Phillips 100. Foot
750. (...) 25. Captain John Iephson 100. Horse (...).

These two garrisons of Lecayle and Knockefergus, might meet upon all
occasions, and so by the intended plantation of Lecayle, the garrison of
Knockfergus was thought as much strengthened, as if those companies lay there.

Lying presently in garrison at the Newry, upon Vlster borders, Sir Samuel
Bagnoll 150 foot. Sir Francis Stafford 50 horse.

Lying at the fort of Mount Norreys, Captain Aderton 150 foot.

These two garrisons, and the two intended at Blackewater and Armagh, to be
under one Governor, and to have correspondency as one garrison.

The garrisons at Loughfoyle to be drawn forth into the field.

At the Derry, in List.

Sir Henry Dockura the Governor 200. Captain Digges 100. Captain Willis 150.
Captain Lee 100. Captain Oram 100. Captain Brooks 100. Capt. Orrel 100. Foot
850. whereof to be drawn into the field 650.

At the Lyffer.

Captain Coach 100. Captain Morgan 150. Captain Winsore 100. Captain Dutton
100 Captain Goare 150. Captain Pinner 100. Capt. Band 100. Foot 800. For the
field 550.

At Dunalong.

Sir John Bolles 150. Captain Floyd 150. Capt. Badby 150. Capt. Sidley 100.
Capt. Basset 100. Foot 650. For the field 400.

At Kilmore, Captain Alford 100. For the field 35. At Newtowne. Capt. Atkinson
100. For the field 40. At Romolyon, Capt. Bingley 150. At Gulmer at, Captain
Vaughan 100 At the Cargan, Capt. Stafford 100. At Anny, Captain Sidney 100.
Foot 650. For the field 75.

Total in List 3000. For the field 1675.

Thus at Lougsfoyle with these English foot, and one hundred English horse,
together with five hundred Irish foot, and one hundred Irish horse, and the
help of the Submitties, especially of Neale Garne, and of Cormocke Oneale. It
was thought that Sir Henry Dockewra might plant an intended garrison at
Ballishannon, as by his own offer he had proiected in England, and besides
keeping his own, might also draw out sufficient forces to meet the Lord
Deputy in the heart of Tyrone, if the project of planting Ballishannon could
take such effect as was hoped. To the furtherance whereof, I did at this time,
upon his Lordships command, devise a Cipher, to pass between his Lordship and
the Governors of Loughfoyle, Knockefergus, and Lecaile, to the end, that if
the rebels should light upon any their letters, contriuing this meeting or
other service, yet they might not be able to discover any their secret purpose,
especially since they were so ignorant, as they could not attain the
deciphering of those Characters, or any like, though far more easy: and this
Cipher was presently sent to the above named Governors.

His Lordship further resolved in Council to write to the Lords in England, to
have six thousand of the trained bands in readiness, to be sent over presently
upon the suspected, invasion of foreign powers, and to have a Magazin of
victuals and munition at Limricke, as well to answer the service in Mounster,
if they should make descent in those parts (being most likely) as to be drawn
thence to Galloway, in case no such invasion were made, there to answer the
prosecution of the Connaght rebels, intended the Winter following.

All things thus proiected for the following prosecution of this war, his
Lordship on the two and twentieth of May, began his intended journey above
mentioned, from Dublin, and the twenty three came to Tredagh, and the twenty
five to Dundalke, where his Lordship lay, till the dispersed Companies could be
draw nethither, and victuals brought. Here he composed all controversies
between the late Submitties, and settled a correspondency between them, as well
to make them concur in the defense one of another, as also in the defense of
the Pale. Here his Lordship received the twenty eight of May, letters from the
Lords in England, requiring that no Captain should supply his Company with
Passe-volants at pleasure; but only with such men as should be sent out of
England for supplies. That the Captains refusing to show their companies when
they were required by the Commissaries of the Musters, should be checked two
months pay. That such Pensioners should be cheked as without special license,
should be absent from any service. And that special care should be had to
punish and prevent such soldiers, as dismissed by their Captains Passes, or
running away from their colors, did duly return into England.

The nine and twentieth of May, upon the intercession of the Lord President by
his Letters, (according to the course held by directions out of England), the
Lord Deputy granted his warrant for drawing of her Majesty's pardon to Cuocher
Omulrian, a Munster rebel, chief of his Sept (or name), and eighty three
followers, as well men as weomen and children of that sept. The second of June
it was resolved in Council, that letters should be written to the Lord
President of Mounster, requiring him to draw the forces under him toward
Lymricke, and in those parts to employ them most part of the following summer,
as well ready to attend the descent of any foreign enemy, as fitly laid to
give countenance to the prosecution of the rebels in Connaght, whether the said
Lord President was to be further directed, to send a thousand foot and fifty
horse, (according to the above mentioned project), to the end that the rebels
being prosecuted in that Province, might have no leisure to join with those of
the North, for disturbing the planting of a garrison at Ballishannon, which Sir
Henry Dockwra was to plant from the way of Loughfoyle. The fifth of June the
Lord President advertised that warning had been given to those of Mounster,
for the sending of their men to the general hoasting above mentioned, which
the Lord Deputy had appointed to meet (according to the old custom) at the
hill of Tarragh, but that he feared the scarcity of victuals and want of
furniture, would either hinder their full appearance, or make them of small use
to the service. The sixth day upon the Lord Presidents letters, warrant was
given for a charter of pardon without fine, to be granted to one hundred fifty
one Inhabitants about Moghely in the County of Cork, as well men as weomen and
children, for life, lands, and goods. And the like was granted to Oswilliuan
More of that Province with 481 followers.

The eighth of June being Monday, the Lord Deputy drew the forces out of
Dundalke, and marched two miles to the hill of Fagher, near the pace of the
Moyry, where he encamped. And while he lay there, his Lordship caused a fort to
be built in the said Pace, at the three mile water, not rising from thence till
he had made this Fort defensible, so as leaving some warders in it, the
workmen might in his absence finish the building. The thirteenth of June, in
the Camp at the Fagher, his Lordship published the Proclamation of the new
Coin, all other moneys having been decried three days before. And by his
Lordships direction like Proclamations printed at Dublyn, and thence formerly
sent to Loughfoyle and Knockfergus, and into the Provinces of Connaght and
Mounster, were at the same time published together in all places. The
foureteenth, in the same Camp, his Lordship and the Counselors there, wrote
the following letter to the Lords in England.

IT may please your most Honorable Lordships, perceiving by your Lordships
Letters of the eighteenth of May, that the victuals expected to answer our
purpose of planting Ballishannon by Connaght, could not arrive in such quantity
nor time, as might enable us to proceed in that journey; and receiving some
arguments of your Lordships inclination to Sir H. Dockwra his offer to plant
that garrison from Loughfoyle, we grew into a new consultation, in what sort to
make the war this Summer. First, it was propounded with the Army to march by
Lecaile and those parts into Colrane, the end whereof should have been to have
brought in subjection all the woodmen, and utterly taken from Tyrone all that
part of Vlster between Colrane and Loughsidney to the Blackewater, from whence
heretofore the Traitor has gathered his greatest strength. The passages being
not very dangerous, and we having the commodity of the Sea to supply us, we
should have made the war that way to great purpose, and with good
conueniency, and perhaps might have fallen over the Banne into Tyrone, all
other ways being of extreme danger, to enter into that Country, except that
one by Loughfoyle. The chief difficulty that did arise against this project,
was the danger wherein we should leave all things behind us, if the Spaniard
should land, when we had carried the chief force of the Kingdom into the
uttermost corner thereof: and the next was, that we being not able to leave any
great guard for the Pale, should have left it naked to any attempt of Tyrone,
and the new reclaimed rebels to the mercy of him, as the Pale to the mercy of
both: But in the end we grew to this resolution. First, in the Interym,
between this and the appointment of the general hoasting, (by the which we
should be supplied with carriages, and about which time we expect victuals and
munition out of England, of the first whereof we are more sparingly provided
then may warrant the engaging our selves into any great business, and of the
second so utterly unfurnished, as we scarce have powder to maintain a good
days fight, nor tools, nor other provisions to fortify, which must be our
chief work, as we carry the rebels before us to dwell by them), we determine
to assure the passage of the Moyry, then to plant a garrison at Lecaile; and to
convey some more men to Sir Arthur Chichester Governor of Carickefergus, (who
with that Garrison and those supplies, together with the advantage that our
stirring in all other places will give him, may go near to work little less
effect, then we with the whole Army should have done): and lastly, we purpose
to lie with the forces as near Tyrone as we can. After when victuals and
munition should be arrived, (which we hope to receive by the last of June,
being the time appointed for the general hosting), we purpose (God willing) as
near as we can to employ her Majesty's forces according to the enclosed
project: (This project I have formerly set down). With the particularities of
Sir H. Dockewra his purpose to plant Ballishannon, (sent by Captain Vaughan to
your Lordships) we are not acquainted, only Master Treasurer has told us of
such a proposition in general. But we doubt not, that withal he has
propounded to your Lordships for such means to accomplish his work, as must
be supplied from thence. For from us he can receive little other assistance,
then our employing the whole forces according to the enclosed project, which in
every part is done as much as may be for his advantage, neither (which is
worse) can we easily have any intelligence from him, or often hear one from
another. But if we perceive that he shall find any impossibility to plant
Ballishannon, we think to advise him, with the whole gross of his strength
to fall into Tyrone, about such time as we shall be at Blackewater, whereby it
may fall out, that we shall (with the help of God) meet at Dungannon, and
utterly waste all the country of Tyrone, unto the which course if we be driven,
we must resolve to make the war this following winter in Connaght, (first
leaving the Northern border in good strength), which we hope will reduce that
Province, and ruin O Donnel; for if we keep him out of Connaght, he cannot
long subsist, and so we hope, for the continual assurance of that Province, to
plant the next year at Ballishannon with facility. But if the planting of so
many Garrisons do seem, by continuing the greathesse of the Army, to draw on
too long her Majesty's charge, we do first think, that to recover this
Kingdom, and to preserve it from being hereafter chargeable, it will be
necessary, that Ballishannon, Loughfoyle, some Garrisons on the Ban, Lecayle,
Mount Norreys, Armagh, Blackwater; and some other places, be continually kept,
all which places may be ever victualed by Sea, or they being near together,
without any dangerous passage between them by land; may be victualed by Sea
and land, without any further force then their own. And if there be in every
Fort some little Keep (or Tower) of stone built, then as the wars decrease,
or occasion shall serve, the places may be guarded with a few men, and so
continue bridles in peace, and fit places to put in more men to great purpose,
when the rebellion shall at any time break out. Neither need these little
Castles be works of any great charge, for they may be easily made such, as
this people will hardly force them. To proceed in our project of this Summer
service. The victuals already contracted for, must-arriue in due time, and
your Lordships supply us with good quantities hereafter. For our only way to
ruin the rebels, must be to make all possible wast of the means for life,
which done, if we be not supplied out of England, we shall as well starve our
selves as them; but especially where we must make the war, which is far
from the relief of any friend, and where nothing is to be gotten from the
enemy, except it be by great chance, since what is in their Countries, they will
lightly either hide, or spoil, or convey to inaccessable Fastnesses. And
because the greatest service here is to be done by long and sudden iournies,
which cannot be done without victual, and no victual but cheese well carried
by the soldier, without garons (or carriage Iades) we must humbly desire your
Lordships to send us some great quantities of cheese. In the provision whereof
whatsoever inconveniences your Lordships shall find, we assure you they will be
ten times counteruailed in the service. Lastly, because the Army is already
weak of English, and this iourny (without the extraordinary favor of God) must
needs diminish them much, as well by the sword as sickness, we most humbly and
earnestly desire your Lps. as soon as conveniently may be, to send us 1000
shot to Carlingford for supplies, that at our return, we may both strengthen
those English Companies; which we mean to leave behind us in the North and
such as we carry with us for the Winter service. The time will be exceeding
fit for their arrival; for besides the succor we may receive from them; if we
grow very weak at our return, they will come over well clothed against the
Winter, and may have time to rest, and to be seasoned, till Christmas, (till
when in these wars it is the most inactive part of the year), and then may
be employed till the end of May (which is the only season to plague these
rebels), and when the Summer is past (wherein those rogues revive and live like
flies) then our Garrisons being well planted, and the Army strengthened with
English, we may begin to cast the Irish Companies, and to clear the English
Companies of them. For they must continue good subjects, or starve if they go
out, and have the Queens sword hang over them, wheresoever they go. In the
mean time we think them necessarily entertained, for we take so many men
from the Rebels, and by them give unto our selves facility to plant the
foundation of their own ruin, and both with us and against us to wast them by
themselves. For if we should not entertain them, they would-lie upon some
Countric of the subject, and except it were defended by as many as themselves,
they would waste and live upon it, so that in effect the very numbers
entertained would grow all to one reckoning. And for a more particular instance
of the benefit that ensues the entertaining these Irish, we think we can give
your Lordships an account of above one hundred that have this year been killed
with the bullet, fighting on our side, who were formerly rebels (for of such
we speak) and questionless would have been so again, if they had lived, and
should have been put out of the Queens pay. We humbly desire your Lordships
to make a favorable construction both of our counsels, and the successes,
since those grounds whereupon we do now justly build our resolution, may by
their alteration give us just cause to alter our course, and the want of such
means, either in matter or time as we expect, may utterly hinder it. And that
more especially, in case any foreign succors do arrive. For then the whole
frame of this our project is broken, and we must be presently relieved out of
England, or else we with this Kingdom shall suffer much hazard. And because
your Lordships in your last letters, gave us some light, that it might be, and
leave to inform you, what likelihood we could here receive, that it would be;
we have first the intelligence which we send your Lordships, with many other
reports. Next we have a constant and of late an extraordinary conceived
confidence in this people. And lastly we judge what a wise and a powerful
enemy will do, by that which is best and easy for him to do. So as we have
many reasons to think, that Spain will send them helps this year, and few
to think otherwise, save that he has so often deceived their expectations.
For if the malice of Spain continue to England, they have an easy and
dangerous step thereto by Ireland; and if they do not embrace the occasion of
this year, there is no doubt but the next will for ever loose it unto them.
Now because it must please your Lordships to proportion our succors to the
force we are likely to be offended with, and that from us you will expect our
own effates; it may please your Lordships to consider, that the power of this
Kingdom consists of her Majesty's English Army; of such Irish as are here in
Companies by themselves, or in English Companies to serve as mercenaries, of
the Nobility, Towns, and inbred people of this Nation, which live as
subjects; and lastly of such mere Irish Lords and their people, as were lately
reclaimed, or still remain in rebellion. The English are few and far
dispersed, the Irish that serve (...) many and therefore likely to follow their
golden hopes of (...), the (...), Towns and People are of so obstinate a
contrariety in Religion (...) without question they are grow (...) malicious to
the Government, and affect (...) of the power of Spain, to declare themselves
the Irish Lords (...) the same motives as they against us, in their last
necessity to join with (...). And all these, especially the Towns, are more
stirred on by this new coin (...) though, if the (...) of Spain do not
arrive, may securely be established, yet if (...) it (...) breed many
dangerous inconveniences.) It may therefore please her (...) to have in a
readiness six thousand of the trained Bands of such Countries, (...) best for
transporting into Ireland, to be sent over into Mounster upon the first (...)
of any (...) power to be arrived there, and some part of her Navy in a
readiness (...) a greater portion of munition and artillery for us, then
otherwise this war (...) require. We do hope to give her Majesty a very
good account of her Kingdom and of our selves, until we shall have cause to
sue for more relief. And if it (...) fall out, that Spain will have war
with England, we shall be glad that the (...) of England may be made in
Ireland, and that we her poor servants shall have the happiness to strike
the first blows for both her Royal Kingdoms, the which the (...) God preserve
long unto her, and her unto them and us, etc.

The same fourteenth day, from the said Camp at the Fagher, his Lordship wrote
to Sir Henry Dockwra, Governor of Loughsoyle, first touching his Lordships
purposes; That the general hoasting being the last of June, his Lordship
presumed within (...) days after, to be provided of all means to put at the
forces in action, according to their distribution (the project whereof he sent
to him enclosed), and to be himself as high as Armagh, with such a power, as
Tyrone should have good reason to think, that he would do somewhat more, and
in the mean time he would (God willing) keep the field as near Tyrone, as
his means would give him leave. So as his Lordship having planted at Armagh
and Blackwater, hoped either by lying there to facilitate his planting of
Ballishannon from Loughfoyle, or to break into Tyrone, and meet him there.
And if Tyrones Army should break, as his Lordship expected, he thought to find
no great difficulty herein, but otherwise held the passage to Dungannon not to
be ventured that way. But touching the planting at Ballishannon, that Sir
Henry Dockwra should not build upon any supplies from his Lordship, of
victuals, munition, or tools: for artillery that he might use that he had at
Loughfoyle, and either bring it back by water, or be after supplied thereof
from Dublin. For munition, tools, and like necessaries, that his Lordship
could spare none, and if he could, yet had no speedy means to send them. For
intelligence, that he had sent him a Cipher, which he might use safely in
writing to his Lordship, not caring how the messengers sped, so the letters
were not understood. That he had sent the like Cipher to Sir Arthur Chichester
at Knockfergus, with whom he should have often intelligence, and might that way
write most safely to his Lordship. That when he knew his own means, and by
his Lordships project should find him in readiness to answer his attempts, he
should choose his (...) for planting Ballishannon, and as near as he could,
send his Lordship certain notice of the time, and use all possible expedition.
But if he could not plant there (...) want or difficulty, that then he should
agree with Sir Arthur Chichester, that they might both at one time break into
Tyrone, where his Lordship, upon notice (...) would meet them in which
journey, besides all other effects of war, they should (...) all the
dwellings, and destroy the corn on the ground, (...) might be (...) by
incamping upon it, and cutting it down with swords, and other ways, holding
(...) best they should spoil all the corn, except that which he could gather,
wherein he should not regard the (...) of the Irish Submitties in his Camp.

The (...) fourteenth day we dislodged from the Fagher, and leaving the Moyry
(...) with Warders to guard it, and the workmen, being to build a Tower (...)
keep of (...) we marched eight miles, and encamped at Carickbane, a little
beyond the Newrie. The fifteenth his Lordship rose, and marching some fifteen
miles, encamped in Enagh the Country of Mac Gennis. The late Rebels near
Dundalke being all submitted, his Lordship had drawn Sir Richard Moryson with
his Regiment from that Government, purposing to place him in Lecayle, nearer
to the enemy. And intending to march thither with the Army the next day, left
the rebels should have leisure to burn the Country, and carry away the prey,
his Lordship sent Sir Richard Moryson this evening with six Companies of
Foot, and one of Horse, to march all night into Lecayle, who coming suddenly
on the rebels, took all the prey, and intaking of Down Patrick, the Bishops
seat, one of the Bradyes was taken, and his head cut off, the rest yielding to
mercy there, and in all adjoining places. Here his Lordship was advertised from
the Secretary of Ireland, that the news of the Spanish invasion this Summer
was seconded from diverse, coming from Cales. The sixteenth day his Lordship
marched with the Army (through high Mountains and Woods, and some dangerous
paces) seven miles to the Blackstaffe tiuer, near a strong Castle, called
Dundrom, lying on the North side of the Paces, where the plain Country opens
into Lecayle, being an Island compassed on the West side with this River, and on
the three other sides with the sea, and two small arms thereof. This night his
Lordship with some horse passed the Blackstaffe bridge, and rode three miles
into Lecayle, to view the Country. In the way Phelim Mac Ever submitted
himself, and yielded to the Queen his Castle of Dundrom. Also Mac Carty
submitted himself, and drew his creaghts (or cattle, servants and goods) into
Lecayle. His Lordship returned to the Camp, and the next day rode to Down
Patrick, and thence by Saint Patricks Well to Arglasse, being six miles, in
which Town two Castles yielded to the Queen, and the Warders up. on their
lives saved, gave up their Arms. A third Castle there had been held for the
Queen all the time of the rebellion, by one Iordane, never coming out of the
same for three years past, till now by his Lordships coming he was freed, and
to him was given a reward from the Queen by Concordatum, besides his Lordships
bounty of his private purse. After dinner his Lordship rode two miles to
Russels Town, and four miles to the Camp at Blackstaffe. The eighteenth day
Mat Rory, Captain of Kilwarden adjoining, was received to the Queens mercy
upon his submission. And Sir Arthur Chichester, Governor of Knockfergus, all
this day expected, came in the evening, to whom his Lordship that night
imparted his designs in the present service, and to the same effect sent a
packet by him to Sir Henry Dockwra, Governor of Loughfoyle; and to them both,
as also to Sir Richard Moryson being to be left Governor of Lecayle, his
Lordship gave Proclamations to be published for establishing the above
mentioned new coin. All this time Arthur Mac Gennis the chief of his name,
and Edmond Boy Mac Gennis his Uncle, made means to be received to her
Majesty's mercy, but could not obtain the favor, without first doing some
service. This day his Lordship and the Counsel (following the Army) gave
thirty pound by concordatum to Phelimy Ener Mac Gennis for some special
services and Balinthor a strong Castle was taken by our men, with diverse cowes
and other goods, six of the Ward being killed, and the rest swimming awny.

His Lordship having placed Sir Richard Moryson (with five hundred foot, and
fifty horse under his command) to govern Lecayle (which had their residency at
Down), did march back on the nineteenth day eleven mile, to five mile Church,
near the Newry, passing one pace exceeding strong by nature, and plashed with
trees, which lay at the end of the Plains of Lecaile, and entrance into the
woody Mountains. And before the entry of this pace, Sir Arthur Chichester
having received two hundred Foot to strengthen his Garrison, returned back to
Knockfergue. The twentieth day his Lordship marched with his forces three miles
to Carickbane, lying North ward of the Newrie.

This day Sir Henry Dauers lying at Mount Norryes, advertised his Lordship,
that Tyrone lying in a fastnes, and his men never venturing upon the Plain,
the soldiers left under his command there, could not in all this time get any
occasion to fight with him, whereof they showed great desire, only the horse
often showing themselves upon the hills, had kept him beyond Armagh, where he
with his Creaghts lay, feeding some thousands of Cowes. Whereupon because his
Lordship desired to preserve the grass near Armagh for his horse troops, as
also to make store of hay there for the Winter following. He sent Sir William
Godolphin with his Lordps. troop of horse under his command, to second the
forces at Mount Norreys, in attempting some service upon Tyrone, meaning to
draw presently his whole forces thither. But in the mean time Sir Francis
Staffords Lieutenant of his horse, sent by Sir Henry Dauers to spy the rebels
proceedings, had passed to the view of Armagh, and found that Tyrone had sent
back all his cowes, upon the hearing of his Lordships return out of Lecayle.
For which cause, and upon notice that Tyrone had taken a days victuals for his
men, as if he meant to attempt something, his Lordship recalled Sir William'
Godolphin with his troop. The one and twentieth day his Lordship lay still, in
regard that, for difficulty of getting Garrous (that is, carriage Iades), or
by some negligence, victuals were not (according to his former directions) put
into Mount Norreys, to which place he purposed to draw with his forces. This
day three days bread came to his Lordships forces, which in stead of other
victuals lived upon becues. And his Lordship writ to Sir Henry Dauers, that
according to his daily use of late days, he should the next morning early
draw the forces of Mount Norreys toward Armagh, and should on the sudden
possess the Abbey there, and the Town, whether his Lordship would also draw
the Army presently for his second.

The two and twentieth day, his Lordship having, by extraordinary pay above the
Queens price, gotten garrons, and carrying victuals with him for Mount
Norryes, and for the Garrison he intended to plant at Armagh, marched six
miles near to Mount Norryes, where Sir Henry Dauers with that Garrison met
him, having not been able, for some difficulties, to execute his Lordships
former directions. From thence his Lordship (taking with him the said Garrison)
marched forward seven miles, and that night encamped a little beyond Armagh,
where some few rebels showed themselves braggingly, but attempted nothing. His
Lordship before his return from Lecayle, was purposed to leave such forces at
Mount Norryes, as might plant the Garrison at Armagh when they found
opportunity: but lest they should have been hindered by a greater force, his
Lordship rather then to return toward the Pale (for the attending there of
the general Hoasting, where his Army should have spent the same victuals it
now did) was resolved himself in person to plant it, imagining that Tyrone,
not looking for him till the general hoasting, would not have his whole forces
with him, nor by that reason, and an opinion and fear that his Lordship
intended to march further into Tyrone, would have any mind to follow his
Lordship, or hinder his retreat when he should have weakened his forces by
that Plantation. Therefore the three and twentieth day his Lordship making a
show to draw from his camp beyond Armagh toward Blackewater, caused his
forces to make a stand for his retreat, and so himself with his followers and
servants rode more then a mile forward, to view the way to Blackewater Fort,
and the place of the famous Blackewater defeat, under the Marshall Bagnols
conduct, and having passed a pace without one shot made at his troop, he
returned to his forces, and marching back, he left a garrison of seven hundred
fifty foot, and one hundred horse, at the Abbey of Armagh, under the command
of Sir Henry Dauers, and that night marched with the rest near to Mount
Norreys, where he encamped, having in this march from Armagh, viewed the Foard,
where General Norries formerly was hurt, making a stand with his horse, to
secure his foot distressed by Tyrones charge.

The four and twenty, his Lotdship leaving at Mount Norries the foot and horse
of that garrison, marched himself with 1250 foot, and 150 horse, six miles to
(...), being two miles short of the Newry. This was a hill naturally and
artificially ofold sortified, where in regard of the weakness of his forces he
encamped, purposing there to attend and solicit the hastening, to send to him
from the Pale, all the means he expected to furnish him for his intended
iourny, to build the demolished Fort of Blackwater.

Here his Lordships Army was mustered, and was by Pole,
Captains and Officers 87. Targets 112. Pykes 291. Muskets 125. Calliuers 635.
In all 1250.

Whereof besides Captains and Officers, English 593. Irish the rest. Wanting
Swords 191.

The six and twenty day, his Lordship sent victuals to the garrisons at Mount
Norreis and at Armagh. The twenty nine day his Lordship received aducrtisement,
that Sir H. Dauers drawing out the garrison of Armagh into the fastnes, where
Brian mac Art lay with his Cattle, had killed diverse of his men, taken many
horses from him, and spoiled much of his baggage, besides three hundred Cowes
which he had taken from Mac Gennis. And the same day his Lordship received the
examinations of certain Waterford Mariners, who testified, that being at the
Groyne, they were pressed there to serve the King of Spain, in a fly boat of
two hundred tun carrying bread to Lisbone; where there was an army of three
thousand men to be shipped with victuals and munition for Ireland, and there
heard that Tyrones Agent lay at Court, importuning aid to be sent him
presently, being not able to subsist any longer without speedy aid. And that
the examinates demanded if they were Pylots for the Irish Coast; and finding
they should be employed that way, had secretly got shipping to transport
themselves into France, and so returned home.

The thirtieth day Arthur Mac Gennis chief of the name, terrified by the
plantation of the garrison in Lecaile, made humble suit for mercy, and obtained
her Majesty's protection for nine days, conditionally that he should come the
Satturday following, to submit himself in person to her Majesty's mercy, and
crave her gracious pardon at Dundalk, where his Lordship then purposed to be.
And Rory Oge Mac Gennis, obtained the like protection for one month. The same
day his Lordship upon the Lord President of Mounster his intercessory letters,
granted warrant for her Majesty's pardon, to be passed for two hundred seventy
Artificers and Husbandmen of the County of Kerry. The first of July his
Lordship had purposed to rise from Dunanurey, and to return himself to
Dundakle: but he stayed that day, in respect the weather was very foul, and
the rather to countenance the Conuoy going with biscuit up to Mouut Norreis and
Armagh.

Hitherto his Lordship had kept the field, rather to make Tyrone keep his
forces together, and so to weaken him, then for purpose of any other feruice of
moment: but now hearing from Dublin, that the rising out for the general
hoasting, came slowly, and not only victuals were not yet arrived there, but
even the carriages and beeues for the Army, were like in great part to fail;
the second day of July his Lordship dispersed his forces into the said
garrisons fronting nearest upon the rebels, and so with his followers and
servants rode to Dundalke, leading with him of his army only three Companies
of foot, and one troop of horse. The third day, Sir Francis Stafford Governor
of the Newry, brought Arthur Mac Gennis to Dundalke, who made his submission to
her Majesty, kneeling before the Lord Deputy and Counsel. Then he made
certain humble requests: First for his pardon which was granted: Secondly, for
lands granted to his father by letters Pattents, which his Lordship promised to
confirm, excepting only the Lands of Glasny Mac Gennis, on whom he should make
no imposition. That he might take in such tenants as would come from the
Rebels, acquainting the Governor of the Newry therewith before he received
them, which was granted. Fourthly, that he might retain and absolutely command
all his old tenants, till Alhollandtide next, which was granted, excepting
Glasny Mac Gennis. Fifthly, that he might enjoy the Corn he had sowed in
Lecaile, which being sowed on other men's Lands, could not be granted, only
favorable respect to him was promised. Sixthly, that his people might be freed
from all actions of private wrongs in the war, which was granted upon a fine
of three hundred Cowes, presently to be delivered for the Army. The same time
Patricke mac Mahowne, Nephew to the chief of that name, was upon like humble
submission received to her Majesty's mercy, with promise of his pardon.

The fifth day the Lord President and Counsel of Mounster, by letters desired
his Lordship, to recall his warrant of marshall Law, given to the Lord Bourke,
as well because the Lords abused the same, to draw followers to them, and to
revenge their private quarrels, as because the whole Province was peaceable,
and willing to be governed by judicial courses, and this warrant his Lordship
presently recalled.

This day Sir Oliver S John's brought letters from the Lords in England, whereby
her Majesty gave direction, that the Lord Deputy should publicly to all the
Army, and privately to the chief Commanders, give thanks from her Majesty to
them, for the zeal and duty they had showed in her service, and signify her
gracious acceptance of their endeauours. The sixth day his Lordship stayed at
Dundalke, to hasten the supplies of the general hoasting, which came in
slowly, and to order the Irish forces of the same fitly for defense of the
Pale. This day Captain Thomas Roper, with his company of foot, according to
his Lordships former directions, came from Kells, to serve in the army under
his Lordship. And while his Lordship lay here, news came from Armagh, that Sir
Henry Dauers had taken some chief horses from Tyrones camp, and had entered
Mac Carty his Country, being one of the greatest fastnesses in Ireland, and
brought from thence a great prey.

His Lordship finding that the rising out of the general hoasting, would do
little good in the Army, and they being willing to undertake their own
defense, which as their own peril his Lordship thought he might best commit
to their trust. The seventh of July his Lordship gave order, that the forces of
the general hoasting, for the Counties of Dublyn and Lowth, should lie at
Lowth, under the command of the Lord of Lowth, and Mr Garland of Killencoule.
That those of Mead should lie at Kels, under the command of the Lord of
Tremelstone, and Mr Dillon his Deputy. That those of West-Meath should be
commanded by the Lord of Deluin, and any Deputy his Lordship should choose; so
that his Lordship or his Deputy should always in person be resident with them,
and keep them together ready to answer any service, upon pain of a fine and
imprisonment, to such as should disobey. That those of Kildare, should under
the Earl of Kildares command, lie at Athy, or else where, at his Lordships
discretion: and that the Sheriff of the shire command them under his Lordship.

The ninth day his Lordship marched from Dundalke toward the North, and
gathering the forces to him out of the adioining garrisons, encamped at
Latenbur, beyond the Newry, where he lay still the tenth day, till the victuals
was in readiness to be carried to Armagh. The eleventh day his Lordship marched
some four miles, to an hill little beyond Mount Norreis, and that day his
Lordship was advertised, that Sir Arthur Chichester had taken the sole Castle
held in those parts of Knockfergus by Brian mac Art, namely, the Reagh, and
that Sir Richard Moryson in Lecale, had taken in two Loughes (or Islands in
Lakes), being all the fastnesses (or places of strength) which the said Brian
mac Art held there. The twelfth day the Army marched early in the morning to
Armagh, and there resting some hours, marched again after dinner a mile and a
half beyond Armagh, and there upon an hill encamped.

The thirteenth day of July, the Lord Deputy with the Army rose from the former
Camp, and marched one mile and a half, to an hill on this side (namely the
Southside) of Blackewater, where he made a stand, Tyrone and his horse and
foot, showing themselves out of a wood, beyond a Meadow on the other side of
the River, and that with Trumpets and diverse colors, (some won at the old
defeat of the English in those parts), and with some Drums, rather for a
bragging oftentation then otherwise, since they fighting like thieves upon
dangerous passages, used not to appear in such warlike manner. And from the
trenches kept by the Rebels on the other side of the water, some vollies of
shot were powered upon us, which sell down on every side dead on the ground, by
reason of the distance between us, and did small or no hurt. We having a
Rabinet and a Falcon, made from this hill, some shot at the rebels troop far
distant, whereupon their Puppits bravery suddenly vanished; and according to
their wonted manner, they hid themselves in the woods. Presently the Lord
Deputy sent three hundred foot to another hill on this side of the River,
adioining to the old Fort lying beyond the water, and his Lordship rode to that
hill, whom many voluntary Gentlemen with his servants followed. And in the way
my self and some others lighted in a Valley to refiesh ourselves by walking,
but found an enemies soil no place for recreation, for out of the Ditches and
Furrows many shot were made at us; whereupon we took our horses, one shot
dangerously, yet (God be praised) without hurt passing between my legs,
while one of my feet was in my stirrup, and so we retired to the gross,
standing in more safety. Toward evening, we encamped upon the above
mentioned hill, at which time we saw fair off by a Wood side, Tyrone draw some
horse over to our side of the water, either (as we imagined) to assail Tirlogh
Mac Henry of the Fewes, lately submitted, and coming after us to attend the
Lord Deputy in this service, or else to confer with him and his company:
but as soon as Sir William Godolphin Commander of the Lord Deputies troop of
horse, by his Lordships direction made toward Tyrone, he with his horse
presently retired back. That night we made Gabyons to enter the Rebels
trenches, and sent the Rabinet and Falcon to be planted on the other hill,
where our above mentioned three hundred foot lay. All the night the rebels out
of the trenches shot at our men, while they were busy in working. But the
fourteenth day very early at the dawning of the day; upon our first discharging
of the said great pieces, charged with musket bullets, and after some three
vollies of our small shot, the rebels quitted their trenches, basely running
into the Woods, and our three hundred men passing the River, under Captain
Thomas Williams his command, possessed the trenches, and the old ruined Fort,
with the Plain in which it lay, the Wood being almost musket shot distance,
whether the rebels were fled, and had by night carried their hurt and slain
men. Presently the Lord Deputy sent one Regiment to lie beyond the Blackwater,
upon a hill where his Lordship had made choice to build a new Fort. Upon view
of the trenches made upon every Foard, his Lordship found they were strongly
and artificially fortified, wondering much that either they should so
laboriously fortify them, if they meant not to defend them, of should so
cowardly quit such strong places, and so suddenly, if they had former
resolution to make them good. In gaining them we had some twenty men hurt,
and two slain, and they had greater loss, especially in the going off, though
we could not truly know it.

The fifteenth day his Lordship with a troop of horse, and four hundred
foot, drew toward Tyrones Wood, and viewed the paces in the sight of the
rebels who ran away with their cowes, only at his Lordships retrait making
some few shot at our men, but hurting not one man. In the evening, Captain
Treuer, and Captain Constable with their Companies came to the Camp, sent
thither from Lecayle to strengthen the Army, according to his Lordships
direction to Sir Rechard Moryson, after the Country was all taken in, and Mac
Gennis the greatest neighbor Rebel had submitted himself.

The 16 day the L Deputy drew out a Regiment of Irish, commanded by Sir
Christo. St. Laurence, and passing the Blackwater, marched to Benburb, the old
house of Shane O Neale, lying on the left hand of our Camp, at the entrance of
great woods. There our men made a stand, in a fair green meadow, having our
camp and the plains behind them, and the wood on both sides, and before them.
The rebels drew in great multitudes to these woods. Here we in the Camp, being
ourselves in safety, had the pleasure to have the full view of an hot and long
skirmish, our loose wings sometimes beating the rebels on all sides into the
Woods, and sometimes being driven by them back to our Colors in the midst of
the meadow, (where as soon as our horse charged, the rebels presently ran
back) and this skirmish continuing with like variety some three hours: for
the Lord Deputy, as he saw the numbers of the rebels increase, so drew other
Regiments out of the Camp, to second the fight. So that at last the Rebel had
drawn all his men together, and we had none but the by-Guards left to
saue-guard the Camp, all the rest being drawn out. Doctor Latwar the Lord
Deputies Chaplain, not content to see the fight with us in safety, but (as he
had formerly done) affecting some singularity of forwardness, more then his
place required, had passed into the meadow where our Colors stood, and there
was mortally wounded with a bullet in the head, upon which he died the next
day. Of the English not one more was slain, only Captain Thomas Williams his
leg was broken, and two other hurt, but of the Irish on our side twenty six
were slain, and seventy five were hurt. And those Irish being such as had been
rebels, and were like upon the least discontent to turn rebels, and such as
were kept in pay rather to keep them from taking part with the rebels, then
any service they could do us, the death of those unpeaceable swordmen, though
falling on our side, yet was rather gain, then loss to the Commonwealth.
Among the rebels, Tyrones Secretary, and one chief man of the Ohagans, and (as
we credibly heard) far more then two hundred Kerne were slain. And lest the
disparitie of losses often mentioned by me, should savor of a partial pen,
the Reader must know, that besides the fortune of the war turned on our side,
together with the courage of the rebels abated, and our men heartned by
successes, we had plenty of powder, and sparing not to shoot at random,
might well kill many more of them, then they ill furnished of powder, and
commanded to spare it, could kill of ours.

These two last days our Pioners had been busied in fortifying and building a
new Fort at Blackwater, not far distant from the old Fort, demolished by the
rebels, and for some days following, his Lordship specially intended the
furtherance and finishing of this work, so as many soldiers were
extraordinarily hired to work therein as Pyoners.

The nineteenth day his Lordship wrote to the Lords in England, that had not
the Irish submitties for the new coin (now current over all) furnished the
Army with beeues, it had been in great distress, since the victuals of the new
contract were not arrived, and that of the old store consisted principally of
saltfish, whereof the soldier could not feed, especially in Summer, besides
that by long keeping it was of ill condition, so as infection was feared in the
Army, praying that in the next contracts, the soldier might be fed therewith
only one day in the week. That he had in his directions to Sir Henry Dockwra,
given him choice, either with the countenance of his Lordships Army on this
side Tyrone, to go forward with planting Ballishannon, or concurring with the
Governor of Knockfergus, to enter into Tyrone, where his Lordship upon, notice
would meet them; and in respect he since understood, that he wanted tools for
the Plantation, he thought the second project would rather be followed by him.
That Tyrone lay with all his forces to hinder his Lordship from passing to
Dungannon, which he most feared, and had no fastness but only this to stop
it, so as he doubted not to break in to meet Sir Henry Dockwra, if he could
once be assured of his resolution. Further, he besought their Lordships to give
warrant for allowance to the Captains for broken Arms, upon bringing the old,
because upon the breaking of pieces, the soldiers were turned to serve with
Pikes, and our shot diminished daily, and the Pikes were increased more then
our use required, the Captain excusing himself, that upon breaking of pieces,
he was not able to provide other Arms then Pikes for his men. Likewise he
advertised to their Lordships, that since the last dispatch, Sir Henry Dockwra
had taken in Newtowne, being some sixteen miles from Dungannon (Tyrones chief
seat), on the North side, (as he the Lord Deputy had planted at Blackwater,
being some fifteen miles from Dungannon, on the South side); and that Sir
Henry Docwra had spoiled and burned the Country there about, and had taken
some one thousand cowes, from the parts near the Lough of Earne. That Sir John
Barkley, Governor of the forces at the Anneley, had met with Tyrrels men, as
they passed toward Ophaly, (for which purpose that Garrison was specially
laid there), and had taken from them three hundred cowes and killed some of
them, and had stopped them from troubling that Country. And that he the Lord
Deputy with the Army had destroyed the rebels Corn about Armagh (whereof he
found great abundance), and would destroy the rest, this course causing famine,
being the only sure way to reduce or root out the Rebels. Finally, praying
their Lordships (as formerly) to send one thousand shot for supplies, the
strengthening of the English being the next way to diminish her Majesty's
charge, since the Irish were kept in pay rather to prevent their fighting
against us then for confidence in their fighting for us.

The same nineteenth day of July, the Lord Deputy wrote to Sir Robert Cecill,
her Majesty's Secretary, that he found upon good consideration, that the
Government of Connaght was not in his disposal, and therefore being loath to
exceed his Commission, he would only assure him, that as it was requisite, a
man of experience, and fit for the present service, should have that
Government, so he conceived none to be fitter then Sir Oliver Lambert, who had
already deserved well in this service, and would (in his opinion) be able to
do her Majesty as good service, as any in that place, whom (if it might stand
with her Majesty's pleasure, to give him warrant), he was desirous to employ in
those parts, fearing it would be a great hinderance to his intended work, if
any should be put into that Government, who might prove unfit, or unable to
make that war; In which respect, he having no other end but the advancement
of her Majesty's service, was bold to make it his humble suite, that Sir Oliver
Lambert might be placed in that Government.

While the Army lay at Blackwater to build the new Fort, his Lordship on the
twentieth of July, drew out two Regiments into the woods, as well to view the
paces, and provoke the rebels, as to fetch some houses thence, for the building
of our Fort, and to cut a field of Corn lying on the skirt of the Woods; which
was all performed; the rebels on the further side of the Blackwater, only
making a slight skirmish with our men, upon their retreit on this side the
River. The two and twentieth day, we cut all the Corn by the Bogge and Wood
side, near our Fort, except that which our men had power to reap. The three
and twentieth day Captain Thomas Williams with his Company, being left to
govern the new Fort (who before the Blackwater defeat did valiantly defend the
old Fort there, being after demolished by the rebels) his Lp. with the army
dislodged, and at our rising, a Proclamation was made, that how soever Tyrone
vaunted, that his Pardon was offered him, and he might have it at pleasure, her
Majesty was not only resolved never to receive him to mercy, but was pleased
again to renew her gracious offer, that whosoever brought him alive, should
have 2000 li. and whosoever brought his head, should have 1000 li. for reward.
Thence we marched two little miles to an hill South Westward in Henry Oges
Country, where we encamped, and cut down the Corn on cucric side. The seven
and twentieth day his Lordship leaving Sir Henry Follyots Regiment to guard
the Camp, drew out three Regiments, expecting that the Rebels would fight, who
showed themselves on an hill near us, with all their horse and foot, and
sounding of Trumpets, yet our men not only cutting down the corn close by
them, but entering the Woods to cut Corn there, and burning many houses in the
skirts of the woods, they were so patient, as after one volley of shot, they
retired into the thickest Woods. The same day the Army dislodging, marched a
mile or two more Southward, where we cut down great abundance of Corn with our
swords (according to our fashion), and here Shane Mac Donnel Groom, Tyrones
Marshall (whose Corn this was) upon humble submission was received to her
Majesty's mercy, and came to his Lordship in person the same night at our
setting down in our last Camp, whether we returned. The eight and twentieth
his Lordship leaving Sir Christopher Saint Laurence his Regiment to guard the
Camp, drew out three Regiments both in the morning and evening, to countenance
two conuoies of victuals. This day his Lordship sent a dispatch to Sir Henry
Dockwra, about their concurring in the present services, and the like to Sir
Arthur Chichester, to the same purpose. His Lordship stayed the longer in these
parts, to see the Forts well victualed, and to cut down the Corn, whereof he
found great store.

The nine and twentieth day his Lordship was advertised, that Sir Henry Poor
had scattered and broken three hundred rebels in Lease, and had beggered them
by diverse preyes of cattle taken from them, and among them, being of the Sept
of O Mores, had killed, burnt and hanged forty at least, and after had slain
in fights O Connor Mac Lyre, and most of his men, and hurt many of those which
escaped.

And this day great store of victuals for the Forts came from the Newry with a
conuoy safely to the Camp. The thirtieth day his Lordship rose with the Army,
and marched Northward back to the new Fort of Blackwater, and beyond it, in
all some three miles, along the South side of the River, and there his Lordship
encamped close upon the Bogges and the Fastnesses (or fortified passages) in
the Wood. The same evening his Lordship drew some choice men out of every
Regiment, and some troops of horse, and with them rode to view the Country,
and woody paces, more specially that pace which lay right before us Northward,
where the nearest and best passage was to enter Tyrone, the Arch-traytors
chief house Dangannon, being some ten miles distant, to which, after the
passage of this pace and Blackwater, the plain Country lay open, yet being in
some parts boggy. Here Tyrones men lay entrenched on the other side of the
River, in such trenches as he had made to impeach the building of our new Fort
at Blackwater, and cowardly quitted them (as is above mentioned.) The Rebels
bestowed some vollies of shot on his Lordships troops, but they returned
safely, having only one man hurt. And here one of the three Trumpets in
Tyrones pay, ran from him to our Camp.

The one and thirtieth day his Lordship drew out (as before) and that day and
the first of August next following, cut down the Wood, to clear the said
pace, lying between us and the said passage over Blackwater. And this day the
rebels attempted to cut off a guard, which we had placed on a remote hill, to
second the workmen cutting the Wood, but were by them and the workmen stoutly
received, and by our seconds beaten back.

At the same time, by accident we had almost lost all our best horses: for at
the Alarm given, the horses being frighted with the skirmish, and with diverse
horsemen hurrying out to answer the Alarm, broke their headstals, and ran
back to Armagh, and some of the best as far as the Newry, whether our men
following, did recover them all: but had the rebels horsemen followed them, no
doubt they might have caught them, and defeated our men loosely following them,
and so by this advantage have done us more mischief, then they could otherwise
have done with their forces doubled.

The second of August his Lordship with the Army rose, and marched back to
Armagh, to the end he might shun all paces, and from thence have an open
passage into Art Mac Barons Country. We marched six miles to Armagh, and
three to Rawlagh, where while we encamped, Sir Henry Dauers with three hundred
foot, and forty horse, was sent into a Fastness to burn some twenty fair
timber houses, which he performed; and about the time to set the watch, he
returned toward the Camp, and at his retreat all Tyrones Forces guarded with
three hundred horse, skirmished with our men, but they seconded out of the
Camp, came off orderly, the rebels following them to our very Camp, into
which they powered a volley of shot, and by reason of the Fastnesses adjoining,
and night approaching, retired in safety.

Here his Lordship was advertised, that the Earl of Ormond had executed in the
borders of Kilkenny and Tiperary nine and twenty rebels, of which Tybot Leyragh
Butler, and David Bourk, and Vlicke Bourke, were the chief, and that the
Company under his Lordships command, had slain eight and twenty, of which two
principal men of the Omores, one Okelly, one Captain Edmund Roe Bourke, and
one Richard Bourke, son to Vlicke, were the chief.

The third of August we rose, and having marched three miles back, we encamped
between the paces and Armagh, a little beyond Armagh toward the North, to the
and our messengers and our conuoyes for victuals might more safely pass (which
was the chief end of our returning), and that we might have better grass for
our horses, all the higher Country above, being eaten by the rebels Creaghs (or
cattle), and all the way we marched, the rebels in their fastnesses drew down
closeby, and followed us all the way, being very strong. Here the Commissary
took a view of the Army in field with his Lordship. Regiments.

First, of Sir Benjamin Berry his Lordships Lieutenant of his foot, in List
825, by pole present in the Camp 490. 2. Regiment of Sir Oliver Saint John's,
in List 875, by Pole 533. 3. Regiment of Sir Hen. Folliot, in List 500, by Pole
305. 4. Regiment of Sir Christopher Saint Laurence, in List, 750, by Pole 400.
Total in List 2950, by Pole 1728,

Herein are not contained either Officers present, or the sick, or hurt, or
upon other occasions absent. The fourth day some Companies were drawn out to
cut the pace of Armagh, and the rebels being in sight, offered not to skirmish
with them. But toward night they drew down strong out of the woods, to an hill
under which we lay encamped in a fair meadow. They came with cries and sound
of Drums and bagpipes, as if they would attempt the camp, and powered into it
some two or three thousand shot, hurting only two of our men. But his Lordship
commanding that none in the Camp should stir, had lodged in a trench some
four hundred shot, charging them not to shoot till the rebels approached
near. And after these our men had given them a volly in theirteeth, they drew
away, and we heard no more of their Drums or Bagpipes, but only mournful
cries, for many of their best men were slain, and among the rest one horseman
of great account, and one Pierce Lacy an Archrebell of Mounster. The next
morning we found some dead bodies at the skirt of the wood, and three scattered
pieces. Hence his Lordship sent direction to Sir John Barkeley, to bring with
him to the Camp a regiment from the Annaly and Liseannon, because Tyrone was
grown strong by the coming to him of his Mac Guire, and his Mac Mahownd, and
of Cormocke mac Baron, (coming to him from the frontires of Loughfoyle). The
fifth day his Lordship sent again some shot, with Pyoners, to cut the pace
close by the Rebels.

The sixth day his Lordship purposed to rise and meet our Conuoy bringing
victuals from the Newry: but being stayed by ill weather, sent early some horse
to stay the Conuoy, till his Lordship drew down toward those parts. This day
his Lordship gave order to Master Treasurer, that proportions of new moneys
should be sent to all the Market Towns, to change the same for sterling, and
that Proclamations should be made in them to decry the old sterling moneys, and
only make the new to be current. The seventh his Lordship rose to draw toward
the Newry, and marching to Mount Norreis, encamped near the said Fort. The
eight day his Lordship dispatched the Earl of Clanrickard into Connaght, to
command the forces in those parts, having sent for Sir John Barkeley to come
with a regiment to the Camp. Here his Lordship gave warrant for the passing of
her Majesty's pardon for land, life, and goods, to Arthus Mac Gennis, chief of
his Sept, with some 170 followers.

Here his Lordship received letters out of England from Mr Secretary,
signifying that the Lord President had sent to her Majesty diverse
aduertisements, that the Spaniards would presently land in some part of
Mounster, from whence the Lord Deputy for necessity had lately drawn one
thousand foot and fifty horse into Connaght. That her Majesty did well allow of
his Lordships care in drawing those men to that service, and not leesing the
present certainty for apprehension of the future, not so assured. That it was
probable that the King of Spain would do something now at the vpshot, and
though it was not credible, that he would send ten or twelve thousand men into
Ireland, yet since he had from February last begun a foundation to provide
forces for the Low Countries or Ireland, as his affairs should require: and
since the Low Country Army was reinforced by land out of Italy, her Majesty
thought he might with ease transport four or five thousand men for Ireland,
and was like to do it, and so he might for the time turn the state of
Ireland, would think them well bestowed, if he should leese them all at the
years end. That in this respect her Majesty had resolved to leauy five
thousand men to be in readiness, and to send two thousand of them presently for
Mounster, to arrive there by the tenth of this month; so as if the Spaniards
should land, the Lord President might be enabled to keep the Prouincials from
revolt, till he the Lord Deputy might come thither, and more forces might be
sent out of England; and if they should not invade Ireland, then his Lordship
might keep the one thousand he had drawn from Mounster, to finish the work
whereof he had laid an happy foundation, heartily wishing that his Lordship
might be the happy Instrument to save Ireland, to whom he professed himself
tied in most constant and honest friendship, and praying his Lordship to
esteem these ready seconds, besides the public duty to proceed much out of an
extraordinary respect to his Lordship. That for bestowing of the Companies to
be sent into Mounster, as he who was gone, (meaning (...), the Earl of Essex),
made too great a Monopoly in bestowing all such places himself, so now there
was a great confusion, every Lord importuning to prefer his friend and
follower; but that for his part, he sought no man's preferrement herein, but
only advised that those might be first respected, which came over with the
Lord Deputies recommendations. That the Lord President had earnestly moved him,
and in good sort challenged to have hopes in him for the procurement of some
means to gratify his followers; and had by other friends obtained of her
Majesty, that some of those Companies might be sent over undisposed, and left
to his disposal, to which he the Secretary had given second, rather then that
the places should be bestowed in England, without any thanks eather to the
Lord Deputy or Lord President. Protesting that how soeuen he loved the Lord
President, he would not scant his due respect to his Lordship, wherein he
thought to give him the least discontent. That he conceived the Spaniards would
not make difcent at Corcke, which Town was not guardable when they had it.
Noryet at Lymricke, though fit by the situation, because an enemy engaged, so
far into the Kingdom, could not hope for supplies, when her Majesty should
take due resolution to oppose them. But rather judged Galloway a fit place for
their discen giving commodity to join with the Northern rebels, and seated in
a Country all out in rebellion. Or else Waterford, in respect of the goodly
River and the peoples affection to Spain, adui (...) the Fort of Dungannon
should carefully be furnished with a Commander, men, and necessaries. Lastly,
that Ostend was obstinately besieged by the Archduke, with thirteen thousand
foot, and sixty pieces of battery; and howsoever the States had left two
thousand Dutch there, yet their Army being at Bercke, whence it would not be
raised, the Town had been carried within ten days, if Sir Francis Vere had
not thrown himself into it with one thousand six hundred English, to whom
her Majesty sent one thousand men, and prepared to send 2000. more, no succor
the place, because part of the Army in Italy was come down to the Arch Duke.

The ninth of August his Lordship and the Counselors present in the Camp,
writ to the Lords in England. That the Army had bin employed in preparing her
Majesty's Forts, and fitting them for the winter war, and in the present
spoiling of the rebels corn, (the only way to ruin them), hoping to keep the
army in field til harvest were past; so that it being impossible to cut all
their corn, our garrisons might have opportunity to gather the rest, and the
rebels might be hindered from gathering any, except it were Tyrones corn near
Dungannon, whereunto the passage was so difficult, as his LP for so little
thought not good to hazard al, especially since Sir Hen. Dockwra for want of
Match (as he had written) could not meet his Lordship in Tyrone, according to
their former project, whereof his Lordship notwithstanding professed himself
nothing sorry, in regard that meeting would have given the Arch rebel power
to fling the Dice again for recovery of their fortune, and that upon an
unequal hazard, by setting his rest upon either of them apart, divided into
three bodies, under the Lord Deputy, the said Sir Henry Dockwra, and Sir
Arthur Chichester, even with the whole force of his Northern partakers, though
his other friends further off were kept from aiding him, by the disposal of
our other forces. That besides the spoiling of their corn, his Lordship by
search had found an ensie way to pasle to Dungannon, which hitherto was never
by any Guide made known to us, and had cut down a broad pace, through a thick
Wood in two days labor, and so came to the River, where he purposed, as soon
as might be, to build a Fort with a Bridge, there being from thence to
Dungannon less then four miles, all in a plain; That this would cut the
Arch-traytors throat: for howsoever the name of Oneale was so reverenced in the
North, as none could be induced to hetray him upon the large reward set upon
his head, yet when the hope of assistance from Spain should be taken away,
they seeing their Corn spoiled, and upon our expected supplies seeing us enter
Tyrone, could not but see their apparent confusion. That howsoever this Summer
few of their cowes had been taken (which work is more proper to the Winter
war), yet they had been forced to feed them within their fastnesses, which
they used to keep for feeding them in Winter, so as they must either starve
them by keeping them there in winter, or hazard the taking of them by our
Garrisons, if they feed them abroad. That for the future service, they
besought again to be enabled, by the sending of one thousand shot out of
England for supplies, and that the rather, because Tyrone was very strong, as
appeared by a note delivered by Shane Mac Donnel Groom, who having been
Tyrones Marshall, was received to (...) the seven and twenty of July, besides
our experience of their strength, when few days since they powered three
thousand shot into our Camp, and could hardly be kept from forcing it. So as
our army consisting only of one thousand seven hundred nintie eight by Pole,
and more then half of them being Irish, the speedy sending of the supply was
most necessary. As also the sending of munition and victuals, without which
all this labor would be lost, and the soldier forced, not only to leave his
Garrison, but to live idly in the Pale upon the subject. Lastly, that the Army
(by Gods grace) had not had any disaster, but burning their houses in the very
Woods, had still beaten the Rebels, few or no English being lost. Together with
these letters were sent diverse notes of victuals and munition remaining, and
new stores to be sent over. And therewith was sent the above mentioned note of
Tyrones forces, as follows.

A perfect note of such Captains and Companies, as are under the command of
the Traitor Tyrone, within Tyrone, not mentioning the Chiefetaines, as O
Donnel, O Cane, Mac Gire, and the rest of the Vlster Lords, but only such as
attend him in his Country.
Horse.

Tyrone for his Guard, 100. His son Hugh Oneale, 100. His brother Cormock,
100. Art Mac Baron, 20. Phelim Ohanlons son, 10. Tirlogh Brasils sons, 50.
Con, Tyrones base son, 20.

In all 400.

His Guard of Foot.

Led by James Osheale a Lemster man, 200. Led by Ienkyn Fitz Simon of Lecayle,
200.

In all 400.

Other Foot.

Hugh Mac Cawel, and two other Captains under Cormock, Tyrones brother, 600.
Con, son to Art Mac Baron, 100. Brian Mac Art, 200. Con, Tyrones base son,
100. Mac Can, 100. Owen O Can, 100. Donough Aferadogh Ohagan, 100. Owen Ohagan,
100. Donnel Oneale for Owen Eualle O Neale, 100. Three Brothers, Gillaspick Mac
Owen, 100; Rory Mac Owen, 100; Randal Mac Owen, 100. Kedagh Mac Donnel, 100.
Owen O Quin, 100. James O Hagan, 100. Phelym Oge O Neale, 60. Tirlogh Brasills
sons, 200. Henry wragton, 200. Henry Oge Mac Henry Mac Shane, 100. Tirlogh
Con Mac Barons son, 100. Art Ohagan, son to Hugh, 100. Hugh Grome Ohagan
and his Cousin, 100. Donnel Grome Mac Edmund, 100. Patrick Mac Phelim, 100.
Gilleduff Mac Donnel, one of Connaght, 100. In all 3260.

Total of Horse and Foot, 4060.

All these (three hundred excepted) had means for themselves and their
companies within Tyrone, and diverse of them have great forces besides these,
which they keep in their own Countries for defense thereof.

This present ninth of August the Lord Deputic wrote to Sir Robert Cecyll the
Secretary this following letter.

SIr, I received your letter of the five and twenty of July, the fourth of
this month, being in Camp near the place where the Marshall Bagnol was
slain. The news you received from the President of Mounster, of Spanish
succors, I do find no ways more confirmed, then by the assured confidence
this people has thereof, out of the which they are grown from the most humble
begging of their peace, to exceeding pride, and the traitor himself so strong,
as (believe me Sir) he has many more fighting men in his Army, then we. And
yet we do not omit any thing of our purposes, but have since our coming to
this Camp, made that a fair way to Blackwater, which the Marshall shunned,
when he was overthrown, and every day cut down either his Woods or his Corn
in his sight, only with some slight skirmishes, in all which (God be thanked)
we cannot say, we had any disaster hitherto, but in all he loses some of his
best men. I presume there could nothing be added to our Couusell of the
distribution of her Majesty's forces: but whether the fault has been in the
Commanders of the several parties, or in some impediments which they pretend,
I know not; but we receive little assistance by any of them, and the whole
brunt of the war lies upon us. But out of the present judgment we make of
this Country, we have discovered, and directed Sir Arthur Chichester a
course, which if we may enable him to go forward in, will, I hope, utterly
banish Tyrone; and have found another way into his country, that if we can but
build a Fort, and make a passage over the River, we shall make Dungannon a
center, whether we may from all parts draw together all her Majesty's forces,
and (as I presume) before this winters end, not leave a man in the Country of
Tyrone, Whatsoever others have undertaken, I beseech you Sir to remembet, that
in all my dispatches, I have declared, that the uttermost you could look from
us in this Summers work, should be to plant such Garrisons as must take effect
this next Winter, and that we should proceed slowly, and come short of our
purpose, if we were not continually supplied with means, and in time, of
victuals and al kind of munitions. If you have not been informed in due time of
our wants, I must excuse my self, that being continually employed in the
active prosecution of as busy a war as any is in the World, and most
commonly far from Dublin, where our Magazins are, I am driven in all the
several kinds of our means, to appoint of the Counsel Commissioners, whom I
have desired in my absence to inform you of the estate of these things, and to
solicit our wants, having directed the particular Ministers of every nature,
to inform them of the remains, and to deliver them (to be sent over)
estimates, of what we should want. Only in general I have in all my
dispatches protested, that without sufficient supplies of these things, we
should be driven to sit still, and make all the rest of her Majesty's charge
unprofitable. Sir, I cannot from a quiet judgment make you a large and perfect
discourse at this time of our affairs, for I am continually full of the
present business, and have so little rest, as sometimes these rogues will keep
us waking all night: but in short, I dare assure you, I see a fair way, to
make Vlster one of the most quiet, assured, and profitable Provinces, if the
Spaniard do not come: If they do, I cannot say what we shall first resolve
on, till by the event we see their purpose; for to provide for all places, that
carry equal probability of their undertaking, we cannot, neither can I put
my self into any part of Ireland with my chief strength, but I may happen to
be as far from their descent, as I shall be where now I am, which makes me
the more loath to forgo my hold in these parts; and yet for all occasions you
must not imagine me to be now in the head of a great Army, but of some sixteen
hundred fighting men, of whom there are not half English, and upon the news
of Spanish succors, I know few Irish that I can reckon ours. With this Army I
must make my retreat, which I resolved to have left most part in Garrisons all
this winter in these quarters; and in truth Sir, I cannot at this present
think of a better counsel, then that we might go on with the war by these
Garrisons against Tyrone, as we were determined, whether the Spaniards come or
no, and to make head against them, chiefly with means out of England. By this
course they shall give each other little assistance, and if we do but ruin
and waste the traitors this Winter, it will be impossible for the Spaniards to
make this people live, by which course I presume it is in her Majesty's power
to give the King of Spain a great blow, and to quit this Country of them for
ever. If in the checkes, the Queen do not find the weakness of her Army. I
disclaim from the fault; for without a wise honest Muster-master, of good
reputation, to be still present in the Army, the Queen in that kind will never
be well served, and upon those Officers that are, I do continually call for
their care in that matter. If according to our desire you had sent us one
thousand supplies of shot to the Newrie, it had advanced the service more then
I can express, but some you must needs send us, to be able to leave those
garrisons strong in winter. Most part of these troops I have here, are they that
have stricken all the blows for the recovery of the Kingdom, and been in
continual action, and therefore you must not wonder if they be weak. If Sir
Henry Dockwra do not plant Ballishannon, I think it fit, that Sir Arthur
Chichester had a thousand men of his List, whom I hope we would find means to
plant within four or five miles of Dungannon, and by boats victual them
commodiously. I do apprehend the consequence of that plantation to be great:
but till I hear from you again, I will take no men from Loughfoyle, because I
am loath to meddle much with that Garrison without direction: but I besecch you
Sir by the next let me know your opinion.

I pray you Sir give me leave to take it unkindly of my L: President to inform
you, that Sir Hen. Dockwra has had greater favor in the nomination of
Captains the^ he; for he never placed but one, whom I displaced after. To have
some left to his nomination, is more then I could obtain, when the last supply
came to me. But since it is the Queens pleasure, I must bear this (and as I
do continually a great deal more) with patience. And though I am willing you
should know I have a just feeling of these things, yet I beseech you Sir to
believe, that my meaning is not to contest, or to impute the fault unto you,
for (by God Sir) where I profess my love in the same kind I have done to you,
they shall be great matters that shall remove me, although they may (and I
desire that I may let you know when they do) move me. I do only impute this to
my misfortune, that I perceive arguments too many of her Majesty's displeasure:
but while for her own sake she does use my service, I will love whatsoever I
suffer for her, and love the sentence, that I will force from the conscience of
all, and the mouth of the just, that I have been, and will be, an honest, and
no unprofitable servant unto her. I dare undertake, we have rid my Lord
President of the most dangerous rebel of Mounster, and the most likely man to
have renewed the rebellion; for that night I received your letters, the rogues
did power above three thousand shot into our Camp, at which time it was our
good fortune to kill Pierce Lacie, and some other of their principal men. We
are now praying for a good wind, for we are at our last days bread, if
victuals come in time, we will not be idle. Sir, if I have recommended any into
England, I am sure it was for no charge; for I know none that have gone from
hence but there are many that continue here more worthy of preferment then
they, therefore I pray Sir let them not be reckoned mine, that there challenge
any thing for me, but whatsoever shall please their Lordships I must be
contented withal, and it shall not much trouble me, for I mean not to make
the wars my occupation, and do affect as much to have a great many followers,
as to be troubled with a kennel of hounds. But for the Queens sake, I would
gladly have her served by such, as I know to be honest men, and unhappy is that
General, that must fight with weapons of other men's choosing. And so Sir,
being ashamed that I have troubled you so long, I desire you to be assured,
that no man shall love you more honestly and faithfully, then my self.

From the Camp near Mount Norreys this ninth of August, 1601. Yours Sir most
assured to do you service Mountioy.


Touching the above mentioned distate between the Lord Deputy and the Lord
President of Mounster, his Lordship shortly after, wrote a letter to him,
resenting himself in very high terms, of the wrong he conceived to be
offered him, as follows in his Lordships letter.

MY Lord, as I have hitherto borne you as much affection, and as truly as ever
I did profess it unto you, and I protest rejoiced in all your good successes
as mine own; so must you give me leave, since I presume I have so just cause,
to challenge you of unkindness and wrong, in writing into England, that in
preferring your followers, Sir Henry Dockwra has had more power from me then
your self, and consequently to solicit the Queen to have the nomination of
some Captains in this Kingdom. For the first I could have wished you would
have been better advised, because upon my Honor he never, without my special
warrant, did appoint but one, whom I after displaced; and I do not remember
that ever since our coming over, I have denied any thing, which you have
recommended unto me, with the mark of your own desire to obtain it, and in
your Province I have not given any place (as I think) but at your instance.
For the other, I think it is the first example, that ever any under another
General desired or obtained the like suit. And although I will not speak
injuriously of your deserts, nor immodestly of mine own, yet this disgrace
cannot make me believe that I have deserved worse then any that have been
Generals before me: but since it is the Queens pleasure, I must endure it, and
you choose a fit time to obtain that, or any thing else against me. Yet I will
concur with you in the service, as long as it shall please her Majesty to
employ us here: but hereafter I doubt not but to give you satisfaction that I
am not worthy of this wrong. The Counsel and my self, upon occasion of
extraordinary consequence, sent for some of the Companies of Mounster out of
Connaght, when we heard you were to be supplied with two thousand out of
England, but we received from them a flat denial to come, and the copy of
your letter to warrant them therein. If you have any authority from the Queen
to countermand mine, you may very well justify it, but it is more then you
have vowed to me to have, when I (before my coming over) protested unto you
that if you had, I would rather serve the Queen in prison, then here. My Lord,
these are great disgraces to me, and so conceived, and I think justly, by all
that know it, which is and will be very shortly all Ireland. My alleagiance and
own honor are now engaged with all my burdens, to go on in this work,
otherwise no fear should make me suffer thus much; and what I do, it is only
love does move me unto it: for I know you are dear to one, whom I am bound to
respect with extraordinary affection. And so my Lord I wish you well and will
omit nothing (while I am in this Kingdom) to give you ^he best contentment I
can, and continue as,

Your assured friend, Mountioy.


The Lord President within few days, not only with a calm, noble, and wise,
answer, pacified his Lordships anger; but also by many good Offices between
his Lordship and Master Secretary, (with whom as a most inward friend he had
great power) so combined their new begun love, as he engaged his Lordship in
a great bond of thankefulnes to him.

The eleventh of August, his Lordship wrote to the Governor of the Newry, that
to avoid the continual trouble of Conuoyes hereafter, he should presently send
up as great provision of victuals to Armagh as possibly he could, while his
Lordship lay in that part with the Army: For two days after, by reason of much
rain falling and the expecting of these victuals, his Lordship lay still in
the Camp near Mount Norris. The thirteenth the victuals came, but not in such
great proportion as was directed, because the victuler had failed to bake great
part of his meal, and the Cowes expected from Dundalke, were not yet sent by
the Submitties, according to their promise. The same day his Lordship rose and
encamped three miles short of Armagh. The foureteenth his Lordship rose with
the Army, and put all the victuals he had received into the Abbey of Armagh and
the Fort of Blackewater, and returned back to the same camping place. The
fifteenth his Lordship drew back to his former Camp, near Mount Norreis, and
sent out some Companies of Horse and Foot to the skirts of the wood near the
Fort, to guard those that cut wood for making of Carres, to transport more
victuals to the said garrisons. The sixteenth his Lordship drew back to
Carickbane, near the Newry, to hasten the provision of victuals, in as great
quantity as might be, which was dispatched within few days. The twenty three
his Lordship wrote the following letter to Mr Secretary.

SIR I did ever foresee, and have signified so much that any foreign succors
would clean alter the State of this Kingdom, and the whole frame of our
proceedings, and do find that the assurance that these people do now receive
thereof, does make them stand upon other terms then they were wont, and much
divert our purposes, which we had conceived with good reason and great hope. Of
any but the English we have small assurance, and of them the Army is exceeding
weak. The Irish newly submitted, and their wavering faith hithetto we have
used to great effect: for we have wasted them, and the rebels by them, but when
we come to lay our Forces in remote garrisons, they fly the hardness of that
life, and do again betake themselves unto any head that is of power to
spoil, and with the best paid and prevailing party they will ever be. I am
certainly told by Sir John Barkely, that some Spaniards that arrived at Sligo
(as they say to discover, and with assurance of the present coming of a great
force,) do there fortify, and (as he has been more particularly informed)
not in a compass only capeable of themselves, but in such sort as it will be
able to lodge great numbers. This, (and my being prevented to follow my
purposes in these parts as I would,) draws me into the Pale, to advise of the
best assurance for the maine, and yet not to quit my purposes in such sort in
these parts; but if the Spaniards do not come, I may again look this way with
my former desire, which was to beat the chief Traitor clean out of his
Conntrey: for until that be done, there will be ever left a fire, which upon
all occasions will break out more and more violently. When I have spoken with
the rest of the Counsel, and considered more nearly the disposition of these
inward parts, I will more largely relate unto you my opinion, neither will I
now much trouble you with my own estate, although not only my self, but (I
protest) the service does feel the effect of a general conceived rumor of her
Majesty's displeasure to me. I am so nearly interessed therein; that I cannot
speak much of that matter, without the prejudice of a private respect to my
self: but only this, I most humbly desire her Majesty for her own sake to
use me no longer here, then she thinks me fit to be trusted and graced; for
without both, I shall but strive against the wind and tide, and be fit for
nothing but my own poor harbor, unto the which I most humbly desire to be
speedily called with her gracious favor, since my own conscience makes me
presume to desire so much, that best does know with how intolerable labor of
mind and body, I have and do continually serve her. And so Sir I beseech God
to send you as much contentment as I do want.

The 23 of August 1601. Yours Sir to do you service, Mountioy.


The fortifying of the Spaniards at Sligo, vanished with the rumor, which was
grounded upon some arriving, to bring the Rebels certain news of present
succors, and presently returning. And the brute (or perhaps his Lordships
jealousy) of her Majesty's displeasure, arose from the confessions of some
examined, about the rash attempts of the unfortunate Earl of Essex, who had
accused the Lord Deputy to be privy to that project. His Lordship purposing to
draw into the Pale (or parts near Dublyn), left his forces in the North, (for
those of Loughfoyle had not yet correspondency with these), in this following
manner disposed.

At Carickefergus.

Sir Arthur Chichester Governor 200. Sir Foalke Conway 150. Captain Billings
150. Captain Phillips 150. Captain Norton 100. Captain Egerton 100. Foot 850.

Sir Arthur Chichester 25. Captain John Iephson 100. Horse 125.

At Lecaile.

Sir Richard Moryson Governor 150. Captain Toby Cawfield 150. Foot 300.

These following forces, when they should be drawn out, for conuoy of victuals
or otherwise, were to be commanded in chief by Sir Francis Stafford, and were
thus disposed in several garrisons.

At the Newry.

Sir Francis Stafford Governor 200. Captain Iostas Bodley 150. Sir William
Warren 100. Foot 450. Sir Francis Stafford 50 Horse.

At Mount Norreis.

Captain Edward Blaney Governor 150. Captain Atherton 150 Sir Samuel
Bagnoll 150. Captain Rotheram 150. Foot 600. Sir Samuel Bagnoll 50 Horse.

At Armagh.

Sir Henry Dauers Couernour 150. Sir H. Follyot 150. Capt. Guest 150. Capt.
Thomas Roper 150. Captain Francis Roe 100. Capt. Treuer 100. Foot 800.

Sir Henry Dauers 100. Captain Darcy 25. Horse 125.

At Blackewater.

Captain Williams Governor 150. Captain Constable 100. Sir Garret Moore 100.

Foot 350.

The twenty four of August, his Lordship leaving the field, rode back to the
Newry, from whence he sent one W. an Englishman in bonds to the Lords in
England, for the reasons following. Sir Henry Dauers after his elder brothers
perishing in the late Earl of Essex his attempt, was desirous by active
prosecution of the Rebels, to deserve her Majesty's good opinion. And for this
cause, as for that he was enabled to do great services, as well by his noble
virtues, as by the command he formerly and now had both of horse and foot; his
Lordship in special love to him, being most willing to give him all
opportunity to attain this his desire, appointed him Governor of Armagh,
aduising him to be often stirring with the forces under his command, and to
practice what possibly he could devise upon the person of the Arch-traitor. To
him this Englishman made offer to kill Tyrone, yet would not discover his plot
for greater secrecy (as he pretended), neither would he press him further,
since he required no assistance; and so in the night he was suffered to go by
the watches, and passed to Tyrones Camp, whence he was employed to the Ilander
Scots, and coming to Sir Arthur Chithester hands, was by him sent back from
Knockefergus to his Lordship at the Newry, where being examined what he had
done in Tyrones Camp, he auowed that once he had drawn his sword to kill him,
though under pretense of bragging what he would do for his service, yet gave
he no good account of his actions or purposes, but behaved himself in such
sort, as his Lordship judged him frantic, though not the less fit for such a
purpose. Now because he had not performed that he undertook, and gave an ill
account of himself in this action; his Lordship, as well for the discharge of
Sir H. Dauers, who employed him, as of himself who consented thereunto, and
advised Sir H. Dauers so to do, thought good to send him prisoner to the
Lords, that he might be there examined, where by reason of his friends dwelling
in London, they might be sufficiently informed of the man's quality.

The five and twentieth, his Lordship and the Counsel there present, wrote from
the Newry this following letter to the Lords in England.

IT may please your Lordships. Since our last letters we have for the most part
employed our selves in putting up as great quantity of victuals as we could to
Armagh and the Blackewater, being loath to engage our selves into any thing,
which we had further purposed, until we should see the issue of this assured
expectation of the Spaniards invasion, or till we might by some means better
strengthen this Army. Of the first we have reason to be jealous, both by many
arguments of assured confidence in this people of present succor, and by the
arrival of a Spanish ship, in which the Arch-traytors agent is returned, with
assurance that he left the Spanish forces ordained for his aid in a readiness
to set out. For the strengthening of our Army we had good reason to be
provident, considering the weakness thereof, and especially of the English,
and finding by experience the rebels strength now, when he had none but the
forces nourished in Tyrone to assist him. Wherefore hearing that Sir Henry
Dockwra had planted a Garrison at Dunnagall, and had left O Donnel possessed in
a manner of nothing in Tirconnel, and that upon the late ariuall of his
munition, he intended to be active in those parts near Loughfoyle, and
understanding by Master Secretary, that about the twelfth of August there were
two thousand men to be supplied for Mounster, we resolved to send for some of
the Companies in Connaght of the Mounster List, and to put the rest into
Galloway and thereabouts, for the assurance of those parts, and upon the
receiving of that addition to our strength, to have drawn to Monaghan, and
spoiled the Corn of that Country, being of exceeding quantity, or if we had
seen reason, to have left a Garrison there, and to have enabled it to gather
the most part of that Corn for their better provision, or otherwise to have
continued the prosecution in these parts, until we should hear of the
Spaniards landing, or by any assurance of their not coming, should be at
liberty to proceed in our former purposes. But receiving answer from the
Captains of Mounster, that they had direction not to stir from Connaght upon
any other order whatsoever, then from the President of Mounster, in regard of
the present expectation of Spaniards to land in those parts: and we thereby
being not so well able to wade any further in our determinations for the North,
and receiving some probable intelligence, that the place designed for the
Spaniards landing was Sligo, we resolved to leave the Northern Garrisons very
strong in foot and horse, and as well provided with means as we can, and to
draw our selves with the rest of our force toward Connaght, appointing the
rest of the Couusel to meet us in the way at Trym, to advise with us of the
best course to establish the heart of the Pale, and to answer the present
expectation of Spanish forces. And although by our sudden leaving the North,
we have ommitted some things which we conceived to be of great consequence to
the service, yet if it shall please your Lordships to supply the foundations we
have laid in those parts with one thousand shot, according to our former suit,
and with store of victuals for the Garrisons in Winter, we hope you shall find
no small effect of our Summers labor. But seeing we are persuaded, that if any
Spanish forces arrive, they will land at Sligo, where they have a fit place to
fortify, to be relieved by sea, to unite themselves with all the Rebels force,
and where they have a fair Country to possess, with an casie way (by the
rebels assistance) into Mounster, or the heart of the Pale, or especially to
Loughfoyle, where we cannot, without great difficulty, affront them, having no
magazins of victuals or munition at Athlone or Galloway, and where it is
impossible for us to provide our selves, or if we could, most difficult to
carry them by land, when we are so far in the Country, and have no means
for carriage. Therefore we most humbly desire your Lordships to send good store
of victuals and munition to Galloway, and to Lymbrick, which howsoever our
expectation fall out, will be most necessary for the prosecution of Connaght,
and that prosecution as necessary this Winter, since O Donnel has forsaken
his own Country, and betaken himself to live in that Province. But because
we do foresee it to be no ill Counsel for the Spaniards to land at Sligo, and
think that Tyrone will presently urge them to cut off our Garrison at
Loughfoyle, whether from thence they have a fair way, and secure from our
opposition, and may imagine, that it will be no great difficulty for them with
such royal provisions as they will bring, to force those slender
fortifications. We beseech your Lordships to send a large provision of victuals
and munition to Carlingford and Knockfergus; for we cannot by any other way
then that relieve Loughfoyle if it be distressed. Neither can her Majesty
hazard any loss in these great provisions, though we never use them; for all
kind of victuals may be issued in this Kingdom with great gain, and
especially Corn, which we chiefly desire; and for munition, it may be kept
with providence as a store for all occasions. Thus howsoever it fall out, we
shall be enabled to make such a prosecution this Winter in Connaght and the
North, as in all reason will end these wars, it the Spaniards come not, and
will leave this Province of Vlster in far greater subjection, then ever any
of her Majesty's Progenitors had it. And since we apprehend, that Spain may
make in this Country a dangerous war for England, we conceive that if not
now, yet with his first ability; he will embrace it, which makes us to have
the greater desire (if it be possible) to prevent his footing here for ever,
and that (by Gods help) we hope to do before this next Su^mer, if we may be
enabled this winter to ruin Tyrone and O Donnel. We have great need of one
hundred Northern horses, for our horses here grow weak, and ill, and if your
Lordships please to afford us that number, we will so handle the matter, as it
shall be no increase of the List. If the Spaniards come, we must have at the
least three hundred, and if they be Northern horses, and Northern Riders, we
assure our selves they will be much fitter for this service, then such as are
usually sent hither, who come with purpose to get license to return, and yet
are a greater charge to her Majesty. But for the one thousand foot we desired
by our former letters, we find their coming to be of that necessity, as we
must be most humble and earnest suitors to your Lordships to send them
presently: for our Companies are so exceeding weak, and now decay so fast, by
the extremity of the weather, as a much greater number will not supply us,
but that the checkes will be as great as now they are, and they little be
seen amongst us, which gives us cause to wish now, and humbly to move your
Lordships, to be pleased to send one thousand foot more soon after. The
reports here are so uncertain, as until we meet the rest of the Counsel at
Trym, we know not how the Pale stands affected, upon this assured confidence of
the Spaniards coming, only this we perceive, many of them are wavering, yet
the Lords hereabouts, namely, Mac Gennis, Tirlogh Mac Henry, Ever Mac Cooley,
and O Hanlon, keep with us, notwithstanding that Tyrone has sent them word,
that hereafter it will be too late for them to make their peace with him, if
they do it not now upon this occasion, and they assute us, as much as men can
do, that they will not fall again from their obedience, though thereby their
state be no better then horseboyes. But of this we can give your Lordships no
assurance, neither in them have we any extraordinary confidence. It may
further please your Lordships to be advertised, that the Lord of Dunsany,
having the command of a Fort in the Brenny, called Liscanon (where we had
placed certain Irish Companies, as fittest to spoil and wast the Country
thereabouts), did lately draw most of them into Mac Mahowns Country, for the
taking of a prey, which they lighted on, (as is said) to the number of some
sixteen hundred Cowes: but in their return, being hardly laid unto, (as some
of them say, with very great numbers, yet as we have heard by some that were
present, not above senenscore), they did not only lose their prey, but
according to the manner of the Irish (who have no other kind of retreat) fell
to a flat running away to the Fort, so as poor Captain Esmond (who had the
command of the Rear, and very valiantly with a few made good the place) was
sore hurt, and afterward taken prisoner, and forty or fifty of our side
slain. We cannot learn that any English were among them, so as we account our
loss to be no more then the taking of the Captain, neither do the Rebels
brag thereof, both because they escaped not free, loosing very near as many
men as we did; and for that they knew they dealt but with their Countrymen,
who (as they do) hold it no shame to run, when they like not to fight,
though we mean to call some of ours to account thereof. And so we most humbly
take leave.

The eight and twentieth of August, his Lordship received two letters from the
Lord President of Mounster; the first imported, that hearing that his Lordship
had sent into Connaght for part of the Companies of the Mounster List to come
into the North, he prayed to be excused, that he had given contrary
directions, upon fear of the Spaniards landing, and the knowledge of Tirrels
purpose to come with the banished Mounster men, and aides of Northern men out
of Connaght, presently to disturb the Province of Mounster, and signified,
that now to manifest his precise obedience to his Lordships commands, he had
sent them directions to march toward his Lordship upon sight of his letter,
yet praying his Lordship to send some part of them into Munster, without which
help he could neither keep the field against Tirrel and the Provincial
fugitives at their first entry, nor upon the Spaniards arrival, give any
impediment to their disposing of such Towns, as were recommended to his
special care, and assuring his Lordship that the Spaniards had been seen at
Sea, and that in his judgment and by vulgar report, it was likely they would
make descent in some part of Mounster. Lastly, aduertising that he had sent
James the Suggon pretended Earl of Desmond, and Florence Mac Carty (the chief
practiser with the Spaniards in those parts) into England. The second letter
imported the Lord Presidents recommendation (which by established course was
effectual) to his Lordship, for the granting of her Majesty's pardon for lands
lives and goods, to five hundred forty two inhabitants of Muskery, and other
parts in the County of Cork, for which present warrant was accordingly given.

The nine and twentieth day his Lordship came to Trym, where the Counselors
coming from Dublin met him, according to appointment. Here they consulted of
the public affairs, more particularly how that part of the Army within
Lemster, might be employed to prosecute Tirrel, sent by Tyrone to disturb that
Province, and yet to be ready upon any sudden occasion to make head against the
foreign enemy. And the aduertisements being daily multiplied, that the
Spaniards were at Sea, it was concluded, that in regard these forces were not
able to answer both, or either the ends aforesaid, great part of the Army in
Vlster should be drawn down, and both forces joined, should assail Tirrel,
who came to insult over the subjects, and to draw them to rebellion, but
especially the late Submitties, whom by many promises and threatenings he had
tempted to a relapse, but prevailed not with them. And his Lordship resolved,
by his presence to give a sharper edge to this service, till either he should
be called, to affront the Spaniards landing, or to draw back into the North;
if they landed not.

The third of September his Lordship and the Counsel here wrote unto the Lords
in England, excusing that the extraordinary expenses had far passed the
limited sum of six thousand pound yearly, which was far too little, for the
transportation of victuals, carriage of munition, charges and imprests to
victualers, rewards to messengers, and for special services, making of boats,
and things of like necessity, and the repairing of Castles, Houses, Bridges,
Forts, and all buildings. In which last charge, they had not been able fitly to
repair Athlone Castle, the Key of Connaght, nor the Castles and Bridges of
Carlogh and Laughlin, and the Forts of Phillipstowne and Maryburgh, being of
great consequence, to curb the Traitors, and assure the subjects, and the
decay whereof would give the rebels free passage into many Countries, besides
our dishonor to neglect those places, which the wisdom of former times with
great policy planted; the great charge of repairing whereof, appeared by the
transmitted certificats of Commissioners appointed to view these places. And
for these reasons they besought her Majesty's warrant, to leave this charge to
their discretion for a time, without any limitation, promising not to enlarge
the same in any thing, which might be spared, without apparent prejudice to her
service, and giving their opinion, that in this time of the new coin, these
places might be repaired with small charge. Likewise they desired to have great
store of munition and victuals sent over, and that presently, to prevent the
usual contrariety of winds after Michaelmas, and all the Winter season.
Lastly, they desired to have the one thousand shot presently sent over, for
which they had formerly written; the Army consisting in great part of Irish,
which could not be kept to live in Garrison out of their own Country. And
they advertised the Lords, that diverse of the horse at twelve pence per diem
had quit their pay, being not able to live thereupon in those dear times.

This third of September likewise his Lordship received letters from her
Majesty, giving warrant for the pay of two thousand men sent into Mounster,
being above the Establishment. The same day his Lordship received letters from
Sir Robert Cecyll Secretary, that the Spaniards were discovered near the
Silly, and as he thought they would land at Lymrick, being forty five sail,
whereof seventeen were men of war, whereof six were Gallions, the rest of
one hundred, or one hundred and fifty tons burden, and had in them six
thousand soldiers, praying his Lordship to demand such supplies as he thought
needful, and upon the Spaniards landing, to name the places whether the
supplies should be sent, and assuring his Lordship that the two thousand men
for Mounster were already embarked.

The same time his Lordship received letters from the Lords in England,
importing her Majesty's acceptance of his service, with her willingness and
theirs to send him needful supplies, praying him to demand them timely,
because he could hardly receive them from England in six weeks after the
demand, the wind standing favorable. Likewise professing that it is the fault
of the Commissioners and Commissaries for victuals, if there be any want
thereof, since the proportions required by them were arrived in Ireland; as
likewise that the soldier made not some part of provision for victuals by money
(especially in parts near the sea, and like places, where victuals were to be
bought), since by these great provisions of victuals in England with sterling
money, her Majesty lost the third part of the profit she hoped to make by the
new standard of Ireland, and which might be made, if vittels were provided by
the soldier in Ireland, having full pay in that mixed money. Also aduertising,
that her Majesty had sent for Ireland twenty lasts of Powder, with all
munitions in proportion necessary, half by land, and (for sparing of carriage)
half by Sea, praying that care might be had in issuing thereof, since they
were informed, that great wast thereof had been formerly made, by the Irish
bands, converting the Powder to their private gain, and by the whole army,
under pretense of her Majesty's remittall of Powder spent in service (which had
been defalked out of the soldiers pay, but was after held an hard course, to
punish them for their good deferts), now charging upon her Majesty all wilful
and fraudulent consumptions of Powder. Further signifying, that Sir Henry
Dockwra his failing in correspondency with his Lordship this Summer, for want
of match, was distasteful to them, had he not made amends by surprising of
Donnegall, which would faciliate the planting of Ballishannon. That her Majesty
referred the garrison of Loughsoyle wholly to his Lordships direction, and the
transposing any part thereof to the inabling of Sir, Arthur Chichester at
Knockfergus, the charge of that garrison being exceeding burden some to her
Majesty, by reason that Coast in Winter is so subject to storms, and for that
it was supplied with all provisions out of England bought with sterling money,
and small quantity of the Irish mixed moneys could be there issued to any such
purpose, in which regard her Majesty wished that the Irish in those parts (in
whose service no profit was found) should either be cast, and pensions of mixed
moneys given to the chief Lords, or at least should receive no victuals out of
the stoare, but have their full pay in that standard, to provide therewith for
their Companies. Touching the expected landing of the Spaniards, their
Lordships being of opinion that they would presently land in Mounster,
advertised his Lordship, that two thousand men were embarked for that Province,
and two thousand more should be ready within twenty days at the Seaside, to
come where his Lordship should direct them. Touching the exception above
mentioned which his Lordship had taken, that part of the Officers for the
Companies sent into Mounster were left to the Lord Presidents disposal, and
all the rest were bestowed in England, their Lordships professed, that as in
all circumstances of honor and contentment, they desired to respect his
Lordship, so they prayed him to consider, that it stood with the reputation of
a Counsel of State, to confer some such imploiments, and keep men of quality
at Court, to be upon all occasions used in her Majesty's service, wherein
notwithstanding they had preferred few or none, who had not his Lordships
letters of recommendations to that Board, and now referred them all to be
continued or cassed at his pleasure. Lastly, whereas their Lordships were
informed, that some were apprehended in Ireland for coining of the new mixed
moneys, they signified her Majesty's pleasure, that those men should be
executed, the rather to prevent the great inconvenience might arise, in
maintaining the exchange for such counterfeit moneys and otherwise.

The fourth of September his Lordship wrote from Trym to Sir Robert Cecyll the
following letter.

SIR at my coming into these parts, I found them not so distempered as I was
borne in hand I should, so as I make no doubt at all, but if the Spaniards do
not come, I shall be able to give her Majesty a good account of my charge here;
and I am not out of hope, but rather of opinion, since they have stayed so
long, that they will not come this Winter, though I desire not to lead you
into that conceit, nor omit not my self to provide for the worst may happen:
and therefore have sent Master Marshall toward Leax, with almost a thousand
foot and some horse, both to be near the Lord President of Mounster, for what
may fall out that way, and to prosecute Tyrrell in the mean while, who with
some two hundred Rogues is gotten thither, and with the remain of the Moors,
Connors, and their followers, whom I could not cut off the last year, are
altogether drawn to be above four hundred. For Connaght, I have appointed Sir
Oliver Lambert, with as many Companies as I can spare him, until I may
understand her Majesty's further pleasure, because I know him to be very
active, and find a necessity to employ some forces that way, so long as the
brute of the Spaniards coming does continue; especially now, that Odonnell
does make his residence in that Province about Sligo, and might otherwise do
what he lift without impeachment. For my self, I think it fittest to stay
hereabouts a while, for from hence I may aptly draw toward Mounster or
Connaght as need requires, or fall back toward the North, so soon as we can
gather any certainty of the Spaniards not coming. And if we may be supplied
with the 1000 shot, so earnestly desired by our former letters, (and without
which, our foundation will be in a manner overthrown), to strengthen the
English Companies here, (I assure you) grown exceeding weak, (otherwise I
would not put her Majesty to that charge); I make no doubt but we shall be able
to do her Majesty that service there this Winter, (those shot being landed at
Carlingford or the Newry, with the victuals, munition, and other means
desired), that the Spaniards shall not from thenceforth be able to get footing,
to do us any great annoyance, especially if it would please you to procure,
for an addition to the rest two hundred shot to be sent for the supplying of
Sir Arthur Chichester at Carickfergus: for from that place we have discovered
such an entrance into the heart of Tyrone, as in all likelihood will soon ruin
that Arch-Traytor, if Sir Arthur may be enabled with means, as from me he
shall not want what I can yield him. I have here enclosed sent a note, that you
may see how the garrisons are planted North-wards, and who it is that commands
in each of them, in the absence only of Sir Francis Stafford, for he has the
chief command over them, as the best mean to make them join upon all
occasions of the service.

The ninth of September his Lordship received advertisement from the Lord
President, that the two thousand men embarked in England for Mounster, were
arrived, part in Corkharbour, part at Waterford, of which companies some were
left by the Lords of her Majesty's Counsel, in their directions to his
disposal, but he left them to his Lordships pleasure, knowing the duty he
ought to his General. And whereas the Lords of the Counsel, in the same
letters gave directions that the foot Companies of the Lord President and Earl
of Thomond, being each 150, should be increased each to two hundred, the Lord
President auowed that it was obtained by the said Earl, joining him for
countenance of the suit, altogether without his priuity, which he prayed his
Lordship to believe: for since his Lordship had promised that favor to him
upon the first occasion, he protested that he never had any thought to make so
needless a request in England. Therewith he sent his Lordship the list of the
said Companies newly arrived, being one thousand four hundred under foureteen
Captains named in England, one hundred for the increase of the Lord Presidents
and Earl of Thomonds foot Companies, and five hundred which he the Lord
President, by virtue of the Lords letters, (the Lord Deputy pleasing to give
his admission) assigned to five Captains, being in all two thousand foot.

His Lordship having disposed the forces as is above mentioned, and written
from Trym to the Lord President, desiring him to meet him upon the borders of
Lemster, meaning Kilkenny, as the fittest place for that meeting, took his
journey thitherward, and arriving at Kilkenny the thirteenth of September, the
same night received advertisement from the Lord President, that the Spaniards
were met at Sea, bearing for Ireland, and therein (as he was informed) for
Mounster, so that he craved pardon that he came not to meet his Lordship,
whose pleasure he conceived to be, that in this case he should not be absent
from those parts, where the enemies descent was expected; and he further prayed
his Lordship so to fashion his affairs in Lemster and the North, as the forces
he meant to bring might be in readiness; withal protesting, that he stayed
only for a second direction, which if he received, he would come without delay
to his Lordship.

The next day his Lordship wrote the following letter to Sir Robert Cecyll her
Majesty's Secretary.

SIr, having left the Northern borders as well guarded, as in providence I
could, the command whereof I left to Sir Ioh. Barkeley, and having sent Sir
Oliver Lambert into Counaght to settle those parts, and Sir Rich. Wingfeild the
Marshal into Leax, to prosecute Tirrel with his adherence, I wrote to the
President of Mounster to meet me about Kilkenny, if he conveniently might,
with a desire to establish a full correspondencie for the resistance of
foreign forces, if they should arrive, or otherwise for making the wars in
all parts this Winter, the rather because I know not how (for the present)
Galloway, and consequently Asherawe (if it be planted) might be supplied of
munition and some other provisions, but out of, and by Mounster: and further my
being in those parts seeming to me of no small purpose, to divide the Birnes
and Cauenaghs from holding intelligence, or ioining with Tyrrel, and to nourish
the ouerture I have lately entertained from O. M. S. the chief of the Moors,
to bring me Tirrel alive or dead, which he desires should pass as a secret
between only me, himself, and Omoloy, to whom he has already given a pledge to
perform it. Now that I might not disinable any of the forces, I am come to
Kilkenny only accompanied with some threescore horse, without any one
Commander or Captain of the Army, having left them all with commandment to be
resident on their charge. Only when I came near Master Marshall, I sent to
confer with him, being before accompanied with none of the Counsel, but
only Sir Robert Gardner chief Justice. As I entered into Kilkenny, I received
intelligence from the Lord President of the Spaniards being at Sea, and
returned his messenger, desiring him not to stir from his charge, but to
advertise me often of occurrents. My self purpose to return presently to
Carlogh (whether under the color to prosecute Tirrel, I will draw as many of
the forces, as I can, to employ them in the mean time, and to be ready to
answer such occasions as shall fall out in Mounster) that being (as things
stand) the place best to give direction to all parts, and to assure the most
dangerous. Now Sir, what I should desire or advise from hence, on so great a
sudden, as I think it fit to make this dispatch, and in so great a matter, I
am not very confident, but propound to your much better judgment what I think
first and fittest to be thought of. That it may please the Lords to send over
the two thousand men by their last letters signified to me to be at Chester,
with all expedition, one thousand of them to Carlingford, the other to Dublin.
These I intend to thrust into other companies, to make them full (if I can) to
a man, whereby the Queen shall be served with all their bodies, and yet her
List no way increased, nor other charge but transportation. I desire so many at
the least may be sent to Carlingford, because I am confident that it is the
best counsel, whether the Spaniards land or no, to strengthen that part of the
Army, which will be able to assure the Pale that way, and to ruin the
Northern Rebels, in such sort, that it shall not be in the power of foreign
force to make them live, and if the worst happen, they be thereby enabled to
come off to us, if we send for them, where now they cannot except we fetch
them. In general, for such a war you must send great Magazins of munition
and victuals, and when you resolve how many men you will send, or have sent,
the proportion will be easily cast up by such Ministers as you have there in
those kinds. The best place for the greatest quantity will be Dublin; for from
thence we may find means to transport what other places shall have need of,
except the war be in Connaght, for then only from Lymrick and Galloway all
our provisions must come, and in Connaght I chiefly expect the Spaniards first
descent, yet there with most difficulty can front them with any war before
Galloway, or Athlone (from Lymricke) be thoroughly supplied with provisions. If
foreign force do not arrive, these provisions will not be lost; for this
Winter Odonnell must be forced out of Connaght, or else he will get there what
he has lost in Tyrconnell, and so, this Winter we must do our endeavor to do
the like in Vlster, to ruin Tyrone, which is a work of no small difficulty,
but of so great consequence, that I am persuaded it would not only turn the
professions of this people, but even their hearts to her Majesty's obedience,
for such as love Tyrone, will quit their affections, when the hope of his
fortune fails, and such as do not, their dependancy on him will fall, when
their fear of his greatness shall be taken away: for believe me Sir, I observe
in most (if I be not much deceived) of the Irish reclaimed Lords, great desire
to continue Subjects, if they might once see appearance of defense, though
perchance not so much out of their honest dispositions, as the smart they yet
feel of a bitter prosecution. If you hear that foreign powers in any great
numbers are arrived, you must resolve to send at the least 200 Horse out of
England, and two thousand men more well armed, for you must believe Sir, that
then it will not be the war of Ireland, but the war of England made in
Ireland. If we beat them, both Kingdoms will be quiet, if not, even the best
in more danger then I hope ever to live to see. If you provide us more men when
we send you word that the Spaniards are landed, we will write whether we
desire they should be sent. Howsoever, I presume her Majesty shall not repent
the putting over so many men hither; for we hope to ease the charge in the
shortness of the work: If this aid arrive not here, and if any foreign
force arrive in England, (the which we gather by some intelligence may be),
then if you send hither new men to assure places fit to be kept, we may bring
you over old soldiers and Captains, two or three thousand; which I will
undertake shall strike as good blows as ten thousand ordinary men. I have made
some of the subjects lately reclaimed, and in these times suspected, put
themselves in blood already, since my coming hither; for even now I hear my
Lord Mountgarrets sons have killed some of the Clarcheeres, and some of
Tyrrels followers, since I contested with their Father, about somewhat I had
heard suspicious of them. Sir I will again advertise you of our affairs here
very shortly, and desire you now to pardon my have.

From Kilkenny this foureteenth of September 1601. Your most assured friend to
do you service, Mountioy.


His Lordship returned from Kilkenny to Carlogh, where he disposed the forces
to answer the service in those parts of Lemster. Thence he wrote to the Lord
President to meet him some time at Kilkenny, if possibly he could: And within
few days hearing that the Lord President having left Sir Charles Wilmot with
the forces at Cork, was on his journey toward him, his Lordship parted from
Carlogh, and the nineteenth of September met him at Laughlin, whence they rode
together to Kilkenny.

Before I proceed further, I will briefly add the affairs of Mounster till
this time, Mounster.
collected out of the Lord Presidents letters. The settling of peace in the
year 1600. was interrupted by the allarum of a Spanish invasion generally
given in the beginning of this year 1601. And in the month of April the
Mounster Rebels which fled the last year into Connaght and Vlster, attempted
again to return into Mounster, having been strengthened by Tyrone; but the
Lord President sent Captain Flower with one thousand foot to the confines,
and these forces of Mounster on the one side, and Sir John Barkeley with the
Connaght Forces on the other side, so persued them, as the same month they
were forced to break and return into Vlster. Florence mac Carty
notwithstanding his protection, had procured the sending of the said Rebels out
of the North, and besides many rebellious practices, about this time laded a
Bark with hides, which should bring him munition from foreign parts. The
Lord President ceased not to lay continual plots to apprehend the ticulary
Earl of Desmond, and having often driven him out of his lurking dens, (in
which service the Lord Barry having a Company in her Majesty's pay, did noble
endeavors,) at last the Lord President understanding that he lurked in the
white Knights Country, his Lordship did so exasperate him with fear of his
own danger, as in the month of May he took him prisoner and brought him to
Cork, where he was condemed for treason, to entitle the Queen in his lands,
and for a time kept prisoner there.

In the month of June the Lord President received this gracious letter from
the Queen, written with her own hand.

MY faithful George. If ever more service of worth were performed in shorter
space then you have done, we are deceived among many eye wituesses: we have
received the fruit thereof, and bid you faithfully credit, that what so wit,
courage, or care may do, we truly find, they have all been thoroughly acted in
all your charge. And for the same believe, that it shall neither be
unremembered, nor unrewarded, and in mean while believe, my help nor prayers
shall never fail you.

Your Sovereign that best regards you, E. R.


In the beginning of July the Lord President advertised the Lord Deputy, that
according to his directions he would presently send into Connaght 1000 foot
and fifty horse of the Mounster list, though upon good and fresh intelligences,
the arrival of Spaniards was daily expected in that Province, and the forces
remaining with him, were not sufficient to guard Kinsale, Waterford, Yoghall,
Killmalloch, Lymricke, and Cork, (the last whereof according to his Lordships
directions, he would have care specially to strengthen). That he had given the
chief leader of the said forces Sir Fran. Barkely direction to return to him
upon his letter, if her Majesty's service in his opinion should require it,
praying the Lord Deputy to allow of this direction, since he meant not to
recall them, but upon sudden revolt of the Prouincials or arrival of
Spaniards. That the Prisoner usurping the title of Earl of Desmond, and many
other evidences made manifest; that the rebels of Vlster, and especially the
Spaniards, did most rely upon the help of the said prisoner, and Florence mac
Carty, which Florence though protected had assured them of his best aid, and
had prevailed in a Council held in Vlster, that the Spaniards should land at
or near Cork. And that hereupon he the Lord President had apprehended
Florence, and sent him together with the said Earl Prisoner into England,
where they were safe in the Tower, which being in time known to the Spaniards,
might perhaps divert their invasion of Ireland. And no doubt the laying hand on
these two Archrebels, much advanced her Majesty's service in the following
invasion, whereby the Lord President deservedly won great reputation. Thus
much I have briefly noted to the time above mentioned, when the Lord Deputy
wrote to the Lord President to meet him on the confines of Mounster.

They meeting (as I said) at Laughlin, rode together to Kilkenny, where the
twenty The landing of the Spaniards.
day of September they sat in Counsel with the Earl of Ormond, and the rest
of the Counsel with purpose, so soon as they had resolved of the meetest
course for the present service, to return to their several places of charge.
But the same day news came by post, (for Posts were newly established for the
same purpose) that a Spanish Fleet was discovered near the old head of
Kinsale, whereupon they determined to stay there all the next day, to have more
certain advertisement thereof. The three and twentieth day another Post came from
Sir Charles Willmot, aduertising the Spanish Fleet to be come into the harbor
of Kinsale, and it was agreed in Counsel, that the Lord President should
return to Cork, and the Lord Deputy for countenancing of the service in
Mounster, should draw to Clommell, and gather such forces as he could
presently, to draw to Kinsale, nothing doubting but that this forwardness
(howsoever otherwise the Army, neither for numbers of men, nor sufficiency of
provision, was fit to undertake such a task) would both cover their many
defects from being spied by the Country, and for a while, at the least stop the
current of that general defection of the Irish, which was vehemently feared.
This was resolved in Counsel, after the Lord President had given them comfort
to find victuals and munition at Cork: for at first they were not so much
troubled to draw the forces thither, as suddenly to bring victuals and munition
thither for them. But when they understood, that his Lordship had fed the
soldiers all Summer by cesse, and preserved her Majesty's store of victuals
which they thought to be wasted, they were exceeding joyful of this news, and
not without just desert, highly commended the Lord Presidents provident
wisdom, in the said most important service to the State.

The same day they wrote these letters to the Lords in England.

IT may please your Lordships: The Spanish Fleet so long expected by the
Rebels here, is now in the harbor of Kinsale or Cork, as it may appear unto
your Lordships for a certainty, by the copies of these enclosed letters, from
Sir Charles Wilmott, and the Mayor of Cork, which is as much news as we have
yet received, so as we can not judge, whether this be the whole Fleet set out
of Spain, or whether part thereof is coming after to them, or bound for any
other harbor, only we have some reason to think (the weather falling out of
late exceeding stormy and tempestious) that all the ships could very hardly
keep together, and the report was, the whole number were at least seventy. We
are now to be earnest suitors to your Lordships, to supply us with all things
needful for so weighty an action, and so speedily as possibly it may be. The
two thousand foot already (as we conceive) at Chester, we now desire may
presently be lent to Waterford (and neither to Carlingford nor Dublin, as I the
Deputy thought fittest in my last dispatch, when I meant to have used them in
the North), two thousand more at the least had need come soon after unto
Cork, if it be not invested before their coming, but if it be, their landing
must then be at Waterford or Yoghall, and with them three hundred horse will be
as few, as we conceive we have reason to demand, and therefore expect both the
one and the other so soon as may be, also munition and victual must be sent
for ten thousand men, to come likewise to Waterford (unless your Lordships
hear from us to the contrary), for if in those two kinds we be not royally
supplied, men and money will serve us to little purpose, with all which we
recommend to your Lordships consideration, whether it were not fit to send some
part of her Majesty's Navy to lie upon this coast, as well to assure the passage
by Sea, as to attempt something upon the Spanish shipping. Thus having briefly
set down our requests, as sparingly as we may do, the danger considered, we
think it not impertinent to acquaint your Lordships with the cause of our
meeting here, and purposes. We thought fit upon the expectation of these
foreign forces, before we held it of any certainty, to confer with the Lord
President of Mounster, and to consult upon the general disposal of the forces
of this Kingdom, how to make the war upon their arrival, which we could
hardly do, without being thoroughly informed by him, of the state of that
Province, and what means of victual, munition, and other provisions we should
find there, if we should draw the army thither, or from thence were driven to
make the war in Connaght, where we found it would be of exceeding great
difficulty, unless we might have good helps out of Mounster. For this
purpose meeting at this place upon Monday the one and twentieth of this
present, the next day while we were in consultation, came the first of these
letters from the Mayor of Cork, assuring us of the discovery of the Fleet
near the old head of Kinsale, but whether friends or enemies he then knew not,
but that being made certain by the rest of the letters that came since, we
presently grew to this resolution, that the President should return with all
speed possible, though before he left the Province, he took order to the
uttermost that could be done in providence, as well to settle the same, as to
defend all places likeliest to be invaded; and we concluded, that I the Deputy
should draw forward, as far as Clommell, to be near the chiefest brunt of
the war, and upon the present apprehension of all things there is, to give
directions to the rest of the Kingdom, and yet to omit no occasions against
the invasion, whilst the Marshal drew up as many of the forces to me, as he
can with best conueniency and expedition. For since the two thousand supposed
to be at Chester, came not to Carlingford and Dublyn, in time to supply the
Companies Northward, that they might have gone on with their prosecution, we
have now resolved to leave no more in those parts, then are sufficient to keep
the garrison places, because we hold it to be to no purpose, until her
Majesty send hither greater forces, though we are still of opinion, it were the
best course to proceed there, if her Majesty would be pleased to enable us, for
otherwise it cannot be looked for, but that we shall go backward greatly in this
business. Thus being confident your Lps. will be careful of us, we take this to
be sufficient upon this sudden, since what is any way necessary or fit for us,
is to your Lordships in your wisdom and experience best known, and so we do
most humbly take leave, with this assurance, that we will leave nothing
unperformed, that may give true testimony to the World, that we value our duty
to our most gracious Sovereign, and tender the preservation of this her
Kingdom, committed to our charge (as we know we ought) before our lives and
livings, and doubt not but to give her Majesty a very good account of all our
doings.

From Kilkenny this three and twenty of September, 1601. Your Lordships most
humbly to command, etc. signed by the Lord Deputy and Council.


The four and twentieth day; his Lordship wrote this following letter to Master
Secretary.

SIR I did ever think, that if any foreign force should arrive, it would be
doubtful for me to lay my finger on any sound part of all this Kingdom, which
if our supplies had come in time, to have left the Northern garrisons strong,
we might in some good sort have provided for, but now my resolution is this, to
bend my self as suddenly as I can against these foreign forces. If we beat
them, let it not trouble you, though you hear all Ireland does revolt, for (by
the grace of God) you shall have them all return presently with halters about
their necks: if we do not, all providence bestowed on any other place is
vain. Till I know more particularly in how many places they have made their
descent, I cannot write much; but for the present I apprehend a world of
difficulties, with as much comfort as ever poor man did, because I have now a
fair occasion to show how prodigal I will be of my life, in any adventure
that I shall find to be for the service of my dear Mistress, unto whom I am
confident God has given me life to do acceptable service; which when I have
done, I will sing Nune dimittis. This day I expect to receive light and further
ground to write more at large, and being now ready with the President to take
Horse, whose fortune and mine shall now be one, I leave you to Gods continual
blessings, in have. Kilkenny the four and twenty of September 1601.

The same day Master Marshall was dispatched into the Pale, to draw the
Companies thereabouts toward Mounster, and to procure from the Council at
Dublyn all things necessary for that business. Sir Henry Dauers was sent for
the Companies about Armagh, and Sir John Barkeley had direction to bring other
Companies that were laid about the Nauan. And the L. Deputy the same night rode
to Kiltenan, a Castle and dwelling of the Lord of Dunboyne, being a great days
journey, where he was assured that the Spaniards were landed and entered into
Kinsale. The five and twenty (...) Lordship rode to Clommell, where Sir
Nicholas Walsh, one of the Council, came to (...), and there it was resolved;
his Lordship should go on to Cork, and so to proceed as there should be
cause. The six and twentieth his Lordp. rode to Glonowre, the Lord (...)
Castle. The seven and twentieth his Lordship rode from Glonowre to Cork,
accompanied with the Lord President, Sir Robert Gardener, and Sir Nicholas
Walsh, Counselors.

The eight and twenty day his Lordship was advertised by a Scot coming from
Lisbone, that the Spaniards sent to Kinsale, were six thousand in number,
commanded by Don Iean del' Aguyla, who had been general in Britain, that one
thousand of them scattered by tempest, were since arrived at Baltemore. That
they were directed to Kinsale, with promise of great succors by the pretended
Earl of Desmona, lately taken and sent into England, and by Florence mac
Carty, whom the Lord President upon suspicion had lately taken, and in like
sort sent prsoner into England. That the Spaniards gave out, that as soon as
they could have horses from Tyrone, and other Irish rebels, in which hope they
had brought four hundred, (or as after was credibly advertised 1600 saddles),
they would keep the field, and therefore would not fortify at Kinsale, and
that upon the revolt of this Country, the King of Spain meant from these
parts to invade England.

Whereupon the same eight and twenty day the Lord Deputy resolved in Counsel,
that letters should be written into England, that it was given out, the
Spaniards in Mounster were six thousand, and that of certain they were five
thousand commanded by Don Iean del' Aguila, whereof three thousand were arrived
in Kinsale, and the Vice Admiral Siriago, (for Don Diego de Brastino, was
Admiral of the Fleet), with four other ships scattered by tempest, were
arrived at Baltemore. That no Irish of account had repaired to them; excepting
some dependants of Florence mac Carty, (of whose imprisonment the Spaniards had
not heard before their landing), who was the perswader of their coming to that
Port. That to keep Rebels from ioining with them, it behooved us presently to
keep the field. That it was requisite to send some of the Queens ships, who
might prevent their supplies, and give safety to our supplies, both out of
England and from Coast to Coast, and might bring us to Carke Artillery for
battery, with munition and victuals. Likewise to write presently for three
hundred Northern horse, and for the two thousand foot at Chester, and two
thousand more. To write for six pieces of battery, the biggest to be Demi
Cannon for the field, with carriages and bullets. To certify the Lords that
Artillery could not be brought from Dablyn, because the Irish ships had not
masts and tackle strong enough to take them in and out, (besides that, Easterly
and Northerly winds only serving to bring them; were rate at this season of
the year;) and that the greatest Pieces in Mounster lay vnmounted on the
ground. And lastly, to write for powder for five thousand shot, and for six
Pieces of Battery, (which must be some sixty last), and for fifty tun of
lead, with like quantity of match, and five thousand Pyoners tools.

The same day his Lordship was by letters advertised, that a Friet in a
Soldiers habit, was dispatched from Kinsale the four and twenty of September,
and passed through Clommell, naming himself James Flemming, and from thence
went to Waterford, where he abode few days, and named himself Richard
Galloway. That he had Bulls from the Pope, with large indulgences to those, who
should aid the Spaniards, (sent by the Catholic King to give the Irish,
liberty from the English tyranny, and the exercise of the true old Apostolic
Roman Religion), and had authority to excommunicate those that should by
letters, by plots, or in person join with her Majesty, (whom the Pope had
excommunicated, and thereby absolved all her Subjects from their oath of
alleagiance). That every general Vicar in each Diocese, had charge to keep
this secret till the Lord Deputy was passed to Cork, when he assured them, his
Lordship should either in a general defection not be able to understand these
proceedings, or hearing thereof should be so employed, as he should have no
leisure to prevent them. That he gave out, the Spaniards at Kinsale were 10000,
besides 2000 dispersed by tempest, which were landed at Baltimore, having
treasure, munition, and victuals for two years. And that Tyrone would presently
come up to assist them at Kinsale, and to furnish them with horses, which they
only expected from him; and had brought saddles and furniture for them.
Lastly, advice therein was given to his Lordship to write to the corporate
Towns and chief Lords, not to believe these fabulous reports, but to take
advice (not given out for fear of their defection, but only for their good)
to continue loyal subjects.

The nine and twentieth his Lordship with the Lord President and the above
named Counselors, took some horse for guard, and rode to view the Town and
harbor of Kinsaile; and the Spaniards Fleet, that upon that view, they might
resolve of the fittest place for our Camp to sit down by them. They found the
Spaniards possessed of the Town, and the greatest part of their shipping to
have put to Sea for Spain, (for of thirty four ships arriving there, only
twelve now remained in the Harbor, some of the other being lately put out, and
then seen under sail), so as they saw there was no more to be done, till our
forces should be arrived out of the North and Lemster, and we enabled from
England to keep our selves from breaking, after we should take the field.

The first of October his Lordship and the Counsel here, wrote to the Lords in
England, according to the project resolved on the eight and twentieth of
September. Further beseeching their Lordships to pardon their earnest writing
for munition and victuals, though great proportions of them were already sent,
and that in respect the magazines formerly appointed for the best, when the
place of the Spaniards descent was unknown, were so far divided, as we could
not without great difficulties make use of them in these parts, and at this
time, when for the present the Spaniard was Master of the Sea, and the Queens
forces being drawn toward Kinsaile, the rebels might easily intercept them by
land, but especially for that great use might be made of those provisions in
the very places where now they were, if Tirone come into Mounster with his
forces, as no doubt he would, namely, the magazin at Lymricke would serve
excellently for the prosecution formerly intended, and after to be made in
Connaght, though by sea or land they could not be brought to Cork, without
great difficulties and dangers. Adding that for the present, the Lord Deputy
was forced to draw most of the forces of the North into Mounster, leaving only
the Fortes guarded, and so the Pale was not able to defend it self against
Tyrone, whereas he hoped to have been enabled both to continue the prosecution
in the North, and also to besiege the Spaniards at one and the same time,
whereof yet he did not altogether despair, so as their Lordships would
speedily furnish such things, as were earnestly desired by them, for the good
of the service; being confidently of opinion, that the only way to make a
speedy end of the rebellion, and as quick a dispatch of the Spaniards out of
Ireland, was to make the war roundly both in the North, and in Mounster at
one time. Also aduertising that the Spaniards (as they for certain heard)
brought with them not only sixteen hundred Saddles, upon the Rebels promise
of horse, but also great store of Arms for the common people, upon hope they
had given them of their general revolt; and humbly praying their Lordships,
that in regard our greatest strength and advantage consisted in our horses they
would cause a thousand quarters of Oats to be speedily sent for Cork, without
which store, our horses were like to starve within a short time, and in case
they approved the prosecution in the North to be continued without
intermission, then they would be pleased to send the like quantity of Oats
to be kept in store at Carlingford. Lastly, praying their Lordships to send
hither a Master Gunner, with six Canoniers.

The second of October, his Lordship wrote this following letter to Master
Secretary.

SIr I do think we shall find these forces out of Spain to be above four
thousand, abundantly provided with Munition, Artillery, and Arms (besides
their own use, to arm the Country people, great store of treasure, and of
all victuals but flesh. All the Chiefes that are in rebellion, and all the
loose sword men, will presently take their parts. The Lords that we have
reclaimed, if we do not defend them from Tirone, must and will return unto
him. Upon the first good countenance the Spanish army shall make, I fear me,
many will declare themselves for them, but upon the first blow we shall receive
(from the which I hope God will preserve us), I doubt there would fall out a
general revolt. The Commander of the Spanish Army is one of the greatest
Soldiers the King of Spain has, the Captain under him are most ancient men,
their Bands, some out of Italy, some from the Terceraes, and few Bisonioes.
They are specially well armed, all their shot (as I heard) muskets, they have
brought sixteen hundred saddles, and Arms for horsemen, of light shot,
whereof they make account to be provided in Ireland, and so may they be, as
well as in any part of Christendom, and likewise to have horses for their
saddles, but therein I think they will be deceived. There are not yet come
unto us any other forces, but such (...) only I found in this Province. Upon
the arrival of the first troops (which I look for howerly) we shall send you
word of some good blows that will pass between us, for I mean to dwell
close by them (by the grace of God) to put them to it. Sir, the King of Spain
has now begun to invade her Majesty's Kingdoms, if only to put Ireland in
general commotion, he has chosen the worst place, if to do that, and to lay
a sudden foundation for the war of England, the best: if he has been
deceived in any expectation here, the State of Spain must now make good the
error, and doubtless is engaged to supply all defects. The commodity that is
offered unto her Majesty is, that she may sooner prevent then Spain provide:
Now as her Majesty's faithful workman, I am bold to propound in my own task,
that it may please her to send presently good part of her royal Fleet, and
with them such provisions for battery as we did write for, and at the least so
many horse and foot as by our letter we have sued for, with victuals and
munitions in abundance for them. It will be fit that this Winter there be a
sharp war made in Vlster, which will keep the Spaniard from any important
succor, and ruin for ever the Traitors, if the war be well followed. If it
be made by the several Governors, the effect will not be so great: if you
will have it performed thoroughly, you must make one Governor of all Vlster, and
the fittest man that can be chosen in England or Ireland is Sir Arthur
Chichester. If you resolve on that course, from him you must continually
receive his demands, only of the three hundred horse we did write for, it
were good he had sent him out of the North one hundred. For foot, if you send
him out of England to supply the Companies at Loughfoyle and Knockefergus,
above our proportion, it will be much better: for Armagh and those parts shall
receive from us. This course I hope will soon make an end of the war in
Ireland, of Spain in Ireland, and perchance of Spain for a long time with
England. I doubt not but you will conceive this action to be of no less
importance then it is. What goodly Havens are in these parts for shipping, how
many fighting men of the Irish may be from hence by the King of Spain carried
for an invasion of England; (the want of which two kinds has been his chief
impediment hitherto) you well know. Believe Sir, out of my experience here, if
the King of Spain should prevail in Ireland, he may carry above ten thousand
men from hence, that joined with his Army, will be of more use for the invasion
of England, then any that can be chosen out of any part of Christen dome. And
now Sir, that you know (as I hope) the worst, I cannot dissemble how confident
I am, to beat these Spanish Dons, as well as ever I did our Irish Macks and
Oes, and to make a perfect conclusion of the war of Ireland as soon, as if
this interruption had never happened, if we have Gods blessing and the
Queens, and those ordinary means without the which none but infinite powers
can work. I beseech the eternal God preserve her Majesty and her Kingdoms,
and send me the happiness to kiss her royal hands, with the conscience of
having done her the service I desire. And so Sir I do wish you all happiness,
and will be ever

From Cork the 2 of October 1601. Yours Sir most assured to do you service,
Mountioy


The same day his Lordship wrote another letter to Master Secretary as
follows.

SIR here are diverse worthy men very fit to have charge, who have followed the
wars here as voluntaries to their very great expense, and look now by my means
to have command upon the coming over of the next Companies, if you send more
then serve only for supplies. I have no means to keep them from going thither,
to use the help of their friends and get them Companies there, but by
promising them any thing that I can do for them here, for by that course I
conceive I ease you of that trouble, which their importunate suits would breed
you, and hold them here ready for any service upon the sudden, thinking it no
policy at this time to spare any, that may give furtherance to the great work
we have in hand. If it will please you to do me that favor, to procure that
the Companies to come over, may be appointed Captains of my nomination, I
shall be able to satisfy those Gentlemen's expectations, who I am persuaded
will be fitter for this employment then any that can be sent from thence, and
they finding their advancement here, where they are to be tied to their task,
will (in my judgment) endeavor to deserve the best, being in the eye of him
that was the means thereof, which for the service sake chiefly I affect,
though I can be content Sir to acknowledge unto you, that I would gladly have
the World see, that I am no less graced in my employments then my
Predecessors have been; for this people do not little observe it, and at
this present especially I hold it a matter of that consequence, as without it,
I shall be the less able to weeld this great business, with that success
that otherwise I am hopeful of: We have not here any of the Queens Pinnisses,
whereof at this time there is great want. At my coming out of the North,
althougst the Rebels in general did give out, that they were out of hope of
foreign succors this year, (I think in policy, and to make us flow to call
for supplies), yet Tyrlogh mac Henry did assure me upon his life, that the
Spaniards would come, and further told me that one Bathe Agent for Tyrone in
Spain, and since returned to him, was sent into Scotland, whence he was
presently to return: Whereupon I delivered a description of the man to
Captain Button, and willed him to lie upon the Coasts to apprehend him,
assuring my self that I should have wrested out of him the certainty of all
things. Since that time I have heard nothing of that Captain, nor of the
Queens Pinnis under his command. I pray you Sir let us have some of the
Queens ships with expedition, for without them we shall not be able to
convey any thing upon this Coast from place to place, and the ways by land
will be dangerous. So Sir I wish you all happiness.

The third of October, his Lordship and the Counsel here wrote to the Lords in
England this following letter.

IT may please your Lordships. Having seriously considered of the great work
we have now in hand, we observe that besides the foreign enemy the Spaniard
with whom we are first to deal, and the known Traitors and Rebels already in
arms, there are two other sorts of people here, which if we do not carefully
provide for, they will soon adheare unto the rest, and make their party so
strong, as in judgment we cannot see how we shall be well able to encounter
it, unless by good providence it be prevented, which is the mark we aim at.
The one of these two sorts is the subject, who has lands and goods to take to,
for whom we must provide defense, else with his liuelyhood we are sure to
loose him, and therefore we will omit nothing that our means will stretch to,
that may preserve, cherish, and content him. The other sort are such as have no
living, nor any thing that will afford them maintenance, and yet hitherto have
not showed themselves disloyal, though all of them be Swordmen, and many
Gentlemen by descent, and are able to draw after them many followers. To this
sort we hear for certain, the Spaniards make offer of great entertainment,
and if we should not in some sort do the like, we cannot in reason look but
they must and will fall to their party. We have therefore out of this
necessity resolved, to take as many of them into her Majesty's intertainement,
as we have any hope will truly stick unto us, being confident that we shall
make good use of them against the Spaniard; for we mean thoroughly to put them
to it, though if we should fail in our expectation, and find them cold or
slack in serving with us, yet will it be a great countenance to the service
to show the persons of so many men on our side, where otherwise they would have
been against us: and of this we can assure your Lordships, that when they have
served our turn against the Spaniards, until we have freed ourselves of
them, we can without danger case her Majesty of that charge, and will no longer
hold them in entertainment. In the mean time they shall spend little of the
Queens victual, but being paid of the new coin, provide for themselves,
which may be with less oppression to the Country, then if in that sort they
were not entertained, for then they would spoil all, and put out such as
otherwise will continue in subjection. Of this course of ours, we humbly desire
your Lordships approbation (though we will be very sparing to entertain more
then shall be necessary) and warrant to Master Treasurer to make them payment,
and hold us we beseech you excused for resolving it, before we acquainted your
Lordships there with all, seeing we were enforced thereunto by necessity for
the service sake (since many of them were active, and would otherwise have
served the enemy), and we could not sooner write unto your Lordships of it,
and even so, etc.

The same day Sir Benjamin Berry came to Cork with his Lordships Guard which
he commanded, and with some other Companies (for till this time his Lordship
had no part of the Army with him, but only the Bands of the Mounster List.) The
ninth day the Companies came to Cork, which Sir Richard Wingfield the Marshall
had drawn out of the Pale, and Sir John Barkeley Sericant Mayor had drawn
from the frontiers of Lemster and Connaght. The tenth day being Saturday, the
Companies came to Cork, which Sir Henry Dauers had drawn from Armagh and the
Northern Garrisons. And this day Sir Richard Wingfield Marshall, and Sir John
Barkeley Serieant Mayor, were sent with some horse and foot, to view and choose
a fit ground near Kinsale, where our Army might sit down to besiege the
Town. The next day some horse and foot were sent out to keep the Irish from
selling victuals to the Spaniards. The twelfth two French men ran from the
Spaniards to us, who confessed that three thousand Spaniards landed at the
first in Kinsale, beside six hundred since artiued in a great ship scattered
from them by a tempest.

This day one advertised his Lordship, that under pretense of favoring the
Spaniards descent, he had spoken with their General; who inquired whether the
L. Deputy in person came to view Kinsale, and with what numbers, to which he
answered, that he was there in person with four hundred foot lodged not far
off out of sight, and four troops of horse. That he asked what soldiers the
Lord Deputy had, to which he answered some eight thousand, besides the daily
arrival of others of the Army in Lemster and the North: what soldiers were
new, and what weapons they had, and what artillery the Lord Deputy had, to
which he answered with addition to our strength. He said that the General
presumed by the contrary winds, that they in England heard not of his arrival,
and though he told him the English Fleet was at Plymoth, he seemed not to
believe it, and made countenance, that they should have enough to do, to
defend the English coast from invasion, and much insisted upon the copper money
the Queen sent, with purpose to make the Irish her slaves: but promised gold
and silver from his Mastor. That he inquired to Tyrone and Odonnel, seeming to
distaste their being so far off, and the way to them being dangerous, and his
own want of horses, and therefore prayed this Gentleman to certify Tirrell
and the Lord of Leytrim, that he expected Tyrone with horses and beeues, which
he prayed them to supply in the mean time, both sending him notice before
they came, adding that himself had Bread, Rice, Pease, and Wine for eighteen
months, and store of treasure. And that he inquired much after the strength of
Cork, and the Queens new Fort there. Lastly, he advertised, that the ships
returned were fourteen (of them six the Kings own of one thousand run the
least, in which was the Admiral General, Saint liage, and the great Admiral
of Castill, Don Diego, de Bruxero.) That the twelve remaining were smaller, and
embarged (or arctied) to serve the King, whereof some were Irish. That the
ships at Baltemore had 700 men. That by his view, there were 3000 in Kinsale
royally provided of all provisions for war, having many saddles for horses; and
that upon Tyrones expected coming, they intended to take the field.

The thirteenth it was resolved we should presently take the field, though we
had not as yet any provisions fit for that purpose, but that day and the two
days following we could not stir from Cork, by reason of extreme rain and
foul weather. Neither artillery, munitio^ nor victuals were yet come from
Dublin, yet it was thought fitter thus unprovided to take the field, then by
discovery of our wants to give the Irish opportunity and courage to join with
the Spaniard.

CHAP. II. Of the besieging of the Spaniards at Kinsale, with the delivery of
the Town to the Lord Deputy and their return into Spain in the same year
1601.
THe 16 day of October, his Lordship with the Army rose from Cork, and
encamped five miles short of Kinsale, at a place called Owny Buoy. The 17 the
army rose, and marching toward Kinsale, encamped within half a mile of the
town under a hill called Knock Robin, where some few shot of the Spaniards
offered to disturb our sitting down, but were soon beaten home. We had at
that time scarce so much Powder as would serve for a good days fight, neither
had we any competent number of tools, so as we could not entrench our
selves, for these provisions were not yet come from Dublin. That day Captain
Morgan came out of England with one of the Queens ships, and our Master Gunner
came from Waterford, aduertising that some ships of provisions, sent from
Dublin, were come to that Port where they were enforced to stay by a contrary
wind, being Southerly. The eighteenth the Army lay still, and we viewed the
fittest places to incampe near the Town: but our Artillery being not come,
we removed not. And that night the Spaniards made a salley, much greater then
the former, to disturb our Camp, but our men soon repelled them without any
loss to us. The ninteenth we lay still, expecting provisions, and that day,
our men sent to view the ground, had some slight skirmishes with the enemy, and
Deu Iean after professed, that he never saw any come more willingly to the
sword, then our men did. That night Sir John Barkeley was appointed to give
Alarm to the Town, who did beat the Spanish guardes set without the Town,
into their trenches. The next night after, some sixteen hundred Spaniards came
to the top of the hill, under which we lay, either with purpose to cut off
some of the scouts, or to attempt some thing on the Camp: But Sir John
Barkeley lying with a party of ours not exceeding three hundred, discovered
them, and skirmishing with them, killed some dead in the place, took some
Arms and other spoil, and hurt diverse, and did beat them back to the Town,
without the loss of any one of our men, and only three hurt.

The one and twentieth Cormock Mac Dermot an Irish man, chief of a Country
called Ministry, came with the rising out (or soldiers) of his Country, to
show them to the Lord Deputy, who to the end the Spaniards might see the mere
Irish served on our side, commanded them at their return to pass by the
Spanish trenches, made without the Town on the top of the hill, but lodged
strong parties (out of the enemies fight) to second them. The Irish at first
went on well, and did beat the Spanish guards from their ground, but according
to their custom, suddenly fell off, and so left one of the Lord Presidents
horsemen engaged, who had charged two Spaniards: but Sir William Godolphin
commanding the Lord Deputies troop, when he saw him in danger, and unhorsed,
did charge one way upon their gross, and Captain Henry Barkley Cornet of the
same troop, charged another way at the same instant, and drove their shot into
the trenches, and so rescued the horseman with his horse, coming off with one
man hurt, and only one horse killed, from the great numbers of Spanish shot,
whereof four were left dead in the place, diverse carried off dead into the
Town, and many hurt.

The two and twentieth day Captain Button arrived at Cork with the Queens
Pinnis, called the Moon, which wafted other ships bringing victuals and
munition from Dublyn, and the same day came to the Camp, aduertising that the
same ships were come from Waterford toward Cork. That night his Lordship
sent him back, to bring his ship about to Kinsale Harbor, and to take with
him Captain Wards ship from Oyster Haven, where it lay to guard the victual
and munition we brought with us.

These two ships were commanded to annoy the Castle of Rincoran, seated close
upon the harbor of Kinsale, and possessed by the Spaniard; but after they had
spent many shot upon the Castle without any great effect, because their
Ordinance was small, they lay still to keep the Harbor, that neither the
Castle nor the Town might be relieved by water, which was the chief end of
their coming. The three and twentieth the Dublyn shipping arrived at Cork, and
were directed to come presently to Oyster Haven, where we might unlade the
Artillery (which could not be brought by land), and other provisions for the
present use of the Army.

The four and twenty day it was resolved, we should rise and incampe close by
the Town, but the shipping being not come about with the artillery and other
necessaries, that day was spent in dispatching for England. And by night
Captain Blany and Captain Flower were sent out, to lie with five hundred
foot, to intertaine the Spaniards which were drawn out of the Town, but they
came no further, and so our men returned.

This day his Lordship and the Counsel wrote to the Lords in England this
following letter.

IT may please your Lordships, since our last dispatch from Cork, which bare
date the fourth of this present month, we spent some time there, expecting the
coming of the old Companies out of the Pale and Northern parts, and hoping to
be supplied with victuals, munition, and other necessaries from Dublyn, without
which we saw it would be to little purpose to take the field. But when we had
stayed there till the sixteenh, and were not provided of munition, (none being
come to us from Dublyn or from Lymricke, whether we had likewise sent to have
some brought to us), and wanting both victuals, and most of the provisions
belonging necessarily to so great a siege, yet to inuest the Town where the
Spaniards are lodged, from receiving succors both of victuals and of such as
were disposed to join with them, and withal to avoid the opinion, which the
Country began to conceive of our weakness, because we did not draw into the
field, we resolved the sixteenth day to rise, and the next day did sit down
within less then half a mile of the Town, keeping continual guardes round
about the enemy. We can assure your Lordships that we do not think our selves
much stronger (if any thing at all) in numbers then they are, whose army at
their setting to sea, did bear the reputation of six thousand, and we have
cause to judge them (because since our last letters to your Lordships, there
arrived another ship at Kinsale, which brought five hundred men more unto them)
now to be above four thousand by the Pole. In both these points of number in
reputation or by Pole, they differ not much from ours, for it may please your
Lordships to consider, that the whole force we can draw into this Province
(leaving the Pale, Connaght, and the North provided for, as it may appear by
this enclosed note they are in some measure) does not exceed in list 7000, and
of those we are enforced to leave some part upon the borders toward Lymricke,
to be some stay to the whole Country, and it must in reason be thought, that
our Companies generally are weak in numbers, seeing they have had no supplies
of a long time, and that we desire two thousand to reinforce them, besides that
many are taken out of them for necessary wards, some are sick, and many of the
Northern Companies lie yet hurt, since the late great skirmishes against
Tyrone, which they performed with good success but a little before they were
sent for to come hither. We do assuredly expect, that many will join with
Tyrone, (if he only come up toward these parts), and almost all the Swordmen
of this Kingdom, if we should not keep the field, and the countenance of
being Masters thereof, how ill provided soever we do find our selves.
Wherefore we most humbly and earnestly desire your Lordships to hasten away at
the least the full number of such supplies of horse and foot as we do write
for in our last, and that it will please your Lordships to believe from us,
that if the Country should join with Tyrone, and make a defection, our chief
security will be in the horse we must receive out of England, for the most of
these here already, are much weakened and harazed out, with their continual
employment in every service. It may also please your Lordships to consider,
that in a siege, where four thousand such men as these Spaniards, are
possessed of any place whatsoever, there will be necessarily required royal
provisions, and great numbers to force them, neither can it be thought, but
the sword and season of the year will continually waste our Army, so as we are
enforced earnestly to desire your Lordships, while this action is in hand, to
send us continual supplies, without which this Army will not be able to
subsist. And although (grieved with her Majesty's huge expense) we are loath to
propound for so many men as are conceived to be needful and profitable for
the present prosecution of this dangerous war, yet we are of opinion, that
the more men her Majesty can presently spare, to be employed in this Country,
the more safe and sudden end it will make of her charge. And not without cause
we are moved to solicit your Lordships to consider thereof, since we now
perceive that we have an Army of old and disciplined soldiers before us of
four thousand Spaniards (that assuredly expect a far greater supply), and much
about twenty thousand fighting men, of a furious and warlike nation of the
Irish, which we may justly suspect will all declare themselves against us, if
by our supplies and strength out of England, they do not see us likely to
pre^uaile. These Prouincials (a few of Carbry only excepted, appertaining to
Florence Mac Carty) do yet stand firm, but no better then neutralitie is to be
expected from those which are best affected, nor is it possible to discover
their affections, until Tyrone with the Irish Forces do enter into the
Province, who (as the Council at Dublin write) is providing to come hither.
The supplies from Spain are presently expected: If they should arrive before
our Army be strengthened out of England, or before this Town of Kinsale be
taken, it must be thought a general defection through out the Kingdom
(wherein we may not except the Towns) will ensue, and then the war will be
drawn to a great length, and the event doubtful. If the Queens ships do not
in time come to Kinsale, our task will be very heavy, with this small Army
to force so strong an enemy, so well provided of all necessaries for the
war. Wherefore we humbly beseech the sending of them away, which will not
only give us a speedy course to win the Town, but also assure the coasts
for our supplies, and give an exceeding stay to the Country (the enemy
fearing nothing more, and the subject desiring nothing so much as the arrival
of her Majesty's Fleet.) The sixty lasts of Powder and six pieces of battery
with their necessaries, the victuals and all things else, written for in our
former letters, we humbly desire may presently be dispatched hither, and
although so great a mass of victuals, as is needful, cannot be sent at an
instant, we desire it may be sent as it can be provided, and directed for
the haven of Cork. What we shall be able to do till our supplies come, we
cannot say: but what we shall have reason to fear, except they come in time,
your Lordships may judge. Only we assure your Lordships, that her Majesty
(with the help of God) shall find, we will omit nothing that is possible to
be done, nor shun any thing that may be suffered, to do her the service
we owe unto her. If in the mean time, by all our letters both to the Council
at Dublin, and all others in this Country, to whom we have occasion to write,
we give out these Spaniards to be in number not three thousand, in their
means scant and miserable, in their persons weak and sickely, and in their
hopes dismayed and amazed; we hope your Lordships will conceive we do that, but
for the countenancing of our party, and to keep as many as we can from falling
from us. On the other side, Don Iean de l'Aguyla the Spanish General, has
used many arguments to move the Irish to defection, and among other (which is
very forceable and fearful unto their wavering spirits), he tells them, that
this is the first great action that the King his Master has undertaken, and
assures them he has protested, that he will not receive scorn in making good
his enterprise, and that he will rather hazard the loss of his Kingdoms, then
of his Honor in this enterprise. The Priests likewise (to terrify the
consciences) threaten hell and damnation to those of the Irish, that do not
assist them (having brought Bulls for that purpose), and send abroad
Indulgences to those that take their parts. These and such like policies (as
their offering of six shillings a day to every horseman that will serve them)
do so prevail with this barbarous Nation, as it is a wonder unto us, that
from present staggering they fall not to flat defection, as they will soon
do, if they once discover them of ability to give us one blow, before the
coming of our supplies and means, which we are most earnestly to solicit
your Lordships to hasten, assuring your Lordships that nothing will more
confirm the state of this Kingdom, then the arrival of her Majesty's Fleet,
which we are resolved by the best judgments may be employed in these parts to
prevent the arrival of foreign succors. Yet in the mean time we will omit
nothing that shall be feasible with the force we have, neither have we been
idle since our coming hither, having had continual skirmishes, whereof two
especially were well performed by our men. The first the twentieth of this
month, when the enemy by night sallyed with more then a thousand foot, to cut
off a guard of horse we kept near the Town, and purposing to attempt
something on our Camp; but three hundred of our men led by Sir John Barkley
did encounter them and beat them back, with loss of many of their men, and
some bodies left in the field, by whose spoil our men were encouraged, and
returned with triumph. The other, the next day when Cormock Mac Dermot, chief
Lord of Muskerie, coming to the Camp, to show us his rising out, we willed
him to return by the Spaniards trenches, that they might see the Irish serve
on our side against them, where they entertained a good skirmish, but soon
falling off, a horseman was engaged and unhorsed: but Sir William Godolphin
with my troop rescued him, charging close to their trenches, in a way flancked
by two trenches, and filled with great numbers of shot, yet returned (to our
great marvel) with little or no hurt, having beaten them from their strength,
and killed many of their men, whereof they left some behind them, besides
others we saw them carry off. From this beginning we hope God will so bless
our just quarrel, as shortly we shall have cause to inform you of better
success. We understand that Tyrone will presently come hither, which if he
do, your Lordships can judge how weak we are to deal both with him and the
Spaniards.

The same day his Lordship wrote this following letter to Master Secretary.

SIr, what we desire, and how our affairs are disposed of, you have by our
general letters to my Lords. Now I will desire, that my unremovable affection
may be held as a conclusion so absolutely granted, that I may no more trouble
you with any ceremonies; for you shall find, that I will not value my life,
nor any fortune of this world to make you assured demonstration thereof, when I
shall have the happiness to have power and occasion to show it. Only now
touching the point of my Lord Presidents coming over, to take from you any
doubt, that in my own particular I could not earnestly concur with you, I
do protest on my Christianity, that I know no man in this Kingdom, that I
could have been better pleased, should have been the deliverer of my affections
and actions, then himself, and by him unto you, and from you might have
delivered and received much, which I desire most to do; neither do I know any,
who I conceive could have delivered more sufficiently the present state of this
Kingdom, nor propounded to greater purpose for her Majesty's service the
course that will be fittest for you in England to embrace. But against mine
own private desire, he has opposed his own peremptory distaste of the motion,
with this protestation, to hate me if I should urge it. Besides, it seems to
me against the public commodity, in so weighty a cause to send away so worthy
an instrument, and deprive our selves of the assistance we receive thereby at
this time, (especially the stage of this great action being chiefly in his own
Province, in the which the success of his government does best show what
authority his judgment and presence does carry). So that I conclude, for your
sake, his own and mine, but especially for the public, at this time he cannot
well be spared from hence, besides that he has vowed to fall out with all, if
it be urged. And although these spoils of ambition are of all other the most
unwillingly shared by men of our profession; yet I protest I am glad, even in
this great goal of honor, to run equally with him, and to participate with
all his adventures. This band of the honor we bear to you, and mutual
affection to each other, having for chief knot the service of our dearest
Sovereign, there is no corruption that may be likely to dissolve it; and
therefore I hope it is tied by the hand of God, and it shall not be in the
power of man to loose it. I am assured, that you and I think, the State of
England cannot but conceive the importance of our work: for now I act a est
alia between England and Spain, and we that do play the game, have least
interest in the stake, though we will win or loose our lives, to show that we
do not play booty: wherefore I hope you will not forget us, for vestrares
agitur: And let this only argument, which I could confirm with many
circumstances, oppose it self against the Counsels of those, that will sell
their birth rites in Heaven it self, to please their own envious and partial
pallates, that the war of the Low Countries was begun, and has been
maintained with few more natural Spaniards, then are arrived here already; and
that putting arms and discipline into this people, they are more warlike then
any of his auxiliaries. Sir I will trouble you no longer, being desirous to do
somewhat worth the writing. God send us an Easterly wind, and unto you as much
happiness as I do wish unto my own soul.

From the Camp by Kinsale this 24 of October 1601. Yours Sir most assured for
ever to do you service, Mountioy.


The five and twenty the Army was ready to rise, but the weather falling out
very foul, direction was given not to dislodge. Four natural Spaniards came
this day to us from the Enemy, who the next day were sent to Cork. This night
Sir John Barkeley went out with some three hundred foot, having with him
Captain Flower, Captain Morris, and Captain Bostocke, and fell into the
Spaniards trenches, and did beat them to the Town, fell into the gate with
them, and killed and hurt above twenty of the Spaniards, having but three hurt
of our men. Hitherto we lodged in Cabbins, so as it rained upon us in our beds,
and when we changed our shirts.

The six and twenty the Army dislodged and encamped on an hill on the
Northside before Kinsale, called the Spittle, somewhat more then musket shot
from the Town, and there entrenched strongly. When we fat down, we discovered
that the Spaniards had gotten a prey of two hundred or three hundred Cowes, and
many sheep, which were (in an Island as it seemed) upon the South-east side of
the Town, beyond the water, which we could not pass but by going eight or
nine mile about, where there was a neck of land to go into it. Captain Taffe
being sent with horse and foot, used such expedition in that business, as he
attained the place before night, and (...) hot skirmish recovered the prey,
save only some twenty Cowes that the Spaniards had killed, although they were
under the guard of a Castle, called Castle Ny Park, which the Spaniards had in
possession.

The disposal of the whole Army in Ireland the seven and twentieth of October
1601.
Left at Loughfoyle.

Sir Henry Dockwra 50. Sir John Bolles 50. Horse 100.

Sir Henry Dockwra 200. Sir Matthew Morgan 150. Captain Badby 150. Sr John
Bolles 150. Captain Erington, 100. Captain Vaughan, 100. Captain Bingley,
150. Captain Coach, 100. Captain Basset, 100. Captain Dutton, 100. Captain
Floyde, 100. Captain Oram, 100. Captain Alford, 100. Captain Pinner, 100.
Captain Winsor, 100. Captain Sydley, 100. Captain Atkinson, 100. Captain
Digges, 100. Captain Brook, 100. Captain Stafford, 100. Captain Orrell,
100. Captain Letgh, 100. Captain Sidney, 100. Captain Gower, 150. Captain
Wills, 150. Captain W. N. 100.

Foot 3000.

Horse left at Carickfergus.

Sir Arthur Chichester Governor, 50. Captain John Iephson, 100.

Horse 150.

Foot left at Carickfergus.

Sir Arthur Chichester Governor, 200. Sir Foulke Conway, 150. Captain
Egerton, 100. Captain Norton, 100. Captain Billings, 150. Captain Phillips,
150.

Foot 850.

Foot left in Lecale.

Sir Richard Moryson the Governors Company under his Lieutenant, himself
attending the Lord Deputy at Kinsale, 150.

Horse left in Northern Garrisons.

At the Newrie Sir Francis Stafford, 50. At Mount Norreys, Sir Samuel Bagnol,
50.

Horse, 100.

Foot in the North Garrisons.

At the Newrye Sir Francis Stafford, 200. At Dundalke Captain Freckleton, 100.
At Carlingford Captain Hansard, 100. At Mount Norreys Captain Atherton, 100.
At Arinagh Sir Henry Dauers under his Lieutenant, himself being at Kinsale,
150. At Blackwater, Captain Thomas Williams, 150.

Foot, 800.

Horse left in the Pale, and places adjoining.

In Kilkenny the Earl of Ormond, 50. In Kildare the Earl of Kildare, 50. In
West-meath the Lord of Dunsany, 50. In Lowth Sir Garret Moore, 25.

Horse, 175.

Foot in the Pale.

At Kilkenny the Earl of Ormond, 150. Captain John Masterson, 100. Captain
Thomas Butler, 100. At Carlogh Sir Christopher Saint Laurence 150. Sir Francis
Shane, 100. Sir Tilbot Dillon, 100. Sir Edward Fitz Garret, 100. Sir Henry
Harington, 100. Sir Richard Greame, 100. At the Nasse Sir Laurence Esmond, 150.
In Ophalia Sir George Bourcher, 100. Sir Edwird Harbert, 100. Sir Henry
Warren, 100. In Leax Fort, Sir Francis Rush, 150. To be placed by the Counsel
at Dublin, Sir Henry Power under his Lieutenant, himself being at Kinsale,
150. Sir Samuel Bagnol, 150. Sir William Warren, 100. Captain Guest, 150
Captain Cawfeild, 150. At Kildare the Earl of Kildare, 100. Captain Ocarrol
in his Country, 100. At Kelles the Lord of Dunsany, 150. In West-meath the
Lord of Deluin, 150. Captain Mac Henry, 100. At Ardee Sir Garret Mere, 100.
Captain N. N. 150.

Foot 3150.

Horse left in Connaght.

The Earl of Clanrickard, 50. Captain Wayman, 12.

Horse, 62.

Foot left in Connaght.

Sir Oliver Lambert Governor, 150. The Earl of Clanrickard, 150. Sir Thomas
Bourk 150. Captain Clare, 150. Captain Thomas Bourk, 100. Captain Malbye,
150. Captain Tybbot ne Long, 100. Captain Dauy Bourke, 100. A Company void
for the Judges pay, 100.

Foot 1150.

Total of Horse 587. Total of Foot 9100.

The List of the Army with his Lordship at Kinsale.
The old Mounster List.

Sir George Carew Lord President, 50. Sir Anthony Cook, 50. Captain Fleming,
25. Captain William Taffe, 50.

Horse 175.

Foot of the old List.

The Lord President, 150. The Earl of Thomond, 150. Lord Barry, 100. Lord
Audley, 150. Sir Charles Wilmot, 150. Master Treasurer, 100. Captain Roger
Haruey, 150. Captain Thomas Spencer, 150. Captain George Flower, 100.
Captain William Saxey. 100. Captain Garret Dillon, 100. Captain Nuse, 100.
Sir Richard Percy 150. Sir Francis Barkeley, 100. Captain Power, 100. A
Company for the Earl of Desmonds use, 100.

Foot 1950.

New Companies sent into Mounster lately, which arrived and were put into pay
the fourth of September past.
The Lord President added to his Company, 50. The Earl of Thomond added to his
Company, 50. Sir George Thorneton, 100. Captain Skipwith, 100. Captain
Morris, 100. Captain Kemish, 100, Captain North, 100. Captain Owslye, 100.
Captain Fisher, 100. Captain York, 100. Captain Heart, 100. Captain Lisle,
100. Captain Rauenseroft, 100. Cap. Rich. Hansard, 100. Captain George
Greame, 100. Captain Yeluerton, 100. Captain Panton, 100. Captain Cullom,
100. Captain Hobby, 100. Captain Gowen Haruy, 100. Captain Coote, 100.

Foot 2000.

Horse brought from the North and the Pale to Kinsale.
The Lord Deputies troop, 100. Sir Henry Dauers, 100. Master Marshall, 50.
Sir Christopher Saint Laurence, 25. Sir Henry Harrington, 25. Sir Edward
Harbert, 12. Sir William Warren, 25. Sir Richard Greame, 50. Sir Oliver Saint
John's, 25. Sir Francis Rush, 12. Captain George Greame, 12.

Horse 436.

Foot that Sir John Barkeley brought from the borders of Connaght to Kinsale.
Sir John Barkley, 200. Sir Arthur Savage, 150. Sir Oliver Saint John's, 200.
Sir John Dowdall, 100. Captain Kingsmill, 100. Captain George Blount, 100.
Captain Bosteck, 100.

Foot 950.

Foot brought out of the Pale by Master Marshall, and from the Northern
Garrisons by Sir Henry Dauers to Kinsale.
The Lord Deputies Guard, 200. Master Marshall, 150. Sir Benjamin Berry, 150.
Sir William Fortescue, 150. Sir James Fitz-piers, 150. Sir Thomas Loftus, 100.
Sir Henry Follyet, 150. Captain Edward Blany, 150. Captain Josias Bodley,
150. Captain Rotheram, 150. Captain Thomas Roper, 150. Captain Roe, 150.
Captain Treuer, 100. Captain Ralph Constable, 100.

Foot 2000.

At Kinsale, Horse 611. Foot 6900.

Total of the whole Army in Ireland, Horse 1198. Foot 16000.

Of the six thousand nine hundred foot at Kinsale in Mounster, one Company of
one hundred was converted to the Earl of Desmonds use (who was then kept in
England), and some were placed upon the borders of the Province, to be a stay
to the Country. And all the old Bands called out of the North, the Pale, and
Connaght were very deficient in number, having been long worn out in
skirmishes, (...) and sicknesses, without any supplies lately sent out of
England, though much and often desired. These six thousand nine hundred foot
were distributed into Regiments, commanded by Colonels, as shall appear at the
increase of the List the next month.

The seven and twentieth day, our Artillery and provisions sent from Dublin,
were landed at Oyster Haven, our munition was brought into the Camp, and the
front of the quarter that faced the Town, and both the (...) of our (...) were
more strongly fortified, and the Camp was round about entrenched, and all
those works perfected, which could not be done the day before, by reason of
the foul weather.

Now the Spaniards held the Castle of Rincorane from their first landing, and
because it commanded the Harbor of Kinsale, so that our shipping could not
safely land our provisions near the Camp, it was thought fit to make the
taking thereof our first work. To which purpose Sir John Barkeley, Sir William
Godolphin, and Captain Josias Bodley Trench-Master, were sent to choose a fit
place to plant our Artillery against the Castle. The 28 day two Coluerings
which had not been long used, were made fit, and the next day they were
mounted. The Spaniards were in the town four thousand strong, and we had not
many more in the Camp by Pole, though our List were more. That night the
Spaniards issued out of the Town by water, to relieve the Castle, but Captain
Buttons ship did beat them back. The thirtieth day the two Culuerings began
to batter the Castle, but one of them brake in the cauening.

In the mean time the Spaniards gave an Alarm to our Camp, and drew a demi
Canon out of the Town, wherewith they played into the Camp, killed two with
the first shot, near the Lord Deputies tent, shot through the next tent of the
Play Master, (wherein we his Lordships Secretaries did lie) brake a barrel of
the Pay-Masters money, with two barrels of the Lord Deputies bear in the next
Cabin, and all the shot were made, fell in the Lord Deputies quarter, and near
his own tent.

This night the Spaniards attempted again to relieve the Castle, but Sir
Richard Porcy having the guard, with the Lord Presidents Regiment under his
command, did repulse them. The one and thirtieth day the coluering battered the
Castle, and that morning another culuering, and a canon, being planted, they
played without intermission, which while we were busily attending, 500 of their
principal Spaniards came out of Kinsale (with show to go to relieve Rincorran
by land) and drew toward a guard we kept between Rincorran and the Town
(leaving a great gross for their seconds, under the walls), under that color
to give a safe passage for their boats to the Castle. Whereupon diverse broken
Companies out of the Regiments in the Camp (being all in arms) drew
voluntarily that way, and Sir Oliver Saint John's sent out Captain Roe his
Lieutenant Colonel and Sir Arthur Savages Lieuienant with one hundred men, and
seeing them likely to draw on a round skirmish, he himself took thirty shot
of his own Company, and went vpto them, where he found Captain Roe and those
with him, skirmishing with the enemies shot, being two hundred, and having
another gross lying near the Town to second them. And seeing the Spaniards
come up close with their Pikes to give a charge, he joined with Captain Roe,
and incountring them, did beat them back to their seconds, making them to
retire hastily, the Spaniards then playing upon our men with shot from every
house in that part of the Town. In this charge Sir Oliver Saint John received
many pushes of the Pike on his Target, and with one of them was slightly hurt
in the thigh, but he killed a Leader and a common soldier with his own hand.
The Lord audley coming up with his Regiment, was shot through the thigh. Sir
Garret Haruy was hurt in the hand, and had his horse killed under him, Captain
Buttlers Lieutenant was slain, and four other of our part. Sir Arthur Savages
Lieutenant was shot through the body, and fourteen other of our part weee
hurt. The enemy left ten dead in the place, besides their hurt men, which we
apparently saw to be many, and the next day heard to be seventy, by one who
saw them brought to the house, where their hurt men lay, and who reported, that
eight of them died that night. Likewise in this skitmish Iuan Hortesse del
Contreres was taken prisoner, who had been Serieant Mayor of the Forces in
Britain, and our men got from them diverse good Rapiers, and very good Arms.

All this while our 3 pieces battered the Castle; till six of the clock at
night, when those of the Castle did beat a Drum, which the Lord President
(whom the Lord Deputy had left there, when himself in the evening returned to
take care of the Camp) admitted to come unto him. With the Drum came an Irish
man borne at Cork, and these in the name of the rest, prayed that with their
Arms, Bag and Baggage, they might depart to Kinsale. This the Lord President
refused, and said he would not conclude with any but the Commander of the
Castle, neither had commission to accept any composition, but yielding to her
Majesty's mercy. Presently they sent another Drum, and a Serieant with him,
but the Lord President refused to speak with them. At their return the
Commander himself, being an Alfiero (or Ensign) called Bartholomeo de Clarizo
(for the Captain had his leg broken) came unto the Lord President, but
insisting on the condition to depart with Arms, Bag and Baggage to Kinsale,
his offer was refused. After he was put safe into the Castle, we began afresh
the battery, and they more hotly then ever before bestowed their vollies of
shot on us. But the first of November at two of the clock in the morning, when
they found how the Castle was weakened by the fury of our battery, they did
again bear a Drum for a parley, but we refusing it, many of them attempted
to escape under the rock close to the water side, which our men perceiving,
drew close up to the Castle, and hindered their escape. The first of November
early in the morning, the Lord President came to the Camp, and made relation
of that nights proceedings to the Lord Deputy, where it was determined, that
if they would render the Castle and their Arms, upon promise of life to the
Spaniards only, and promise to send them safe into Spain, they should be
received to mercy, which was concluded, because the speedy taking of the
Castle was of importance to the more easy furnishing us with all provisions
from that harbor, and of reputation to our side, as also because we could not
enter the breach without loss of good men (which we esteemed precious, being
no more by Pole in the Camp, then the Spaniards in the Town besieged by us,
by reason our Companies were very deficient in the numbers of the List, having
not been supplied out of England of a long time), and because this noble
dealing with the Spaniards in the Castle, might induce those in Kinsale, to
leave the Town upon like composition, when they felt the misery, whereunto we
hoped ere long to bring them. About one hour of the day the Alfiero sent word
to the Lord President (by that time returned) that he would quit all their
Arms, and render the place, so as they might be suffered thus unarmed to go
into Kinsale, which being refused, he entreated that himself alone might hold
his Arms, and be put into Kinsale, which being also refused, he resolutely
resolved to bury himself in the Castle. His Company seeing him desperately
bent not to yield, did threaten to cast him out of the breach, so as they might
be received to mercy. So as at last he consented to yield, and that all his
people should be disarmed in the Castle (which was committed to Captain Roger
Haruy then Captain of the Guards, to see it done), that the Alfiero himself
should wear his sword till he came to the Lord President, to whom he should
render it up. And this being done, they were all brought prisoners into the
Camp, and immediately sent from thence to Cork. The Spanish thus yielded, were
in number fourscore and six, and four women (whose names I have, but omit
them for breultie), besides a great multitude of Irish Churles, Women and
Children, but not any Swordmen; for those being skillful in the ways, had all
escaped, one Dermot Mac Carty only excepted, who was a Pensioner to the King of
Spain, and heretofore a follower to Florence Mac Carty. Also some thirty
Spaniards had been slain in the defense of this Castle, which was now yielded
to us, those in Kinsale, not making one shot at our men the while, but standing
as men amassed.

The second of November, finding how much we had to do, in taking Rincorran
Castle with our weak provisions, it was concluded, that all attempts against
Kinsale Town were in vain, till we were better furnished for such a
business, which notwithstanding we made daily countenance to take in hand.
This day we drew our Ordinance from the Castle into our Camps. The third day of
November the Spanish Serieant Mayor in Britauny, taken in a skirmish, and the
Alfero yielding at Rincorran, obtained license to write to Don Iean de l'
Aguyla, and one of our Drums had license to carry their letters, who stayed in
the town all the following night.

And this day his Lordship received letters of supplies sent out of England,
whereupon he wrote to the Counsel at Dublin, and to Sir Arthur Chichester, to
make stay of certain Companies, which lately he had directed to be brought
out of the North and the Pale, to the Camp at Kinsale. Touching the said
supplies, her Majesty writ to the Lord Deputy this letter following.

Elizabeth Regina.
RIght trusty and well beloved, We greet you well. Upon such aduertisements as
We have received from diverse places, of a Fleet dispatched from Spain, with
a good number of men of war to be landed in that Our Realm, in assistance
of Our Rebcls there, We have thought good to send from hence some further
forces for increase of Our Army there, to enable you the better to make head
against them, if they shall fortune to land. Wherefore We have caused to be
leauied here the number of two thousand men, and appointed them to be embarked
by the twentieth day of this month of October (above the other two thousand
lately sent unto you.) For this two thousand now leauied, because We cannot
certainly judge here, whether you shall find most commodious for Our service,
either to use them for the filling up of decayed Bands there, or to retain
them in Companies, or to employ some of them for filling up the decares of
other Companies, and to retain other some in Bands. We have thought good to
leave the disposition of them to your discretion, with the advice of our
Council, and only to authorize you hereby, that forasmuch as any part of them
which you shall retain in several Bands, will be above the number of Our
Establishment, for the payment whereof, neither you nor Our Treasurer have any
warrant, that you may give warrantto Our Treasurer for the payment of the whole
or any part of the said two thousand, which you shall find necessary to
retain in Our pay in Bands several, above the number of Our Establishment, or
any other former Warrant limited, the said payment to be made in lending and
apparel, as other Our soldiers there are paid, and to begin from the day of
their landing there. Since the writing of thus much to you, concerning the two
thousand preparing, We have received aduertisements of the landing of the
Spaniards at Kinsale, whereupon we have added a further supply of three
thousand men more, to be sent to you. And for that it may be, We shall have
cause to increase or alter the numbers of Our Army, as Our service shall
require, We do therefore give you warrant, to give order from time to time for
the payment of all such numbers of men there, either horse or foot, above the
number limited by Our Establishment, as you shall be from Our privy Council
here, or six of them (whereof our Treasurer of England, and Our principal
Secretary to be two) authorized to retain in Our pay, as Our service shall
require. Given under Our Signet at Our Manor of Richmond, the fourth day of
October, in the forty thee year of Our Reign.

Postscript. Of al these numbers two thousand shall be embarked in Our own ships
by the fourteenth of this October at Rochester, because they shall be secured in
their transportation. Two thousand more shall be sent by the twentieth of this
month to Bristow and Barstable, and the fifth odd thousand shall be sent to
Loughsoyles so as Out leauie is now in all five thousand men.

The same day his Lordship received another letter from the Queen, of her own
hand, and signed below, not above (as the usually signed), as follows.

SInce the braine-sicke humor of unadvised assault has seized on the hearts
of Out causeless foes, We doubt not but their gain will be their baine, and
glory their shame, that ever they had the thought thereof. And that your humor
agrees so fightly with Ours, We think it most fortunately happened in your
Rule, to show the better whose you are, and what you be, as your own hand writ
has told Us of late, and do beseech the Almighty power of the Highest, so to
guide your hands, that nothing light in vain, but to prosper your heed, that
nothing be left behind, that might avail your praise, and that your self in
venturing too far, make not the foe a prey of you. Tell Our Army from Us,
that they make full account, that every hundred of them will beat a thousand,
and every thousand theirs doubled. I am the bolder to pronounce it in his name,
that ever has protected my righteous cause, in which I bless them all. And
putting you in the first place, I end, scribbling in have,

Your loving Sovereign E. R.


The same day his Lordship received letters from the Lords in England,
signifying that run ships of war set sail from Rochester, with the first
wind after the eight of October last, to attend the Coast of Mounster, wherein
were sent two thousand foot for the Army in Mounster, under Captains
appointed. That two thousand more were then levied to be sent to the Army, by
the way of Bristow and Barstable, which were left to his Lordship, to be
disposed in supplies or Companies, as he thought fit. That one thousand foot
more were sent to supply Loughfoyle Garrison. That two hundred horse were sent
to his Lordship for the Army, and fifty horse to Loughfoyle. That they had sent
his Lordship, besides the former twenty last of powder, thirty last more. That
they had sent large provisions of victuals. And that they greatly commended the
Lord Presidents providence, that he had made his soldiers former ly live of
their pay in money, and so preserved the former store of victuals in Mounster,
for this time, without which the Army could not have kept the field till the
new provisions arrived. The last part of their LPS. letter follows in these
words: Hereunto we must add this, as that whereof our selves have been a good
while both hearers and obseruers. That no Prince can apprehend with better
acceptance your Lordships proceeding in that Kingdom, then her Majesty does,
in so much as she used often this speech, that she would not wish her Army
there, nor the safety of her people in better hands then in yours. In whom
(and so in other Principal Officers of her State and Army) as she does
observe, that all difficulties are well entertained with alacrity and
resolution; so we must let your Lordship know, that when her Majesty had read
a private letter of yours to me the principal Secretary, written from
kilkenny with your own hand, as soon as you had heard the news of a foreign
enemy, it pleased her Majesty to cause it be read to us all, as being
written in a style, wherein she discerned both the strong powers of your own
mind (in promising to your self all happy success against such an enemy)
and the lively affections you bear to her person (for which you desire to be
made a Sacrifice), wherein although you have not deceived her former
expectation, yet her Majesty would have you know, that she does not doubt,
but you shall live to do her many more services, after you have made the
Province of Mounster serve for a Sepulcher to these new Conquerours. Of the
four thousand men which now her Majesty sends into Mounster, we send only
two thousand under Captains, the rest we leave to conductors, to be used as
you shall please, when they arrive, and to displace any whom we do send, if
you think them not sufficient. Now therefore till we hear further from you,
we have no more to say, but that we account our selves all in one ship with
you; that we will all concur to advance by our Ministry, whatsoever her
Majesty shall resolve to do for you, all of us having one end and one
desire, to enable you as her Majesty's principal instrument, to free that
Kingdom from the malicious attempts of foreign power, and to redeem it out
of the in ward misery by intestine rebellion.

The fifth of November four barks with munition and victuals that were sent
from Dublin, arrived in Kinsale harbor, and upon certain intelligence, that
Tyrone was coming up with a great Army to join with the Spaniard, it was
resolved by the Counsel of States, and the Colonels of Council at war, that
the next day the Camp should be fortified against Tyrone, on the North side
furthest from the towneward, and that the next day following, the Lord
President with two Regiments of foot, consisting of two thousand one hundred
men in List, and with three hundred twenty five horse, should draw to the
borders of the Province, to stop, or at least hinder Tyrones passage. To which
purpose the Lord Barry, and the Lord Bourke, with the forces of the Country,,
had direction to attend the Lord President.

The sixth day the Camp was accordingly fortified, and the seventh in the
morning, the Lord President with the said horse and foot left the Camp, at
which time it was concluded by both Counsels, that we could attempt nothing
against the town, until either the Lord President returned, or the new Forces
and provisions promised from England arrived, it being judged a great work for
us in the mean time, to continue our lying before the Town, since the
Spaniards in the Town were more in number, then we who besieged them.

The same seventh day his Lordship and the Counsel here wrote to the Lords in
England this following letter.

IT may please your Lordships. The first and second of this present month, we
received her Majesty's and your Lordships most comfortable letters, of the
fourth and sixth of the last, and for the special care, it pleases you to
take of us do yield (as we have just cause) our most humble and heartiest
thanks, protesting that we will labor to deserve the same and the continuance
which it pleases your Lordships to promise thereof, with the uttermost of our
endeavors and services, even to the sacrificing of our lives. And in the mean
time humbly pray your Lordships both to accept in good part and favorably to
report unto her Majesty, what hitherto we have been able to perform, though
nothing to that we did affect, if our means had answered our desires, or that
little we expected to come foam Dublin, which we sent for upon the Spaniards
first landing here, had by a more favorable wind arrived sooner, as we hoped.
We beseech your Lordships give us leave to refer you for your information in
that point to the Iournall which herewithall we send, for thereby we conceive
will best appear, both what we have done, and were enabled to do, since the
return of Master Marshall and other Officers and Commanders, sent of purpose
into the Pale, and the parts Northwards, to draw the forces thereabouts the
more speedily hither to us, and to hasten hither such other provisions, as
(...) here we should have need off. And with your Lordships favor, license us
to add, that we can hardly proceed any further, till our supplies of men and
munitions come; for we find it a work of great difficulty and assured loss
of men, and expense of al provisions of war, to undertake with these means
we have to force so many men out of any place, although it were not greatly
otherwise fortified but by the bodies of men only, whereas this Town of
Kinsale has a good wall, and many strong Castles in it.

We do look howerly for Tyrone, esteemed to be coming with a great Army of
horse and foot, selected out of all the rebels in Ireland, and from all others
that he can seduce to his party. At his coming these Prouincials will
discover themselves either against us or neutrals (as they are) for better we
do not expect from them. Except out supplies do come before his arrival, we
shall hardly be Masters of the field, but rather driven (we fear) to
discontinue our siege; yet if her Majesty's shipping, provisions, and supplies,
do arrive in any time, we hope to give her (ere it be long) a good account of
this place; though we desire your Lordships to consider the difficulties we
have to contend with in this Country and season of the year, besides the
force and opposition of the enemy. I the President do acknowledge the receipt
of such an intelligence, concerning Captain A. as it pleases your Lordships
to remember, and since that time kept very good spiall upon him, and have had
the sight of all his papers, yet cannot find any thing gives me cause to
suspect him; and therefore we all think it fit, seeing his Company is returned
hither among other, to make use of his service here, for which we find him very
fit, until there may be some apt occasion to dispose of him elsewhere, without
giving him coffeehouse, unless we had more particular and certain ground
to charge him with, which we must receive from thence: yet in the mean time
he shall be so narrowly looked unto, as if he have the will (which we doubt
not), he shall not have means to hurt much.

The same seventh day his Lordship understanding from Master Secretary by his
letter dated the nineteenth of the last month, and received the second of this
month, that he found her Majesty inclined to make one Governor over all
Vlster, and especially to like of Sir Arthur Chichester for that great charge,
whereupon he purposed to proceed therein, if his Lordship would explane
himself; how he would have that matter carried.

His Lordship wrote his mind plainly therein, aduising that Sir Arthur
Chichester should be made Governor of all Vlster, by what name it should
please her Majesty to give him, whereby he might direct all the parts of that
Province, and be resident where he should think fittest for the service,
commanding in chiese where he came. The managing of the war to be in general
left to himself, except he received particular directions upon special
occasions from England, or from the Lord Deputy, adding that from him the Lords
might be more speedily informed, of what is done, or fit to be required for the
making of that war, whom of all other Commanders he thought fittest for that
charge, praying that the Lords there would advise him and Sir Henry Dockwra, to
hold a good correspondency for her Majesty's service, since he conceived the
war was to be chiefly made by their two ioining together. For the Scots,
that any number not exceeding four thousand might in his conceit fitly be
entertained, and left to the disposal of Sir Arthur Chichester, whose
judgment upon the state of things there, was fittest to be followed, for he
could best choose apt places to lodge them, till Sir Henry Dockwra and he might
draw into the field, when those Scots should join with them, and would be of
very great use to spoil, which is the best service can be done upon the Irish.
Concluding that he had written to Sir Arthur Chichester, that he should send
into England to him the Secretary; his opinion in this business, which (no
doubt) he would presently do. But this project of appointing a Governor in
Vlster, took no effect by reason that Tyrone with most of his Forces were
defeated shortly after in Mounster.

Master Secretary at the same time had sent his Lordship spanish news, which
in this his answer he confessed were very likely, yet thought it would be
very hard for them to make ready four thousand men more before Christmas. He
signified that they here were all of opinion, that the necessity of the Spanish
forces already in Ireland, being more then was expected, both by loss at Sea,
and since their coming hither, and by the failing of the Irish hitherto to
join with them, their supplies would be hastened sooner then was determined:
for so they were advertised by all the Prisoners taken, and by such as did come
unto us from them. His Lordship acknowledged himself very much bound unto
Master Secretary for the good dispatch he procured with this last passage, and
not the least that her Majesty was pleased to allow of their entertainment of
the Irish, yet beseeched him to believe that by this course they had prevented
Tyrone of a great many men, that otherwise would and must have served him for
entertainment, having no other means to live, and yet hitherto all was done
within the compass of the list; and the White Knight was one of them, that
before the coming of this approbation was provided for, so careful was he to
give him good contentment.

For their outcries in the Pale, he answered that he did not marvel, for by
that which he had observed, he did judge that the word Pale had cost the Queen
a million, and yet so il were they disposed, and so backward even in their own
defense, as they now suffered Tyrone with a few horse, about the number of 60 to
burn and prey them at his pleasure, though they were able of themselves to
have beaten him and all his forces, and besides had the assistance of Companies
in the Queens pay, being three thousand or two thousand at least, yet if he
would consider, that four thousand Spaniards (for so the prisoner that we
took delivered them to be upon his salvation, with whom all our prisoners
relation and our intelligence did concur) are possessed of a Towneful of
strong houses, and walled about, and helped with many advantages of ground,
(though commanded by some places), he might easily conceive, that it must be
no small army can force them, since our approches this winter were so
difficult, that the very trenches we made were continually filled with water,
and the decay of our men was so great, by continual labor, sickness, sword,
and bullet. And therefore we had no reason to keep a great body of men in the
Pale to guard it, till this dangerous war were fiuished. But to prevent this
clamor of the Pale it was merely impossible, though it would please her
Majesty to keep there ten thousand in her pay, when they would not stir, nor
raise the cry, but suffer themselves to be so used, out of the malice of
their own hearts; that they might have some color of complaint, being the
worst sort of people in all the Kingdom, though he protested he had been as
careful of them, as if they had been his Kindred or special friends, knowing
well their humor to be so clamerous.

For her Majesty's expense, he besought him to believe, that no man did look
upon it with more grief then himself, who reaped no commodity by it, only
being a painful and faithful distributer thereof, according to the
necessity of her own service: but if he did not from his soul desire, and
with all his wits and endeavor seek to abridge it, and to end both her war
and charge, then he desired no mercy of God, nor favor from her. And if he
were not bound thereto by his public duty, yet he protested, that his private
estate would urge him thereunto: which he found unable any longer to continue
the expense, at which he was forced to live, growing greater by the mixed
coin, as he ever thought it would fall very heavy upon him, by which reason
he might value his entertainment to be less by the half, then it was in the
time of the old standard. For whatsoever we bought with this new coin, it was
raised to the double price.

Whereas it seemed Master Secretary had been informed, that all they which of
late submitted themselves to her Majesty's mercy and protection, were now
again revolted to the Rebels: he answered, that it was true, that some of them
had made their peace with Tyrone, and in truth, except we could have given
order for their defense against him, he did never expect other from them, and
especially since the arrival of this foreign force, he did think none in
Ireland so sure, but even here in Mounster they would do the like, if our Army
did not hang over them, yea, he was sure that the Lord President was of the
same opinion. But he was not moved to preserve any thing which the world (to
his disadvantage) might call his, by neglecting that which he knew fittest to
be preserved for her Majesty and her service. Touching these submitties while
they were in rebellion, he did spoil waste and kill many of them, when they
were received to mercy, he made many of them kill others in rebellion, and
leese their lives for the Queens service, and now they were again reuoulted
he doubted not, but either to ruin them again, or to force them to
submission, upon what conditions he listed, if God pleased to send us an happy
end of this war with the foreign enemy. For the atchieuement whereof he hoped
he should hear (by the grace of the eternal God) that they would adventure
as far, and in as good a fashion, as might be expected from this Army, upon the
arrival of the supplies of men and munition. Till when he protested, that we
were at a stand, because that he was most sure, that without good numbers of
men, and store of al sorts of munition, this Town so manned as it was, could
not be forced.

He added, that hitherto (God bethanked) we had in all our endeavors prospered
against this proud enemy, and that there never was Army better disposed then
this, nor Comma^ders that continually showed more sound judgment and brave
resolution then ours had done. In particular, that Sir Oliver S. John's had had
great honor given him by the whole Army, for that which he did in their sight,
for he found no man come off, from the skirmish (mentioned in the Iournall)
which spoke not of what he had extraordinarily performed with his own hand,
and that in a far grearer measure then was therein related. That at the same
time the Lord Audley was hurt, fighting very gallantly, and if it should please
her Majesty to take notice thereof, it would be a great comfort to them, and
encouragement to the rest. That he hoped God would enable us shortly, to send
him relations of better service. In the mean time and ever he prayed the
eternal God to preserve her Majesty and her Kingdoms, and send them her poor
servants peace and quietness.

He added what he could wish it had pleased her Majesty to have left the horse
to his disposal, or at the least to have bestowed them on some Englishmen, for
as 100 are conferred, though he hold the Commander a worthy Gentleman, and
faithful to her Majesty's service, yet he was Irish, and in short time would
make those horse Irish, so as he accounted to have received only one hundred
to serve his purpose. For he did very much build on those horse, not only to
be his chief strength at this time, but to have stood hereafter when her
Majesty did lessen the army, to be employed for the absolute finishing of this
war. And to this purpost now (in all likelihood) he should not be able, to
make use of them, which he confessed did not a little trouble him.

He added, that although there were but four thousand Spaniards already
landed, and they had no horse, yet there was no doubt but they would avail
themselves of great assistance in this Country, and that with a number much
about this of natural Spaniards, their King had made the long continued great
war in the Low Countries. Besides, he besought him to remember, that about
two hundred Spaniards held a Fort lately built at Croyden in Britany, till Sir
John Norreis lost very near one thousand five hundred men before it. That (God
bethanked) we had plucked one hundred fitfy Spaniards by the ears out of
Rincorran, and we hoped (by the grace of God) to do the like by them in
Kinsale, yet except God should please extraordinarily to work for us, this was
not likely to be done without great loss of men, and expense of all provisions
to that purpose. For now they began to work very hard about fortifying of
the Town, finding (as themselves said) that they had other men to deal with,
then they expected; etc.

The eight of November certain ships to the number of thirteen, were discried
to pass by Kinsale to the Westward, but it was not known whether they were
English or Spaniards. The tenth day we had news that the Earl of Thomond was
landed with one thousand foots, left to the Lord Deputies disposal, and with
an hundred horse, appointed in England to be commanded by the said Earl; and
these were the thirteen ships discovered to pass Westward.

By this time the Spaniards had gotten knowledge of the Lord Presidents
departure from the Camp with good part of our forces, and thereupon supposing
us to be much weakened, (as in deed we were, and Inferior in bodies of men to
them in the Town), they drew out this day about noone most part of their
forces, and soon after sent some sixty shot and Pykes to the foot of the hill,
close by our Camp, leaving their trenches very well lined for their seconds:
some of ours were presently drawn out to entertain skirmish with those that
came up, and another strong party was sent but toward Ryncorran, who from the
bushy hill played in flanckes upon their trenches, and did beat them from the
same; so as they that were first sent out close to out Camps being beaten
back by our shot, and thinking to find the seconds they left behind them, were
disappointed by their quitting of the Trenches, and by that means driven to
follow the rest to the succor of the Town. Our men follewing with much fury,
hurt and killed diverse, amongst whom they brought off the body of a Sergiant,
and possessed the enemies trenches, the which the enemies (being reinforced)
made many attempts to regaine, but were repulsed and beaten back into the
Town. We heard by diverse, that Don Iean committed the Sergiant Mayor, who
commanded then in chief, presently after the fight, and threatened to take his
head, commended highly the valor of our men, and cried shame upon the
cowardice of his own, who he said had been the terror of all Nations; but
now had lost that reputation, and he gave straight commandment upon pain of
death, which he caused to be set up on the Town gates, that from thenceforth
no man should come off from any service, until he should be fetched off by
his Officer, though his powder were spent or his Piece broken, but make good
his place with his Sword. Captain Soto one of their best Commanders, was that
day slain, (for whom they made very great moan), and some twenty more, besides
those we hurt, which could not but be many. On our side, only some ten were
hurt, and three killed; among whom Master Hopton a Gentleman of the Lord
Deputies band, was sore hurt, and in few days died thereof. If this skirmish
had not been readily and resolutely answered on our part, the Spaniards had
then discovered the smalnes of our numbers, and would no doubt have so plied us
with continual sallies; as we should hardly have been able to continue the
siege.

The eleventh day we had news, that the one hundred horse and the thousand
foot embarked at Bastable, (both which were left to the Lord Deputies
disposal, the horse to be made new troops, the foot to be dispersed for
supplies, or to raise new Companies as his Lordship should think fit) were
arrived at Waterford.

The twelfth day Sir Richard Leuison Admiral of the Queens Fleet sent into
Ireland, and Sir Amias Preston Vice Admiral, were arrived with ten ships of
war at Cork, wherein we had two thousand foot all under Captains appointed
in England, besides other provisions of artillery and munition, and his
Lordship directed the Admiral with all speed to bring the Fleet into the
Harbor of Kinsale.

The thirteenth day his Lordship wrote to Master Secretary this following
letter:

SIR hearing that our last packet is not yet gone from Cork, by reason of the
contrariety of the wind, I have so good occasion to make this addition to our
former dispatch, that I have received letters from my Lord of Thomond, Sr
Anthony Cook, and others from diverse places, that all the supplies appointed
for this Province, are safely arrived at Waterford, Yoghall, Cork, and Castle
Haven, with no loss (that I can hear of) but of one victular, although the
weather has been extreme tempestuous; and this last evening I was informed
but by a rumor, that the Queens ships were discovered about the Haven of
Cork, whereupon I presently dispatched to Sir Richard Leuyson to put into the
Haven of Kinsale, for otherwise it would be long ere we shall be able to avail
our selves of such artillery and munition as he brought for us. From my Lord
President I heard, that the Rebels are drawn down very strong, whereupon I
have directed Sir Christopher S. Laurence, (that was coming to the Camp with
most of the forces of the Pale) to repair speedily to my Lord President, and I
mean to send unto him all the Horse that is now come out of England, which I
hope will be forces sufficient to stop any power the Rebels can make, specially
since Tyrone (as I hear) himself will not be with them, except they do
steal by, which will be heard to prevent. If they come to force their passage,
I am confident that against so many Horse as the Lord President shall have,
they will never put themselves upon the plain. For although they are as
dangerous an enemy as any are in the World, when we are driven to seek them
in their strength, or pass their fastness, yet are they the worst and weakest
to force their own way, either upon straights or plains, so that except they
steal their passage, (which I fear most) I make no doubt but my Lord
President will give a very good account of them. We here in the Camp, since
our last letters, have not had much to do, only the enemy one day drew out (I
think) most of his whole force, upon opinion that the greatest part of our
Army was gone from us to meet the Rebels, and began a round fight with us,
close to our trenches: but we entertained them so well, that we waited on them
home, to the walls of the Town, and made them leave some of their dead bodies
behind them, although we saw them carry many off with them. They have made
within less them Caliuer shot of our trenches, very good fights, even from
thence close to the Town, so that our men did follow them with great
disadvantage, yet we did beat them from one trench to another, til I had much
ado to make our soldiers come off. The greatest loss of our side fell to my
share, for I had one of my Company killed, and a very gallant Gentleman that
served in that Band, called Mr. Hopton, hurt (I fear) to death, and I think
there was not above 2 or 3 more that were killed in the Camp over our heads,
while we were in the skirmish. Then we made them so good a Muster, that they
have thought good to check us no more, but within the Town and without they
do work very hard, and have raised Rauelings and Mounts, and we on the
contrary side keep very good watch; for if we should receive but one blow of
the Spanish Fencer, all Ireland would take heart with it; and we have no great
reason to be very secure, for believe me upon my Honor, I think the besieged
are more in numbers, then we that are the besiegers at this time. They do
continually taste us, but they find us so well at our ward, that they still
go away with the vennies. And now, if the Queens ships be come, we will cast
at all, and I hope in God, ere it be long, win a fair game for the Queen,
whose money we play. If any without consideration of the just circumstances of
our present business, to serve any private purpose, tax me for being too
negligent of other parts of this Kingdom, and too large in my demands, I
beseech you Sir to believe, that I had good ground, both for my precipitate
drawing hither, and for the provisions I have craved to strengthen my self by
all means, while I am about this work. For the first, it was not my opinion
only, but my Lord Presidents, that if I did not suddenly make head to this
force, most of this Province would have revolted; and if we had suffered the
force of Spain to have been Masters of the field but six days, as easily
they might have been, if we had not sought well to prevent it, I assure my se
fe, that all the Towns of this Province would have revolted, and the current of
that fortune would have run so violently through all Ireland, that it would
have been too late o have stopped it. For the second, the difficulties of a
winters siege, in this Country (where by reason of the great numbers of the
besieged, we are forced to keep strong and continual guards) will soon waste a
greater Army then ours, if God do not mightily bless us: for the weather is
so extreme, that many times we bring our Sentinels dead from the stations, and
I protest even our chief Commanders (whose diligence I cannot but mightily
commend) do many of them look like spirits, with toil and watching, unto the
which we are with good reason moved, since there be many examples, that where
an enemy can sally out with two or three thousand men, they have defeated
Armies, that have been trebble our number. But now besides these ordinary
difficulties, which in all winter sieges do waste, or make unprofitable the
greatest part of an Army, when we are to make our nearest approches to force
them, we cannot do it without great loss, for although the Town be weak
against the Canon, yet can we plant the Canon no where, but they have places
that do absolutely command it, so that the town is weak to defend it self, yet
exceeding strong to offend, which is the best part that art can add to any
fortification, and this is so well provided by nature, that from one hill they
beat into any ground that we can lodge in near them. All these difficulties,
and many more, I do not allege, as being any ways diffident of the great
favor that God is determined to show her Majesty in this action, but that you
may in some measure guess, that we are not so improuident in her Majesty's
cause, as to require an army and charge of greater proportion then is fit for
such a task, the which when we have performed with that happiness, that I
hope the eternal God will blosse us with all, I will then say and prove it
unto you at large, A Domine factum est hoc, and mirahilc est (...) nostris.
Sir, if I should write all unto you, that I have a desire to let you know, both
for the public and my private, I should not end my letter before the time that
I hope we shall beat the Spaniards, but having been up most of this night, it
grows now about four a clock in the morning, at which time I lightly choose
to visit our Guards my self, and am now going about that business, in a
morning as cold as a stone, and as dark as pitch, and I pray Sir think whether
this be a life that I take much delight in, who heretofore in England, when I
have had a suite to the Queen, could not lie in a tent in the Summer, nor
watch at night till she had supped: but by God Sir, I will do for Queen
Elizabeth that which I will not do for my self, and willingly, and be you my
pledge that I will faithfully serve her against all the World, or any in the
World, or else I beseech God now I am going out, that I may never return alive
to my House of Turffe, in the which I write this at her Maieistes Camp before
Kinsale; This thirteenth of November 1601.

The thirteenth day our Fleet recovered the mouth of Kinsale Harbor, but could
not get in, the wind being strong against them. The foureteenth day the Fleet
with much difficulty warped in; and recovered the Harbor, whence the Admiral
and Vice Admiral came to the Lord Deputy at the Camp. This night and the next
day the two thousand foot, sent under Captains in the Queens ships, were
landed, and came to the Camp. And the fifteenth day in the afternoon, the
Lord Deputy went aboard the ships, whence returning to the Camp, the Enemy
discerned him riding in the head of a troop of horse, and made a shot out of
the Town at him, which grazed so near him, that it did beat the earth in his
face. In these ships were sent unto us not only artillery and munition, but
also special Officers to attend the same, as five Canoneers, two
Blacke-smiths, two Wheele-wrights, and two Carpenters. This day the Lord Deputy
was advertised, that according to his former direction, Sir Christopher St
Laurence was come out of the Pale, and the Earl of Clanrickard out of
Connaght, to the Lord Presidents camp, to whom his Lordship wrote, that if the
Rebels should slip by him, he should be careful to come up with his Forces to
our camp, so as he might arrive there to join with us, before the Rebels
came up so far. The Queens ships after they had saluted the Lord Deputy at
his going aboard with thundering peales of Ordinance, had direction the next
day to beat upon a Castle in the Island, called Castle Nyparke, which the Lord
Deputy was resolved to make his next work, and to beat the Spaniards out of
it, and so to inuest the Town on that side. This some of the ships performed,
and brake the top of the Castle, but finding that they did it no greater hurt,
and that the weather was extreme stormy, they ceased shooting. This day his
Lordship gave direction, that the hundred horse and one thousand foot, which
first landed at Castle Haven, and now were arrived from thence in the Harbor
of Kinsale, should be conducted to Cork, to refresh themselves, for being
beaten at Sea, and now landed in extreme weather, and in a Winter Camp, where
they had no means to be refreshed, they began to die, and would have been
lost or made unserviceable, if this course had not been taken to hearten them.
This day and for many days after, diverse Spaniards ran from the Town to us,
by whom we understood that in the tenth days skirmish, the above named
Captain Soto, a man of special account, was slain.

The seventeenth day the weather continued stormy, so as neither that day nor
the next we could land our Ordinance, or do any thing of moment, yet because
this was the day of her Majesty's Coronation, which his Lordship purposed to
solemnize with some extraordinary attempt, if the weather would have suffered
us to look abroad, we sent at night when the storm was some what appeased,
the Seriant Mayor and Captain Bodley with some four hundred foot, to discover
the ground about Castle N. park, and to see whether it might be carried with
the Pickaxe, which was accordingly attempted; but the engine we had gotten to
defend our men; while they were to work, being not so strong as it should have
been, they within the Castle having store of very great stones on the top,
rumbled them down so fast, as they broke it, so that our men returned with the
loss of two men, and proceeded no further in that course.

The eighteenth day the Lord Deputy called a Counsel both of the Counsel of
Ireland, and of all the Colonels and chief Officers of the field, and
propounded to them, that since it had pleased her Majesty so graciously to
supply us with the matter and provisions for the war, it was our parts to
adulse of such a form, as might be most likely to bring forth an effect, not
unworthy her Princely care. First our strength and means to attempt the place
or continue the siege, were thoroughly considered, and next the numbers and
commodities of the enemy in the Town, and of their succors abroad. The
commodities and incommodities of proceeding with expedition, or by keeping them
from all relife, were thoroughly disputed, and in the end it was concluded, that
the soundest course were to use all means to inuest them as speedily as we
might, by possessing our selves of al they held without the Town, and next to
mount our artillery in such places, where it might annoy them most, and by
breaking down their Houses, to expose them to the same extremities of cold and
rain, as we were exposed to in the Camp, by which means they might be
reduced to a greater weakness, and then be forced with much less hazard,
since when it comes to the point of entering of a breach, there is little or no
difference between a strong Town and a weak, for the besieged in either, do
wholly trust to their new and sudden works, which the enemy within had as good
opportunity to do in this place as in any other, and had yet (of our
knowledge) so many hands to fight, as that the advantage would chiefly have
been his.

The nineteenth day A Demi Cannon was unshipped, as soon as it was calm, and
placed on this side of the water, which played most part of the day upon the
Castle Nyparke, being a great relief to the besieged, and brake many places,
but made no breach that was assaultable. In the night they of the Town
attempted to relieve the Castle by boats, but were repelled by Captain
Tolkerne and Captain Ward, who lay with their Pinnaces between the Island and
the Town.

Hitherto nothing could possibly be attempted against the Town, more then had
been done. For considering that the numbers of the defendants not only
equalled, but by all report, exceeded the number of the besiegers, (yea
exceeded them far, after the Lord President was sent from the Camp to meet
Tyrone with two thousand one hundred foot and three hundred and twenty horse),
and considering that if we had undertaken the carrying of approaches, with a
purpose to batter, the whole Army must either have been tired with watching
night and day, without shelter, in tempestuous weather, or disgracefully have
forsaken the work, or (to say the best) incurred the hazard of fight in places
of disadvantage, with an expert enemy. And considering that the Country stood
upon such tickle terms, and so generally ill affected to our side, that
almost the least blow, which in the doubtful event of war might have lighted
upon us, would have driven them headlong into a general revolt. And further,
that our Army consisted for a third part (at the least) of Irish, who being not
fit to make good an entrenched camp, and much less fit to give upon a breach,
would without question, either presently have quitted us, or turned their
weapons against us, if the Spaniards had had any hand over us; and considering
that in all sound judgment, this little army, (which was to be the soul of
that body that should oppose it self against these inuaders and rebels), was
by all possible means to be preserved as much as might be, and not at all
ventured, but with manifest assurance to prevail. These things with other like
circumstances considered, what could there be more done, during the time that
we wanted our supplies and seconds? but to assure our Camp with careful
watches against sallies or surprises of the Enemy, and to inuest them from
succors or relief, not omitting in the mean time to provide whatsoever might
be needful, for the business in hand, the meeting with all inconveniences,
and the taking of all advantages upon the Enemies guardes without the Town;
for which purpose diverse skirmishes were made with very good success on our
part.

The List of the Army at Kinsale the twentieth of November.
The foot of the List the seven and twenty of October, are 6900.

The Companies drawn since that List from other parts of the Kingdom to
Kinsale Camp.

Sir Francis Rush 150. Captain Masterson 150. Captain Thomas Butler 100. Sir
Richard Greame 100. Captain Toby Cawfield 150. Sir Christopher S. Laurence
150. Sir Henry Harrington 100. Sir Samuel Bagnoll 150. Sir Edward Harbert 100.
Sir William Warren 100. Sir Edward Fitzgarret 100. Sir Tybbot Dillon 100. Sir
Garret Moore 100. Captain Lyonell Guest 150. Captain Malby 150. The Earl of
Clanrickard 150. Sir Thomas Bourke 150. Captain Clare 150. Captain Thomas
Bourke 100. Captain Laurence Esmond 150. Sir George Bourcher 100. Foot 2650.

Companies sent in the Queens ships under Captains, viz.
Captain Sheffeild, 100. Captain Norton, 100. Captain Henry Fortescue, 100.
Captain Bret, 100. Captain Lower, 100. Captain Chatterton, 100. Captain
Dorington, 100. Captain Crompton, 100. Captain Gilbert, 100. Captain Wade,
100. Sir Anthonic Cook, 150. Sir Alexander Clifford, 150. Captain Lane, 100.
Captain Wadnol, 100. Captain Blandel, 100. Captain May, 100. Captain Wynn,
100. Captain Kenricke, 100. Captain Butler, 100.

Foot 2000.

Of the one thousand foot landed at Castle-hauen with the Earl of Thomond,
and the one thousand foot landed at Waterford with Sir Anthony Cook, having
no Captains, but being left to the Lord Deputies disposal, one thousand three
hundred fifty were distributed among the Captains, to supply the deficient
numbers in their several Companies, and the rest were divided into these
following Companies increasing the List.

Sir Garret Haruye, 150. Captain Henry Barkeley, 150. Captain Roberts, 150.
Captain Boyse, 100. Captain Henslo for Pioners, 100.

Foot 650

Total of foot, 12200.

Hereof in the old list taken out for a dead Company kept for the Earl of
Desmond, 100.

Take now out absent Sir George Thorton in Garrison at Kilmallock, Capt. Gawen
Haruye in Garrison at Limricke, and Captain Treuer (reckoned before, but not
coming hither, who stayed about the Newry, as I remember,) 300.

So the Total of foot is 11800.

Of these not distributed into Regiments.
For attendance of the Munition, Sir George Bourcher, Master of the Ordinance,
100. For Pioners, Captain Hensloe, 100.

Foot, 200

Foot distributed into eleven Regiments under command of the Lord Deputy, Lord
President, and nine Colonels.
Under the Lord Deputy commanded by his Lieutenant Sir Benjamin Berry, 1400.
Under the Lord President, 1100. Under the Earl of Clanrickard, 1000. Under the
Earl of Thomond, 1000. Under the Lord Audley, 900. Sir Richard Percy, 950. Sir
Richard Moryson, 1100. Sir Charles Willmot, 1000. Sir Oliver Saint John's, 1050.
Sir Henry Follyet, 1050. Sir Christopher Saint Laurence, 1050.

Foot, 11600.

Total of foot, 11800.

Out of these Regiments was raised a squadron volante (or flying Regiment)
which only was to answer Alarums, and to be freed of al watches, and to the
same Sir Henry Power was appointed Colonel, and Captain Bostock his
Lieutenant. The several Companies of this squadron are these.

Out of the Lord Deputies Regiment, Sir Richard Wingfield Marshall, 150. Sir
John Barkeley Serieant Mayor, 200.

Out of the Lord Presidents Regiment, Captain Saxey, 100.

Out of the Lord Audleys Regiment, the Treasurers Lieutenant, 100.

Out of Sir Charles Willmots Regiment, Captain Nuse, 100.

Out of Sir Henry Follyots Regiment, Captain Josias Bodley, 150.

Out of Sir Oliver Saint John's Regiment, Captain Bostock, 100.

Out of the Earl of Clanrickards Regiment, Captain Laurence Esmond, 150.

Foot 1050.

Horse in the Army at Kinsale.
Take out of the List made the seven and twenty of October, Sir Edward Harbert,
12: and Captain George Greame twelve, and thirty of Master Marshals
(otherwhere employed, and now absent from the Camp), and the whole List is
five hundred fifty seven.

Horse called since that time from other parts in the Kingdom to the Camp at
Kinsale.
The Earl of Kildare, 50. Sir Oliver Lambert, 25. Sir Garret More, 25.

Horse, 100.

Horse newly sent over and landed at Castle-hauen, and at Waterford.
The Lord President added to his troop, 50. The Earl of Thomond a troop
newly erected, 100. Sir William Godolphin (who commanded the Lord Deputies
troop) had newly erected to his own use, 50.

Horse, 200.

Total of horse, 857.

The twentieth of November his Lordship understood by letters from the Lords in
England, that one thousand foot and fifty horse were sent, and already
shipped for Loughfoyle. The same day the demy-Cannon planted the day before,
did again batter Castle Nyparke, together with another Cannon this day landed,
and planted by it: and with some Ordinance also out of the ships, though they
served to small purpose. About noone one hundred men were sent with Captain
York and Captain Smith, to view the breach, and though they found it not
assaultable, yet the Spaniards within being no longer able to endure the fury
of the shot, hung out a sign of parley upon the first show of those men, and
offered to yield themselves and the Castle, upon promise of their lives only,
which being accepted, they were brought presently to the Camp, being in number
sixtcene that were left alive.

Before the Castle was yielded, the Spaniards in the Town made diverse shot at
Captain Tolkernes Pinnace with a piece of Ordinance which they mounted a day
or two before close to the Gate of the Town, but did no hurt at all unto the
Pinnace, the same warping nearer to the other side under the hill, and at last
riding safely without danger of the shot.

The same day a platform was made upon a ground of advantage, being a strong
Rath, between the Town and the Camp, that commanded one part of the Town,
that under the favor thereof, we might the better make our nearer approches,
though at that time we could hardly work, by reason of the extreme frost, and
a demi Cannon was mounted upon it, with which some shot were made at the Town.
A sentinel taken in the evening affirmed, that the first piece shot off, went
through the house in which Don Iean lay, and did otherwise great hurt. The one
and twentieth the prisoners taken in Castle Nyparke, and some runawaies, were
sent to Cork, with directions to the Mayor, to send them and the former
prisoners by the first ship into England, keeping (of them) still at Cork
only the Serieant Mayor (taken in skirmish), and the two Commanders of the
Castles of Rincorran and Nyparke. This day the Cannon and demi-Cannon, planted
upon the platform, did play into the Town. And this day the Lord Deputy went
over into the Hand, to view how from thence the Town might be best annoied and
invested. And the Spaniards this day put out of the town great numbers of
Irish women, and children, which came to the Camp, and were suffered to pass
into the Country to their friends.

The two and twentieth day, one James Grace an Irishman, obtaining the Lord
Deputies Protection, escaped out of the Town, and gave his Lordship this
intelligence following. Six Irish Gentlemen horsemen came into the town of
Kinsale on Sunday the fifteenth of November, and one Owen Conde came the same
day, and they are all ready to go out again, and Father Archer with them, to
put out the Country, if the Bishop will suffer him. Don Iean says privately,
that the Lord Deputy was borne in a happy hour, for he will have the Town,
unless they be relieved from the North. They have nothing but ruske and water.
They have but four pieces of Artillery, one small piece is at the Churchyard,
one great and a small in James Meaghes Garden, and the other biggest of all is
at the Watergate, to play upon the shipping, and all four are mounted. The
Spaniards were five thousand by report at their setting out from Spain, they
landed at Kinsals three thousand five hundred, they are yet 3000, there are two
hundred sick and hurt in the hospitals, they lost 100 at Rincorran, and 17 and
a boy at Castle Nyparke. They had nine slain when they offered to relieve the
Castle, and five when Captain Soto was slain. They had four and thirty
Colors abroad when they shot into the Lord Deputies Camp, and that was all
they had, and they had then two pieces, a great and a small, and that day all
the Townsmen were put out at the Gates, that they might do no hurt with the
Munition. They fill the old Abbey at the West gate with earth, that they may
mount a great piece there, which they make account wilcomma^d the ground where
the English battery is planted at the North Gate, where the Mount is raised,
yet it is not likely they will mount any Ordinance there, but rather keep it as
a hold. They have store of powder and munition, which lies at John Fitz Edmonds
Castle, but they mean to remove it presently, and put it in a seller within
the town. Their treasure lies at the house where Captain Bostock lay. They
are much afraid the Lord Deputy will place some Ordinance at Castle Nyparke,
or thereabouts, which will much annoy them: but most of all they fear the
placing of it at a place near the water side (where some were sent to seek
rods, not far from the place where the skirmish was, when they sallyed), for
which caul they raised their mount, but especially filled up the old Abbey;
from whence it is best commanded. Don Iean lies at Phillip Roches. A shot made
from the English on Friday at night, hit the house where Don Iean lay. The
Townsmen will stay no longer there, for fear of the shot, and then the
Spaniards will be in great distress. One went from Don Iean to Tyrone about
nine days ago to hasten his coming, the man was blind of one eye.

The same day the Lord Deputy received from her Majesty direction, that
forasmuch as the County of Clare was of ancient time within the Government or
precinct of the Province of Mounster, until of late it was annexed to the
Province of Connaght, which her Majesty understood was upon some untrue
surmise made by Commissioners for Connaght, to the grieuance and dislike of her
subjects of that County. That the Lord Deputy and the Counsel there, should
speedily consider of this information, and if they found it not evidently an
hinderance to her service, then they speedily should give order, that by
reuocation of the former Commissioners and letters Patents for government of
these several Provinces, and by granting new Commissioners of like authority
and effect, and by all other ways requisite in Law, the said County of Clare
should be reunited and annexed unto the Province of Mounster, and be reduced
under the order and government of the Lord President and Council of Mounster,
which her Majesty was persuaded would be for the advancement of her service,
and the good liking of her loving subjects in those parts.

The same two and twentieth day four Pieces were planted by the Cannon and
demi Cannon, which altogether played into the Town, one of which shot killed
four men in the Market place, and struck off a Captains leg, called Don John
de Saint John, who after died of that hurt, we likewise planted three
Culuerings in the Island beyond the water, in which the foresaid Castle Nypark
stands, and from whence we heard, that Don John feared annoiance.

The three and twentieth these did beat upon the old Town with good effect.
And the same day our other six Pieces on the North-East side played upon the
Town, and so continued till night, in which time (in all men's judgments, and
by report of the prisoners we took) they did great hurt to the Town. This day
while the Lord Deputy, the Marshall and Serieant Mayor were viewing the ground
where the approches were intended, a private soldier of Sir John Barkleys, in
their sight, and in the face of the Spanish guards, attempting to steal a
Spanish sentenel (as he had stolen diverse before) this sentenel being seconded
by four, that he saw not, he fought with them all five, whereof one was the
Serieant Mayor, whom he had almost taken; and when he found he could do no
good upon them all he came off without other hurt, then the cutting of his hand
a little, with the breaking of a thrust, which one of them made at him, and he
hurt the Serieant Mayor.

The night following, we began certain near approches on the North-East side
of the Town on a hill, which by the natural situation thereof, was free from
sudden sallies, by reason of a Valley between it and the Town, so as it might
be speedily seconded from the Camp. There with much expedition was raised a
Fort (and Artillery planted, to play into the Town), which with three or four
Companies was easily gardable; for in this business there seemed nothing more
to be respected, then how to approach and infest the enemy in such sort, as
neither our old, nor our new men might be ouerspent, or ouer-harried with
watches and works (the time of the year and extremity of the weather
considered) nor the enemy might take any advantage to surprise our works by
their sallying, without engaging themselves in fight with our whole Army. For
making those approches, the Lord Deputy drew out one thousand foot, continuing
the work all night; and although the ground were extreme hard, by reason of
the Frost, and the night very light, yet that night they brought the work to
very good perfection. The enemy played all the night upon them with great
vollyes, but hurt only three men, either in the trenches, or in diverse sallyes
they made (in the one whereof a squadron of our new men did beat them back to
the Gates.)

This day the Lord President advertised, that Odonnell, by advantage of a Frost
(so great as seldom had been seen in Ireland), had passed a Mountain, and so
had stolen by him into Mounster, whereupon he purposed to return with the
forces he had, to strengthen the Camp. And in the evening Sir Richard
Leuison, by the Lord Deputies direction, drew the Admiral and Vice Admiral in
between the Island and Kinsale, whence the four and twentieth day they shot
into the Town.

The five and twentieth day all the Artillery still played upon the Town: but
the shot from the ships doing little hurt, save only upon the base Town, the
Lord Deputy gave direction to spend few shot more, except it were on the high
Town. This night direction was given to make a platform for the Artillery
upon the trenches, which was made the three and twentieth at night. Somewhat
after midnight the Spaniards made a sudden salley, with purpose to force the
trench, but were soon beaten back by Sir Francis Barkeley, who commanded the
watch that night in that place.

The six and twentieth the Lord President with the two Regiments of foot, and
with his horse he had led out against Odonnell, together with a Connaght
Regiment under the Earl of Clanrickard, and a Regiment of the Pale under Sir
Christopher Saint Laurence (which upon the way were commanded to join with the
Lord President), came to the Camp; and these four Regiments were that night
quartered by themselves, upon the Westside of Kinsale, to inuest the Town more
closely, and to keep Odonnell and the Spaniards from joining together, which
quarter or lesser Camp was commanded by the Earl of Thomond: for the Lord
President remained ever near the Lord Deputy in the great Camp, and so did
the Earl of Clanrickard. This day the three Culuerings were brought from the
Island beyond the water on the Eastside, and were planted on a hill, in a point
of land near the water on this side of the Haven, lying to the East of our
Fort newly built there, to which hill the Town lay near and very open. In the
mean time the Spaniards from the Town, played upon our ships with a
Demy-Cannon, and shot our Admiral twice, and our Vice Admiral once, while
they rode (as aforesaid) close by the Town, but our ships within few shot
exchanged, did dismount their Demi-Cannon, so as they could make no more shot
with it, and at the same shot hurt their chief Gunner.

The seven and twentieth day betimes in the morning, our three pieces planted
the day before on the point of the hill near the water side, played upon the
Town, and did great hurt to the enemy, by reason they were planted so near
the Town, but the eight and twentieth day falling out extreme windy and
rainy, we were enforced to cease our battery, and spent the rest of the day in
drawing down to that place, some other pieces, formerly planted upon the first
platform.

The foresaid eight and twenty in the morning, we sent a Trumpet to summon
Kinsale, who was not suffered to enter the Town, but received his answer at
the gate, that they held the Town first for Chhist, and next for the King of
Spain, and so would defend it Contratanti. Upon his return with this answer,
the Lord Deputy commanded to make battery with all our Artillery, (planted all
on the East side of the Town), which was presently performed, and continuing
till toward night, brake down great part of the East gate. In the mean time
the Spaniards being retired in great numbers into their trenches on the West
side, to escape the fury of our Ordinance on the East side, Sir Christopher S.
Laurence was commanded to draw out from our new Camp, on the West side, and to
give upon them in their trenches, which he performed, and did beat them out of
the Trenches, following them to the very gates of the Town, killing many, and
hurting more of them, and so returned without loss of a man on our side,
having only some few hurt. The nine and twentieth all our Artillery played
upon the Town, and brake down most part of the Eastern gate, and some part of
a new work the Enemy had made before the gate. This day two Spaniards wrote
from Kinsale to some of their friends prisoners in our Camp, whom they styled
poor Soldiers, when we knew them to be men of account, and withal sent them
such money as they wanted, yet under the title of Alms, as if they had neither
money of their own, nor were of credit to be trusted for any.

The last day of November Sir Richard Wingfield the Marshall took some fifty
shot, and went to the wall of the Town, to view the fittest place for us to
make a breach, the Spaniasds made a light skirmish with them, and hurt some
few. The Marshall when he had well viewed the wall, drew the shot off, and
judging the wall, close to the Eastern gate on the right hand, to be fittest
for the making of a breach, he gave present order that our artillery should
beat upon that place, which was done without intermission, and therewith we
brake down before night a great part of the wall, which the Enemy in the night
attempted to make up again, but was beaten from it by our Guards, who played
upon them with small shot most part of the night. In the evening a Spaniard
ran away from Kinsale to our camp, who reported to the Lord Deputy that our
Artillery had killed diverse Captains and Officers in the Town, besides many
private soldiers.

The first of December it was resolved in Counsel of State and by the Counsel
of War, (namely the chief Commanders and Colonels) that some foot should
be drawn out of the camp, to give the Spaniard a brauado, and to view if the
breach we had made were assaultable, and also to cause the Spaniards to show
themseues, that our Artillery might the better play upon them. To this purpose
two thousand foot, commanded by Sir John Barkeley the Sergiant Mayor, and
Captain Edward Blany, were presently put in Arms, and drawn near the walls
of the Town, who entertained a very hot skirmish with the Spaniards, who were
lodged in a trench close to the breach without the Town. During this skirmish,
our Artillery played upon those that showed themselves, either in the breach or
in the trench, and killed many of them, besides such as were killed and hurt by
our small shot.

Among the rest on Captain Moryson a Spaniard, (of whom as one of the pledges
upon the composition, we shall have cause to speak hereafter) walked cross the
breach, animating his men, and though Sr Richard Wingfield our Marshall caused
many both great and small shot to be made at him, with promise of 20 pound to
him that should hit him, or beat him off, (whereupon many great shot did beat
the dirt in his face, and stories about his ears); yet all the skirmish he
continued walking in this brave manner, without receiving any hurt. Many think
them best soldiers, who are often and dangerously hurt, but it is an error:
for wounds are badges of honor, yet may befall the coward as soon as the
valiant man; and I have known most aduenmrous men who never received wound.
Pardon this my digression, not warrantable in a iournall, I will only add,
that brave soldiers (for the stars have a kind of power in our birth) are
by some secret influence preserved, when others intruding themselves into that
course of life, or driven to it by necessity of estate, fall at the first
allarum: And to speak theologically, God preserues us, but still in our ways,
so as he who without calling rushes into another way then his own, has no
warrant of divine protection. After an hours fight, when we had taken full
view of the breach, and found it not assaultable, our men were drawn off, with
little or no damage on our part, only three of our men were hurt, and
Captain Guests Horse was killed under him, which Captain first had killed two
Spaniards with his own hand.

The same day it was resolved in counsel, to plant a Fort on a Rath on the
West side of the Town, to lodge therein some foot, for seconds to the guard
of our artillery, intended to be planted near the same. And to this purpose,
in the night following, the Marshall, the Sergiant Mayor, Captain Edward
Blany, and Captain Josias Bodley Trenchmaster, (the Lord Deputy being almost
all night present with them), drew out five and twenty of each company, and
intrenching themselves on the said hill, not half Calliuers shot from the
Town, began to cast up a small Fort. And though the Spaniards perceived not
their purpose, yet many of them lying in a trench they possessed close to the
West gate, did play very hotly all night on our men, guarding the Pyoners, and
ours did no less on them, so that diverse were hurt and killed on both sides.
But the second day of December, about nine in the morning, when a great mist
began to break, and they discovered our work a yard high, then from the
said Trenches, and more from the Castles, and high places in the Town, they
plied us all the day with small shot. Notwithstanding which annoyance, our men
brought the work to very good perfection before night. In the mean time, a
Serieant to Captain Blany, drew out some seven or eight shot, and suddenly
fell into a Trench which some Spaniards possessed, close by the Town, of whom
the Serieant killed two, and each of the rest one, with their own hands. But
when not content therewith, they attempted another Trench, something distant
from the first, the Serieant in going on was shot through the body, and two of
his Company were hurt in bringing him off, and so returned with this and no
more loss.

This night the Trenches where the Cannon was planted on the East side of the
Town, were manned with the Lord Deputies guard, (commanded by Captain James
Blount) with Sir Thomas Bourkes Company and Sir Benjamin Berries company, (both
commanded by their Lieftenants), by Captain Rotherams company, (commanded by
himself) by Captain Hobbies company (commanded by himself) Captain Nuses
(commanded by his Lieftenant) and by Captain Roger Haruy his company,
(himself commanding in chief as Captain of the watch there that night for as
every Colonel watched each third night, so every Captain watched in one place
or other each second night). Also this night the Fort on the West side near
the Town, between the two Camps, which was cast up the day before, was
manned by Captain Flower (commanding in chief) and his company by Captain
Spencer and his company, by Captain Dillon and his company, and by the
companies of Sir Arthur Savage, Sir John Dowdall; Captain Masterson, and Sir
William Warren, (commanded by their Liefetenants) together with certain
squadrons out of the Earl of Thomonds quarter in our second camp, which stood
in guard without the Trenches. Now within an hour after night, and some two
hours before the Moon rose, it being very dark and rainy, the Spaniard
impatient of the Forts building, the day before so close to the Towns West
gate, and resolving to attempt bravely on our Ordinance, planted on the East
side, made a brave sally with some two thousand men, and first gave slightly
toward the Trenches on the West side, but presently with a gross and their
chief strength fell upon the Trenches, in which the Artillery lay on the East
side, continuing their resolution to force it with exceeding fury, having
brought with them Tools of diverse sorts, to pull down the Gabbyons and the
Trenches, as also Spykes, to cloy the Ordinance. The allarum being taken in the
camp, the Marshall and Serieant Mayor, Sir Richard Moryson, Sir William
Fortescue, Sir Francis Rushe, and Captain Roc, fallied presently with some
six hundred men toward the Cannon, and Sir Benjamin Berry with some one
hundred men fell directly toward the Port of the Town next to the Camp, and
the Lord Deputy sent out Sir Oliver Saint John's with seconds. Upon the Marshals
arrival and charge, the enemy brake, and our men did execution upon them. Sir
Bentamin Berry fell directly upon the enemies seconds, whom he charged and
brake, killing many of them, and taking the Commander of that body, being an
ancient Captain, of great estimation with the enemy. At the same time the
enemy gave upon our trenches and Fort built the day before on the West side,
and continued the attempt long with great fury, till Captain Flower in heat
and without direction, sallying out of the Fort, to follow part of their forces
discomfited, the enemy entered the Fort before he could return, and possessed
themselves of our trenches. Yet still our men continued the fight, and Sir
William Godolphin gave many brave charges with his horse, to countenance our
men, till the Earl of Clanrickard was sent to second them on this part, with
Captain Skipwith, Captain Clare, Captain Boise, Captain Thomas Bourke, and
some threescore men (for the rest of the Regiment was not advanced so far.)
Then his Lordship and the rest charged the enemies gross, being without the
Fort, and brake them, and did execution upon them falling toward the town,
and so returning thence, entered the West Fort again, with little resistance,
for the enemy abandoned it. This Fort his LP. and his Company made good, till
he was relieved from the Lord Deputy. In this salley in all the enemy left in
the field above one hundred and twenty dead bodies, besides such as were killed
near the Town, and could not next day be discerned by us. And we took
thirteen prisoners, among whom was a Captain Reformado (as they term them,
for honor of antiquitic) who was taken by Henslo, Captain of our Pioners, and
a Serieant, and a Drum. After we heard by some of the Town, that they left
dead above two hundred of their best men, among whom were two Captains, two
Alferoes, and the Serieant Mayor (being the second Commander to Don Iean), and
Don Carloes, and that more then two hundred of them were hurt. On our part
Captain Flower, Captain Skipwith, and the Earl of Clanrickards Lieutenant
were hurt, and Captain Spencer, and Captain Dillon, and Captain Flowers
Lieutenant, were killed in the West Fort, who staying in the Fort when Captain
Fllower sallied, were there found dead in the place which they were commanded
to make good, and with their faces to the enemy, in as honorable manner as
could be expected from any soldier. The enemy sallying on our Fort guarding
our Cannon, cloyed a demyculuering of ours, which being a little crased, was
left without the Fort, but the next morning it was made serviceable again.
Some of them were killed upon the cannon, and upon the powder, and the trenches
about the cannon were in some places filled with dead bodies; for in that
particular attempt they left seventy two bodies dead in the place, and those of
their best men, whereof some were found having spikes and hammers to cloy the
cannon. And in general among the dead bodies many were found to have spells,
caracters, and hallowed meddals, which they woare as preseruations against
death, and most of them when they were stripped, were seen to have scarres of
Venus warfare. We took some forty shouels, and as many mattocks, and much
Arms, left in the field, which tools were so massy, as they had great
advantage of us therein, and the sight of them would have put her Majesty's
Ministers of the Ordinance to shame, who for private gain sent sale ware to
us, unfit to be used. In defending this fort of the cannon, Captain Rotheram
and James (...) Ensign, won great reputation by their valor, and the courage
they gave to others. Because the Earl of Clanrickards Company had watched the
night before this, Sir Henry Follyot was sent with his Regiment to guard the
Western fort till morning.

Some hour before this skirmish, the Lord Deputy was advertised by one
Donnogh O Driscoll, that six Spanish ships were put into Castle Haven, and
that six more were sent with them from the Groyne, but in the way were
scattered from these by tempest, and that since it was not known what became
of them. That in these six ships arrived, were two thousand Spaniards, with
great store of Ordinance and Munition, and that by their report twenty
thousand more were coming presently after them. The third of December, by
reason of rany weather, nothing could be done, only upon relation of a French
runnaway, that the enemy purposed to sally again, some of our men were for a
short time drawn to Arms, but in vain.

The fourth day we received a confirmation of the Spaniards arriual at
Castlehauen, whereupon it was resolved in Counsel, that our first camp should
be more strongly fortified, and that al our horse should be drawn into it, and
that the quarter or lesser camp on the West side (consisting now only of three
Regiments, namely, of the Earl of Thomond, Sir Richard Percy, and Sir
Christopher Saint Laurence) should rise and sit down farther off, toward the
South-gate, having another Regiment added to strengthen it, drawn out of the
first camp on the North side of the Town, where the Lord Deputy lodged, the
lot whereof fell to Sir Charles Wilmott. That our trenches and Fort on the East
side for the guarding of the cannon, should be committed to the continual
guard of Captain Blany, and our Fort at the West gate to Captain Ghest. And
that our battery should cease, till those storms of new Spanish supplies and
the Irish Rebels drawing near were over.

A Drum was sent to the Town, to offer Don Iean liberty to bury his dead,
which message he received with due respect, but prayed us to bury them, with
promise to do the like for any of ours happening to fall in his power. And
because our Drum, according to his direction, expostulated with Don Iean, that
howsoever the Spanish prisoners were well used by us, yet his Lordship heard,
that one of our men taken in the last salley, after he was hurt, so long as he
gave himself out to be an Irish man, was kept in the hospital, but after
being discovered to be an Englishman, was drawn out, and killed. For this
cause Don Iean sent back with him a Spanish Drum to the Lord Deputy,
entreating burial for his dead, with the foresaid promise to do the like for
ours; and for the expostulation, denying any such thing done to his knowledge,
with protestation to punish it highly, if he could discover any such thing to
have been done. The first, his Lordship promised to do as a Christian like
act, though he knew the inequality of the offer, having so many of their
bodies presently in his power. For the second, his Lordship rested satisfied,
yet his Lp did further expostulate with the Drum, that upon our summons of the
Town, after martial manner, they were not content to return a resolute
answer, but added scandalous words, terming us meschini. To which he answered,
protesting that the speech was ill delivered by an harquebuzier, who undertook
to interpret it, but could not do it rightly. His Lordship also excepted to a
kind of challenge sent by Don Iean, that the question between England and
Spain should be tried by combat between them two, this trial being in
neither of their powers by commission, nor in Don Ieans will, though he had
the power, besides that the Council of Trent forbad the Romanists to fight in
Campo Stectuto (or combat in the field) so as this message was rather
quarelsome then honorable, which otherwise his Lordship protested to be most
willing to accept, with thanks for the noble offer. Lastly, his Lordship
remembered, that at our first setting down, he sent a Drum to Don Iean, with
this message; That whereas his Lordship understood certain Ladies and women to
be in the Town, he offered them before the playing of our Artillery free
leave to depart, or remaining there still, to command any provision for
themselves which our camp afforded. And that Don Iean made an uncivil
answer, That he would not be his Baud. To these exceptions he answered with a
Spanish shrug of the shouldier, as having no knowledge nor commission, to
satisfy his Lordship therein. So his Lordship protested, that all the
courtesy offered hitherto by him, proceeded out of that honorable respect
which uses to pass between honorable enemies, and because he would ever be
true to his own Honor, whatsoever others were to theirs. But in case it were
conceived to proceed of any respect of the greatness or power of the Spanish
Nation, or his own fear, that he would hereafter show how much he disdained
such ill interpretations of courtesy. And so his Lordship dismissed the Drum.

This night the Spaniards attempted something by boats against our Sentinels,
but were soon beaten back again. The fifth day Sir Richard Leuison, though
the wind hindered the going out of Kinsale Harbor, yet with towing, got out
the Warspite, the Defiance, the Swiftsure, the Marline, one Merchant, and a
Caruill, and with them went to seek the Spanish Fleet newly arrived at
Castlehauen.

The same day the four Regiments above named, did remove to the new camping
place, as was determined the day before.

The sixth day at ten in the morning, our Fleet arrived at Castle haven, and
before four in the afternoon one Spanish ship was sunk, the Spanish
Admiral with nine foot water in hold drove to the shore upon the rocks, the
Vice Admiral with two others drove likewise a ground, most of the Spaniards
quitting their ships. Our Fleet was forced to stay there the next day by
contrary winds, and the Spaniards having landed some Ordinance, played upon our
ships all the day, but the night following they warped out; and the day after
returned to Kinsale.

The sixth day likewise, a Scottish Bark bringing soldiers from Spain, and
being one of the Fleet newly arrived at Castlehauen, but severed from them at
sea by storm, came into the Harbor of Kinsale, and put the Spaniards, being
fourscore, into our hands, who were brought to the camp, and examined before
the Lord Deputy. David High of Lies, Master and Owner of the Unicorn
examined, laid upon oath: That he went from Waterford six weeks ago with
goods of Waterford for Rochel, and so for Bordeaux, but was driven through
foul weather and a leake into the Groyne, where within an hour after he was
at Anchor, his ship was arrested, and himself taken by the Governor called
Conde, but after they had unladen the Bark, and taken away the sails, he was
set at liberty. That Siriago with a part of the Spanish Fleet sent for
Ireland, was then there, and ready to embarke again for Ireland, having about
one thousand four hundred land soldiers, placed in nine ships, whereof this
examinate was one, the Admiral in which Syriago was, being a Netherlander of
one hundred fifty tun, or therabout, the Vice Admiral a Flemming of one
hundred twenty tun, or there abouts, beside three French ships, and three
Scots, and a Fliboat. That they have great provisions of Powder, Pioners
tools, and twelve or 14 great Pieces mounted for the field. That the seven and
twentieth of the last, they set sail at Groine, and had their directions (as
far as this examinate understands) for Kinsale. That before their departure
from the Groyne, one Jordan Roche of Kinsale, bound for Bordeaux, and from
thence for South-Spaine, coming to an anchor at the Groyne, was there taken,
and forced in the Kings name to be a Pilot on this coast, his ship being sent
on her voyage; by whom they understood, that the Castles of Ryncoran and
Nyparke were taken, which he heard also by the report of a French man he met
at sea. That aboard his ship there was embarked about fourscore Spaniards, and
five or six women, about five and twenty tun of Bread, and six Butts of
wine, whereof the most part was spent in beuerage: but other munitions then the
soldiers weapons they brought none aboard. That Brittingdona is at Lisbone,
ready to transport two thousand soldiers more for Ireland, so soon as he can
get shipping. That Don Diego de Brochero in his return for Ireland, landed at
Lisbone, and from thence posted to the Court, and after his arrival, a present
dispatch was made, to hasten these supplies for Ireland. That in Spain they
make no doubt but Ireland is already won, and from thence the common brute is,
they will for England, then for Scotland, and after will set upon the Turk,
That the fifth of December, they made the land between Cork and Kinsale, and
the wind being scant, turned all that day and night to come in, and by seven
of the clock this morning came into the Harbor, and at opening of the day
perceived our Fleet, which by the Spaniards was conceived to be their Fleet:
but by him (as he says) known to be her Majesty's, and that of purpose he
came to put the Spaniards into our hands. That before his ship came to anchor,
he got a boat; and discovered to Sir Amyas Preston the Spaniards he had
aboard. Whereupon Sir Amyas Preston manned out his boats, and towed in the
ship, whereunto the Spaniards made no resistance. Lastly, that he heard at the
Groyne, that the Adilantado, being then at Port Saint Marie, did daily expect
the coming offoure thousand Italians, but for what purpose he knew not.

The Spaniards then examined on oath, said, That there is in the Fleet with
Siriago not above one thousand, diverse of them taken out of the Gaoles, and
very poor and naked, whereof one whole Company of Portingals was taken out of
prison. That the Admiral is laden with Biscuit, Powder, and Match, and two
cannons for battery. That the whole Fleet consists of ten sail, whereof the
Admiral and Vice Admiral are hulkes of three hundred tonnes, as they esteemed
them, the rest small barks of diverse Nations. That Siriago commands the
Fleet, and Captain Alonzo del Campo commands the foot in chief, being a
Captain of the Terceres, who has an old Company, and Sanedra has another old
Company, but is himself a young soldier. That they heard nothing that Kinsale
was besieged. That Brittendona was at Lisbone, and that they were gathering
supplies, but knew not if they will be ready before the Spring or no. That the
Adilantado was in South-Spaine, and that a Regiment of three thousand Italians
was to come for Ireland. That the whole Fleet was bound for Kinsale, and they
thought the Queens Fleet was their ships of Spain. That all the shipping was
to be gathered together at Lisbone, against the Spring, and four thousand
Italians were coming for England.

This sixth day of December, all the Ordinance was drawn from the Eastern and
Western platformes, into the first Camp on the Northside of the Town, where
the Lord Deputy lodged, that we might the better attend the service of the
field, having our Artillery commodiously placed, since we were advertised, that
Odonnel was joined with those Spaniards which landed lately at Castle-Haeuen,
and that he, together with Tyrone, assisted by all the Rebels force in
Ireland, were drawing up toward Kinsale to relieve it, and were come within
few miles of the camp. Of all these news the Spaniards in Kinsale had
knowledge, and thereupon took heart again, when they were otherwise ready to
yield upon reasonable composition. For this respect, it was thought enough for
us to keep the ground we held, against all these enemies, till we should be
further supplied out of England, since upon the least defeat or disaster
befalling us, the whole Kingdom would have been hazarded (if not lost), by
reason of the peoples inclination to a general revolt.

We fortified the foresaid camp on the West (or South-West) side, where the
Earl of Thomond lay with four Regiments, and it was resolved, that two small
forts should be cast up, and manned, between that camp and the water side
Southward (the said forts and camps, each one flancking the other), thereby so
to inuest the Town, as all succor from the country might be cut off from it.
Further it was resolved, that the ditches of the Lord Deputies camp should be
deepned, and the trenches highthned, and that the back part furthest from the
Town, lying open hitherto should now be closed, and made defensable against
Tyrones forces, as the side toward the Town was made against the Spaniards,
if they both at one time should give upon us. And that all the Forts should be
barricadoed, and by all possible art all the accesses to the town between our
two camps be stopped.

The seventh day the Lord Deputy advertised Master Secretary in England, of all
these particulars, adding that we daily heard very hot Alarums of Tyrones
purpose, to relieve the Town, who strengthened with the above named forces,
was now lodged in Woods, and in accessable strengths, very near to our camp,
so as he hindered us from forage for our horse, and from the helps we
formerly had out of the country, for sustentation of our Army. And that his
neighborhood on the one side, and the Spaniards in Kinsale on the other, kept
us at a bay, from proceeding in our aproches and battery. Besides that our last
supplies were in this short time incredibly wasted, the new men dying by dozens
each night, through the hardness of the winter siege, whereunto they were not
inured. Yet his Lordship still made good his first hope of victory, though it
were deferred, and that which he thought to have attempted with safety to the
State, and ease to the Army, was now to be done with hazard to the State
(inseparable from great actions) and greater painefulnes to the soldier (to
be endured with patience.)

The eight day our Artillery was placed in the several places of our North
side Camp, for the best defense thereof, and a Fort on the West side by the
other Camp, (according to the above mentioned resolution) was cast up, and
almost finished, where toward night we had a slight skirmish with the
Spaniards, in which we had an Ancient and some few men hurt. In the evening the
Rebels Horse were discovered, about Tyrones Forces show themselves.
two miles off, and after supper all our men were drawn into Arms, upon
notice given us by the scouts, that the Rebels drew nigh, but after a small
time, all saving the watch were dismissed to rest.

This night Sir Richard Leuyson returned from Castle Haven, with the Queens
ships into the Harbor of Kinsale, and came to the Camp, to give the Lord
Deputy account of the good service done there. The nine ten and eleven days,
we spent in building the two Sconces, (or Forts) as was formerly resolved in
the sixth days Counsel. They were built on the West side of the Town,
between the Earl of Thomonds quarter and the water Southward, and to inuest
the Town round about, we cast up trenches between the Forts and the Earl of
Thomonds quarter, being thirty score in length, the Forts and the Camp
slancking each other, and we cast up Trenches from that side to the Lord
Deputies Camp, to stop the passage of Cowes, Horses, or any relief to the
Town. The Spaniards made two or three light sallies to view our works on the
West side, as they did likewise the twelfth day, but they were beaten back with
ease, and no loss on our part. The thirteenth day we drew three pieces of
Artillery from the Lord Deputies camp, and planted them on the West side near
the other camp, to play upon an Abbey, which flancked that part where we
intended to make a new breach. The same day the Spaniards taken in the Scots
ship, were sent for England.

And Sir Oliver S. John's was dispatched for England, and by him the Lord Deputy
and the Counsel wrote this following Letter to the Lords in England.

IT may please your Lordships: How we have proceeded in the great business we
have in hand here, since ourlast dispatch unto your Lordships of the seventh of
the last month, we have thought fit to set down by way of iournall enclosed,
humbly praying leave to refer your Lordships thereunto, to avoid needless
repetition; and if the services we have hitherto performed, shall happily fall
short of that which your Lordships in this time have expected, and our selves
(we acknowledge) hoped, we have made collection of the sundry difficulties
and oppositions that we have incountred, since the first news of these
Spaniards discovery upon this Coast, to the end it might appear unto your
Lordships plainly by the view thereof, (as we are confident it will), that
nothing has been wanting in our endeavors, to bring this work to the desired
conclusion, but that a more slow proceeding has been inauoydably occasioned,
by the slow and untimely coming to us of those means and provisions, without
which it is impossible to be effectually active, and the arising of new
accidents and impediments in the mean time, which made our work more
difficult, and therefore will not (we hope) be imputed any fault of ours. Since
the arrival of the Queens ships, the forces, altillery, and other
provisions out of England, we have so annoied this Town with battery in all
parts thereof, as the breach was almost assaultable, and the Houses in the
Town much beaten down, to the great weakening of the defendants, in so much
as we were not without hope to be offered it by composition, or within a little
more time to have entered it by force, though that was held a course of much
hazard and loss, in regard they within are very strong in bodies of men, which
we know to be most certain. The Spaniard finding how hardly he was laid to,
importuned Tyrone and Odonnell with their forces to come to relieve him, they
both are accordingly come, and encamped not far from the Town. And now one
thousand more Spaniards are arrived at Castle Haven, with great store of
munition and artillery, and report that a greater force is coming after, which
does so bewitch this people, as we make account all the Country will now go
out, as most of them have done already, as in our former letters we signified
that we feared. Odonnels forces are said to be four thousand, and to be joined
with the Spaniards that landed at Castle Haven, and Tyrones (as we hear
generally) to be as many more, and since his passage through the Country
hither, Tyrrell with many other Lemster Rebels, (as it is said) are joined with
him, and coming also hither. By these means we are induced to leave our
battery for a time, and to strengthen our Camps, that we may be able to endure
all their sury, as we hope we shall, and keep the Town still be sieged, and
so invested, as we are not out of hope in the end to carry it, notwithstanding
all that they can do. Yet since it is now most apparent, that the King of
Spain means to make this place the seat of the War, not only for the
gaining of this Kingdom, but from time to time to push for England, if he
should get this, (for so some that we have taken and examined, do confess),
and that the whole strength of the Irish are drawn and drawing hither, to set
up their rest, to get that liberty (as they call it) that they have so long
sought for. We must earnestly entreat your Lordships to supply us, and that
speedily, of all things necessary for so great a War, as this is like to be.
We hold it a matter of necessity that four thousand foot more be sent us
presently; without staying one for another to come together, but as they can be
levied and shipped away, and we desire good choice may be made both of the Men
and Arms, for in both the last were much defective, those under Captains were
but ill bodies of men, and the supplies had very ill arms and weapons: We
conceive it will be fittest for the service, that I the Deputy have liberty to
put so many of them under Captains, as cannot at the first be used for
supplies, for though our chief meaning is to fill up the bands already here,
if so many be wanting at their coming hither, that her Majesty may not
unnecessarily be charged with new bands, when the old be not full, but much
deficient, yet a great part of our companies being extreme sick, through the
exceeding misery of this Winters siege, (so as at this present there is but one
third part of the last men that came over serviceable, and able to do duties,
whereof happily a great part may recover), it cannot therefore be determined,
until they be here, what number will be necessary for supplies, and what
companies fit to be raised, for that must grow out of a view here of such as
continue still sick, or are grown deficient by death, or running away,
whereof of late there are very many, notwithstanding the severe courses we have
taken, by executing some for a terror to the rest, by making Proclamations
upon pain of death, that none should depart the camp without license, by
giving direction to the Port Towns that they should be stayed and apprehended:
and lastly, by sending special men to Cork, Yoghall, Waterford, and Wexford,
to see the same duly put in execution, for which purpose they have commission
for martial law, all which is well known to every private man in the camp,
and yet they steal away daily in such numbers, as besides those that by
devises do get passages, there are at this present taken between this and
Waterford, at the least two hundred ready to be returned; though we confess
the misery they endure is such, as justly deserves some compassion, for diverse
times some are found dead, standing centinell, or being upon their guard, that
when they went thither were very well and lusty, so grievous is a Winters
siege, in such a Country: For the sick and hurt men we have taken the best
course we can devise, for at Cork we have provided a guesthouse for them,
where they are most carefully looked unto, and have their lendings delivered in
money, to buy them what the market does afford, with an increase of what is
held fit for them, allowed out of the surplusage of the entertainment for the
Preachers and Cannoneers, (which we conceive your Lordships have heretofore
heard of). And for those that are sick or sickely at the camp, because we
much desire to keep them well (if it were possible), we take this course.
First their own means is allowed them very duly, Sir Robert Gardner being
appointed a Commissioner for that purpose, that the soldier in all things may
have his right, with proclamation that whosoever found him self in any want,
should repair to him; and secondly, out of a general contribution from the
Officers and Captains of the Army, there is fifty pound a week collected for
them, and bestowed in providing warm broth, meat, and lodging, so as a
marvelous great number are thereby relieved. And yet all this does not serve,
but that a great many are still unserviceable which we have here noted at the
greater length that it might appear unto your Lordships that it proceeds not
from want of care or providence in us, but from keeping the field in such a
season, where humane wit cannot prevent their decay. We must further earnestly
entreat your Lordships, that the Fleet may remain upon this Coast during the
war with the Spaniards, and to furnish us with victuals, munition and money,
for Easterly winds are rare at this time of the year, and without every of
these, this action cannot be maintained, but that the Army will break, and
come to nothing. Neither will this Country now afford us any thing, no not so
much as meat for our Horses; and therefore we must likewise be humble suitors,
that two thousand quarters of Oats may speedily be sent us, without which
undoubtedly our Horses will be starued. The particulars of our wants, both of
munition and victuals, are set down by the Master of the Ordinance, and the
Victualer for this Province, and we have made choice of Sir Oliver S. John's, to
solicit your Lordships for a speedy and favorable dispatch, as also to give
satisfaction in all things wherein it may please your Lordships to require a
more particular information, in regard he is well acquainted with all things
that have passed here, otherwise as we were unwilling to have spared him, so
we found him very unwilling to leave the service at this time, had not I the
Deputy inioined him to undertake this business, knowing he could best
satisfy your Lordships in any particular that you might doubt off. We have
also held it very fit humbly to signify to your Lordships, that where we
heard from the Counsel of Dublyn, and otherwise, of her Majesty's purpose to
send some Scots, that it would now very much advance the service, for if four
thousand Scots (which we think a convenient number) might speedily be landed
there, to join with the English at Loughfoyle and Carickfergus, while Tyrone
keeps here with the Forces of that Country, they would no doubt in short time
make so great a spoil there, as he should never be able to subsist, to
maintain a war any more, and a great part both of the English forces and of
them, after having swept those Countries bare, which they might quickly do,
might draw hither to our assistance, with great part of the prey, which would
abundantly relieve both them and us with victual, and so stop the passages
behind him, as he should never be able to return; but that the war both of
Spain and Ireland might have an end together here, whereof we cannot but wish
your Lordships to have due consideration, and humbly pray you to excuse us, for
making thus far bold, which nothing should have led us unto, but zeal and
affection to the service. Lastly, whereas the Enemies Fleet at Lysbone, under
the conduct of Bretandona, is (by intelligence from Spain) assuredly intended
for these parts, to bring supplies to Kinsale within a month or six weeks:
And whereas we find the great importance of this service depending on the
countenance of her Majesty's Fleet, to have the same with us as well to guard
the Harbor and repel the enemies landing, as also to guard our Magazins of
munition and victuals, which must be kept in ships; we having no other
conueniency to keep them: We have made humbly bold to stay the Fleet commanded
by Sir Richard Leuison, and do in like sort beseech your Lordships to victual
them for three months longer, with all possible speed; for they are now
victualled only till the twentieth of January. And because so great a quantity
of victuals as will serve them for that time, can hardly be so soon provided;
we humbly desire that this supply of their victuals may be sent unto them in
parts, as it can be made ready: And because this Fleet, by the opinion of the
best experienced in Sea services, (whom we for our parts do believe), must
necessarily be divided, and yet is too small to serve in two parts, we humbly
pray that some such addition of ships, as in your wisdoms shall be thought meet,
may be sent hither, to forbid the enemy to plant in other places, as Baltimore
and Berre Haven, where it is very probable they mean to plant: by which
division of the Fleet better service may be expected, then otherwise can
possibly be performed. For it is no doubt, but many opportunies will be offered
to fight with the Enemy, which otherwise cannot be looked for. This we humbly
submit to your Lordships favorable consideration, not forgetting (as earnestly
as we may) to recommend to your Lordships good favor Sir Richard Leuison,
Admiral of this Fleet, who has showed himself a most worthy Gentleman, both
in performing of that service upon the Spanish ships at Castle-hauen (which in
our I ournall is expressed), as also in being himself painful, careful,
wise, and valiant in the whole course of all affairs; which your Lordships
committed to his charge, and that in such measure, as we think a more
sufficient and gallant Gentleman could not haud been chosen for such an
employment. And so we most humbly take leave, etc.

By the same dispatch the Lord Deputy wrote this following letter to Master
Secretary in England.

SIr, I know that all great actions are accompanied with many difficulties,
neither are they strange to me, that have put on a mind to endure any thing
for such a Mistress, in such a quarrel. And with cheerfulness shall I
suffer the extremity of hardness, and adventure, if it shall please her
Majesty so graciously to interpret our labors, as to believe (as it is true)
that our difficulties arise out of themselves, and not from any defect of our
Counsels or endeavors. For my self, I protest that I do faithfully propound
unto my self, whatsoever I presume are her Majesty's chief ends, to make a
speedy, safe, and honorable conclusion of this war, which to no private man
would be more unsupportable then to my self, were I not vpheld by my duty and
affection to her service. I do conceive that it is apparent, that the King of
Spain is resolved to make a powerful war with England, and that he has
chosen this Country to be the seat thereof, where we that are her Majesty's
Ministers here, must either mar, or give way to this foundation. If he be
resolved to send continual supplies, and to fortify in several places, the
war is likely to grow long and difficult. For first, it is hard to force a
warlike Nation out of any strength, without great numbers, royal provisions,
and long time, and how hard our supplies of either, can be spared, or sent in
time so far, I fear the estate does already feel too much. The necessity
of making head to an enemy (who having the hearts of all this people, shall
have all their helps, if they durst), does draw our Army to endure all the
incommodities of a miserable Winters siege, wherein, without all prevention,
the greatest part of our strength will decay, before we be ready (in our
chief design of forcing the Town) to use it. And if otherwise we should use
in this work more then advised haste, we might easily hazard the loss of this
Kingdom; for little disasters to us will be conceived overthrows, and
believe Sir, that nothing contains even the best of this Country inhabitants,
but the prosperity and reputation of our Army; so that, although it may please
God to enable us to cut off the thread of this war, sooner then we see
reason to presume of, yet because we have just reason to expect a growing
enemy, and in so great a cause, it must please her Majesty, either to bend
and maintain her Royal power this way, or by some attempt in his own
Countries, to divert his purpose for this; for otherwise if he persist in his
purpose for Ireland, if he once grow of power to break the banks of our
opposition, he will suddenly (and not by degrees) ouerflow all. Hitherto it
has pleased God to prosper us, in all we have undertaken, or has been
undertaken against us; we have won whatsoever the enemy was possessed off
without the Town; we have taken above two hundred Spanish prisoners; there are
(as we are certainly informed) above one thousand dead and killed of them in
the Town, the which we have now as thoroughly invested as may be: but on the
other side the whole force of Tyrone and Odonnell, with all the strength of the
Rebels of Ireland, do lie within six miles of us, and to their assistance they
have the Spanish supplies, and (that which is worst) their munition and
provisions; the whole Province either is joined with them, or stand neutrals;
and what use soever the enemy makes of them, I am sure we receive by them no
manner of assistance. Notwithstanding all this, I hope we shall give a good
account of the besieged; but we have reason to proceed with great caution,
having a desperate enemy before us, and so many that are engaged in the same
fortune behind us. For Tyrone and O Donnell have quit their own Countries, to
recover them here, or else to loose all. Now Sir, to enable us in this great
war, you must continually supply us with munition and victuals. It is true,
how incredible soever you think it, that of two thousand men you send us, you
must account that we make use of little more then five hundred, and yet we can
well justify, that there is nothing omitted that humane wit can provide, for
the preservation of such as we have. I have (much against his will and my own)
sent over Sir Oliver Saint John's, because I presume he can satisfy you in many
things, which by writing we can hardly do. Once more I thought good to
remember you, that I protest before the eternal God, that it grieueth me to
see her Majesty so ill served in her Musters, from the abuses whereof (as I
have done heretofore) I do utterly disclaim, as not being in my power to
reform; for all the Ministers in that kind, are but ciphers or false numbers,
and it is beyond my power to descend into every particular care, in such an
active time, wherein I spend all my meditations in making only of the war;
and wherein how much of the weight of every man's burden does lie upon my
shoulders, I do better feel, then I can express, or make you believe. I will
discontinue the consideration of any thing that belongs to my own private, and
have now only desired this bearer to negociate for me as a public person,
and of public matter, and I beseech God to send me the height of my ambition,
which is, with the conscience of having done her Majesty the service I desire,
to enjoy a quiet, private life; and that her Majesty may never more have need
of men of our profession.

Yours Sir most assured to do you service Mountioy.


The foureteenth day was so rainy, and so tempestious in winds, as we could
not stir out, to proceed any thing in our businesses. The fifteenth our
Artillery, planted by the Camp on the West Side, did play upon the tops of
the Castles in the Town, where the enemies shot were placed, that from thence
they might annoy our men, working in the trenches, and in the platform, and
attending our Artillery. Our pieces brake down many of these Castles, and
killed many of their shot lodged in them. Likewise in the night, while our men
were making new approches, our Ordinance played upon the Town, and many
volleys of small shot were exchanged between us and the enemy.

The sixteenth day the same Ordinance played in like sort upon the Castles in
the Town, and did much hurt to the men there lodged. The seventeenth day was
very tempestious with rain, and especially wind, and so continued all night,
for which cause our Artillery played but seldom upon the town. And this night
the Spaniards sallyed, and brake down a platform, which we had begun the day
before, with purpose to plant our Artillery there; whereupon a slight skirmish
fell between us and them, but with little or no hurt on either side. The
eighteenth day our Artillery continued to play upon the Town. And this day
his Lordship intercepted this following letter, which he commanded me to
translate out of Spanish into English.

To the Prince Oneale, and Lord O Donnell.
I Thought your Excellencies would have come at Don Ricardo his going, since
he had order from you to say, that upon the Spaniards coming to you (from
Castle-Hauen), you would do me that favor. And so I beseech you now you will
do it, and come as speedily and well appointed as may be. For I assure you,
that the enemies are tired, and are very few, and they cannot guard the third
part of their trenches, which shall not avail them, for resisting their first
fury, all is ended. The manner of your coming, your Excellencies know better
to take there, then I to give it here; for I will give them well to do this
way, being always watching to give the blow all that I can, and with some
resolution, that your Excellencies fighting as they do always, I hope in God
the victory shall be ours without doubt, because the cause is his. And I more
desire the victory for the interest of your Excellencies, then my own. And so
there is nothing to be done, but to bring your squadrons, come well appointed
and close withal, and being mingled with the enemies, their Forts will do as
much harm to them, as to us. I commend my self to Don Ricardo. The Lord keep
your Excellencies.

From Kinsale the eight and twentieth (the new style, being the eighteenth
after the old style) of December, 1601. Though you be not well fitted, I
beseech your Excellencies to dislodge, and come toward the enemy, for
expedition imports. It is needful that we all be on horseback (...), and the
greater haste the better.

Signed by Don I can del Aguyla.




The nineteenth day was so extreme rainy, as we could do little or nothing.
The twentieth in the morning being very fair, our Ordinance played, and brake
down good part of the wall of the Town. And to the end we might sharpen
Tyrone (whose lying so near did more annoy us, by keeping relief from us,
then he was like to hurt us by any attempt); or if Tyrones force came not up
sooner, that we might proceed more roundly, this day another great breach was
made beneath the Platform, and though many shot were made to hinder us, yet by
the next morning the work was brought to good perfection. The night was
stormy, with great lightning and terrible thunder; to the wonder of all,
considering the season of the year and this night came certain intelligence,
that Tyrone, drawn on by Don Ieans importunity, determined presently to set up
his rest for the relief of the Town, and that the next night he would lodge
within a mile and half of our Camp.

The one and twentieth ourscouts confirmed the same, and toward night Tyrone
Tyrone shows himself horse and foot.
showed himself with all his horse and foot, upon a hill within a mile of us
in the way to Corkes. Whereupon two Regiments of our foot, and most of our
horse being drawn out of the Camp, made toward them: but when they saw our
men resolutely come forward, they fell back to a Fastness of wood and water,
where they encamped.

This night being light with continual flashings of lightning, the Spaniards
sallied again, and gave upon a trench, newly made beneath our Canon, but were
the sooner repelled, because we kept very strong Guards, and every man was
ready to be in Arms, by reason of Tyrones being so near unto us.

The two and twentieth Tyrones horse and foot often showed themselves from an
Hill, beyond which they encamped in a Wood, yet our Artillery still played upon
the Town, breaking down the Wall, and some Turrets, from whence the Spaniards
shot annoyed our men. Many intelligences confirmed, that Tyrone on the one
side, and the Spaniards on the other, had a purpose to force our Camp.

This night the Spaniards sallied, and gave upon a trench close to the Westside
of the Town, which the Serieant that kept it did quit: but Sir Christopher
Saint Laurence appointed to second him, came up with some foot, and did heat
the Spaniards into the Town, before they could do any great hurt, save only
a little defacing it. Our Artillery still played upon the Town, that they
might see we went on with our business, as if we cared not for Tyrones
coming, but it was withal carried on in such a fashion, as we had no meaning
to make a breach, because we thought it not fit to offer to enter, and so put
all to hazard, until we might better discover what Tyrone meant to do, whose
strength was assured to be very great, and we found by letters of Don Ieans,
which we had intercepted, that he had advised Tyrone to set upon our Camps,
telling him that it could not be chosen, but our men were much decayed by the
Winters siege, and so, that we should hardly be able to maintain so much
ground, as we had taken when our strength was greater, if we were well put
to, on the one side by them, and on the other side by him, which he would not
fail for his part to do resolutely. And it was most true, that our men daily
died by dozens, so as the sick and runnawaies considered, we were grown as
weak as at our first setting down, before our supplies of four thousand
foot.

The strength of our Regiments the three and twentieth of December.
The Lord Deputies Regiment had able men, 715. The Lord Presidents Regiment
able men, 556. The Earl of Clanrickards Regiment able men, 529. The Earl of
Thomonds Regiment, 572. The Lord Audley his Aegiment, 370. Sir Richard Percies
Regiment, 544. Sir Richard Morysons Regiment, 541. Sir Oliver Saint John's his
Regiment, 515. Sir Charles Wilmotts Regiment, 454. Sir Henry Follyots Regiment,
595. Sir Christopher Saint Laurences Regiment of Irish, 747. Sir Henry Powers
Squadron volant (or flying Regiment) drawn out of the former Regiments, after
the making of the List in November last, 449.

The Total of Foot able men besides runawaies, and hurt, and sick, lying
as well in the Camp, as at Cork, 6595.

This evening one of the chief Commanders in Tyrones Army, having some
obligations to the Lord President, sent a messenger to him for a bottle of
Vsquebagh, and Tyrone redues to assail our Camp.
by a letter wished him, that the English Army should that night be well upon
their guard, for Tyrone meant to give upon one Camp, and the Spaniards upon
the other, meaning to spare no man's life but the Lord Deputies and his. Don
Iean de l' Aguila after confessed to the Lord President, that notwithstanding
our sentinels; he and Tyrone the night following, had three messengers the one
from the other. All the night was clear with lightning (as in the former
nights were great lightnings with thunder) to the astonishment of many, in
respect of the season of the year. And I have heard by many horsemen of good
credit, and namely by Captain pikeman, Cornet to the Lord Deputies troop, a
Gentleman of good estimation in the Army, that this night our horsemen set to
watch, to their seeming did see Lamps burn at the points of their staves or
spears in the midst of these lightning flashes. Tyrones guides missed the
way, so as he came not vpto our Camp by night, as the Spaniards ready in
Arms howerly expected, but early about the break of the next day.

The four and twentieth of December, some half hour before day, the Lord
Deputy in his house sitting at Counsel with the Lord President and Master
Marshall, as thinking the intended enterprise of the enemy by some accident to
be broken, suddenly one of the Lord Presidents horsemen called him at the
door, and told him, that Tyrones Army was come up very near to our Camp. And
Sir Richard Greame, having the Scout that night, when he discovered that
Tyrone with his forces was on foot marching toward the Camp, presently
advertised the Lord Deputy thereof, and his Lordship being always in
readiness to intertaine them (seldom going to bed by night), and at this time
(as I said) setting in Counsel, when he heard that they were advanced within
three quarters of a mile to our Camp, caused all our men to draw into Arms in
the quarter, and himself with the Marshall attending him, advanced toward our
scouts, whence he sent the Marshall Sir Richard Wingfeild, to take view of the
enemy, and he brought him word, that they were in the same place formerly
advertised. Upon his return the Lord Deputy left for defense of the great
Camp on the Northside, his Lordships own Regiment, under his Lieutenant Sir
Benjamin Berry, the Lord Presidents Regiment (who was in his Lordships absence
to command both Camps in chief), the Earl of Clanrickards Regiment the Lord
Audlie his Regiment, and Sir Richard Moryson his Regiment. This done, the Lord
Depuputie sent a Corporal of the field unto our lesser Camp (or quarter)
commanded by the Earl of Thomond, and gave order there for disposing the four
Regiments of the Earl of Thomond, Sir Richard Percy, Sir Charles Wilmot, and
Sir Christopher Saint Laurence, and directed how to set all the Companies in
their several guards. In former notes I find Sir Richard Percies Regiment
quartered in the Earl of Thomonds Camp, but here I find it reckoned among
them of the greater Camp, and the Earl of Clanrickards Regiment in this
lesser Camp, whereof I remember not the certainty, but am sure, how soever
they had been changed, that the Regiments for number, were at this time thus
disposed in the two Camps. By this time the Marshall, with some The defeat of
Tyrones forces.
four hundred horse, and Sir Henry Powers. Regiment (being to answer
Alarums, and so drawn out at this time, as they had been for three nights
before on like occasion) was advanced within twenty score of the enemy, the
ground rising so high between them and our men, as they could not see one the
other.

It was now the break of day, whereas midnight was the time appointed for the
Rebels to meet with Don Isans forces, the Spaniard being to set upon our
lesser Camp (or the Earl of Thomonds Quarter), and Tyrrell leading the Rebels
Vantguard (in which were the Spaniards lately landed at Castle-Hauen), and
Tyrone leading their Battle, and O, Donnell their Rear, being all to set
upon our chief Camp, conceiving themselves of sufficient strength to force
both our Camps at one instant, and to make no great work of it.

The Lord Deputy, with the Lord President in his company, being come up to our
forces, led out against Tyrone, and resolving there to give him battle,
commanded Sir John Barkeley Serieant Mayor to draw out of the Camp the two
Regiments of Sir Oliver Saint John's and Sir Henry Follyot: Upon their coming
up, the enemy finding us resolved to fight, retired himself over a Foard, and
the Marshall seeing them disordered in their retrait, sent word thereof by Sir
Froncis Rush to the Lord Deputy desiring leave to fight, and his Lordship by
Sir Samuel Bagnol gave him leave to order that service according as he in his
discretion, should find the disposition of the enemy, and therewith sent back
Sir George Carew Lord President with three troops of horse, to the great
Camp, to command both Camps in chief, and to make head against the Spaniards,
if they should sally out of the Town.

But the Spaniards still expecting the coming up of the Rebels, according to
their mutual project, and never imagining that we with our small forces,
could draw out sufficient bands to meet and beat the Rebels, contained
themselves within the town walls, till (as by the sequel shall appear)
their sailies could little profit them.

After the said message sent to the Marshall, presently the Earl of
Clanrickard came up, and exceedingly importuned the Marshall to fight.
Whereupon the Marshall drew a Squadron of foot with their Drum to the Foard,
and willed Sir Richard Greame with his horse to march directly to the Foard.
Then the enemy retired hastily with horse and foot over a boggy ground to
firm land, hoping to keep that boggie passage against us: Then the Marshall
directed Sir Henry Dauers (commanding the horse under him), with his horse, and
Sir Henry Power with his Regiment of foot to advance, who presently came over
the foresaid Foard unto him. The Lord Deputy being upon the hill with two
Regiments of foot, commanded the Serieant Mayor there attending him, to second
our men with those foot. So the Marshall having the Earl of Clanrickard, and
Sir Henry Dauers with him, advanced with some hundred horse; and began with a
hundred Harqubufiers (led by Lieutenant Cowel a valiant Gentleman, marked by a
red cap he wore, to be a special instrument in this fight) to give occasion of
skirmish on the Bog side, which the rebels with some loose shot entertained,
their three Batallions standing firm on the one side of the Bog, and our Fort
on the otherside. In this skirmish our foot were put up hard to our horse,
which the Marshall perceiving, put forth more shot, which made the Rebels
retire toward their Battle. Then the Moshiall finding a way through a Foard,
to the ground where the Rebels stood, he possessed the same with some foot,
and presently he passed over with the Earl of Clanrickard, Sir Richard
Greames, Captain Tasse, and Captain Fleming, and their horse, and offered to
charge one of the Rebels Battles of one thousand eight hundred men: but
finding them stand firm, our horse wheeled about. Now Sir Henry Dauers with
the rest of the horse, Sir William Godolphin with the Lord Deputies, and
Captain Minshall with the Lord Presidents troops (kept by the Lord Deputy to
answer all accidents), and our Serieant Mayor with two Regiments (sent by the
Lord Deputy to second the Regiment of Sir Henry Power, being with the
Marshall,) came all up, whereupon the Marshall with the horse charged home upon
the Rear of the Battle, and the Irish not used to fight in plain ground,
and something amazed with the blowing up of a Gunpowder bag (they having
upon the like fright defeated the English of old at Blackwater), but most
discouraged to see their horse fly (being all Chiefes of Septs and Gentlemen,
to the number of five or six hundred), were suddenly routed, and our men
followed the execution. The other two Battles that stood still, now finding
this routed, made haste to succor them. Whereupon the Lord Deputy sent
instantly Captain Francis Roe with Sir Oliver Saint John's Regiment (of which
he was Lieutenant Colonel), to charge on the Flanck of the Vanguard, which
presently retired disorderly, being followed by our foot and horse: but the
Spaniards landed at Castle-Hauen, marching there, and being not so good of
foot as the Irish, drew out by themselves, yet were by Sir William Godolphin
leading the Lord Deputies troop, soon broken, and most of them killed, the
rest (with their chief Commander Don Alonzo Del Campo) being taken prisoners,
namely, two Captains, seven Alfieroes, and forty soldiers, whereof some were
of good quality. In the mean time many of the light footed Irish of the Van
escaped, as did likewise almost all the Rere, by advantage of this execution
done upon the Spaniards and the maine Battle, (of which body far greater
then either of the other, all were killed), but only some sixty or there
abouts.

Thus the Irish horse first leaving the foot, then two of the Battalions being
routed, they all fell to fly for life, our men doing execution upon many in
the place. On our part Sir Richard Greames Cornet was killed, Sir Henry Dauers,
Sir William Godolphin, Captain Henry Crofts Scout-master were slightly hurt,
only six soldiers hurt, but many of our horses killed, and more hurt. The
Irish Rebels left one thousand two hundred bodies dead in the field, besides
those that were killed in two miles chase: we took nine of their Ensigns, all
their Drums and Powder, and got more then two thousand Arms. And had not our
men been greedy of the Spaniards spoil, being very rich, had not our foot
been tired with continual watchings long before, in this hard winters siege.
Had not our horse especially been spent by ill keeping and want of all meat
for many days before, (by reason of Tyrones neerenesse, so as the day before
this battle it had been resolved in Counsel to send the horse from the Camp
for want of means to feed them, and if Tyrone had lain still, and not
suffered himself to be drawn to the plain ground by the Spaniards
importunity, all our horse must needs have been sent away or starued.) Had not
these impediments been, we had then cut the throats of all the rebels there
assembled; for they never made head against them that followed the execution,
nor scarce ever looked behind them, but every man shifted for himself, casting
of his Arms, and running for life. In so much as Tyrone after confessed
himself to be overthrown by a sixth part of his number, which he ascribed (as
we must and do) to Gods great work, beyond man's capacity, and withal
acknowledged that he lost above one thousand in the field, besides some eight
hundred hurt. This we understood by the faithful report of one, who came from
him some few days after, and told the L. Deputy moreover, that he tormented
himself exceedingly for this his overthrow.

After the battle, the Lord Deputy in the midst of the dead bodies, caused
thanks to be given to God for this victory, and there presently knighted the
Earl of Claurickard in the field, who had many fair escapes, his garments
being often peirced with shot and other weapons, and with his own hand killed
above twenty Irish kerne, and cried out to spare no Rebel. The captive Spanish
Commander Alonzo del Campo, auowed that the Rebels were six thousand foot and
500 horse, whereas the Lord Deputy had but some one thousand two hundred foot,
and less then four hundred horse. So before noone his Lordship returned to
the camp, where commanding vollias of shot for joy of the victory, the
Spaniards perhaps mistaking the cause, and dreaming of the Rebels approach,
presently sallied out, but were soon beaten into the Town, especially when
they saw our triumph, and perceived our horsemen from the hill on the West
side, to wave the Colors we had taken in the battle, and among the rest,
especially the Spanish Colors, (for such most of them were, the Rebels in
woods not using that martial bravery). The same day an old written Book was
showed to the Lord Deputy, wherein was a Prophecy, naming the soard and hill
where this battle was given, and foretelling a great overthrow to befall the
Irish in that place.

A note given by one of Tyrones followers, of his loss at this overthrow.
Tirlogh Ohagan Son to Art Ohagan, Commander of five hundred, slain himself
with all his company, except twenty, whereof eleven were hurt, and of them
seven died the eighteenth day, after their return.

Kedagh Mac Donnell, Captain of three hundred, slain with all his men, except
threescore; whereof there were hurt five and twenty.

Donnell Groom mac Donnell, Captain of a hundred, slain himself and his
whole company.

Rory mac Donnell, Captain of a hundred, slain himself and his company.

Five of the Clancans, Captains of five hundred, themselves slain and their
companies, except threescore and eighteen, whereof eighteen were hurt.

(...) sons had followers in number three hundred, under the leading of
Captain Mulmore oheagarty, all slain with the said Mulmore, saving one and
thirty, whereof twenty were hurt. Colle Duff mac Donnell, Captain of one
hundred, lost with all his company.

Three of the Neales, Captains of three hundred, sent by Cormack mac Barron,
all lost saving eighteen, whereof there were nine hurt.

Captains slain fourteen. Soldiers slain 1995. Soldiers hurt 76.

The five and twentieth day (being our Christmas day) the Spaniards in the
afternoon made a flight sally, but finding us ready to entertain them,
presently they (...) back, yet to hinder our making a trench, which woe then
began; and which they found would do them much hurt, they sallied again
strongly at nine of the clock in the night, and maintained the fight till
eleven, wherein the Ensigns to Captain Roper and Captain Ghest, with diverse
others on our part were hurt hard by their wall but in short space after, they
were beaten into the Town with many of theirs hurt, and so we perfected that
work. The six and twentieth in the night, the Spaniards made another sally at
the West gate (as formerly) upon a new trench we kept close to the Town, and
that so hotly, as they enforced our men to quit it, having the Liefetenant of
the guard and ten more of them shot. But when the Spaniards made vpto our lower
Four, they were presented with a volly of shot in their teeth, which killed
fearre, and hurt eight of them, and so they drew into the Town.

The seven and twentieth the Lord Deputy dispatched Sir Henry Dauers into
England, with the following letters (touching the happy overthrow of Tyrone),
from his Lordship and the Counsel here, to the Lords in England.

IT may please your Lordships. In the last dispatch sent by Sir Oliver S.
John's, which longere this time we hope is safely delivered unto your hands,
there was at large revealed unto you all our proceedings at the siege, and also
the estate we were then in, having before us in the Town the spanish forces,
and at our backs Tyrone and Odonnell, with the (...) Army; since whose
departure they dislodged from the place where they then in camped, and lay in
camp within less then two miles of us, in the way toward Cork whereby the
passage from our Camp to Cork was blocked up, so as no provisions for our
relief from thence could come unto us, which unto the Army was agreat
annoyance, and we in a manner were no better then besieged. The Enemies proud
in their strength, resolved to set up their rests, accounting us in their
opinion lost men, unable to resist so great a power, and therefore by a
general consent, they determined on all parts to give upon our camp, as well
out of the Town by the Spaniards, as by the Irish on the other side, and
according to that resolution, on Christmas even before day, Tyrone with his
Army rose, and with all his forces of horse and foot, by break of day
presented himself in order of battle: but it pleased God in his goodness to
give us a gracious victory, with a handful of men in respect of his Army, the
particulars whereof being too long to insert in a letter, we humbly refer
your Lordships to the relation sent with these, wherein the same is at large
and particularly related, in which overthrow we gained many Spanish letters of
great consequence, the most effectual of which we send unto your Lordships
herewith, together with a brief abstract of those which we reserve here, as
unwilling to trouble your Lordships with those of less monent. By view of
which intelligence and aduices, and the relation of such Spanish Prisoners of
account, and understanding, as we have had conference with all, the second and
further preparation of the foreign enemy, is more apparently discovered, then
at the dispatching away of Sir Oliver S. John's: And therefore we may not cease
humbly to importuue your Lordships, in regard of these threatened supplies by
sea and land, and that the great and speedy use we have of the men; munition,
victuals, and treasure, which we formerly moved your Lordships for, in the
letters sent by the said Sir Oliver S. John's, will admit no long delays, that
your Lordships will not only be pleased to supply us presently therewith, but
that those proportions may be enlarged in every point, as in your wisdoms
(upon due regard had to the intelligences sent herewith) shall be thought meet:
for in our understanding (we being now by the occasions aforesaid enabled to
know more of the enemies dsignes, then we did before) all of every kind that
was by us formerly written for, will be too little. And further, in as much as
the chief strength of our Army consists in our Horse troops, who in this
service were the principal means and instruments of the overthrow given the
enemy, as well in giving the first charge, as in doing and following the
execution: for the preservation of them in strength, we humbly pray your
Lordships that the two thousand quarters of Oats formerly written for, may
presently be dispatched hither; and in regard the whole Country is so harried
and wasted, that it cannot yield us any relief, and that without corn our
horses (as they begin) must daily weaken more and more, and so our army be in
hazard to perish; for timely prevention thereof, we humbly pray your Lordships,
that an addition of Oats may be given to the said proportion, and although not
at once, yet from time to time sent hither, as conueniency of shipping will
give leave: for we dare assure your Lordships, if for want of them our horses
had not been grown so feeble, there had few of the enemies horse or foot
escaped. And that your Lordships will be further pleased to send away with the
best expedition the munition and habiliments of war already written for, and
to send the same with all possible haste, according to the demands sent
herewith, and subscribed by the Master of the Ordinance, without which all
other charges and provisions are to no purpose. We also pray your Lordships
that you will be pleased to have consideration to send hither a compitent
Fleet to guard the Coast, for we are of opinion, and so gather by the
collections we have probably made, that the King of Spain his Fleet will be
great, which being granted, the ships we have here will not be enough to supply
all occasions, considering how they must be dispersed, both to defend the
Coast, and to prohibit the sending and arrival of their seconds, as also to
answer all other services, wherein shipping is necessary to be employed. And
for as much as the ending and deuersion of this war rests chiefly in the
weakening and disinabling of Tyrone, (whose reputation by this last overthrow,
is both with the foreign enemy, and his own followers, very much blemished);
and for that it may be apparently conceived, that the Spaniard will no longer
maintain a tedious and chargable war in this remote Kingdom, then he has a
strong and powerful party, and safe means of landing therein: To disinable
him from this assurance and hopes here, in our understanding, the sending of
four thousand Scots into Vlster, would do excellent service, and they being
once joined with her Majesty's forces at Loughfoyle and Carickfergus, would
either absolutely banish Tyrone from thence, by possessing all the holds and
places of strength in Vlster, or else constrain him to make his defense at
home, and keep him from giving any help to the Spaniards, and so be utterly
rejected from having either credit or aides hereafter from them. The same time
the Lord Deputy wrote to Master Secretary this following letter.

SIR we have written to the Lords both of our estate and desires, and do wish
that it may please them to conceive that the materials be great that must stop
the breach that the King of Spain has already made in this Country, and a
slender opposition will not resist, but be carried away with an inundation, if
he send supplies. We have already miraculously overcome one dangerous brunt,
and God has given the Queen the greatest victory that ever she obtained in
this Country, but believe me Sir that there is no one place that is defended
with good men, but will go near to break the Army that does force it, though
it be carried. We have forced two places already held by the Spaniard, and now
he remains possessed and fortified in four several places more, with great
store of munition, artillery and victuals There is supply of horse and foot
certainly coming unto them, some say in great numbers. We have endured, (I
dare boldly say) the most miserable siege for extremity of weather and labor,
that in this age has been heard of. If it please God to enable us to effect
this, it is impossible for this army to undertake, in this season, and those
places, as it is now or will be diminished, any present service without rest.
Believe me Sir, you must make peace, or provide for a chargeable war; for
there is nothing that carries these places without royal provisions. If her
Majesty think her own occasions, and not us her poor Ministers, to be the
cause of this huge expense, I shall willingly endure the purgatory I line in,
and sacrifice my time, my life and my living, to do her the best service I
can; but if you find that she conceiueth the worse of me, because I am the
Cook to dress her diet here so chargably, I beseech you Sir (if I may ever
deserve your love) use your uttermost power to rid me speedily of my office,
and I dare presume that I have made no evil way for my successor to tread
after me. I would feign write much unto you, but with wet and heat in the last
overthrow, I have taken some cold, and my head does make me write in great
pain. I beseech you Sir pardon me, and esteem me your honest poor friend,
that am resolved to be so ever. I was glad to send Sir Henry Dauers over with
this good news, who (I assure you) has taken exceeding pains, and lost some
of his blood in this last service, and besides some necessity of his own, has
long desired such an opportunity to come over for a time. And so Sir I beseech
God to send us peace, for I am weary of the war.

From before Kinsale the seven and twenty of December 1601. Yours Sir most
assured to do you service, Mountioy.



The 28 day of December, the Lord Deputy was advertised that Syrriago a
principal Commander of the Spaniards, landed in the West parts, having
received news of Tyrones overthrow, was suddenly gone for Spain, without
acquainting any of the Spaniards therewith, and that he carried with him in
the same ship Hugh Odonnell. And thus was the old prophecy fully
accomplished, which often before we had heard, namely, that Mounster should be
the destruction of the three great Northern Hughes. For Hugh Mac Guyer Lord of
Fermanagh, and the first Robinhood of this great rebellion, was long since
killed near the City of Cork, and Hugh Tyrone, and Hugh O Donnell were
overthrown at Kinsale, whereof Hugh O Donnell is now fled for Spain, whence
he never returned; and Hugh Tyrone drew faintly his last breath in the North,
without hope of better living, then as a Wood-kerne here, or as a fugitive
abroad. Likewise Hugh Mostian, a famous Rebel at this time fled with O Donnell
into Spain.

The nine and twentieth day his Lordship had aduertisements from diverse places,
that Tyrone in his flight out of Mounster passing the Blackwater, lost many of
his carriages, and had some hundred and forty of his men drowned, fear making
them so hasty, as they could not attend the passing of their own fellows,
much less the fall of the waters.

The last of December Don Iean General of the Spaniards, offered a Parley,
sending his Drum Mayor out of the Town with an Alfiero, bringing a sealed
letter from The Spaniard parlies.
him to the Lord Deputy, by which he required, (as by the same sent in the next
dispatch by Sir Richard Moryson to the Lords in England appears) that some
gentleman of special trust and sufficiency, might be sent from the Lord
Deputy into the Town, for whose pledge a Spanish gentleman of like quality
should be sent by Don Iean into the camp, and upon conference he would
acquaint the said gentleman with the conditions upon which he stood. This
granted, the Lord Deputy chose Sir William Godolphin to be employed in this
important negotiation, and sent him into the town to confer with Don John, as
he likewise sent Don Pedro Henrico to remain in the Camp.

His first conference with Sir William Godolphin tended to this. That having
found the Lord Deputy (whom he termed Viceroy) though a sharp and powerful,
yet an honorable enemy; and the Irish not only weak and barbarous, but (as
he feared) persidious friends, he was so far in his affection reconciled to
the one, and distasted with the other, as he was thereby induced to make an
ouerture of such a composition as might be safe and profitable for the state of
England, with least prejudice to the Crown of Spain, by delivering into the
Viceroyes power the town of Kinsale, with all other places held by the
Spaniards in Ireland, so as they might depart upon honorable rearmes, fitting
men of war not forced by necessity to receive conditions, but willingly
induced for just respects to relinquish a people by whom their King and Master
had been notoriously abused, if not betrayed. That if the Viceroy liked to
intertaine this parley, he would please to understand him rightly, and make
such propositions as were suitable to men resolved rather to bury themselves
alive, then to give way to any accord that should taste of dishonor, being
confident of their present strength and the royal seconds of Spain, did not
the former respects lead them to disingage their King of this enterprise. Sir
William Godolphin directed only to receive his demands, returned to the Camp,
and related them to the Lord Deputy and Counsel. The answer sent back by him
was this; That howsoever the Lord Deputy had lately defeated the Irish, and
well understood their weakness and the irresistable difficulties that pressed
them, how ere they labored to cover the same, yet knowing that her sacred
Majesty his Mistress, would in her merciful disposition repute her victory
blemished by voluntary effusion of Christian blood, he was content to
intertaine this offer of agreement, so it were upon honorable terms, fitting
the advantage her Majesty had against them.

In the next conference the Lord Deputy required for the first Article, that
Don Iean should leave his treasure, munition, and artillery, and the Queens
natural subjects to be disposed at her Majesty's pleasure. But Don Iean vowed
rather to endure the last of miseries, then to be guilty of so foul a treason
against his King, and the reputation of his prosession, though he were unable
to subsist, much more now when he had not only means to sustain the war,
but hope by patience and constancy to attain the best ends of his business.
Adding, that he took it so ill to be misunderstood, in having an Article of
this nature propounded to him, as if it were once more mentioned, the Viceroy
should from thenceforth use the advantage of his Sword, and not the benefit of
his former proffers. He further said, that the Viceroy had cause rather to
judge two hundred thousand ducats well disbursed by the Queen, to have the
Spaniards quit their possession of Baltimore alone, to say nothing of Kinsale,
Castle Haven, and Beer Haven, which with all them perishing, yet Baltimore
might easily be kept for the arrival of the Spanish Fleets and all seconds
that his Master so deeply engaged should please to send, which might draw on a
more powerful invasion, this first being undertaken upon false grounds, at the
instance of a base and barbarous people, who having discovered their own
weakness, had armed his King and Master to rely on his own strength, being
tied in honor to relieve his people thus engaged. This (said he) I speak in
case the Viceroy were able to force Kinsale, as I assure my self he cannot, I
having upon my honor two thousand able fighting men old soldiers, besides the
sick daily recovering, now better inured to the climate, and enduring of all
hardness, besides our convenient means of food, such as we Spaniards can
well live upon, and our store of munition most importing, with confident
assurance shortly to have new supplies of all things. Adding that he preserved
his strength, to be able to front us in a breach, which their hearts not
failing, they had hands and breasts to stop against trebble our forces, though
he would give the Viceroy that right, that his men were passing good, yet spent
and tired with a Winters siege, obstinately continued beyond his expectation,
but with such caution and so good guard, as he having watched all advantages,
could never make a salley without loss to his part, wherein he acknowledged
himself much deceived, that grounding upon some error in our approches, he
had promised himself the defeat of one thousand men at least, and at one
blow: but (said he) when we meet in the breach, I am confident upon good
reasons, to lay five hundred of your best men on the earth, which loss will
make a great hole in your Army, that has already suffered such extremity.

Lastly he concluded, that the King his Master sent him to assist the two
Counts O Neale and O Donnel, and he presuming on their promises to join their
forces with his within few days, had first long expected them in vain, and
sustained the Viceroyes Army, and at last had seen them drawn to the greatest
head they could make, lodged near Kinsale, reinforced with Companies of
Spaniards, every hour promising him relief; and at last broken with a
handful of men, and blown asunder into diverse parts of the World, O Donnell
into Spain, O Neale into the furthest North: so as now finding no such Counts
in rerum Natura (to use his very words) with whom he was commanded to join, he
had moved this accord, the rather to disingage the King his Master from
assisting a people so weak, as he must bear all the burden of the war, and
so perfidious, as perhaps in requital of his favor, they might at last be
won to betray him.

Relation of this conference being made to the Lord Deputy and Counsel, they
considered, that the treasure that Don Iean brought, was at first but one
hundred thousand Ducates, whereof the greatest part could not but be spent in
paying his soldiers 4 months, and other occasions of expense, for which and
other good reasons, they concluded not to stand upon the first article,
especially since many strong reasons made the agreement, as it was honorable,
so to seem very profitable to the State of England; namely, that our Army was
wasted and tired with the winters siege. That it was dangerous to attempt a
breach defended with so many able men. That if we should lodge in the breach,
yet they having many strong Castles in the Town, so much time might be spent
ere we could carry it, as our Fleet for want of victuals might be forced to
leave us. That at this time our Army was only provided for six days. That we
had not munition or Artillery to make any more then one battery in one place
at once, five of our pieces being crased. That upon any disaster befalling us,
the Irish were like to revolt. That besides the taking of Kinsale, the other
places held by the Spaniards, as Baltymore, Custle haven, and Beare-hauen,
would have made a long and dangerous war, with infinite charge to the State
of England, they being strongly fortified, and well stored with all provisions
of war, and our Army being so tired, as it could not attempt them, without
being first refreshed, and then being supplied with all necessaries, to the
unsupportable charge of our Sat, must have been carried by Sea to those
places, inaccessable by land. Lastly, that in this time the King of Spain
could not but send them powerful seconds, being thus far engaged in his
Honor. Besides that by this long war we should be hindered from prosecution
of the Rebels, who were now so broken, as in short time they must needs be
brought to absolute subjection.

After many goings to and fro, certain Articles were agreed upon the second of
January toward the end of the year 1601, according to the English, who end
and begin the year at our Lady day in Lent, but the Articles bear date the
twelfth of January 1602 after the new style, and according to the Spanish
manner, to begin the year the first day of the same month. The Lord Deputy
gave me the said Articles in English to be fair written, that the copy
thereof being signed by both the Generals, might be sent into England. And
likewise his Lordship commanded me to translate the same Articles into the
Lattin and Italian tongues, that two coppies of each being signed by the
Generals, one of each might remain with the Lord Deputy, and the others be
sent The conditions of the Spaniards yielding Kinsale and other places.
to the King of Spain. These Articles follow word by word in English, as they
were signed by the Lord Deputy and the Spanish General.

Mountioy.
IN the Town of Kinsale, in the Kingdom of Ireland, the twelfth of the month
of January 1602, between the noble Lords, the Lord Mountioy, Lord Deputy and
General in the Kingdom of Ireland, for her Majesty the Queen of England, and
Don Iean de l'Aguyla, Captain and Campe-Master General and Governor of the
Army of his Majesty the King of Spain, the said Lord Deputy being encamped and
besieging the said Town, and the said Don Iean within it, for just respects
and to avoid shedding of blood, these conditions following were made between
the said Lords Generals and their Camps, with the Articles which follow.

1 First, that the said Don Iean de l'Aguyla shall quit the places which he
holds in this Kingdom, as well of the Town of Kinsale, as those which are
held by the soldiers under his command in Caste-Hauen, Baltimore, and the
Castle at Beere-Hauen, and other parts, to the said Lord Deputy (or to whom he
shall appoint), giving him safe transportation, and sufficient for the said
people of ships and victuals, with the which the said Don Iean with them may
go for Spain, if he can at one time, if not, in two shippings.

2 Item, that the soldiers at this present being under the command of Don Iean
in this Kingdom, shall not bear Arms against her Majesty the Queen of
England, wheresoever supplies shall come from Spain, till the said soldiers
be unshipped in some of the Ports of Spain, being dispatched as soon as may
be by the Lord Deputy, as he promises upon his faith and honor.

3 For the accomplishment whereof, the Lord Deputy offers to give free
pasport to the said Don Iean and his Army, as well Spaniards as other Nations
whatsoever, that are under his command, and that he may depart with all the
things he has, Arms, Munition, Money, Ensigns displaied, Artillery, and
other whatsoever provisions of war, and any kind of stuff, as well that
which is in Castle-Hauen, as Kinsale, and other parts.

4 Item, That they shall have ships and victuals sufficient for their money,
according and at the prices which here they use to give, that all the people
and the said things may be shipped, if it be possible at one time, if not, at
two, and that to be within the time above named.

5 Item, that if by contrary winds, or by any other occasions there shall
arrive at any Port of these Kingdoms of Ireland or England, any ships of
these, in which these men go, they be entreated as friends, and may ride
safely in the Harbor, and be victualed for their money, and have moreover
things which they shall need, to furnish them to their voyage.

6 Item, during the time that they shall stay for shipping, victuals shall be
given to Don Ieans people at just and reasonable rates.

7 Item, that of both parts shall be cessation of Arms and security, that no
wrong be offered to any one.

8 Item, that the ships in which they shall go for Spain, may pass safely by
any other ships whatsoever of her Majesty's the Queen of England; and so shall
the ships of the said Queen and her subjects, by those that shall go from
hence: and the said ships being arrived in Spain, shall return so soon as
they have unshipped their men, without any impediment given them by his Majesty
the King of Spain, or any other person in his name, but rather they shall show
them favor, and help them if they need anything, and for security of this,
that they shall give into the Lord Deputies hands three Captains, such as he
shall choose.

9. For the security of the performance of these articles, Don Iean offers,
that he will confirm and swear to accomplish this agreement, and likewise
some of the chief Captains of his charge shall swear and confirm the same,
in a several writing.

10. Item, that Don Iean in person shall abide in this Kingdom, where the Lord
Deputy shall appoint, till the last shipping, upon his Lordships word; and if
it happen that his people be shipped all at once, the said Don Iean shall go
in the same Fleet, without any impediment given him, but rather the Lord
Deputy shall give him a good ship, in which he may go; and if his said men be
sent in two shippings, then he shall go in the last.

11. And in like sort the said Lord Deputy shall swear and confirm, and give
his word on the behalf of her Majesty the Queen and his own, to keep and
accomplish this agreement, and jointly the Lord President, the Marshall of the
Camp, and the other of the Counsel of State, and the Earls of Thomond and
Clanrickard, shall swear and confirm the same in a several writing.

I promise and swear to accomplish and keep these articles of agreement, and
promise the same likewise on the behalf of his Majesty the Catholic King my
Master.

Don Iean de l' Aguila.

Geo. Carew, Clanrickard, Thomond, R. Wingfeild, Geo. Bourcher, To. Gardner,
Ric. Leuison,
The Date of this writing is after the new style. Don Iean de l' Aguila.

Fynes Moryson,

This agreement being asigned by hands, promised by honorable words, and
confirmed The siege of Kinsale raised.
by solemn oaths on both parts, the Lord Deputy raised the siege upon the
ninth of January, and his Lordship with Don Iean de l' Aguila, and some of the
chief Spanish Captains in his Company, rode that day to Cork, whether our
Army marched the same day, the gross of the Spaniards remaining at Kinsale.
After the Lord Deputy dispersed the Army through the Towns of Mounster to be
lodged, namely, at Cork, Waterford, Youghall, Rosse, Callan, Cashell,
Thomastowne, Kilkenny, Dungaruen, and Clommell. The tenth of January his
Lordship gave order to the victualer to provide a months Bisquit for three
thousand five hundred Spaniards, after a pound and a half each day for a man,
and to provide for them as much beef and bear proportionably, as could be
gotten with speed. His Lordship gave order, that the shipping should be
unladen in the Ports, and made ready to transport the Spaniards into Spain.
The eleventh of January his Lordship received letters dated the two and
twentieth of November, from the Lords in England, aduertising that the Earl of
Desmond was there lately dead, and therefore requiring that the Company of
foot kept in his name, and for his maintenance, should be discharged,
reserving that part of intertainement, which out of the same was allotted to
the Lord Bishop of Cashell, and to the relief of the Earl of Desmonds
sisters. Further aduertising, that eighteen hundred quarters of Oats were
sent into Mounster for the horse troops, which would, with the transportation
cost her Majesty fifteen shillings the quarter, and were to be issued to the
troops at the same rate.

The same day his Lordship received letters, dated the four and twentieth of
December from the Lords in England as follows.

AFter our right hearty commendations to your Lordship, we have now at last
(after long and great expectation) received your letters by Sir Oliver S.
John's, who arrived yesternight at the Court, by whom although her Majesty has
not received so much satisfaction as was hoped for, upon the former
probabilities contained in your dispatches, yet his relation has made a great
alteration of that anxiety, in which her Majesty remained, by those reports
which have been brought to this place, to which in respect of your long and
unexpected silence (from those parts) we could no way give contradiction,
having not received (before now) any particular advertisement, since the
arrival of Sir Thomas Savage, and therefore no way able to make any judgment
of your estate, which was thus described. First, that the Irish rebels lodged
close by you; that your Camp was full of all misery and penury (to the great
slander of this Kingdom); lastly, that there were six thousand Spaniards
landed, of which last particular my Lord of Ormonds man was the relator. For
prevention of which uncertainty hereafter, we are commanded in her Majesty's
name to require you, from hence forward to advertise us frequently from time to
time of your proceedings, to the intent that her Majesty may still have means
to provide for your support, which you may not look to receive from hence in
the time you shall use them, except we may be daily informed beforehand from
you, of all such particular circumstances as fall out in that place. To come
therefore now to this present dispatch, we have perused your Iournals, both of
the services done, and of the difficulties which have interrupted your
proceedings hitherto, whereunto we mean to make no other reply then this;
That we that know your judgment and affection to her Majesty's service, so
well as we (...), must say thus much, that we are no more doubtful, that you
have done as much as you could, then you have reason (we hope) by the course
that is taken with you from hence, not to believe and know, that her Majesty
has in no sort neglected you. For demonstration whereof, you shall first
understand, that before the arrival of Sir Oliver Saint John's, her Majesty
had given order for four thousand men to be sent into Mounster, with such
supplies of munition and victuals, as her Majesty thought fit prouisionally to
send, though (for lack of advertisement) we could not make any other
particular judgment, what were too much, or too little. Only this we know,
that if that body of Spanish forces (which are now in that Kingdom) shall not
be defeated before the like body of an army (or a greater) arrive, her Majesty
shall be put to such a war in the end, as howsoever this State may undergo
the excessive charges of continual leauies and transportation (which you will
well consider to be of intolerable burden to this Kingdom, all circumstances
considered), yet such will be the extreme difficulties to maintain such an
Army in that Realm, where it must fight against foreign Armies, and an
universal rebellion, and in a climate full of contagion, and in a Kingdom
utterly wasted, as we do well foresee, that it will draw with it more pernicious
consequents, then ever this State was subject to. For whosoever shall now
behold the beginning of this malicious design of the King of Spain, must well
conclude, although he has now begun his action upon a false ground to find a
powerful party in that Kingdom at his first descent (wherein he has bin in
some measure deceived), yet seeing he is now so deeply engaged, and so well
finds his error, that he will value his honor at too high a rate, to suffer
such a work to dissolve in the first foundation. In consideration whereof her
Majesty like a provident Prince, resolves presently to send a strong Fleet to
his own coast, to prevent his new reinforcement, not doubting, if such a
disaster should happen, that these forces should remain so long unremoved by
you in Ireland (which we cannot believe) that her Majesty's Fleet shall yet be
in great possibility to defeat the new supplies by the way; for which purpose
her Majesty perceiving how dangerous a thing it is for the Fleet in Ireland,
to lie off at Sea in this Winter weather (which they must do, if it be
intended that they shall hinder a descent), and how superfluous a thing it is
to maintain such a Fleet only to lie in Harbors, her Majesty is pleased to
revoke the greatest part of her Royal ships hither, and to add to them a
great proportion, and send them all to the Coast of Spain, leaving still such
a competent number of ships there, as may sufficiently block up the Harbor,
and give security and countenance to transportation. To which end we have
written a letter in her Majesty's name to revoke Sir Richard Leuison, and to
leave Sir Amias Preston with the charge of those ships contained in this note,
to whom we have given directions in all things to apply himself to those
courses which you shall think most expedient for that service. You shall also
understand, that we have now directed Sir Henry Dockwra to send eight hundred
men by pole to Knockfergus to Sir Arthur Chichester, and commanded him to make
them up one thousand, and so with all speed the said Sir Arthur himself to
march up with a thousand of the best men to your reinforcement in Mounster. And
thus having for the present little else to write unto you, till we hear
further, we do conclude with our best wishes unto you of all happy and speedy
success. And so remain etc. at the Court at whitehall, the four und
twentieth of December, 1601.

The same eleventh day of January, his Lordship received other letters from the
Lords, dated the seven and twentieth of December, signifying, that whereas his
Lordship had often moved on the behalf of the Captains, that they might
receive their full pay, without deduction of the soldiers apparel, which
they themselves would provide, now her Majesty was pleased to condescend
thereunto. I remember not whether his Lordship had moved this since, or before
the new mixed coin was curtant, but sure this was great advantage to her
Majesty at this time, having paid silver for the apparel and being to make
the full pay in mixed money.

The same eleventh day of January his Lordship received from the Lords in
England letters dated the five and twentieth of November, signifying, that a
proportion of victuals was provided at Plimoth, for which he should send four
Merchants ships of the Queens Fleere at Kinsaile. And requiring to be
advertised upon what terms the Spaniards had yielded, which were then sent
over for England, that they might be disposed accordingly.

By the old date of this letter and another above mentioned of the two and
twentieth of November, received all on the eleventh of January, it may appear
how necessary it is to have the Magazins in Ireland well stored, and how
dangerous it is, that the Army should depend on sudden provisions.

The same day his Lordship received letters from the Lords in England, that her
Majesty had made a leauy of four thousand foot, whereof two thousand were
now at the Ports to be embarked for Mounster, namely, one thousand one hundred
committed to the charge of eleven Captains, and nine hundred under the conduct
of some of the said Captains left to his Lordships disposal.

The fourteenth his Lordship lying at the Bishop of Corkes house, received this
following letter from Don Iean, lying in the Town of Cork, translated out of
Spanish.

Most Excellent Lord,
SInce they carried me to the City of Cork, certain Merchants have told me,
they think they should find ships to carry me and my folk into Spain, if
your excellency would give them license and pasport, of which I humbly beseech
your highness, as also that of your great beniguitie, your excellency will have
pity of these his prisoners, who here do expect the great mercy, which so
great a Prince as your Excellency, uses toward his servants and prisoners.
These poor prisoners suffer extreme wants, both with hunger and cold; for
there is no sustenance given them at all, nor find they any alms. I beseech
your Excellency will be pleased to have compassion of them. There is one dead
of hunger, and others are ready to die of it. God keep your Excellency the
years which we his servants wish his Excellency.

From Cork the four and twentieth of January 1602 (style nouo and as they
write.) Your Excellencies servant Don I can del' Aguila.


The Spanish prisoners were these: Taken at Rincorran Castle, men and women,
90. Taken at Castle Nyparke 16. Taken in the sallye the second of December, 13.
Taken at Tyrones over throw the four and twentieth of December, as well
principal as ordinary men one and forty prisoners, in all one hundred sixty;
besides the runnawaies during the siege were thirty, and these together with
many of the said prisoners, had been sent into England, and the rest (of whom
Don lean writes) were still prisoners as (...).

The four and twentieth of January, the Lord Deputy and Council here wrote to
the Lords in England this letter following.

MAy it please your Lordships, we have received your letters of the four and
twentieth of December, the eleventh of January, which were the first that we
received out of England, since the arrival of Sir Richard Leuison with our
munition and supplies. And although we have upon every important revolution of
our business, dispatched unto your Lordships both our estate and desires, yet
we humbly desire your Lordships pardon, for the omission of our duty to
inform you more often of our present estate, the chief cause thereof being,
the respect and fear we have to possess you with such falsehoods, as it
seems they do, which undertake more liberally to advertise your Lordships of
the estate of our affairs; for in no place do all intelligences come
apparrelled (even to them that are nearest unto them) in more deceivable
mists, until time and great observation discovers the truth. So that if we
should write unto your Lordships often, according to our best informations, we
should present to your Reverent judgments such ridiculous contrarieties, as
would give you occasion to confound your determinations, and to condemn us.
But in general, we beseech your Lordships to remember, that as we have in all
our dispaches declared our hopes to overcome all difficulties, (out of the
confidence of our good cause and alacrity to serve her Majesty), so we have
continually propounded, how great and difficult a war it was, in which we
were engaged, in that (without Gods miraculous preservation) the Army in a
winters siege would so decay, as it must have pleased your Lordships
continually to supply it with men, victuals, and munition. Also we propounded,
that we held it a matter of no small danger and great difficulty, to force such
and so many men in a place of the least advantage. That we expected no less
then a general revolt, and a powerful combination of the Rebels against us.
Lastly again we humbly desire your Lordships to remember, that we have
promised nothing but the uttermost of our faithful Counsels and endeauours, to
accomplish in that service her Majesty's purpose. And therefore we are most
heartily sorry, that by our faithful and sincere Counsels, and our extreme
enduring in the execution thereof (howsoever the event were not so speedily
happy as we desired and labored for), yet it was not our happiness, that her
Majesty should receive so much satisfacti- by Sir Oliver Saint John's, as we
hoped to have given her upon the former probabilities. Yet when it shall please
your Lordships thoroughly to consider our difficulties, by the true relation
thereof, with all material circumstances, we presume it will appear, that we
could have done no more, and we must only attribute it unto God, that we have
done so much. By Sir Henry Dauers your Lordships have been acquainted at large
with all our proceedings until that present. Since which time the effects of
that victory (which it pleased God of his infinite goodness to give us against
the traitors upon Christmas Eve) have appeared by great and unexpected good
thereof insusuing: for the Rebels are broken and dispersed; O Donnel, Redmond
Bourke, and Hugh Mostyon (all Arch-rebels) have embarked themselves with
Sirriage for Spain, and that without Tyrones knowledge, and contrary to his
advise and will, they having only left behind them in Mounster (with the
Provincial Rebels) Tyrrell and a small force with him, being dispersed by small
companies in Carbery, Beer, Desmond, Kerry, and the County of Lymrick. Tyrone
in great fear, and with a speedy march hasted out of the Province of Mounster,
loosing upon every Foard many of his Foot, but especially in passing the
Rivers of Broadwater, of May in Connolagh, and at the Abbey Owney, in O
Malryans Country. At which Foards, the waters being high (as we are informed),
he lost above two hundred men, and all the way as he went, the wearied foot
cast away their Arms, which those of the Country gathered up, and with all
took some of their heads, but not so many as they might have done, if they had
regarded their duties as they ought. Their tired horses were slain by their
riders. Their hurt men which escaped at the overthrow, and were carried away
upon garrons, died upon the way, and four principal Gentlemen (whereof we
understand Tyrone himself was one, and Mac Mahown another, the rest are not
known yet) were carried in litters Since his departure from O mulryans Country,
we hear nothing of him, but we assure your Lordships, that the dismay in which
they were and still are, is incredible. Upon Newyeeres Eve, Don Iean sent a
letter unto me the Deputy, the copy whereof is here within sent unto your
Lordships. The next day Sir William Godolphin was sent with instructions, to
receive from Don Iean the points, whereof he desired to treat, whose
discreet carriage in so weighty a cause (wherein he performed as much, as in
discretion and judgment could be required) was such, as (without doing the
Gentleman wrong) we may not omit to recommend him to your honorable favors,
he being (as by experience we may truly report) wise, valiant, and of many
extraordinary good parts. The copy of the articles agreed upon between us and
Don Iean, subscribed by either part, your Lordships with these shall likewise
receive, hoping that in the same we have done nothing, but that which shall be
agreeable to your Lordships, and which (as we suppose) our present estate (duly
considered) vehemently urged us to embrace. Now our great care is to hasten
these Spaniards away, who are (as Don Iean affirms) no less by pole then
three thousand five hundred. The defect of shipping is our chiafe want. They
and we are in equal pain, for they are no less desirous to be gone, then
we are to send them away. The contempt and scorn in which the Spaniards hold
the Irish, and the distaste which the Irish have of them, are not to be
believed by any, but those who are present to see their behauiours, and hear
their speeches; insomuch as we may probably opniecture, that by such time as
Don Iean with his sorces is arrived in Spain, it will be a difficult thing for
the Irish hereafter to procure aides out of Spain. The copy of the contract
for the rates which Don Iean must pay for tunnage, and for victuals, for his
men in their return, your Lordships with these shall also receive. The ninth
of this month we dissolved the Camp, and brought hither with us Don Iean,
who remains hostage for the performance of the Covenants between us.

The day following, Capt. Roger Haruy and Capt. Flower were dispatched
Westward, to receive from the Spaniards the Castles of Castle-hauen, of
Baltimore, and of Beere-hauen. The winning of which places in our judgments
(although Kinsale had been taken by force) would have been more difficult unto
us then that of Kinsale, as well in respect of the incommodities which we
should have found in keeping a strong and furnished Army in so remote places,
as in respect of the natural strength of those places, and espetially of
Baltimore, which with a little Art would be made of great strength. Since our
coming to Cork, I the Deputy, to ease her Majesty's great and unsupportable
charger, have discharged two thousand foot in List, wherein, without all
respects of favor I cast those, who had the weakest Companies. And as soon as
we may be better secured, that the Spaniards purpose to forbear any further
attempt for this Realm (which in a few months will appear) as many as
possibly can be spared, shall be in like sort cashered. To suppress the
present Rebellon in Mounster, I the Deputy have designed four thousand foot,
and three hundred twenty five horse, which being laid in such convenient
places as we intend to lay them, our hope is, that in short time this
Rebellion will be extinguished. But until we be better assured from the
attempts of Spain for this Kingdom, the remainder of the Army is dispersed
into the remote places of the Province Eastward of Cork, and I the Deputy do
purpose to remain here, until I may be more secured, that there will be no
cause to draw the Army back into these parts. Paul Iuie the Inginer (with the
best expedition that may be), shall be sent to the parts of Baltymore and
Beer-hauen, to chuse-out fit grounds to fortify. The like must be done at
Kinsale, and for the better holding of the Cities of this Province in due
obedience (of whose assurance, in case the Spaniards had prevailed, we had
cause to doubt) we think it (under your Lordships reformation) very
expedient, that in every of them, Cittadels were raised, which guarded with a
few men, and having some Pieces of Artillery, will euerhave power to command
them. There places being thus strengthened, there is no Port forgotten, that
may be fit for the Spaniards acommodating in any enterprise from hence upon
England; for all which lie in Desmond, Kerry, or Connaght, have too large a Sea
to pass for England, which is subject to infinite inconveniences. And as for
the coast within Saint Georges Channel, the dangers of it are so infinite, as
there is no fear of those Ports. Notwithstanding it has pleased God to give
us this happy success, in freeing this Realm of the Spanish Army under Don
Iean, yet fearing that some seconds under another Commander may be employed
hither, we humbly beseech your Lordships, that you will be pleased to send the
victuals for which we wrote by Sir Oliver Saint John's. If the Spanish supplies
come, we shall have cause to expend them in this Province. If they come not,
then our cares shall be such, as they shall be preserved, and dispensed to the
best use for her Majesty's service. The like suit we make for the munitions for
which we then wrote. But for the supplies required of us in the dispatch we
made by Sir Henry Dauers, your Lordships may please to make stay of them, till
a further occasion to use them. Only of one thousand thereof we have great
need, for the reinforcing of the Companies which are weak; and therefore we
desire that five hundred of them may land here at Cork, and the other five
hundred at Waterford, and that the rest may be in readiness, if we have any
new occasion to send for them, till which time we are unwilling to charge her
Majesty, or trouble your Lordships or to draw any new forces into these parts,
which has made us give direction, that Sir Arthur Chichester with the one
thousand men which your Lordships have commanded him to lead hither, shall stay
about the Newry, and make the war there, as well defending the Pale, as
annoying Tyrone: for Sir Arthur being there, shall be near enough to us, if
there should fall out any occasion to draw those men hither. Sir Richard
Moryson is made the bearer of these our letters, who^ we have chosen to
satisfy your Lordships in such things, wherein happily you may doubt. In
particular, we have acquainted him with the dates of all our letters, which
we have sent your Lordships since the landing of the Spaniards; so as he can
inform your Lordships of his own knowledge, that we all or I the Deputy have
written thus often, namely, the three and twentieth of September, the first,
third, and four and twentieth of October; the seventh, and the thirteenth of
November; the seventh, twelfth, and seven and twentieth of December, and this
present dispatch by himself. If any of these have miscarried, or found so slow
passage, as your Lordships expectations were not satisfied in such time, as for
the service had been fit, we beseech you be pleased to consider, that the like
may happen to such of yours as are sent hither. And this may appear by your
Lordships letters which we last received. For the eleventh of January (as is
noted in the beginning of this letter) we received your Lordships of the four
and twentieth of December, and with it another of the seven and twentieth of
that month touching the apparel, a third of the two and twentieth of
December, yea a fourth of the two and twentieth of November. We have licensed
Captain Josias Bodley to pass into England, upon some private business
importing him, and have addressed him to your Lordships, to receive your
pleasure. If you resolve upon any fortifications in this Kingdom, the
Gentleman is very will experienced, and practiced in that Art, and one whom in
all our works we have principally employed, which he has with great hazard,
labor, and sufficiency discharged. We find all men here to embrace with much
gladness her Majesty's resolution, to leave the apparrelling of the soldier,
being much better contented to have full pay, without detaining of any sums
for their clothes, and we hope it will be a mean to make the Captains keep
their companies strong. And as your Lordships have directed, upon notice of the
decease of the Earl of Desmond, the company allowed for him, is discharged,
save what has pleased you to continue to his sister, to the Archbishop of
Casbell, and 10. Power: Order is also taken that the Oats sent over hither,
shall be issued at as high rates as we can, but it has never been hitherto
seen, that the price exceeded ten shillings the quarter, and we think they
cannot be issued at a higher rate, for the soldier cannot live paying any
more, but will rather suffer his horse to starve, which would be greater
inconueniency to the service, then if the oats had not come at all, though
that way also they must have starued, if the siege had continued. The Spaniards
shipped from hence to Plymoth, where either such as had runneaway from the
Spaniards, or such as were in Ryncorren and Castle Nyparke, and yielded upon
promise of their lives only; and so much I the Deputy signified by my letters
to the Gentlemen of the parts where they should land, of purpose to be made
known to your Lordships, and that they might accordingly be suffered to pass
into France, or some other Country, which was as much as they desired. And so,
etc.

From Cork this foureteenth of January 1601.

The Lord President was desirous to go over with this dispatch of pleasing
news to the Court, but the Lord Deputy was loath to spare him, till the
Spaniards were gone, and because the relation of this business much concerned
his Lordships honor, he thought it necessary to choose a messenger, as in other
parts fit for the business, so especially sound to him in affection. And for
such he chose Sir Richard Moryson, who had been very inward with him, till the
death of the Earl of Essex, at which time his Lordship began to grow something
strange toward him, in regard that Mr Secretary had conceived some displeasure
against him, about a passage of his dependancy on the said Earl; yet his LordP
ever professed to continue his love to him, and promised at some fit time, to
make his peace with Master Secretary. To which purpose his Lordship chose this
occasion, concurring with his own ends. Only his Lordship advised Sir Richard
Moryson, to entreat the L. Presidents approbation of his carrying this packet,
to the said end so much importing him, to which the Lord President very nobly
gave his consent, and so he was dispatched with the Lord Deputies and the Lord
Presidents letters to Master Secretary of especial recommendations on his
behalf.

Among his instructions, he was directed, at his first arrival, to repair to
Sir Oliver Saint John's, to learn of him the present estate of the Lord
Deputies affairs in Court, and that after, they both should communicate their
proceeding one with the other. To an imaginary question, why there was no use
made of the first breach at the North East gate of Kinsale, he was directed to
answer, that the first battery was chiesly intended to annoy the Spaniards, by
beating down the houses, and to take from them the use of some places, whence
they might annoy us. That when by beating down the gate, we had made a breach,
we found it not yet to be attempted, but made nearer approaches, whereupon the
Spaniards made their strong salley, both upon our approches and upon our
Cannou, and the next day we had intelligence that Tyrone, Odonnell, and all
the Rebels, were encamped so near us, as if we had engaged our selves in that
work, and in the garding of our Cannon so far out of the Camp, they might in
three hours have fallen upon us on all sides, with great advantage, which made
us draw the Cannon into the Camp, and to leave that work, choosing rather to
inuest them close on the West side, which before lay open, so as they might
easily that way receive succors from the rebels, and join with their forces.
Further the reasons were set down, which moved the Lord Deputy and the
Counsel, to make composition with Den Iean, namely, our weakness, and the
enemies strength, since our Army by sickness, runawayes, and death, was
fallen to be almost as weak, as at the first sitting down, whereas the
Spaniards were more now then three thousand men by Pole: the sufferings of a
Winters siege, falling more upon us in the field, then upon them in the Town.
Besides, if we had taken Kinsale by force, our Army could not possibly have
marched into the Western parts, possessed by other Spaniards, till it had
been refreshed, and till we had new supplies of victuals, and munition, which
could not easily arrive, Easterly winds in Winter being very rare upon this
Coast. Besides that ere we could have forced the Spaniards in the West, in all
likelihood new spanish supplies would have arrived, and the taking of those
remote places, would have been more difficult and dangerous, then that of
Kinsale, and the King of Spain would have bin engaged in a long war, which by
this composition is like to be ended. Besides our Army consisted much of Irish,
unfit for such service, as the entering of a breach, so as therein we must of
necessity have used our old English companies, where in all probability we must
have lost great part, (they being esteemed by the Spaniards themselves as
gallant fellows as ever they met, and such as in truth the loss of them would
be formany years vnrepairable). And if we had been repulsed with any blow
given us, we had reason to doubt, that all the Irish (yea those of our Army)
would have turned their swords against us; yea, if the breach had been
entered, the Town of Kinsale being built all of stone, the Spaniards in the
houses would have made us new work, no less difficult then the former.
Moreover, six of our Pieces for battery were crased, so as we could not make
any more then one breach, and the Spaniards having so many hands, and so large
scope of ground within, might easily have stopped one gap against us And if we
could have made diverse breaches, yet we had not powder and bullets sufficient
for that purpose, and for the small shot: besides that our men were so wasted,
as they could not guard diverse batteries, neither had we sufficient inginers
for that purpose: So that, howsoever we stood upon terms, that Don Iean
should leave his munitions and treasure to her Majesty, yet finding him make
obstinate opposition thereunto, we were forced for the above named reasons, and
many like, to make this present composition.

Likewise among the instructions, diverse reasons were set down, moving Don
Iean to make the said composition, namely, the malice he and the Spaniards
generally had conceived against the Irish, in whose aid they too late
discovered no confidence could Iudicially be placed. And for that they coming
to succor Tyrone and Odonnell, could never see any such men, saying, that they
were not In rerum naturas, (that is, existent). Also for that Don Iean, having
instructions to keep the field, and not to defend Kinsale, now since the
overthrow of the Irish, had no hope to be able to come into the field.
Moreover, that his best men in this long siege were spent, in continual
watches, and his new men grew weak, with feeding only upon ruske. Further his
desire to disingage the King his Master, from a war wherein he had little
probability to prevail, in respect of the small or no assistance, which he
conceived might be expected from the Irish. Also for that the treasure he
brought, being at the first but one hundred thousand ducats, was in great part
exhausted, by paying the soldiers six pence per diem, and the Commanders
their entertainements, so as by the remainder he had no hope to work any
revolt among the Irish, or to give satisfaction to the covetous humors of
those already in rebellion.

The nine and twentieth of January, the Lord Deputy and Counfell here, wrote to
the Lords in England this following letter.

MAy it please your Lordships. Since our last dispatch by Sir Richard Moryson,
here has no extraordinary matter happened, that might give us just cause now
so soon to write again, were it not, that it pleased your Lordships in your
last, to blame our slacknesse, that of late we wrote too seldom, and to
command from hence a more frequent advertisement of our proceedings, which for
your Lordships satisfaction we are most careful to perform. The chief point
to which of late we have applied our selves, has been the dispatching away
of the Spaniards into their Country, because till we have freed the Country
of them, we may not safely leave this Province, to follow such services in
other parts, as we desire next to undertake, and we do the more earnestly
labor to end this, for that we more and more observe such a settled hatred
against this people, both in Don Iean and the Spanish in general, as we
gather upon many good grounds, that if they could be returned before any new
supplies come from Spain, the King would be easily induced to forbear any
further to engage himself in this business, and for that they wihall do
protest, to use their best endeauours to that effect, which we hold to be
unfeigned. But the winds continuing hitherto Westerly, and for the most part
somewhat to the southward, and withal very much stormy, neither such of them
as had shipping, and for a good space lay aboard to take the first occasion to
be gone, can by any means get out of the Harbor, nor such shipping of ours as
are to come from the Easterly parts, for transportation of the rest, can find
the means to come about hither, nor three other ships that have been long
ready to go to the Westward, to take in those at Castle Haven, Baltimore, and
Beerehauen, can by any industry work thither for that purpose, though we know
they have with all care and earnestness endeavored it. So as now we grow more
doubtful then before, that other forces from Spain will arrive here, ere
these get home, and therefore cannot but wish, that for the prevention thereof,
her Majesty will be pleased to continue her resolution, for the sending of
her Fleet to Sea, with as much expedition as may be, and that the Tramontana,
and the Moon, being ships of small burden, and so fittest for the service on
this coast, may presently be sent hither, and the rather, for that here will
be none left but only the Swiftsure under the command of Sir Amias Preston
(the two Merchants ships, appointed by your Lordships to stay here, being, the
one sent away with Sir Richard Leuison, and the other employed for the
transporting of these Spaniards, by reason we had not other ships for that
purpose.) And upon the same grounds, we most humbly pray your Lordships, to
send away the one thousand foot for supplies, and what else we desired in our
former letters, that we may not be unprovided for the worst that may happen,
although that we are in good hope, ere it be long, to have good reason to
ease her Majesty's charge in this Country, without any danger to her service
here. We are further humbly to beseech your Lordships, to procure us her
Majesty's Warrant, to pass unto Neale Garue O Donnell the Country of
Tyreconnell, in such sort as we promised the same unto him under our hands, now
almost a year ago, so warranted by direction from her Majesty. He thinks the
time long till he has his grant, and in his late letter to me the Deputy,
protests that he will do no more service, until he have seen me, or that his
grant be performed; for which though I have blamed him, as I justly might,
that being an unfit fashion of writing for any subject, yet the rudeness of
his education, and his forwardness and ability to do service considered, we
cannot but acknowledge, that we hold it very meet, that we should perform
unto him what we promised, which to do, we want warrant from her Majesty; and
therefore desire to have it with your Lordships next dispatch, for we know he
will earnestly call upon it. We do not hear of any head of importance or
strength, that remains gathered together of the Rebels, so that we hope, that
if no more Spanish succors do arrive, their force will quickly come to
nothing. But because we cannot assure the subjects, what further assistance the
Rebels shall receive out of Spain, and for that if the King send any more, we
presume he will do it in a far greater measure then heretofore, as having
experience not to trust in the force of the Rebels, and therefore reason to
rely upon his own strength. We most humbly desire your Lordships for a while
to continue your honorable cares of our affairs, and to enable us to
withstand whatsoever shall be attempted by the foreign enemy, and what you
send, we will employ with all sincerity and our best endeauours, to the
advancement of the service which her Majesty does require and expect from us.
And so, etc.

The last of January, the Lord Deputy was advertised by one coming out of the
West parts, that he was at Beerhauen the thirteenth of that month, where the
Spaniards were in number sixty, and Oswylliuan had some three hundred Irish,
and the Spaniards not knowing of Don Ieans composition with his Lordship, did
build a Fort there with trees and earth, near the Castle, and planted three
small pieces of Ordinance therein, whereof the greatest carried nine pound of
powder. That he came from thence to Baltimore, where he found one hundred
Spaniards, which did not fortify, but hearing of Don Ieans composition, and
having two ships with them, had shipped their Ordinance, and were ready to go
to Sea.

About this time one Richard Owen came from Tyrone, to mediate with the Lord
Deputy her Majesty's mercy toward him; whereupon his Lordship gave leave to a
Gentleman in the Pale of Tyrones old acquaintance, to parlee with him,
according to the following instructions, dated the fourth of February.

When you speak with him, you shall tell him, that you understand, that
Richard Owen came from him to the Lord Deputy, with commission from him to tell
his Lordship, that he desired to be received into the Queens mercy, if his
life might be secured.

Whereupon you finding in him such conformity, (out of your ancient love, which
in former time you bare him), were glad of the alteration; and therefore, as
his friend did now undertake this long journey, to persuade him to those
courses, which might best answer his duty to his Prince, and repair his
estate, which in your opinion is desperate.

If you find him desirous to be receitied to mercy, you shall give him hope of
it, and promise him furtherance for the effecting of it, upon these conditions.
That he shall in token of his penitency, and according to the duty of a Rebel
to his natural Prince, first under his hand write a letter of submission to
the Lord Deputy, humbly craving in the same her Majesty's mercy, with promise
to redeem his errors past by his future service. That likewise he shall
write a public submission to her Majesty, imploring at her hands forgiveness
of his faults, and likewise promise amendment of his life, with a willing
desire to do her foam acceptable service, in recompense of his transgression,
in the same protesting, to serve her Majesty against all men, either of
Ireland, or forraigners, that shall endeavor the disturbance of this Country.

That he shall put into her Majesty's hands his eldest son, for the assurance
of his future loyalty, and four principal gentlemen of his blood, as he
formerly promised.

That he shall at his charge, find workmen to build such Forts in the County
of Tyrone, and in such places, as the Lord Deputy shall think fit.

That he shall permit throughout Tyrone her Majesty's Officers of Justice, as
the Sheriffs, and others, to have free liberty to execute their Offices, as is
accustomed in other Provinces and Counties of the Realm, and answer all other
duties formerly agreed upon.

That he shall only undertake for himself, and his pledges to lie for no
more, then those that dwell upon that land only, that is contained in his
Letters Pattents, not any way undertaking for the rest of Tyrone, as Turlogh
Brassiloes sons, Mac Mahound, O Cane, Macgenis, Macguire, the two
Clandeboyes, and all of the East side of the Ban. That if any of his neighbors
shall continue in rebellion, none of their people shall be harbored in Tyrone,
and likewise that none of Tyrone shall (by his consent or knowledge) succor
any Rebel, or give assistance to them; and if any such offender shall happen
to be discovered, either by himself, or any other her Majesty's Officers, upon
knowledge thereof, that he shall do his best endeavor to prosecute the
parties offending, and either take them, whereby they may be tried by the laws
of the Realm, or kill them, if they may not otherwise be had, and shall
assist her Majesty's Officers, in taking to her use the goods and chattels of
the offenders and their retinues. That he shall not only truly pay all her
Majesty's rents and duties, from this time forward, due unto her out of Tyrone,
but also pay the arrerages, that for many years have been by him detained.

That in respect of the great charges that he has put her Majesty unto,
(although it be not the thousand part of her disbursements), In nomine pene
(which in all such great offenses is accustomed) toward the victualing of her
Majesty's garrisons, he shall pay two thousand Cowes within six months. That
the County of Tyrone may be limited, and no more by him to be possessed, then
is contained in his Letters Pattents: That the territory of Tyrone may be
divided into shires, and have gaoles as he has formerly desired. That he put
at liberty the sons of Shane O Neale, and all other prisoners English and
Irish. These things you shall only propound as from your self, yet as
conceiving that they will be demanded at his hands, if he be received, and to
draw as large an ouerture from him, of what he will agree unto, as you can
persuade him, telling him, that the greater assurance he does give the state of
his loyalty, the greater will be his safety, for we shall conster his good
meaning by his free offer thereof, and after we shall have the less reason to
be lealous of him.

The fifteenth of February the Lord Deputy and Counsel here, wrote to the
Lords in England this following letter.

MAy it please your Lordships. The foureteenth of this last month we
disparched Sir Richard Moryson, with our letters to your Lordships from this
place, and the nine and twentieth we wrote again by Captain Butler, yet to
this day the wind nath continued still so Westerly, as since the departure of
Sir Richard, no shipping is (...) to us, either out of England from your
Lordships, (as we desired) or from Waterford, Wexford, and those parts, (as we
directed), to carry away the Spaniards hence, nor yet until sunday the seventh
hereof, could those ships stir, that lay ready at Kinsale, to be sent to
Baltimore, Castle Haven, and Beer Haven: but now they are gone, we hope that
the service to be done by them, (which is the possessing of the Castles, and
sending away the Spaniards in them), will be presently accomplished, although
the wind has served them so scantly, as we fear they will hardly recover all
the places whereunto they are directed. There is only one Scottish ship gone
from Kinsale for Spain, which carried one hundred sixety Spaniards with part
of the Artillery, but there lies now ready at the Harbor for the first wind,
so much shipping as will carry away one thousand five hundred more, so as there
will be yet remaining in Kinsale above one thousand Spaniards, which with the
first shipping that comes from the other Ports, shall be embarked. Don Iean
stays to go last. It appears by some letters intercepted, which we send
herewithall unto your Lordships, that the King of Spain purposes to send a
larger supply hither with all expedition. Don Iean assures us to do his best,
to stay them, and if he arrive first in Spain, he makes no doubt to dissuade
their coming; but if they should come before his departure, he promises to
return them, according to his covenant in the contract, if they do not come
under the command of some other, that has a commission a part from his from
the King. The Irish have of late received letters from Odonnell, to encourage
the Rebels to persevere in their rebellion, assuring them of present aid from
Spain, in the mean time, the best of them all do but temporize, being ready
to assist them, when they come, especially if they come in any strength, as it
is to be thought in all reason they will, having found their first error. Her
Majesty must therefore be pleased to be at some charge to erect fortifications
at Beer Haven, Kinsale, and this place, the commodities and weakness of
these places; being as well known to the Spaniards as to us, and further with
all speed to erect Cittadels at Lymbrick, Cork, and Waterford, though it be
only to assure the Towns from revolt. It appears by the King of Spaines
letter, (and so by the Duke of (...)), that his heart is very much set upon the
enterprise of Ireland, and therefore it is not unlike, but that he may send
more supplies, after or before Don Ieans arrival in Spain, either under him
or some other Commander, which if he do, it is also likely the same will be
sent shortly. For prevention thereof (if in your Lordships wisdom it shall be
thought meet), we do humbly beseech, that the four thousand supplies
heretofore desired, and by your Lordships intended, may be presently sent
hither, whereof two thousand to be erected into companies, and their Captains
to be named here, and the other 2000 for supplies of the Army, which is
exceeding weak; for our men die daily in greater numbers then they died in the
camp, the infection being greater, and by some thought a kind of plague, (for
the people in the Towns die in far greater numbers then the soldiers),
though we hope the contrary: And we do further desire, that her Majesty will
be pleased to hasten her Fleet to the Coast of Spain, which coming timely,
will in our opinions hinder any enterprise for Ireland, but least that shoule
fail, we renew our former motion, that the Tramontama and the Moon, may be
returned to serve upon the Coast of Mounster, that the proportions of munition
and victuals desired in our former letters, may speedily be dispatched hither
and that victualers without impediment may come from all places to relieve us,
for already a very great dearth is begun and a famine must ensue, the rates of
all things being incredible, and the new money much repined at, notwithstanding
we do our uttermost endeavors to advance it. But in a matter of so great
importance, we humbly desire your Lordships to give us leave to deliver our
opinions freely, having so assured ground for it, that if the King of Spain
continue his war in this Country, it will be hard to preserve her Majesty's
army and Kingdom, without the altering of the current money, so general is the
dislike thereof, and so insolently do they begin already to refuse it: but if
there come no foreign aid, her Majesty (as we think) may securely continue it
as it is; for all we that are of the Army, whom it most concerns (in regard
we live wholly upon our entertainment), will (God willing) endure it, for the
advancement of the service, though we are sensible of our loss, by the
excessive enhauncing of the prices of all things that we are to lieu upon,
which cannot be helped so long as this new coin continues current. Of Tyrone
since his overthrow and departure, we hitherto have heard little, neither do
we think he will be able to do any great harm, without the aid of new
supplies from Spain. And so we humbly take leave, etc. From Cork, etc.

The same fifteenth-day the Lord Deputy wrote to Master Secretary in England
this letter following.

SIr, this strange continuance of the winds in the West and the South, makes
me look back into the danger, that both her Majesty's Army and Kingdom have
passed for if Sir Richard Leuison with her Majesty's Fleet had not taken the
opportunity of that wind, which did no more then bring him hither, and give
the rest of the supplies (with great difficulty) their passage from other
ports to us, no doubt by these contrary winds (from that time to this day
continuing) all the affairs of her Majesty here had been in an extreme
hazard. And when I consider; first, that in all likelihood we could expect no
less then a powerful supply out of Spain, and that the greater, the more the
King should find himself engaged, and his Army stand in need of seconding,
except he might be in time advertised of this ouerture we have made here, to
disimbarke himself fairly of an enterprise, which I presume his Ministers here
do believe, and will persuade him to be unfit any longer to embrace. Then, that
the winds have been such, as have only served to carry him the danger of his
men here, and not the peace which they have made (for since Syriago his
departure, which was presently after the overthrow, Don Iean del' Aguyla was
never able to send away any dispatch, which we may hope to be arrived in
Spain.) And lastly, that we have credible intelligence of the Kings resolution
and forwardness, to send his men here strong and speedy succors. When I
consider these things, I cannot but fear a heavy war to be toward us,
which (as I do constantly believe) had been prevented, if it had pleased God
to send us a wind in any time to have sent away these Spaniards, or at the
least the assured relation of their estates. Thus the continuance of contrary
winds in these parts, does make me apprehend the extreme perils, wherewith her
Majesty shall be driven to make the war in this Country with extreme
charge, if the Spaniards persevere in their purpose: for without huge Magazins,
great waste and continual charge of shipping and land carriages, such a war
cannot be made, and I am persuaded that her Majesty were as good give over at
the first the defense of this country, as to intend a war, without making those
provisions for it. Now as my love to her and to her service does make me as
sensible (I will boldly protest), as any man living of whatsoeur burden the
state does feel, so the same love should make me suffer with alacrity the
weight of my uneasy charge, and the dangerous ways wherein I walk, if I did
not perceive the poor Ass to be the worse liked, that he does carry so much
treasure from her cofers, howsoever he do unwillingly bear it away, and
feels nothing but the heavy burden thereof. This, and some inclination that
I have found, to measure my labors by the success, not by my endeauours, have
(I confess) more discouraged me, then all the difficulties I ever passed, or
may expect: And saving the thankefulnes, which I cannot choose but yield unto
God, for the success which it has pleased him of late to give me, I protest I
was never accompanied with more unquiet thoughts, then since my last coming to
Cork, where I continue in a most noisome Town, full of infection, seeing no
end of my labors, nor finding any measure of them, and yet fearing that they
are valued of so little merit, as they are rather likely to draw on
dislike-Wherefore as in my own heart I do utterly distaste this unhappy
profession, with no further ambition then to set down in quietness under mine
own Vine, with the conscience of having been no unprofitable servant to her
Majesty, so Sir (I vow before God) I will acknowledge it an everlasting bond,
if you will be a mean, to procure me that harmless fortune, that I may (as
above all things I desire) serve her Majesty henceforward, with as pure, as I
will ever do with faithful devotion, and make my self ready for another
World, for I thank God I do hate this. Blame me not (I beseech you Sir) for
apprehending my fortune with so much discomfort, since I do not only perceive
what enemies I have, that are ingenious and industrious to urge all my
proceeding to my disadvantage, but find that their malice did take such effect
with her Majesty, as to move her to be unsatisfied with my endeavors, wherein
my own conscience cannot acknowledge any thing omitted within my power, or
belonging to my duty, whatsoever the success had been. Sir as I never
deserved any ill of them by deed, (except it be by doing her Majesty better
service then they can or will do), nor by word, (for I do not think or
speak of them, but when these tokens of their good will do force me unto
it), so I protest, I do as much scorn their malice, as the barking of so many
whelps, and would be little troubled with it. But when I think that their
false evidence does sway the opinion of my supreme Judge, in the title of her
favor and my desert, and do remember how doubtful the fortune of the war
is, I cannot but fear, that one disaster shall be put into the ballence
against all my labors and endeauours; and therewithal conclude and confess,
that I covet no mortal fortune more, then to be fairly rid of the part which
I play on so dangerous a stags, before these serpents may find any advantage to
hiss at me. Whereas otherwise if I had been secure of her Majesty's favor
against these Vipers tongues, I should with confidence and alacrity go toward
the greatest dangers that can rise against me: but as God has hitherto stopped
their mouths, so I hope, for her Majesty's good, (if not for mine) he will
continue his favor, who prosper me in all things, as I do sincerely intend
her service, etc.

The eighteenth day the Lord Deputy received letters from the Lords in England;
signifying that besides the two thousand last sent, the greatest part under
Captains; the rest left to his Lordships disposal, now upon a second leauy
two thousand more were appointed to be embarked the six and twentieth of the
last month, all which were left to his Lordships disposal, excepting one
Company given to Captain Thomas Dutton, upon his Lordships letters of special
recommendation.

The same day his Lordship received from the Queen this following letter.

Elizabeth Regina.
RIght trusty and wellbeloued, we greet you well; The report which your letters
by Dauers have brought us, of the success it has pleased God to give you
against our Rebels, and the Spaniards combined with them, was received by us
with such contentment, as so great and happy an accident could afford:
Wherefore although we (as ever we have done in all other happiness which has
befallen us), ascribe the highest praise and thanks to his divine Majesty; yet
forasmuch as we do account that they who are the servants of our State in
like actions, are made participant, (in a second degree) of his favor bestowed
upon us, by their virtue and industry, we cannot but hold them worthy of
thanks from us, as they have received honor from him. Among whom, you being
there the chief, (not only as chiefly put in trust by us, but as we plainly
perceive, in vigilance, in labor, and in valor, in this late action), we
could not forbear to let you see, how sensible we are of this your merit. It
is true, that before this good success upon the Rebels, we were in daily
attention, to have heard of some quicker attempt upon the Town (then any was
made), both in respect that your own Letters tended to such sense, and
especially because protraction of time brought with it apparent dangers, as
well of access of new supplies from our foreign enemies, as of defection of a
people, so unconstant of disposition, and so rebellious to government, as
those of that nation ever have been. But we that time having understood by
those iournals (which were committed to St John's and Dauers), some reasons
which have moved you to the course you have taken, rather then to have used
speed in attempting, seeing all assaults are accompanied with loss, and every
loss (in such a time) multiplied in rumor, and wholly converted by practice,
to the prejudice of the cause in question, which is maintained (now as things
do stand), by the reputation of your army, we do now conceive that all your
works have had their foundation upon such reasons as you thought most
aduantagious for our service. It remains therefore now (and so we desire it
may be made known to our Army, that have served under you, in such manner as
you shall think best to express it), that as we do know they have endured
many incommodities in this siege, (which we would have been glad they could
have avoided, having made so good proof of their valor and loyalty, as they
have done at this time, so as we rather seek to preserve them, as the best
treasure of a Prince, then to suffer them to wast, if otherwise our Kingdom
could have been kept from danger of foreign conquest, and intestine
rebellion), so we expect it at the hands of the better sort of our seruitors
there, that it shall well be infused into the minds of the rest, that
whatsoever either our own directions or expending of treasure could do, (for
prevention of those difficulties, which follow all armies, and are inseparable
where the war is made in a climate so il tempered for a winters siege) has
been royally and prouidently afforded them. A matter of much more charge and
uncertainty, because all our care and direction have attended the winds and
weathers courtesy To conclude with answer to your demands for further supplies
of men. Although we hope that the time is so near of the final conclusion of
your happy success against the remnant of the strangers in that poor Town,
being pressed with so many wants, and with the despair which our late victory
will add hereunto, as that hardly any supplies sent from us can come, before
it have taken effect; yet because you may perceive how much we attribute to
your judgment in any thing which for our affairs is there desired, we have
(as by our Counsel has been signified unto you) given order for four
thousand men to be sent thither out of hand, with the full proportion of
munition which you desire. In which kind of provisions we find so great
consumptions, as we must require you to take some better order with them that
have the distribution thereof. For if it be observed what quantities have
been daily sent over, and yet what daily wants are pretended, the expense will
be found insupportable, and so much the rather, because all men know, that
whatsoever the Irish Companies receive, (except now in this action) is
continually converted for money to the use of the Rebels. Given under our
Signet, at our Palace at White Hall, the 44 year of our Reign, the twelfth
of January 1601.

In the beginning of this Letter, above the Queens hand signed, these
following words were ouerwritten by the Queens own hand, viz. Though for
fear of worse end, you did desire (as we confess we once thought to direct)
to end this work, before either Enemy or Rebel could increase the peril of
our honor, yet we hope that no such adventure shall be more made, but that
their confusion be ere now lighted on their own heads. And let Clanrickard
and Thomond know, that we do most thankefully accept their endeauours. For
your self, we can but acknowledge your diligence, and dangerous adventure, and
cherish and judge of you, as your careful Sovereign.

The twentieth of February, twenty Spanish Captains with 1374 common
Soldiers, being before embarked at Kinsale, in six English ships, sailed for
Spain. The seven and twenty day the Lord Deputy and Counsel here, wrote to
the Lords in England this following letter.

MAy it please your Loedships, since our last dispatch the fifteenth hereof,
1400 of the Spaniards, that had lien aboard their shipping in the Harbor of
Kinsale, to take advantage of the first favorable wind for Spain, found the
means to set forth with a very scant wind upon Sunday last, the twentieth of
this present, so as now we have rid our selves of above 1600 by Pole,
reckonining those which we sent from Cork into England, being some two
hundred, and these last numbers were truly mustered by one of our own
Commissaries. If our shipping could get about from Waterford, Wexford, and
those Eastern Ports, (from whence only two have yet recovered Kinsale, though
all the rest have been a good time ready, and some of them at Sea), we doubt
not within four or five days we should be able to dispatch away all the
rest, though there remain yet as great a number (the certainty whereof we do
not know). Captain Haruy, who was sent into the Western parts to ship away
the Spaniards that were there, and to take possession of the places, is for
certain possessed of Castle Haven, and upon Friday last set forwards toward
Baltimore, whereof by this time we make account he is possessed also, and that
he is busy sending away the Spaniards with the first wind, though we have not
yet heard from him since his being there. On Friday last being the eighteenth,
we received two packets from your Lordships, the one of the twelfth, the other
of the 16 of the last month, and at the same time there came into this
Harbor, five companies of foot, (whereof four were under Captains, namely,
Dauys, Holcroft, Bradbery, and Barker, and the other one hundred under the
conduct of the three last). Good store of shipping came likewise in with
victuals that day and the next, and on Sunday there arrived at Kinsale (about
the time that the Spaniards left that Port) two Barks laden with munition and
artillery, working tools, and such other things as we had written for, and
your Lordships most carefully had provided, so as we have just cause, with all
thankfulness, to acknowledge that it has pleased her Majesty and your
Lordships to supply us as roially and plentifully as we desired; and that as
your Lordships well note for our special comfort, your providence and care of
us was such, as things necessary were in readiness for our supplies, before
you had notice from us that we had need of them. We are resolved, now that all
those provisions are come, to keep a good force in the West parts of this
Province, which will both settle those that hitherto have stood wavering, and
may besides prosecute those that have showed themselves worst affected, while
such places as are needful may be fortified: For since (as we signified by
our last, upon the intercepting of certain Spanish letters) there is great
likelihood, that a new supply from Spain will come speedily and strongly, if
at all, it behooves us to be in readiness to intertaine them, by making the
places known to them very strong, and to curb the Towns by Cittadels, to be
erected; otherwise they will revolt, and fall to the Spanish party, when they
shall see them come strongly and well prepared. And for those four thousand
men which we perceive your Lordships had appointed for us, we humbly leave it
to your Lordships consideration, upon the sight of these letters out of Spain
which we send, whether you shall think fit to send them to us presently, or
else have them there in such readiness, as if any further supplies should
arrive out of Spain, we might in time make use of them here. The Companies
that are come, are men well chosen and well appointed, their Arms good, and
for ought yet we find, the men neither changed, nor the arms or apparel
embezelled, and yet they have been very strictly both viewed and mustered,
before Commissioners specially appointed; and the like course we mean to take
with the rest of them, if they do come as your Lordships have appointed, which
yet we leave wholly to your Lordships, who can best judge what number is
meetest for us, by the intelligence we send you, but especially by such as your
Lordships receive from Spain. And as for those that in the conduction of the
other men, abused themselves to her Majesty's so great loss, we will do the
best to find out the truth and ground thereof, and inform you (as your
Lordships have directed), and further will most carefully perform what else
your Lordships in these letters have commanded. But where your Lordships
conceive an omission in me the Deputy, that so many arms are lost here, I
humbly answer, that being not able to look unto these things my self, I gave
commission to Master Marshall, Sir Robert Gardener, and Sir Oliver S. John's, to
take the particular care and charge thereof, who being now not here, cannot
relate what they have done, only we remember we have heard it alleged, when
the Captains were charged with the Arms of their Companies, that their
answer was, that some of the Soldiers ran away with them, and some others
assaying to make escape, were stripped both of their apparel and arms (which
our selves saw to be true in many that were found and returned naked to the
Camp), and the truth is, such as were not lost that way, nor spoiled and
broken in the service, (as it cannot be denied but some were), some part were
put over with the supplies to other Companies, (which were very few), and the
rest could not be recovered from the cashered Captains, who being in
entertainment but a short time, had nothing due, whereout it might be
defalked, but must answer it before your Lordships there in England, for from
hence they went soon after they were discharged. The Captains last come, (as
others did before them), desire that their warrants of entry might bear date
that day that your Lordships appointed them to be at the water side, to receive
their Companies; and we acknowledge, we think in reason, they are to have it
so, or else their impressed to be remitted, otherwise they have nothing to bear
the charge of themselves and Officers from that time to their landing here,
which is often times six weeks, or a month, in which time their impressed is
usually spent; and if afterward it be defalked from them, they must all be so
long without intertainment, and so unable to live. We humbly desire to know
your Lordships pleasure herein, as we did formerly upon the like occasion, but
hitherto have received no answer from your Lordships: We are further to
signify unto your Lordships, that the Victualer issues (as he says by
direction); but one pound and a half of beef per diem, to a soldier, which
is too little for him to live upon, and yet the rate in the victualing nothing
abated, which is intolerable for him to bear, and likewise the Victualer
thinks that he may not issue the Oats at a lower rate then 15 s. the quarter,
which is seven shillings six pence the barrel, being so high a rate, as the
Horseman out of his entertainment cannot allow so much for his horse, but by
that means both the Horse will be starued, and the Oats will perish before
they be spent. In time of plenty, the ordinary rate of Oats in Ireland, was
but at twelve pence the barrel, yet they are now well content to pay six
shillings a barrel, which is at the highest rate the Soldier can give. Of
these particulars we humbly pray redress from your Lordships. And so, etc.
From Cork, etc.

The first of March the Lord Deputy by letters from the Lords in England was
required, to send over a Lieftenant, being one of the late cast Companies, but
still remaining in Ireland, to the end he might answer before their Lordships
certain complaints made against him: For whereas many Officers in the late
leuies of men, had received in the Country able and sufficient men, as well to
serve under themselves, as to be conducted over to be disposed by the Lord
Deputy, whereof they had for diverse sums of money dismissed many at the Sea
side, pretending that they were lame, or sick, and that they had taken better
men in their place, neither of these pretenses being true. Their Lordships
purposed to inflict some exemplary punishment for this great offense, and
therefore required this Lieftenant to be sent over, who was accused among and
above the rest.

The eight of March Sir Oliver S. John's, (who was sent into England from
Kinsale with news of the good success in the taking of Rincoran and Nyparke
Castles, and the happy repulse of the Spaniards sallying upon our Cannon),
returned back to Cork, and brought from the Queen this following letter.

Elizabeth Regina.
RIght trusty and well-beloved, we greet you well. By the genlemans relation whom
last you sent unto us, and by your Letters, we received (with much contentment)
the news of the rendition of Kinsale, and other places held by the Spaniards
in that Kingdom: wherein although by comparing the same with those reports
which were brought us by diverse, that they were not only in misery for
victual, but in penury of men, as not being five hundred strong, we conceived
that you might have given them stricter laws in their composition, (and so do
now perceive how easy a matter it is, for those that are nearer hand to the
matters of war then we are, to be mistaken), yet upon those considerations
which we have observed in your iournall last sent over, containing many
important circumstances, which did lead you to that course, amongst which no
one has so much moved us, as that assault would have shed the blood of our
subjects, which is dearer to us then any revenge or glory), we do account it
both in the success, one of the most acceptable accidents that has befallen
us, and in your carriage thereof discern it to have been guided with as many
parts of an able and provident Minister, as any we have used in service of like
nature. And therefore hold it both just and necessary for us to yield you this
testimony of our gracious acceptance of your endeauours, which have been
accompanied with so much pain and peril. It remains now, seeing the state
of all things there, and your own desires do require it, that we speak
something of those things which are fit to be thought of for the time to come,
whereof seeing this event has both already begun, and is very like to work
great alteration to our advantage. That which we could wish you to aim at, is
in sum (next to the safety of the Kingdom) to give all possible ease to our
State, by diminishing that great consumption of treasure, which of late years
we have sustained. And yet how to direct precisely by what means and parcels
in every particular the same is to be done, is very hard for us at this
present, especially until we shall receive from you and our Counsel there
further light, by the information of the state of all things now after these
successes, together with your own opinion thereupon, only as it is apparent
to us already by your letter, that in your own judgment, having due sense of
the infinite inconueniencies which daily are multiplied upon this Kingdom by
that occasion, you did immediately after the rendition, both cast some part of
our Army there, and stay the supplies coming from hence, so in that course we
doubt not, but you do and will continue, as far forth as things may bear
it, in taking care that our Army be not weakened by holding more small
garrisons then are necessary. And this we may with very good reason say, out of
observation of that which has passed of latter years, and agreeable to your
own opinion. That one charge there is very great to us, and yet without any
manner of ground of safety, if there were cause of adventure, and that is the
entertainment of great numbers of Irish, wherein we will note unto you these
two considerations: First that when things there, were at most hazard for us,
your own spirit was doubtful of the service which might be reaped by them.
Secondly that heretofore, when they have been used, it has not been seen,
that either they were entertained at the same rate of pay with our own Nation,
or so mixed in common with them in regiments, but ever kept more apart, both in
companies several, and used in places and in services proper for them, which
course although this extraordinary danger of our Kingdom has given occasion
to dispense with, yet doubt we not but in your own conceit you will think it
meet, with all convenient speed to reform, and give beginning to it, by such
degrees of dimunition, and in such measure, as you shall find to be most for
the good of our service.

For the matter which has been moved to you from the Arch-trairor, we commend
your handling of the offer, in that you have kept the dignity of the place you
hold, and therein ours, and yet we do not mislike, that you did not so
desperately reject him, as to conclude him thereby from opening the further
scope of his desires. And though till the next ouerture, we have little more to
write unto you, yet we may say thus much in generality, that the monstrousness
of his fact, stained with so many and deep spots of offenses of several
natures and degrees, (though none more odious then his ingratitude); and the
quick sense we have always of the biemishing of our honor, does not permit
us to hold any other way with him, then the plain way of perdition. And
therefore do advise you to all courses, that may win us glory upon him, and
if our Arms must be accompanied with any part of mercy, rather to employ the
same in receiving the secondary members and Vriaghts from him, by whom that
life which is left him stands, then to make so much account of so vile an
head, as to think him worthy to be recovered; but rather that abandoned of God
and men, he may be left to feel the just reward of his foul demerits.
Notwithstanding, we will not mislike to hear from you again what you have
further discovered, and guide our further resolution according to occasions.
Hereupon we have thought good to return this gentleman Sir Oliver S. John's to
you, with thus much of our mind upon your late letters, and with such other
matters as from our Counsel he may have in charge to impart unto you, being
one, of whose good discretion and affection to our service we are very well
persuaded, to the end that upon his arrival, (by which time much will be seen
of the event of your late happy success) you may enter into some solid
consideration of the form of government hereafter to be held, of the
proportions of our army to be continued, and of all things that may be likely
to settle that State in safety from foreign attempts, and in a better
obedience to us then heretofore. When you have debated and resolved what
seems good to you there, upon all such points, we can be then contented that
you send back this gentleman hither again, instructed therewith. And because
it will be also needful for the furtherance of our resolutions here, to have
good understanding of the civil parts of that government, as well as of the
martial, and that suit has been made unto us for Sir Robert Gardener our
chief Justice there, to be licensed to come hither, we shall like well that
you send them both, to the end that upon their report of your conceits there,
we may enter into more particular consideration of all things incident, which
upon their arrival we shall be better able to do. Given under our Signet, at
our Palace of West minster, the eight day of February 1601. in the four and
fortieth year of our reign.

The same day Sir Oliver S. John's brought from the Lords in England this
following letter to the Lord Deputy.

AFter our hearty commendations to your good Lordship, we have had (in most of
our late dispatches) so little cause to fill our papers with any thing, but
with commendations of your Lordships wise proceedings, and congratulations for
her Majesty's happy success under you, as at this time (if any other) we
intended not to mix this acknowledgement of our extraordinary contentment for
your late victory against the Spaniards, with any other particular directions,
especially seeing the change you have made in that Country, by freeing the
same from foreign power, (howsoever infested still with an intestine
rebellion), must (in all men's knowledge, that are acquainted with the affairs
of State) have brought so many changes, as we can hardly tell what advice or
direction to offer of new, until we may receive from thence some further light
of the present State of that Kingdom from you, whose own eye and judgment is
nearest, and ablest to perform the same. In which consideration, seeing it
has pleased her Majesty by her own letters, not only to give you notice of
her royal and gracious acceptance of your so noble endeavors, but to direct
your Lordship also to send over hither Sir Robert Gardener, and this gentleman
Sir Oliver S. John's, with relation of all particulars fit for her knowledge, we
will in expectation hereof forbear to enlarge our letter any further, then
with our best wishes to your Lordship of all perfect health and happiness, as
those that will ever be found, etc.

The same eight day Don Iean and the remain of the Spaniards at Kinsale, were
all embarked ready to be gone. The next morning the Lord Deputy left Cork, and
taking his journey toward Dublyn, arrived that night at Yoghall.

And because the stormy weather and contrary winds, kept the Spaniards still in
the Port at Kinsale, his Lordship was forced to stay in that Town some few
days, from whence he wrote to Master Secretary into England, upon the twelfth
of March, aduertising him thereof: And further giving him notice, that the
other Spaniards which were at Beere-Hauen, Castle-Hauen, and Baltimore, now
were gone for Spain. That Don Iean had sent to Cork the pledges promised in
the eight article of the agreement. That five English Companies were lately
arrived at Waterford: And lastly, praying to be excused to the rest of the
Lords of her Majesty's Counsel, that he forbear to write unto them, till he
came to Waterford, where within few days he hoped to meet the Earl of
Ormond, and some other of the Counsel, and upon conference with them, to be
better able to satisfy their Lordships in some things concerning the present
State of this Kingdom, according to her Majesty's pleasure lately signified to
him by her letters. The pledges above mentioned were to lie for the safe
return of our ships, wherein the Spaniards were embarked.

These pledges were principal Commanders, and among them was one Captain
Moryson, (of whose bold service mention is made in the sally upon the second of
December). This gentleman was invited by the Lord Deputy to accompany him to
Dublin, the rest of his fellows still remaining at Cork, whether he was to
return unto them, and they together to be shipped for Spain, upon the safe
return of our ships. In which journey to Dublyn, and during this Gentleman's
abode there, I had familiar conference with him for names sake, and understood
from him, that his Family in Spain was descended of an English Gentleman, who
followed the Emperor Charles the fifth in his wars, and after by his bounty
was seated in Spain, where at this day the chief of his name had good
revenues.

The Lord Deputy being come to Waterford, did write, together with the rest of
the Counsel, upon the eighteenth of March, this following letter to the Lords
in England.

IT may please your Lordships: The eighth hereof, we received by Sir Oliver S.
John's at Cork, the dispatch which it pleased your Lordships to make by him,
and may not omit with all humble thankfulness to acknowledge the great
comfort and contentment we have taken, in that it appears both thereby, and
by the relation of Sir Oliver, that her Majesty and your Lordships have most
graciously and favorably accepted and allowed our poor endeauours. We are
most careful (as you have directed) to send Sir Robert Gardener and him unto
your Lordships, so soon as I the Deputy can get to Dublyn, where Sir Robert
Gardener now is, and shall have considered and debated with the Counsel there
the business, wherein your Lordships look to be thoroughly informed. In the
mean space, because that will ask some time, we have thought fit to acquaint
your Lordships, how things stand here since our last dispatch. The Spaniards
for certain are all gone from Beere-Hauen, Castle-Hauen, and Baltimore, and
that day that Sir Oliver S. John's did arrive at Cork, we heard that all the
Spaniards at Kinsale, and last of all Don Iean himself, were shipped, and in
readiness to set sail, but since we hear that until Saturday the thirteenth
hereof, they could not get forth the Harbor, and were that night beaten back.
On Sunday they were ready to set out again, since which time we have not heard
from thence, more then that they lay aboard in the mouth of the Harbor, and
our men were possessed of the Town, and we have observed the wind since that
time to be good for them, so as we are in good hope they are all gone. The
pledges, according to agreement were come to Cork, being three Captains of
long continuance, so as we have cause to think Don Iean has dealt sincerely
with us, and are not out of hope, to be no more troubled with any Spaniards:
yet to be provided for the worst that may happen, so long as the Spanish Cloud
hangs over us, we have divided both the victuals and great part of the
munition into sundry Harbors, along the Sea Coast of this Province, the more
ready to answer all occasions, as may more fully appear by the notes we send
herewithin: If by this means her Majesty's charge grow great, (as we cannot
but acknowledge it will), and the service North ward go on slowlier then it
would otherwise, if we might apply our selves wholly that way, we beseech your
Lordships favorably to consider the necessities that lead us thereunto, least
leaving any place unprovided for, the facility should inuit a coming
thither, and in that regard we have given out an intention, to fortify in all
the several places of Beer-hauen, Castle-hauen, Baltimore, and the Creekes and
passages along that Coast. Whereas these Spaniards being gone, as now God be
thanked they are, we have no meaning so to do, in regard we have no answer
from your Lordships touching that point, and thereby conceive, that her Majesty
will not undergo so great a charge, though we continue still of this opinion,
that it were the safest course to fortify in those places: and if the
Spaniards should come again, without strong Forts and Cittadels upon the
chief towns, (whom our late experience showed us apparently to be wavering),
we can neither have safety for retreat, if any diaster should befall us, nor
commodity for victuals and munition, but that altogether would be in danger,
and the whole hazarded or lost at an instant; which point we hold our selves
bound in duty to provide for; and therefore if her Majesty do not like to
make Cittadels in these Towns and Cities, which we noted to be fit in our
former letters, we hold it of very great necessity that the harbors of Cork
and Kinsale be yet well fortified, which we have already begun to do at Kinsale,
and have viewed the mouth of the Harbor of Cork, where by raising one good
Fort at the entry, and another upon an Island in that River, the Harbor will
very aptly be secured, and all victuals and munition for our use most
commodiously defended against all enemies, which we hold a matter of very great
importance. And if these works shall be erected, ten Culuerings, and ten
demy-culuerings of Iron, mounted upon unshod wheels, for platformes to be
placed in the Forts, to be made in those two Harbors must forth with be sent
(with bullets for them), either to Cork, or to Kinsale. Our whole store of
victuals being divided into sundry parts of this Province, (as by this note
appears), we are in doubt we shall want when we enter into a prosecution
Northward, unless your Lordships be pleased to continue that course for our
supplies, that we confess you have most prouidently hitherto afforded us: for
where some conceine, and (as it seems) have informed, that we may be
furnished here with victuals, it is to us most strange, and past all belief,
and to make it more apparent unto your Lordships, it may please you to
consider, that it is impossible to make an end of this war without wasting
and spoiling of the Country. This (as we must do still) we have of long time
very earnestly labored, and effected in as great a measure as we can possibly
devise, and then how can it in reason be thought, that we can starve the
Rebel, and yet preserve victuals in the country for the soldier? so as we
must conclude, that if we fail once of our victualing out of England, upon
hope to have it found in this Realm, by any man's understanding, the Army will
either be starued, or driven to break upon a sudden, when it will not be in
our power to help it, and this we beseech your Lordships to believe, if we
have made any use of our experience here. Yet if there be any possibility
thereof, when we have conferred what may be provided out of the Pale, and
quietest parts of Mounster, we will further certify your Lordships. And
besides we do apparently foresee, now that the apparrelling of the soldier is
left unto the Captain (which yet best contents all parties), that if the
exchanging of the new coin be not Royally kept up, the soldier will be in
worse case then before. For all things here are already grown so dear and
scarce, since the new coin went current, as clothes are both excessiuely dear
here, and in any quantity not to be had for money, but must necessarily be
provided in England, and brought hither, which cannot be, if the exchange fail
never so little; for then will the soldier be unclothed, which rather then he
will endure, he will run away, though he be sure to be hanged, and this we
fear will be likewise a mean for the breaking of the Army. The decaies by
sickness and otherwise are already so great, notwithstanding all that we can
do (and yet we have not been wanting in our prouidency), as we most humbly
crave to have supplies sent from time to time (till the rebellion be broken,
which if no foreign forces arrive, we hope will be in short time), not under
Captains but Conductors, for we find by experience that the Captains that are
sent hither with their Companies (conceiving that they shall not stand long)
either by negligence or corruption, loose their men, so that when they are
turned over to supply others, scarce ten of a hundred can be had of them, where
at the first coming over with the Conductors, we can better call them to a
strict account, and find the men, to fill up other Companies, by disposing
them to such as we know will best preserve them, so as they need not reinforce
their Companies with the Irish, as they will when they cannot come by English,
by which means the Companies (we confess) are full of Irish, which till our
supplies come cannot well be helped. And whereas I the Deputy have ever bin
(as my duty is) most desirous to diminish her Majesty's List, and to that end,
not only have taken all occasions by the death of Captains to extinguish
their entertainment, but also have merely discharged above five thousand
since November 1600. Now the Captains and men thus discharged, thinking their
fortunes overthrown by me, had never consideration of the necessity imposed
upon me to do it, but only looking upon their own loss, and (as they esteem
it) disgrace, they become so many enemies to me, and many of them clamorous
against me and my proceedings And whereas by some of your Lps letters it
pleased you to let me know, that your sending many Captains proceeds from my
recommending of many unto you. I do humbly assure your Lps., that almost all
which came over were strangers to me; and if the rest have had letters from me,
I wrote them at their request, only to testify that they had behaved
themselves no otherwise then honestly here, which was the least I could afford
them, when I was forced to take away their Companies. But if her Majesty
expect an abatement of her List, I beseech your Lps. to consider my hard
condition. For if I discharge such as you send over, I do not only become
odious unto them, but offend many of your Lordships, by whose favor they
obtained that charge. And if I discharge such old Captains as I found here,
and of whose sufficiency I have since had continual experience, by their often
aduenturing their blood and lives, I should not only return unto her Majesty
importunate suitors, armed with good justice to crave reward but my self should
incur the same and more just dislike of them and their friends. But that
which for her Majesty's service grieueth me most, is that I should thereby
disinable my self, hereafter to do her Majesty that service, which
heretofore I have done, and next unto God must attribute to their valor and
sufficiency. For touching the Irish by whose discharge I mean to make no small
abatement, I have heretofore labored by insensible degrees to deminish that
charge, and I will choose a fit time fully to effect it, the sudden doing
whereof might cause rather an increase then decrease of her Majesty's charge.
We have lately recommended some of the incorporate Towns here to your
Lordships, and may happily have occasion to do the like, to draw them (if it
might be) to a more affectionate furtherance of the service, at the least to
hold them with some contentment, though indeed they have not affoarded us that
help that they both might and ought. Yet our meaning was not thereby to press
your Lordships to any enlargement of their Franchises, for which happily they
will thereupon be suitors; for we confess truly to your Lordships, that we
think these Corporate Towns in general, have already too great and too many
privileges, and immunities, unless they better knew (or would more readily
endeavor) to deserve them, which we thought meet at this time to give your
Lordships a taste of, least they might otherwise make that use of our letters
that we intended not, Further, we desire that your Lordships will persuade her
Majesty to resolve presently to make Cittadels in the chiefest of these
Towns, without which we shall never bring them to perform their duties. And so
etc.

Don Iean (whether with or without authority given him from Spain, I know
not), had often discoursed with the Lord Deputy, during their abode together at
Cork, that it was no unlikely or difficult work to make Peace between
England and Spain, yea, he went so far, as to urge the Lord Deputy to deal
therein. But his Lordship only made answer, that he knew her Majesty to be
graciously inclined, to hold good amity with all Christian Princes, yet as she
was confident in her own power, so she was in all things jealous of her Honor,
and especially in that point, wherein her Royal meaning had not bin
entertained with the like, by the State of Spain, whence we had received such
ill measure in all our late treaties to that purpose, as all men were
discouraged to be any more made instruments therein. Whereupon Don Iean swear
unto his Lordship, that as he left the State of Spain affected, upon his
knowledge it was then a thing easy to effect, and a thing much desired of
them, to have firm Peace between England and Spain. And he further added
that if upon his arrival in Spain, finding things to stand in the same
condition, he did (at the return of our ships thence) give his Lordship any
inckling thereof, then upon his reputation his Lordship dealing with the State
of England in that matter, should loose no honor thereby. The Lord Deputy
hitherto had done no more then answer Don Ieans proposition in civil terms;
wherein he had spoken no more; then any private man might lawfully have done,
if he had license to confer with him; yet lest he might be thought to have
exceeded his Commission in this nice discourse, and having good reasons to
imagine, that as God many times does work by unlikely, yea, by contrary
means, so he and Don Iean out of then Commission to make war one upon the
other, might prove Commissioners for making a Peace, his Lordship advertised
thus much to Master Secretary in England, praying to have further warrant and
instructions, if it were thought fit he should further proceed therein. But
by Don Ieans silence from Spain, this ouerture passed as a dream, and took
no effect as long as the Queen lived.

The four and twentieth day of March, being the last day (after the English
writing) of the year 1601, the Lord Deputy and Counsel being at Kilkenny,
and entertained by the Earl of Ormond in his house, wrote this following
letter to the Lords in England.

IT may please your Lordships, having certain intelligence since our coming
to this place, that Don Iean with all the rest of the Spaniards, departed from
Kinsale on Tuesday the 16 hereof, and that the wind since that time has served
them so well, as we assure our selves by this they are near the Coast of
Spain, we thought fit hereby to give your Lordships notice thereof, that you
may know we are free now of them all. Since our being here, there has been
brought in a notorious rebel, one William Mac Hubbard, lately taken in
Vpperossery, who of late has done great spoils and murders in these parts,
more then any other, so as we have caused him to be executed in this Town, to
the great terror of many. About the same time that he was executed, a son of
Garret Mac Mortaghes, named Moris Mac Garret, died of a hurt lately given him
in fight, who was a most dangerous young man, like to trouble all the Country.
The death of these two Rebels, as also of a notorious Rebel by birth of
Mounster, lately slain (called Dermot Mac Awlye, who was an inward man, and a
great practicing instrument with Tyrone) will greatly quiet all these parts,
and your Lordships can hardly think what a great change we find already by
their so happy and timely cutting off. And as for Sir Fynneen O Dryscoll, O
Donneuan, and the two sons of Sir Owen Mac Carty, they and their followers
since their coming in are grown very odious to the rebels of those parts, and
are so well divided in factions among themselves, as they are failen to preying
and killing one another, which we conceive will much avail to the quieting of
these parts. I the Deputy am this day going toward Dublin, from whence your
LPs shall hear from me, according to the directions given me by your
Lordships. And I the President am returning into Mounster, to attend my charge
there. We have been much importuned by the Army in general, touching an
abatement of half a pound of beef upon every flesh day from every particular
soldier, and of two hearings every fish fish day, and the horse troops
likewise find themselves grieved, that the victualer charge them with two
shillings six pence increase in the issuing of every barrel of Oats, without
any other warrant then a private letter from M. Wade Clerk of the Counsel,
which although we conceive M. Wade has signified over upon some such purpose
of your Lordp2, or other good ground, yet inregard of the importunities of the
Captains, and to prevent a general mutiny of the Army, in regard the
soldiers are weak, and much infeebled by the late siege of Kinsale, and that
the prises of all things are increased above all measure, by reason of the new
standard coin, and that the Country is generally much harryed and wasted, and
thereby great scarcity and wants grow here, we hold it meet, and accordingly
gave direction to the Commissary of the victuals, to issue Oats (as formerly)
at six shillings the barrel, and allow the soldier two pound of beef, and
eight herings a dav, according as it was formerly accustomed, till your
Lordships resolution were returned in that behalf, which we humbly pray and
expect. And so having no other matter at this time worthy the presenting to
your Lordships, we most humbly take leave, etc.

The Lord President having accompanied the Lord Deputy to Kilkenny, did from
thence return to his charge in the Province of Mounster. At Kilkenny the Lord
Deputy began to feel himself sickly, having formerly complained of some
distemper (a likely effect of his watchings and cold taken, during the hard
winter-siege at Kinsale),), and his Lordships sickness so grew upon him, as
the next day he was carried in a Horse-litter, and so all the journey, till he
came to Dublin, where he ariiued the eight and twentieth of March, in the
beginning of the year 1602, and his distemper still continuing, applied
himself to take Physic. I will conclude the Acts of the year past with this
following abstract of her Majesty's charge in the Realm of Ireland, from the
first of April 1601, to the nine and twentieth of March, 1602.

The Total of all charges as well in the Establishment, as by other warrants
extraordinary, two hundred eighty three thousand six hundred seventy three
pound nineteen shillings eleven pence half farthing.

Viz. In the new coin mixed ready money, two hundred fifteen thousand eight
hundred fifty pound nineteen shillings four pence half penny.

In apparel for the soldiers, provided in England with silver money, sixty
seven thousand eight hundred twenty three pound six pence half penny half
farthing.

Checqued by the Muster-Master, in money fifteen thousand one hundred forty
nine pound six shillings; in apparel, twenty two thousand four hundred fifty
seven pound six shillings two pence half penny.

So her Majesty's whole charge is in the year 1601, two hundred forty six
thousand eighty seven pound seven shillings eight pence half penny half
farthing.

Besides the concordatums, bills impressed upon accounts here, the leauies and
transporting of forces (paid in England), the payment of works, and the
charges of the Office of the Ordinance, for Powder, Bullets, etc,

The third Book.
CHAP. I. Of the prosecution of the war by the Lord Mountioy, Lord Deputy,
against the rebels, in the year 1602.
IN the beginning of the year 1602 for the latter part of March, and good part
of April, the Lord Deputies indisposition of body above mentioned, did still
continue, and his Lordship for a short time attended nothing, but the recovery
of his health. Only on the one and thirtieth of March, he signified to the
Lords in England, that from the sixteenth of March, when the Spaniards set
sail from Kinsale, the wind had continued so favorable, as he nothing
doubted but they were arrived in Spain. And his Lordship advertised the state
of his weak health, and prayed to be excused, that he could not as yet
consider with the Counsel here, about the dispatch of Sir Robert Gardner, and
Sir Oliver S. John's, with the relation of this Kingdoms present estate,
according to the directions he had formerly received to that purpose, which he
was careful to do so soon as health would permit him. Adding that in the
mean time the forces were so disposed, as they might be most active in the
prosecution of Tyrone, and his broken partakers. And the Lord Deputy having
intelligence, that after the knowledge of his and Don Ieans agreement, the
preparations of seconds in Spain were diuerted, and so not fearing any
interruptions by foreign forces, was bold to give the Lords in England
confidence of his future endeauours in his charge, whereof he hoped to give her
Majesty a good account, God pleasing to restore his health, so as he might
proceed with that speed and alacrity which he intended.

The third of April his Lordship received letters from the Lords in England,
signifying; That they concurred with him in grief, that by contrary winds
staying the Spaniards transporting, his Lordship was forced to stay in
Mounster, and slack the opportunity of prosecuting Tyrone at his first
return and flight out of Mounster, when he was in such plight, as he could
feign no hopes of safety to himself, lying in some fastness or other, and
often changing his aboade, for fear of some attempt against his person set at
a price, and still having neither Powder nor Lead, but making infinite means
into Scotland to be furnished therewith, so as if the Northern Garrisons were
not weak for want of supplies, and if some forces could have been spared to
strengthen them, in all probability they might have ruined Tyrone ere this.
That our ships transporting the Spaniards, were well used in Spain, and upon
their arrival, the ships prepared at the Groyne for Ireland were presently
unfurnished, so as her Majesty's Fleet, and some ships of the Low Countries
lying this Summer on the Coast of Spain, they conceived all Spanish aides for
Ireland would for the present be diuerted. That for Cittadels to be built in
the Towns and Ports, her Majesty in general allowed thereof, leaving the
choice of most fit places, and the manner of building to his Lordship, as also
to certify an estimate of the charge, and the best means to raise it
otherwise, then out of her Majesty's coffers. That her Majesty commended the
discreet intercepting of the Spanish letters, by which the Kings earnestness
to follow that enterprise apppeared, but no doubt by the English Fleet
prepared for that coast would be diuerted. That no supplies should be expected
out of England, where the leauyes had been so burdensome, as for the present
it was fit to forbear them. That in all grants to the submitting rebels, they
required his Lordship to have care, that they were not so absolute, as they
should not be in awe of the State, or be able to tyrannise over their
neighbors, and particularly that any treason of the Pattentees should forfeit
all the grant. That Irish Companies should not be employed near their own
home, especially in any great numbers, neither should have any pay for
apparel, there being no reason that their pay should be equal to that of
the English. Lastly, to the end the Submitties might not abuse her Majesty's
mercy to their temporising ends, as they had often done, by reuolts into
rebellion after submissions and Protections, their Lordships required, that as
every chief rebel was taken in, so they should be disarmed.

But this last point was not effected for this consideration, that by that
means every chief Lord upon submission should leave his Country without
defense, and open to be spoiled, both by neighboring rebels, and theeuish
subjects. It is true, that after all the war fully ended, a general
disarming had been requisite, but the event will show, how that was after
neglected in the proper time (when the first act was, casting the English
forces), which now was pressed, when there was no possibility to effect it.

The List of the forces in April, 1602.
Colonels of the Army, 14.

The Earl of Clanrickard. The Earl of Thomond. The Lord Audley. Sir Henry
Dockwra. Sir Samuel Bagnol. Sir Christopher Saint Laurence. Sir Arthur
Chichester. Sir Richard Moryson. Sir Charles Willmot. Sir Richard Percy. Sir
Oliver Saint John. Sir Henric Power. Sir Henry Follyot. Sir Benjamin Berry.

The forces in Mounster of Horse.

The Lord President, 100. The Earl of Thomond, 100. Sir Charles Willmott, 25.
Sir Anthony Cook, 50. Captain Taffe, 50.

Horse 325.

Foot in Mounster.

The Lord President, 200. The Earl of Thomond, 200. The Lord Barry, 100. The
Lord Audley, 150. Sir Charles Willmott, 150. Sir George Carry, Treasurer, 100.
Sir George Thorneton, 100. Sir Garret Haruie, 150. Sir Richard Perey, 150. Sir
Francis Barkely, 150. Sir John Dowdall, 100. Sir Samuel Bagnol, 150. Sir
Anthony Cook, 100. Sir Alexander Clifford, 100. Sir Arthur Savage, 150. The
Earl of Desmond, 100. The White Knight, 100. Captain Roger Haruy, 150.
Captain Flower, 150. Captain Saxey, 100. Captain Slingshye, 100. Captain
Skipwith, 100. Captain Hobby, 100 Captain Francis Kinsmell, 150 Captain
Power, 100. Captain George Kinsmell, 100. Captain Cullom, 100. Captain
Bostock, 100 Captain Gawen Haruie, 100. Captain Coote, 100. Captain
Stafford, 100. Captain Owslye, 100. Captain Blundell, 100. Captain
Dorrington, 100. Captain Sidley, 100. Captain Boys, 100. Captain Holcroft,
100.

Foot, 4400.

Horse in Connaght.

The Earl of Clanricard, 50. Sir Oliver Lambert, 25. Sir Oliver Saint John's,
25. Captain Wayeman Marshall, 12.

Horse, 112.

Foot in Connaght.

Sir Oliver Lambert Governor, 150. Earl of Clanrickard, 150. Sir Thomas
Bourke, 150. Sir Oliver Saint John's, 200. Captain Tibbot Bourke, called Tibot
ne long, 100. Captain Malby, 150. Captain Thomas Bourke, 100. Captain Ghest,
150. Captain Rotheram, 150. Captain May, 100. Void for the Judges pay, 100.
Captain Clare 150.

Foot, 1650.

The forces lying Southward upon Lemster in Garrisons.
Horse at Ophaly Leax and Kilkenny.

Earl of Kildare, 25. Sir Edward Harbert. 12. Master Marshall, 20. Captain
Piggot, 12. The Earl of Ormond, 50.

Horse, 119.

Foot at Ophaly Leax and Kilkenny.

The Earl of Kildare, 150. Sir George Bourcher, 100. Sir Edward Harbert, 100.
Sir Henry Warren, 100. Captain O Carroll, 100. Sir Henry Power, 150. Sir
Francis Rush, 150 Sir Thomas Loftus, 100. The Earl of Ormond, 150.

Foot, 1100.

The forces lying Northward upon Lemster in Garrisons.
Foot in West-Meath, Kelles, Liscanon in the Brenny, Dundalke, and Moyry.

Lord of Deluin, 150. Sir Francis Shane, 150. Captain Thomas Roper, 150. The
Lord Dunsany, 150 Captain Esmond, 150. Sir William Warren, 100. Sir Henry
Harrington, 100. Captain Ferdinand Freckleton, 100. Captain Richard Hansard,
100.

Foot, 1200.

Horse in Kelles, and Liscanon in the Brenny.

The Earl of Kildare, 25. Sir Henry Harington, 25. Lord Dunsany 50.

Horse, 100.

Out of Mounster forces were drawn into Connaght one thousand foot, and
fifty horse, and the abouesaid forces of Connaght are one hundred twelve
horse, and one thousand six hundred fifty foot. Hereof were left to guard
Galloway and Athlone, foot two hundred. Left in Garrison at the Abbey of Boil
one thousand foot, and sixty two horse, which served to further our new
plantation at Ballishannon, (for there a Garrison was newly planted, and Sir
Henry Follyot was made Governor thereof.) The rest of the horse and foot
were laid at the Annaly, and might fitly join with the Garrisons disposed
Southward and Northward upon Lemster, upon all occasions of service, as more
especially they might concur in stopping the Rebels for passing either on the
South or North-side into Lemster. As likewise the Garrisons Southward might
answer one another, and these Northward answer one another, upon all
occasions of service.

Garrysons in the North.
Foot at Mount Norreys.

Having drawn out six hundred foot, and one hundred horse for the Army, left
to keep the Fort, Captain Atherton, 150.

Foot at Armagh.

Having drawn out for the Army seven hundred fifty foot, and one hundred
twenty five horse, left to keep the Abbey Sir Henry Dauers his Company 150,
himself commanding the horse in the Army.

Foot at Blackwater.

Having drawn out for the Army one hundred foot, left to keep the Fort
Captain Thomas Williams, 150.

Horse and Foot at the Newrie.

Having drawn out three hundred foot for the Army, left to keep the Town,
Sir Francis Stafford, 50 horse. Sir Francis Stafford, 200 foot.

In Garrison Total of Horse, 50. Foot, 650.

The Forces at Loughfoyle lay thus in Garrisons, out of which Sir Henry
Dockwra was to draw a competent force into the field, for the Summer service,
and to meet the Lord Deputy in Tyrone.
Foot.

At Derry Sir Henry Dockwra, 200. Captain Orme, 100. Captain Flood, 150. At
Dunnman, Captain Atkinson, 150. At Dunalong, Captain Badbye, 150. At Ainogh,
Captain Sidney, 100. At Culmore, Captain Alford, 100. At Ramullan, Captain
Bingley, 150. At Bert, Captain Winsore, 150. At Kilmatren, Captain Vaughan,
100. At Cargan, Captain Heart, 100. At Liffer, Captain Willys, 150. Captain
Pinner, 100. Captain Brooks, 100. Captain Coach, 150. Captain Leygh, 100.

At Dunagall, Asheraw, and Ballishannon.
Sir Irhn Bolles, 150. Captain Diggs, 100. Captain Gore, 150. Captain
Stafford, 100. Captain Wood, 150. Captain Orell, 150. Captain Basset, 100.
Captain Dutton, 100.

In all 3000 Foot.

Horse at Aynagh, Dunalong and Liffer, Sir Henry Dockwra, 100. At Ballishannon,
Sir John Bolles, 50.

In all 150 Horse.

Besides Irish foot, 300; and Irish Horse, 100.

The Forces in Garrison at Carickfergus, out of which Sir Arthur Chichester was
to draw a competent strength to come by water, and meet the Lord Deputy in
Tyrone.
Foot.

Sir Arthur Chichester, Governor, 200. Sir Foulke Conway, 150. Captain
Sackfeild, 100. Captain Norton, 100. Captain Billings, 150. Captain
Phillips, 150.

Foot 850.

Horse at Carickfergus.

Sir Arthur Chichester Governor, 25. Captain John Iephson, 100.

Horse 125.

Foot in Lecale.

Sir Richard Moryson under his Lieutenant 150, himself commanding a Regiment
in the Army.

The Lord Deputies Army in the field for this Summers service.
Horse.

The Lord Deputy, 100. Sir William Godolphin, 50. Sir Garret Moore, 50. Sir
Richard Greame, 50. Sir Samuel Bagnol, 50. Sir Henry Dauers, 100. Master
Marshall, 30. Sir Christopher S. Laurence, 25. Sir Francis Rush, 12. Captain
Fleming, 25. Captain George Greame, 14.

Horse in the Army, 506.

Foot.

Lord Deputies Guard, 200. Sir John Barkeley, 200. Sir Benjamin Berry, 150. Sir
Henry Folliot, 150. Sir William Fortescue, 150. Sir James Peirse, 150. Sir
Garret Moore, (...). Sir Christopher S. Laurence, 150. Sir Edward Fitz Garret,
100. Sir Tibbot Dillon, 100. Master Marshall, 150. Capt. Josias Bodley, 150.
Capt. Toby Gawfeild, 150. Captain Richard Hansard, 100. Capt. Edward Blany,
150. Capt. Fran. Roe, 150 Capt. Ralph Counstable, 100. Capt. Fisher, 100.
Captain John Roberts, 100. Capt. George Blount, 150. Captain James Blount,
100. Captain Hensto for pioners, 200. Captain Masterson, 150. Captain Henry
Barkley, 150. Captain Morrys, 100. Captain Anthony Earsfeild, 100. Captain
Treuer, 100.

Foot in the Army, 3650.

Total of horse by the List, 1487. Foot by the List, 16950.

The forces being thus disposed for the Summers service, and the Lord Deputy
having recovered his health, his first care was to obey her Majesty's
directions, in dispatching for England Sir Robert Gardener, and Sir Oliver S.
John's with a relation of the present state of this Kingdom. By them, besides
instructions of the present state, his Lordship sent this following letter to
the Lords in England, dated the fifth of May, 1602.

MAy it please your Lordships, although you have good reason to guess at the
difficulties of the war of Ireland, both by the long continuance, and the
exceeding charge thereof before my time (under which the rebels strength did
ever grow), as by the slow progress (though still to the better) that it has
made (I must confess) under my government; yet since I do conceive, that
none but we that are personal actors therein (especially in these times,
wherein the fashion and force of this people is so much altered from that it
was wont to be), can thoroughly apprehend with how many impediments, crosses and
oppositions we undertake and proceed in all things. I humbly desire your
Lordships to give me leave, for your satisfaction and the discharge of my
duty, to open unto you some of the causes (which I do better feel then I can
express) that have hindered so speedy a conclusion of this war, as her
Majesty, out of her great providence, and large proportion of expense, might
happily expect. At my first arrival, I found the rebels more in number, then
at any time they had bin since the conquest, and those so far from being
naked people, as before times, that they were generally better armed then we,
knew better the use of their weapons then our men, and even exceeded us in that
discipline, which was fittest for the advantage of the natural strength of the
Country, for that they, being very many, and expert shot, and excelling in
footmanship all other Nations, did by that means make better use of those
strengths, both for offense and defense, then could have bin made of any
squadrons of pikes, or artificial fortisications of Towns. In regard whereof,
I presumed that man's wit could hardly find out any other course to overcome
them, but by famine, which was to be wrought by several Garrisons planted in
fit places, and altered upon good occasions. These plantations could not be
made but by Armies, which must first settle them, and after remove them, as the
strength of the enemy required; the time for those plantations (not only of
most conueniency, but almost of necessity) was to be in the Sum, and that for
many eminent reasons, but especially in that means might be provided for
horse to live in the winter, without which those Garrisons would prove of
little effect. Now I beseech your Lordships to remember, that I received this
charge the eight and twentieth of February, in the year 1599, at which time I
found the rebels in number, and Arms (as I have said) grown to the very
height of pride and confidence, by a continued line of their success and our
misfortunes; of the subjects, the worst assisting them openly, and almost the
best leaning to their fortune, out of a despair of ours; the Army discouraged
in themselves, and (believe me my Lords, for you will hardly believe) much
contemned by the Rebels. None of our Garrisons had stirred abroad, but they
returned beaten, the enemy being so far Master of the field, that Tyrone had
measured the whole length of Ireland, and was coming back unfought with. And
with me they began the war at the very suburbs of Dublin. At that time the
choice of the whole Army, and even of every Company (that was left behind) was
drawn into Mounster by the Earl of Ormond; how beit I being desirous to loose
no time nor opportunity, presently gathered together that poor remnant, being
the refuse of the rest, with a purpose to have fought with the Traitor in his
return, between Fercale and the Ennye: but he hastening his iournies upon
some intelligence of my design, and I being the longer stayed (by the
difference of the Councels opinion) from mine intent, it fell out, that I came
too late to try that fair fortune with him. The rest of the Spring I was
enforced to attend the drawing of diverse Captains and Companies from remote
and divided Garrisons, that were to be employed for Loughfoyle and
Ballishannon; for by your Lordships appointment, I was to send one thousand
other soldiers from these parts, and to cast three thousand more, in
consideration of so many sent thither out of England, and to reduce the List
from sixteen thousand to fourteen thousand, which at that time was a
proportion too little to undertake the war with all; I was further to
victual the Forts of Leax and Ophalye, in those times accounted great and
dangerous services. And about the fifth of May, 1600, I drew toward the North,
chiefly to divert Tyrone and his Northern forces, from giving opposition to
the Plantation at Loughfoyle, but withal purposing, if I found means for
victuals and carriages, to have left a Garrison at Armagh. The first I did
thoroughly effect, for I gave way to those of Loughfoyle to land, and settle
quietly, drew Tyrone with his chief forces upon my self, and in all the
fights I had with him, made him know, that his fortune began to turn, and
brake those bounds of his circuit, whence he was wont to affront our greatest
Armies; for in that which was last before this called a Northern journey, when
the Army consisted almost of double numbers of Horse and Foot, they were by
the Traitor forced and arrested within the confines of the Pale. At my return,
I finding by observation in my journey (wherewith the whole Counsel did
concur in opinion), that the Garrison of Loughfoyle would do little hurt to
Tyrone, except there were forces left at, or about Armagh, since they might
easily fly out of their reach, and should enjoy between Dungannoa and the
Pale, one of the largest and most fertile Countries of Ireland, we became
suitors to your Lordships in June 1600, that with more men, and more provisions
you would enable us to that Plantation, and in the mean time I intended the
service in Ofalie and Leax, the strength of the rebellion in Lemster, and most
dangerous Rebels of Ireland. And whereas the last time the Army passed through
Leax (being one of the greatest that has been at any time together in this
Kingdom), it was encountered and almost distressed by the only Natives of that
Country, it pleased God, that in all our conflicts, which were many, we so
prevailed against them, as though all the Rebels in Lemster were then gathered
together, yet by killing Owny mac Rory, with many of the best men of both
Countries, and by utterly spoiling them (that were exceeding rich in all means
for life), they have never since been able to make head any otherwise, then to
live dispersed in little numbers as Woodkernes, and daily are consumed and
wear away. And further, in that year we recovered all the Earl of Ormonds
pledges. Upon the arrival of the supplies sent by your Lordships, although the
time of the year were far spent, and indeed ouer-farre to plant Garrisons
to any great purpose, for the next ensuing winter, and that, at that instant we
were ill provided both of victual and money, yet we set forward, and the
fifteenth day of September came to Dundalke, and incamping two miles from
thence, within half a mile of the entrance of the Moyry, we found that pace
(by which we were to pass), being naturally one of the most difficult passages
of Ireland, fortified with good art, and with admirable industry, (the enemy
having raised from mountain to mountain, from wood to wood, and from bogge to
bogge, long trauerses, with huge and high Flanckers of great stones, mingled
with Turffe, and staked on both sides with pallades watled), and possessed with
one of the greatest Armies that ever they were able to make But that which was
our maine impediment, was the extremity of the weather, and great rain, which
made the Rivers impassable, how be it in the end the waters somewhat falling,
after we had endured more then credible hardness, and given many, and those
violent assaults on their trenches, we wanne our passage, and immediately
planted a garrison within eight small miles of Armagh, now called Mount
Nerreys, for at Armagh the grass was so consumed, that we could not have lived
there with our Horses, while the place should have been made tenable, and this
other garrison was thought ncessary to be possessed, though Armagh it self had
been planted, and in the mean time of little less effect. And so far did we
stretch out our victuals, and improve our time, and all other provisions, that
having Tyrones Army continually within little more then musket shot of us,
within two days we made this Fort guardable, and left therein all our baggage,
that with all our means for carriage, and even with many of our own Horses,
we might from the Newry convey as much victuals thither, as might be, which we
performed in so short a time, and yet in so good time, that we were forced to
fast two days in our return. This garrison could not be to such effect as it
should be, because we had not victuals enough to leave a compitent proportion
for a sufficient number of men, neither could there any Horse be left for want
of means for them. Nevertheless, that Winter there was great good service
done by those of that Fort, commanded by Captain Edward Blaney, a very worthy
and painful Gentleman.

I do not repeat the manner of our fights, nor the number of them, both
before, and after in our return, wherein the Rebel seldom escaped without a
blow; and namely in the pace of Carlingsord, where he received a notable
overthrow: Neither set I down any thing in this, to amplify our own doings
or endeauours, but to give your Lordships an account, how this season was lost
from making such plantations, as by taking their effect in the Winter, should
in short time have broken the heart of the Rebellion, and to let it appear
unto your Lordships, by the many difficulties and oppositions we found in
only bending this way, how impossible it had been for us at the same time,
with the numbers we had, to have planted in other places, which had been as
necessary as this, to have made a sudden end of the war. And among other
considerations, your Lordships may be pleased to conceive that albeit the List
of the Forces here in Ireland, being vnitely considered, may appear to be
sufficiently great, yet dividing the same into his parts, as three thousand in
Mounster, three thousand at Loughfoyle, one thousand for Knockefergus, and
almost two thousand in Connaght, the remainder (whereof I have been only able
to prevail my self, and wherewith I have sustained the burden of the War,
both in Lemster and the North), can hardly bear such deminution, as (...)
Armies are subject unto, in their deficient men, with so many subdiuisions, as
I am necessarily constrained to make, for the guarding of important places (as
with the Earl of Ormond, in Leaxe, Ophalia, and diverse other parts) to defend
the subject from the incursions of Rebels, and yet leave me a competent Army to
try a fortune with all the Rebels of the North, which we must be prepared
for, seeing no such diuersion can be expected from the foresaid Garrisons, as
is able to hinder the light footed Kerne (having fled their Creaghts into their
fastnesses) from joining their utmost strength from the (...) parts of their
associates, in less then three days warning. Whereas we on the contrary, in
case of present use, can hope for no manner of assistance from our disioyned
troops, within the compass of as many weeks. And besides these impediments,
and many other, I did neither then nor at any time since, meet with any more
hurtful to my proceedings, (...) the restraint of our extraordinaries, and the
want of al such kind of necessaries, as your Lordships were persuaded were
only fit for a more royal war; whereas the substance of extraordinaries,
growing chiefly by huge provisions of carriages, to convey victuals, and waste
therein, by large proportions of Pyoners, and other Workemens tools, with
diverse other sorts of engines, and enginers, for fortification, and passages
over Rivers, and other places otherwise impassable, by materials for the same,
rewards for spials and other services, I will boldly affirm what I presume I
can prove to your Lordships, that there is no war in the World, that to be
effectually followed, does require a more liberal expense for provision of all
these things, then this, and of all other extraordinaries, saving the charge of
great Artillery, whereof also in some measure, though in a far less then
other places, we have great use. And of many (perchance more forcible) to
present unto your Lordships oriely these two reasons: An Army is no where
arrested with so many Rivers and impassable Marshes; as here: Secondly, where
the war is to be made to best effect, we find no means of victuals, or any
other necessary provision, but what we bring with us. To redeem the loss of
this opportunity for plantation to so good effect as it should have been, I
undertook with an Army no greater then a reasonable garrison, to make the
war of Lemster, in the depth of Winter. And first I fell into the Glinnes,
the fastest Country of Ireland, and till now of all the parts of Lemster,
only untouched, where I first spoiled all the Country, and made Donnell
Spantgah, whom before I had received to her Majesty's mercy, to join with me
therein, and after forced Phelim Mac Feogh, and all the Tools, (the most
pestilent infestors of the Pale) to submission, who have since showed more
appearance of good subjects, then ever I knew or heard of any of these Rebels.
After going up and down as far as Athlone, I fell into Fercale, forced
Tyrrill out of an exceeding great strength, and banished him, and in effect all
the Oconnors, out of Ophaly into the North. Returning toward the North, I
spoiled all the Ferny, with a journey where I was present, and wherein (besides
many other) were killed two of Ever Mac Cooleys sons. I wasted the Fuse by
Sir Richard Moryson, planted a garrison above twenty miles from the Pale in the
Brenny by Sir Oliver Lambert, and returning to Drogheda, by the general advice
of the Counsel, I took in Turlogh mac Henry, Lord of the Fuse, and Ever mac
Cooly Farmer of the Ferny, Sir Ohy Ohanlon a Northern Lord, and many of the
Macmahowns and Orellies, who all besides their greatest oaths, gave us such as
were thought their best pledges for their loyalty. And to loose no part of this
beginning year 1601, having settled the new Submitties of Lemster, and the
borders of the North, with as great assurance as I could, I drew again into
the North, before the general hosting for that year could be in readiness,
and cleared and assured the passage of the Moyry, by cutting down most part of
the Woods, and building a Fort there: Then I went into Lecayle, wholly
possessed by Mac Gennis, and took in all the Castles in those parts: From
thence I went to Armagh, and there placed a garrison. And albeit at this time
the continual rumors we heard of preparations in Spain, made us proceed
somewhat more irresolutely in our maine course of plantation and making the
war in Tyrone it self, yet we went forward with an intent, to draw Sir
Arthur Chichester by Loughsidney into Tyrone: to plant a garrison at the
Blackwater: to force a passage somewhat beneath it to meet him, and by building
a Fort and Bridge upon the passage, to have made Dungannon it self the Center,
whether without any great difficulty the Garrisons of Loughfoyle, Armagh,
Knockfergus, Mount Norreys, and ell other of the North, might at all times meet
together, to beat and absolutely to banish the Arch-traitor out of his own
Country: and in the performing thereof, to have spoiled all the Rebels corn
saving such as should be within the command of those Garrisons, whom (with the
countenance of the Army in the Harvest time) we resolved to enable to make
large provisions thereof, for themselves and their horses. And so far had we
proceeded in this course, that we had forced Tyrone from the Blackwater, where
he lay with his Army, and had fortified and enreached there with great art: we
had cleared the passage intended to Dungannon (the making of the bridge only
excepted, which we meant to supply with a floate), and spoiled most part of
their standing Corn. About which time the assured news was come unto us of
the ariuing of the Spaniards, which first staying, and after clean diuerting
our course, we were driven by their coming, to bend our counsels, to defend
her Majesty's Kingdom from foreign invasion, that before were busy to
recover it from inward rebellion, and to that end to break off our work, and
to leave the further prosecution of that business (the places already
possessed only preserved.) By this continued time, wherein the Army from the
first was led on in action, enduring all seasons, and more fights then (I
think) ever Army did in so short time, your Lordships must not wonder, if to
make head against the Spaniards, we drew up weak Companies: for besides
deficients by sickness, and death, there were many Companies that had thirty
and forty hurt men in them. Yet upon any uncertainty (how probable soever), I
was loath to loose to her Majesty the chief benefit of one whole years
service, till I was fully assured of their landing, and therefore first drew my
self only with a few horse into Mounster, and never sent for the forces, till
the very last pinch of necessity. And thus have your Lordships also the
reasons, how this second year was lost, without laying the new foundation for
rooting out of the Rebels, though God be thanked it was won in defending her
Kingdom from a powerful and ambitious Inuader, to his dishonor, and I hope
also to the more sound and sudden subversion of the Rebels. I will speak
nothing of the service at Kinsale, since to my great comfort I do find her
Majesty and your Lordships so well satisfied therein, but so behoofefull for
the public good I conceived it, to make a clean riddance of them out of this
Country, and as much as I might to assure in them the performance of their
departure, that it was necessary to keep the Army in those parts until we
were quit of them. And to give them the less advantage, if they had purposed
falsely, I presently conveyed the Cannon into an Island that does absolutely
command the Haven of Kinsale, with a sufficient guard, and beginning a
fortification there at that instant to maintain it, I took order they should
have no more victuals sold unto them, then I presumed would but serve them from
day to day, and for their provision of bread, in effect they spent on their
own stoare. So that I could have been able at any time to inuest them again,
on as ill or worse conditions then I left them. But before the wind and other
provisions served for their departure, he Winter was so far spent, that we
could not in the fittest time return the Companies to their Garrisons, nor
otherwise could we have done it, because the places were not stored with
victuals, nor any provision for horse. And yet those little remnants that were
left to defend those places, did many excellent seruiees, and now I hope your
Lordships shall daily hear of more, the whole forces being returned. What
course we have thought on for this next Summer, I will not trouble your
Lordships with the repetition thereof, being set down and delivered to Sir
Oliver S. John's. Only this I beseech your Lordships to give me leave to
remember you of, out of a public durie how much soever it may seem to taste
of my private ends, that you continually enjoin me, and I as much endeavor, to
decrease the List, yet you still send over new Captains, and command me to
bestow Companies on such, as give them up in England, to others recommended by
them, unto whom (to deal plainly) most of them do sell them. And even of
late I have received your Lordships letters for the increase of some particular
men's Companies. When I cast the Captains which your Lordships send over, I
procure their hate, and many of your Lordships displeasures, besides their own
friends that favor them. If I do not increase such as you commend, I do
incur the like. If I cast those Companies and Captains, that in so many
trials I do know to be best able to do her Majesty service here, I shall
despair, or at least be diffident hereafter, of doing any good, and yet have
they most reason to condemn me of injustice, and to importune your Lordships
to be otherwise relieved, that have spent most of them their Mouds, and all of
them their continual labors, even in mine aie for the recovery and defending
of this Kingdom. I humbly desire your Lordships, since heretofore it was my
fortune to be hated of few, that you will preserve me from becoming odious,
by doing that which is fittest for the service. For I have already tasted of
their spleen, whom (God knows) against my will I have been forced to
cashere, though I have dealt more favorably with some of them, whom being loath
to harm, I have rather commended, when my only fault was, that I did not
punish them. And since I hope, God will so bless our work, that ere it be
long, we shall much diminish the number of our laborers, if in that great
cashering; there be not means to preserve the best Captains, I would be loath
to be the man, that should undertake the conclusion of the war. And now I
do humbly desire your Lordships to pardon me, if out of my great care to
satisfy you in all things, I have troubled you with so long, and (I fear me)
so unworthy a letter of your Lordships reading, etc.

Instructions being given to Sir Robert Gardener, and Sir Oliner Saint John's,
whereby they might satisfy her Majesty in all points, touching the present
state of her affairs in this Kingdom. The Lord Deputy with some Commanders,
diverse voluntary Gentlemen, and his servants attending him, rode to Dundalke.
And whilst he there attended the coming up of the forces, and the arriving
of victuals, with other necessaries that might enable him to take the field,
his Lordship on the thirtieth of May, received from her Majesty this letter
following.

Elizabeth Regina.
RIght trusty and well-beloved, We greet you well. Whereas the payment of our
Army in that Kingdom has been of late years made partly in money by certain
weekly lendings, and partly in apparel, which course of payment was
instituted upon good considerations, to prevent the fraud which diverse
Captains of evil disposition did exercise upon their Companies.
Notwithstanding we have (...) by your letters, and by the reports of some
persons (who have had credence from you to deliver the same to our Counsel
here), that such manner of payment has not wrought that effect which was
expected, in causing our Companies to be kept fuller, and yet is, by reason of
the late alteration of the standard of our moneys there, more chargeable to Us,
then the payment in ready moneys would be; We have therefore thought good to
cease that manner of payment from henceforth, and to revive the old manner of
payment in money, after the rate of eight pence by the day of the new standard
to each soldier, which course Our pleasure is, shall begin to take place from
the first day of this month of April, and to be continued by your Warrants to
Our Treasurer directed; and shall be made from time to time by way of imprests
to each Captain for himself and his Company, at your disaretion, according
to the state of their Companies, or to the necessity of Our service, until
the days of full paies, which We are pleased shall be made twice in every
year, viz. at the Feasts of Saint Michael the Arch-Angell, and the
Annuntiation of the Virgin Marie. At which times Our pleasure is, that all our
Army shall be fully and clearly paid of their whole wages, all defalcations
due upon them, being formerly deducted. And for that purpose We will provide,
that against that time, there shall be in Our Treasurers hands money
sufficient to make full paids. And whereas by your latter letters, written
since our Conncell signified unto you, that We were pleased to restore this
kind of pay; you do require, that for the establishing thereof with
contentment of our Army, two things may be (...) observed. The one, that Our
Treasurer may have money in his hands sufficient from time to time for
performance of this payment. The other that the Exchange be duly maintained
on this side, without which you allege, that there will arise inconueniencies
intolerable to the army; we are pleased for your satisfaction herein to assure
you, that in both these I oints we will take such order, that neither our
Treasurer there shall want moneys of the new standard for payments necessary in
that Realm, nor the banks here, sterling moneys, to make good the exchange,
according as it is established by our Proclamations. Although in this point we
cannot omit to let you know, that we see no cause or such vehemeni complaints,
as your letters do import, of default in the exchange, for that upon
examination we do find, that of three or four and fifty thousand pounds
returned in this last year, there is not unpaid at this present above six
thousand pounds, which considering our excessive charges in that year, ought
not to give to any much cause of offense. These two points like as we are
pleased to observe, in such manner as we have written, to the end that thereby
our Army and subjects may perceive how great our care is, that they should
receive contentment in things due unto them. So on the otherside, for that a
straight observation of the same on our part, without a good correspondency of
yours and theirs, to remedy some inconueniencies which thereby may be cast upon
us, may prove very burden some to us, we are to admonish you of the
observation of two other points necessary on your part and theirs to be
observed. The first is, that whereas heretofore, when this manner of payment in
money only, which now is received, was in use, through the corrupt disposition
of some Captains, and for want of good discipline in our forces, great frauds
were committed, as well to us, in not keeping the full numbers by us allowed,
as also to the soldiers, in detaining their wages or part thereof from them,
which deceits without good caution now to be used, may be again renewed. We
do therefore expect, that you shall establish so good a course of discipline
for the ordering of our Bands in this point, as that we shall not be hereafter
abused in decaies of our numbers, as heretofore we have been which you shall
never so well prevent nor alien men's minds from like frauds, as by insticting
notorious and exemplary punishments upon Captains and Officers when their
faults in this kind shall appear to be notorious, not only by casting them
out of our pay, but by degrading, and other notes of ignominy, which in
military discipline are used to be justly done to men, who by their shameless
actions do not only bring shame to their profession, but to the public
services notable impediments, and in a manner an evident treachery. And as this
first change of payment in apparel to be paid in money, had his first motion
from you our Deputy, and the principal Captains and Officers of the Army, in
which you now note peril, if the exchange be not maintained. As it is true
that that must be supported by us, and shall be, so we know none must prevent
the Captains taking of pay for their soldiers apparel, and not bestowing it,
but your self, of whose care and judgment we have great reason to assure our
selves, both for your love to our service, and your own Honor. The second point
which we recommend unto you, is the due execution of our former Proclamations,
touching this matter of the exchange, and the assistance of the Master of our
exchange, and his Ministers therein, to the end that all frauds, discovered of
late to have been used hy Merchants, who abuse our Princely intention therein
for their private gain may be remedied, and therein chiefly that the use of
all moneys descried may be taken away from the people of that Country, and
withal sterling money, may be brought into our Exchange, upon such conditions
as our Proclamations contain. For that we do find that our intent in the
erection of this new Coin, can no way so soon take place, as by withdrawing
all other moneys from them, whereby the Rebels may exercise traffic with
foreign Nations, and by them be relieved, wherefore you may add to the
remedies in our said Proclamations mentioned, any other good means that in
your indgements shall be thought meet to be be used, and publish the same by
Proclamation in our name, or advertise us of your conceit, to the end you may
have warrant from us, to do that which we shall think meet to be done therein
Further we have thought good to admonish you, that forasmuch as the winter
apparel already delivered to the soldier, will not be run out until the
fourteenth day of May (inclusiue). And that it is likely, seeing you know
already that we purposed to take away the delivery of apparel, you have
furnished the Companies in Lieu thereof with some money by way of imprests,
whereby it may fall out, that we shall be double charged. Therefore you our
Deputy shall take order with our Treasurer, that upon the half years full
pay, to be ended at Michaelmas next, defalcation be made of so much, as any
Companies shall have received between the first of April and the fifteenth of
May above their weekly lendings, if so much shall be then over paid to any
Company. Given under our signet, at our Manor of Greenewich, the eight and
twentieth of April, in the four and fortieth year of our Reign.

In the beginning of June, the Lord Deputy having gathered the forces together,
The Lord Deputy enters into Tyrone.
took the field, and marched up to Blackewater, to the passage, which he had
the last year discovered to be most convenient to carry her Majesty's Forces
that way into the heart of Tyrone. At this passage, lying some five miles
Eastward from the fort of Blackewater, his Lordship encamped on the South side
of the River, having a small pace or skirt of wood between him and the River,
of which pace he had the year before cut down many trees, so as at this time
the passage was soon cleared. Hence his Lordship sent Sir Richard Moryson with
his Regiment, to possess the North side of the River, for securing of the
Armies passage against any attempt of the Rebels. Thus the Queens forces being
entered into Tyrone, there encamped, and his Lordship spent some time in
causing a bridge to be built over the River, and a fort adioining, to guard the
passage, which of his own Christian name was called Charlemount, and left
Captain Toby Cawfield, (with his Company being one hundred and fifty) to
command the same. From the Camp the Country was plain and open to Dungannon,
being distant some six miles, and while these works were in hand, we might
see the Town of Dungannon and Tyrones chief House there seated, to be set on
fire, whereby it was apparent, that Tyrone with his forces meant to fly and
quit those parts: So as the Lord Deputy sent Sr Richard Moryson with his
regiment to possess Dungannon, whether his Lordship soon after marched with
the rest of the forces.

By this time Sir Henry Dockwra Governor of the Forces about Loughfoyle,
having planted many garrisous in those parts, had lately planted a garrison at
Omy, (being some twelve miles distant from Dungannon), whence he came with his
forces, and met the Lord Deputy at Dungannon. Thus the Lord Deputy having
driven the Archtraitor out of his own Country, as high as the Castle Row upon
the Ban, sent out some parties to spoil and prey the Country as far as
Eniskillin upon Lough Erne. Then he took some of Tyrones strongest Islands,
namely, one wherein he had a strong Fort, where we recovered three pieces of
her Majesty's artillery, and another Island called Magherlowni, which next
Dungannon was the chief place of his aboade, and Magazins for his war.

From Dungannon the Lord Deputy sent Sir Richard Moryson with five hundred
foot, to meet Sir Arthur Chichester, who came with his forces from
Carickfergus, and was to pass Loughsidney, and land within few miles of
Dungannon, where they being met, did according to the Lord Deputies direction,
begin to raise a Fort. In the mean time the Lord Deputy having utterly
banished all Tirones partakers out of those parts, marched five miles from
Dungannon to Loughsidney, where Sir Arthur Chichester lay with his forces, and
his Lordship encamped there, till he had made the Fort defencible to contain
above one thousand foot, and one hundred horse, which were to be victualed from
Carickfergus by the way of the said Lough. This Fort of his Lordships Barrony,
he called Mountioy, and made Sir Bentamin Berry (his Lieftenant, and now one of
the Colonels of the Army) Governor of the same for the present service, which
being done, the command of the Fort was left to Captain Francis Roe. Likewise
for the present service Sir Arthur Chichester commanded in chief the forces to
be left there, which he might draw out upon all occasions of service, as out of
all other garrisons in those parts toward Carickfergus.

While his Lordship encamped here upon Loughsidney, he received the eighth of
July letters from her Majesty, signifying by her own hand, that she was glad
of his recovery of that sickness which did surprise him, after his many cares
and labors both of body and mind in the siege of Kinsale, commending much his
providence, that notwithstanding his own state of body, he did set on foot
such preparations for the summers prosecution, as nothing should be wanting
when the time should serve. That how soever her sensible feeling of her
subjects burdens, caused her daily to call upon him and all other Ministers
for the speedy and careful easing thereof, yet he should wrong both her and
himself in believing, that thereby any errors were imputed to himself, whose
endeauours in that Kingdom had much improued her opinion of him, and should
rather conceive that thereby she would give him more occasion to call all
others to a severe account, who in places under him neglected her service, and
for private gain sought to prolong the war, all other judgment of her
valuation of his services making him guilty of his own grief, and being far
from her disposition toward him. That since this Summer, he meant to lay the
Axe to the root of the tree, by prosecuting the Arch-traitor, who had nothing
to bear him up but false rumors of Spanlsh aides: This Summer (if ever any)
was the time to end the war, since by supplies sent to the States, she had
stopped the current of the Spaniards progress in the siege of Ostend, and had
also set a chargeable Fleet to Sea, to attend upon the Coast of Spain, and
prevent the arrival of any his forces in Ireland. That the reducing the
Arch-traitor by her Sword, being the only agreeable satisfaction she could
receive for the mischiefs fallen upon her loving subjects, by his iniquities,
she conceived the most ready means for effecting the same, was to draw from
him the chief Captains of Countries. To which purpose her pleasure was, that
the Lord Deputy should receive to her mercy such of them, as truly and humby
sought it, wherein without prescribing him any particular course, who best knew
all circumstances, only she gave this caution, to provide against former
mischiefs, that whereas commonly the Rebels, fearing to be spoiled, were wont
to contract underhand with the Arch-traitor, to submit themselves, thereby for
the present to save their Country, and to give succors to the Rebels Creaghts
under hand, and after the return of the Army to revolt again; now he should
consider the inward motives of their craving mercy, and where he could not
ruin them without spending more time and charge, then the maine action would
permit, there to deal with them in a more easy manner, otherwise to give more
sharp impositions in the conditions of their submissions, and by wasting their
goods, to make their obedience more durable. That she judged one condition
necessary, not to pardon any, but upon service done, not only upon those whom
particularly they hated, but upon any other as they should be directed. That
as an argument of her confidence in him, she gave him power of war and peace;
only one thing she professed to see no cause to leave vnexempted, namely the
pardoning of the Arch Traitor, a Monster of ingratitude to her, and the root
of misery to her people, thinking all other mercy then the proscription of him
to all manner of prosecution, merely incompatible with her justice, and
therefore commanding not to receive him upon any conditions, but upon simple
submission to mercy for all things (life only excepted), and to make this her
pleasure known to all his accomplices, persuaded by him that he may be pardoned
at his pleasure, and so fearing to leave him, least after they should be left
to his superiority and revenge.

Concerning fortifications against foreign invasion, her Majesty gave
allowance to repair the Fort at Waterferd, and to build Forts in the Harbors
of Cork and Kinstle, and to build a Fort at Galloway, and at Carlingford, (but
this last was not effected, his Lordship less fearing the descent of foreign
forces within Saint Georges Channel), and further to build such small
fortifications, as he the Lord Deputy should think mere, as well for the
present planting of Garrisons in Tyrone as otherwhere, employing therein
Captain Bodley, or Captain Hansard, being with the Army, or Paul Yuye, being
in Mounster, or any whom his Lordship knew fit to ouersee and contriue these
works. Concerning Neale Garue, who held part of Odonnels Country as yet by a
custodium, her Majesty gave warrant to pass the same to him by letters
Patents; yet in reguard of his tickle disposition, to make such restrictions
therein, as he the Lord Deputy and the Counsel here should think meet, and
to pretend the same to be done by her Majesty's special direction.

The Lord of Deluin, upon succors given to the Rebels, and conferences had
with Tyrone, at his coming out of the North into Mounster, in the doubtful
time of the siege of Kinsale, had since been imprisoned in the Castle of
Dublin, and now her Majesty's pleasure was, that he should be called to his
trial before some of the Counsel (tho it came to no effect, he dying in
prison before the time prefixed for his calling to answer), there being matter
enough to charge him with underhand favoring the rebels, howsoever
peradventure there would be found no plain matter to question him for his life
(wherein her Majesty professed no Prince on earth less allowed any
proceeding, where the proofs were not more clear then day light) and so her
Majesty, howsoever being disposed to forbear severity, yet resolving to use
correction of so ill an instrument.

The same eight day of July the Lord Deputy received letters from the Lords in
England, wherein after congratulating his Lordships recovery, as one to whom
(both in respect of her Majesty's service, wherein almighty God had
extraordinarily blessed him, and for their own particular affection) they
wished both health and honor. Their Lordships at large signified, that the
grounds, of the Summer service were so well laid, as no man coul disallow
them. That supplies of men were sent, and those without Captains. That for the
victuals required, her Majesty thought it an unsupportable charge to provide
one years victual for fourteen thoulsand men, yet they had so reconciled the
demand and the provision, as the demand being for one year, and the whole
numbers by pole, the provision was answerable to the numbers, but not for the
whole time, experience teaching, that the defects in the numbers would supply
the abridgement in the time, besides the help of many garrisons taking half
victuals and half money, and that Beeues might be bought in every Country with
mixed money (whereas the victuals in England were provided with sterling
money.) That concerning fortifications he knew her Majesty's pleasure, praying
him to commit that work to such discreet and honest persons, as her Majesty
might neither be put to unnecessary charges, nor deceived in the
disbursements. That more then forty thousand pounds had been paid to
Merchants in London for bills of exchange, granted by the Treasurer to Irish
Merchants, for satisfying their debts due in London before the alteration of
the standard, which absurd course he could never have held, if he had given
no Merchant any bill of exchange for any more money then he could bring good
proof to have disbursed, or to owe for Merchandise brought into the Kingdom.
That whereas upon his Lordships motion, and the Captains good liking, her
Majesty had been pleased to commit the apparelling of the soldier to them,
against which resolution now many reasons were produced, their Lordships found
further impediment, in that three hundred pound impressed to each Captain before
hand was required, and their sufficiency for the greater part to answer such a
sum, was so doubted, as it was thought her Majesty's money should run a
hazard, whereas formerly the Contractors gave her Majesty time, and besides put
in good suretics to answer all desects. Besides that, it was feared the
Captains would either let the Soldier go naked, or fill their Companies with
Irish, who would require no apparel; requiring to know his Lordships
judgment, whether the old course were fitter to be continued then this.
Lastly, that they conceived the King of Spain, had not fully abandoned his
purposes for Ireland, yet were advertised that her Majesty's Fleetlying upon
that Coast, made him for the present rather apply his Counsel to stand upon
defense, esteeming it dangerous to put to Sea while her Majesty's ships were so
ready to attend him: so as they hoped his Lordship should not be interrupted by
any foreign power, although no certainety could be given of such actions of
Princes, who having many designs, and for them many preparations, may change
minds at their pleasures.

In the same Camp, and the same eighth of July, the Lord Deputy received the
following letter from Master Secretary Cecyll, between whom a firm
combination of love (or at least) so firm as to such great persons is
incident, had long been practiced, and now within few months had been
finally confirmed.

MY Lord, if I were now to begin the frame of our friendship, I should be
curious to fasten it with all the ten nails that belong to Architecture,
because in the beginning men are curious to observe Minutissima: but I that
know how straight the knots are tied of our affections, by the mutual offices
of love and confidence, do not tie my self to these complements, which are
held of great consequence, but in vulgar and light friendships. Let that
argument serve therefore for excuse of my long silence, because I judge you by
my own affections. To speak of the subject of the general dispatch in this my
private letter, were but impertinent, seeing I have joined in the same; and yet
seeing I write there as a Counselor, and here as a friend, that has bound
himself by election, and not by compulsion, I will tell you my opinion
sincerely of those, things which are most material in the same: first my Lord I
do assure you, that it is not in the compass of my judgment how to maintain
that Army, at that height it is at, longer then the time of prosecution,
without extreme prejudice of this estate, whereof though you are not the
efficient cause, or Sine qua non, yet I must confess, I had rather that lot
might light upon any other then upon you, because I would be loath your return
should not succeed a diminution thereof, whereby you might receive the thanks
for that effect, by which this State feels victory more then by any other
consequence whatsoever. For this purpose, I must confess, I have endeavored
to prepare her Majesty's mind to give you the power of compounding with Rebels,
both because you draw the Sword which would best cut out the conditions of
submission, and because for a while they shall rather hope for, then feel any
foreign succors: For the Traitor himself, what you have you see, and
therefore I know that must be your warrant, yet will I privately say this unto
you, that if her Majesty had not the prejudice in her own thoughts, that he
will insult when it comes to the vpshot, and so her opening her self in offer
of a pardon, would return unto her a double scorn, I am confidently
persuaded, that when you have made trial, and shall make it appear, that
there is no other impediment, then her Majesty's acceptance, you shall receive
sufficient warrant for conclusion. In the mean time, lest you should say, you
are put to do that which is tender to handle, because my word can be no
warrant, or for that which is impossible to effect, (which is, that he will
trust his life in your hands by a personal submission), first you have warrant
to try it for receiving him upon condition of his life, so as therein you may
fashion your own course as you list. Secondly, for the point of his not daring
to trust the State for his personal coming in, all other things but that may
be digested, and that doubt sent over hither, whereby her Majesty shall yet
have the honor of refusal, (if God do so dispose her heart), and not he,
which her Majesty seeks to avoid. For the preparation in Spain, I can say no
more then I have done, in the joint dispatch, only the continuance of her
Majesty's Fleet upon the Coast; and this breaking out of Byrones conspiracy,
in which Spain has given the French King occasion of offense, may hinder any
present inualions, and so give you more time, then when Don Iean arrived it was
resolved. And thus have I now of the public affairs delivered you as much, as
I know to be worthy of advertisement. My Lord, being somewhat troubled with a
pain in my eyes, I presumed to write the ordinary matters of my letter in a
borrowed hand, reserving that which was of more priuatenesse to my own self.
To assure you of the Queens acceptance of your services, and of the abolition
of her former exceptions, I vow before God, that my heart does give me that
warrant, out of my poor judgment of her dispusition, (more then upon sudden
speeches sometime when the first apparition of new charge and likelihood to
continue does present it self), that I might say, Dormito securus: When I can
by any occasion, I bring Sir Oliver Saint John's to her Majesty, because he may
see how her Majesty's affections move, to whose report of her language now, to
him I do refer me. But to come to the point, my Lord this I say, the way to
do your Lordship good, is to increase your merit, and that cannot be done
without increasing your means. For the supplies of means therefore to
prosecute, I labor (as far as I have credit) to procure you them. For the way
to make an end by peace, I think no man seeks more then my self to enable
you, by persuading her Majesty to give you that power; wherein when lack of
arguments happens, to work her Majesty's mind (which in her Princely
indignation against that Arch traitor is full of obstruction), I do fall to
the binding argument (which of all things most concludes), and that is this:
That in short time the sword cannot end the war, and long time the State of
England can not well endure it. What in the first is granted, I leave to the
things themselves. But for the second kind, I confess that in Tirones case you
have nothing that can produce good effect, except there be more mortar sent you
to fasten the foundation, which is yet to be laid upon dry stone. For
although I know that by this warrant you may safely give care, and can cause
him to be dealt with, yet that which you can do for him by this way, will be
by him contemned. In which respect, as I know your Lordship has wisdom enough
to conceal the latitude of your Commission, so believe me (out of my
judgment) that if the Queen may once perceive, that it is only in her, that
he comes not to reasonable conditions, and if she were sure that she should
not be scorned, by offering that which he would not accept, then such is her
Princely judgment, and such are the minds of us all, that are sworn to give
her Majesty true Counsel, as I doubt not, but by our humble importunity upon
your aduertisements what you find would be accepted, her Majesty would be
readily induced to do that, which is so much for her Majesty's service, being
a matter, which if my prayers to God could have otherwise brought to paste in
her mind at this time, I know full well how much it had bin more aduantagious,
then to have it sent after occasion, and fittest opportunity. And so much (my
Lord) for my Comment upon the text of her Majesty's own letter. For your
return therefore I remain as I was, that it could be of no other consequence
to her Majesty, then for the greatest good of her service, and to your self
infinite comfort and honor. Of which it is superfluous to speak, till time
give me more light, and give you more opportunity in this present action, to
send me more grounds. Then will I not fail to speak like an honest man, that
will neither halt nor practice with you. In confidence whereof, worthy Lord,
believe me, that I can be to any subject living, I will be to you, in which I
must confess I am more fixed, because I see your moderation, which all that
follow you there have not; and therefore in all great things believe me by my
self, as I will do you. For if you had not the faculty of distinction of
every ones humor, that together with their general and honest affections to
you, have also (as most flesh and blood has) their own private ends (in which
they are not ever so iuditious as to consider, whether all that is good for
them, be good simul and semper for you), I should be often jealous, that they
would show me to you in many colors of opennesse or priuacy, as their
appetite serves more or less. Of our French news, I have entreated Sir Oliver
Saint John to be my Referendary, being of opinion, that Byrone and Auuergne
are both executed by this time, though I know it not. Their practice doubtless
was to have joined with Spain by Sanoy, for some greatness not fit for
subjects, but whether so sarre as to execute any thing against the Kings person
(as adfaciendum pepulum it is diuulged), I cannot confidently speak as yet,
because me thinks his own creature could not be such a monster in that kind.

For Spain I must still say, that I conclude they will assail Ireland again,
and that they would have been there ere this time, but for her Majesty's
Fleet, which she has now returned to tarry out till October. To say where
they will land, were a strange speculation: but I do assure you for my own
part, that I cannot be diuerted from my opinion, that they will again come
into Mounster. I send you not the news of Sir Richard Leuisons taking of the
Carricke at Lisbone, because it came but to day by France, but surely I hope it
is true, and the Flemmings have surely taken one. God send you all happiness
and long life to do her Majesty service; of whom I ask no more requital
then that if you out-liue me, you remember, that Will Cecyll was son to a
father and mother that loved you. The chief cause why the Queen is so
peremptory toward the Traitor, is that she has heard, that after Blount went
to him, he bragged that he was wooed. Now I know not how true that was, but Sir
Robert Gardner seemed to think, that the Traitor in that point was belied. Sir
Oliver S. John is very discreet, and worthy your extraordinary favors; he
knows well what is fit for every man.

Your affectionate friend to do you service To. Cecyll.


After the building of Mountioy Fort, the Lord Deputy purposed to follow Tyrone
through his greatest Fastness, till he should utterly ruin him, or drive him
that way to the Sea: but by reason this degree of prosecution required long
time, and already the victuals were wasted, which his Lordship could with any
conueniency bring with him, and because the further the Traitor should be
followed, his Lordship should be the further from any means to relieve his
Forces, he was enforced to alter his resolution, and embrace the following
course of it self as good as the former. First, he dismissed Sir Henry
Dockwra, to gather and provide for some good numbers of men at the Omy, and to
prepare within twenty days, to draw as far as Dungeuen in Ocanes country,
sufficiently enabled with means to prosecute, and fall upon Tyrone that way.
Secondly, his LP gave order to Sir Arthur Chichester, to do the like by Toome.
And lastly he himself purposed to return within 20 days limited, to make the
war upon Tirone by the way of Killetro, lying next upon the border of Tyrones
Country. In the mean time, on all sides they put up as much victuals as they
could, to such places as were most fit for the subsisting of these several
forces, during this prosecution. His LP was confident, that the Garrison of the
Omy under Sir Henry Dockwra, and the Garrison of Mountioy upon Loughsidney,
(where were left 850 foot, and 100 horse) under Sir Arthur Chichesters command,
would restrain Tirone from the Plains into the Fastnesses (where now he was)
for the twenty days above limited. In the mean time, his Lordship with the
Army intended to lie in such places, as without great conuoyes he might put up
victuals for this purpose, meaning to employ the time in assuring or wasting
all the Countries betwixt Blackwater and the Pale. And with this purpose he
marched back toward Monaghan, and in the way taking some Islands and strong
places, though in those and all the former services we had not lost five men of
the Army, yet we had the disaster, by a casual shot out of one of the Islands,
to leese Sir John Barkley, a worthy Gentleman, and Serieant Mayor of the Army,
and in another slight skirmish to leese Capt. Willis. Upon the death of Sir
John Barkley, his LP made Sir Henry Dauers Serieant Mayor in his place, and
coming into Monaghan, his LP on the 19 of July advertised the Lords in England
of the former services, as also that he had directed Sir Henry Dockwra, and
Sir Arthur Chichester, that in case any new Spanish forces should land in
Ireland, they should draw unto him with their principal forces, yet leave the
Garrisons defensible, as bridles to the submitted late rebels, and a diuersion
to the rest remaining in rebellion. That howsoever the numbers of those
Garrisons seemed to threaten the continuance of her Majesty's charge, yet it
was the most sure way to lessen the Army, and end the war in short time,
which only foreign invasion could hinder, in which case, it would be no
longer the war of Ireland, but the war of England in Ireland, and would
require as royal supplies, as if a part of England were invaded by so mighty a
Prince. That the Garrisons upon Tirone were left so strong in numbers, as that
every of them a part, might without apparent hazard, not only withstand all
the Force, wherewith Tyrone was able in any one place to make head against
them, but be stirring with some parties to seek out him and his Creaghts in
their Fastnesses, and to keep them from feeding, or stirring upon the Plain,
which must necessarily undo the rebels, and this effect of the Summers service
would appear in the next winter. For if in the mean time it were not his
Lordships hap; according to his earnest endeavor, to get Tyrones head, which
was a work of difficulty, not to be hoped in so short a time, yet he was
confident to cut off, so many of his members, as he should not be able to
continue in any one place, but should be forced to fly from bush to bush like
a Wood-kerne, as now he did, so long as the Army kept the field, which being
dissolved, he would soon grow to strength again, except the Garrisons were
kept strong, so as he might not dare to appear himself, or to feed his
Creaghts upon the Plain, which could not be performed without having great
store of victuals to maintain the Garrisons. That for the matter of
fortifications, whereas their Lordships noted the sums demanded to be
excessive, this demand proceeded from a zeal to secure the Kingdom speedily,
and by entering into a Royal charge at once, to cut off her Majesty's
continuing charge, which being now above three hundred thousand pound yearly,
it seemed good husbandry, if by bestowing one hundred thousand pound at once,
especially in the new mixed coin, her Majesty might both secure the Kingdom
against foreign invasion, and so bridle the Towns and Country, as half the
said yearly charge might be presently saved, and yet the Army might be drawn
stronger into the field then now it could be: for it would be less charge to
her Majesty, to keep twenty men in a Castle costing five hundred pound the
building, then to keep one hundred men in a Fort built for one hundred pound,
yet that he would conform himself to her Majesty's pleasure in that point,
employing the money allowed to the best he possibly could. That whereas he the
Deputy had moved, that the Captains might provide clothes for their
companies, now upon better consideration he thought the old course of clothing
them by the Merchants was of necessity to be continued. That touching Neale
Garue, his Lordship found him to be of nature fiery and violent, and with all
extremely both proud and covetous, and as Sir Henry Dockwra had very well
described him to their Lordships, to be in his desires and demands most
unreasonable, and almost intolerable, so as he that must contain him within
any fitting bounds, especially when he should be denied any thing that he
affects, was enjoined to do any thing that he did not like, must be of an
infinite patience; for at such times he used to break out in a fashion most
hardly to be endured, although his Lordship professed, that he took it rather
to be want of breeding, and of knowledge to discern, when he has good usage
and when hard (for through that defect he still thought himself wronged, and
out of that conceit grew to that distemper), then any want of good affection to
the State. For Sir Henry Dockwra did acknowledge, that upon all occasions of
service, that had not appeared evidently to prejudice him in him particular, he
showed himself forward, and very ready to the hazarding of his own person
very often. In which respect his Lordship holding him worth the cherishing,
(being besides well followed by all his Country, so as her Majesty's service
received very great furtherance both by him and them), was therefore resolved,
according to her Majesty's warrant lately received, to pass him the grant of
his Country.

His Lordship further wrote, that he received many aduertisements, that the
Spaniards were ready to return into Ireland, which though he for his part
believed not in regard their Lordships thought the contrary, yet the people
here by many letters from their friends in Spain were made confident, that
they would make a new and strong invasion, before Michaelmas day at the
furthest. That in this regard he made haste to draw the war to some good end,
no way so well to be done, as by planting strong Garrisons upon Tirone, and by
drawing from him his strongest partakers, to which purpose he had sent Sir
Henry Folliot to govern the Garrison lately planted at Ballishannon, who had
instructions to receive Mac Guyre to mercy, upon condition he would be content
to have his Country divided between O Connor Roe and himself, and would
deliver to her Majesty's use the Castle of Eniskillin with the Ordinance
therein. His Lp further signified, that when the Garrison of Ballishannon had
effected the intended service, he would leave it as a Ward, this same and all
other fortifications being so made, as one small Fort of very good strength was
first framed guardable by a few, to which was added a greater Fort of less
strength and charge, like to a bawne or yard, wherein many upon occasion might
be lodged, so as if at any time one Company were found sufficient, the rest
being drawn away, the loss of the bigger Fort, (being commanded by the
lesser) would be of little moment, and yet might be kept fit to receive
greater numbers, if it were thought fit to send them again at any time. Adding
that if the Queen would be pleased to build a little Castle in every one of
the lesser Forts, it would greatly lessen her Majesty's charge in the numbers
of men, and yet be sufficient perpetually to bridle the Irish.

The nine and twentieth of July, the Lord Deputy being in Monaghan, received
letters from Sir George Carew, Lord President of Mounster, by the hands of Sir
Samuel Bagnol whom the Lord Deputy had sent into Mounster to bring from thence
fifteen hundred foot, which accordingly he had performed. These letters
advertised certain expectation of the Spaniards present inuading Mounster,
with great forces able to keep the field, without any support from the Irish
Rebels, which expectation was grounded upon the confessions of many coming out
of Spain, and by diverse letters sent from thence by the Irish, but especially
was confirmed by the arrival of a Spanish ship at Ardea, bringing a good
proportion of munition to Oswillyuan Bear, Captain Tyrrell, and other Rebels
in Mounster, together with a good sum of money, to be distributed among them,
for their encouragement to hold out in rebellion, till the Spanish succors
should arrive. And the Lord President signified his fear of a general
defection, upon the Spaniards first arrival, which he gathered from the
confidence of all the Rebels in that Province, who having before sought for
mercy in all humbleness, and with promise to merit it by service, now since
the Spanish ship arrived, were grown proud (calling the King of Spain their
King, and their ceasing from rebellion, to be the betraying of their King and
of the Catholic cause), yea, sell nothing from this insolency, though they had
bin some times beaten by him, many of their chief men killed, and had lost the
strong Castle of Dunboy. And the twentieth of July, the Lord President
advertised new intelligences of Spanish forces in great numbers, lying ready at
the Groyne either to be sent for Ireland, or the Low Countries, whereof 2000
being horse, there was no probability that they should be sent by sea for the
Low Countries, since they might more conveniently be raised in these parts.
Wherefore he resolutely believing they were intended for Ireland, desired
(...) for speed of intelligences, a running Post might again be established
between Cork and Dublin.

The Lord Deputy by this time had planted a Garrison in Monaghan, wherein he
left for the present Sir Christopher S. Laurence with his 25 horse, and 150
foot, and under him Captain Esmond with his foot one hundred fifty. This
Garrison lay fitly to secure the Pale from Northern incursions, and to
prosecute those Rebels which were like to stand out longest. This done, his
Lordship took, burned, and spoiled all the Islands in those parts of greatest
strength placing wards in some of them. And finding Mac Mahown chief of
Monaghan to stand vpod proud terms (though otherwise making suit to be
received to mercy), his Lordship spoiled and ransacked all that Country, and
by example thereof, brought many Chiefes of adjoining Countries to submit to
mercy, with as good show of duty and obedience as could be desired, and more
strict oaths and pledges then had formerly been required. So as now, from the
Bann to the Dartcy (including all Tyrone) and from thence to Dublin, the whole
Country was cleared, and the chief Lords more assured, then they were ever
before. His Lordship placed Connor Roe Mac Guyre (to whom her Majesty had
lately given the Chiefery of Fermannagh) in the principal house of Mac Mahown,
Chief of Monaghan, lying within two miles of Fermannagh, so as he might from
thence easily plant and settle himself in his own Country, and so be able to
do her Majesty many good services in those parts.

This done his Lordship returned to the Newry, meaning there for a short time
to refresh his wearied forces. The 29 of July, his Lordship and the Counsel
with him, made to the Lords in England a relation of the past services (which
for breuity I omit), and wrote further as follows. Upon such bruites as we
hear of a new invasion out of Spain, (the L. President in a manner assuring
us that they will in that Province invade presently with a strong Army of 15000
foot and 2000 horse) we are much distracted what next to do; for if we should
draw that way, to provide to entertain them, we should loose the advantage of
this prosecution, and spend another year unprofitably, which we grieve to
think upon, and yet perhaps miss of their place of landing. If we proceed,
as we yet intend to draw this war to a speedy end (which is that which we
acknowledge we do more effect), we shall be the less able to make that
defensive stop to their invasion, that we might, if we attended that
business only. We do therefore most humbly and earnestly desire to be
directed from your Lordships (who in likelihood best know the Spaniards
intentions) which of these courses we should most apply our selves unto,
otherwise we are resolved, whatsoever befall, to prosecute the war Northward
with all earnestness, out of the desire we have to draw the war to an end,
and ease her Majesty of that excessive charge, which to our exceeding grief
we observe her to be at, which we doubt not to effect to her great contentment,
and ease her Majesty speedily of a great part of her charge, if we be not
interrupted by the Spaniard; for besides the good hold we have gotten of those,
that have a ready submitted themselves, which by all arguments of sound and
sincere meaning in them, we took to be better and more assured then any that
was taken heretofore, since her Majesty and her Ancesters enjoyed this
Kingdom, especially with the holds that we have planted among them, we have
set down such a plot for the prosecution of the rest, upon all hands at one
instant, so soon as we take the field next, which is agreed upon the tenth of
the next month, (till which time we have thought fit to refresh this Army
ouertoiled and wearied out with continual working upon the Forts, that we have
made, and with exceeding great marches, which we were driven to, for lack of
means to carry victuals with us for a longer time), as we are very confident
we shall in short time ruin or subdue all these rebels. For we have left no
man in all the North that is able to make any very great resistance, or that
has not made means to be received to mercy, O Rourke only excepted, who
hitherto has been furthest off from feeling the fury of our prosecution.
Tyrone is already beaten out of his Country, and lives in a part of O Canes,
a place of incredible fastness, where though it be impossible to do him any
great hurt, so long as he shall be able to keep any force about him, the
wales to him, being inaccessible with an Army, yet by lying about him, as we
mean to do, we shall in short time put him to his uttermost extremity, and
if not light upon his person, yet force him to fhe the Kingdom. In the mean
time we can assure your Lordships thus much, that from O Caves Country, where
now he lives, which is to the Northward of his own Country of Tyrone, we
have left none to give us opposition, nor of late have seen any but dead
carcases, merely starued for want of meat, of which kind we found many in
diverse places as we passed. The forces which last we drew out of Mounster,
being fifteen hundred foot, above the Mounster List, (which the Lord
President desired to retain there only till he had ended his business at
Donboy) are now under the command of Sir Samuel Bagnol, (presently upon their
arrival to the borders) directed by the Annely to prosecute O Rourke, where
most fitly he may join with the forces of Connaght, and shall be met withal
by those of Ballishannon, commanded by Sir Henry Folliot. All those will help
us greatly to pen up the Northern Rebels on that side, when we next attempt
them (as by the tenth of August we mean to do) from Loughfoyle and
Carickfergus, which Sir Arthur Chithester from thence is now very well enabled
for, by the means of the Garrisons we last planted at Tyrone, and upon Lough
Sidney, both being on that side of the Lough, that lies next upon Tirene. And
as those forces on Connaght side, lie very fitly to assist us, for the speedy
dispatch of the work, so are they very ready to intertaine the Spaniards, if
they should land in Connaght, and not much unfit for Mounster, if they should
arrive there. We have directed them therefore severally to apply and bend
their endeauours to answer these sundry occasions. And this in our providence
is the best course that we can think upon; for by the same, if Spaniards come
not, we shall go on very roundly with our business, and we hope (by the
grace of God) perform it to your great contentment, and if they come (which is
the worst), they will be able to make some good defensive war, till we with
the rest shall draw unto them, and then we cannot hope to do any more, until
your Lordships supply us royally out of England. For if the Spaniard come so
strong in horse and foot, as is reported, and as it must needs be thought he
will, (finding the error that the last time he committed), it may not be
expected at our hands with all the Forces we can draw to head, leaving some
Forts guarded, (as we must needs do, to bridle and keep in awe the Country,
and to keep our former labors from being utterly overthrown), that we shall
be able of our selves to put them from any place that they have a mind to
hold, but must rather give them way, till we be better furnished. We are
therefore humbly to desire your Lordships, if the Spaniards arrive, or if you
expect them certainly, then to think upon us favorably, and to supply our
wants, and that speedily, especially men, munition, and victuals, for this
Kingdom will not be able to afford us any thing for such a war, as then we
must make, which your Lordships cannot but know far better then we can
express, for as we have noted heretofore (which we beseech you give us leave
still to remember you of, it will not then be any longer the war of Ireland,
but the war of England in Ireland, to the infinite danger and comber of them
both, though for our parts we will most cheerfully undergo the toil and
hazard thereof, as it becomes us. To conclude, we must acquaint your
Lordships with a very great abuse crept in amongst the Ministers of the
victuals, which does maruellously prejudice her Majesty's service here: We can
never know from any of them when the victuals arrive in any part, whether it be
part of an old contract, or of a new, nor indeed whether it be for her Majesty
or for themselves: by that means we can never find how we are provided for,
nor what we may further expect, and that which worse is, the Rebels get of the
best victual that is sent hither, and yet we cannot call the victualer to
account thereof, for he affirms stiftely, that he is warranted by your
Lordships to sell it for his benefit, and so as he sell it to the subject,
(how ill affected soever), it is no fault of his, if the Rebel afterward get
it. It is in vain for us by our extreme toil to spoil the Rebels corn, and
wast their Country, (the best way yet found to bring them to obedience), if
they can get that English victuals for their money, which we verily think was
provided for those that serve her Majesty here, and the best of it too, when
the poor soldier has that which is not worth the eating. Thus much we have
of late discovered, which we leave to your Lordships consideration, not
doubting, but it will please you to provide remedy, and so, etc.

The Victualers above mentioned, had obtained of the Lords liberty to sell some
victuals, upon pretense (as it seems) that the same would grow musty, and must
either be sold or lost, but they abused this liberty so far, as the best
victuals were sold to the Irish Subjects, and by them, to those that were in
actual rebellion, while they made bold to utter their musty provisions to the
Queens Army.

The seventh of August the Lord Deputy wrote to Sir Arthur Chichester as
likewise to Sir Henry Dockwrae, to make all things in readiness against his
taking the field, which he purposed to do within three days, and his Lordship
proiected with them, in case Tyrone should go into Fermanagh, how to turn
their faces upon him that way, or otherwise to draw into Cormacke mac Barons
Country, for since her Majesty would not be induced to show any mercy to
Tyrone himself, the only way to end the war was to force Cormacke, either
presently by fear of his Countries spoiling, or in short time by planting a
garrison at the Cloher, to submit himself. Some few days after his Lordship
received from her Majesty this following Letter.

Elizabeth Regina.
RIght trusty and wellbeloued, We greet you well. Although We have heard
nothing from you directly since Our last dispatch, yet We impute it to no
neglect of yours, having so great cause to judge the best of your actions, when
every dispatch from other parts of Our Kingdom, reports of great honor in the
success of Our Army under you, a matter specially appearing by those letters,
which We have seen directed to our Treasurer at Wars in Ireland, containing
the discourse of your Marches, and abiding in the heart of Tyrone, and the
recovery of that Island, and that Ordinance of Ours, which had been foully lost
before. In which respect We value the same so much the more acceptably. We
have also thought good at this time to add this further, that We are glad to
find that you are joined with Dockwra and Chichester, because that is the thing
which has been long wished, often attempted, but never before effected,
(being indeed the true consequence of Our Plantation, with great expense both
at Loughfoyle and in other parts of Vlster). So as when We perceive that now
the time is come, when you may make an universal prosecution, and when We find
that your own words give such hope, that this ungrateful Traitor shall never
be able to hold up his head again, if the Spaniard do not arrive, We thought
it fit to touch these two things following. First to assure you, that We have
sent a Fleet to the Coast of Spain, notwithstanding Our former Fleet returned
with the Caricke, there to attend his Coast, and all such Fleetes as shall be
prepared to annoy Us. Next We do require you, even whilst the Iron is hot, so
to strike, as this may not only prove a good Summers journey, but may deserve
the title of that action, which is the wars conclusion. For furtherance
whereof, We have spared no charge, even now again to send a Magazine of
victual, and other necessaries, to those places, by which you may best
maintain those garrisons, with which you resolve to bridle those Rebels. We
have heard likewise from Carew our President of Mounster, that he has taken
the Castle was held by the Rebels at Beer Haven, and defended with the Spanish
Ordinance. In that Province We find by him, that there is constant expectation
of Spanish succors, for which reason, and considering what promises the King
of Spain does make them, and with what importunity they beg it at his hands,
besides one other crast they use, to hide from him all fear, which might
divert him from that enterprise, agreeing amongst themselves, how great soever
their miseries be, to conceal the same from him and his Ministers, as
appears well by a letter of Odonnels own hand intercepted of late, by which
he writes to a Rebel called O Connor Kerry, desiring him to advertise him of
the state of Ireland, but in no sort to deliver any bad report of their losses,
because he would be loath that the Spaniard should know it.

We do require you very earnestly to be very wary in taking the submissions of
these Rebels, who ever make profit of their coming in. Some let slip of
purpose by the Archtraitor, others when they have compounded for their own
peace, are notoriously known to fill their Countries with more Cattle then
ever they had in seven years before, which is a matter that most notoriously
discovers, that the great bordering Traitors, (whose Countries are sought to
be laid wast) do find a safe protection for their goods under them. A matter
whereof we speak in no other sort, then by way of caution, knowing that no
rule is so general, either to leave or take, which may not change, in respect
of circumstances. Given under our Signet. At our Manor of Greenewich the
fifteenth day of July, in the four and fortieth of Our Reign.

To this letter, in the Margent, were added these words in her Majesty's own
hand: We con you many lauds for having so nearly approached the villainous
Rebel, and see no reason why so great forces should not end his days, whose
wickedness has cut off so many, and should judge my self mad, if we should
not change your authority for his life, and so we do by this. Since neither
Spaniard, nor other accident, is like to alter this mind, as she that should
blush to receive such indignity after so royal prosecution. We have forgotten
to praise your humility, that after having been a Queens Kitchen maid, you
have not disdained to be a Traitors skullion. God bless you with perseverance.

Your Sovereign, E. R.


At the same time his Lordship received this following letter from Master
Secretary.

MY very good Lord; it must not seem strange to you, to find this marginall
cotation in her Majesty's letter, whereby the last authority (in pardoning
Tyrone) is so absolutely retrenched. For first, as her Majesty (in these cases)
may well (out of experience of government) assume more to her royal prudence
then any of her Counsel: so (God in Heaven does know) that even in these great
causes, she is pleased to proceed more absolutely then ever, according as she
pleases to approve her will, by the Rules of her own Princely judgment. So
as if you consider how little good the last authority (which was given you to
pardon no more but his life) could have effected, you will easily imagine that
we thought it to little purpose here, to offend by contestation against this
letter, when in both the directions the difference was of so little
consequence. Lastly, the change that is, proceeded merely from the hopes which
your own letters to the Treasurer have given, of our opinion so to ruin him
as he should never be able again to stand; whereof it is true, that her
Majesty has taken so good and comfortable hold, the same being so just and
agreeable to the difficulty of her own nature to forgive that offender, as
although in effect she had done little more then nothing before, yet she
thinks any mercy to him to be much. It remains therefore that I resort to
explane my self in my former advice, when I and some others wished you, though
you had warrant to conclude for no more then life only, that you should
notwithstanding (seeing you had warrant sufficient to hear from him), in no
case forbear to discover what were his highest, or what would be his lowest;
for this was our intent, as faithful Counselors, if you found the State to be
such, as (without his submission to be a Subject) all others coming in would
be idle, and that to offer him nothing but life, (which he has already, and
will keep too long, I fear me) were the way to lack that good, which by
yielding to more, might have been effected, that then and in such case, you
should not forestall him so peremptorily in your dealing with him, as to repel
those ouertures which he would make: for though you were not to conclude for
more then you had warrant, yet when you might send over what it was, and what
your opinion was thereupon, it might be, that when her Majesty should see what
might have come, she would be content (for the good of her Kingdom) to
descend from the greatness of her own heart, full of just indignation against
him. These things I touched, out of the infinite caution, whereunto the
experience of my misfortune to be misiudged presses me more violently, then
any other, whereby I would secure my self against any doubts, that I would
practice upon you in any thing, for any respect whatsoever, which might be
pernicious to you, to whom I have professed all honest friendship. For I
protest unto you, howsoever it may be some men's Philosophy, to conclude that
all private considerations must be extinguished, when there is question of the
good of a man's Country, (because it challenges a part, before Wife, Children,
or Friends), yet do I not think it intended by that great rule, that any
honest man ought to betray an honest trust of a worthy friend, for any respect
whatsoever, unless he knew that friend who is confident in him, false or
wicked to his Country, to which he owes so much duty. For that distinction
makes great odds in the question: Of this letter therefore when you shall
examine the circumstances, you would quickly discern, how little it ought to
trouble you, for if you had already treated, you had warrant for it, if you
have concluded (according to the authority of that warrant), the new restraint
comes too late, if not, then is your Lordship to obey this direction, and in
obeying it, to content your Sovereign, as then advised, whereby you are
justified to the world whatsoever come, because you have obeyed, and if that
success succeed not, which was hoped for by a moderate measure of grace
(following an orderly and sharp prosecution and never otherwise to be but at
great length), you may then resort to her Majesty's own self, for as much as you
shall come short of that, to which you might have arrived, if you had not bin
restrained. For proof whereof it will be very fit, that you do write of the
conditions particularly, which is all that either you or we can say, where we
are all bound, first, to give advice according to our conscience, and then to
yield obedience. I do conclude, that it was (for his own particular) a good
speech of the Cardinal Granuella, who when he found the Emperor grow more
resolute daily against his Counsel, said, He wished that from thence forward
his counsel might never be followed; for said he, if it be bad and not
received, I am glad for my Country, if good and not followed, yet it must
value me to my Master. And so much for that matter: Only this I have thought
convenient for both our particulars, seeing it is impossible that this dispatch
can come so soon to you, as the Queen may expect, that the Secretary receive
it from me, and you from him, for our discharge, lest her Majesty should
suspect, that out of zeal to the cause, (howsoever we dare not contest), yet
that I have delaied to send it, or you pretend to have been longer without it,
then you have been, to which purpose I have written to him, to take care of
the sending it to you with expedition, and to advertise me both of his receipt
from me, and yours from him. And thus for this time I commit your Lordship to
Gods protection. From the Court at Greenewich this sixteenth of July 1602.

Postscript. Pardon me for using another hand, which I hope you will bear
with, being of no other subject then an honest Secretary may set down: because
I am not sure whether you can perfectly read her Majesty's hand, I send you
the same in a copy, the latter part whereof, being suitable with the former
style of favor, that was wont to pass between you, grew by the occasion of
your own Postscript, when you wrote to the Treasurer: that you had been a
good while in Oneales Kitchen, which you meant to warm so well, as he should
keep the worse fires ever after. God knows I do as much desire to hear of
your success, as ever I did to hear of any thing, because upon it judgment
may be made, which is likely to follow, your coming or tarrying. In which be
assured that I will do you all the right to which religion, honor, and
affection can tie me. In the mean time take this comfort, that her Majesty
does feelingly apprehend your virtue, and begins now to speak and write in her
wonted style, and therefore I grow daily more confident, that we shall spend
some years together in her service. For my self I will now give over
professions, and so do you, for neither of our hearts have ever been
accusable for baseness to our friend, though in our kind we have several tastes
of ingratitude, only take this still for assurance, that I am your
affectionate friend to command, Robert Cecyll.

Likewise at the same time the Lord Deputy received this following letter from
the Lords in England.

AFter our very hearty commendations to your Lordship. Although her Majesty
has by her letter taken notice of your Lordships wise and happy proceedings,
by a letter which has been sent from Dublyn by the Treasurer, upon your
taking of the Island in Tyrone, yet we are moved to express our simpathy with
your good fortune, both out of duty to the public, and particular affection to
your self, whom God has made so happy an instrument of her Majesty's service.
We have likewise heard from the President of Mounster of his taking in of
Beere-Hauen, whereby we had well hoped that Province would have proved less
troublesome then yet we can hope, first because there are many provincial
Rebels out, next because the hollownes of those that are reputed subjects,
appears many ways, (though not so visible to all), which is only maintained
by the assurance they have of succors from Spain, whereof (as we have often
said) we can make no other judgment, then that what he is able to do, he
has a will to do, and what he has not done, has only been hindered by the
remaining of her Majesty's Fleet upon his Coast, and which she resolves to
maintain till Winter be well come on, so as: seeing here is done as much as
her Majesty can do, and that many difficulties at home with himself, and
actions of others abroad, may make suspention if not diuertion from that
Spanish invasion. We think your Lordship shall do well, to take time while it
serves in Vlster, seeing we perceive you have now so ordered the matter, as if
he should land in the North, you are near him, and if in the South, you have
means now to draw most of the Forces of the Kingdom to make head against him.
So as we have little else to say for the present, but to commend your
proceedings, and expect the success: Although we find your Lordship had very
good reason to draw away Sir Samuel Bagnoll with those extraordinary
Companies, which you were content to spare till the taking of the Castle of
Donboy, yet we have thought it very convenient, because it is worth your
Lordships knowledge, to let your understand, that if the Spaniards shall
attempt to land in Ireland with an Army, all our intelligences do confirm,
that it will be in Mounster, or upon the nearer parts of Conuaght, and if this
Summer at all, it will be between this and Bartholmewtide. In which respect,
we thought it good to remember your Lordship, to have care for a month or two,
to send some forces to strengthen that Province, above the List, whereby at
their first descent her Majesty's forces may keep some such reputation, as the
Prouincials, whose eye will only be upon the Army, may not grow too insolent,
nor the Governor there be forced to leave the field. For which purpose we
think it not amiss, that you should presently send some horse, though you
spare the fewer foot, considering the weakness of those numbers that are
there, to answer any such occasion: For the North, although we doubt not but
Odonnell is fed with the same hope that the Mounster Rebels are, yet we do not
expect any great forces to land in those parts more Northerly then the Town of
Galloway at the furthest. We have now no more wherewith to hold you at this
time, then with the recommendation of all your actions to Gods protection. From
the Court at Greenewich, this eighteenth of July 1602.

The Army being refreshed with these few days rest, the Lord Deputy had
determined to leave the Newry, and take the field again upon the tenth of
August: but upon intelligence that Tyrone purposed to send Brian mac Carty
back into Killultagh to disturb those parts, and so to divert the prosecution
of Tyrone as much as they could, his Lordship directed Sir Arthur Chichester
from Masserine, and Sir Henry Dauers from the Newry, to draw part of the forces
into that Country, and there to inuest the Fort of Enishlaghlin, being the
only hold the Rebels had in those parts, in which (for the strength thereof),
all the goods of such as were fled into Tyrone, were left.

This resolution the Lord Deputy signified to Sir Henry Dockwra, who expected
to meet his Lordship in Tyrone about this time, according to their former
purpose And withal advertised him, that he had sent such a part of the Army to
Charlemount, and the other Forts near to the Blackewater, as would be (in a
manner) to as good purpose, for any service Sir Henry Dockwra should think fit
to attempt upon Tyrone, or for the stopping of him from passing with his
Creaghts from the fastness wherein he how lay, as if his Lordship were there
present with the whole forces. For his Lordships troop of horse, being lodged
at Charlemount, with more then a thousand foot in List, and Sir Henry Dauers
his troop of horse, being lodged at Armagh, with some seven hundred foot more
in the Forts adjoining, a party of two hundred horse, and a thousand four
hundred foot might be drawn by Sir Henry Dockwra from thence, upon any sudden
occasion, and these forces, together with the Companies at Mount Norreys, and
at Mountioy Forts, were able to do great matters upon Tyrone, if he could
discover his purposes by any good espiall, yet his Lordship offered himself
with those forces he had left, to draw presently up into Tyrone, if Sir Henry
Dockwra thought it needful, rather then any thing fit for the service should
be omitted. And whereas Sir Henry Dockwra seemed to doubt of Henry Oge his
second, his Lordship was so confident of his sound meaning, as he gave
assurance on his part, that he would not only not do any thing to give the
State offense, but would advertise any thing he could learn to further the
service, and rather then fail, would draw his whole force upon Tyrone, to
which also his Lordship had by his letters earnestly persuaded him. And
touching Ocanes submission, his Lordship wrote to Sir H. Dockwra, that he would
be glad to see him, when he came into Tyrone, which should be presently after
the business at Enishlaghlan was dispatched, and then he would be willing to
give him all reasonable contentment. Lastly, his Lordship advised Sir Henry
Dockwra, so to carry his business, as he might be ready to perform his
directions, if the Spaniards should again land in Ireland, as a strong rumor
went, that they shortly intended.

The tenth of August the Lord Deputy wrote this following letter to Master
Secretary Cecyll.

SIR I understand from Sir Oliver Lambert, that the fortification at Galloway
is almost finished, and that there will be needful for that place, to have
four Demy-Cannons, and four whole Culuerings, (but I think it will be well,
if they be all Culuerings, and of Iron), which he thinks will make it of very
great use against the Spaniards, if they happen to land there, as he
suspecteth: For that and other such great works, I think we must necessarily
have some good great Ordinance, and therefore beseech you Sir to be a mean,
that we may be speedily supplied with a score of Iron Pieces, well furnished;
and fitted to be placed there, and elsewhere in Mounster, to the most advantage
of the service, whereby I am very confident that this whole Country will much
the better be secured, and her Majesty greatly eased in her continuing charge,
though her present charge seems thereby much increased. I protest I do apply
with all carfulness my best endeauours, so to husband this business, as her
Majesty in a very short time shall find abatement of her charge here, to her
own contentment, if I be not interrupted by the Spaniards; and if they do
come, I doubt not but these greater works will keep the Towns (near which
they stand) in so great awe, as they will not suddenly nor easily fall to their
party, as otherwise in all likelihood they would, so as they show themselves
any thing strong before any of them, and then will it manifestly appear, that
this cost was bestowed to great good purpose: for the keeping of one Town from
reuolting, will very well counteruaile the whole charge, that her Majesty shall
be at, in planting of all those fortifications, and yet will they afterward
be such bridles to the Countries all about them, as they shall never be able
to rebel again. I conceive that by the placing of a Constable and a
convenient Ward in such of them as shall be thought fittest to be maintained,
her Majesty shall be better and cheaper served, then by laying of Companies or
parts of Companies in them, that must upon occasions be removed. For when one
man only has the charge thereof; who knows that he must be accomptable for
it, he will no doubt have much the greater care, and may more commodiously be
fitted with all things necessary: but then must I in treat you Sir, to take
order that these places be not bestowed there at Court, upon such as will be
suitors for them, (of which kind I make account there will be many, since I
partly know some of them already), for I shall thereby be disabled to do her
Majesty the service I affect, and become merely an unprofitable Officer for
her, in as much as it will be here soon observed, that when these places are
not left to my disposal, who should best know both how every man deserves, and
for what each man's serving here is fittest, it will be to little purpose for
any of them to make me an eye witness of their well deserving, when it is not in
my power to reward them, but will rather use means to her Majesty, or the
Lords, hoping to get that they aim at, by a much easier and shorter course,
which I confess to you Sir I do with some grief observe, in the recommending
of many hither for Captains places, when some have given over their charge
here, by which means I can neither lessen the Queeries charge, as I would, by
cashing of their Companies, nor prefer others thereunto, whom I see daily to
have very well deserved it, and by this means comes in, both selling of
Companies, (a thing which I would otherwise never suffer), and the placing of
such Captains, as those which we found here at the beginning of this war,
whose insufficiency had almost lost this Kingdom. I beseech you Sir conceive,
that I have just cause to be grieved, that must draw upon my self the hatred
of a great many, that I should discharge in the great cash that I intend, who
will ever hold me the overthrow of them, and all their fortunes, especially if
I be not able to bestow upon some of the worthiest of them, such other places
in this Kingdom, as have fallen within the gift of my Predecessors here.
Although (God is my witness) this does nothing so much grieve me, as that I
shall thereby be disabled to serve her Majesty as I would, to make a speedy
end of the war, that might be both safe and durable, by leaving such in all
places, as I know to be best able to serve her, and such as if they did not
employ their time in her continual service, might more justly then any other,
with their presence importune her for rewards of their former services. And so
Sir, etc.

At the same time the Lord Deputy wrote this following letter to her Majesty.

May it please your Sacred Majesty,
I Have received to my inestimable comfort, your gracious letters of the
fifteenth of July, for none of my endeavors do satisfy me in doing you
service, until I find them approved by your Majesty; and when I have done
all that I can, the uttermost effects of my labors do appear so little to my
own zeal to do more, that I am often ashamed to present them unto your fair
and royal eyes, which is the only cause that I do not more often presume to
present your Majesty with the account of my proceedings, led on with a hope
and restless desire; to improve them unto some such degree, as might be more
worthy of your knowledge. And whereas it pleases your Majesty to restrain
me from hearkening unto the Arch-Traytor Tyrone, were it not in respect of my
desire to cut off suddenly the chargeable thread of this war, there could
nothing come more welcome unto me, then to be his continual Scourge, and as
(by the favor of God) he is already brought to a very low ebb, so utterly to
cut him off, or cast him out of this Country. And although I have great reason
to presume, that if he be not assisted by any foreign power, the ruin of
his estate is certain, yet how, as a Vagabond Woodkerne, he may preserve his
life, and how long, I know not; and yet therein I humbly desire your Majesty
to believe, that I will omit nothing, that is possible to be compassed. And for
the caution your Majesty does vouchsafe to give me, about taking in submitties
to their advantage, and to the abuse of your mercy, I beseech your Majesty to
think, that in a matter of so great importance, my affection will not suffer
me to commit so gross a fault against your service, as to do any thing, for
the which I am not able to give you a very good account, the which above all
things, I desire to do at your own royal feet, and that your service here,
may give me leave to fill my eyes with their only dear and desired object. I
beseech God confound all your enemies, and unfaithful subjects, and make my
hand as happy, as my heart is zealous, to do you service.

Your Majesty's truest servant Mountioy.


The Fort of Enishlanghen above mentioned, (the inuesting whereof made the Lord
Deputy deferte the taking of the felld), was seated in the midst of a great
Bogge, and no way accessable, but through thick Woods, very hardly passable.
It had about it two deep Ditches, both compassed with strong Pallisadoes, a
very high and thick rampeire of earth, and timber, and well flancked with
Bulworkes. For defense of the place forty two Musketeres, and some twenty
swordmen, were lodged in it. But after that our Forces, with very good industry
had made their approches to the first ditch, the besieged did yield the place
to the Queen and themselves absolutely to her mercy. So a ward of English was
left in the Castle, after the spoil thereof was taken, wherein were great
store of plate and the chief goods of the best men in the Country, being all
fled to Tyrone, and the men there taken were brought bound to the Newry, and
presented upon the nineteenth of August to the Lord Deputy.

The same day his Lordship wrote this letter following to Master Secretary
Cecyll.

SIR, I have lately written to you at large, and I have now no more matter of
importance, to trouble you with, only since my last, we have taken
Enishlaghlen, a place of great importance, and the strongest that I have heard
of, to be held by any Rebel in Ireland. Henry Oneale, the eldest son of
Shane Oneale, is broken out of prison, as his brother did the like long before,
and because they do cast themselves (without all conditions) into her
Majesty's protection, I cannot but use them well; but as things stand now, I
do not see any great use to be made of them, and I fear I shall be more
troubled with them, then if they were still where they were. To morrow (by the
grace of God) I am again going into the field, as near as I can utterly to
waste the Country of Tyrone, and to prevail the Garrisons there of some
Corn, to keep their horses in the Winter, which being done, I will leave the
Garrisons to take their effect; which when they are well provided, and as well
placed, will do more then an Army. And Sir, except things fall out much
contrary to that, which we have good reason to expect, I presume, that if the
Queen keep these Garrisons strong, and well provided all this Winter, she
may before the next Spring send into this Kingdom Sir Robert Gardner, with
some other good Commonwealths men, with her pleasure how much, and how every
man shall hold his land, and what laws she will have current here; and I am
confident it will be obeyed. Neither is the reducing of this Province to be
too little regarded; for ill inhabited as it was, with no industry, and most
part wasted, I can assure you, the Earl of Tyrone in the time of these wars,
did raise upon Vlster above fourscore thousand pounds by the year, and to
fall from that excess, I think they might be brought to yield the Queen
willingly, much more then ever she expected presently, and in time more then I
dare now promise. And after this Winter, I think she may withdraw her
Garrisons, only leaving Wards in the places, and if I be not much deceived,
you shall find, that these men will be the last of all Ireland, that will
forsake the Queens party, and I presume after this Winter do the Queen good
service against the Spaniards, if they come: but if they come before, I cannot
tell what I may build on: but I perceive by your last letter, they are not
likely to be many, and then, although it may stop, yet I hope it shall not
overthrow our work. If there be no invasion here, if I do not too much
deceive my self, I should do the Queen in her service of this Country more
advantage, by my coming over after Michaelmas, then I can do here. This
Gentleman Sir Richard Treuer I perceive will settle himself in these parts, by
the which he may do her Majesty good service; for it is unfit such land as
he has given him, should lie waste, and it will be much better to be
ordered by men of his worth and quality. And so Sir I beseech God prosper all
the Queens affairs, and make us able to do her the service, that her
Majesty does expect.

Yours Sir to do you service Mountioy.


The next day, being the twentieth of August, the Lord Deputy took the field,
and encamped in the midde way between the Newrie and Armagh, and there
understanding that Tyrone was fled into Fermannagh, and thereupon conceiving
that the war was then chiefly to be made that way, his Lordship resolved,
first, to spoil all the Country of Tyrone, and to banish all the inhabitants
from thence, inioyning such of them as would become subjects, to live on the
South Side of Blackwater, so that if Tyrone returned, he should find nothing
in the Country but the Queens Garrisons. Further to prevent his return, and
to make the war more conveniently upon him, and the remnant of the Rebels,
his Lordship resolved to plant a Garrison at the Agher, being Cormocks chief
house, seated near Fermanagh, and near Monaghan, whither Sir Henry Dockura
might draw the greatest part of his forces, and whether in one days march (as
the passages were now made) most of the forces in the Northern Garrisons might
be drawn together. The nine and twentieth day of August his Lordship passed
the bridge at Charle-mount, over the Blackwater, and that night encamped by
Dungannon which his Lordship made defensible, leaving a Ward to keep the
place, to be a retreat for our men, going out upon service, and to preserve
the Oats growing there abouts for our horses in the winter.

There his Lordship received this following letter from Master Secretary.

MY very good Lord, your Packets of the nineteenth and nine and twentieth of
luly, were yesterday delivered me, and withal your private letter to her
Majesty, dated the tenth of August, all which were very well allowed of, as
hereafter more particularly you shall be advertised, this being rather to
advertise you of their receipt, then that there is left any extraordinary matter
for me to write unto you, which is not contained in the last dispatches from
hence, whereof at the writing of your own, I know you could not advertise the
receipt. One great cause of my writing this private letter, is this, that where
I see how much it does distract your mind, to think of Spain behind you, and
of the North before you, fearing to be diuerted from the conclusion of your
labors, you may perceive in what estate the preparations of Spain are now, as
I am certainly advertised by one of my own, who is newly arrived from the
Ports of Lisbone, where he took shipping the one and twentieth of July last (
stilo veteri.). There are two great ships, each of one thousand tuns, one
called the Saint Andrew, and the other (which shall be the Vice Admiral) the
name forgotten, besides there are but twelve ships of two hundred tons, and
downwards, in which it was resolved to send some fifteen hundred men, to have
relieved the siege at Beer haven, the news of the taking whereof was first
known there the tenth of July, being written from Watersord to Lisbone, and
not before. Of these fifteen hundred men, eight hundred came from the Groyne,
being part of those that were transsported out of Ireland. In the Groyne
remains Odonnell, and there is only the great Saint Phillip with ten small
barks, with which he mightny importuned to be sent into the North. If these
had been sent into Beer haven in Mounster, hoping upon his arrival with some
one thousand or fifteen hundred men, to have raised the siege, possessed some
parts, and made a beginning of a Plantation, hereof great benefit must needs
have grown to the Rebels; for as those small numbers which should have been
landed in Mounster, with the brute of the rest to follow (which is always
multiplied), would have made a distraction of the Vlster prosecution, so any
petty descent with him in Vlster, would have raised the new hopes of all those
Northern Rebels. And truly (my Lord) when it is considered, how great a
benefit it is to the King of Spain to consume the Queen with charge in
Ireland, by his bestowing only (once a year) some such forlorn Companies,
besides that he thereby keeps up some kind of reputation in Europe, in
following on his first design, by sending, though a few, which (being added to
that which same spreads of great numbers) fills the world with continual
rumor of his undertaking humor, I cannot be secured, but that he will still
feed that fire with fuel, although I know it a vanity to believe those other
fond reports of such mighty preparations, and such Armies, as he is no way
able to embrace: for your Lordship may be assured, whatsoever you hear of
gathering of numbers by land to this place or that, they have been only for
defense against such attempts, as they did ignorantly suspect from the Queen,
and the Low Countries, and to continue obedience within his Kingdom in the
South parts, where the Mores have bin very apt to take arms. And for the
Galleys whereof we have heard so many to be brought out of Holy; they were
intended for some enterprise upon Larache, so as the brute that they should
have come for Ireland was idle. Only it is true, that Sir Ki. Leuison defeated
those 8 Galleys, which were come as far to the Norward as Lisbone, under the
conduct of Spinola, who undertook to bring them into the Lowcountries for
Sluse, but of those eight two being sunk, a third spoiled, and never able togo
to sea, the other 5 were likewise so torn, and the slaves so mangled, as we
look not to hear of the^ in these quarters this summer, so as I assure you,
though our carick prove nothing so much as we expected, having been much
pillaged, and many of the goods taken wet, yet has Sir Richard Lonison in this
service deserved an extraordinary repetation. Thus have I now delivered, rather
(out of my private affection) my private opinion, that no great Army is
intended, then that I mean to contest against the contrary opinions (which
are here continually multiplied from thence, of the great Armies the King of
Spain amasseth), to hinder any preparations which may come from hence, whereby
that Kingdom may receive any comfort: First, because I know the very brute of
Leuies here, must needs give help to your proceedings; next because I know
what a folly it is, in cases which concern a Kingdom, to dissuade any manner
of supplies, whereof the lack may prove perilous, especially in this State,
which is so exhausted (by that war of Ireland only) as it is an easy work
to divert all actions of charge, especially whenever they may think to
secure their opinions, by maintaining those grounds to which I should incline,
to whose place it principally belongs to give best judgment of foreign
intelligences. I will only therefore conclude with this, I am sorry to find
my Sovereigns heart so great and magnanimous (though I must confess she has
very just cause), as not to be contented to have made virtue of necessity, and
by her pardon of the greatest Rebel, to have dissolved the strength of the
combination, which being still united with minds of despair, will multiple
still alienation, whereof so potentan enemy as is the King of Spain, will
ever make his benefit; where I am of opinion, that if he were sure to be
pardoned, and live in any security, with the quality of any greatness, such
is his weariness of his misery (and so of all the rest), as he would be
made one of the best instruments in that Kingdom. But I have now gone on too
far, saving that I am apt to take all occasions to exchange my thoughts with
you by letters, praying Almighty God so to bless your endeavors, as we may
more enjoy each others company, for the good of her Majesty's Ieruice. And so I
commit you to Gods protection.

From the Court at Hisham this seventh of August, 1602. Your Lordships loving
and assured friend to command To. Cecyll.


The Lord Deputy spent some five days about Tullough Oge, where the Oneales
were of old custom created, and there he spoiled the Corn of all the
Country, and Tyrones own Corn, and brake down the chair wherein the
Oneales were wont to be created, being of stone, planted in the open field. Sir
Henry Dockwra, only with some horse with him, did meet the Lord Deputy here,
upon the thirtieth of August, and brought with him Ocane, a late Submittie,
having left the English foot at the Omy, where in like sort were the most part
of O Canes and young O Donnells horse and foot, victualed at their own
charge, and ready to attend any service the Lord Deputy should command them.
The same day his Lordship understood, that Sir Arthur Chichester was coming
toward him by Killetro, and that Randoll Mac Sorley had offered him to serve
the Queen in that iourny with five hundred foot, and forty horse upon his
own charge.

Whereupon the Lord Deputy resolved to march with the Army to Dunnamore, and
thence to the Agher, and in the second days march upon the sixth of September,
his Lordship received letters from the Lord President of Mounster, that four
and twenty Spanish ships were bruited to be arrived at Beere-hauen, which
news, though his LP kept secret, yet the whole Country was presently full of
it, and from al parts he received the like alarums, insomuch as amongst the
Irish it was constantly believed, that some Spanish ships were arrived at
Carlingford. Notwithstanding, his Lordship left a Garrison at the Agher, being a
Castle seated in an Island, and he entrenched a large piece of ground for
greater forces, when Sir Henry Dockwra should draw them thither upon any
service, and from that Castle his Lordship brought away two brass pieces.

Tyrone, Brian Mac Art, Mac Mahownd, and Cormack Mac Barron, were fled into the
bottom of a great Fastness, toward the end of Lough Erne, whom his Lordship
followed as far as he could possibly carry the Army, yet came not within
twelve miles of them, besides, they had a way from thence into Orurkes Country,
to which the Army could not pass. Mac Guyre had lately left them, and received
the Queens protection from Sir Henry Foliott, upon condition to put in good
pledges for his loialty, and to give Oconnor Roc Mac Guyre the land belonging
to him, and to build up the Castle of Eniskellin, which he lately brake down,
delivering the same built at his own charge into the Queens possession: and
Tyrone and his abouenamed confederaies were all poor, and all the Rebels
following them, were not above six hundred foot, and sixty horse.

Upon the seventh of September, his Lordship understood by letters from Sir
Oliver Lambert, that he was called back from the prosecution of Orurke, by like
news of the Spaniards arrival.

The same day his Lordship sent back Sir Henry Dockwra, and directed him to
draw most of his forces (with as much victuals as he could put up) to the Omy
and from thence to the Agher, being twelve miles distant and fair way there to
be rendent, and to make the war till harvest were past, being always ready
to follow his Lordships further directions upon any landing of Spaniards.
Likewise the next day his Lordship sent back Sir Arthur Chichester, directing
him to lie at Mountioy Garrison, clearing the Country of Tyrone of all
inhabitants, and to spoil all the Corn which he could not preserve for the
Garrisons, and to desace all the Islands formerly taken, being ready to draw upon
the Rebels, if they should make any head; yet with aduile to be likewise
ready to answer any new directions, if the Spaniards should arrive.

So his Lordship marched back with his Army, and upon the ninth of September
divided all the waste land on the Southside of Blackwater toward the Newry,
between Hen. Mac Shane and Con Mac Shane, sons to Shane O Neale, only with
leave to live there with their Creaghts, and such followers as should come unto
them, till her Majesty's pleasure were further known, and inioyning them to
sow their Corn for the next year upon the Plains.

Thus his Lordship bringing back with him into the Pale fourteen Companies of
foot, and one hundred horse, came to the Newrie the eleventh of September, and
the next day in his and the Counsels letters to the Lords in England, after the
relation of the former services, wrote as follows.

We have taken the best pledges we could of such as are become subjects, al of
them have assisted us with Cowes, most of them with carriages, with men, and
with their own presence, so as if foreign forces do not arrive, we make no
doubt of them, nor to bring the rest to what terms shall be fittest for her
Majesty's Honor and profit. We have thought fit to suffer most of the Natives
of Tyrone, (the rest being put over the River of the Bann), to follow Henry and
Gone Mac Shane, and perchance many of them will not quit them, though the Traitor
should return and grow strong. But for all cuents, we have spoiled and mean
to spoil their Corn, and in respect of the garrisons, and of the Blackwater,
their Creaghts can hurdly return, but they will be still at our command. If they
should prove false, we have good bridles upon them, and at any time their
followers, upon leave to dwell in Tyrone, will easily forsake them. These
followers seem to desire nothing more, then to hold their land of the Queen
without any dependancy upon the Oneales. Howsoever, for the present; we think
good to hold them thus together, partly for the good of the service, and to
give these two young men some lively hood, who (with the rest) being utterly
rejected, might by some desperate course much prolong the warte; and partly
(we must confess freely) our of humane commiseration, having with our eyes
daily seen the lamentable estate of that Country, wherein we found cuerie
where men dead of famine, in so much that Ohagan protested unto us, that
between Tullogh Oge and Toome there lay unburied a thousand dead, and that
since our first drawing this year to Blackwater, there were above three
thousand starued in Tyrone. And sure the poor people of those parts never yet
had the means to know God, or to acknowledge any other Sovereign then the O
Neales, which makes me more comm serate them, and hope better of them
hereafter. When we have conferred with the rest of the Counsel at Dublin, and
are better informed of the state of those parts, we will again presume to
write to your Lordships. In the mean time we hasten thither, finding here all,
both subjects and others, as fully possessed of the Spaniards coming, as if
they were already arrived. The like opinion (as we hear) is generally over al
Ireland, upon what ground we know not, for we have not heard any such
substantial intelligence, excepting the brute advertised by the Lord
President, and a general brute brought hither by all shipping, of huge
preparations in Spain, and whether it be desire or fear that makes this
report believed, it is strange to see how generally and strongly it is
apprehended. We must renew our former motion to your Lordships, that if the
Spaniards do land here, we may speedily be supplied with munition,
artillery, and all things else that we have written for, or that your
Lordships in your wisdoms shall find to be needful for us, who can best
judge what will be fit for an action of so great consequence. And for that we
shall be necessarily enforced, wheresoever they happen to arrive, to draw all
the forces of the Kingdom together, to make head against them, by which means
these Northern parts (especially) being left bare, such as have most readily,
and with best arguments of sincere meaning submitted themselves to her
Majesty's mercy, with intent to live dutifully as becomes subjects, will be
left again to the tyranny of the Arch-Rebell, for want of defense. We beseech
your Lordships to consider, whether it were not more profitable for her
Majesty (though for the present somewhat the more chargeable) to enable us to
make the war upon the Spaniards, and yet to go on too with this prosecution
in some measure, then for lack of a convenient force to be kept on foot, to
loose the benefit of our travel all this Summer, and the charge her Majesty
has been at in planting Garrisons, which being kept, would so bridle all these
Countries, as they should neither have any benefit of the Spaniards landing,
nor the Spaniard any use of them, nor of their victuals, all their Countries
being commanded by some of the Garrisons that would keep them from stirring to
join with others, for fear of loosing all their own at home. It is true,
that by the putting of new men hither when we shall have drawn out the old
against the Spanish Army (which will be a work of most necessity), it cannot
be expected, that the service of those new men will work such effect, as the
old Bands would; yet may it be hoped, the effect will be sufficient to keep
the Irish from joining with the Spaniard, seeing for the most part they shall
live in Garrisons and shall not need to be drawn into the field, unless
only for some short journey, which will not last above two or three days at a
time. And if her Majesty be not pleased to like of this motion, or seem
unwilling to disfurnish her self of so many men and Arms, we humbly leave it
to your Lordships to consider, whether it would not be fit for that purpose,
to entertain two or three thousand Scots, which we think might readily be
sent over to Loughfoyle or Carickfergus, and being inland Scots, and not Irish
Scots, and good security had to serve her Majesty faithfully, they would in
all likelihood better endure the winters hardness, and happily be sound fitter
for any service, then such new men as come usually from England, which yet we
move no further, then as a remembrance, because we perceived the last year
such a matter was thought upon. If the Spaniards come not, we doubt not but to
give your Lordships a very good account of all things here, to her Majesty's
liking, yet must we desire the speedy sending over of the victuals contracted
for, that should have come in July and August last, but no part yet landed that
we hear of; for without those victuals these Garrisons will be unfurnished,
which depend wholly thereupon. And we are further to move your Lordships, to
cause to be sent over a very great proportion of salt and bread; for by
prey-beeues gotten from the Rebels, and good numbers had of the protectees,
whom we have caused to furnish us for our money, we have used a great kind of
sparing of the victuals in the store, excepting bread only. And we doubt not
but many of the Garrisons will be able to help themselves many times with
beeues, so as they may have salt to powder them, while the season lasts, and
will not need to take from the victualers any thing but bread, which now they
will not deliver them alone, unless they be so directed from your Lordships.

The same twelfth day of September, his Lordship wrote from the Newry this
sollowing letter to Master Secretary in England.

SIR, you will understand by our letters to my Lords, how hitherto we have
bestowed our time. Being returned back to the Newry, I find all the world
strangely possessed of the coming of the Spaniards, although I cannot learn
of any assured ground they have thereof. Upon the general concurrence from al
parts of such bruites, I did employ two as likely instruments as any are, to
know the truth, and to learn what assurance Tyrone himself had from Spain.
They undertook upon their lives, that all the intelligence he has received of
succors, is only by letters out of the Pale. Tyrone has many ways made
importunate means to be received to mercy: but I did still reject him, and
published it, that her Majesty had commanded me not to hearken unto him, yet
still he continued to urge me to become a suter to the Queen for him. It is
true, I have been ever loath to negotiate with him any otherwise then with my
sword, because I find it dangerous for my self, considering the Queens
resolution: but upon the receipt of my Lord Presidents letter of a new Spanish
invasion, I adventured thus sarre to entertain his motions, that if he would
swear to submit himself absolutely to her Majesty's mercy (if it should
please her to receive him), whatsoever succor he should receive in the mean
time, I would only undertake to become an humble suitor unto her Majesty for
him, so that notwithstanding till I knew her pleasure, I would not desist in my
prosecution. This day he sent one to me, agreeing to so much, but with all
propounding certain Articles that he desired should be granted: whereupon
misliking that he should in any wise capitulate, I commanded his messenger
presently to depart and forbad him to send any more to me, and to cut off all
hope to his party, I have directed all the Garrisons anew to proclaim his head,
and the like to be done in the Creaghtes of such as are become subjects. In the
mean time N. N. out of his own head, and by that general authorie that is
given to al Commanders to parley with Rebels, has spoken with Tyrone, to the
effect of his own letter, which even now I received, and such as it is I send
it you. I protest before the eternal God it was without my priuitie: but I
must bear with him for greater faults then this; for he and all the Irish are
very irregular, though he be fit enough for the charge I have given him, which
is only of Irish Companies, in a Garrison which of all other I can worst
victual, and they will make best shift for themselves, and greatest spoil
upon the enemy. I have commanded him to meddle no more with Tyrone; for if I
should think it fit, I would employ one better instructed for that purpose. It
is true Sir, that for many respects I have been fearful to deliver freely my
opinion, what course I think fit to be taken with Tyrone, and so am I now: but
if it shall please her Majesty to trust me with the authority to hearken unto
him, I would never use it, but when I should be sure to give her a very good
account of my proceedings therein; for the lower he is brought, the more it
will be for the Queens honor to show him mercy, and it is thought he might
be made an excellent instrument, if Spain continue their purposes for this
Kingdom. If the Queen be resolved never to receive him, it is most necessary
that Vlster should presently be made a Provincial Government; for this people
seem to thirst for justice, and by that means the dependancy upon the Oneales
will be soon extinguished. If the Queen be loath to augment her charge. I
think it were much better that the institution of Connaght, were discontinued,
and the like Officers to be transferred hither. It is true, that in all
Ireland, for the good of the general service, there is no place so fit for the
Deputy to be resident, as at Athlone, and if he were there, Connaght would
little need a Governor. I have here but little time, and much (...) and
therefore I cannot write to you of all things so largely as I would, the which
I purpose to do when I come to Dublyn, only of this I pray you Sir resolve me
by your next: We have here the worst intelligence, of any Instruments that any
Prince in Christendom does employ in so weighty a business; I do know some,
that I do think were fit to be employed both in Spain and about the Traitor
here, yet though I know my self to be honest, they may prove knaves. If the
Queen be so confident of my faith, that she will be pleased to make the best
interpretations of what I shall do therein, I should be able to do her
perchance some good service, and give my self greater light of all things,
then now I have, but if she mislike it, I will only say about me with my
Sword, though it be in the dark. It is not a Letter, nor a reasonable Book,
that can deliver all such conceits of mine, as I think necessary to let you
know of this Kingdom, wherefore I despair to do it, till I may have the
happiness to see you. If I had any certainety that the fear of Spain were
past, I would make a great diminution of the List, wherefore I pray you Sir, if
you have in England any assurance thereof, let me know it as soon as you can,
but here we look for them every hour, and (they say) in the Pale it is held
as sure, as if they were already come. If you show the enclosed Letter, I pray
you put your finger on the latter part, or blot it out; and yet if I thought
the Queen would not be angry, I would give the Lady leave to come to her
Brother, for I am loath to make war with Weomen, especially since she is now
great with child.

The same twelfth day of September, his Lordship wrote from the Newry to Sir
Oliver Lambert Governor of Connaght this following letter.

SIr yesterday at my coming to this Town, your messenger delivered me your
letters, containing a relation of your proceedings, since your going to the
Abbey of Boil, where and in your return thence, I perceive you have had some
knocking on both sides, and the Rebels being so many as you note, I have good
cause to be glad you sped so well, and parted with so good reputation to our
side, and so little loss withal, which I doubt not proceeded chiefly from
your good command and managing of that business, for which I may not omit to
yield you many thanks, neither will I be sparing to testify so much, where it
may most redound to your due and well deserved commendation. Yet must I withal
note, that it somewhat grieves me, to observe so great an alteration in those
that of late seemed desirous (or at least not unwilling) to receive her
Majesty's mercy, for that I have some reason to be doubtful, that this sudden
change proceeds not altogether out of a certain expectation of Spanish
succors, but out of some opinion they have conceived, of a purpose you have to
dispossess the principal men of their lands and livings, and to get the same
into her Majesty's hands, by indictments and Offices to be found thereof; and
if they once entertain such a conceit, they will assuredly put up all to any
hazard, and to their uttermost means shun to be reclamed, which I must
acknowledge to you, I do the rather doubt, in that Tybot ne long has
grievously complained to me, of the committall of his Cosen Dauye Bourke, and
some hard usage toward himself, for which he seems fearful to come to you,
and therefore desires my license to go for England, which I have now sent him,
with this purpose, to give him contentment as much as may be, and yet when he
comes to me, I mean to school him, and so I hope to hold him in good terms,
for so at this time especially it does behoue us, to bring our great work to
the better conclusion. I make no question, but that both he, and O Connor
Sligo, and the rest of them, do all somewhat iuggle and play on both hands, to
serve their own turns, and therefore truly deserve the less favor, for they
so do here for the most part, and yet I wink at it.

But since it behoneth us so greatly to draw the war to an end, to ease her
Majesty of that exceeding charge and consumption of men and Arms, which her
Majesty and the State of England are grown very weary of, and indeed
unwilling to continue much longer. We that are here employed as chief
instruments, to effect what so earnestly is desired, must bear more for our
Countries good, then our own natures can well endure; and therefore let me
advise you, with much earnestness to apply your self unto it, as the only
and sole means to make our doings acceptable in England, where we must be
censured, and by your next let me know certainly I pray you, whether you have
done any thing already for the intituling of her Majesty to any of their lands
in that Province, or whether you have any way attempted it, or given them cause
to suspect it. I shall be well satisfied with your answer, presuming that you
will do it sincerely, yet if any such thing be, I pray you proceed no further
in it, but labor by all means to win them, both because I know it to be her
Majesty's pleasure, and that the multitude of Subjects is the glory of a
Prince, and so every way it is fittest to reclaim rather then destroy them, if
by any good means it might be wrought. O Connor Slige (as you know) was
restrained of his liberty by the Rebels, and that (I think) upon a letter I
sent unto him, so that he has a just pretense for his standing out so long,
and for any action into which he shall enter, neither shall we be able to
disprove his allegations, though perhaps himself be not innocent, neither at
the beginning, nor now. You must therefore be content to think, that what he
does, is by compulsion, though indeed you do not think so for some reasons
apparent to your self: Your stone work at Galloway about the Bulworkes will I
fear prove chargable, and very long; yet can I do no more then recommend it
to your good husbandry and discretion, who may best judge what is fittest.
Tyrone is not yet gone over the Earne, but lies between that and Ruske, where
I have planted a garrison, and another at the Agher, hard by the Clogher, which
lie both very fitly to do service upon him. To the former all the Garrisons
near the Blackewater, and that at Mountioy and Monaghan may fitly draw upon
all occasions, and so I have lefe order with Sir Arthur Chichester, who has
the chief care of all: And to the latter and to Omy, (which is but twelve
miles from it) Sir Henry Dockwra has promised me to put up most of the Forces
of Loughfoyle, and to lie there about himself. To Eniskillin or there about,
Sir Henry Follyot has direction to draw his whole Force, leaving a Ward only
at Ballishannon and Beleeke, which is already done, but he has not his boats
yet from you, which is a great hinderance unto him, and therefore I pray you
send them with all speed possible, if they be not gone already. Touching your
motion for Master Attorney, I now return to Dublyn, where if he cause it to be
moved at the Table, I will with the rest yield to any thing that is fit. In the
mean time you may use the chief Justice in those businesses, who has
allowance for his diet, and is of great experience and continuance in that
Prouinee, so as thereby he may best know every man's disposition. I pray you
let me hear stom you again with as much speed as you can, touching the state
of that Province under your government. And so hoping, for all these late
bruites, that we shall not this year be troubled by the Spaniards, or if we
be, that their number shall be small, (for so Master Secretary has confidently
written to me out of England), I commend me right heartily to you. From the
Newry this twelfth of September 1602.

The Lord Deputy being arrived at Dublyn, and this Summers service ended, since
the composing of the Irish troubles was henceforward to be wrought by the
garrisons planted in all parts upon the Rebels, and the settling of the State to
be managed by Counselors, Sir Henry Dauers Serieant Mayor of the Army, was
the rather induced by the necessity of his private affairs, to discontinue his
service in Ireland. Whereupon his place of Serieant Mayor being void, was
conferred upon Sir Arthur Chichester. And because Sir Richard Moryson had a
pretense to the place by former hopes given him from the Lord Deputy, his
Lordship to give him contentment, raised his Company of foot, reduced lately
in a general cash to 150, to the former number of two hundred.

The seven and twenty of September the Lord Deputy at Dublyn teceiued from the
Lords in England this following letter, directed to his Lordship and the
Counsel of Ireland.

AFter our hearty commendations to your good Lordship, and the rest of the
Counsel there. Whereas your Lordship in your late letters of the twenty nine
of the last July does advertise us of a great abuse crept in amongst the
Ministers of the victuals in that Realm, namely that you cannot know from any
of them, when the victuals arrive in any Port, nor whether it be of an old
contract or a new, nor whether it be for her Majesty or themselves, and by that
means you can never find how you are provided for, nor what you may further
expect, and (which is worse) that the Rebels do get of the best victuals that
are sent thither, and you cannot call the Victualer to acount thereof, because
he affirms stiffly that he is warranted by us to sell it for his benefit, and
so as he sell it to the subject (how ill soever affected) it is no fault of
his, if the Rebels afterward get it. Upon this information from your Lordship,
we have not only called all the Victualers to account how this great abuse is
committed, but have perused our former order taken this time 2 years, when we
contracted with them to appoint commissaries there, for the keeping and issuing
of victuals, by whose default (being their Ministers) it should seem these
lewd parts are played. Therefore for your Lordships satisfaction in the first
point, the answer of Tolles and Cockain will suffice, who do absolutely
affirm, that they sent no other victuals thither then such as by contract they
were tied to send. And though they send often a greater proportion then will
serve to furnish any contract, yet that does always appear unto us upon the
certificates of the Inuoyes, and we that undergo the principal care of those
matters here, have inioined them to have always a good proportion in store to
serve upon all occasions, whereof they send (as they find convenient shipping)
often times a large quantity before hand, more then by contract they are bound
unto. For if they should not make provision before we contract with them, it
would be hard for them to perform the same in so short a time, and by such
days as we must of necessity limit unto them, upon diversity of accidents and
demands from you, and the overplus does always pass into the next contract:
But in that your Lordship does find fault, that you can never be informed upon
what contract the victuals are provided, which do arrive there, we must
remember unto you the order we have always observed here, which will easily
reconcile the difficulties in this matter. First therefore your Lordship is to
call to mind, that we here for the most part, in the making of our contracts,
both for the quantity of the victuals, the time to have it there, and the
places of vnlading the same, are directed by such letters as we receive from
your Lordship and you of the Counsel, and by such certificats as are sent us
from the Surueyor of the victuals from thence, which Surueyor ordinarily has
certified unto us the quantities that arrive there. Then so soon as any
contract is made with the undertakers, we send an abstract thereof unto your
Lordship, both of the several kinds, and for how many men, and for what time
the same is provided, and to what place the same is to be transported. By
which your Lordship may know what you are to expect, and for more assurance,
we have required of your Lordship by diverse letters to appoint certain
discreet persons at the Ports, where the same is to be landed and unladen, to
see and visit those victuals, and to take knowledge both of the quantities,
kinds, and goodness, and that (with good usage) the same is likely to continue
the space of five months from the landing thereof, which direction if it were
duly observed and performed, your Lordship needed no other certificat to
satsfie you in all respects. And we have usually received from Master Newcomen
the Surueyor of the victuals, very exact certificats of the quantities of
victuals that arrive there, as also of the goodness, and upon what contract
they were sent: For until the contract be full, all the victuals sent thither
are to satisfy the same, and if there be any overplus, it is reserved for the
next contract. For the undertakers absolutely deny the sending of any victuals
thither, but such as is to serve the Soldier, and to perform the Contracts,
so as all the victuals are to be accounted for her Majesty's provision.
Therefore it were far easier for your Lordship, to have the like certificat
there. Thus as we have remembered unto you the directions we have given unto
your Lordship: So we have thought good to acquaint you with the rest of the
course we hold here, which you shall understand to be in this manner: Upon every
Contract we make, we give the Victualers an impressed before hand, to provide
those victuals they contract for: but the whole sum that they are to have by
that agreement they never receive until they do produce true Certificates
from the Officers of the Ports, that the full proportions which they are tied
to contract and provide, is laden on shipboard, and ready to be transported of
good and well conditioned victuals, according to the Contract. And therefore if
your Lordship will be as strict to call for the certificates of the vnlading
there, as we do cause the Inuoy to be perused, there can be no abuse in that
case, considering all the victuals sent thither comes to the Magnzines, and
how much soever it is, all is for the use of the Soldier. For the other point
your Lordship does complain of, that the Ministers there do sell the
victuals, and their peremptory untrue and respectlesse answers unto you: It is
the desire of the victualers (as this information is general) that your
Lordship will not only be informed of the particular abuses committed by any
Officer or Commissary there, but to take a severe courses to see them
exemplarily punished. For we have given no other license for the selling of
victuals, then your Lordship has been acquainted with all, in the contracts
made with the Victualers in August was two years, which was in these words:
And because it is not possible in so great a mass of provisions, with all the
care that may be used, by reason of transporting and tossing them to and fro,
but some will perish, and decay. In this case their Lordships are pleased, that
the foresaid Commissaries deputed now by the Merchants, shall be permitted to
utter and sell to the poor in the market Towns where they reside, and near
unto them, such victuals as are decaiable, and unfit to be uttered to the
soldier. And by the instructions given to the Commissaries, there is a clause,
whereby they are restrained: That if there shall fall out any wast in the
provisions, either by leake, moisture, or other casualty and accident, by
transportation by land or by Sea, or by any unfit or inconvenient rooms to
place or house the same victuals, then they are to acquaint the chief
Commander, Colonel, or Counsel therewith, and procure some sufficient
testimony for the manifesting of the truth, and of the quantity, that is
decayed, surprised by any ambush of the Enemy, or by fire, or other inevitable
danger become unfit to be used, that it may appear, that happened not by their
negligence and default, the which being certified, her Majesty in that case to
bear the loss and wast thereof. Therefore we marvel your Lordship would
endure so insolent an answer to be made by inferior Officers, knowing we
always do send your Lordship the Coppies of those agreements and Articles we
make with any victualer. And in this Article this consideration only did lead
us, that if by long keeping, often removing, or other casualty, the victuals
shall not be fit for the Soldier, then your Lordship or the provincial
Governor, or such as you shall appoint, being acquainted therewithal, we
thought it more fit, (and now do so, and not otherwise) that the same may be
sold to the poor in the next markets, then that the loss should light on her
Majesty. Nevertheless in those cases, we refer it to your Lordships
judgment and discretion, whom her Majesty does trust with so great a
government, to order them as you shall see cause. To conclude therefore, if
that caution we took for the good of the Soldier, (that no evil victuals
should be thrust upon him), shall be abused and perverted to supply the need
of the Rebels, and the Soldier the worse served, we think this matter worthy
of strict examination and as severe punishment, as may be inflicted upon
offenders in so high a degree, which we earnestly require may be done, and that
in all these and like cases, your Lordship will consider, that we of her
Majesty's Counsel here, that are absent from thence, do proceed generally in
these matters, as reason does direct us, and as we receive light from you and
the Counsel there: but your Lordship, that does know the state of the
Kingdom, and see the particular course and disposition of things there, and
what is fit and not fit, may easily reform those inconveniences and abuses
that happen, and are committed, and inform us of those particulars that are
not within our knowledge, that these matters may be carried with more perfect
order and rule, for the good of the Soldier, whose welfare is only intended
and sought herein, to her Majesty's excessive charge, and our great trouble.
This is another great abuse, and though it be not pertaining to this matter,
yet by reason of late we have discovered the same to be very common, we have
thought good to inform your Lordship thereof, and earnestly to pray you and the
rest of the Counsel, to give strict order it may be avoided. The matter is
this, we find by diverse examinations taken, that it is a common practice, that
if any Seruing-man, Countrey-fellow, or labouring-man, happen to be maimed or
grievously hurt, by any mischance or disorder, if he be in any of the Countries
near to the Seaside, or any Port where shipping does go for Ireland, he
will find passage there, and follow the Army in some Company or other, and do
such services as he is able, and when he has gotten some knowledge of the
Country, and of the Captains and chief Officers, then he procures a pasport
from some Captain or other, or else he gets his name to be inserted in some
general pasport, as a man (by reason of hurts received) unfit for service, and
so upon his coming over hither again, he is recommended into the Country
for a Pension, by which means the Countries are burdened with this kind of
men, and the poor Soldier, that is indeed maimed in the wars, is
disapointed and hindered of that pension he ought to have. This is to be
reformed by two means: First that order be taken no maimed men, that have
received their hurts in service, be sent away in a general pass, because the
Statute does require a particular certificat from their General, certifying
the hurts and maimes the Soldier has received: Next the remedy is, that no
such pasports be given but by subscription of your Lordship, the provincial
Governors, or chief Colonels, under whom he does serve, expressing the hurts
and maimes the Soldier has received, and in what service, and under what
Captain, and the office and place he held in that Company. This by general
direction being observed, will avoid the number of counterfeit Soldiers, and
give due way to the relief of the maimed Soldier, who indeed without such
particular certificat, ought not by the Statute to be relieved, and the want
thereof has been great hinderance to many poor men. Therefore nothing
doubting but your Lordship will take order herein accordingly, we bid your
Lordship heartily farewell. From the Court at Oatelands, the 29 of August 1602.

The eighth of October, the Lord Deputy wrote to the Lord President of
Mounster; that howsoever by reason of Carmacke escape, he could not for the
present spare the horse and the foot which were with him above the Mounster
List, under the command of Sir Samuel Bagnoll, yet he would not fail to send
fifty horse presently into Connaght, whether he purposed shortly to take his
journey, being now busy about preparation for the same. And further his
Lordship prayed him, to send a good proportion of victuals from the store in
Limricke by water to Athlone, without which the Forces could not be kept
together in that Province, and accordingly his Lordship gave order, that boats
should be sent from Athlone to Limrick, to fetch the same. And whereas his
Lordship had written to the Sheriffs in Mounster, to leauy certain beeues for
the Army, he prayed the Lord President to give them assistance, for taking them
up, and sending them into Connaght with all convenient speed.

The fifteenth of October, the Lord Deputy was advertised from the Lord
President, that Carmock Mac Dermott lately escaped, had made suit to him to be
reconciled to the State, and that upon his answer, that if he would justify
himself to be innocent, he should have a just trial, or if he would confess
his faults, then he would be a suter to the L. Deputy for his pardon, he the
said Carmock had made choice to sue for pardon, rather then to stand to his
trial. And that in the mean time all the Castles in his Country were
possessed for her Majesty, and his followers disposed under other Lords upon
good assurance, beside the faction which was nourished against him among his
nearest Kinsmen, which things made him unable to do any hurt, so as if his
Lordship had any occasion to employ in Connaght the forces which were in
Mounster above the List of the Province, his Lordship might dispose of them at
his pleasure. Further, the Lord President advertised, that he understood by one
James Black, lately come out of Spain, that O Donnell was dead there, and
that this news was most certain.

The twentieth of October, the Lord Deputy dispatched Captain Blany from
Dublin, with Commission to govern the Garrisons of Ruske and Monaghan,
(recalling Sir Christopher S. Laurence and Captain Esmond, from that command,
to repair to Lublin, that his Lp might hear and compose the differences risen
between them.) He had further order to leave Captain Atherton, to govern the
Fort of Mount Norreys, whereof he had formerly the command; likewise to put up
good store of victuals from the Newry to those Garrisons and to deliver letters
to Sir Arthur Chichester, with whom he was to concur in the intended services
for those parts. He was directed to know from Mac Mahown his resolute answer,
whether he would submit himself upon the conditions sent unto him, and if he
refused them, then to give him no further time of protection, but to prosecute
him presently by all means. To give O Gonnor Roe Mac Gayre his best
assistance, to establish him in his Country, and for the other Mac Guyre in
rebellion, not to accept any submission from him, except he undertake some
extraordinary good service, because he had lately abused the savor, offered
him by Sir Henry Folliot, Governor of Ballishannon. Lastly, whereas some of
Tyrones Captains offered to come from him, to serve the Queen, he was
directed to intertaine those offers, and either to draw them from him, or to
make any use of those offers, and treating with them, which he in his
discretion should think fit.

The one and thirtieth of October, the Lord Deputy received from her Majesty
this following letter directed to his Lordship, and the rest of the Counsel
here.

Elizabeth Regina.
RIght Trusty and Well-beloved, and Trusty and Well-beloved, We greet you well.
We have been acquainted with your dispatches to our Counsel of the fourteenth,
and to Our Secretary Cecyll of the thirteenth. In the first whereof We have
perceived the success of your last prosecution, wherein as We have cause, so
We do bless God, that he has so prospered you and our forces under your
charge, as Our enemies are not so hasty to attempt Us anew, or Our rebels able
to interrupt your proceedings, which letter being for the most part but a
iournall, requires no other answer but this, That We do yield unto your
self, and to Our faithful and loving subjects that have assisted you, both
praise and thanks for your good service. And now because We know your
affection is so well mixed with understanding of the state We stand in, both
here and there, as you can well consider of what importance it is to Us to ease
our Kingdom of those great or rather infinite charges, which We have thus long
sustained, which still continuing in that height, would take away the true
feeling of our Victories, We have thought good to deliver you Our pleasure in
that behalf; for it were almost as good for Us to lack a great part of their
reduction, as to be driven to that charge in keeping them, which our Crown of
England cannot endure, without the extreme diminution of the greatness and
felicity thereof, and alienation of Our peoples minds from Us, considering that
for these only rebellions in Ireland, We have bin forced to part with many of
Our ancient possessions, which are part of Our flowers of our Crown, and to
draw from our subjects (a thing contrary to Our nature) those great paiments,
which (but for the hope they had, that the same should serve to work their
future ease and respiration) they would not so willingly have borne, nor We so
justly could have imposed upon them. In all which considerations, though it is
true, that the authority and direction may be expected from Us, to who^
almighty God has only given the supreme power, to warrant your proceedings in
matters of such importance, yet because in this one point of abating of Our
forces now, from the proportion whereat they stand, you had always in your
own judgment the certain Idea thereof, as a thing that you resolved to do,
so soon as the expectation of the Spanish Army was passed over, We rather
think (if you have observed the judgment which you have made by your last
letter of the improbabilitie of their coming in those times with any power),
that these Our letters shall serve more to approve your actions, or at the
least your resolutions, to abridge all those charges, which were either merely
raised in that only expectation, or were only necessary to be tolerated,
until you had planted those Garrisons in this prosecution, then that you are
now to begin it; which if it be so, we do then command you to proceed with
it with all possible speed, both because the preservation of our treasure, and
the very true reasons of State do require it, and for that there is neither
appearance of any foreign Army; neither are the Rebels (by your own
description) of any force to make any dangerous head against you. So as if now
our charge should still continue, we know not in what time it should be a
bared. To conclude therefore in that point, We do refer the numbers, the
places, and persons, to be ordered by you wholly, and by the advice of Our
Counsel there. And We will for the present only lay before you in general,
some things out of square in that Kingdom, which would be looked unto. First,
We find diverse Officers and Ministers entertained, with many other charges,
which are superfluous, whereof the error grows upon a conceit that our charges
are easy, in respect of the mixed coin, whereof your own judgment can best
inform you, all circumstances considered. We do also find lack in the
managing of diverse possessions, which are won unto us, as well as in
collecting and answering former duties, all which would both by your discretion
and your authority be thought of, and distributed to persons, to order with
time according to their several offices, to the intent the World may see, the
end of our prosecution is to reform the Kingdom, to revive Justice and order,
and not still to suffer these licentions expenses, or loose costs, in many
things, by many inferior persons vnremedied, although while the Kingdom was
invaded by a powerful enemy, and torn in pieces with a domestical
rebellion, we know the time could not admit such reformations, as may be used
in greater calmes. And we must say to you our Treasurer, that when we remember
your own words, concerning the point of the exchange in the first alteration
of our coin how you told us still, that in continuance of time cuery second
issue would so recompense the first return, as the exchange might well enough
be borne, We little thought we should have seen so many bills subscribed with
your own hand and your Ministers, to be paid here in sterling. For as it was
not our meaning, nor ever shall be, whenever in verbo Regio We publish any
thing, to make it the instrument of deceit; so We ever reposed so much in your
judgment, as when you should see an abuse, or a plain corrupt traffic made
of that liberty of exchange, which we only vouch safed to erect for the use of
those, that should not make it a trade, then you would either have found the
means to discover their fraud, and so wholly have rejected their bills, and
punished the fault, or else (if you could not have hit the very bird of their
deceit in the eye) you would (taking it pro concesse, that a fault there was)
have taken some such exceptions against them, as might have served so to have
suspended you allowance, as they should not have had from you so good warrant
to demand that justly of us, which is so excessive a burden unto us, the
rather seeing Merchants should by all constitutions bestow the money they
receive for wares uttered, in the natural commodities of the Country, which
imposition would have bridled them very much, and is not unjust, seeing it
cannot be denied, but that there are some commodities (as Hides, Tallow, Yarne,
and many other things) whereon they might have bestowed some money, and not
have made over such great sums. Where you may perceive, that to all those
which served the Army, and for the bills due to the officers and soldiers,
we have made no difficulty, although we know (if it were examined) that in
their exchanging over so much money as some do, there is some indirect
dealing: we would not have you think (whom we know to be honest diligent and a
sufficient servant) that we do touch you in the least degree with lack of
sincerity, or desire to do us service (for of both these We have great
reason to take gracious recognition) but rather to let you to know how sensible
We are of the clamor, how negligent your Deputies have been in many places to
charge Us here: how great portion of treasures is due by your certificats, and
how necessary it is (seeing but by this coin those expenses cannot be borne)
that all super fluous charge be cut off, and this matter of the exchange
corrected in some degree or other, before (like a Canker) it consumes Our
treasure, which is the sinews of our Crown. We pray you therefore (as We do
mean here to do with Our privy Counsel), call to you some three or four of
that Counsel, of the best understanding, and think among you of some better
cautions for this matter of exchange; wherein, seeing We do see the State of
that Kingdom principally with your eyes, We shall be contented to incline most
to those courses which you shall find convenient. And because no day goes over
our head wherein we are sure there is not some increase to that load, We do
hereby give you Our Deputy authority, without tarrying to advertise Us of
your opinion one way or other, to publish a Proclamation or order, either for
tolleration or explanation of the form of Our former institutions, which shall
seem best to you, with consideration of all due circumstances, not doubting
but you shall find many things which were fit for Us to suffer in the
beginning, which by change of circumstances may now be altered. And because in
these matters of paiments, which flow like blood out of the veins, time is
precious, if there be any thing which you and that Counsel shall find fit to
be done for prevention of some part of this abundant consumption, growing by
the freedom of all persons to have the exchange, seeing the distance of place
to be passed by sea is subject to length and uncertainty, We are content
prouisionally to warrant your proceedings in any thinh you do, or publish in
Our name. It remains now that We do satisfy you Our Deputy, of some other
things contained in your private letters to the Secretary; First, for your
doubt you may not use your best means to explore the practices of Spain, and
the inward treasons of the Rebel, because your Ministers may often prove
dishonest, We have no more to say then this, That if you consider that We have
trusted you as absolutely with that Kingdom, as ever We did Deputy, you need
make small doubt of any other interpretation of your actions in that point
toward you; for when soever the greatest curiosity shall censure our actions,
it shall never appear (where We see faith and duty only intentionall in
origin), that We would be willing to censure the actions of Our Ministers
according to the success. And therefore as We do leave liberty here in
England to Our Secretary of State, to employ such persons as are likest to
discover practices (though We allow not any immediate treaties or
corespondencies with subjects of other Provinces, but where We are particularly
acquainted with it), so do We give you warrant by such ordinary means, as
may be taken by opportunity of persons to pass to and fro, under colors of
trade or traffic to foreign parts, to inform your self of the enemies
preparations in such things as belongs thereunto, that you may be able from
time to time to fashion your own present proceedings according to such
aduertisements as may be brought you, seeing you may sometimes receive them
with more expedition, and more freedom for things concerning that Realm, then
they can be usually conuaied to our Ministers here, from those whom they
employ for our service, from whence you have seen what judgment We have made
all this year of their distraction and weakness, though We stick not (in
some measure) to provide for you, though far short of that which We must
have done, if We had credited those bruites which were brought into that
Kingdom, by such as We are persuaded (if it were well observed) came out of
Spain full of device and practice to blow that abroad, which they believed not.

Next concerning your opinion for the ordering of some provincial
Gouernements, and making your residence at Athloue: for the place We know it
is situate very well, to answer all services, and (as things stand) Vlster
has need of good distribution now, as much as Connaght, wherein as We can
very well like that you do prepare for residence in that place, whereby the
limits of Our Pale may be enlarged, so We wish you, that both in Vlster and
in Connaght, you do fashion the commandment in such sort, as one Governor
have not too much Country to rule; for where men are more absolute then
ordinary, they are commonly apt to use things with less care and moderation,
so as in that matter We confess to you, that We had rather have many good
subjects employed in many places, then any one to manage too much. For the
matter of charge of your residence (because we know not what charge belongs
unto it, to make the place capable, nor how it may stand with the State of the
Town of Dublyn, which is a Port, and not to be overthrown, standing so
commodiously for passage out of England), We would have all circumstances well
considered, and then you shall receive more of Our direction.

Lastly for Tyrone, We do so much mislike to give him any grace, that has
been the only author of so much effusion of blood, and the most ungrateful
Viper to Us that raised him, and one that has so often deceived Us, both when
he has craved his pardon, and when he has received it of Us, as when We
consider how much the World will impute to Us of weakness, to show favor to
him now, as if without that we could not give an end to this Rebellion, We
still remain determined, not to give him grace in any kind. And seeing it is
unsafe for any Prince to make all faults appear venial; because every
offender will thereby become insolent, and seeing in common reason the cutting
off so many associates, must needs have left him a body without limbs, and
so not worthy Our respecting, We do very well allow of your late rejecting
him. For when We look on his manner of seeking mercy at all times, We do
still certainly conclude, that it is done upon some practice to serve some
present turn, seeing one day he only desires simple mercy for his life, and
another day falls to capitulate, neither can We see why so much depends upon
his reduction, when, for ought We know, no man can advise us, if he should
come in, and be at liberty hereafter, out of Our hands, how We could be so
assured of him, but that still We must be in doubt of him, and at the same
charges We are at, to contain him and his, notwithstanding their former
reduction, which if We must account to be at (whomsoever or whatsoever We
recover), We shall take small contentment in that victory, whereof the end
would be worse then the beginning. And therefore mistake not this Our
carnestnesse in this point, as if it proceeded from any opinion, that you have
demeaned your self otherwise, then became you in the charge committed to you:
for We would have you know for your comfort, that We approve all the courses
you have held, since you took the Sword in your whole Government, to have
been acompanied with diligence, wisdom, and good successes, and so We accept
the same at your hands. For N. N. his proceedings with the Traitor, although
We do not allow of his boldness to do such a thing without your direction,
yet We have so little reason, by the course of his service, to doubt of his
affection, as We do dispense with that error, in which We assure our selves
he meant no harm. Given under Our Signet, at Our Manor of Richmond, the
ninth day of October, 1602, in the four and fortieth year of our Reign.

The first of November, Rory O Donnell (brother to O Donnell lately dead in
Spain, whom in the Summer following you shall see created Earl of
Terconnell), having made humble suit to the Lord Deputy for her Majesty's
mercy, and finding that his Lordship made doubt of his true meaning, did by his
letters dated the first of November earnestly protest, that he did desire from
his heart, and had long desired to become a subject, though for the present he
had the command of all his brothers forces, and had received promise of help
to be sent this next Summer from Spain or Rome. And to obtain this mercy he
pleaded, that his brother went out upon his private discontent against the will
of his father and himself, being enabled by strangers to force them. That his
Grandfather by Henry the eighth for his good service to the Crown was
Knighted, and had his Country given him and his heirs by letters Pattents.
That his predecessors had long served the Crown against the (...). That
himself had often sought to become a subject, and for the same had been
imprisoned by his brother, with many dangers of his life. Lastly, that now,
as soon as he had made himself master of his brothers forces, he humbly
offered to submit himself, and of late had suffered the Governor of Connaght
to pass by him with the Queens forces, lest by fighting with them, he should
incense the State against himself and his people. And touching Neale Garue,
whereas he had a grant of part of his brothers lands, he offered to prove, that
he had since that grant agreed with his brother, to join with him against the
English forces, as soon as the Spaniards should arrive in Ireland, and be able
to keep the field. Hereupon the Lord Deputy sent him her Majesty's protection
by Captain Gore, with direction to come unto his Lordship, so soon as he
should be in Connaght, whether he intended shortly to take his journey.

About this time the Lord Deputy employed Sir Garret Moore (of English race)
into the Brenny, where all the Rebels submitted, and gladly received her
Majesty's protection: among them one of the O Relyes came with one hundred men,
and Mac Gaurons sons with fifty men, and some one thousand Cowes from
Ororke, being the greatest strength he had. And another of the O Relyes; being
refused pardon, undertook to bring in Mac Guyres head, so he might have her
Majesty's pardon, which Mac Guyre had abused her Majesty's Protection, into
which the Governor of Ballishannon had formerly received him.

At the same time Tyrone sent to the Lord Deputy by Sir Garret Moore, an
absolute submission to the Queens mercy, and wrote to the Lord Deputy, that
howsoever the showing of this submission might hinder him from receiving the
aides he expected out of Spain, yet he had sent it, in confidence that his
Lordship would deal honorably with him. This submission was in these words.

RIght Honorable Lord, your worthy endeavors in her Majesty's service, and
process of time, have sufficiently taught me, how improuidently I have
perscuered in action, whereas heretofore upon my submission I might have hoped,
her Majesty would have received me to her mercy, unto which action I was
enforced for saueguard of my life only, which was indirectly sought for by her
Majesty's officers, as is known to sundry persons of credit here, and her
subjects; and that before I was proclaimed traitor, I never sent letters into
Spain, or received any fro^thence, though afterward I was animated to
continue in Action upon hope of Spanish aid, and promise of many confederates,
of both which being disappointed, my estate is greatly decreased, and though I
might perhaps be able to hold out for a time, yet am I weary of the course I
held, and do much repent me of the same, most humbly and with a penitent heart
desiring and wishing to be reconciled to my Prince, and to be received to her
Majesty's mercy, whom I am right sorry I have so much offended and provoked,
and yet I know that her Majesty's mercy is greater then mine offenses, the
rather that at the first I did not wilfully oppose my self against her
Majesty, but for safety of my life was driven into action as aforesaid, and for
my continuance therein I submit my self to her Majesty's mercy and grace,
acknowledging her Majesty alone to be my natural Prince, and my self her
unworthy subject: but if her Highness will vouchsafe, of her accustomed Grace,
to grant not only pardon to me, my kinsemen and followers, and unto mine
adherents, in their own names, and upon their several submissions, but also
to restore me and them to our pristinate blood and possessions, I will from
henceforth both renounce all other Princes for her, and serve her Highness the
residue of my life, humbly requesting, even of your Honor, now that you have
brought me so low, to remember I am a Nobleman, and to take compassion on me,
that the overthrow of my house and posterity may be prevented by your good
means and honorable care toward her Majesty for me, which with all humility
I desire and will accept: And for the better doing hereof, if your Lordship do
mislike any of the Articles which I did send unto you, I pray your Lordship to
appoint either some of the privy Counsel, or some Gentlemen of worth, to
confer with me; and your Lordship shall find me conformable to reform them.

The twelfth of November 1602. Subscribed Hugh Tyrone.


The thirteenth day the Lord Deputy was advertised that Captain Tyrrell upon a
mutiny between him and the Rebels of Kerry, had left Mounster, and having some
six hundred men with him, was coming back into Lenoster, and it was thought
that Tyrone would send him to Orowrke, to assist him in the defense of his
Country.

About the eighteenth of November his Lordship began his intended iourny into
Connaght, and by the way this following letter from Tyrone, to Oconnor Sligo,
being intercepted, was sent to his Lordship.

WE commend us unto you Oconnor Sligo, we have received your letter, and as
formerly we have written unto you, we have remained in Fermannagh welnigh this
quarter of a year, and have often written unto you, and to Odonnels son, and
requested you to come and see us near Logh Earne, concerning our Counsels
either for peace or war, and neither of you came thither to meet us: We
thought that you and O Donnels son, and Ororke, and O Connor Roe, and our
selves, as many of us as are of our faction, would have maintained war for a
great time, and to that end, we came to these parts, and have Forgone so many
of our own people, as have not risen with us: But seeing that O Rorke (if it
be true) and O Connor have received protection, and that every one does make
peace for himself, we may all easily be deemed men broken, and not
substantial in war: but concerning our counsel and advice which you write
for, our advice unto you is neither to make peace nor cessation, but that peace
or cessation which shall be made by all our consents and agreements; and if you
do otherwise, stand to the hazard your selves, for you shall not have my
consent thereunto.

Subscribed, Oneale.


The Lord Deputy took the foresaid journey into Connaght, as well to take
order with the Rebels in action, which had sent messengers to Dublyn in their
names to crave the Queens mercy, as also to view the Town of Galloway, and to
consider how the descent of foreign enemies might best be prevented, by
building of a Fort upon the Haven. Before his Lordships coming, Sir Oliver
Lambert the Governor, with the Forces under him, had made a journey, wherein
he quite banished Mac William out of the County Maio. His Lordship having made
some stay in the Pale, came to Athlone the second of December, and lay in the
Castle, being very strong, and divided from the Town by a bridge over the
River Shannon, where the Governor and the Counsel for that Province made
their residence.

Here the foureteenth of December, O Connor Sligo, and Rowry Odonnell, (brother
to the Traitor O Donnell lately dead in Spain) two Rebels of greatest power in
those parts, came to his Lordship, and made their humble submission to her
Majesty. O Connor Sligo alleged many things in his own excuse, as the manner
of O Donnels taking him and keeping him in prison, and submitted himself to
her Majesty's mercy. Rowry O Donnell, albeit he had under him all his brothers
followers and creaghts, yet did he both simply and absolutely submit himself
to her Majesty's Grace, without standing upon any conditions, but signifying
his readiness to deliver such pledges as should be demanded of him, all such
Castles (as Ballymote, and others in the County of Sligo) which he had gotten
into his possession, and to do any thing that he might receive her Majesty's
favor, alleging further that his Father and Grandfather had been true
seruiters, that he himself, with the priuity of Sir Coniers Clifford, then
Governor, had resolved to have served her Majesty against his brother, but
upon the discovery of his purpose, he was kept in irons, (a matter well known
to be true), and now most franckly offering his service, (if he might be
received), either here or beyond the Seas, wheresoever her Majesty would be
pleased to employ him, which manner of carriage, proceeding from a man of good
spirit, active and wise, induced the L. Deputy to receive him, and did in some
sort move all the Counsel to pity his case, that he did no sooner submit
himself, and the rather because they did foresee how noteable an instrument he
might be made, to bridle the insolency of Sir Neale Garue, (which was grown
intolerable), of whom they thought he might be the best curb that could be
devised. And therefore they resolved at their coming to Dublin, to send for
the said Sir Neale and this Competitor, and with the advice of the rest of the
Counsel, seriously to consider how to provide for, and to dispose of them
both, wherein albeit they purposed to give unto Sir Neale the benefit of her
Majesty's gracious promise, yet did they think it a thing very expedient for
her service and the settling of Tirconnell, that some competent portions in
Tirconnel should be allotted to this Gentleman, in which point they by letters
humbly prayed the Lords in England to move her sacred Majesty to send unto them
her Highness warrant for taking such a final order between the^, as by the
general advise and consent of this Counsel should be thought fittest for her
Majesty's service.

The Lord Deputy proceeding on his journey to Galloway, kept his Christmas
there, and in that Town, all the Rebels of that Province (the Flahertyes, the
Mac Dermotts of the Courlewes, Connor Roe, and diverse others) submitted
themselves, and were received, and so for the present this Province was brought
to quietness.

Only the proud, insolent, faithless Bryan, Ororke, notwithstanding his
former humble message sent to the L. Deputy touching his desire to be received
to mercy, absented himself, and having drawn unto him Tyrones Mac Guyre
(whom for his deceitful and treacherous dealing, the Lord Deputy had banished
out of Fermannagh, and exposed to prosecution), and the Traitor Tyrell (lately
come out of Mounster) and trusting to the Fastness of his Country, persisted
in his Rebellion. And therefore, albeit his Lordship did foresee the manifold
difficulties which must grow in his prosecution, yet did he hold it very
necessary to take the present opportunity to scourge him several ways, before
the Spring, and before his foreign hopes might give him any further
encouragement. And for this end, as he had appointed a proportion of victuals
and other necessaries, to be presently brought from Lymrick to Athlone, so now
he resolved to furnish Sir Oliver Lambert with an Army to surprise his Country
Leytrim, and to take it in to her Majesty's hands. Sir Henry Follyot also,
with the assistance of Rowrie O Donnell, (who already had done some service
against O Rorke) was appointed from Sligo, and those parts, to enter into his
Country, and his Lordship intended presently to raise a third Army, to be sent
from the Pale to annoy him, by which course his Lordship hoped, this Rebel
should not be able long to subsist in his pride and contempt.

The submission of the foresaid Rebels was made by each of them in writing, and
in these words following:

First, I do acknowledge Elizabeth by the grace of God Queen of England,
France, and Ireland to be the only true, absolute and Sovereign Lady of this
Realm of Ireland, and of every part, and of all the people thereof, unto whose
gracious mercy I do humbly submit my self, my lands and goods; and withal
faithful repentance for my unnatural disobedience unto her Royal Majesty,
do most earnestly implore her mercy and pardon, for my self, and such of my
followers as with me have been seduced to this wicked Rebellion.

Further, I do renounce all and any manner of obedience unto any other Power or
Potentate, which I ow only to my said dread Sovereign Elizabeth, and utterly
abjure any dependancy and adherence to any of her enemies whatsoever, or
disloyal subjects, and do promise, swear and vow, from henceforth to live in
her subjection in all duty and obedience, and to use my best endeavors, to the
uttermost of my power, to withstand and confound any enemy either foreign or
domestical, that shall attempt any thing against the sacred person or estate
of her Majesty, or to the hurt of her faithful and obedient subjects, and
especially, and namely, I do renounce (as before) and promise my endeavors (as
aforesaid) against the King of Spain, and the Arch-Traytor the Earl of Tyrone.

All this as I do upon my salvation swear to perform sincerely, so if I do
herein break my oath, I do acknowledge my self not only to be worthy of all
infamy and extreme punishment, but to be ever after accounted unworthy the name
of a Christian, or the society of men, to the which as I have unfeignedly
sworn, so I do now in witness hereof set to my hand.

In Christmas holidayes his Lordship viewed the Town of Galloway, and judging
it a place of great importance to be preserved from being possessed by any
foreign enemy, he gave present direction to finish that Fort, the building
whereof was already begun, in a place well chosen, both to command the Haven,
and to defend the Town from foreign invasion. During his Lordships abode in
Galloway, he received this following letter from the Lords in England.

AFter our right hearty commendations to your good Lordship, her Majesty has
heard of your whole letter, brought by Sir Henry Dauers, bearing date the
tenth of November, in answer to one of her Majesty's of the ninth of October,
wherein you do prevent (in some things) such directions as were digested into
a dispatch ready to be signed and sent you, as namely, in the matter of
exchange for one point (and so of some others) wherein her Majesty having
heard the Apology of you the Treasurer being (as she is, ever) ready to
interpret graciously, those actions which are well meant, though they succeed
not always as is wished, though she had given us charge to write much more
particularly in that matter, yet now has been pleased to command us only to
let you know Master Treasurer, that (although you shall never need to excuse
your integrity, because she never doubted it) yet she can not free you and your
Ministers from such ouersights, as have increased the burden of this Exchange.
For though one part of your answer is, that new things must be settled with
plausible circumstances at the entry, yet these are her own words, that you
should not have thought it new (long ago) to have stopped that current, when
you saw it carried so much contrary to the true meaning of the Proclamation,
even now that the institution has been on foot almost two years, and that
such a sum of money is returned back again by you, when the issue of the
new coin has bin no greater, seeing (that excepted which spends in the
lendings of the Army) a small quantity has been otherwise dispersed in the
Kingdom, so as surely it may not be denied, but many of these Bilies might
have been kept from the Bank, if your deputies had been as careful as they
ought. For although Captains and Soldiers, and Merchants (carrying and
delivering necessaries for the Army) were by her Majesty's institution intended
to be relieved in their reasonable and just demands, yet who could ever think,
that her Majesty ever intended, that Merchants should have been suffered to
sell those Merchandise for 300l. there, which cost them but one 100l. here, and
then turn that 300l. upon the Exchange, or that Captains and officers would
make over four times more money by one bill, then their whole entertainment
comes to in a year. And therefore foresight hereof (by the experience dearly
bought) makes her Majesty now resolve in her last order, that she will not
allow any exchange, but only to the Army, and such as do relieve the same,
and that she means from henceforth shall be justly answered, how soever it
may be, that some seditious persons, misliking that these unreasonable Bills
have been looked into (and so some suspense of payment made) may speak
scandalously, either of the past or future, when already there is delivered to
your Deputy Master Treasurer, ten or twelve thousand pounds, and more shall
follow after, toward the discharge. And now to come to that which follows,
and does require expedition, your LP shall understand, that the greatness of her
Majesty's Army being such, as she cannot bear it up, without extreme prejudice
to her state and Kingdom, she has commanded us hereby to let you know, that
she is not satisfied with this abatement of 1000, but does command you with
all possible expedition, to reduce the Army to 12000 foot and 1000 horse, a
matter which she finds good to do in her wisdom, not only for the
necessity of the expense, but out of this judgment, that she shall be
sufficiently able to provide for the defense against foreign power, before
the storm shall fall, without which occasion, considering your own relation
of the weakness and desperate estate of the rebel, with the desire of the
rest to come from him, she persuades her self that this List (well compounded
out of the Bands that are cashered) will be strong enough against any home
rebellion, and so much the rather, if you make it as much English as you can,
by ridding as many of the Irish as you think meet, in all which, for the
persons and places, she referres it wholly to your own best judgment. And
now that we are speaking of the Army, we think it fit to remember unto you,
that it is a great error in the Officers of the Ministers of that Kingdom,
that the Masters (which is one of the principal keys of her Majesty's charge)
is no better ordered. The fraud whereof does evidently appear, seeing that
Army which is kept upon such a height in List and payment, is known and
confessed (even by the Captains themselves) to be so extremely defective in
their numbers; for although we are not ignorant, that multiplicitie of
Garrisons hinder the possibility of exact Musters, yet there is difference
between tolerable imperfections, and those gross negligences which are used
by the Ministers of that service, whereof the World is apt sometimes to accuse
those, that should (both here and there) censure the offenders, as those that
do commit the faults un punished; Herein we entreat your LP and that Counsel
to make our case your own, and then to consider, whether we can well discharge
our duties to her Majesty, when (in time of so great an expense) we are not
able to show her any manner of account of her Army by any authentical
certificate, more then every Captain or passenger can relate unto us, no not
for the expense of eight or ten months time. In which point of the Musters we
think it not amiss to say something to you, what we conceive concerning the
Checque upon apparel. First, the order set down very carefully and at large
for the manner of the delivery and the Checque to be raised upon the apparel,
is not observed, the due observation whereof would advantage the checque of the
apparel very much. For such soldiers as are sent from us thoroughly
apparrelled oftentimes have apparel there again (at the time of their
delivery) given them, especially those that are dispersed into Bands, to fill
them up, whereby we see her Majesty's double charge, though special warning
has been given thereof from hence. And daily able men are suffered to come
over hither (as of late ten of those that were set out of the County of
Lincoln in the late leauy), and by the examination taken here lately, it is
proved, that money is given to procure them pasports, and none of those
soldiers of the late leauies do stand her Majesty and the Country (before
they arrive there) in less then six pound a man, The order is not observed
that has been prescribed, that no soldier should be discharged but by Pass
from the Lord Deputy, Principal Governor, or chief Commanders; for daily
diverse come over with Passes of their Captains, and diverse are sent away
together in one pass (sometimes to the number of thirty) and few of them
maimed, and those bring no other passes then from the Mayor where they are set
on land here. In all which, and other particular duties though the Muster
Master, Comptroller, and such other officers may be thought to be only
responsable in such cases, wherewith they are trusted), yet the authority which
your Lordship has, and the means you have to distinguish how and when things
of that nature may be in some good sort reformed, and the persons offending
therein being in your eye to behold both them and their doing, and in your
power to rule and punish them, as you find cause, does impose upon you thus
much either to call upon them, and to chastise them, or else to deliver your
own judgment, which when we shall receive from you, and thereof inform her
Majesty, it would include your care and ours to have it otherwise, and would
satisfy the expectation and discourse of this time, when her Majesty's
subjects (being bitten with accidental charges of the wars) begin now to
think, that much of that which her Majesty imposes here at home, is not
necessary, but rather voluntary, or for lack of care and providence in the
expense, unprofitably wasted, especially now they hear of nothing but
victories and improbabillity of foreign power, and yet find no difference
between the present state of her Majesty's charge, and that which she was at
when there was a Spanish Army in that Kingdom. We have also thought good to let
your Lordship know, how great confusion it breeds in her Majesty's expense,
that those of her Counsel there (while your Lordship has been wholly
conversant in millitarie causes) have not called to their answer, nor
(according to their desert) have punished such Commissaries of victuals there,
as have made private gain to them selves, by sale of the victual committed to
their charge, without warrant from us, or direction from the Purueors here
(their superiors), whereof from you we have received both advertisement and
mislike. But especially for that you of the Counsel there have never called
upon nor strictly charged the Commissaries to bring in their accounts, in so
much as there remains yet vnaccounted for (for any thing we know) the whole
charge of those victuals, which we have carefully sent over, and whereof we
have received certificate of the safe arrival, for the space of almost two
years, of which Mass (if the same be reckoned) your Lordship shall find it
little less then the value of one hundred threescore thousand pound, whereof
your Lordship may thus conclude, that either the sums defalked are great
(which remain in the Treasurers hands) or else the remain in specie is so
great with the Commissaries, as her Majesty might have spared the provisions
lately sent over, by which the Treasure has been so mightily exhausted; or
else the wastes must be such, as are not only to be rejected in the accounts,
but the Authors thereof severely to be punished. A matter wherein we write
the more earnestly to your Lordship, (from whom we would have all exception
taken, that we assure our selves, you deserve not,) because we hear that a
great part of the waste shall be excused, sometimes by the auowing that it
has been cast on their hands, because the soldier has not been enjoined to
take it, and that some other time they have been commanded to remove it, and
carry it from place to place, by which they pretend great loss; and (which of
all things is most subject to suspicion in them), that it is taken for a good
warrant in Ireland, to allow of any wastes, for which a Commissarie can produce
a certifficate from a poor Mayor, Sovereign or Bailiffe of a Town or Port,
which how casily it is obtained, your Lordships own wisdom can best judge,
who are so well acquainted with the poverty and condition of that place.
Further, because no one thing is more heavy to the Queen and the Realm, then
the matter of victualling (wherein it is no way possible for us to do more
here), and that we perceive by your letter of the two and twentieth of
September, amongst other things, that your Lordship is not well satisfied in
diverse things concerning the victuals, we think it not amiss to handle some
particular points of that matter, which we wish all those of the Counsel (and
all other interested in the care of those things) may well understand, because
you may the better (another time) answer those arguments, with which they
seek to satisfy you, when in truth (if they examine themselves), whatsoever
they lack, it proceeds most from their own default. First, whereas in the
letter aforesaid you note, how slowly such victuals do arrive there, as have
been provided here upon request made by your Lordship, we answer, that
Newcomen (whom you sent over) is able to give you satisfaction, that presently
upon his coming over hither, and perusal of your Lordships demands, there
was no delay used by us, to satisfy you in such sort as might be to your
Lordships contentment, and to serve the Army and Garrisons, and (because
Newcomen was not only made privy, but did both think the provision appointed
to be sufficient to answer your Lordships desire, and the use of the Army and
Garrisons, and is one of the undertakers for those provisions of victuals) he is
much to blame if he have not particularly discharged that trust. True it is,
that we conceive you have cause to marvel, that in so great distance of time,
so small quantity of so great a mass as was provided, has arrived there,
which if it has happened by contrariety of winds only, then must your
Lordship be satisfied, and we excused. But howsoever it be, by the coppie of
the Contracts (...) unto your Lordship by us, with the charge the victuals did
amount unto, we doubt not but you rest thoroughly satisfied of our care, and
leave us rather cause to suspect, that our former letters written to your
Lordship concerning the victualing causes, have not come to your hands, or that
the contents of them are out of your remembrance. For in them, namely, that of
the fourth of August last, we did not only send your Lordship (as formerly
we did of all the rest) a coppie of the contract made by the victualers, but
did satisfy you in diverse things whereof we do find you do complain, which
by our former letters we delivered and signified at large, and we both remember
well the things you noted, and the course we held for your satisfaction. To
which we ad nothing more, but do repeat unto you, that we then did say in
that point, that we find it a great fault in the Commissaries of the victuals
there, that they do never inform you of the arrival of victuals in those
parts, nor upon what contract they are provided, which would well become both
the Commissarie and Surueior of the victuals; for by many letters sent from him
to us, we are particularly certified both of the victuals that arrive there,
and upon what contract they are furnished. Besides, the victualers here do
protest, that they do provide no victuals at all, but for the use of the
Army, and to furnish the contracts, so as what quantities soever are sent
thither, the same are to be taken for her Majesty's use, and to be accounted
to furnish the contracts, until they be complete, and then the overplus is
to pass to serve the next contract. For it may fall out, that such victuals as
are sent to one place, may by contrariety of winds arrive in another Province
or Port, which now (as the Purueiours do inform us) has of late happened to
one of their Barks driven into Cork, and there stayed by the Governor, which
should have come to Galloway, and so that Town thereby disfurnished, and those
that are sent sooner from hence may arrive later, and sometimes miscarry. But
the chiefest matter that does breed scruple, doubt, and matter of abuse, is
that there are not appointed there in the usual Ports, where there are
Magizines (as in Dublin, Carlingford, Cork, Lymricke, Carickfergus,
Loughfoyle, and Galloway) some sufficient persons, who with the Mayor and
Officers of the Ports, may ouer-see the vnlading of the victuals from time to
time, and take knowledge of the goodness of the victuals, and the quantities
of the same, and to charge the Surueyors of the victuals to perform their
duties likewise, and to be informed of the fame, and certify you thereof,
wherein, or in any other sort, if any abuse be committed by the Commissaries,
it is both the earnest request of the Undertakers, and our absolute desire, and
that which your Lordships place does require, to see some exemplary punishment
inflicted upon them for their evil carriage, which may and ought to be
reformed. So as for an answer to that letter, we must still refer you to our
former letters, namely, those of the fourth of August last, forasmuch as is to
be performed by us here, who see and hear with others eyes and ears in that
place, and not our own.

And where we do understand by your late letters also, that the Commissaries
and Agents for the Undertakers, do refuse to take beeues at twenty shillings
a piece, the victualers here do not only deny the same to be done by their
priuitie, but earnestly beseech us (as often they have done) that they may have
them at that price, and in our letters sent by Necowmen, at their entreatie we
did require, that your Lordship would be pleased to take order, they might
have at reasonable rates such beeues as were taken from the enemy, which suit
they do renew, and do assure us, they will be glad to receive them at that
rate. And forasmuch as many great and heavy accounts are to be taken, before
either reckonings can be cleared, or faults clearly distinguished, her
Majesty has resolved immediately after Christmas, to send over some well
chosen Commissioners, both for integrity and experience in all things in this
nature, to examine and survey the state of her Majesty's receipts and issues,
To whom, as she nothing doubts, but your Lordship (whose zeal and care
appears so greatly in her Majesty's service) will give the best support which
you can possibly afford them, so her Majesty requires your Lordship now upon
conference with the Counsel there, to appoint a day for all those inferior
persons, who have any thing to do with the matters of accounts receipts, and
expense, to come to Dublin, to the intent that those which shall be sent over,
may not loose their time, by attending their repair from remote places, nor
your Lordship (whose eyes and judgment will give great light to that
Commission) may be otherwise distracted by any new iournies, or prosecutions,
to which the growing on of the year may inuit you. For the present desire you
have that some Commissioners should be sent over for the passing of some lands
to the Submitties, with such reseruations as are fittest for her Majesty, she
means presently to send over authorite accordingly, liking very well (amongst
othings) that you intend to cut off all dependancy upon the Irish Lords, which
is one very necessary consideration. Lastly, because your Lp and the Counsel
may know, that although it is not to be looked for at the hands of any Prince,
that they should unnecessarily keep Companies in pay for the relief of any
Captain, yet because her Majesty in her own disposition intends nothing
less, then to neglect those seruitors of hers, whom you shall testify to have
deserved extraordinarily, being like to suffer penury by this cashering, she
has willed us to let you know, that she is pleased to continue to every such
Captain, and so many other Officers as you think necessary, their ordinary
pay; whereby they may be enabled to maintain themselves there about you, for
many good purposes, until some other occasion offer itself to employ them
elsewhere, or some Company there fall within your gift, to confer it upon
them, which being done, that entertainment may cease. And now that you
perceive her Majesty's resolution, whereof she has much hastened the sending
away unto you, (in which respect we cannot so particularly touch all things as
we would); we must now conclude, that howsoever her Majesty's pleasure is,
that those errors of subordinate Ministers in these matters of accounts and
reckonings, should be thus mentioned to your Lordship and that Counsel, that
is only to make it appear, how serious a reformation is expected from you:
And though she sees how fearful your Lordship is, without a more particular
commandment (what numbers to diminish) to have made so large an abatement as
she commands you, not knowing how soon you might have cause to use them for
her service, yet her Majesty is so far from imputiug it to any error in
judgment, or lack of zeal in you to her service, as she confesses she
has been too blame for not commanding it, and not you for not doing it, whose
care, toil, and peril, as they have been more then any Governor has
undergone before you, so may your Lordship take this comfort also, that the
success which it has pleased God to give you, does make your self an
acceptable Minister to your Prince and Country, and makes all us very glad
(both for the public, to which we owe our first duties, and for your own
private, who shall ever find it in all things fit for us to perform toward
you). From the Court at White Hall the 22 of November 1602.

A List of the Army as it stood the first of January, 1602.
Horse.

The Lord Deputy, 100. The Lord President, 100. The Earl of Thomond, 50. The
Earl of Clanrickard, 50. Sir Henry Dockwra, 100. Sir Arthur Chichester, 25.
Master Marshall, 50. Sir William Godolphin, 50. Sir Francis Stafford, 50. Sir
Garret Moore, 25. Sir Henry Harrington, 25. Sir Oliver Lambert, 25. Sir Oliver
S. John's, 25. Sir Richard Greame, 50. Sir Edward Harbert, 12. Sir Francis Rush,
12. Captain John Iephson, 100. Sir Henry Folliot, 50. Captain William Taffe,
50. Captain Flemming, 25. Captain Geo. Greame, 14.

Horse 1000.

Foot.

The Lord Deputy, 200. The Lord President, 200. The Earl of Kildare, 150. The
Earl of Thomond, 200. The Earl of Clanrickard, 150. The Earl of Ormond, 150.
The Lord Audley, 150. Sir George Carry, Treasurer, 100. Sir Henry Dockwra, 150.
Sir Oliver Lambert, 150. Sir Arthur Chichester, 200. Sir Kichard Wingfeild,
150. Sir Francis Stafford, 200. Sir Oliver S. John's, 200. Sir Foulke Conway,
150. Sir Samuel Bagnol, 150. Sir Richard Meryson, 200. Sir Garret Moore, 100.
Sir Francis Shane, 100. Sir Christopher S. Laurence, 150. Sir Henry Follyot,
150. Sir George Bourcher, 100. Sir Francis Rush, 150. Sir James Fitz Pierce,
100. Sir Tho. Lofties, 100. Sir Henry Power, 150. Sir Edward Harbert, 100. Sir
William Fortescue, 150. Sir Charles Willmott, 150. Sir Richard Peircy, 150. Sir
Edward Fitz Gerald, 100. Sir Francis Barkely, 150. Sir Ben. Berry, 150. Sir
Mat. Morgan, 150. Sir Tib. Dillon, 100. Sir Tho. Bourke, 150. Sir Geo.
Thornton, 100. Sir Garret Haruey, 150. Sir Ed. Wingfeild, 200. Captain Edw.
Blaney, 150. Capt. Tobey Cawfeild, 150. Capt. Josias Bodley, 150. Capt. Hen.
Atherton, 150. Capt. Edward Treuer, 100. Capt. Ric. Hansard, 200. Capt.
Ferdinand Freckleton, 100. Capt. Francis Roe, 150. Capt. Lau. Esmond, 150.
Capt. Tho. Williams, 150. Capt. Lyonell Ghest, 150. Capt. Tho. Roper, 150.
Capt. Tho. Rotheram, 150. Capt. Ralph Constable, 100 Capt. Ralph Bingley, 100.
Capt. Tho. Badbey, 100. Capt. Ellis Flyod, 100. Capt. Lewis O. rell, 100. Capt.
Ellis Jones, 150. Capt. Edw. Leigh, 100. Capt. Edw. Basset, 100 Capt. Tho.
Coach, 150. Capt. W. Winser, 150. Capt. Roger Orme, 100. Capt. Nich. Pinner,
100 Capt. Ioh. Sidney 100. Cap. W. Stafford, 100. Cap. Ralph Sidley, 100. Capt.
Bassel Brook, 100. Capt. 10 Vaughen, 100. Capt. H. Sackford, 100. Capt. Tho.
Phillips, 100. Capt. Roger Langford, 100. Capt. I. Phillips, 100. Capt. H.
Malby, 100. Capt. Tho. Bourke, 100. Capt. Tibott Bourke, 100. Cap. Rich. Hensle
for Pioners, 100. Sir Francis Kinsmill, 150. Capt. Geo. Kinsmill, 100. Capt.
Eostock, 100. Capt. Sam Harrison, 100. Capt. James Blonnt, 100. Capt. H.
Skipwith, 100. Capt. Edw. Morryes, 100. Capt. Edw. Fisher, 100. Capt. H. Heart,
100. Cap. Abrey York, 100. Cap. Cher. Coote, 100. Capt. Gawen Haruey, 100.
Capt. Dorington, 100. Capt. Holcroft, 100. Capt. H. Bakley, 150. Capt. Tho.
Boys, 100. Capt. Edw. Leg, 100. Capt. Dennis Dale, 50. Left in Ward at
Enishcorthy, 20.

Foot 12, 370.

The fourth of January, Sir Henry Dockwra Governor of Loughsoyle forces, wrote
to the Lord Deputy this following letter.

RIght Hon. and my very good Lord; the argument of this my letter shall be
only the testification of my private duty, and a little discourse touching
Neale Garue, and those Irish, whom I must freely confess I am more to seek in
what sort to govern and use, to the benefit of her Majesty's service, and
discharge of my own duty, then in any other point of the whole business.
Neales first coming without compulsion, his bringing us to Liffer, his
services many times commendably performed in his own person, the furtherance
he gave us for planting at Dunagall, the help he gave our men in their
greatest wants, when O Donnell besieged them, the loss of his brother in that
service, the trial of his fidelity, by standing firm in so dangerous a time,
and lastly the goods he forsook of his own to serve the Queen for half pay,
are arguments neither untruly gathered, nor unjustly alleged to make much in
his favor. On the otherside, his extreme pride, ambition, and infatiable
couetousness, his want of any knowledge when he is well dealt with all, his
importunity in all things, right or wrong, his continual begging, and
unprofitable wasting of whatsoever he gets, his aptness to desperate and
unspeakable discontent for trifles of no worth, his facillitie to be misliked
by men of best quality, and his underhand iugling (which is too apparent by
many Indices) with the Rebels, he is truly to be charged with all, as the
other good services are to be acknowledged. And yet to discountenance him, and
challenge him of those faults, were to raise a new war, and to drive the
whole Country (in an unseasonable time) to an obdurate alienation of mind from
all English Government. To discharge his people, we shall find a singular
want, for spiall of many things which they give us light of, so should we
likewise for gathering of preys, whenever we go a journey, and besides the
Arms they have got amongst us, and the charge they have put her Majesty unto,
the one would hardly be recovered out of their hands, and the other not
unworthily thought to be an ill piece of service to make utterly lost. Again,
on the other side they give continual aduertisements, as well from us to the
Rebels, as from them to us. Forts or places of strength alone by themselves,
they neither will nor dare abide in, without help. To make their peace with O
Donnel, they shall uer find difficulty. To join with the Spaniards (if any
come near to those parts) they may if they will, and will undoubtedly if the
be never so little discontented. In these inconveniences on the one side, and
necessity on the other, I see not (in my judgment) any better course to be
held, then to temporize somewhat, to feed their humors a while, though it be
chargeable to the Queen, and to mingle lenity and severity so, as some be
punished for these notorious abuses, when they are apparently proved (let him
rage and storm while he will), and others winked at, whose faults are apparent,
and yet more closely carried from direct and manifest proofs, by testimony of
witnesses, and therwithall to get what by fair means and by force (as I see
best occasion to temper them) the best pledges he has for himself, and the
best of his people into my hands, and being once possessed of them, to keep
them till I see greater cause of assurance of his fidelity, or at the least a
less occasion of suspicion, which course I am already entered into, under a
good color, as having taken his second son (the elder being at Dublin)
together with two more of the chiefest men about him, with his own consent, in
the name of pledges for others, but in truth most of all for himself. I am not
ignorant but he will grievously complain against me for those courses, and
many of our own Nation will whet him forward, some for want of knowledge of
the truth, some blinded with private malice against my own person, and
whatsoever shall happen amiss upon cause of his coffeehouse, will be
imputed to me, and the corruption of my dealings, but I fly to your honor for
succor, and gladly submit my self to a better course, if I may be instructed;
for such is the state of the business between me and him, without
partiallitie or malice, both upon the duty of my allegiance, and peril of my
soul.

Together with this letter, Sir Henry Dockwra sent to his Lordship the copy of
the following letter he had lately written to the Lords in England.

MOst Honorable Lords; the iourny mentioned in my former letters, and intended
upon Ocane, I set forward on, before Captain Vaughan departed the River, having
first shipped all necessary provisions for planting a Garrison at Colrane, and
seen them down the Lough, with a fair wind to carry them thither, before I
set forth. How be it having passed through the Country, and effected in a
manner all things to my own desire, being come unto the place, I found not the
ship nor any appearance of news what was become of her, which the Master
excuses, but so, as I leave to your Lordships to judge, whether sufficiently
or no, this bearer being instructed with the full state of the cause. The sum
and effect of that journey was, that notwithstanding this, I sent down
Captain Orme with two hundred English and the Irish of Enishlowen, to pass
over at the Green Castle by water, to the end that he entering at one end of
the Country, and I at the other, the prey might the more assuredly be taken,
or at least the more spoil done, my self went ouerland, passed two paces
without resistance, entered the third, beat them from defense of it, set fire
on their Camp (containing 30 great houses all full of Corn), took Ocanes
brother prisoner, that had before perfidiously revolted from the Queens
service (whom I sacrificed in the place), and so passed by, not through the
Wood, because it was no ordinarily passage, and a fair way did lie by the Sea
side hard by, so came into the Plains and heart of the Country, burning and
spoiling, till I met that night with Captain Orme, at a place of strength
agreed upon between us, who coming a way least looked for, lighted upon the
killing of some few of the people, and a small prey of fifty Cowes and five
hundred sheep, for with the rest (for all his sudden coming), they made away,
and got to the Mountains. For four days space together afterward, I divided
the forces into three bodies, and trauersed first about, and then through the
Country, spoiling and burning such a quantity of Corn, and number of houses,
as I should hardly have believed so small a circuit of ground could have
afforded, if I had not seen it. And because I failed of meeting the ship, I
held my course toward Tyrone, intending (all under one journey) to have wasted
and spoiled as high as Dungannon, but that I was prevented by a sudden thaw of
weather, after a long frost and snow (which raised the Rivers, that with much
difficulty I could recover home. But being returned, I met with letters from
Dunagal, aduertising me of their great want of victual, by reason that the
ship (which I had a month before dispatched away with all provisions) was not
then arrived. Whereupon (having diverse other reasons also to draw me that way)
I resolved to make my next journey thither, and to settle and establish the
Garrison of Ballyshannon. So with one hundred Gartons load of Biscuit and
munition, I passed unto them, and happily relieved their greatest wants in a
most seasonable time. At my coming I found there was a ship from Galloway
arrived within the harbor of Calbeg, and during the time I was there, the other
that I had sent from hence, came also into the same harbor, but by extremity of
weather (which I was ancie witness unto) neither of the^ both was able to put
in, either to Ballishannon or Dunnagall, all the time I was there, which was
twenty days, so that the further fruit of my coming thither, consisted only
in this, that I caused Neale Garue to make a cutting upon the Country for
Cowes, wherewith the garrison was plentifully relieved, went to Ashrawe, and
there left four companies of foot and fifty horse, which I carried from
thence, besides those that were at Dunagall before settled, then there got in a
sufficient quantity of Corn, to feed the Horse near all the Winter long, fet
in turffe and old houses for fuel, by the commodity of the garrous which I
carried with me, saw the situation of Bundroise and Dulike, and all that part
of the Country, and so returned to Dunagall, where I took in Mac Swine
Fannaght, and some others of the Country, for whom Neale Garue had undertaken
and delivered in pledges of his own, such as in truth I made choice of, more
to bridle himself, then for any great assurance I think they are for the
other. Howbeit, the state of things stood in such terms, chiefly by reason of
the extreme foulness of weather, that I was not altogether unwillingly drawn
to accept of their subjection upon slender assurance, whom (had the time
served, to compel to other conditions) I should hardly have dealt withal, or
given care unto in any sort. But this is the advantage which I think my self
to have gained by taking them in, that Neale Garues importunity is satisfied
(who if his humors be altogether restrained, will undoubtedly prove a
desperate Rebel), himself settled in full possession of his own Country (if
he can keep it) furnished with means to feed his people of his own, which
before I could not be rid of, but he would wring the Queens store, and besides
be always complaining (as he did still) of his half pay, in which
notwithstanding he is now less to be hearkened unto, for that the just and
reasonable color which he had before, of being banished from all private
means of his own to maintain them by, is clearly taken away, and further an
opportunity is gained, that those men which had played false before, being
returned home, with all their goods, thinking themselves safe and sure under
protection, may upon very justifiable reasons hereafter be looked into, and
seized on, when they least expect, and can worst avoid it, whose goods by any
other means would never be got, but concealed or done away amongst the
Rebels, where we shall never find them. What other benefit is had by settling
that Garrison as it is, your Lordships may easily gather out of your own
knowledge, to which the bearer is able to add somewhat, as having lived a good
space of time thereabout, and going furnished with many instructions and
remembrances for that purpose, who will also lay down unto your Lordships the
state of the Army, as being a Commissarie, and the necessaries requisite to
that place, as being a man specially chosen by the Captains, and in that kind
of business requested to labor and solicit in their behalf. The Castle of
Ballishannon I could not take, by reason the piece of Artillery was not come,
nor any manner of provision (so much as a boarde) to be had for the purpose.
But all things are now sent away, which the winds serving fitly to bring
thither, that business will be easily effected. But your Lordship must
understand, that the Bar at the coming in, is so shallow (whatsoever some
vain men will talk to the contrary), and the rode so open, without being
covered with any manner of land, as by mere necessity the ships that shall be
employed in bringing any thing to it, must be of very small burden if they
get in, and yet, if any weather arrise, forced (whether they be great or small)
to make the place of their vnlading at Dunagall, from whence it must be
carried to the other place by land, so that both the charge and trouble thereof
will be much more then was expected, or then I could ever be rightly informed
of, till I saw it. I have now assembled the Forces, to make another journey
into Tyrone, but in so unfit a season of weather, as it yet holds, as I shall
be forced to suspend it, till some alteration make the Rivers and high ways
more passable.

The next after that, which I mean (God willing) without question to
undertake, is to accomplish my first intent of settling at Colraine, which I
know my self able to perform, though the whole force of the Rebels should be
returned before I undertake it. But then shall our Forces be so far extended
and divided asunder, as more then the bare keeping of those holds we are
possessed of, we shall not be able to do, till a new supply of men arrive,
which in my opinion should come most seasonably toward the ending of the next
month, in that the Cowes, (which now their Corn is gone, is their only
relief) are then easiest to be fet away or spoiled. And for any impeachment
we shall have by the Spaniards, though we be daily threatened by many
thundering rumors, yet I see no great reason to suspect their coming hither,
nor shall in that respect rely my self further then upon your Lordships
better intelligence, and most honorable care, according to the occasions shall
be offered. Only this I must put your Lordships in mind of, that by an Army
able to master us in field, coming furnished with Artillery, the River and all
our provisions both of victual and munition are easily to be taken from us,
which notwithstanding we may much prevent, if our Forts at this place be made
up in time, (which is almost done already), and a couple of good ships of war
lodged at Cullmore for that straight. Whilst I was my self at Ballishannon, I
must advertise your Lordships, that I gave charge to Captain Wills, lying at
Lyffer, that with those Forces I left behind, he should make a journey upon
Sleught Art, a people in Tyrone, who before my going, made many offers of their
subjection, but so as in conclusion I must stand to their courtesy, how long
they would continue in that state, and therefore rejected them utterly. He fell
(according to my directions) upon them, brought away three hundred Cowes, and
burned most of their Houses and Corn. They offer again a new parley, but
because I am resolved to take in none of Tyrone, left their numbers (to feed
upon their own hungery store) should be diminished, I do still refuse them,
and will do all other of that Country, except I see some apparent
extraordinary and special cause to the contrary. So I most humbly recommend my
duty and the best service I am able to perform to your Lordships command.
From the Derry the second of January 1602.

The Lord Deputy being returned from Galloway to Athlone, and being advertised
from Rowry O Donnell, that he had lately done some services against O Rowrke,
did by his letters of the sixth of January give him thanks for the same,
encouraging him to drive O Rowrke out of his Country, wherein an Army of four
thousand English was then ready to assist him, with assurance that her Majesty
was so incensed by O-Rowrkes contempts, as she was resolved never to pardon
him, and with promise of that Country to him and his heirs, if he joined his
Forces to expel O Rowrke. Further his Lordship assured him, that this should
be no bar, but rather a furtherance, to his hopes of having his brothers
lands. For as he would never take from Sir Neale Garue any thing for merly
given or promised to him, so if he could prove, that since his submission he
had committed any treason, wherein the other could not by an honorable trial
justify himself, then he should be sure, that his Lordship would satisfy
his best expectations.

The ninth of January his Lordship in his and the Counsels letter to the Lords
in England, after relation of the present affairs, wrote further as follows.

IN this journey I the Deputy received her Majesty's express direction for the
reducing of her Highness Forces to twelve thousand Foot and one thousand
Horse, which I do most willingly obey, and for performance thereof, I took
present order, which now is fully put in execution, though upon the sudden it
could not be done, the Army being divided in the remote parts of this Kingdom.
And albeit I have given straight charge, that out of the new cashered
Companies, the bands subsisting should be made strong; yet must I make known
to your Lordships the difficulties I find to perform this direction, by reason
the Soldiers being once cashered, do use (notwithstanding any care that we
can take) to wander to and fro, and sometimes fall into the Rebels hands, which
use to strip them of their arms and clothes, sometimes into the hands of
bordering Subjects, which deal no better with them, and so they become most
miserable creatures: so hard a thing is it to keep them together, to be turned
over to other Companies, when once they know of their cashering; as I remember
your Lordships have noted the like difficulty in your letters, to keep
together, and to send over the whole numbers by you appointed to come into this
Kingdom. And in this cashering of Companies, according to her Majesty's
express pleasure, which her Highness prescribes to be of the Irish
Companies, that the English may subsist and be made strong, although I would
willingly perform this direction; and to that end have discharged a number of
Irish Companies heretofore and now, yet seeing the Arch-rebell does yet hold
out, (albeit I have directed such a course for his prosecution by Sir Arthur
Chichester, who is in pursuit of him, as before the Spring I hope he shall be
quite broken), and that this rebel O Rowrke has drawn such a head together, I
think it not amiss yet to continue some of the Irish Companies for a time,
hoping with Gods good favor, that ere it be long, I may reduce the Army to a
lesser number, and then with more conueniency and less danger, may discharge
the Irish Companies, which in the mean time I will so exercise and employ, as
they shall not be idle, but shall be still exposed to endure the brunt of the
service, upon all occasions: And touching the continuing of this service
against the Rebel O-Rowrke and his Confederates, (which we are of opinion may
not be delaied), for the prevention of further dangers, as also for the
upholding of her Majesty's Army, in regard of the general scarcity of all
sorts of victuals in all parts of this Kingdom, we humbly pray your Lordships
to remember, that a proportion of victuals be sent to Galloway, Ballishannon,
and Lymrick, with all speed, without the which we see no means how this
service can be followed, or the Army in general may be preserved from
perishing. For where it is expected by your Lordships that some great numbers
of Beeues, and other victuals may be gotten from the Rebels, we have already so
impouerished them by prosecutions, as they are ready to starve. And amongst the
Subjects of the Pale, their Harvest was so unseasonable, and their Corn was so
destroyed by the weather, as numbers of subjects will undoubtedly die of
famine; and we see no means for her Majesty's Army in this Kingdom to
subsist, especially for this present year, but upon provisions to be sent out
of England, which in discharge of our bounden duties, we thought meet plainly
to signify unto your Lordships, and do humbly leave it to your careful
providence: For such abuses as have been committed in disposing of the
victuals, we shall be ready upon the arrival of such Commissioners, as are
purposed to be sent, to yield unto them our best assistance, and in the mean
season, to have all things in readiness against their coming.

The sixteenth of January the Lord Deputy received the following letter,
directed from her Majesty to his Lordship, and the rest of the Counsel for
Ireland.

Elizabeth Regina.
RIght trusty and well-beloved, We greet you well. The abuses which by the frauds
of Merchants do daily multiply in the course of exchange, do cast upon Us so
great burden, and We find them to be so impossible to be prevented, by any
cautions that can be devised, (whereof we have sufficient proof in the like
fruit that follows of the restraints made since the first Proclamation
published), as We can find no other way to remedy those inconveniences, but by
taking from the Merchant all benefit of exchange, other then hereunder is
mentioned, in the form of a Proclamation, which We think good to be published
in that Kingdom, to make known to all men in what manner We intend to allow
of the exchange, from the day of the publishing thereof, which therefore you
shall cause to be done immediately upon the receipt of these Our letters. And
for that Our intent is by this Proclamation (as you may perceive by the tenor
thereof) to explane all former Proclamations and Orders touching this matter of
the exchange, and that from the day of the publishing of this new declaration
of Our pleasure, the same only be taken for the rule of the exchange, and no
benefit of Our former Proclamation to be allowed to any; yet because in some of
them there be some clauses meet for Us to be continued, We have here under
made a short note of those clauses out of the said Proclamations, which clauses
Our pleasure is that you cause to be taken verbatim, and inserted into this
Proclamation when you shall publish it, or else to express the substance of
them in such words as you shall think fit, or to alter or omit any of them, or
to add to this new direction for our advantage; requiring you in your
consideration of this our purpose, to cast aside all private respects, and
only to aim at the ease of our great charge, so far forth as it may be done
without inconueniency of greater moment to Our State there, then our charge is
to Us.

The Proclamation.
Upon the alteration of the Standard of Our Moneys in this Realm, whereunto
We were led as well by examples of Our Progenitors, who had ever made a
difference between the Moneys of this Realm, and Our Realm of England, as
also by a necessary providence of keeping the sterling Moneys, both from the
hands of Our Rebels here, and also from transportation into foreign
Countries, which chiefly by the said Rebels and their Factors was done; We did
erect an Exchange for the use of all sorts of Our Subjects, and others using
intercourse between these 2 Realms, for converting of Moneys of the new
Standard of this Realm into sterling Moneys in England, and of English Moneys
into those of this Realm reciprocally, hoping that the honest and upright
carriage of Merchants in an equal exercise of traffic between the two
Realms, would have caused in the said Exchange an indifferent and mutual
commodity, both to the Merchant for his trade, and to Us for Our payments, and
both their and Our intentions have concurred, in preserving the sterling Moneys
from the Rebels, and from transportation into foreign Countries: but in this
little time of experience which We have made thereof, being not yet two years
past, We have found Our expectation greatly deceived, and the scope given the
first institution of the Exchange, exceedingly abused by the slights and
cunnings of Merchants, which though We did immediately (upon the beginning of
the Exchange) discover to be breeding; yet did We not think that the same
would ever have grown to such a hight, as since We have perceived. Wherefore
We did by some restrictions and limitations seek to contain those frauds
within reasonable bounds; but it falls out that the remedies proposed, have
been so far from the easing of the grief, as whatsoever has been by Us
prescribed for the redress, has but served for a ground and pretext of new
inventions of deceit: for that by the cunning craft of some Merchants, the
scope given by Our Proclamation to the said Exchange, is so abused, as that
some Merchant who has brought commodities into that Kingdom from hence, has
not been content to sell the same for reasonable gain, but having raised his
price of the same commodity to so much in the new moneys, as do in their true
value of silver almost counteruaile the sterling he paid for it here, viz. That
which cost him ten shillings sterling to thirty shillings Irish, after that
rate, that which cost him 100 pound to 300 pound, he has returned to Our
Exchange the same 300 pound, which being answered him here in sterling,
yields him profit of three for one, which is so great a gain, as no
adventure of any Merchants into the further most parts of traffic does yield,
and to Us such a burden, as if the same should be permitted, were nothing else
in effect, but to make Our Exchequer a Mart for the cunning of Merchants to
work upon: Besides many of them have of purpose to make profit by the said
Exchange, bought up old bills of debts, from diverse persons, to whom payment
has upon just consideration been deferred, and compounding for the same, for
small sums of money of the new Standard, returned the whole upon Us by
exchange, whereby they have made an exceeding profit, conrrary to the true
meaning of Our Proclamation, intended for the use and benefit of such, as
exercised an honest and direct course of Merchandise. By which frauds there is
ever a great quanrity of moneys of the new Standard returned upon Us for
sterling Moneys in this Realm, but neither is there any proportionable
quantity of sterling Moneys brought in here into the Exchange, nor delivered
into the Banckes to be converted into new Moneys there: And consequently, there
does grow upon Us an intolerable burden, in continual payments of sterling
Moneys, and yet the two mischiefs (which were the chief cause of alteration
of Our Standard) not remedied; that is, the preserving of the sterling Moneys
from the Rebels, and from transportation into foreign Countries: For little
of it being brought in by Merchants of this Country, and the same being not
current to be used here amongst Our good Subjects, We find it partly
transported, and partly falling into the hands of the Rebels, wherewith they
have been the better enabled to continue in their wicked courses: Wherefore
for redress of so great abuses daily practiced by Merchants, We do hereby
publish, that Our meaning is, that from the day of the publishing hereof, the
places of exchanging of moneys, shall be only at Dublyn for this Our Realm of
Ireland, and at London for Our Realm of England, for all such as use the trade
of Merchandise, but for others that are in Our pay, and have wages of Us, as
being of Our Army, or otherwise, there shall be a Bancke maintained at Cork,
as heretofore it was, to receive their bills, but the bills received there, shall
be paiable only at London, and fot the use of passengers and soldiers
departing out of Our Realm into England, there shall be likewise exchanges at
Bristoll and Chester. So as no such soldier or passenger do bring thither any
bill containing above the sum offoure pound. But for Merchants, there shall not
be at the said places of Chester and Bristoll, any payment of bills returned,
but only at Our City of London, in such manner as is hereafter expressed. And
further Our pleasure and meaning is, that the said Exchange shall extend only
to such, as now are, or hereafter from time to time shall be in Our pay here,
serving Us in the field, or in wards, or garrisons, and to all Officers of
government of Justice, of Our revenues, or of the Exchange, and to such
others as are contained in Our establishment: To all and every of whom, We are
pleased to allow the benefit of exchanging Moneys of the new Standard of this
Realm, into Moneys current in England, (wanting only twelve pence sterling in
the pound), viz. yearly to each of them rateably in his degree, for so much as
he does save, above his expense, of that which he does receive yearly of Us,
or ought to receive clearly for his pay, all deductions and defalcations being
foreprized; and so as there be no fraud used by any of them in abusing this Our
liberality and fauonr, conttary to Our true meaning: And for others using trade
of Merchandise, although they deserve no favor, in regard of the frauds,
wherewith many of them have abused Our gracious meaning, in the institution of
Our exchange intended, and in regard of the excessive raising of the prices of
all wares, whereby both Our Subjects are extremely burdened here, and We
intollerably charged in the exchange in England, yet in regard of the present
poverty of this Our Realm, whereby We conceive that there wants as yet for a
time sufficient commodities of the growth or manufaction of this Kingdom,
wherewith to maintain traffic, We are pleased to maintain for their use an
exchange in this manner. That every such person, not being of those that belong
to Our Establishment, but a Merchant, who shall deliver to the Master of the
Exchange, or his Deputies in this Realm, one hundred pounds, whereof forty
pound shall be of the Standard, of sterling money of silver or of gold, and
threescore pound in mixed Moneys of the new Standard of this Realm, shall
receive of the said Master of the Exchange, or his Deputies, a Bill directed to
the Bancke of exchange in England, where the same is playable, whereby he
shall receive for each hundred pound delivered here in that manner, one hundred
pounds in Moneys current of England, wanting only twelve pence in the pound
for each pound of the mixed Moneys delivered, and for the starling no
defalcation to be made, as heretofore has been ordained. And after that rate
for more or less in quantity. And to the end that the frauds used by some
Merchants may be better prevented, and the Master of the exchange, or his
Deputies understand, that he deals truly in bringing his moneys to the
exchange. Our pleasure is, that every such Merchant, resorting to the exchange,
shall bring a certificate from the Officers of Our Custom House, where his
goods were entered, what goods he has entered there, and at what time, to the
end that it may thereby be discerned, that he seeks nothing, but the return
of his own money, and is not a cullourer of other men's. And sor that diverse
Noble men and Gentlemen of this Realm, have cause many times to repair into
England, either for suites or other necessary causes, and some have children
there, either at the Universities, or at the Innes of Court or Chancerie, or in
Our service at Court, who shall have cause for those purposes to use sterling
money, and to have the moneys of this Realm converted into moneys current in
England, We are pleased, that all such have the benefit of the exchange in such
manner, as for those of our Army is above limmited, for such yearly sums of
money, as Our Deputy and Counsel there for the time being, shall think good
to allow to any of them, upon their demands. And the Warrant of our said
Deputy and Counsel shall be sufficient Warrant to the Master of our
exchange, or his Deputies, for the receiving of all such Bills as they shall
require him to admit, for any such Nobleman or Gentleman.

And now having explained some part of the abuses offered to Us in the
exchange, and declared Our pleasure for the reformation of them, We do not
doubt but that, as upon the former restrictions by Us proposed to the same end,
so now, many ill minded persons will not stick to flander Our doings, as though
there were not in Us an honorable meaning to perform what here We have
promised, whereof although Our proceedings shall by their true and just effect
manifest the contrary, yet because evil tongues accustomed to calumniate the
actions of Princes, are sometimes the instruments of alteration of peoples
minds from their dutiful opinions of their Sovereigns, where there is to us
nothing so dear as the conservation of the love of our subjects, We do for
preventing of any such malicious purposes, require all Magistrates and
Officers, who have any charge in the Government of that Our Kingdom, to have
an care to such evil rumors, and to the spreaders of them, and such as they
shall find to be authors or instruments of diuulging any slanderous speeches,
touching this matter of the exchange, to make them an example for others to be
admonished by. And to assure all men, that this institution of base money in
this Kingdom has had his chiefest ground, upon hope We had thereby to weaken
the Rebels of this Kingdom, who by the use of sterling money, had and have
means to provide themselves from foreign parts, of all things necessary to
maintain their evil courses. And that the same being by this way partly, and
partly by power of Our Army, once suppressed, We shall have just cause to
restore the moneys of this Realm to such estate, as our Progenitors have
accustomed to use here. Given under our Signet at our Palace of Westminster
the four and twentieth day of December, 1602 being of our Reign the five and
fortieth year.

The clauses of former Proclamations touching the Exchange meet now to be
continued.

The use of sterling Moneys or of any other, then these new moneys, prohibited
upon penalties of imprisonment and fine; All Officers having power given them
to seize the said moneys put in use, and every Informer allowed the moiety of
so much as he shall discover.

To allow for all sterling moneys of silver, brought into the Exchange, with
purpose to receive new Moneys for the same, gain of two shillings in the pound
of new moneys: for gold two shillings six pence gain of new moneys.

To allow ten in the hundred profit, for all base silver moneys brought into
the Exchange.

Counterfetters to be severely looked to and punished. All passengers coming
into Ireland, to be searched, or put to their oath, what sterling money they
carry with them.

The same day his Lordship and the Counsel here, received this following
letter from the Lords in England.

AFter our very hearty commendations to your Lordships, we have received your
letter of the seventh of this instant, together with a several note or
abstract of some material points and doubts to be considered and resolved,
concerning the last prescribed form of the Exchange. And as both your letters
and abstract, were addressed together for answer of her Majesty's letter,
lately sent unto you with a form of a Proclamation thereunto annexed, so now
you shall again receive the resolution of her Majesty and us of her Counsel,
touching the same matter only, and the doubts by you propounded, which
according to your desire we send with as much speed as a business of that
importance, (reduced to a new deliberation) could be dispatched. For the
liberty that her Majesty did give you, either of proceeding, or of respite and
suspense to publish the Proclamation, according to the judgment you shall make
of it upon consideration of any very dangerous effects, that you shall find
apparent or likely to ensue, you have rightly acknowledged her Majesty's
gracious respect unto you, in whom (as the chiefest Ministers of that State)
she reposeth special confidence, both for your care and wisdom, and for the
opportunity you have (by the present contemplation of all things near at hand
and under your eye) to discern and discover any inconueniencies, and to apply
the medicines accordingly. And therefore, although it pleased her to take that
resolution (together with us of her Counsel) which was set down by the said
Proclamation, hoping that it would be a means to cure and prevent the
intolerable frauds and enormities in the practice of the exchange, which was
intended and instituted for the ease of her excessive charge, and for the good
of her subjects there; yet for as much as you have showed so great a distrust
and fear of dangerous consequence, if you should forthwith have proceeded to
the publishing of that Proclamation, and upon advised consultation (as her
Majesty assures her self) have propounded these points of doubtfulnesse, that
accompanied your letter, she is well pleased to give such credit to your
opinion, as that she has upon a new deliberation with us of her Counsel,
caused a temper and moderation to be set down, with the chief points whereof
you doubted, as may appear unto you by a form of a Proclamation, differing
from the former, and now sent unto you, wherein because you may readily observe
the particular alterations from the former Proclamation, by comparing both
together, we need not make rehearsal of them here, for satisfaction of your
doubts. Only we have thought good to say somewhat concerning the sixth and
seventh Articles in your abstract, in which you make question what course is
best to be holden for the discovery of the frauds used by Merchants and
others in their exchanges, and what means are to be used that her Majesty be
not ouer-burthened in the exchange, upon which questions and your own opinions
thereof delivered, we cannot omit to make two observations. The one that your
selves do acknowledge the intolerable frauds of Merchants and others used in
the exchange, whereby not only her Majesty's gracious intention and meaning of
the exchange has been extraordinarily abused; but her Subjects in that
Realm, by the excessive rates in the sale of all commodities, have been
unconscionably ouercharged: And therefore your selves cannot deny, but that it
were very dangerous for the exchange to be vpholden without remedy of these
frauds. The second, that for as much as there cannot be any certain rule and
order prescribed, to avoid these frauds, that shall be free from the evasion of
cunning and deceitful persons, and the only remedy does consist in the
careful and diligent oversight of her Majesty's Ministers, to whom that trust
is committed, her Majesty thinks that as your selves did truly find the
faults and abuses, so none can better provide for their remedy then you, that
are there present, and especially you the Treasurer, by whose Ministers errors
her Majesty has been so much prejudiced. And whereas especial cause of these
frauds is imputed to the multiplicity of the bills of exchange, we should most
willingly be of that mind, to reduce all unto one place at Dublyn, were it not
that we find you the Treasurer to vary in your opinion, having signified
heretofore by your particular letters to some of us, that there is no possible
way of remedy, but by reducing all the Banckes to one place, and yet by this
letter jointly with the rest of the Counsel, delivering your opinion for the
establishing of two places, unto which opinion, because we conceive you are
won, upon the consultation of that Counsel, we have applied our consent
thereunto: And to the end it may plainly appear unto you, how the Merchants
and others abusing the exchange, do most fraudulently serve their turn both
upon her Majesty's Subjects there, (if it be true as has been informed to us
by persons of good credit coming from thence, that they improve their
commodities to a treble price, and more, in respect of that Coin), and
likewise upon her Majesty's excessive loss, by return of their money upon the
exchange, we have thought good to send you an Estimate or Calculation of the
gain that one of them may make, and (as it is to be supposed) does make, in
this course upon the expense but of one hundred pounds uttered there in
commodities, making and raising thereupon but two for one, whereby you may
judge how unreasonable advantage may be further made, upon the profit of three
or four for one, if the Merchant be so ill disposed, or can find the means of
a corrupt Minister under the Treasurer to combine with him: And so we bid you
right heartily well to fare. From the Court at White Hall the 24 of December
1602.

A computation (sent over enclosed in the former letter) of the gain which a
Merchant may make by the Exchange, bringing to the Exchange in each one hundred
pound, forty pound sterling: and supposing the Merchant to be without sterling
money in his store, or without credit, and to use the Exchange directly.

If he convert one hundred pound sterling into wares, and sell the same in
Ireland at the rate of two for one, viz. For two hundred pound Irish, he does
thereby gaineas follows.

To have the benefit of the Exchange, he must have fourscore pounds sterling,
which supposing that he buieth at five shillings Irish each twenty shillings
sterling, his fourscore pound sterling does cost him one hundred pounds Irish.

Then comes he to the Exchange with one hundred pounds Irish, and fourscore
pounds sterling; for both which the Minister gives him a bill to receive in
England one hundred seventy five pound sterling, for he must loose five pound
of the exchange of the one hundred Irish.

Then has he in his purse in England one hundred seventy five pound, defalking
his first stock, which was one hundred pound, rests clear to him seventy
five pound.

And this he may do upon as many returns as he makes in a year.

If it be objected, that he cannot buy sterling money at so low a rate, as for
five and twenty shillings Irish, but that he do pay thirty shilling Irish for
twenty shillings sterling, then is his gain the less by nineteen pound, and
yet shall he gain six and fifty pound.

But supposing such (...) Merchant as is not in necessity to by sterling money
with Irish, but that he they borrow it here of friends, though he pay twenty
pound in the hundred for (...) is his gain in this manner.

His hundred pounds sterling converted into wares, and sold in Ireland for two
hundred pound Irish, he brings to the Exchange one hundred and twenty pound
Irish and fourscore pounds sterling borrowed, and receives a bill to be paid
in England, one hundred fourscore and fourteen pound, loosing six pound for
the return of one hundred and twenty pound Irish.

So has he in his purse in England one hundred fourscore and fourteen
pound, out of which deducting one hundred pound, which was the first stock,
rests to him fourscore and fourteen pound. Out of which gain, allowing
him fourscore pounds, to pay for so much borrowed by him, yet rests to him
fourteen pound.

And further he has remaining in his hands in Ireland fourscore pound Irish,
remaining of his two hundred Irish, whereof he brought only one hundred and
twenty pound to the Exchange. To have which fourscore pound returned by the
Exchange, he must borrow two and thirty pound sterling; and so shall he have
a bill to be paid in England, one hundred and eight pound; for he loses
four pound for exchange of the fourscore pound Irish: Out of which one
hundred and eight pound, abating the two and thirty pound borrowed, there
rests gained seventy six pound. Whereunto adding the fourteen pound above
mentioned, then the whole gain is, fourscore and ten pound.

From whence take for the interest of one hundred and twelve pound, borrowed
for three months, after twenty in the hundred for a year, which is for three
months six pound twelve shillings, and then his clear gain is, toward his
freight, custom, forbearing the money and other charges, fourscore and four
pound, eight shillings.

About the end of January, the Lord Deputy returned from Connaght to Dublyn,
and by the way received letters from Rowry O Donnell, who now had undertaken
the prosecution of O Rorke, and signified his determination to make a road
presently into his Country, and to leave some of his men to lie upon him, in
some places of convenient strength: but his Lordship being come to Dublyn,
received another letter from the said Rory O Donnell, upon the eighteenth of
February, signifying that O Rorkes strength was much increased, by the repair
of many chief Rebels into his Country, so as for the present he was nether
able to attempt O Rorke, nor to defend himself from his attempts, till the
English forces should draw up to assist him, the hastening whereof he prayed,
and that he might have leave to put up his Creaghtes for a time toward
Ballishannon, for his better safety.

The five and twentieth of February, the Lord Deputy wrote this following
letter to the Lords in England, and sent it by the hands of the Lord President
of Mounster, at this time going for England.

MAy it please your Lordships, although I am unwilling to inform you often of
the present estate of this Kingdom, or of any particular accidents or
services, because the one is subject to so much alteration, and the other
lightly delivered unto all that are not present with such uncertainty, and
that I am loath to make any project unto your Lordships, either of my requests
to you, or my own resolutions here, since so many things fall suddenly out,
which may alter the grounds of either: yet since I do write now by one that can
so sufficiently supply the defects of a letter, I have presumed at this time to
impart unto your Lordships, that I think fit to be remembered, or do
determine on, most humbly desiring your Lp., that if I err in the one, or
hereafter alter the other, you will not impute it to my want of sincerity or
constancy, but to the nature of the subject whereof I must treat, or of the
matter whereon I work: And first to present unto your Lordships the outward
face of the four Provinces, and after to guess (as near as I can) at their
dispositions. Mounster by the good government and industry of the Lord
President, is clear of any force in rebellion, except some few unable to make
any forcible head. In Lemster there is not one declared Rebel: In Connaght
there is none but in O Rorkes Country; In Vlster none but Tyrone, and Brian Mac
Art, who was never Lord of any Country, and now does with a body of loose men
and some creaghts continue in Glancomkynes, or near the borders thereof.
Connogh Macgayre sometimes Lord of Fermannagh, is banished out of the Country,
who litres with O. Rorke, and at this time O Connor Macgayre is possessed of it
by the Queen, and holds it for her. I believe that generally the Lords of the
Countries that are reclaimed, desire a peace, though they will be wavering,
till their lands and estates are assured unto them from her Majesty, and as
long as they see a party in rebellion to subsist, that is of power to ruin
them if they continue subjects, or otherwise shall be doubtful of our defense.
All that are out, do seek formercy, except O Rorke, and O swilliuan, who is
now with O Rorke, and these are obstinate only one of their diffidence, to be
safe in any forgiveness. The loose men, and such as are only Captains of
Bonnaghtes, as Tyrrill, and Brian Mac Art, will nourish the war, as long as
they see any possibility to subsist, and like ill humors, have recourse to any
part that is unsound. The Nobility, Towns, and English-Irish, are for the most
part as weary of the war as any, but unwilling to have it ended, generally,
for fear that upon a peace, will ensue a severe reformation of Religion; and
in particular many bordering gentlemen that were made poor by their own
faults, or by rebels (...), continue their spleen to them, now they are become
Subjects, and having used to help them selves by stealths, did never more use
them, nor better prevail in them, then now that these submitties have laid
aside their own defense, and betaken themselves to the protection and Justice
of the State, and many of them have tasted so much sweet in intertainements,
that they rather desire a war to continue them, then a quiet harvest that
might arise out of their own honest labor, so that I do find none more
pernicious Instruments of a new war, then some of these. In the mean time,
Tyrone while he shall live, will blow every spark of discontent, or new hopes
that shall lie hid in any corner of the Kingdom, and before he shall be
utterly extinguished make many blases, and sometimes set on fire, or consume
the next Subjects unto him. I am persuaded that his combination is already
broken, and it is apparent, that his means to subsist in any power is
overthrown, but how long he may live as a woodkerne, and what new accidents
may fall out while he does live, I know not. Ifit be imputed to my fault, that
notwithstanding her Majesty's great forces, he does still live, I beseech your
Lordships to remember, how securely the Banditoes of Italy do live, between
the power of the King of Spain and the Pope: How many men of all Countries of
several times have in such sort preserved themselves long from the great power
of Princes, but especially in this Country, where there are so many
difficulties to carry an Army in most places, so many inaccessable strengths
for them to fly unto, and then to be pleased to consider the great work that
first I had, to break this maine rebellion, to defend the Kingdom from a
dangerous invasion of a mighty foreign Prince, with so strong a party in the
Country, and now the difficulty to root out scattered troops, that had so
many inaccessible dens to lurk in, which as they are by nature of extreme
strength and peril to be attempted, so is it impossible for any people,
naturally and by art, to make greater use of them; and though with infinite
danger we do beat them out of one, yet is there no possibility for us to
follow them with such agility, as they will fly to another, and it is most
sure, that never Traitor knew better how to keep his own head, then this, nor
any Subjects have a more dreadful awe to lay violent hands on their sacred
Prince, then these people have to touch the person of their O Neales; and he
that has as pestilent a judgment as ever any had, to nourish and to spread
his own infection, has the ancient swelling and desire of liberty in a
conquered Nation to work upon, their fear to be rooted out, or to have their
old faults punished, upon all particular discontents, and generally over all
the Kingdom, the fear of a persecution for Religion, the debasing of the
Coin, (which is grievous unto all sorts), and a dearth and famine, which is
already begun, and must of necessity grow shortly to extremity; the least of
which alone, have been many times sufficient motives to drive the best and
most quiet estates into sudden confusion. These will keep all spirits from
settling, breed new combinations, and (I fear) even stir the Towns
themselves, to solicit foreign aid, with promise to cast themselves into
their protection: And although it be true, that if it had pleased her Majesty,
to have longer continued her Army in greater strength, I should the better have
provided for what these Clouds do threaten, and sooner and more easily either
have made this Country a rased table, wherein she might have written her own
laws, or have tied the ill disposed and rebellious hands, till I had surely
planted such a government, as would have ouergrowne and killed any weeds, that
should have risen under it, yet since the necessity of the State does so urge a
diminution of this great expense, I will not despair to go on with this great
work, through all these difficulties, if we be not interrupted by foreign
forces, although perchance we may be encountered with some new eruptions, and
(by often aduenturing) with some diasters; and it may be your Lordships shall
sometimes hear of some spoils done upon the Subjects from the which it is
impossible to preserve them in all places, with far greater Forces then ever
yet were kept in this Kingdom: And although it has been seldom heard, that
any Army has been carried on with so continual action and enduring, without
any intermission of Winter breathings, and that the difficulties at this time,
to keep any Forces in the place where we must make the war, (but especially
our Horse), are almost beyond any hope to prevent, yet with the favor of God
and her Majesty's fortune, I do determine, my self to draw into the field, as
soon as I have received her Majesty's commandments by the Commissioners, whom
it has pleased her to fond over, and in the mean time I hope, by my own
presence or directions, to set every party on work, that does adioyne or may
be drawn against any force that now does remain in rebellion. In which
journey the success must be in the hands of God, but I will confidently
promise to omit nothing, that is possible by us to be done, to give the last
blow unto the Rebe lion. But as all pain and anguish, impatient of the
present, does use change for a remedy, so will it be impossible for us to
settle the minds of this people unto a peace, or reduce them unto order, while
they feel the smart of these sensible grietes, and apparent fears which I
have remembered to your Lordships, without some hope of redress or security.
Therefore I will presume (how unworthy soever I am) since it concerns the
Province her Majesty has given me, with all humbleness to lay before your
grave judgments, some few things, which I think necessary to be considered
of.

And first, whereas the alteration of the coin, and taking away of the
exchange, in such measure as it was first promised, has bred a general
grieuance unto men of all qualities, and so many incommodities to all sorts,
that it is beyond the judgment of any that I can hear to prevent a confusion
in this estate, by the conunuance thereof; that (at the least) it would please
your Lordships to put this people in some certain hope, that upon the end of
the war, this new standard shall be abolished, or eased, and that in the
mean time the Army may be favorably dealt with in the Exchange, since by the
last Proclamation your Lordships sent over, they do conceive their case will
be more hard then any others; for if they have allowed them nothing, but
indefinitely as much as they shall merely gaint out of their intertainements,
that will prove nothing to the greater part. For the only possibility to make
them to live upon their intertainement, will be to allow them exchange for the
greatest part thereof, since now they do not only pay excessive prices for
all things, but can hardly get any thing for this money; and although we have
presumed to alter (in show, though not effect) the Proclamation in that point,
by retaining a power in our selves to proportion their allowance for exchange,
yet was it, with a mind to conform our proceedings therein, according to your
Lordships next directions, and therefore do humbly desire to know your
pleasures therein For our opinions of the last project it pleased your
Lordships to send us, I do humbly leave it to our general letters, only as
from my self I made ouerture to the Counsel of the other you sent directed
only to my self, and because I found them generally to concur, that it
would prove as dangerous as the first, I did not think it fit any otherwise to
declare your Lordships pleasure therein. And whereas it pleased your Lordships
in your last letters to command us to deal moderately in the great matter of
Religion, I had, before the receipt of your Lordships letters, presumed to
advise such as dealt in it, for a time to hold a more restrained hand therein,
and we were both thinking ourselves, what course to take in the reuocation of
what was already done, with least encouragement to them and others, since the
fear that this course begun in Dublin would fall upon the rest, was apprehended
over all the Kingdom, so that I think your Lordships direction was to great
purpose, and the other course might have overthrown the means to our own end
of reformation of religion. Not that I think too great preciseness can be
used in the reforming of our selves, the abuses of our own Clergy,
Church-liuings, or discipline, nor that the truth of the Gospel can with too
great vehemence or industry be set forward, in all places, and by all
ordinary means most proper unto it self, that was first set forth and spread
in meekness, nor that I think any corporal prosecution or punishment can be
too severe for such, as shall be found seditious instruments of foreign or
inward practices, nor that I think it fit, that any principal Magistrates
should be chosen without taking the Oath of Obedience, nor tolerated in
absenting themselves from public Divine Service, but that we may be advised
how we do punish in their bodies or goods any such only for Religion, as do
profess to be faithful subjects to her Majesty, and against whom the
contrary can not be proved. And since, if the Irish were utterly rooted out,
there was much less likelihood that this Country could be thereby in any time
planted by the English, since they are so far from inhabiting well any part
of that they have already, and that more then is likely to be inhabited, may be
easily chosen out and reserved, in such places by the Seaside, or upon great
Rivers, as may be planted to great purpose, for a future absolute reducement of
this Country, I think, it would as much avail the speedy settling of this
Country as any thing, that it would please her Majesty to deal liberally with
the Irish Lords of Countries, or such as now are of great reputation among
them, in the distribution of such lands as they have formerly possessed, or the
State here can make little use of for her Majesty. If they continue, as they
ought to do, and yield the Queen as much commodity as she may otherwise
expect, she has made a good purchase of such subjects for such land. If any
of them hereafter be disobedient to her laws, or break forth in rebellion,
she may when they shall be more divided, ruin them more easily, for example
unto others, and (if it be thought fit) may plant English or other Irish in
their Countries: For although there ever have been, and hereafter may be small
eruptions, in some places, which at the first may easily be suppressed, yet the
suffering them to grow to that general head and combination, did questionless
proceed from great error in the judgment here, and may be easily (as I
think) prevented hereafter. And further it may please her Majesty to ground
her resolution, for the time and numbers of the next abatement of the list of
her Army, somewhat upon our poor advice from hence, and to believe that we
will not so far corrupt our judgments with any private respect, as without
necessity, to continue her charge, seeing we do thoroughly conceive how
grievous it is unto her estate, and that we may not be precisely tied to an
establishment, that shall conclude the payments of the Treasurer, since it has
ever been thought fit to be otherwise, till the coming over of the Earl of
Essex, and some such extraordinary occasion may fall out, that it will be
dangerous to attend your Lordships resolutions, and when it will be safe to
diminish the Army here, that there may be some course thought of, by some other
employment to disburthen this Country of the idle Swordmen, in whom I find an
inclination apt enough to be carried elsewhere, either by some of this Country
of best reputation among them, or in Companies as now they stand under English
Captains, who may be reinforced with the greatest part of Irish. That it may
be left to our discretion, to make passages and bridges into Countries
otherwise inaccessible, and to build little piles of stone in such garrisons,
as shall be thought fittest to be continual bridles upon the people, by the
commodity of which, we may at any time draw the greatest part of the Army
together, to make a head against any part that shall first break out, and yet
reserve the places only with a ward, to put in greater Forces as occasion
shall require, which I am persuaded will prove great pledges upon this
Country, that upon any urgent cause the Queen may safely draw the greatest
part of her Army here out of the Kingdom, to be employed (at least for a time)
elsewhere, wherein I beseech your Lordships to consider, what a strength so
many experienced Captains and Soldiers would be, to any Army of new men
erected in England, against an invasion, or sent abroad, in any offensive
war: but until these places be built, I cannot conceive how her Majesty
(with any safety) can make any great diminution of her Army. Lastly, I do
humbly desire your Lordships to receive, the further explanation of my meaning
and confirmation of the reasons that do induce me unto these propositions from
the Lord President of Mounster, who as he has been a very worthy actor in the
reducement and defense of this Kingdom, so do I think him to be best able to
give you through account of the present estate, and future providence for the
preservation thereof, wherein it may please your Lp. to require his opinion, of
the hazard this Kingdom is like to run; if it should by any mighty power be
invaded, and how hard it will be for us in any measure to provide for the
present defense, if any such be intended, and withal to go on with the
suppression of these that are left in Rebellion, so that we must either
adventure the new kindling of this fire, that is almost extinguished, or
intending only that, leave the other to exceeding peril. And thus having
remembered to your Lordships the most material Points (as I conceive), that are
fittest for the present to be considered of, I do humbly recommend my self
and them to your Lordships favor. From her Majesty's Castle of Dublin this
six and twentieth of February, 1602.

At the same time the Lord Deputy wrote to the Lords in England, about his
private affairs, wherein he signified, that al manner of provisions necessary
for the maintenance of an household were (of late especially) bought at such
excessive rates (as well in regard of the famine growing daily greater in
Ireland, (by the continual spoil of the Country, and the Armies cutting
down of the Rebels Corn for these last two years) as also in regard of the
disualuation of the mixed coin now current, after the taking away of exchange
(whereof each shilling had no more then two pence halfepenny silver in it), and
that the prices of the said provisions daily so increased, as sour times the
entertainment allowed him by her Majesty for his maintenance, would not
answer his ordinary expenses, except it would please their Lordships to allow
him exchange for the most part of his entertainment, that thereby he might be
enabled to make his provisions out of England.

In the beginning of March, the Lord Deputy understood, that Brian Mac Art had
secretly stolen into Killoltagh, with some five hundred men under his leading,
(as he had lately done the like, but was soon driven out again by Sir Arthur
Chichester.) Whereupon his Lordship sent Sir Richard Moryson from Dublyn up to
his Garrison in Lecayle, and gave him his Lordships guard, and three other
Companies of Foot to lead with him, that he might assist Sir Arthur
Chichester in the prosecution of this Rebel, who was soon driven out of
Killoltagh by those forces.

Now because I have often made mention formerly of our destroying the Rebels
Corn, and using al means to famish them, let me by two or three examples show
the miserable estate to which the Rebels were thereby brought. Sir Arthur
Chichester, Sir Richard Moryson, and the other Commanders of the Forces sent
against Brian Mac Art aforesaid, in their return homeward, saw a most horrible
spectacle of three children (whereof the eldest was not above ten years old),
all eating and knawing with their teeth the entrals of their dead mother, upon
whose flesh they had fed twenty days past, and having eaten all from the feet
upward to the bare bones, rosting it continually by a slow fire, were now come
to the eating of her said entralls in like sort roasted, yet not divided from
the body, being as yet raw. Former mention has been made in the Lord Deputies
letters, of carcases scattered in many places, all dead of famine. And no doubt
the famine was so great, as the rebel soldiers taking all the common people
had to feed upon, and hardly living thereupon, (so as they besides fed not
only on Hawks, Kytes, and unsavory birds of prey, but on Horseflesh, and
other things unfit for man's feeding), the common sort of the Rebels were driven
to unspeakable extremities (beyond the record of most Histories that ever I
did read in that kind) the ample relating whereof were an infinite task, yet
will I not pass it over without adding some few instances. Captain Treuor and
many honest Gentlemen lying in the Newry can witness, that some old women of
those parts, used to make a fire in the fields, and diverse little children
driving out the cattle in the cold mornings, and coming thither to warm them,
were by them surprised, killed and eaten, which at last was discovered by a
great girl breaking from them by strength of her body, and Captain Trenor
sending out soldiers to know the truth, they found the childrens skulles and
bones, and apprehended the old women, who were executed for the fact. The
Captains of Carickfergus, and the adjacent Garrisons of the Northern parts
can witness, that upon the making of peace, and receiving the rebels to mercy,
it was a common practice among the common sort of them (I mean such as were
not Swordmen), to thrust long needles into the horses of our English troops,
and they dying thereupon, to be ready to tear out one another throat for a
share of them. And no spectacle was more frequent in the Ditches of Towns, and
especially in wasted Countries, then to see multitudes of these poor people
dead with their mouths all colored green by eating nettles, docks, and all
things they could rend up above ground. These and very many like lamentable
effects followed their rebellion, and no doubt the Rebels had been utterly
destroyed by famine, had not a general peace shortly followed Tyrones
submission (besides mercy formerly extended to many others), by which the
Rebels had liberty, to seek relief among the subjects of Ireland, and to be
transported into England and France, where great multitudes of them lived for
some years after the peace made.

The fourth of March the Lord Deputy received letters from Sir Henry Dockwra,
aduertising many vehement suspicions of Sir Neale Garues disloial purposes,
namely, his underhand putting Mac Swyne to go again into rebellion, and to
take an Island of his, which was a fit place to set up a new rebellion, and also
his making a storchouse of Arms, with extraordinary provisions of them.
Further he advertised, that himself used all means to keep Tyrone in the
Glynnes (where he now was) till his Lordship came up (which journey he advised
to be in the beginning of the next month), but understanding that within few
days he would remove toward Fermanagh, howsoever the English there at that
time were weak, yet he would lie for the Arch-rebel on his way to Omy, or
Agher, not doubting but in the passage of those Plains he should have some
opportunity of fighting with him, and (at the least) to take good part of his
prey from him. Lastly, he advertised, that he had razed Hen. Ouingtons Castle,
and Mac Hugbes Island, which both had been neasts and starting holes for thieves.

The fifteenth of March the Lord Deputy left Dublin, and rode toward the
Northern borders, where his Lordship (with his rotinue) lay to and fro, the
remaining few days of this year (and part of the beginning of the next, till
Tyrone was received to mercy, and the war ended) to the end his Lordship being
in those parts, might give life to the present service, as well of the forces
sent to prosecute Ororke, as of the Garrisons lying in wait for all advantages
upon Tyrone himself and his broken partakers.

Touching Mounster affairs in the year 1602, the Lord Deputy at his coming
from The affairs of Mounster.
Cork caused Sir Ric. Percy to be sworn Counselor for the Province of
Mounster, and in his iournall toward Cillkenny Knighted three Irish men, John
Fitz Edmonds and two Citizens of Watterford, Edward Gough, and Richard Aylward.
The Lord President at Killkenny took his leave of the Lord Deputy, and making
short Iourneys, by reason he was sickly, came not to Cork, till the third of
April, 1602.

When the Spaniards by composition were to render the Castles in the West, O
Swilliuan Bear had surprised his Castle of Donboy in Beerehauen from the
Spaniards, where of some were killed in the surprisall, which freed them from
suspicion to have yielded it voluntarily contrary to the composition. This
strong Castle upon an excellent haven O Swilliuan kept for the King of Spain,
having sixty Warders with him at first, and three pieces of Spanish Ordinance.
The Lord President meaning to take this Castle, took the field the 23 of
April, and after many attempts upon the Rebels, in which some of them were
killed, and some taken and executed, and many preyes taken by parties sent out,
it was resolved the fourteenth of May to pass the forces over to an Island,
called the great Island, that way to march to Beerehauen, the way thither by
land, being impassable for the victuals and carriages, besides many places of
advantage in the Mountains, where the Rebels, though few in number, might
distress a great Army, and easily forbid their passage. Here by the sea side,
the Foot stayed for the ships carrying the Victuals, Munition and Ordinance,
which were detained by contrary winds till the last of May. The sixth of June,
the forces were ferried over to the land near Castle Dermot, where they
encamped; and though they landed in another part then the Rebels expected, who
lay there to hinder, and impeach their landing, yet the Rebels hasted to them
to begin the skirmish with them, when they were in good order, and almost had
all passed the Ferry, so as the Rebels having no advantage in this fight, they
left 28 dead in the place, and had more then 30 wounded, whereof Captain
Tirrel was one, being slightly hurt in the belly, and some were taken
prisoners, whereas on our part only seven were hurt. The tenth of June, our
forces having landed their Ordinance, encamped within musket shot of the Castle
of Donboy, but not within the sight of the Castle, a rising ground lying
between the Camp and the Castle, so as the great shot from the Castle flew
over the Camp without doing any hurt. The twelfth a Fort within the Hand of
Dorses, kept by the Rebels, was surprised by the English, and all the Rebels
killed or hanged, and therein were taken three Iron Pieces of Spanish
Ordinance. The 17 of June after two days battery, the English assaulted the
breach, and possessed part of the Castle Dunboy, the Rebels keeping and
defending the rest, all that day and night, and great part of the next, at
which time the English were by force made full Masters of it. The Rebels
defending it, were 134 selected Soldiers, and all of them were killed in the
Castle, or seeking to fly, or being prisoners were executed in the camp,
except twelve men of chief account, and most esteemed by Tyrrell, which were
kept to be examined upon torture, or to work some good for the service with
Tyrrell, by the saving of their lives. Of Spanish Ordinance, there was taken
one Demi Culuerin, two Sakers, and one Falcon of brass, and two Sakers, five
Minions, and one Falcon of Iron. The Gunners were Italians and Spaniards, who
perished with the rest, nine barrels of powder taken in the Castle, were
employed to blow it up, left any Spaniards or Rebels might after make use of it.

This Castle taken, the Lord President returned to Cork, where Sir Samuel
Bagnoll attended his coming with letters from the Lord Deputy, and according
to his Lordships directions, the Lord President sent by him 1500 Foot, being
above the old Mounsterlyst, who came with these Forces to the Lord Deputy the
29 of July, and brought letters from the Lord President, aduertising the above
mentioned confident expectation of a second Spanish invasion. At the same time
Sir Edward Wingfield was landed at Cork, bringing to the Lord President 500
foot for supplies of the weak Companies. Sir Charles Wilmott Governor of
Kerry, (wherein were many provincial Rebels, besides 1000 strangers to help
them,) had before the siege of Dunboy prosecuted Mac Morris, cleared Kerry of
all Rebels, and prosecuted them into Desmond, taken Castles and great preyes of
Cowes, and brought the Knight of Kerry on his knees, and this done, he marched
toward the Lord President in his way to Dunboy, and united his Forces to the
Army. After the taking of that Castle, he was now again sent into Kerry, with
directions that all garrisons should burn the Corn they could not gather, and
that he should remove the Irish Inhabitants with their goods to a Country
near Lymricke; that the Spaniards again expected, might make no use of them.
In August the Lord President was advertised that many in Carbery revolted, and
that upon a ship from Spain not long before arrived with money to distribute
among the most active Rebels, Donnogh Mac Carty and Finnen his brother (who had
attended the Lord president at the siege of Dunboy) were now revolted, and had
taken impresse money from the King of Spain, whereupon the two Captains Roger
and Gawen Haruy lying there in garrison, had taken many preyes from them, and
spoiled the Country. And yet by daily intelligence the Lord President
understood, that the news of the taking of Dunboy coming into Spain, the
King had commanded to stay all his provisions for Ireland, till his pleasure
were further signified. And no doubt the Queens Fleet lying at this time upon
the coast of Spain, most of all discouraged him from any new attempt in
succor of the Irish Rebels. About the end of August it was generally diuulged
in Mounster that a Spanish Fleet was discovered upon the Coast, whereupon the
Irish posted up and down the Country with great signs of joy, so as at the
Lord Presidents suit, Sir Samuel Bagnol was sent back to him with the forces
he had formerly led out of Mounster to the Lord Deputy.

The second of September the Lord President received this following gracious
letter written from the Queen with her own hand.

Your Sovereign, E. R.

MY faithful George, how ioied We are that so good event has followed so
troublesome endeavors, laborious cares, and heedfull travels, you may guess,
bnt We best can witness, and do protest that your safety has equalled the
most thereof. And so God even bless you in all your actions.

About this time the Lord President having received manifest proofs that
Cormock mac Dermod, Lord of Muskery, had lately committed many acts of treason,
caused him to be apprehended and committed prisoner to the gentleman Porter,
and hearing his followers practiced his escape, gave the said gentleman Porter
charge to keep him safely upon his danger to answer for him, in the mean
time seazing all his Castles into her Majesty's hands, and like wise causing
his wife and children to be brought prisoners to Cork. Notwithstanding,
Cormocke escaped out of a window, the nine and twenty of September; yet being
heartned to rebellion by Captain Tyrrell and Oswilliuan Bear, he considered
that his Castles were all in the Queens power, his eldest son lately Student
in Oxford, was now kept prisoner in the Tower, that his youngest son, his wife
and daughter, and many of his chief followers were now prisoners at Cork, and
that the Rebels desiring to join with him, were hunger-starued, and would live
upon his Country already wasted, and therefore he wisely chose to submit
himself to her Majesty's mercy, and upon the two and twentieth of October,
this his submission was accepted.

About this time the Lord President heard that O Donnell was dead in Spain.
The three and twentieth of October Sir Samuel Bagnoll, with the Regiment sent
back from the Lord Deputy, fell by night upon Tyrrels Camp, lying in Muskery,
to expect Cormocks return, killed eighty of his men, made him fly away in his
shirt, took all his Cattle being more then one thousand, with sixty Horses and
hacknies, besides things vnseeue in Irish spoils, as velvet, outlandish
apparel, Spanish Coin, and all the money Tyrrell had gotten of the proportion
sent from Spain, and made Tyrrell fly into the Mountains of Desmond. In
November Sir Charles Wilmott brake by night into the quarter of the Knight of
Kerry, killed forty of his men, took five hundred Cowes, two hundred Garrons,
and two months provision of meal. The Rebels Tyrrell, Burke, O Swilliuan, and
Mac Morris, being daily assaulted by the English, and spoiled of their Cattle,
the rest of this month and the following of December, and having many of their
best men killed, suddenly fell into disputations, and after to controversies,
and so the strangers resolved to steal away, as they did with great amasement,
leaving the fastnesses they had held, to the ransacking of the English, first
Tyrrell, then William Bourke, who leading 1500 men, marched toward the Pale,
Sir Charles Wilmott having first in another conflict with them, killed many of
the most forward Kerne, taken all their baggage and prey of Cattle, being 2000
Cowes, 4000 Sheep, and 1000 Garrons.

In December the Lord President leaving Sir Charles Wilmott to command in
chief all the Forces, having besides the Lord Barry with 1600 Prouincials
under him, to attend such service as he should direct, left the Province of
Mounster to meet the Lord Deputy at Galloway in Connaght. In the mean time the
said Rebels fled toward the Pale as broken men, some resolving to join with
Tyrone, and some to return into Connaght their own Country, wherewith the
Mounster Rebels were so danted, as they daily came in to Sir Charles Wilmott in
great numbers, and with much Cattle, to submit themselves to mercy. The Lord
President before his journey into Connaght, took order that O Swilliuan Bears
Country should be so wasted, as neither Spaniards nor Rebels should find
relief there. About this time Captain Taaffe commanding our Irish men in
Carbery, assailed a band of Rebels led by a Priest, the Popes Nuntio, killed
him with most of his men, and got all their Cattle: And now in the absence of O
Swilliuan fled away, his Country was wasted and his Castles all taken. The
foresaid Priest was a man of special authority, so as upon his death the Mac
Carties and all Carbery submitted to mercy, and had power over all spiritual
livings in Ireland, so as all Priests depended upon him.

The Lord President returned into Mounster in January from Connaght, and having
sent Sir Edward Wingfeild with certain Companies of foot into Connaght,
according to the Lord Deputies direction, and leaving Sir Charles Wilmott, and
Sir G. Thornton Commissioners to govern Mounster, himself in the beginning of
February rode to Dublyn, leaving no Rebel in Mounster but Mac Morris, the
Knight of the Glan, Thomas Oge, and Connor O Driscoll, not able jointly to make
two hundred men, whereof Mac Morris in few days was well beaten and spoiled of
all he had by Sir Char. Wilmott. And in the beginning of March the L. President
sailed into England from Dublin.

CHAP. II. Of Tyrones taking to mercy, whereby the war was fully ended. And
of a new mutiny of the Cities of Mounster for establishing the public
exercise of the Roman Religion, with the appeasing thereof in the beginning of
the year 1603. Together with the Lord Deputies recalling into England, and the
rewards there given him for his service in the beginning of the year 1603;
with mention of his untimely death within few years after and a word of the
State of Ireland some ten years after.
THE five and twentieth of March, in the beginning of the year 1603, the Lord
Deputy wrote this following letter from Mellifant, Sir Garret Moors house, to
Master Secretary in England.

SIR, I have received by Captain Hayes her Majesty's letters of the sixth of
February, wherein I am directed to send for Tyrone, with promise of security
for his life only, and upon his arrival, without further assurance, to make
stay of him, till her pleasure should be further known, and at the same time
I received another from her Majesty of the seventeenth of February, wherein it
pleased her to enlarge the authority given unto me, to assure him of his life,
liberty and pardon, upon some conditions remembered therein. And withal I
received a letter from your self of the eighteenth of February, recommending
to me your own advice to fulfill (as far as I possibly could) the meaning of
her Majesty's first letter, and signifying her pleasure, that I should seek by
all the best means I can, to promise him his pardon by some other name then
Earl of Tyrone, and rather by the name of Barron of Dungannon, or if it needs
must be, by the name of some other Earl. Secondly, to deliver him his Country
in less quantity, and with less power then before he had it. And lastly, to
force him to clear his paces and passages, made difficult by him against any
entry into his Country. And now since it has pleased her Majesty, by so
great a trust to give me so comfortable Arguments of her favor, I am
encouraged the more freely to presume to declare my self in this great matter,
which I call great, because the consequence is great, and dangerous to be dealt
in, without the warrant of her gracious interpretation. And though my opinion
herein should proceed from a long and advised consideration, described with
large and many circumstances, and confirmed with strong and judicial reasons,
yet because I think it fit to hasten away this messenger. I will write of
these things somewhat, though on the sudden, and commit the rest to the
sufficient judgment and relation of the Lord President, now in his journey
toward you, and the rather, because I find him to concur with me, in the
apprehension of this cause, and of the state of all other things of this
Kingdom. And first, for her Majesty's first letter; I pray you Sir believe me,
that I have omitted nothing, both by power and policy to ruin him, and utterly
to cut him off, and if by either I may procure his head, before I have engaged
her Royal word for his safety, I do protest I will do it, and much more be
ready to possess my self of his person, if by only promise of life, or by any
other means, whereby I shall not directly scandal the majesty of public faith,
I can procure him to put himself into my power. But to speak my opinion freely,
I think that he, or any man in his case, would hardly adventure his liberty to
preserve only his life, which he knows how so well to secure by many other
ways, for if he fly into Spain, that is the least whereof he can be assured,
and most men (but especially he) do make little difference between the value
of their life and liberty, and to deceive him I think it will be hard; for
though wiser men then he may be ouer-reached, yet he has so many eyes of
jealousy awake, that it will be impossible to charm them, and I do (upon
assured ground) believe, that it is nothing but fear of his safety, that of a
long time (especially of late) has kept him from conformity to the State, and
if any thing do keep him now from accepting the lowest conditions, and from
settling himself and his heart, to a constant serving of her Majesty, it will be
fear of an absolute forgiveness, or the want of such an estate, as may in any
measure content him. The danger of his subsisting as he does, is either, if
there come no foreign forces, to maintain still a loose head of Rebellion
(which will be better able to offend any such as are become subjects, then we
can be, if we were a thousand times more, to defend them at all times, and in
all places) to stir up, and to maintain al humors, and to be a wound
remaining open, unto which they may have recourse, and upon all accidents be
ready to swell, or to infect the whole body of this Kingdom: Otherwise, if
there should be any invasion, to be a powerful and politic head, to draw this
Country to their assistance. If there come no foreign Forces, and that he
should be cut off, yet is it likely, some other in the nature of a spoiling
outlaw would arise up in his place, as ill as himself; and if he be kept
prisoner, the like effects will arise, as if he were dead. If he be cut off,
or kept prisoner, and the Spaniards should arrive, most of the Swordmen will
flock unto them for advantage of pay, and the coffeehouse of Lords of
Countries would be as great, or greater, then if he were amongst them, and
therefore they as likely to fall then as now, to the Spanish party: but if it
were possible to make him a good subject, the use her Majesty may make of him,
must be amongst these people, since during his life and liberty, none will
aspire to that place of O Neale, which does carry with it so great an interest
in the North, and what interest he has, he may be led to employ, to
suppress and settle the minds of the people to government, and having once
declared himself to be a dutiful subject, it will be first a great
discouragement for the Spaniards to come; and if they do come, if he continue
honest, his presence and interest will sway the North from giving them
assistance, or annoying the subjects, if we withdraw our Garrisons, and make
the rest of Ireland more advised how they declare themselves against the State.

Sir, to conclude, because I cannot shortly express mine own mind herein, I
think it best, if it please her Majesty, to receive him to her mercy, so that
first his submission be made in as humble sort, and as much for her Majesty's
Honor as can be devised, and then that she assure him of absolute
forgiveness, and forgetting of his faults, and as much honor and profit as he
had before, provided that we take from him (as much as possibly we may) those
locks wherein his chiefest strength lies. Otherwise I am persuaded, either the
Queen shall not serve her own turn by him, if she keep him prisoner, or he
will serve his turn if he live at liberty, and ever have ( Animum reuertendi)
an affection to relapse. How I am resolved to proceed in this business, you
shall know by the Lord President, which notwithstanding many things may alter,
but for the substance I do think we shall be able to compass as much, as by
her Majesty's last letter is required, and by yours written after that, except
that point of the taking from him the title of the Earldom of Tyrone, for the
which I think there be many reasons that it should not be much stood upon.
Besides what I have written before of giving him contentment, which may be
applied to this, first, you do but give him a title, which he did shake of, as
a mark of his bondage, and that which he falls from, to accept this, he did
as much prefer before this, as the estate of an absolute Prince before the
condition of a subject, and it is the name of O Neale, with the which he has
done so much mischief, that is fatal and odious, and not the name of Tyrone,
which he was saine to leave, before he could have power to become a Rebel;
for believe me out of my experience, the titles of our Honors do rather
weaken then strengthen them in this Country, and if you give him the same
degree, but with another name, it may be thought a condition rather by him
obtained, then by us imposed, especially if he enjoys his Country; and
lastly, if you make him only Barron of Dungannon, you leave in him a spur
to coffeehouse, without any greater bridle from doing hurt, for his power
will be never the less, and yet he that does not sit easily, will ever think
of another seat, and his own title will the more run in his mind, the more
he is unsatisfied with this new. Notwithstanding al my opinions of these
things, I will run as near as I can to the straightest line of her Majesty's
pleasure, and I presume I will so handle this matter, that I will be sure her
Majesty's Honor shall not be endangered, (I mean) by the authority she has
given me, which any man shall hardly take notice of, till I be assured upon
what terms I shall find him; and if his requests be not as humble as
becomes him, or as by her Majesty is required, he shall make little use of
any negotiation that shall be with him. And so Sir, etc.

Touching the receiving of Tyrone to mercy, no man shall take from me the
reputation The Earl of Tyrone received to mercy.
(such as it is) to have been the isntrumental cause of doing this honor to
my deceased Sovereign and my Nation, and of giving this disgraceful blow to
the Arch-Traitor Tyrone, that he humbly submitted himself to Queen Elizabeth,
finding mercy at her royal feet, whom he had proudly offended, and whose sole
power (in despite of his domestical associates and foreign support), had
brought him on his knees, and that the victory was fully achieved by the sole
Sword of the English Nation and well affected English-Irish, whose blood he had
spilt; and that so the Arch-Traitor lost the means longer to subsist in
rebellion, by the advantage of Englands unsettled Estate, or at least the
advantage and the vainglory to fasten merit on the sacred Majesty of King
James, the said Queens happy successor, by submitting to his royal mercy,
and so hiding the extreme misery in which he was plunged, to have made this his
action seem altogether voluntary, and every way noble in him, to which he was
forced by the highest constraint, and in the most base manner that can be
imagined: Now as no man knows the circumstances of this action better then my
self, so I will briefly and truly relate them. Queen Elizabeth had been
sick for more then a months space, and of some apparent danger of her death,
the Lord Deputy had been advertised, and at this time she was dead,
(departing the four and twentieth of March, the last day of the year past),
though it were not know ne to the Lord Deputy till the seven and twentieth of
March in the night. nor publicly, or to Tyrone himself, till the fifth of
April, after his humble submission made before the Lord Deputy to the Queen,
as then living, though indeed she were dead. This business passed in manner
following. There was a gentleman among the voluntary followers of the Lord
Deputy, who had long been earnestly ambitious of the honor of Knighthood,
which by no endeavors of service, expense of money, or assistance of friends,
he could hitherto attain. Now a servant of his posting from London, and
getting a happy passage at Sea, came upon the 27 of March (late in the night)
to Mellifant, where the Lord Deputy then lay, and brought with him the first
news of the Queens death, which when he had related to his Master, he having
been long pleased to take my advise in his affairs, advertised me of these
news, and brought his servant to confirm the same in my hearing. Whereupon I
required his servant not to speak a word thereof to any man, threatening him
with the Lord Deputies displeasure, and severe punishment, if any such rumor
were spread by him. Then I was bold to give his Master confidence of receiving
the honor he desired, if he would follow my advise, which was this; that he
should go to the Lord Deputy, and tell him this report of the Queens death,
brought by his servant, and the strict charge he had given unto him for the
concealing thereof, till his Lordship should think fit to make it known, and
withal to make tender of himself, and all his means, to follow his Lordships
fortune in this doubtful time (for such it was in expectation, though most
happy in event.) The Gentleman did as I advised him, and for his particular, it
took the same effect which I expected, as I will show, when I have first set
down, how his Lordship hereupon proceeded with Tyrone.

The Lord Deputy being warranted by the Queens letters above written, to
receive Tirone to her Majesty's mercy, had upon the five and twentieth of March
sent Sir William Godolphin and Sir Garret Moore, to treat with him, for which
they had a Commission in these words.

Mountioy.
Whereas the Earl of Tyrone has made humble suite unto us, that upon his
penitent submission to her Majesty's mercy, we would be pleased to send some
Gentlemen, to whom he might make known his humble petitions, and impart
somewhat to them that does much concern her Majesty's service: For the great
trust we repose in you, and the good opinion we conceive of your discreet
judgments, we have made choice of you to be employed herein, and do by these
presents give you both jointly and severally our absolute warrant and
authority, upon this occasion of her Majesty's scruice, to parley and confer
with him, or any of his adherents, or followers. Provided that of this your
conference you shall with all convenient speed give us knowledge in all
particulars, and of all his and your proceedings herein, to the end you may
receive our further directions. And for so doing this shall be your sufficient
warrant. Given at Tredagh the four and twenty of March, 1602.

To Our trusly and well beloved, Sir William Godolphin, and Sir Garret More
Knights.
When I had written this Commission his Lordship commanded me to write this
following protection.

Mountioy.

WHereas upon the humble suite and submission of Hugh Earl of Tyrone, and his
penitent contrition for his former offenses, by many messages and letters
signified unto Us, We have thought good to receive into her Majesty's most
gracious protection, his own person, and such as shall come in his Company,
with safety to him and them, and the rest of his followers whatsoever,
(dwelling in the County of Tyrone, or now abiding with him,) as well in their
bodies as goods, for and during the space of three weeks, to the end he might
repair unto us, to let us more fully understand his humble petitions. These
are straightly to charge and command all and every her Majesty's Officers,
Ministers, and Subjects, to permit and suffer him and them peaceably to enjoy
the benefit thereof, without any restraint, molestation, or hostile act,
against him or his in their bodies or goods, during the time above limited. So
as in the mean time hec and they continue of good and dutiful behavior
toward her Majesty, and this State. Given at Tredagh the four and twentieth
of March, 1602.

To all Commanders of horse and foot, and to all other her Majesty's Officers
and Subjects to whom it may appertain.
Likewise his Lordship commanded me to write several letters to the Governors
of Garrisons, requiring them to give Tyrone and his followers full benefit of
this Protection. And these writings being all signed by the Lord Deputy, were
delivered to Sir William Godolphin, with charge that when Tyrone was in his
Company, and on the way to come to his Lordship, then (and not before) he
should deliver him the Protection, and likewise the letters, to be sent to the
several Garrisons, by his own messengers. These Commissioners, on the six and
twentieth of March, sent one Bathe from Armagh to Tyrone, to prepare the way of
their meeting. The seven and twentieth both the Commissioners came to
Charlemont, where Sir William Godolphin stayed for his troop of horse, but Sir
Garret Moore rode that night to Tullough-oge, where he spoke with Tyrone. The
eight and twentieth Sir Garret Moore wrote to Sir William, that Tyrone was
fully resolved to obey the Lord Deputies commandments, and would meet him the
next morning at nine of the clock, to ride forward in his company to the Lord
Deputy. And Henry Hagan, who brought this letter, gave Sir William confident
assurance of Tyrones performance.

The same eight and twentieth day, the L. Deputy being at Mellifant, and there
having the foresaid notice of the Queens death, and considering that this
rumor was no good ground for a new treaty with Tyrone, yet breaking out, were
it true or false, might cause new combustions in Ireland, most apt to relapse
into new tumults (as appeared by the ensuing mutiny of the very Cities and
corporate Towns), as also that if it were true, then he had no power from the
succeding King, to receive Tyrone to mercy, yea that in case it should prove
false, then such treaty with the Arch-traytor in any other then Queen
Elizabeth's name, might prove very dangerous to him. For these reasons he
resolved speedily to strike up the former treaty with Tyrone and so presently
dispatched a horseman to Sir William Godolphin, to advertise him thereof, and
to require him to hasten Tyrones coming, by remembrance to him that his former
delays in Treaties had much incensed the Queen, and by threatening him, that
if he made the least delay of his submission, his power to do him good might
be easily restrained, and then he should expect nothing from him but a sharp
prosecution to his utter ruin. Sir William having received these his
Lordships, and Sir Garrets foresaid letters, thought it no time to stand nicely
upon terms of equality, (which might argue his distrust of Tyrone, and awaken
in him his old iealousies of our meaning to him), and therefore leaving order
that his troop should follow him, did ride from Charlemont and met Tyrone on
the nine and twentieth of March, at nine of the clock in the morning at Toker,
a place lying five miles beyond Dungannon, where showing him the Lord Deputies
protection, he most humbly and thankfully accepted thereof, and so committed
himself to the Commissioners, to ride in their company to the Lord Deputy. By
the way they delivered his Protection to his own hands, and likewise the
letters, which he was to send to the several Governors by his own messengers.

On the thirtieth of March 1603. they came al together to Mellifant in the
afternoon, where Tyrone being admitted to the Lord Deputies chamber, kneeled at
the door humbly on his knees for a long space, making his penitent submission
to her Majesty, and after being required to come nearer to the Lord Deputy,
performed the same ceremony in all humbleness, the space of one hour or there
abouts. The next day he also made a most humble submission in writing, signed
with his own hand, in manner and form following (as appears upon record.)

I Hugh Oneale, by the Queen of England, France, and Ireland, her most
gracious favor created Earl of Tyrone, do with all true and humble penitency
prostrate my self at her royal feet, and absolutely submit my self unto her
mercy, most sorrowfully imploring her gracious commiseration, and appealing
only to her Princely clemency, without presuming to justify my vnloyall
proceedings against her sacred Majesty. Only most sorrowfully and carnestly
desiring, that it may please her Majesty rather in some measure to mittigate
her just indignation against me, in that I do religiously vow, that the first
motives of my unnatural rebellion, were neither practice, malice, nor
ambition; but that I was induced first by fear of my life, (which I conceived
was sought by my Enemies practice) to stand upon my guard, and after most
unhappily led, to make good that fault with more heinous offenses, the which in
themselves I do acknowledge deserve no forgiveness, and that it is impossible
for me, in respect of their greatness, in any proportion even with my life to
make satisfaction; I do most humbly desire her Majesty to pardon them, that as
I have been already a sufficient argument of her Royal power, having little
left but my life to preserve it self, so that it may now please her Majesty,
to make me an example of her Princely clemency, the chiefest ornament of her
high dignity. And that I may be the better able hereafter with the uttermost
service of my life to redeem the foulenes of my faults, I do most humbly sue
unto her Majesty, that she will vouchsafe to restore me to my former dignity
and living, in which estate of a subject I do religiously vow to continue for
ever hereafter loyal, in all true obedience to her royal person, crown,
prerogative, and laws, and to be in all things as far and as dutifully
conformable thereunto, as I or any other Nobleman of this Realm is bound by
the duty of a subject to his Sovereign, or by the Laws of this Realm,
utterly renouncing and abiuting the name and title of O Neale, or any other
authority or claim, which has not been granted or confirmed unto me by her
Majesty, and that otherwise by the Laws of this Realm, I may not pretend inst
interest unto, and I do religiously swear to perform so much as is above
mentioned, and the rest of these Articles, subscribed by my own hand, as far
as shall any way lie in my power, and to deliver such pledges for the
performance thereof, as shall be nominated unto me by the Lord Deputy.

I do renounce and abjure all foreign power whatsoever, and all kind of
dependancy upon any other Potentate but her Majesty the Queen of England,
France, and Ireland, and do vow to serve her faithfully against any foreign
power inuading her Kingdoms, and to discover truly any practices that I do,
or shall know against her royal person or Crowns; and namely and especially,
I do abjure and renounce all manner of dependancy upon the King or Estate of
Spain, or treaty with him or any of his confederates, and shall be ready with
the uttermost of my ability to serve her Majesty against him, or any of his
forces or confederates.

I do absolutely renounce all challenge or intermedling with the Vriaghts, or
softering with them or other neighbor Lords, or Gentlemen out of my Country,
or exacting any black rents of any Vriaghts (or bordering Lords.)

I do resign all claim and title to any lands, but such as shall be now
granted unto me by her Majesty's Letters Pattents.

Lastly, as the only being a Subject, does include all the duties of a
Subject, so will I be content to be informed, and advised by her Magistrates
here, and will be conformable and assisting unto them, in any thing that may
tend to the advancement of her service, and the peaceable government of this
Kingdom, as namely for the abolishing of all barbarous customs, contrary to
the laws, being the seeds of all inciuility, and for the clearing of difficult
passages and places, which are the nurseries of rebellion, wherein I will
employ the labors of the people of my Country, in such sort and in such
places, as I shall be directed by her Majesty, or the Lord Deputy and Counsel
in her name, and will endeavor for my self and the people of my Country, to
erect civil habitations, and such as shall be of greater effect to preserve
us against thieves, and any force but the power of the State, by the which we
must rest assured to be preserved as long as we continue in our duties.

This submission was presented by the Earl of Tyrone kneeling on his knees,
before the Lord Deputy and Counsel, and in the presence of a great assembly.
At the same time the Earl promised to write unto the King of Spain, for the
recalling of his son from thence into Ireland, and to do the same at such
time, and in such words, as the Lord Deputy should direct. Likewise he vowed to
discover how far he had proceeded with the King of Spain, or any other
foreign or domestical enemies, for past or future helps and combinations.
Then the Lord Deputy in the Queens name, promised to the Earl for himself
and his followers her Majesty's gracious pardon, and to himself the restoring
of his dignity of the Earldom of Tyrone, and of his blood, and likewise new
letters Pattents for all his lands, which in his former letters had been
granted to him before his rebellion, excepting only the Country possessed by
Henry Oge Oneale, and the Fues possessed by Turlogh Mac Henry, to both which,
at their submission the Lord Deputy had formerly promised, that they should
hold the same immediately from the Queen, to which end this exemption and
reservation was now made of these Countries, and the disposing of them left to
her Majesty's power. And likewise excepting and reserving three hundred acres
of land, to be laid to the Fort of Mountioy, and three hundred more to the
Fort of Charlemont, during her Majesty's pleasure to hold any Garrisons in the
said Forts. To these exemptions of Henry Oge and Turlogh Mac Henry, their
Countries and themselves, from the Earls right or power, he gave his full
consent as likewise to the reservation of the lands laid to the said Forts. He
promised to reduce his Country to pay her Majesty like composition, as
Connaght now did, and for long time had paid, and to answer rising out of
soldiers, and all charges for advancing her Majesty's service.

The third of April, the Lord Deputy, having the Earl of Tyrone in his
company rode to Tredagh, and from thence upon the fourth day to Dublyn.

The next day an English ship arrived in that Haven, in which came Sir Henry
Dauers, who brought with him letters from the Lords in England, aduertising the
Queens death, and that James the first was proclaimed King of England,
Scotland, France, and King James proclaimed.
Ireland, the copy of which Proclamation they sent, to the end it should here
be published in like sort.

Also in the same ship came one Master Liegh, kinsman to the Lord Deputy, who
brought his Lordship a favorable letter from the King out of Scotland. This
Master Liegh his Lordship presently graced with the honor of Knighthood.

And concerning the gentleman formerly spoken of, whose servant brought the
first news of the Queens death, I was not deceived in the honor I did
ominate to him, (as I have formerly written), for after he had followed my
advice, in the manner of his imparting that important news to the Lord Deputy,
his Lordship conceived so good an opinion of him, for his discretion, and for
the particular affection he had expressed toward him, by the tender of his
service in following his fortune this doubtful time, as his Lordship did not
only by the way from Meltfant to Dublyn, extraordinarily grace him, and often
call him (not without some admiration of the better sort of his train) to ride
by his side, talking familiarly with him, but now upon his arrival to Dublyn,
upon this occasion of honoring his cozen Leigh, did also knight him.

In the mean time according to the Lord Deputies commandment, the Counselors
of the State, the Noblemen, Knights, and chief Commanders of the Army, then
being at Dublyn, assembled together in the Castle, to whom his Lordship made
known the Queens death, and the Kings Proclamation, which he first, then all
in course signed, and presently taking Horse, with joyful acclamations,
published the same through the chief streets of Dublyn.

I cannot omit to mention, that the Earl of Tyrone, upon the first hearing the
Lord Deputies relation of the Queens death, could not contain himself from
shedding of tears, in such quantity as it could not well be concealed,
especially in him, upon whole face all men eyes were cast: himself was content
to insinuate, that a tender sorrow for loss of his Sovereign Mistress caused
this passion in him; but every dull understanding might easily conceive, that
thereby his heart might rather be more eased of many and continual ielousies
and fears, which the guilt of his offenses could not but daily present him,
after the greatest security of pardon: And there needed no Oedipus to find out
the true cause of his tears: for no doubt, the most humble submission he made
to the Queen he had so highly and proudly offended, much eclipsed the vain
glory his actions might have carried, if he had hold out till her death:
besides that by his coming in, as it were between two reigns, he lost a fair
advantage, for (by Englands Estate, for the present unsettled) to have subsisted
longer in rebellion (if he had any such end) or at least an ample occasion of
fastening great merit on the new King, if at first and with free will he had
submitted to his mercy, which he would have pretended to do, only of an
honorable affection to his new Prince, and many would in all likelihood have
believed so much, especially they to whom his present misery and ruined estate
were not at all (or not fully) known.

The sixth of April the Earl of Tyrone made a new submission to the King, in
the same form he had done to the Queen, the name only changed. He also wrote
this following letter to the King of Spain.

IT may please your most Excellent Majesty: Having since the first time that
ever I received letters from your Highness Father, and your Majesty, or
written letters unto you, performed to the uttermost of my power whatsoever I
promised: insomuch as in the expectation of your assistance, since the repair
of O Donnell to your Majesty, I continued in action, until all my nearest
kinsemen and followers having forsaken me; I was enforced (as my duty is) to
submit my self to my Lord and Sovereign, the beginning of this instant month
of April, in whose service and obedience I will continue during my life.
Therefore, and for that growing old my self) I would gladly see my son
settled in my life time, I have thought good (giving your Majesty all thanks
for your Princely usage of my son Henry, during his being in Spain) most
humbly to desire you to send him unto me; And for the poucrtie whereunto I was
driven, I have in sundry letters, both in Irish and other languages, so
signified the same, as it were inconvenient herein to make relation thereof:
And so I most humbly take my leave.

From Dublin, etc. Your Highness poor friend that was, Hugh Tyrone.


Together with the same he wrote another letter to his son Henry to hasten
his coming from Spain into Ireland, but without any effect. Lastly, the Lord
Deputic renewed to the Earl of Tyrone his Majesty's Protection for a longer
time, till he could sue out his Pardon, and sent him back into his Country,
to settle the same, and to keep his friends and former confederates in better
order, upon this change of the State.

Sir Henry Dauers, who lately brought letters to the Lord Deputy from the Lords
in England, returned back with purpose to repair presently unto the King,
whereupon the Lord Deputy commended to his relation the following instructions:
signed with his Lordships hand. Wherein you must note, that his Lordship omits
the news of the Queens death, received by the servant of a Gentleman (as
aforesaid), the same being only a private inteliigence, whereupon he could
not safely build his late proceedings, and that his Lordship only insists upon
letters from the State, which could only give warrant to the same. The
instrustions are these.

You are to inform the Kings Majesty, that at your coming over hither, the
fifth hereof, with the letters from the Lords in England, signifying the
decease of my late Scueraigne Mistress, you found with me here at Dublin the
Earl of Tyrone, newly come in upon Protection, and by that means the Rcalme
for the present generally quiet, all expecting that upon a conclusion with him
(which then every one conceived to be likely, in as much as he put himself into
my hand, which till that time he would never do to any) the Country would in
short time be thoroughly settled, so that every one thet found himself in
danger, did press me (in a manner hourly) for his pardon, foreseeing that he
that stayed out longest, was sure to be made the example of the Justice of the
State, where such as could soonest make their way, by assuring their future
loyalty and service, were hopeful to lay hold upon their Sovereigns mercy.

Now to the end you may acquaint his Majesty, how far forth I have proceeded
with the Earl of Tyrone and upon what warrant; you shall be hereby thus
remembered. He had often made great means to be received to mercy, which as
often I had denied him, prosecuting him to the uttermost of my ability, being
cuer confident in opinion, that until I had brought him very low, and driven
him out of his own Country, (as I did the last Summer, and left Garrisons upon
him, that took most of the Creaghts, and spoiled the rest of his goods,) he
would not be made fit to crauc mercy in that humble manner that was beseeming
so great an offender. In December last, when I was at Galloway, he importuned
me by many messages and letters, and by some that he trusted very well vowed
much sincerity if he might be hearkened unto there, and at that time he sent
me a submission, framed in as humble manner, as I could reasonably require: To
that I sent him this answer, that I would recommed it to her Majesty, but
until I had further direction from her, I would still prosecute him as I did
before, and get his head if I could, and that was all the comfort I gave him;
yet ceased he not to continue a suitor with all the earnestness that he could
devise, hoping in the end to obtain that he desired. In the month of March, I
received letters from her Majesty, of the sixteenth and sauenteenth of
February, whereby I was authorized to give him my word for his coming and
going safe, and to pardon him, so as he would come parsonally where I should
assign him, to receine it, and yield to some other conditions, in the last of
those two letters contained. And withal I was specially required, above all
things to drive him to some issue presently, because her Majesty then conceived
that contrariety of successes here, or change of accidents in other parts,
might turn very much to her disadvantage; for which she was still apt to
believe that he lay in wait, and would spin out all things further then were
requisite, with delays and shifts, if I should not abridge him. Shortly after
the Earl renewing his former suit, with very great carnestnesse, and in most
humble manner (as may appear by his letter in March sent me to Tredagh,
whether I was then drawn upon special occasion of seuice), I thought it fit
to entertain the offer of his submission, and to draw on the speedier
conclusion of so important a business, both for that the daily intelligence out
of Spain, threatened danger unto this Kingdom, and for that I had then received
advertisement from the Counsel in England of her Majesty's dangerous
sickness, the least of which accidents might have revived his hopes, added new
life unto his languishing partisans, and utterly changed the whole frame of my
proceedings. To this end I signed his Protection for three weeks, with
several warrants to the bordering Garrisons of forbearance from doing any
hostile act, either upon his person, and the persons of his followers, or upon
their goods, during the term aforesaid, appointing Sir Garret Moore (a
Gentleman well deserving of the State, and out of ancient acquaintance with the
Earl, much respected by him) to repair unto him, and to give him knowledge,
that if simply and plainly (according to the tennor of his humble requests) he
were resolved (without any delay) to present his petitions unto me in his own
person, where I assigned his appearance, he should then receive a protection
for his safe coming and return, with assurance for his people and goods
during his absence, by the hands of Sir William Godolphin whom I had purposely
sent into those part with a sufficient guard, to attend his resolution, and to
bring him safely unto me. These conditions (though at first seeming somewhat
hard, as both tasting of too great an humblenes, and not utterly free from
danger of his person, whose head was set to Sale, by a public act, and private
men not bound to take knowledged of the present proceedings), found easier
acceptance then almost any man would have imagined, the Earl peremtorily
commanding, that none of his, upon what pretense soever; should presume to
dissuade him from obaying this summons, seeing no way of mediation was left
unto him, save only this, vowing in the presence of a great many that although
the Deputies heavy hand had almost brought him to the height of misery, yet
should no mortal power have extorted from him a submission of this nature, but
that out of long and earnest observation of his proceedings, he had found
reason to hope, that when his Lordship should discover the unfeigned penitency
of his heart, for his forepast misdeeds, with a firm resolution to redeem his
offenses, by faithful serving her Majesty, and well deserving of the State,
during the whole remainder of his life, that he should then find from him as
great commiseration of his present sufferings, and as charitable a repair
against the threatened ruins of his house, posterity, and poor distressed
Country, as he had tatted bitterness in the whole course of his former
prosecution. Thus persuaded, he left directions for settling his Country, the
best he might on such a sudden, and with a guard of 50 horse under the leading
of Sir William Godolphin, making great marches, until he came unto me within
three miles of Tredagh, fell there down on his knees before a great assembly,
confessing his unworthiness, yet humbly craving her Majesty's mercy, which as
above all earthly things he protested to desire, so he vowed with the
uttermost of his power to deserve the same. It were too long to set down all
that passed in this first interview, he striving to express in all his
speeches and gestures the lowest degree of humblenes, to me, that was to value
and to maintain the greatness of her State and place, who^ he so highly had
offended. The next morning I sent for him (the Treasurer at Wars being only
present with me), and made him see how well I understood his present condition,
how impossible it was for him to subsist, even in the poorest and most
conte^ptible fashion of a Woodkerne, if her Majesty were but pleased to employ
the present instruments of his ruin. Finally, finding him most sensible, both
of his estate, and the Queens high favor in remitting his crime, I promised
him her gracious pardon, on those conditions, mentioned in the memorial sent
by your hands. From thence he attended me to Tredagh, and so to Dublin the
fourth of April, where the next day I received letters from the Nobility in
England, signifyng the death of our late Sovereign: Whereupon I called
together the Counsel and such of the Nobility as were in Town, and
acquainting them with the contents thereof, I propounded also the present
proclaiming of his Majesty, whereunto all most willingly agreed, and among
them the Earl of Tyrone, and when they had set their hands to the
Proclamation, all together did accompany me the Deputy to the publishing
thereof in the City. Since that time I thought fit to dismiss the Earl of
Tyrone into his own Country, the better to retain his people and partisans in
good order, but first we took from him a new submission to his Majesty, signed
by his hand, which now I send by you.

Also you shall inform his Majesty, that now there is no Rebel in Ireland,
who has not sued to be received to the Kings mercy, and that I think fit to
yield the same to most of them, leaving only some few to be prosecuted to utter
ruin, for an example and terror to other ill affected subjects, wherein I
desire to know his Majesty's pleasure.

Lastly, you are to present my humble suit unto his Majesty, to be discharged
of this Government, or if it shall please his Majesty to employ me further
herein, yet that he will vouchsafe me leave to kiss his Royal hands, which I
desire not only out of my particular affection to have the happiness to see him,
but also out of my desire to inform him thoroughly of the present estate of this
Kingdom, wherein I presume that I shall be able to do his Majesty very good
service. And if it shall not please his Majesty to resolve for the present on
some other man, to undertake this Government, but only to leave the
authority to some fit man's hand, during my absence, and if he be resolved to
make choice among those that are here present, and therein shall require my
opinion, you shall say, that although I will not presume to recommend any to
his Majesty, yet I do think Sir George Carry Treasurer at wars to be most
fit for that place, who has already been Lord Justice of this Kingdom, and
howsoever he be no soldier, yet is well acquainted with the business of the
war, wherein he has been ever very industrious to advance the service.

At the same time the Lord Deputy sent over Master Richard Cook one of his
Secretaries, to negotiate his affairs in Court. And because his Lordship
desired to retain the superintendency of this Government, with title of Lord
Lieutenant, and with two third parts of the Lord Deputies allowances, in regard
no man was able to support the place of Lord Deputy with the other third part
of that allowance, except he had other great Fees and place of commodity in
this Kingdom, his Lordship nominated (as before) Sir George Carry to be most
fit for that place, some other Counselors being in this one point joined with
him, namely, to sign all such warrants as should be signed for the disbursing
of the Treasure. The instructions given to Master Cook were these.

To procure a new Pattent to the Lord Mountioy with title of Lord Lieutenant,
and with authority to leave Sir George Carey Treasurer at Wars to be Lord
Deputy, and so his Lordship to come presently over. 2. To procure new Pattents
for Wards, letting of the Kings lands, compounding the Kings debts, etc. (as
before.) 3. To solicit for victual, munition and money. 4. To move the change
of the base coin now current. 5. To advertise the news from Spain. 6. To
solicit the sending of new Seals; namely, the great Seal, Signets, Counsel
seals, for the State, Mounster, and Connaght, for the Kings Bench, Common
pleas, and Exchequer. 7. To procure authority to pass estates to the Irish
Lords.

After King James his Proclamation at Dublin, the Lord Deputy sent like
Proclamations to all Governors, Magistrates, and Officers of Provinces,
Cities, and Countries to be in like sort published, and with all made known to
them severally his Majesty's pleasure signified in his letters directed to the
Lords in England) to continue all Governors, Magistrates, and Officers, and
all his Majesty's Ministers (as well Martial as Civil of both the Kingdoms
of England and Ireland, in as absolute authorities and jurisdictions of their
places, as before the decease of the late Queen Elizabeth of famous memory
they enjoyed and exercised the same, as also to continue and establish all the
Laws and Statutes of both Kingdoms in their former force and validity, till
such time as his Majesty should please to take fuller knowledge, and resolve
for the publik good of any alteration (not intended but upon some special and
weighty causes), and should please to give notice of his pleasure. Further his
Lordship advised them, to concur with him in the vigilant care, to present
all things in the best estate might be, to the first view of so worthy and
mighty a Sovereign.

The twelfth of April the Lord Deputy received letters from Sir Charles
Wilmott and Sir George Thorneton, (appointed Commissioners with joint authority
for governing the Province of Mounster, in the absence of Sir George Carew Lord
President, late gone for England), aduertising that they had blocked up Mac
Morrish in the Castle of Billingarry, belonging to the Lord Fitz-morrice, and
hoped by the taking thereof, to clear the Province of all open Rebels.

The fifteenth of April his Lordship received a letter from Ororke, humbly
imploring the Queens mercy, and the same day after his hearing of the Queens
death, another in like humbleness craving the Kings mercy.

The sixteenth day his Lordship received letters from the Mayor of Cork,
aduertising The mutiny of the Cities in Mounster about Religion.
that he had received the Kings Proclamation the eleventh of April, and had
deferred the publishing thereof to this day, only to the end it might be dove
with more solemnity, humbly praying, that in regard the Fort built for defense
of the Harbor of Cork from foreign invasion, was not kept by a Commander
sufficient to secure the same for the Crown, his Lordship would accept the
offer of him the Mayor, and therest of the corporation of the said City, to
keep the same for his Majesty at their own peril. Lastly, complaining that
the Soldiers now keeping the Fort, did shoot at the Fishermen, and at the
Boats sent out of the Town for provisions, using them at their pleasure.

The same sixteenth day his Lordship was advertised by several letters: First
that the Citizens of Waterford had broken up the doors of the Hospital, and
had admitted one Doctor White to preach at Saint Patrickes Church, and had
taken from the Sexton the keys of the Cathedral Church, of themselves
mutinously setting up the public celebration of the Mass, and doing many
insolences in that kind. Secondly that Edward Raghter a Dominican Friar of
Kilkenny, assisted by some of the Town, came to the Blacke-Fryers, used for a
Session-House, and breaking the doors, pulled down the benches and seats of
Justice, building an Altar in the place of them, and commanded one Biship,
dwelling in part of the Abbey, to deliver him the keys of his House, who was
to take possession of the whole Abbey, in the name and right of the Friars his
brethren.

The eighteenth day his Lordship was advertised from the Commissioners of
Mounster, that the Citizens of Cork had not only refused to join with them
in publishing the Proclamation of King James, but had drawn themselves all
into Arms, and kept strong guardes at their Ports, and had absolutely
forbidden the Commissioners to publish the same, with such contemptuous words
and actions, as would have raised a mutiny, if they had not used greater
temper: That the Townsmen had made stay of boats loaded with the Kings
victuals and munition for the Fort of Haleholin, saying that the Fort was built
within their Franchizes without their consent, and was meetest to be in the
custody of the City. Whereupon they the said Commissioners accompanied with the
Lord Roche and some 800 persons of the Country, (all expressing muchioy, but
none of the Citizens assisting, or expressing any joy), did publish the
Proclamation, upon an hill near the Town, with as much solemnity as might be,
and had furnished the Fort with victuals and munition from Kinsale. And they
besought his Lordship speedily to reestablish by new Letters Pattents the
Magistrates authority, because the ceasing thereof by the Queens death, had
especially emboldened these Citizens to be thus insolent.

The same day one Edward Gough a Merchant of Dublyn, newly coming out of
Spain, and examined upon oath, said that at Cales he saw the Ordinance shipped
to S. Lucas, for forty sail (as he heard) there ready to go for Lisbone,
where was a fleet of 140 ships prepared (as some said) for Ireland, or (as
others said) for Flaunders; but he heard no General named, only heard that
Don Iean de l'Agula, was again received to the Kings favor. The 22 day his
Lordship wrote to the Soneraigne of Kilkenny, that howsoever he had no purpose
violently to reform Religion in this Kingdom, but rather prayed for their
better understanding, yet he could not permit, yea must severely punish in that
Town and otherwhere, the seditious and mutinous setting up of the public
exercise of Popish Religion, without public authority, and likewise with
prejudice done to those of the prosession established by God, and by the Laws
of both the Realms, requiring that he and they should desist from such
mutinous disorders, apprehending the chief authors, and if they wanted power
to suppress the sedition of a few Priests and Friars, his LP offered to assist
them with the Kings forces; for he would not fail to give life to the Laws
and obedience due to his Majesty.

The four and twentieth day, his Lordship was advertised that the Citizens of
Lymrick had with their Priests entered into all the Churches of the City, and
there erecting Altars, had used the Rites of the Romish Church.

The 25. day, his Lordship wrote this letter to the Citizens of Waterford.

YOur letters of the three and twentieth of this instant came this day to my
hands. And having duly considered the contents of the same, I find, that they
return a double excuse of the courses you have used: first, for your delay of
time to proclaim the Kings most Excellent Majesty, according to such
directions as was sent unto you, from the Earl of Ormond, by a Counselor of
this State. And the next, for such disorders as were reported to be committed,
by the public breach of his Highness Laws in matters of Religion: To the
which We return you this answer following. First, albeit We would have wished,
that you had had a more careful regard to have performed such directions as
you received from to Noble a Peer of this Realm, by so reverent a messenger,
as you might assure your selves in such a matter durst not abuse you, his
Highness sole and undoubted right concurring also with your own knowledge and
consciences, yet We will not condemn you for that omission of the time, seeing
afterward you did obey our directions in that behalf, and gave so public a
testimony of your joyful allowance and consent to his Majesty's Right and
lawful title proclaimed amongst you. But as in this part you have given unto
us a kind of contentment, so in the last point, We cannot forbear to let you
understand the Just mislike We do conceive, that you being Citizens of wisdom
and good experience, and the Laws of the Realm continuing in force, would be
drawn either by your Priests, or any like practices, to commit any public
breach of the Laws, and the rather because out of that unspotted duty, which
you profess you have ever carried to the Crown, you would not in reason
conceive that the example of your offense in such a cause, and in so great and
populous a City, could not but in it self be very dangerous, in these
disordered times, wherein examples do carry men astray, which in discharge of
Our duty to the Kings Highness We may not suffer. And therefore have resolved
to make Our speedy repair unto those parts, for none other purpose but to
establish his Majesty's Laws, that no public nor contemptious breach be made
of them, wherein We wish you had bin more wary, contenting your selves with the
long and favorable tolleration you enjoyed during the late Queens reign,
rather then in this sort to have prescribed Laws to your selves; whereby in
wisdom you may perceive how much you have prejudiced the very obtaining of
your own desire, by the courses you have taken, (as we are credibly informed).
And yet because it may be, that the reports of your behavior have been made
more heinous then there is cause, We are well pleased to suspend Our giving
credit to such particular informations, until upon due examination the truth
may appear, wherein We hope and shall be glad that you can acquit your selves
so of these imputations now laid upon you, or otherwise that you conform your
selves now at last, in such sort to the obedience you owe to his Majesty, and
his Laws, as We be not enforced to take severe notice of your contrary actions.

The same day his Lordship was advertised from the Mayor of Galloway, that
howsoever he found no seditious inclination in the Citizens; yet to prevent
disorders in these mutinous times, the Governor of the Fort had given him some
of his soldiers, to assist his authority, whom he to that purpose had placed
in the strongest Castles of the City.

The same day his Lordship received letters from the Mayor of Cork, signifying
that the thirteenth day of this month he had published in the City the
Proclamation of the King, with the greatest solemnity he could, and complaining
that the Soldiers in the Kings Fort offered many abuses to the Town, with
offer from the Corporation to undertake the safe keeping of that Fort for his
Majesty.

The 26 day his Lordship wrote to the Sovereign of Wexford, that whereas they
excused their erecting of popish rites, by the report they heard of his
Majesty's being a Roman Catholic, he could not but marvel at their
simplicity, to be seduced by lying Priests to such an opinion, since it was
apparent to the World, that his Majesty professed the true religion of the
Gospel, and ever with careful sincerity maintained it in his Kingdom of
Scotland, charging him and those of Wexford upon their Wexford to his Majesty,
to desist from the disordered course they had taken, in celebrating publicly
the idolatrous Mass, least he at his coming up into those parts, should have
cause severely to punish their contempt, showed to his Majesty and the laws of
his Kingdom.

The same day his Lordship was advertised from the Commissioners of Mounst r,
that the Citizens of Cork grew daily more and more insolent, defacing places
of scripture written on the walls of the Church, to the end they might wash and
paint over the old Pictures, and that one termed a Legate from the Pope, with
many Priests, had gone in solemn procession, hallowing the Church, and singing
Mass therein publicly, the Townes-men having placed guards of armed men, set
at the Church door, and at the Porch, yea burying their dead with all
Papisticall Ceremonies, and taking the Sacrament in like sort to spend their
lives and goods in desence of the Romish Religion, and thereupon taking boldness
to offer wrong to the English, and to practice the getting of the Kings Fort
into their hands, yea refusing to sell any thing to the English for the new
mixed money, and not suffering the Kings victuals to be issued out of the
store, till they had assurance that the Soldiers should be sent out of the
liberties of Cork.

The 27 day his Lordship wrote to the Sovereign of Clemmell, commending him
and the rest of that City, that they had proclaimed the King with great joy and
gladness, but charging them upon their uttermost peril, to cease from the
public exercise of the Romish Religion, which they of themselves had
mutinously established.

The same day his Lordship wrote this following letter to the Sovereign of
Kilkenny.

AFter my hearty commendations. I have received your Letters of the 25 and 26
of this month, and am glad to understand thereby, that you are somewhat
conformable to my directions, being willing to have cause to interpret your
actions to the best; but though I mean not to search into your consciences,
yet I must needs take knowledge of the public breach of his Majesty's Laws:
and whereas you let me understand, that the Inhabitants are willing to withdraw
themselves for their spiritual exercise to priuacy, contented only with the
use of the ruinous Abbey, that being a public place, I cannot but take notice
thereof, and marvel how you dare presume to dispose at your pleasure of the
Abbey, or any thing belonging to his Majesty, and therefore again charge you
upon your alleagiance, to forbear any public exercise of that Religion,
prohibited by the Laws of this Realm, and fully to reform these disorders,
according to my directions, upon your extreme peril.

The same day his Lordship wrote this following letter to the Mayor of Cork.

AFter my very hearty commendations, I did first receive some mutual complaints
and informations, from the commisioners of Mounster and you, whereof so far as
they concern your particulars I will take notice, and be glad to hear you
both, or your Agents for you, and reform what I shall find amiss in either,
but of public offenses or errors, I must take public knowledge. And first
for the Proclamation of the King, wherein I am informed that you were not only
your selves slow and backward, but made resistance to those, who being
Governors in that Province in our late Sovereigns time, and having our
directions, were not like to abuse or deceive you, and offered with due
forwardnes and obedience, after your unfitting and dangerous delays, to have
published the same, whereof I cannot but marvel, and think you much to be
blamed in so undoubtful a right, and with directions received from those in
authority, to make such needless consultations, and much more to offer violent
resistance to those, who better understood their duties, and were ever ready in
so much loyalty to perform it: yet in regard of your solemn and joyful
publication thereof, I am willing to interpret your actions to the best, and
take your good performance for an excuse: But I am further given to understand,
that you have suffered the public celebration of the Mass to be set up in
your City, of your own fancies, and without public authority, both against
the laws of this Realm, and (I assure you) contrary to that Religion which
his Majesty zealously professes. Whereof I cannot but take public notice, as
you have publicly offended the King and his Laws, and as I have done before,
so again I charge you upon your alleagiance, to desist from such seditious
insolences, and to apprehend the chief Authors thereof, which if you do not
presently obey, I shall be forced against my will to use his Majesty's Sword
and Power, to suppress the same. Further you have by your letters made suit
unto me, to have the Kings Fort Halebolin committed to your custody, and I am
informed that you have proceeded in that insolency, as to stay his Majesty's
Munition and victuals, and Artillery, which upon special trust of your loyalty
was kept in your City, from being transported from thence to the relief of the
Kings Fort. It may be you have rashly and unadvisedly done this, upon some
opinion of the ceasing of authority in the public government, upon the death
of our late Sovereign, (which is somewhat more, though no way in true and
severe judgment excusable), and I think otherwise you would never have been
so foolish, to run into so great danger, but since, as it has pleased his
Majesty to renew and confirm unto me, by his royal letters and Letters
Pattents under his Scale, the place of his Deputy in this Kingdom, and to
signify his gracious pleasure, to continue all other his Officers and
Magistrates, as well martial as civil, in their former authority and
jurisdictions, so by virtue thereof, and power given me from his Majesty, I
have renewed the Lord Presidents Pattent, and granted a new commission to Sir
Charles Wilmott and Sir George Thornton, with charge and authority to govern
the Kings Forces, Forts, and places of strength, and to defeud the Towns from
foreign invasions, and intestine mutinics or rebellions, and further to
govern that Province according to his Majesty's directions. In which command
of theirs there is no derogation from your civil government and limited
authority, if you rightly understand the one and the other: Therefore as you
should at first have concurred with them, put in so great place of trust over
you by your late Queen and Mistress, especially in dangerous times of change,
for the peaceable government of all under both your charges, that you might
have deserved his Majesty's gracious acceptance of your service, by presenting
all things in the best state you could to his Highness first view, so now I
require you upon your allegiannce, to be assisting and obedient to them in all
things touching his Majesty's service, and not to presume to interrupt the
conuayance of the Kings victusls, munition, or artillery, unto such places as
shall be thought fit by them, for the furnishing of his Maicstics Forts, or
Forces, wheresoever they think convenient. This if you shall perform, I shall
be glad to interpret your past actions to the best, finding your endeauours to
redeem what you have done amiss, and not be forced against my will to take
notice of the height of your offenses or errors, and use his Majesty's power
to redress them. I have since the writing hereof, seen a letter presented me
by Master Meade, in denial and excuse of these informations, and if I shall
find you conformable and obedient to these my directions, I will be glad to
have occasion to interpret all things past in the better part, and take as
little notice as I can thereof. And so, etc.

The same day the Lord Deputy wrote this following letter to the Mayor of
Lymricke.

AFter my hearty commendations, I have not written unto you (that I remember)
since I sent you directions for the Proclamation of the King, which because I
understand you published according to your duty, with all due solemnity and
signs of joy, and continued in duetifull sort, not being seduced unto
disorders, as some of the Towns of that Province were, I thought rather to
have cause to commend you, and give you encouragement in your loyal
proceedings, then any way to blame you, but I have since been informed, that
you have taken example of other Cities seduced by their Priests, and against
his Majesty's Laws (and I assure you contrary to the religion he zealously
professes) upon your own fancies without authority, set up the public
celebration of the Mass, whereof I cannot but take public notice, as you hane
publicly offended the King and his laws, and therefore I charge you upon your
alleagiance, to desist from such seditious insolences, and to apprehend the
chief authors thereof, which if you do not presently obey, I shall be forced
against my will to take more severe notice thereof, then willingly I would. And
so hoping that in a matter of so great consequence you will be better advised,
I expect to have answer from you.

The eight and twentieth day his Lordship wrote this following letter to the
Commissioners of Mounster.

AFter my hearty commendations, I have already sent you your Commission
renewed, for continuance of your authority, and signed the Kings Letters
Pattents to the Lord President for his government, and as formerly I advised
you, so again I pray you, to transport as great a proportion of victuals and
munition as you can out of the City of Cork, into the Fort of Halebolyn, and
the Castle of Shandon, and if you may, by fair means, you shall do well to
endeavor to draw some Companies into the Town, which if you cannot effect, yet
I would have you not to slack the carrying of victuals and munition. I have
drawn together some 5000 men, and shall be able to employ them in reducing and
settling the Towns of those parts, and if the Citizens of Cork, upon the
renewing of your authority and my late directions, prove more conformable then
they were, you shall do well to govern all without violence, but if they
continue obstinate in their former insolences, I advise you to set guards upon
the stores of victuals and munition, and to leave the Town.

The same day his Lordship wrote this following letter to Sir Charles Wilmot,
one of the said Commissioners.

SIR Charles, I have received your letter of the twentieth of April, and am
glad of the good success you had in taking the Castles in Kerry, and for your
men of Cork, I have heard of their insolences, and I believe them, and for
any thing I know, all the Towns in Mounster stand upon little better terms:
As Soon as I could possibly, (for I had no Forces in all Lemster) I have
gathered together 5000 men, and am coming toward you, and have so disposed of
all things in the North, that if need be, I will draw the whole Army of Ireland
ere it be long into Mounster, some few excepted to guard the garrisons: With
Waterford I think to begin, for they gave the first example, but it is true
that if they hold against me, I am ill provided to force them, for at Dublyn
we are ill stored of all things, but we will do as well as we may. I do like
your course well to draw as many as you can to one head, and I think it fit,
that it were about Cork: If your munition and victuals be in the power of the
Town, I know not what to say, but I have first written to the Town, not to
interrupt you in the disposing of the Kings munition and victuals, and upon my
commandment if they deny it, it is treason, therefore I think they will be
advised therein. If you may therefore, as suddenly as you can, convey as great
a proportion of victuals, but especially and first of munition, out of the
Town, then I will command them to receive you (with such forces as you shall
appoint) into the Town, which if they deny, it is treason too: And if you
have any store out of the Town, and your Forces be gathered together, and they
continue obstinate, it were good some little guard (though it were but seven or
eight men) were put into the Castles, where the munition and victuals are, and
for all the rest of the English to withdraw themselves out of the Town by
little and little, and then if they continue obstinate still, in not receiving
the King Forces, my desire is that you shall presently inuest the Town, which
I presume may be done with some 1000 men, if you put two or 300 men into the
Fort next to Kinsale gate, (which with so many men will be easily guardable),
and with the rest of your foot entrench near to the gate next toward Shandon,
and with some 100 Horse beat the ways. When you are in this forwardness, if
you think this way feasible, I will send you, either more men (if with those
you have you think not fit to engage the Cannon), or if I be loose my self
from being engaged in any other place, I will come to you; but if Waterford
hold out, I shall for the time have my hands full. Let me hear from you at
large of all things, and in the mean time, it is fit you put the best
Arlillery you have into Halebolin Fort. I have sent this by one whom I think
to be trusty, and I pray you to send him back speedily to me, and to impart
this project to as few as you think good. Write to me how Lymricke, and the
other Cities do stand. And so, etc.

The thirtieth day his Lordship received letters from the Mayor of Corcke and
his brethren, signifying that the Commissioners had by directions charged them,
to suffer his Majesty's Ministers to pass through their ports with eight and
forty barrels of powder, and lead and match proportionable, to be brought from
his Majesty's store in that City to the Fort of Halebolyn, and that in regard
they wondered so great a proportion should be carried to the Fort, where no
Artillery was yet planted, especially the quantities formerly issued being not
yet spent, nor any service being in hand, they fearing the Commissioners
purposed to assault the Town, or at least to starve them, were enforced
thereby to make stay of the said munition, till his Lordps pleasure were
further known, renewing their suit, to have the custody of the Fort committed
to the corporation. That they did all they could to cause the mixed money of
the new standard to pass current, but it was with such grief and loss to the
poor town as they hoped his Lp would be a means to his Majesty for altering
the same; That they had received rebuke from his Lordship, concerning certain
insolences, but could not call to mind any particular wherein they had
offended the State except that be an offense, after many abuses and wrongs done
them, to keep watch and ward, to preserve themselves and keep the City for
the Kings Majesty, in those doubtful times (as they termed them). That
touching the point of Religion, they only exercised now publicly that which
ever before they had been suffered to exercise privately, and as their public
prayers gave public testimony of their faithful hearts to the Kings Royal
Majesty, so they were tied to be no less careful to manifest their duties to
almighty God, in which they would never be dissembling temporisors.

Thus they foolishly rushed into apparent treason, by making stay of the Kings
munitions, and presumed to excuse their mutinous and insolent establishing the
public exercise of the Romish Religion (and that upon their own heads,
without any direction, yea in opposition of public authority.)

The Lord Deputy now being ready to take his journey for Mounster, and
purposing first to attempt Waterford, wrote to the Mayor thereof the first of
May to this effect. Because it seems by your neglect of my directions, and
your impertinent answers, that you do not know, or have forgotten, both my
authority and your selves, I think good to let you understand, that it has
pleased the most mighty Prince King James the first, Our Sovereign, by his
letters Pattents, under his Great Seal of England, to make me his Deputy and
chief Governor under himself of this Kingdom, and further to command me, by
his letters signed with his Royal hands, to cherish his good subjects, and to
suppress the Rebellious, the which difference of good and rebellions, I am no
otherwise to distinguish in you, but by that obedience which I have required,
and do now require of you to his Majesty's Laws and Royal pleasure. And as,
in my duty to God and my King, I should rejoice to find you in the number of
those that I am bound to cherish and preserve. So should I be heartily sorry
to find you such, as I must be forced to correct or to ruin. And although it
be none of my purposes to enter into your consciences, yet if the effects of
your consciences be, to disturb the peace of this Kingdom, to violate the
Laws thereof, and by force to set up your own Religion; It is my duty to use
the Kings power to suppress such insolences, and therefore my purpose is to
repair my self to the Kings City, whereof you are one of his Magistrates, to
see his peace and obedience maintained, the which if both I and you, and that
Corporation do not (as our duty is) intend, we have a King, that is not only
able to call us his poor servants to an account, but to revenge the wrongs of
the greatest Monarch of the World.

The same day his Lordship writ to the Mayor of Cork, this following letter.

AFter my hearty commendations. I have received two letters from you, the one
not signed with any hand, the other signed by you the Mayor and two of your
Brethren; and for the first, concerning the stay you have made of the Kings
munition and Victuals, I marvel greatly at your presumption, to limit and take
account what proportions the Commissioners authorized by his Majesty think
good to issue, for his service, and wish you in matters of so great consequence
to be well advised, not doing any thing rashly, nor consulting or deliberating
after your fancies of things not belonging any way to your consideration, but
submitting your own judgments to be ruled by those placed in authority over
you, I mean Sir Charles Wilmot, and Sir George Thorneton, whose Commissions to
govern that Province I have lately by order from his Majesty renewed. For the
answer of your second letter, I refer my self to those I sent you by Master
Mead, which I think ere this time are come to your hands, and as by them you
shall more particularly perceive, so I assure you, that I expect better
satisfaction from you, for the late insolent disorders committed or permitted
by you in that City, then by these I have received, charging you again (as
formerly) to desist from the violating of his Majesty's Laws, by public
celebration of the Mass, set up of your own fancies, without superior
authority. In which, if I find you not conformable and obedient to my
directions, I must conceive of your loyalty and affection to his Majesty's
service, as I find by the effects testified in your public actions, and be
forced to take more severe notice thereof, then I willingly would, in regard of
the good opinion I have heretofore had of your proceedings. And for that point
in your last letter, touching the Fort of Halebolin, whereof you desire to have
the keeping to the Kings use, I will deal plainly with you, that since I find
you so little able to govern the inhabitants of your Town in due obedience to
his Majesty and his Laws, and so easily seduced by your Priests and Friars,
to the prejudice thereof, and the hazard of your selves, and have always found
by experience the true integrity and forward resolution of the Kings soldiers
to advance his service: till I shall see a better reformation of these your
proceedings, I must needs think them fitter then you to have places of so
great trust committed to their guard and custody.

The same day his Lordship understood by letters from the Mayor of Cork, that
the Kings forces, lying near the Town, and their armed men of the City, had
proceeded to acts of hostility, some having been killed on both sides,
whereof they craved relief from his Lordship, making their contumacy against
the Commissioners authority, a private quarrel to the person of one of them,
as being their enemy, and seeking their utter ruin. Likewise the Bishop of
Cork advertised, that a most seditious sermon was preached at Cork by a
Popish Priest, teaching that he could not be a lawful King, who was not placed
by the Pope, and sworn to maintain the Roman Religion. Also that one of his
men, going to the Port of the Town, was hurt by one of the guard, who wished
he had the Traitor his Master there, with threats of death to him. Lastly, that
the Citizens, by resolution taken in a public Counsel with their Priests, had
written to all the Towns and Cities, to assist them in the defense of the
Catholic faith, and had not only stayed the Kings munition, but laid it up in
their own storehouses, and imprisoned the clarke who kept it.

The third of May his Lordship being on the way toward Mounster was advertised
from Justice Synot, that the Citizens of Wexford had conformed themselves to
his Lordships pleasure, and had redeliuered the Churches to the hands of the
English Ministers. The fourth of May, his Lordship in camped at Gracedea, near
the City of Waterford, and summoned the Mayor and his brethren to open their
Ports, and to receive him and the Kings Forces.

The same day his Lordship wrote this following letter to the Mayor of Cork.
For the dispatch of your messenger, and not to omit any thing that heth in me
to make you understand your dutiful obedience to his Majesty, and the great
errors and insolent demenor you have of self will or malice entered into; I am
content to write unto you, tho I know not well in what sort to write, for by
your courses I cannot take you for subjects, and out of my desire to interpret
your actions to the best, I could wish not to have cause to repute you Rebels.
To deal plainly with you, for any thing that you selves inform, or I can
otherwise understand, I see not that Sir Charles Willmot has done but as in
his duty he was tied to do, but I am presently drawing down to the City of
Cork, and having reserved one care for any your just complaints, will judge of
your proceedings as I shall find them. I have let you understand my pleasure
by my letters, (one sent by Master Meade, which if he have not delivered he is
more to blame), and I assure my self some of them came to your hands, and in
all I have charged you upon your alleagance (as again by these I do) to desist
from public breach of his Majesty's Laws, in the celebration of the Mass,
prohibited by the same, and to yield due obedience to his Magistrates, and
especially upon your extremest perils, not to presume to make any stay of his
Majesty's victuals and munition, left (upon special trust on your fidelity)
within the walls of that City, but to suffer it by his Majesty's Commissioners
of that Province, to be issued to the Forts, or where they shall think meet
for the present service. I shall be glad to find that you conform your selves
to due obedience in all these, and other duties of good subjects; if otherwise
you obstinately persist in the contrary, I must needs hold you for enemies to
the King and the Peace of these his Realms, and as such think you fit to be
prosecuted by the revenging sword of these and other his Majesty's Forces. From
the Camp at Gracedea, near Waterford, the fourth of May, 1603.

The fifth of May his Lordship was advertised, that the Governor of
Loughfoyle, upon Sir Neale Garnes late insolences and disloyal practices, had
by force taken from him, his Cowes, Horses, and all his substance, and that he
himself had given pledges to come to his Lordship. The disloyalties proved
against him were these. That he obstinately carried himself in all things
concerning the service. That he forbad his people to yield any relief to the
English Garrisons. That he restrained his men from building or plowing, that
they might assist him to do any mischief. That be threatened to set fire on
the Liffer. That he refused to admit any Shiriffe in his Country. That he had
long been upon a word with the Rebels. That he swore he would go into
Rebellion, rather then any English man should enjoy a foot of Church land in
his Country, which notwithstanding was reserved in his Pattent. That he had
created himself O Donnel, and that he had murdered an honest subject, who
would not follow him in those courses, with many like insolences. And hereby
the Lord Deputy and State were set at liberty for the promise of Tirconnell
made unto him. So as his Lordship had now good occasion to give Rowry O Donnell
contentment. To which end some good portions of land, being assigned to Sir
Neale Garue, his LP procured the rest of the late O Donnells Country, to be
given his brother Rowry, whom afterward in England he procured to be created
Earl of Tyrconnel, thereby extinguishing the name of O Donnell.

The Citizens of Waterford, at first refused to receive any Forces into the
Town, but only his Lordship and his retinue, yet the chief of them attended
his Lordship in the Camp, and for their proceedings in the points of Religion,
his Lordship requiring them to bring unto him one Doctor White a Jesuit, the
chief seducer of them by seditious Sermons, they were ready upon safe conduct
or protection to bring him to his Lordships presence which being granted them
by word of mouth, the said Doctor White, accompanied by a young Dominican
Friar, came into the Camp, but when they foolishly carried a Crucifix, openly
showing the same, the soldiers were hardly kept from offering them violence;
and when they put up the Crucifix in their pockets, yet could hardly endure the
sight of their habits, which each wore according to his order, Doctor White
wearing a black gown and cornerd cap, and the Friar wearing a white woollen
frock. White being come into his Lordships Tent, was bold to maintain
erroneous and dangerous positions, for maintenance of that which the Citizens
had done, in the reforming of Religion without public authority, all which his
Lordship did (as no Lay man I think could better do) most learnedly confute.
And when White cited a place in Saint Austin for his proof, his Lordship
having the book in his Tent, showed all the company, that he had falsely
cited that Father; for howsoever his very words were found there, yet they were
set down by way of an assertion which Saint Austin confuted in the discourse
following. At this surprisall, White was somewhat out of countenance, and the
Citizens ashamed. But in conclusion, when those of the Town alleged King John
his Charter for privilege why they should not receive the Kings forces into
the Town, his Lordship replied, that no King could give that privilege to his
subjects, whereby his Successors should be prejudiced in the due obedience
they were to expect from them, and in a word, told them, that if they did not
presently open their Ports to him and the forces with him, he would cut King
John's Charter in pieces with King James his sword, and if he entered the Town
by force, would ruin it, and strew salt upon the ruins.

Whereupon they better considering of the business, received his Lordship and
the forces into the Town, and the soldiers were so well disciplined, that
howsoever they were not a little grieved by this yielding to have the hope of
rich pillage taken from them, yet no wrong worth the speaking of was done to
any one in the Town. His Lordship here suppressed all public exercise of
Romish Religion, and restored the Churches to the English Ministers, and took
from the chief Citizens an oath of Allegiance to his Majesty, with an
abiuration of all dependancy on any foreign Potentate (having held the like
course of reformation in his passage hither through Kilkenny, the Citizens
whereof had in like sort offended), but his Lordship forbear any way to censure
their past sedition, leaving them to the Kings mercy for Charter, life and
goods, if thereby they had endangered them. Only his Lordship left one thou:
sand men in Garrison at Waterford, and made choice of a place of advantage,
where they should lie, till such time as a Fort might there be built to command
the Town, and bridle it from running into like insolences hereafter. And
because the North being now quieted, there was no further use of any Garrison
in Lecayle, his Lordship appointed Sir Richard Morryson (formerly Governor of
Lecayle) to command this Garrison left at Waterford, and to govern the County
of Wexford.

Certain heads whereupon some Waterford men were examined a part one from the
the other, and in a careless manner, yet so as the answers were written out
of sight.
1. What preparations were devised to rescue Waterford, if the Army had laid
siege thereunto.

2. Who were the instruments that were appointed, and were assembling them.

3. Who were their leaders both in Town and Country, and when and where they
should meet.

4. Whether any thing were published in writing, and set upon the Church doors
and other places, to seduce the people, and what the effect thereof was, or by
whom it was set up, or whether it was set up in Clomell only, or in more
places.

5. Whether any of them did know Sir Mahowne O Dullany Priest, to come to
Clomell the fifth of this month, reporting that Sir Donnell O Carroll had
fifteen hundred men ready to the rescue of Waterford.

6. Whether any of them knew Humfery Arthur of Lymrick, or any other messengers
from thence, to come to Clomell, to report that five thousand were in
readiness to the rescue of Waterford also, or whether he be still at Clomell
yea or no.

7. Whether they knew which quarter of the Country was appointed for Father
Mulrony to take the charge thereof, to be assembled to the rescue of Waterford.

8. Whether they knew Father Leinaghs haunt, likewise so of Father Ractor, and
the rest, whose names they are not to seek of themselves.

9. Whether they have or can tell certainly, that any intended yet to draw
these Rescues to Cork, or any other head, to prevent the Army.

10. Whether themselves are sworn to live and die in the quarrel, or what
Noble men or Lawyers are sworn also.

11 Whether they be able themselves to deliver any of these seducers to the
Lord Deputy, yea or no, by what reason they should not (if they deny it) being
conversant with them daily.

12. Whether they knew any messengers gone for Spain or elsewhere, to procure
help to those confederates, who are gone, when they went, and what they be,
or from whence, and what was their message, or how charges were collected for
them.

From Waterford his Lordship by small iournies (in regard of the impediments by
the slacknesse and failing of supplies of Garrons and Beeues from the Country)
marched to the City of Cork, and coming thither upon the tenth of May, was
without any contradiction received into the Town, with all the forces he
brought with him, though Sir Charles Willmott had invested the Town, and at
the same time (with the forces of the Mounster List) lay before it.

The eleventh day his Lordship, to make it apparent to them and all the World,
how willing he was to give them gentle audience in their just complaints, first
admitted them to speak what they could of any offense they had received, or
justly suspected, before they were called in any question for their own
disorders. But their accusations for the most part were such, as if they had
been proved (which was not done, the proof as less important being deferred
to a more convenient time) yet imported rather imputation of want of discretion
in rash speeches, then any just pretext for their proceeding, and therefore
were laid a part, as impertinent to the maine cause then to be handled. And
for the rest of their more selected accusations, they were judged to have in
them no important excuse for their seditious carriage, but were such for the
greater part, as his Lordship was forced to justify without calling the
adverse party to his answer, as being done either by his Lordships
directions, or out of duty imposed upon the Commissioners of this Province by
virtue of the place of authority committed to their charge. Thus the Townsmen
labored to divert their public offenses by a colorable excuse of private
spleen, and some grudges against one of the Commissioners.

And in regard the Earl of Ormond came that night to Cork, the Lord Deputy
(being desirous not only to have his Lordship, but as many of the Nobility,
and men of the best rank as he could, to be witnesses of their heinous
offenses, and of the mild proceedings against them) did defer till next day,
the receiving of the Townesmens answers in justification of their own
actions. At which time many breaches of his Majesty's Laws and their duties
were objected against them. First, in the public erection of the Romish
Religion against the Laws, and the abolishing that profession which was
allowed by the same. Secondly, in their maintaining these actions by force and
armed men. Thirdly, in their attempt to demolish the Kings Fort at the South
Gate of the City. Fourthly, in staying the issue of the Kings munition and
victuals, with the seazing of them into their own hands, and the imprisoning
of the Kings Officers and Ministers, to whose charge they were committed.
Lastly, in bearing Arms, and doing all acts of Hostility against his
Majesty's forces, wherein their insolent proceedings were so far followed, as
they had killed a grave and learned Preacher walking upon the Hills adjoining
to their walls, and had battered Shandon Castle, wherein lay the Lady Carew
(wife to the Lord President then absent in England.)

After due examination taken of all these points, his LordP resolved, as he had
formerly done at Waterford, to leave the censure to his Majesty's pleasure,
that he upon view thereof, might use his Royal mercy or justice, in remitting
or punishing and reforming the same. Only his Lordship took notice of some
few of the principal offenders and ringleaders, whose offenses were apparent,
and severed from the common action, and them his Lordship commanded to be
hanged, for example and terror to others. Some his Lordship left in prison to
be tried by course of Law, as Master Meade the Recorder, who was a most
principal offender: but he might as well have forgiven him; for no man that
knew Ireland did imagine, that an Irish Jury would condemn him. The chief
Citizens of Cork took the above mentioned oath of Allegiance to his Majesty,
abiuring all dependancy upon any foreign Potentate.

From Cork his LP wrote to the Earl of Tyrone, to meet him at Dublyn, in
readidinesse to bear him company into England. This done, his Lordship lest a
strong garrison of soldiers in the Town of Cork, and so upon the fifteenth
of May matched toward Lymrick, and the Citizens thereof having proceeded to no
further disorder, then the public celebration of Mass, were soon reduced to
order, and willingly took the oath of allegiance, with abiuration of
dependancy upon any foreign Potentate, as the other Cities had done.

The sixteenth of May his Lordship received letters from the Earl of Tyrone,
whereby he gave him many thanks, that he had procnred out of England
authority to proceed with him according to the instructions he had formerly
from the late Queen, promising to be ready at Dublyn to attend his Lordship
into England, and touching a complaint of Shane O Neales sons, for some cowes
his men had taken from them, promising to make restitution. And because he
thought many complaints would be made against his people, by reason of their
poverty, he besought his Lordship not to give credit to them, till he might
repair to his Lordship to satisfy him, protesting that he would be ready at
all times to come unto his Lordship, and to do all duties of a faithful
subject.

The Lord Deputy having given order to fortify the Castle of Lymrick, and
having from thence written to the Mayor of Cork to assist the Commissioners in
building the Fort at their South Gate, took his journey toward Dublyn the
nineteenth of May, and came to Cashell the twentieth of May, where he reformed
the Town, as he had done the rest, and took the like oath of Allegiance from
the Townsmen. There he understood, that a Priest commanding all the people,
had tied a Goldsmith of our Religion to a tree, threatening to burn him and his
heretical books, at which time he burnt some of our books, which he so
termed, but that upon a Townesmans admonition, the Priest set the said
Goldsmith free, after he had stood so bound to a tree some six hours before
all the people of the Town, in continual fear to be burned.

The Lord Deputy having quietly settled all the Towns and Cities in Mounster,
returned to Dublyn, and because upon the first settling of peace, many
petitions were exhibited against the late Rebels for restitution of goods,
which they had taken in time of rebellion, and were not now able to restore, so
as the exacting thereof, was like to produce new troubles, rather then any
satisfaction to the plaintiffes, an authentical act of oblivion for all like
grieuances was published, and sent to the Governors in all parts of the
Kingdom.

In this late Mounster Journey, his Lordship received letters from the King,
whereby Sir George Carey left L. Deputy, by the Lord Mountioy, L. Lieutenant
returning into England.
he was chosen to be one of his Majesty's Privy Counsel in England, and being
made Lord Lieutenant of Ireland, with two third parts of the Deputies allowance
assigned to him, was licensed to come over into England, and had authority to
leave Sir George Carey the Kings Deputy during his Lordships absence, having
the other third part of the Deputies allowance, and his own entertainment as
Treasurer at Wars for his support.

And Captain Floyd lying now in the Harbor with the Kings Pinace called the
Tramontana, ready to transport him, his Lordship with the Earl of Tyrone in
his company, together with his household servants, and some Knights and
Gentlemen his followers, took ship in the afternoon, and the next morning
early we discovered the desired land of England, the weather being very saire:
but within one hour the sky being over cast with a thick fog, and we bearing
all sails, we fell suddenly upon the Skerryes an hideous great black Rock,
where after so many dangers escaped in the wars, it pleased God miraculously
to deliver us from being cast away (as it were) in the very Haven. For certain
birds called Guls, seeing our ship ready to rush upon them, and their desert
habitation with full sails, rose crying and fluttering round about us, whereat
the Governors of the Pinace being amazed, looked out, and beholding that
terrible spectacle, cried to the Steare-man aloof for life, which fearful
voice might have danted him, as it did most in the ship; but he stoutly did his
work, answering helm aboard, which done, the ship by force of the stern, and
by the help of the tide coming in between it and the Rock, turned about with
strange swiftness, and swumme along by the Rock, so near to it, as the Beat
hanging at the stern, dashed against it. Neither were the most expert men in
the ship for a long time free of this fear, knowing that such great Rocks
have usually small pinacles adioining to them, the least whereof had been as
dangerous to us as the maine Rock: but the ship (by Gods merciful providence)
passing on safely, that day by noone we came into the Bay of Beaumarris, and
were set on shore by the boat.

The Earl of Tyrone rode from thence to London in the Lord Mountioy his
company, and howsoever his Lordships happy victory against this Traitor, made
him gracious in the eyes of the people, yet no respect to him could contain
many Weomen in those parts, who had lost Husbands and Children in the Irish
wars, from flinging dirt and stones at the Earl as he passed and from
reuiling him with bitter words: yea, when the Earl had been at Court, and
there obtaining his Majesty's direction for his pardon and performance of all
conditions promised him by the Lord Mountioy, was about September to return,
he durst not pass by those parts, without direction to the Shiriffes, to
convey him with troops of Horse from place to place, till he were safely
embarked and put to the Sea for Ireland.

The Lord Mountioy coming to Court was honored of all men; and graciously
received of the King, being presently sworn one of his Majesty's privy
Counsel. And for further reward of his services shortly after the King made
him Master of the Ordinance, gave him two hundred pound yearly old Rent of
Assise out of the Exchequer, and as much more out of the Duchy, to him and his
heirs for ever, besides the Country of Lecale in Ireland, together with other
lands in the Pale there, which after the decease of the Lady Mabell Countess
of Kildare were to fall to the Crown for want of heirs males of her body. He
had the full superintendency over all Irish affairs, no dispatches passing to
and from the Lord Deputy, but through his hands as Lord Leiuetenant. And his
Majesty likewise created him Earl of Devonshire, which dignity was to descend
to the heirs of his body lawfully begotten. But it died with him, and he
enjoyed the rest of this worldly happiness but few years. For he was
surprised with a burning Fever, whereof the first fit being very violent, he
called The death of the Lord Mountioy created Earl of Devonshire.
to him his most familiar friends, and telling them that he had ever by
experience, and by presaging mind been taught, to repute a burning Fever his
fatal enemy, desired them (upon instructions then given them) to make his
Will, and then he said; Let death look never so ugly, he would meet him
smiling, which he nobly performed, for I never saw a brave spirit part more
mildely from the old mansion, then his did, departing most peaceably after nine
days sickness, upon the third of April, in the beginning of the year 1606.

This most worthy Lord, cured Ireland from the most desperate estate in which
it ever had been, and brought it to the most absolute subjection in which it
had ever been since the first Conquest thereof by our Nation. Yet he left
this great work imperfect, and subject to relapse, except his successors
should finish the building, whose foundation he had laid, and should pollish
the stones which he had only rough hewed. And because he knew this relapse
would be most dangerous, having observed every rebellion in Ireland to be more
dangerous then the former, and that none could be more dangerous then this
last, without the loss of the Kingdom, therefore he was most careful to
prevent all future mischiefs. To which end, whatsoever effects his designs
had, sure I am, that he did meditate these wholesome prciects: First to
establish Garrisons in the Cities of Mounster, and in the renewing of their
forfeited Charters, to cut of many exorbitant privileges granted to their
first English Progenitors, from whom they were so degenerated, as the very
speaking of English, was by them forbidden to their wives and children. Then by
the exchanging of lands, and by the disposing of the new grants of lands to be
made to the Irish, to draw them all to inhabit the inland Country, and to plant
the English upon the havens, Seacoasts, and Rivers. Lastly, because he knew
all endeavors would be in vain, if Civil Magistrates should think by fair
means without the sword to reduce the Irish to due obedience (they having been
conquered by the sword, and that maxim being infallible, that all Kingdoms
must be preserved by the same means by which they were first gained,
especially with the Irish by their nature pliable to a hard hand, and iadish
when upon the least pricking of prouender the bridle is let loose unto them,)
therefore his LP purposed to persuade, that the Army should stand in some
convenient strength, till the Kings revenues were increased, and established
(so as Ireland might be a nursery to maintain some convenient number of old
Soldiers, without any charge to England), and till the reformation of Religion
and due obedience to the Magistrate were at least in some good measure settled
in Ireland, and especially in the foresaid Cities.

A List of the Army, as it was disposed at the Lord Mountioyes return for
England, about the eight and twentieth of May, in the beginning of the year
1603.
Horse in Lemster.

The Lord Lieutenant, 100. Master Marshall, 50. Sir Henry Harrington, 25. Sir
Edward Harbert, 12. Sir William Godolphin, 50. Sir Richard Greame, 50. Sir
Garret Moore, 25. Sir Francis Rush, 12. Captain Flemming, 25.

Horse in Mounster.

The Lord President, 100. The Earl of Thomond, 50. Captain Taffe, 50.

Horse in Connaght.

Sir Oliver Iambert Governor, 25. The Earl of Clanrickard, 50. Sir Oliver S.
John's, 25 Captain Wayman Provost Marshall; 12.

Horse in Vlster.

Sir Arthur Chichester Governor of Carickfergus, 25. Sir Henry Dockwra,
Governor of Longfoyle, 100. Sir Richard Treuer at the Newry, 50. Sir Henry
Folliot at Ballishannon, 50 Captain John Iephson, 100.

Total of Horse, 1000

Foot in Lemster.

The Lord Lieutenant, 200, The Earl of Ormond, 150, Master Marshall, 150. Sir
Hen. Power, 150. Sir W. Fortescue, 150. Sir Geo. Bourcher, 100. Sir Fra. Rush,
150. Capt. Coach, 150. Capt. Lau. Esmond, 150.

In all 1350.

Foot in Mounster, first at Waterford.

Sir Ric Moryson Governor of Waterford, and the County of Wexford, having his
own Company yet in Lecale. Sir Fran. Stafford, 200. Sir Ben Berry, 150. Capt.
josias Bodley, 150. Cap. Ellis Jones, 150. Capt. Hen. Bartley, 150. Capt. Ed.
Fisher, 150. Captain Leg, 100. Capt. Ralph Counslable 100.

Total 1100.

Foot at Cork.

The L. President, 200. Sir Christ, S. Laurence, 150. Sir The Loftus, 100. Mr.
Treasurer, 100. Capt. Haruy, 100. Sir Ed. Wingfeild, 200. Sir Garret Haruy,
150. Capt. Coote, 100.

In all 1100.

Foot at Lymrick.

The Earl of Thomond, 200. The Lord Audley, 150. Sir George Thorneton, 150.
Sir Francis Bartely, 150. Sir Francis Kinsmel. 100. Captain Stafford, 100.
Captain Thomas Boyse, 100. Captain George Kinsmell, 100.

In all 1000.

At Kinsale, Sir Ric. Percy, 150. In Kerry, Sir Charles Willmott, 150. At
Baltemore, Capt. Flower, 100. At Halebolin Fort, Capt. Fr. Slingsby, 100.

In all, 500.

Total Foot in Mounster, 3700.

Foot in Connaght.

Sir Oliver Lambert Governor, 150. The Earl of Kildare, 150. The Earl of
Clanrickard, 150. Sir Samuel Bagnol, 150. Sir Edward Harbert, 100. Sir Francis
Shane, 100. Sir Oliver S. John's, 200. Sir Tibbot Dillon, 100. Captain Ghest,
150. Cap. Skipwith, 100. Cap. Thomas Roper, 150, Captain Thomas Rotheram, 150.
Captain Harison, 100. Captain Rorie O Donnell, 150. Capt. Tibott Bourke, 100.
Captain Tyrrell, 150. For the Judges use, 100. Sir Tho. Bourk, 150.

In all, 2400.

Foot in Vlster, as at Knockfergus.

Sir Arthur Chichester Governor, 200. Sir Francis Conwey, 150. Capt. Roger
Langford, 100. Capt. Tho. Phillips, 100. Capt. H. Sackford, 100.

In all, 650.

At Mountioy, Captain Francis Roe Governor, 150. Capt. Edw. Morryes, 100.
Cap. George Blount, 100.

In Lecale, Richard Moryson, late Governor, to be removed to Waterford, 200.
At Armagh, Capt. Williams, 150. At the Newry, Capt. Treuer, 100. At Canan, Sir
Garret Moore, 100. At Chhrlemount. Capt. Toby Cawfeild, 150. At Mount Norris,
Capt. Atherton, 150. At Dundalke, Capt. Ferdinand Freckleton. 100.

At Monaghan and Ruske, Capt. Edward Blany Governor, 150. Sir James Fitz
Pierce, 100. Sir Edward Fitz Garrett, 100.

In all, 1650.

Foot at Ballishannon.

Sir Henry Follyot Governor, 150. Capt. Edw. Basset, 100. Capt. I. Phlllips,
100. Capt. Thom. Bourke, 100. Capt. Dorington, 100. Capt. W. Winsor. 150. Capt.
Ralph Sidley, 100. Captain Oram, 100.

In all, 900.

Foot at Loughfoyle.

Sir Henry Dockwra Governor, 150. Captain Richard Hansard, 200.

At the Liffer, a place (in the Governors judgment) most necessary to be
held by the English, and guardable with one hundred men, to be maintained by
land annexed to the Town, were left for the present, Sir Matthew Morgan, 150.
Capt. Nith. Pinner, 100. Capt. Bassel Brook, 100.

At Newtowne, a most necessary Garrison, and guardable by 30 men, was left
Captain Atkinson, 100.

At Omy, necessary and requirrng this guard, Capt. Edw. Leigh, 100.

At Aineigh, less necessary, Capt. Lewis Orrell, 100. Capt. Ellis Flyod, 100.

At Colmarhetreene, less necessary, Capt. Io. Vanghan, 100.

At Colrane, a most necessary Garrison, and requiring no less number to guard
it, left Capt. Ioh. Sidney 100.

At Ramullan, a necessary Garrison to be held, and guardable with 50 men, left
Captain Ralph Bingley, 100.

At Do Castle, necessary, and requiring this guard, Capt. Tho. Badbey, 100.

At Colmore, most necessary to be held, was left Capt. Heart with 20 men, spared
out of the former Companies.

In all 1500

Total of Foot, 11150.

The charge of the Irish wars in the last year 1602, beginning the first of
April, and ending the last of March, besides concordatums, munition, and other
extraordidaries, two hundred fourscore ten thousand seven hundred thirty
three pound eight shillings nine pence half penny farthing half farthing.

The charge of the Irish wars from the first of October 1598, to the last of
March 1603, being four years and a half, besides great concordatums, great
charge of munitions, and other great extraordinaries, eleven hundred fourscore
eighteen thousand seven hundred seventeen pound nineteen shillings one penny.

The charge of the Army (as is abouesaid) forecast for the year following,
beginning the first of April, 1603, and to the last of March, 1604, the horse
standing as in the former list, but the foot to be reduced to 8000, amounts to
one hundred sixty three thousand three hundred fifteen pound eighteen
shillings three pence farthing half farthing.

In the year 1613, by the entreaty of my brother Sir Richard Moryson
(Vice President of Mounster) and out of my desire to see his children God had
given him in Ireland, Anno 1613
(besides some occasions of my private estate), I was drawn over again into
Ireland, where we landed the ninth of September, miraculously preserved from
shipwreck. For at nine of the night (being dark at that time of the year) we
fell upon the coast of Ireland, and not well knowing the coast, but imagining
it to be Yoghall Port, we tacked about, to beat out at Sea the night
following. But having some hours before sprung a Leake, and our Pumpes being
foul, so as they would not work, we had no hope to live so long at sea, and
again not knowing the coast, we durst not venture to put in upon it, besides
that in case it were Yoghall Harbor, our best fortune was to enter a barrd
Haven by night. In this distress by divine Providence we were preserved, the
Moon breaking out through the dispersed clouds, and shining so bright, as our
best Marrines easily discovered the Harbor of Yoghall, and the tide serving
happily, we passed the bar into the same. And the next morning we might see
the danger we had escaped most apparent; for our ship was so far unable to
endure the waves of the sea, with her great leake and the foulness of the
Pumpes (if we had been forced to keep a board till the next days light might
make us know the coast) as the same night she had sunk in the quiet Harbor,
if the Mariners had not chosen rather to drive her on ground.

At this time I found the State of Ireland much changed; for by the flight of
the Earl of Tyrone, and the Earl of Tirconnell, with some Chiefes of
Countries in the North, and the suppression and death of Sir Cabier Odogherty
their confederate, in making new troubles, all the North was possessed by new
Colonies of English, but especially of Scots.

The mere Irish in the North, and ouerall Ireland continued still in absolute
subjection, being powerful in no part of the Kingdom, excepting only
Connaght, where their chief strength was yet little to be feared, if the
English-Irish there had sound hearts to the State. But the English Irish in all
parts (and especially in the Pale) either by our too much cherishing them since
the last Rebellion (in which we found many of them false hearted), or by the
Kings religious courses to reform them in their obstinate adiction to Popery
(even in those points which oppugned his Majesty's temporal power), or by the
fullness of bread in time of peace, (whereof no Nation sooner surfets then the
Irish), were grown so wanton, so incensed, and so high in the instep, as they
had of late mutinously broken of a Parliament, called for the public good and
reformation of the Kingdom, and from that time continued to make many
clamourous complaints against the English Governors (especially those of the
pale against the worthy Lord Deputy and his Ministers) through their sides
wounding the Royal authority, yea, in all parts the Churl was grown rich,
and the Gentlemen and Swordmen needy, and so apt to make a prey of other men's
goods. The Citizens of Mounster had long since obtained the renewing of their
old Charters with all their exorbitant privileges, and were now grown most
refractory to all due obedience, especially for matters of Religion. In which
parts the very numbers of the Priests (swarming among them, and being active
men, yea contrary to their profession, bloody in handling the sword) far
exceeded the number of the Kings soldiers, reduced to very small or no
strength. And many loose me^ flocked into that Province out of the
Low Countries, who being trained there in the Irish Regiment with the
Archduke, daily sent over new men to be in like sort trained there, and
themselves lay dispersed and hidden in all corners, with hearts (no doubt) apt
to embrace mischievous enterprises.

And howsoever the English Lawyers, coming over after the last war, vaunted
Ireland to be reduced to full obedience by their Itinerary circuits, (scarce
mentioning with honor the sword that made way to them), yet they were therein
deceived, that the Irish in their clamorous and litigious nature, flying to
them with many complaints, did it only to get countenance to their causes from
them, who were strangers to them (perhaps against former judgments of the
Governors, who better knew them, and so to oppose one Magistrate against
another), not (as they might perhaps think) in sincere affection to be ruled
by the Laws. Yea, those Chiefes of Countries who used to wait on them to the
limits of their Country, did it rather to keep the people by their awful
presence from exhibiting complaints against themselves, then (as the Judges
thought) out of their dutiful respect to them or to the State.

For otherwise, even among the English-Irish, in the inferior persons from the
Counstables to the Justices of Peace, and so upward, Justice had not his due
course (which can never have life, but in the moving of all the members with due
correspondency), and many outrages were by the English-Irish, and mere Irish,
done against the English lately planted there. So as now when Ireland should
have enjoyed the fruits of the last war, in the due subjection of the mere
Irish, these times threatened the next combustions from our degenerate English
Irish. Only the lovers of peace were erected to good hopes by a general
confidence that our Sovereign would apply his Royal power, severe Justice
(most available in Ireland) and other his heroic virtues, to the timely
prevention of any mischievous issue, as not long after his Majesty happily
began, with bringing those his subjects to conformity of making wholesome Laws
for the public good, by common consent of that Kingdoms three Estates,
assembled in his Royal Court of Parliament at Dublyn, in the year 1614, to
which work and all his Royal counsels, God give happy success.

The List of Officers General and Provincial, Warders, Horsemen and Footmen,
as they stood at this time of Peace.
Officers General.
The Lord Chichester Baron of Belfast Lord Deputy of Ireland, having enjoyed
that place many years beyond all example of former times. Sir Thomas Ridgeway
Treasurer at Wars. Sir Richard Wingfeild Marshall of Ireland. Sir Olyuer S.
John's Master of the Ordinance. Sir John King Muster-master. Sir Allen Apsley,
and Thomas Smith, Commissaries of victuals. Edward Lenton Provost Marshall of
the Army. Sir Iosus Bodley, Directer General and Ouerseer of the
Fortifications. Sir Thomas Dutton Scout-Master. Captain John Pikeman, and
Captain William Meeres, Corporals of the field.

Officers Provincial.
The Lord Dauers, Lord President of Mounster, and Sir Richard Moryson his
Vice President (besides the command in his own right, left him by the Lord
Lieutenant Mountioy at his, leaving the Kingdom.) Sir Richard Aldworth,
Provost Marshall of Mounster. The Earl of Clanrickard, Lord President of
Connaght, and Sir Oliver S. John's his Vice President, besides his employments
in his own right. Captain Charles Coote Provost Marshall of Connaght. Sir
Henry Dockwra Governor of Loughfoyle. Edmond Else Provost Marshall there. Sir
Henry Follyot Governor of Ballishannon. The Lord Chichester, Governor of
Carickfergus. Sir Henry Power Governor of Leax. Sir Edward Blaney, Seneshal of
Monaghan, and commander of the Kings Forts there. Robert Bowen Provost Marshall
of Lemster. Moses Hill, Provost Marshall of Vlster. Captain William Cole for
Ballishannon, and Captain Hugh Clotworth for Loughchichester, both Captains
of Boatmen.

Warders.
Dublin Castle, Roger Dauies has Warders, 14. Maryborough, Sir Adam Loftus
warders, 16. Phillipstowne, Sir Garret Moore, warders, 12 Duncannon, Sir
Laurence Esmond, warders, 30. Dungaruan. Sir George Carey, warders, 12.
Castlemaigne, Sir Thomas Roper, warders, 17. Limrick Castle, Sir Francis
Bartley, warders 20. Castle Park, Captain Skipwith warders, 20. Halebolin,
Sir Francis Slingesby, warders, 20. Athlone Castle, the Earl of Clanrickard,
warders, 20. Ballenfad, Captain S. Barbe, warders, 10. Dromruske, Captain
Griffoth, warders, 9. Carickfergus Castle, Captain Fortescue, warders, 20.
Moyry Castle, Captain Smith, warders, 12. Mount Norreys, Master Annesley,
warders, 10. Omey, Captain John Leigh, warders, 20. Toome, Sir Thomas
Phillips, warders, 12. Do Castle Captain Samford, warders, 9. Donnegall,
Captain Brook, warders, 9. Cloughaughter, Captain Culme, warders, 9.
Eniskillen, Captain Cole, warders, 10. Enishlaughlin, Sir Foulke Conway,
warders, 14.

In all, 335.

Horsemen.
The Lord Deputy, 25. The Earl of Clanrickard, 25. The Lord Dauers, 25. Master
Marshall, 20. Sir Oliver Lambert, 25. Sir Edward Harbert, 12. Sir Richard
Aldworth. 12. Sir Garret Moore, 25. Sir Henry Folliot, 6. Captain John
Kinsmill, 25. - Captain Charles Coote, 12.

In all, 212.

Footmen.
The Lord Deputy, 100. The Earl of Clanrickard, 50. The Earl of Thomond, 50.
The Lord Dauers, 50. The Lord Cromwell, 50. Master Marshall, 50. Master
Treasurer, 50. Sir Richard Moryson, 50. Sir Charles Wilimott, 50. Sir Francis
Rush, 50. Sir Henry Follyot, 50. Sir Edward Blaney, 50 Sir Francis Roe, keeper
of Mountroy and the Territoy, 50. Sir Thomas Rotheram, keeper of the Forcat
Galloway and the land, 50. Sir Francis Cook, 50. Sir William Stuart, 50. Sir
Arthur Sauadge, 50. Sir Henry Power, 50 Sir Tobey Cawfeild, keeper of
Charlemount and the Territory, 50. Sir Foulke Conway, 50. Sir Oliver S. John's
50. Sir Thomas Roper, 50. Sir Richard Hansard, 50. Sir Thomas Phillips, 50.
Captain Craford, 50. Captain John Vaughan, 50. Captain Arthur Basset, 50.

In all, 1400.

The Total number, 1947.

THE DISCOVRSE UPON SEVERAL HEADS THROVGH THE SAID SEVERAL DOMINIONS. Of
Traveling in general. PART III.
BOOK I.
CHAP. I. That the visiting of foreign Countries is good and profitable: But
to whom, and how far?
SInce the best and most generous wits most affect the seeing of foreign
Countries, and there can hardly be found a man so blockish, so idle, or so
malicious, as to discourage those that thirst after knowledge from so doing, I
might seem to undertake a vain and needelesse task, if I should persuade
thereunto. Wherefore I pass over the abundant fruits it yields. I will not
speak of the experience thereby attained, which instructs the most dull and
simple, as the Sun by his beams colors the passenger, intending nothing
less then to be so colored, and which neither by hearing, nor any sense can
so easily be gained, as by the eyes. For since nothing is in the understanding,
which has not first been in some of the senses, surely among the senses,
which are (as it were) our Sentinels and Watchmen, to spy out all dangers, and
conduct us through the thorny laberinth of this life's pilgrimage, not any one
is so vigilant, so nimble, so wary, nor by many degrees so trusty, as the
sight, according to the saying of the Poet;

Segnius irritant animos delapsa per aures,
Quam quae sunt oculis subiecta fidelibus, etc.
Less does it move the mind that beats the ears,
Then what before the faithful eye appears.
This ground of my discourse being granted, yet I am not so blindly affected to
this course of traveling, as I will thrust all into this warfare without
difference or choice. First, women for suspicion of chastity are most unfit for
this course, how soever the masculine women of the Low Countries use to make
voyages for traffic, not only to their own Cities, but even to Hamburg in
Germany, and more remote places, neither would I advise Angelica, if she were
alive in these days, to trust her self alone and in desert places to the
protection of wandering Knights, lest she should mere with more strong
encounters, then was that of the weak Hermit.

Nor yet will I herein give unlimited liberty to married men; holding Alexius
inexcusable, who left his Bside upon the very marriage day: yet after a due
time of conversation to combine love, why should he not in su^mer season follow
the wars at his Princes command, yea upon his free will? (since we owe
ourselves to our Country, as to our VViues), yea why should he not search
after politic wisdom, by short excursions into foreign parts? (since we
permit Merchants and Mariners, though married, to take long voyages for gain,
neither can Gentlemen more enrich themselves, then by the knowledge of military
and political affairs). And indeed the civil Law permits men to travel
after the Espousals: Always provided that this industry rather increase, then
diminish our estates, except our Country be in question, in which case all
respects to our private Family, (whether of love, of frugality, or whatsoever
private good), must be cast behind our backs, (since the Commonwealth
contains each private man's estate, and a part must be put to hazard for the
preservation of the whole body).

Let Plato the Divine Philosopher have patience with me, though I be not of his
opinion, who in his twelfth Book of Laws, assigns to this course the last
period of life, from the age of fifty years to threescore. It is true which he
says of that age, to be most able to discern between good and unprofitable
Laws, and that it is less subject to infection from corrupt customs. Yet as
some young men once freed of the Tutors awe, be prone and apt to run into
vices, so many old men (always comparing like dispositions) having forceably
restrained themselves from natural inclinations, for fear of shame, this
cause of restraint once taken away, (while among strangers they are at more
liberty), do often return to their own nature, even in vices most improper
to that age, and in that case their dotages are more slanderous both to
themselves and their Countries. Now that old men may dote in this sort, one
example of Tyberius the Emperor may serve for plane prove thereof, who in his
youth and the years of his strength, having dissembled his wicked inclination,
at last in his old age gave his nature the raines and retiring himself (as it
were out of the sight of the Senate and people of Rome) into the Island Caprea,
there he shamelesly gave himself over to all beastly lust, thinking himself
safe from the censure of the Romans, though his wickedness was no less known
in Rome, then if it had been done in their market places, according to the
Italian Proverb;

L' Amer' e cieco and vede niente;
Ma nonson' cieche l'altre gente:
Love is stark blind, and sees naught done amiss,
But other people are not blind ywisse.
And though we should grant that which Plato attributes to old men, yet they,
whose custom is grown to another nature, shall never be able to endure the
frequent changes of diet and air, which young men cannot bear without
prejudice to their health; except it be by little and little and (as it were)
by insensible degrees. Not to speak of the weakness proper to old age, which
makes them so sickly, as they are not only unfit for conversation abroad, but
also have small hope to return and relate their observations at home. Old men
are indeed most fit for Ambassages in neighbor countries, for in this
employment they live in the sight of their Contrymen, and may use their
accustomed diet, and a little change of air does but little hurt, which they
may prevent or mitigate by the advice of Physicians.

Neither are childrens unripe years fit for this course, howsoever they are
more to be excused, who send them with discreet Tutors to guide them, with
whose eyes and judgments they may see and observe. Thus the Romans (as
Snetonius writes) permitted the visiting of foreign Countries to the Sons
of Senators, under the government of one who had borne Office in the City,
(for the charge of such children is not to be credited to all of full age
without choice). Children like Parrats, soon learn foreign languages, and
sooner forget the same, yea, and their mothers tongue also. A familiar friend
of mine lately sent his son to Paris, who after two years returning home,
refused to ask his father blessing after the manner of England, saying,
Cen'est pas le mode de France, It is not the French fashion. Thus whilst (like
Apes) they imitate strange fashions, they forget their own, which is just as
if a man should seek his perdition, to gain a cloak for ornament. Likewise
sickly men are unfit for this course of life, who in regard of their weak
health, want the means to make benefit thereof. Lastly, they shall do well to
keep them selnes at home, who have a scrupulous conscience, and think
themselves so wise, as they will not follow the advice of experienced men. But
as in all actions they are happy that hold the mean, so middle age is most fit
to visit foreign parts, and to make use thereof, having first laid a good
foundation of Arts and Sciences in general, and specially those which they
mean to profess, and being of soripe discretion, as they can distinguish
between good and evil. And since we must not only respect their ages, but
most of all their dispositions, I will add, that it must be diligently
observed in each man, whether he naturally affect this course or no: for it is
most certain, that the nature of man cannot with good success beforced to any
course it likes not, according to the old saying of the Poet,

Naturam expellas furc a licet, vsque recurrit:

Though Nature be repelled by force, Yet still it turns to have his course.

I know that second causes can do nothing without the first, and it is no
less true, that the first does in natural things work by the second, which
makes me of opinion, that the position of the Stars in each man's nativity is
not altogether vain. This granted, it is not just, that the Commonwealth,
Parents, or Friends, should wrest any man's nature to courses contrary
thereunto, not leaving each man liberty to show and follow his own inclination.

To conclude, I think with Plato, that before any man take this course, he
must obtain leave of the Magistrate, as the custom is in England, where none
but Merchants may without leave go out of the Island, to the end that suspected
persons may be kept at home, left being not well instructed in the true
religion, they should be seduced by Papists. And I take Parents consent for
granted, without which, the sacred power given them by God should wickedly be
violated.

My purpose was thus slightly to have passed over the worthy praises, due to
the knowledge of foreign States, wherewith I began, lest (with the vaiue
Rhetoritian) I should seem to praise Hercules, whom no man dispraised. But
when I consider, that so many heads, so many wits, and remember that my self
have sometimes heard (though a man shall be last to hear the detractions of
his own courses) some pleasantly, others wittily, and some maliciously to
scoff at this kind of industry to gain knowledge, it will not be amiss so
far to take in hand again the task I had almost finished, as according to
the end of my discourse, I may encourage the indifferent Reader, by fully
answering their idle objections. In the first front are the pleasant men, who
remember the Italians stale Proverb,

Chi Asino va a Roma, Asino se ne torna.

If an Ass at Rome do soiourne, An Ass he shall from thence return.

The very Asses straying into barren pastures, do after learn more willingly
to stay at home with plentiful feeding. And very dull spirited men (at whom
this bitter Proverb allegorically aims) howsoever by this industry, they do
not suddenly become catces, yet (I will be bold to say) they are by nothing
more, or with greater ease instructed, according to their capacities, so they
travel not alone, as Socrates Laconically said. For if by the way they find
good companions, they must needs in some measure be partners of their wits and
observations. Neither are the wise obseruers of humane Pilgrimage ignorant,
that grave University men, and (as they say) sharp sighted in the Schools,
are often reputed idiots in the practice of worldly affairs, as on the
contrary blockish men, and (to speak with the Italians) very. Asses, by
continual practice in grave employments, gain the wisdom of them whose
affairs they manage, and the more they seek to know the World, the more they
converse with those who know more then themselves, so much are they more
inflamed with sweet emulation, such as (...) sleep from Themistocles, reading
the Triumphs of Miltiades.

Secondly, the witty detracters object, that Aglaus Psophidius was judged wise
by the Oracle of Apollo, because he never went out of the Grange wherein he was
born, according to that of the Poet Claudian.

Foelix qui patrijs aeuum transegit in aruis.
Ipsa Domus puerum quem videt ipsa senem.
Happy in native soil his life who spends,
Whom one house birth, one house a gray head lends.
But what if passengers should come to a stately Palace of a great King, were
he more happy who is led only into the kitchen, and there has a fat mess of
brewis presented him, or rather he who not only dines at the Kings Table, but
also with honor is conducted through all the Courts and Chambers, to behold
the stately building, precious furniture, vessels of gold, and heaps of
treasure and Jewels. Now such, and no other is the Theater of this world, in
which the Almighty Maker has manifested his unspeakable glory. He that sails
in the deep, sees the wonders of God, and no less by land are these wonders
daily presented to the eyes of the beholders, and since the admirablevariety
thereof represents to us the incomprehensible Majesty of God, no doubt we are
the more happy, the more fully we contemplate the same.

Thou will say, he has lived well who has spent his time retired from the
world.

Been qui latuit, been vixit.
Who known is least, has lived best.
This may be true in women; and thus among many Roman Gentlemen, when one
praised Fuluia, another Claudia, a third with good judgment preferred a
Senators unknown wife to both these, and many other severally commended,
because she was no less good and fair, yet was known to few or none: Not
unlike to that Matrone, who thought all men's breath did stink as her husbands
did. But it is the part of an industrious man, to act their affairs in the
world, tho sluggards lie by the fire. Of a man, Parents challenge a part,
Friends a part, and the Commonwealth a part, and he was judged an
unprofitable servant by the most true Oracle of God, who hid his Talent.

Neither do the Verses of the Lyricall Poet (objected in the third place) any
whit move me.

Oblitusque meorum, obliuiscendus and illis.
Abroad forgetting thine, at home forgot by thine.
And in another place;

Romae laudetur Samos and Chios, and Rhodos absens.
In Samos, Rhodes, and Chios what may please,
Let us at Rome commend sitting at ease.
O poor effeminate Horace (let his Genius, pardon me) a very hog of the
Epicures heard, and (to use his own words) borne to consume corn. Is any
mutual remembrance of kinsmen more pleasing, then that which is caused by
mention of their virtues? If a man should offer to show thee all the strange
miracles of Africa, would thou answer, go your ways and paint them, which
done I will gladly see them: or if one would show thee Paradise, and the
infinite flowers and fruits thereof, would thou rather snort in a chimney
corner, and not shake off the least drowsinesse, for the very possession of
that happy inheritance, but if he would go and paint them, then promise,
perhaps and at leisure to view them? yet as Socrates for arguments sake, was
wont to defend the contrary to all disputers; so I rather judge that Horace
thus writes in the person of the Epicure, (after the manner of Poets) or for
pastime and spending of vacant time, then that it was his own judgment.

There want not some, who discourage men from this course, by the manifold
difficulties and dangers thereof. But as the Poet says:

Per ardua virtus, Virtue climbes craggy Rocks.
Nec iacet in molli vener anda scientia lecto.
Venerable science with his gray head, Is never found on a soft feather bed.
Many more there be, who tremble at the very thought of dangers of death, to
which this course of life is subject. Behold Salomous sluggard, who says,
There is a Lion by the way, a Lion is in the streets. Fear thou the Sea
because it swalloweth many? Why fear thou not a bed, in which more have
breathed there last?

But a greater fear distracteth even the minds of the wiser sort, that they
see many return from foreign parts corrupted with vices proper to them,
according to the Flemings Proverb: that no man was ever made more healthful by
a dangerous sickness, or came home better from a long voyage. And because it
is hard to learn virtues, and more hard not to learn vices, or to depose them
once learned; from hence they say it is, That so many homebred Angels, return
from Italy no better then Courtly Devils. Surely this is just, as if a man
should say, I have a ground ouergrowne with bushes, which I fear to root up,
because nettells or darnell will more easily spring then grass or corn.
Fields are made fruitful by tillage, so are men made more wise by knowledge of
foreign Kingdoms. The Italians say excellently;

Coglier' le roso, lasciar' le spine.
Sweet Roses gathered, make an end,
And leave the prickles that offend.
We must observe virtues for imitation, and vices that we may abhor them,
Contraries are manifested by contraries; beauty shines more being set with a
deformed foil, and the glory of virtues is more eminent, by the object of base
vices. Yet that which was said of the Athenians, may truly be said of the best
wits of all sexes and conditions. If they be good, they are best, if ill,
worst. Thus Histories witness, that women by nature most witty, have often
given extraordinary testimonies of excellent goodness, or monstrous badnesse.
Thus Swetonius says of Caesar.

Magnas virtutes magna comitantur vitia.
Greatest virtues of the mind;
With like vices are combinde.
Thus the English Proverb says. No knave to the learned knave. I confess that
steep mountains yield most violent streams, but it is a point of Art to lead
these streams in a fair bed till they fall into the Sea. This is the scope of
all I say: That by this course the good become best, the bad prove worst.
Surely, out of the holy Scriptures the Atheist gathers most profane
arguments, as the godly Reader sucks the Eternal food of his soul. Bees and
Toades draw honey and poison out of the same herb. To conclude, the ill humors
of the body grown predominant, turn the best meats to their nourishment; yet,
none but a mad man for the abuse of that which is of it self good, will forbid
to read the most holy Scriptures, to gather sweetest flowers, or to eat the
best meats. Zwinglius writes of a certain Earl, who after long absence
returning to his home, and no less to his former vices, as a dog to his vomit,
and being for the same reproved, did answer that his Tailor also returned to
his occupation. But Cato the younger, was of a more virtuous mind, whose
regular morality could not be corrupted by wanton Asia, but made his familiar
friend Curio a false Prophet therein. Far greater was the virtue of Scipio,
who in Spain left a fair Virgin untouched, and yet would see her, that he
might excel Alexander the Great in the rare emulation of continency; who durst
not behold the captive daughters of Darius, least he should be subdued by
women, who had conquered men. Live with good men, seek out honest not
licentious houses to lodge in; For the Italians say well.

Dammi con chi tu viui, io sapro quel' che tu fai.
Tell me with whom thou do converse,
And I will soon thy deeds rehearse.
Restrain the vices to which thou art naturally most inclined, by forcing thy
self to exercise contrary virtues. For the Poet says truly:

Animum rege, qui nisi paret, Imperat:
Be sure to rule thy mind in all thou do,
If it obey not, then it rules the roast.
Let the incontinent man restrain his unbridled lust, by the remembrance of
his chaste Mistress at home, which will make him fear the miserable diseases
incident to the unchaste, as Seamen tremble to strike upon a Rock. Let him that
is given to excessive drinking of wine, while yet he is sober, behold the
rediculous gestures, the dull brain, the shickle memory, the oppressed
stomach, with each weakness and deformity of the drunkard: so by one vices
remedy, let him learn to cure all the rest. There is no danger to so wary
minds, either of leesing their own virtues, or of learning foreign vices:
besides, that sweet virtues are of such power, as they forcibly draw, even
negligent men standing least upon their guard, to admire, love and exercise
them. Yea, let these strict censurers of manners tell me, if they have so
cleansed the pumpe of their own Commonwealth, as there is less danger of
this corruption at home then abroad. Surely many fall into vices abroad, but
more at home; many returning from foreign parts, after they have abroad
satisfied their disordinate appetites, by giving youth his swinge (as the
Prouerbeis), do at home cast off their vices, and return to the old bounds of
shamefastness, which at home they never violated; adding to their old virtues
the luster of foreign ornaments. On the contrary, most men at home, wrapped
in the habit of vices, by custom taking away both the shame and sense of
sin, never reform their debauched life, nor forsake vices; till in age or
death they be for saken by them.

But among other vices, dissembling, lying, and jealousy, are by popular voice
deemed proper to Travelers. The first imputation I will refer to the precept
of the next Chapter, showing how far it is fit for a wise man to dissemble, and
the second to the last precept of the same Chapter, showing how a Traveler
should govern his tongue. And in this place by the way I will briefly discuss
the reproach of jealousy, which the tumultuous flock of Weomen injuriously
thrust upon us: Just as if they should say, that by experience and the
industrious search of wisdom, we should be endued with vices, not with
virtues, or that those who can see far of, yet cannot discern that which is
before their eyes and feet, or that those who are skillful in politic
affairs, are ignorant in domestical government, and that those who abhorring
litigious suits at law, readily make peace with their neighbors, would nourish
household dissentions most odious to a wise man, not knowing the terms of
love, wherewith they are in duty bound to entertain their dearest friends,
their sweetest wife.

Et dulces natos ac pignora chara Nepotes.
And Children sweet sent from above,
And Nephews, dear pledges of love.
But to say truth, most honorable titles of old, are by abuse grown most
reproachful, as the name of Sophysters, by their continual brawlings about
Moon shine in the water, the name of Elenches by intricate fallacies, the name
of Tyrants by unlimited cruelties, and the name of jealousy by affecting
extremities. As that jealousy is most hateful, which grows from malice of
nature, from a mind guilty of wickedness, or from conscience of any defects in
a man's own body or mind; so the virtue of jealousy (dear not only to
Travelers, but to all wise men) is (in my opinion) approved of all men that
are in their right wits. Our very God is in a good sense said to be ielous: He
that has a Jewel of price, is not willing to have it snatched out of his
hands, much less out of his sight. Reason like a severe Schoolmaster, should
ouerlooke all thy own actions, and why shouid it not have like authority in
directing the behavior of those, whose honor or shame cannot be divided from
thine. And of this Judgment (so virtue decline not to the neighbor vice,
between which there goes nothing but a pair of sheares, as the Proverb is),
you shall ever find the chastest Weomen, desiring an husband virtuously ielous.
For others who had rather not be loved, then have their actions observed, leave
them to be their husbands executioners, and to the rack of their own
consciences, only praying them to take this warning, that their husbands loves
(for which perhaps they little care) begin then to freeze, or rather vanish
away, when they have once cast away all care of their good name, since only
virtue combines true love.

But the slanderers of this industry press us more nearly, obiecting, that
vices, ill customs, and very heresies are spread through the World by
travelers. Let me ask them, how we should have known the diverse elevation
of the Poles? who would have taught us Geography, representing painted Worlds
unto us? how should we have learned all other Arts? yea, how should we have
discovered new Worlds (or rather the unknown Regions of the old) had not this
industry of Travelers been? Yea, to use the most binding and concluding
argument, the saving knowledge of the holy Gospel had been unrevealed to us,
had not the Apostles excelled in this industry, of making the whole World
their Country to preach the same? When we have thus compared the great and
manifest profit of traveling, with the light and doubtful inconveniences
objected against it, we must confess, that they who discourage the affecters
of these great rewards, by such small dangers, are not unlike the Sophisters,
who persuade that blindness, deafness, and the priuations of other senses,
are not to be numbered among evils, because we see many unpleasing things,
often hear that which offends the ears, and for one good smell draw in
twenty ill sauors. For my part, let them dispute never so subtilely, though
they convince me, yet shall they never persuade me, to pull out my eyes, stop
my ears, or cut of my nose, nor yet to prefer sloth to an active life.

But we must give ear to Parents, Friends, and as well private as public
Common-wealths-men, who not unjustly seem to fear, lest young men by this
course should be perverted from true Religion, and by this fear, dissuade
passing into foreign parts, as the chief cause of this mischief. Surely if
the vessel be new that takes an ill savor, it will stick much faster
thereunto, but I have already professed, that I would have a Traveler of ripe
years, having first laid good grounds of all Arts, and most especially of
Religion. Let me speak of my self: When I beheld the mimicall gestures and
cerimoniall show of holiness of the Roman Priests, (under the shadow whereof
they abuse the superstition of Laymen with unspeakable Arts, to their own
ambition and covetousness), and on the contrary observed their corrupt
manners, I was so far from being seduced by them, as I could not refrain
from laughter, and wondered (as Cicero speaks of Southsayers), that one Priest
did not laugh when he saw another his fellow Priest If you meet a fair
painted face, the more near and narrowly you behold it, the less it pleases,
but if the beauty be true, then there is danger, least you or your son
swallow the bait. Search corrupted Wares narrowly, and they will stink at thy
nose, which farther off, seem to be odorifferous. Such is the painting of the
Papists. The English and those of the reformed Church, who esteem their
Arguments as spears of bulrushes, permit their books to be read in our
Universities, but they perhaps guilty of errors, will in no sort give liberty
to read our books. We appeal to all that are skillfull in Languages for the
truth of our translations, they by statute of the Jesuits College, admit no
young Scholar to study languages, till he have taken an oath, that he will
use that skill to the defense of the Roman translations with tooth and nail,
wherein if they offend their consciences, they have the Popes power of
dispensation on their side. Therefore let the Papists fear to give their
followers leave to hear us in our Schools or Churches, lest they be chained
with the force of truth. And let us securely permit our men to pass into the
heart of Italy, so they be first of ripe years, and well instructed. Upon my
word they run no other danger; then the escaping the snares of the Inquisition,
of which discretion, I shall speak at large in the four and twentieth Precept
of Dissimulation, in the next Chapter. If any man object, that some of our
young Scholars have passed into their Seminaries beyond the Seas, let him
consider, that they were not seduced abroad, but first infected at home, in
their parents houses, and our Universities, which mischief Parents and
Magistrates ought to prevent, by keeping the suspected at home: for the rest
there is no danger.

But behold, when I thought to have finished my task, carpers consumed with
envy, who bark at travelers as dogs at the Moon, and thinking to gain
reputation by other men's disgrace, they are not ashamed to say, that vagabond
Caine was the first Traveler. Old Writers I confess sometimes use the word of
Perigrination, for banishment; but God be praised, here is no question made of
banished or cursed men driven out from the sight of God. They which spend the
greater part of their years in foreign places, as it were in voluntary
banishment, may more instly be compared to Caine, and are not unlike to rude
Stage players, who to the offense of the beholders, spend more time in putting
on their apparel, then in acting their Comedy, (for life is compared to a
stage, and our Parents and Kins-men expecting our proof, to the beholders).
Therefore it is fit to restrain this course within due limits, to which the
Romans (as Suetonius writes) prescribed (perhaps too strictly) three years.

In the last place, they that detract from Travelers, to the end they may
choke us with our own disdain, if not with arguments, send out their spies in
their last skirmish to cast this Dart at us. After so many dangers and
troubles, how many of you, (after your return) are preferred in the
Commonwealth? To what purpose do you tire your selves in attaining so many
virtues? Is it to exercise them, leaning on a plowmans or shepherds staff? I
should enter a most spacious field of common grief, if I should search the
causes, why in our age great part of the Counselors of States, and Peers of
Realms, rather desire to have dull and slothful companions, then those that
are wise and ambitious; and so in like sort, rather base and expert ready
servants, then those thot are free and learned. Knowledge puffs up, and I
remember of late a learned Physician, who being sent for by a great Lord, and
he being offended at his long stay, freely and boldly answered; that knowledge
could not dance attendance. Hence is our calamity, to omit the more curious
search of this evil whose first encounter astonisheth me, though I am not
ignorant of the cause: but let him that cast this Dart, tell me, whether this
ill be uot common to all men of virtue, and if it be so, he must at least
confess with the Poet,

Solamen miser is socios habuisse doloris:
Partners in grief, do solace give.
And let all rare men in any kind of virtue, when they are despised or
neglected, comfort themselves with this Phylosophicall precept of Aristotle,
that virtue is desired for it self, not for any thing else. So I say the fruit
of travel is travel it self.

Having thus retorted our enemies weapons upon their own breasts, because the
common sort is more moved with examples, then arguments, it remains, that in
the last place I should adorn the triumph of this virtuous industry, with some
few and special examples. Many have been found, who have passed into remote
parts of the World, only to gain health; far greater is the number of them,
who as the Poet says;

Pauperiem fugiunt vltra Garamant as and Indos:
Who further run to shun base poverty,
Then Garamants and Indians doely.
And greatest is the number of them, who following the standard of ambition,
have pierced to the very gates of hell with sound of Drums and Trumpets. To
conclude, as diligent Merchants gather precious wares into one storehouse, so
Phylophers have from the first ages of the World, passed by flocks into
foreign parts, to gain knowledge, as the Egyptians into Chaldea, the Greeks
into Egypt, and the Romans into Greece. Pythagorus walked sarre and near, not
only to learn, but also in diverse places to get Disciples whom he might
teach: for the Poet says well;

Scire tuum nihil est, nisi, te scire hoc, sciat alter:
To know avails thee no whit,
If no man know, thou know it.
To be brief, if we will credit old monuments, (which I confess to suspect),
he came in person, and sowed the precepts of his Philosophy, even among the
Britains divided from all the World. Plato has written somewhat too severely
against Travelers, perhaps like Alexander the Great, who was angry with his
Master Aristotle, because he had published the (...), which he had read unto
him, thereby leaving him nothing wherein he might excel others; so Plato
having gotten the name of Divine, by his very travels would forbid or limit the
same to others, that he might shine among the Philosophers.

Velut inter stellas Luna minores,
As the bright Moon, among the lesser stars.
It is most certain, that he was not only industrious, but even curious in
this course, so as he sailed into Sicily, the entrance of which Island was upon
pain of death forbidden to strangers, only that he might see the burning of
the Mountain AEtna. Apelles by drawing of a most subtle line at Rhodes, was
made known to Protogenes. Homer being blind, yet ceased not to travel: In our
Age, they which are renowned at home for any Art, are not content therewith,
except they may pass into foreign Courts, to make known their skill. The
most ancient Lawgiuers, got the experience, by which they had rule in their
Cities, not by secure study at home, but by aduenturous travels abroad, as the
Poet says;

Ingenium mala saepe mouent,
Adversities do often whet our wits.
Moses, Orpheus, Draco, Solon, Mines, Rhadamanthus, Licurgus, and almost all
the Consuls of Rome, themselves had been in foreign parts, and granted ample
privileges to strangers. Among Physicians we read that Esculapius and
Hypocrates traveled, and that Galene was at Smyrna, Corinth, Alexandria, in
Palestine, at Lemnos, Ciprus, and at Rome; and Auicenna boasts, that he had
passed through the whole World. I know that many in our Universities become
learned Physicians, but no doubt they would have been more learned, if they
had passed into foreign parts. One Land yields not all things: A man shall
hardly learn at home the diverse natures of herbs, and other things, or the
diverse dispositions of one and the same body, according to the difference of
the clyme, air, and diet. This the Spaniard wittily observed, who having got
the French Pox, sailed into America, and did there learn the cure of that
disease, from those who first infected the Spaniards therewith. We praise
Physicians especially for experience, as Lawyers for diligence, desiring to
have an old Physician and a young Lawyer, to give us counsel and follow our
business, but experience is of several things dispersed through the
universal World. It is written that of old the Egyptians had several
Physicians for each several disease, who would not have returned more learned
from their Lectures? Also they laid up approved remedies of diseases in the
Temples of Isis and Vulcane. What Scholar then returning from Egypt, should
not have gained great reputation to his skill? and we know that opinion many
times avails with the sick even more then the medicine. In this sort
ambitious men of old, by the only opinion of their experience by seeing the
world, did obtain to be numbered among the Gods. Jupiter of Creta in Italy,
Bacchus in the furthest East; Hercules in the most remote parts of Afric,
toward the West, planted monuments of their travels. The voyage of the
Argonautes, the wanderings of Ulysses and AEneas, are sung by all
Ballad-sellers. Alexander the Great passed the monument of Bacchus in the East.
It were infinite only to name the Roman Emperors, who excelled in this
industry: For as the Wiseman said, that he was a Citizen of the World, so the
Romans, by giving remote Princes the privilege to be Citizens of Rome, and by
sending Roman Citizens in Colonies, to inhabit remote places, used the whole
World for a City, neither did they ever admit any to the highest dignities in
the City of Rome, nor yet to the inferior Magistrates thereof, who had not
first borne rule or Office in some remote Province. One Julius Caesar, came,
saw, and overcame with his Army, among the Cimbrians, Germans, Spaniards,
Britans, Grecians, Africans, and those of Asia. The very Western Emperors of
later times, have been enflamed with the same desire. Charles the Great made
happy war beyond the Pyrenean mountains against the Sarrasens, beyond the
Alps against the Lombards, and in Germany against the Saxons. Who has not
heard of the European Princes, like so many Floods carrying Armies into the
East? To omit all other, (for I desire to be brief), Charles the fifth,
inferior to none of his Predecessors, and emulous of Hercules himself,
passed his pillars at the furthest straight of the Mediteranean Sea, and added
to his Arms the Mot of Hercules; Non plus vlira. No farther beyond this, only
leaving out the first word Non, because he had passed the limits of Hercules,
as Alexander the Great had done those of Bacchus. Whereby notwithstanding some
think that he did rather blemish, then increase the fame of his travels, since
that part of Afric was so near adjoining to his Kingdoms of Spain; but in
the mean time they forget that he was borne at Gaunt in Flaunders.

Methinkes I have said enough, and too much in so clear a cause, therefore I
will only add some choice examples of the holy Scriptures, and so conclude.
Abraham left his Country at Gods command, and went to the Land of Promise,
called also the Land of Pilgrimage: Jacob served for his wives in Mesopotamia,
and in his old age passed into Egypt. The Israelites were brought by large
circuit from the servitude of Egypt, into the Land of Promise, that the
protection of God might by adversity be more imprinted in their minds, and they
be more stirred up to keep the Laws of so gracious a God. The example of a
woman the Queen of Sheba, is famous, who came to Jerusalem to be an eye and
ear witness of Salomons wisdom. To be brief, Christ himself lived in the
flesh as a Pilgrim, choosing no set place of abode; when he was in the Cradle,
three Wisemen came from the East to worship him, and himself being an Infant,
was carried into Egypt, to shun Herod's tyranny. He commanded his Apostles to
preach the Gospel throughout the World. Among the Fathers, Saint Augustine
wished to have seen three things, Christ in the flesh, Paul in the Pulpit, and
Rome in the flower. In our Age the Turks and Papists so madly affect
Pilgrimages, as they superstitiously think the same available to the
salvation of their souls, with which extreme, least I should seem to know no
mean, I will conclude these examples.

For my part, I think variety to be the most pleasing thing in the World, and
the best life to be, neither contemplative alone, nor active altogether, but
mixed of both. God would have made eternal spring, had he not known, that the
diuers-seasons would be not only most profitable to the works of nature, but
also most pleasant to his creatures, while the cold Winter makes the temperate
Spring more wished. Such is the delight of visiting foreign Countries,
charming all our senses with most sweet variety. They seem to me most unhappy,
and no better then Prisoners, who from the cradle to old age, still behold the
same walls, faces, orchards, pastures, and objects of the eye, and still hear
the same voices and sounds beat in their ears; Not the song of the Cuckoo,
nor the craking of the Crows, nor the howling of Wolves, nor the bellowing of
Oxen, nor the bleying of Sheep, no nor the sweet voices of Larkes and
Nightingales, if they be shut up in a Cage, do so much please us at home, as
the variety of all, composed of diverse tunes, delights us in the fields abroad.
In like sort, it is manifest that all the other senses are not so much pleased
with any thing, as variety. They are in some measure happy, who having but one
house, yet have change of chambers, to remove as the season of the year
changes: but I judge Lawyers and Officers more happy, who have their Terms to
live in the City, and their Vacations to return into the Country, so often
(as it were) renewing their marriage days: And of all, I judge the Nomades
most happy, (the comparison holding in other things) who live in Tents, and so
by removing, not only escape the heat of Summer, the cold of Winter, the want
of pastures, all diseases, and all unpleasing things, but at their pleasure,
enjoy all commodities of all places.

Let us imitate the Storkes, Swallows, and Cranes, which like the Nomades
yearly fetch their circuits, and follow the Sun, without suffering any
distemper of the seasons: The fixed Stars have not such power over inferior
bodies, as the wandering Planets. Running water is sweet, but standing pooles
stink: Take away Idleness, and the bate of all vice is taken away. Men were
created to move, as birds to fly, what they learn by nature, that reason
joined to nature teaches us. Nothing can be added to the worthy praises of him
as the Poet suith;

Qui Mores hominum multorum vidit, and vrbes:
Who many Men's manners has seen,
And has in many Cities been.
In one word, I will say what can be said upon this subject; Every soil is to
a valiant man his own Country, as the Sea to the Fishes. We are Citizens of
the whole World, yea, not of this World, but of that to come: All our life is a
Pilgrimage. God for his only begotten Sons sake, (the true Mercury of
Travelers) bring us that are here strangers safely into our true Country.

CHAP. II. Of Precepts for Travelers, which may instruct the unexperienced.
I Will follow my purpose, and give precepts, not to expert men, (as Phormio
did to Hanniball in military affairs), but only to the unexperienced, and
that not curiously, as if I would prescribe them every step they should go,
but such as may whet the wits and memories of other men, well knowing that many
things may be added, which are slipped out of my memory, and which others may
daily find out.

1 In the first place, as every man in any course of life, so most of all a
Traveler, who is subject to many dangers, must by his daily prayers solicit
God for his gracious protection. All our actions must take beginning from God,
the fountain of all good, if we desire with the Israelites, to have Gods Cloud
and pillar of fire protect us in our iournies and aboads. Let him daily commend
himself to Gods protection, and even in his iourneys, daily at morning and
evening, not while he siumbers in his bed, but in private withdrawn from
company, either kneeling as before his father, or standing as before his Master
and Lord, make his prayers, though never so short, to his almighty and most
merciful God. And let no man take this for a needless precept, for I freely
profess, that when I was most devout in this kind, I found my self hedged
about with the good Angel, as on the contrary when I neglected the same, I
often observed by some manifest accident, that I was left to error and danger.

2 Let each Traveler forecast with himself his own purposes and ends: For
they which are unskillful in the Arts of painting, caruing, and building, can
never worthily praise, nor well imitate the rare works they shall see of these
kinds. Experience teatheth, that no action is wisely undertaken, whereof the
end is not forecast in the first place, howsoever it be last put in execution:
but since it were infinite to apply my precepts to the several ends of several
men, and no more possible, then for a Physician to cure the Patient, not
knowing the causes and the progress of his sickness, I profess to write
especially in this place to the Humanist, I mean him that affects the
knowledge of State affairs, Histories, Cosmography, and the like, and out of
that I write, let other men apply to their use, what they judge fit for them.
And if the Humanist judge many things I shall write less necessary for him,
let him know, that as an Orator and Poet must have some skill in all Sciences,
so the Humanist must have some knowledge of all things which fall into practice
and discourse.

3 Let a Traveler observe the underwritten things, and of them some curiously,
some slightly, as he shall judge them fit for his purpose. He shall observe the
fruitfulnes of each Country, and the things wherewith it abounds, as the
Mines of metals and precious stones, the chief laws and customs of the
workers in those Mines, also Batches and the quality of the water, with the
diseases for the curing whereof it is most proper, the names springs and
courses of Rivers, the pleasant Fountains, the abundance or rarity of
Pastures, Groves, Wood, Corn, and Fruits, the rare and precious Plants, the
rare and proper Beasts, the prices of necessary things, and what he daily
spends in his diet and horsemeat, and in hiring Horses or Coaches, the soil of
every days journey, the plenty of Fishes or Flesh, the kinds of meat or
drink, with the sauces and the rarer manners of dressing meats, the Countries
expense in apparel, with their constancy or fickleness in wearing it, the
races of Horses, as the Giannets of Spain, the Coursers of Naples, and the
heavy Horses of Freesland, and how they manage and feed these Horses, the
situation of Cities and Provinces, the healthfulnes of the Air, the
Chorography, the buildings, the riches, the magnificence of Citizens, their
household stuff, and in general all special things, as Statuaes, Colosses,
Sepulchers with the inscriptions, Lybraries, with the most rare Books,
Theaters, Arches, Bridges, Forts, Armories, Treasuries, Monasteries, Churches,
public houses, Universities, with their Founders, revenues, and disputations.
To conclude, let him visit the most learned men, and those that excel in
military Art or any virtue, and let him confer with them, as his ends
require. Thus did I visit Beza at Geneua, thus did I visit Belarmine at Rome,
(being ready to take Horse, and in the habit and person of a Frenchman). Thus
in my return did I gladly see Henry the fourth of Burbon, King of France,
famous for the feats of Arms and Wisdom; only Lipsius, whom I loved for his
Book of constancy, and much desired to see for his universal learning, did
bereave me of this hope, when I came into the Low Countries, by his inconstant
flight to the Spaniards. The Traveler shall further observe the policy of each
State, and therein the Courts of each King or Prince, with the Courtiers
entertainements, fees, or offices, the statures of the Princes, their
revenues, the form of the Commonwealth, whether the Prince be a Tyrant, or
beloved of the people, what Forces he has by Sea or Land, the military
discipline, the manners of the people, their vices, virtues, industry in
manual Arts, the constitution of their bodies, the History of the Kingdom,
and since the soul of each man is the man, and the soul of the Commonwealth
is Religion, he shall observe the disposition of the people, whether it be
religious, superstitious, or profane, and the opinions of Religion differing
from his, and the most rare Ceremonies thereof. He shall also observe the
traffic of Merchants, and therein the commodities which they carry out, and
most want, the Havens and roades for Ships, theit skill in navigations, and
whether they use subjects or strangers for their Mariners. Lastly, the value
of the Coins in each Country, and the several current pieces, and whatsoever
he shall think meet to add hereunto.

4 And because the memory is weak, and those who write much, are many times
like the Clerks that carry their learning in their Book, not in their brain,
let him constantly observe this, that whatsoever he sees or hears, he apply it
to his use, and by discourse (though forced) make it his own. Thus Students of
Rhetoric, at first seeking matter for words, rather then words for matter, at
last attain an easy style flowing like a still River, and lay aside the
affectation of words. Let nothing worth the knowledge pass his eyes or ears,
which he draws not to his own possession in this sort. In the mean time,
though he trust not to his papers, yet for the weakness of memory, let him
carefully note all rare observations; for he less offends that writes many
toys, then he that omits one serious thing, and after when his judgment is
more ripe, he shall distill Gold (as the Proverb is) out of this dung of
Ennius. Let him write these notes each day, at morn and at even in his Inn,
within writing Tables carried about him, and after at leisure into a paper
book, that many years after he may look over them at his pleasure. But great
caution must be had, especially in places of danger, how he carry about him
these papers, the subject whereof, cannot but in many Places be offensive and
perhaps dangerous, if once upon suspicion he chance to be searched. Therefore
as he sends his books and heavy things for carriage, half yearly, either
into his own Country, or to some place in the way by which he is to return,
there to be kept for him, so he shall do well to send these paper books
therewith. And for abundant caution, lest any thing he notes by the way, should
in any place upon mischance prejudice him, he shall do well to write such
things in Ciphers and unknown caracters, being also ready to give a fained
interpretation of them to any Magistrate, if need be.

5 Also I advise him to leave a trusty friend at home, who will keep good
credit with the Merchant that furnishes him with money abroad, left his friends
ill paiments leese him his credit, and so drive him to disgraceful wants. For
if his friend pay readily, nothing shall be wanting to him, but Merchants will
never trust those which break their day. And for his exchanges, and other
ways of receiving moneys, at fit times and places, as also for the value of
gold and silver coins, let him read the former last Chapter of the first
Part, treating thereof.

Fifty or sixty pounds sterling yearly, were sufficient at the time when I was
beyond sea, to bear the charge of a Travelers diet, necessary apparel, and
two iournies yearly, in the Spring and Autumn, and also to serve him for
moderate expenses of pleasure, so that he imitated not the Germans, who drink
and banquet as much abroad, as at home, nor the Italians, who live they among
Christians or Pagans, yet cannot restrain their incontinency; nor the
Polonians, who being perhaps the sons of Castellani, (I mean such as have
the keeping of Castles, or like entertainements from the King only for their
life), commonly spend more prodigally in Italy, and like places, then at home,
so as many times they spend their whole patrimony abroad. In which kind I
cannot but commend our Countrymen, who how soever at home they may have spent
prodigally, yet going beyond seas, rather dispose their expenses to repair
this former prodigality then otherwise, and practice the rule of the Poet,

Intra fortunam quemque manner suam:
Each man his cote to fit,
As his cloth will permit.
But I return to the purpose, and since it is convenient, for him that
travels, to make two iournies yearly in the Spring and Autumn, and since in
these iournies his expenses will be greater, then when he abides in Cities, as
well for the hiring of Coches and horses, as for his diet in common Innes, he
must be careful to take the opportunity to moderate his expenses, when he
settles himself to abide some months in any place. They which have servants
to attend them, must make account, that each servant shall spend as much for his
diet as himself, especially in Germany, where passengers of all sorts sit at
the same Table, and pay the like shot.

For the danger or security of carrying money about him in all parts, I shall
speak at large in the three and twentieth precept of this Chapter. In
general, he must be wary not to show any quantity of money about him, since
Thieves have their spies commonly in all Innes, to inquire after the condition
of passengers. If his iourny be long, let him not tell (no not to his
companions in his iourny) the furthest end thereof, but rather from City to
City profess that he intends to go no further. Suppose he be at Paris, if
he profess his iourny is from thence to Rome, it is all one as if he showed
his purse, since all men know, he must have great store of money for that
iourny, so as it were more fit he should profess only to go for Strassburg
in Germany, or for Lions in France, and when he shall come thither, he shall
either perhaps have new consorts of his iourny, or else may profess to his
former consorts, that there he met with letters, which force him to go further.

6 That he may the better premeditate those things which formerly I advised to
be observed by him, and the like, he shall do well before he set forth, to
get some skill (at least superficial) in the Art of Cosmography, for if he be
altogether ignorant thereof, he shall, like a blind folded man, not know where
he is, or which foot first to set forward. No man can read with profit and
pleasure the voyages of other men, old Histories, and the marching of Armies,
except he have some skill in this Art, how much less shall he be able
himself to perform such actions, if he have no skill therein. I contain
under this Art, Corography, and the knowledge of those Kingdoms which he is to
pass, they being most necessary for his use. Also it is fit for him, as well to
observe the old as the new names of each place, which gives great light in the
reading of old writers.

7 For the Precepts before he set forth, in the last place I advise him to
make his will, which no wise man staying at home will have unmade. In which I
commend our Progenitors, who made their wills if they took a iourny but from
York to London, the same being much more necessary in this our age, when we
undertake sat more dangerous iournies. And that the rather, for that there be
many difficulties in understanding the laws and manners of making wills in
foreign parts, and the force they will bear at home, besides that very death,
and that in a strange place, is like too much to distract the mind, though it
be not afflicted in that sad hour with worldly cogitations.

8 When he has once begun his journey, since at the first step the ignorance
of language does most oppress him, and hinder the fruit he should reap by
his journey, while he being as it were deaf and doumb, and astonished with
this Babylonian confusion of tongues, can neither ask unknown things, nor
understand other men's speeches, by which he might learn much. My advice is,
that in each Kingdom which he desires most to know, and the language whereof
is of most use in his own Country, he go directly to the best City for the
purity of language, namely, in Germany to Leipzig, Strasburg, or Heidelberg,
and in France to Orleans, etc. where having learned the language, at least as
much as is necessary to understand, and to be understood, he shall make his
next iourny more profitable by discourse, and in the same make his language
more perfect. Hearing much increases knowledge, what can thou learn, if at
least thou understand not those who should instruct thee, howsoever thou
be hardly, or not at all understood by them, except thou have an interpreter
with thee, which a man of small means cannot maintain, and yet in that case
does the rich, only borrow his knowledge, and take it at the second hand.

I confess, that rich men (having such consorts, and making good use of them)
may with more case attain knowledge, while they have the help of other men's
Eyes, Ears, Feet, and understandings, and may suck from them the
Quintessence of their observations. But poor Cleanthes, while in the day time
he drew water to gain his living, did by night more earnestly thirst after
knowledge, and gain it, which all rich men do not, whose wits use to be
corrupted with their fortunes. And I would think that even for these rich men,
it were more honorable and safe, to be able to use their own senses and
understandings, then other men's, since we see that Princes Ambassadors and
Peers of other Realms are more welcome and esteemed, and less subject to
contempt, if they do but only get the forms of saluting and calling for
necessaries in the language of the Country, as if they would not seem
strangers.

And first in the learning of a Language, labor to know the grammar rules
thereof, that thy self may know whether thou speak right or no. I mean
not the curious search of those rules, but at least so much, as may make thee
able to distinguish Numbers, Cases, and Moodes. Merchants, Women, and Children,
neglecting these rules, and rushing into the rash practice of Languages, do
many times pronounce the tongue, and speak common speeches, more gracefully
then others, but they seldom write the tongue well, and always forget it in
short time, wanting the practice, On the contrary, they who learn the rules,
while they be attentive to the congruity of speaking, perhaps do less
gracefully pronounce the tongue, but in the mean time they both speak and
write pure language, and never so forget it, as they may not with small labor
and practice recover it again.

In the next place, I advise him to gather the choice phrases, that he may
speak and write more eloquently, and let him use himself not to the
translated forms of speech, but to the proper phrases of the tongue; for every
language in this kind has certain properties of speaking, which would be
most absurd, being literally translated into another tongue. To this end the
stranger must read those Books, which are best for speeches in familiar
conference, in which kind, as also for the instruction of his soul. I would
commend unto him the Holy Scriptures, but that among the Papists they are not
to be had in the vulgar tongue, neither is the reading of them permitted to
Laymen, and were not the phrases so known to those who use to read them, as
they would be understood by discretion without knowledge. Therefore to this
purpose he shall seek out the best familiar Epistles for his writing, and I
think no Book better for his discourse then Amadis of Gaul, for the Knights
errant, and the Ladies of Courts, do therein exchange Courtly speeches, and
these Books are in all Languages translated by the Masters of eloquence. In
the third place I advise him to profess Pythagoricall silence, and to the end
he may learn true pronuntiation, and the properties of each language; not to
be attained but by long observation and practice, that he for a time listen to
others, before he adventure to speak. As in general to all living in
foreign parts, and desiring to search out the knowledge of them, not to be
had so well from any, as from the Inhabitants, so particularly to him, that
would learn the language, my counsel is, that he shun for the time the
conversation of his own Contrymen, only visiting them in their lodgings,
and that not often nor long, but that he live not in the house with any of
them: For the Dutch Travelers conuersing, drinking, and lodging with their
own Countrymen, hardly attain any small skill; and never the perfect use of
any foreign Language; be it never so easy. So as my self remember one of
them, who being reprehended, that having been thirty years in Italy he could
not speak the Language, he did merrily answer in Dutch; Ah lieber was kan man
doch in dreissig Iaher lehrnen? Alas good Sir, what can a man learn in thirty
years? But the true cause of his not speaking the tongue, was his perpetual
conuerling with his Contrymen. I profess freely, that I never observed any
to live less together in foreign parts, then the English, nor any who made
more profit of their travel then they: but I return to the purpose. When he
that desires to learn any Language, has observed the former rules, then let
him hier some skillful man to teach him, and to reprove his errors, not
passing by any his least omission: And let him not take it ill, that any man
should laugh at him, for that will more stir him up to endeavor to learn the
tongue more perfectly, to which end he must converse with Weomen, Children, and
the most talkatiue people; and he must cast of all clownish bashfulnesse, for
no Man is borne a Master in any Art. I say not, that he himself should rashly
speak, for in the beginning he shall easily take ill forms of speaking, and
hardly forget them once taken. The very Artificers of (...) can speak Latin,
but most rudely and falsely; and I speak of experience, that the Scholars of
our Universities, conversant in reading Creero, howsoever they seldom speak
Latin, but only in disputations, yea, and shun the occasions of speaking it,
yet when they come abroad, and are forced necessarily to make use of the latin
tongue, they do perhaps at first speak it less readily, but in short
practice they speak it more eloquently and more easily; then the said Polakes,
or any other abroad, who have practiced the tongue from their young years, and
so they might speak readily, neither cited for the quantity of sillables, nor
the purity of phrase, nor the strict keeping of Grammar Rules. Moreover I
speak by experience, that it is commendable at home before setting forth, to
learn the reading and understanding of a language, and the writing thereof,
yet cannot then be profitable to practice the speaking of the tongue, (...)
he can have the foresaid commodities in that part where it is natural. And
for this cause, I prescribed Pythagoricall silence, and to listen to others,
before the practice of speech, and to take more care to speak well, then much:
but at last the learner must begin, and he that never did a thing ill, can
never do it well.

But whereas many boast, and have the same to speak many tongues, as well as
their mother tongue, I do not think but know, that it is false. The French
have a good Proverb.

Enter les auengles, les borgnes sont les Roys:
Among the blind, the pore blind are the Kings.
And thus they which have no skill in tongues, will boldly say, that this or
that man does perfectly, and without stamering, speak many tongs. But
howsoever a stranger living some six or more years in any foreign part, may
perhaps speak that tongue as perfectly as his own, yet he that trauelleth in
few years, through many Kingdoms, and learnes many languages, shall never
speak all, nor many of them, with natural pronuntiation, and without errors,
and some stamering, and slownesse in speech. Yea he that learnes one tongue
alone, and that with many years practice, shall more hardly attain the
perfect properties and elegancies thereof, then an unskillful man would think.
For Theophrastus having lived many years at Athens, was known to be a
stranger, of an old woman selling herbs, only by the pronuntiation of one
syllable. For my own particular, I remember that I passed from Genoa to Milan
on foot, in a disguised habit, and that in an Inn not far from Pauia, I met
an Englishman. We satdowne to supper, where he voluntarily and unasked, did
rashly profess himself to be a Dutchman, whereupon I saluted him in Dutch
familiarly, till he betrayed manifestly his ignorance in that language, and
excused himself that he was no Dutchman, but borne upon the confines of
France, where they speak altogether French. Then I likewise spoke to him in
French, till he was out of countenance, for his want of skill in that language.
So as my self being a man in his case, dissembling my Country and quality,
ceased further to trouble him. And we after discoursing in the Italian tongue,
he chanced to speak these words; Io mi repentiua, whereas an Italian would
have said, Io mi ne pentiua. And by this little difference of adding the
syllable ne, I knew him to be an Englishman, for I had found before that he was
no Frenchman, which Nation together with the English adds that syllable. Thus
when supper was ended, I took him aside, and spoke English to him, whereat he
rejoiced, and embracing me, swore that he had been in the stable, and
commanded his man to make ready his horses, and would presently have rid away,
if I had not discovered my self to him. And so we lodged in one chamber and
bed. See how small a thing will make it manifest, that we are not that Country
men whereof we speak the language.

The knowledge of tongues has ever been highly esteemed. Aulus Gellius writes,
that Mithridates spoke the languages of two and twenty Provinces, which were
subject to him, so as he never spoke with any subject by an Interpreter.
Themistocles in one year got so much knowledge in the Persian tongue, as he
was able to speak with Artaxerxes without an Interpreter. Ennius said, he had
three hearts, meaning three languages. Claudius the Emperor put a Grecian
Prince from being a Judge, because he could not speak Latin, and sent him
into Italy to learn the Tongue, as Suetonius writes. To conclude, who has not
heard the worthy fame of that Heroical Woman, Elizabeth late Queen of
England, among whose rare virtues, her skill in Languages was not the least,
being able to confer with most Ambassadors or Princes in their own tongue.
And whereas some Kings think it a base thing to speak in a strange tongue,
and take it for honor, if they can induce any Ambassador to speak their
tongue, they seem to me like unto those, who being poor and proud, speak
much against rich apparel, and extol stuffes and furnitures of small price,
that they may seem to do that of election and judgment, which they do only
for want. Yet I would not be so understood, as if I thought fit, that one
Ambassador at a treaty, should consent to have the same written in the
language of another Ambassador, but rather that it should be written in a
third tongue, equally known to them both, as in the Italian Tongue, the Treaty
being between England and France. But in the mean time; I think it
honorable to the most mighty King, to be able to entertain familiar speech
with any Ambassador or Prince of neighbor Kingdoms, though less potent then
his own. Let us be encouraged by these noble foresaid examples, to labor
diligently, that we may attain this rich Jewel of speaking Tongues. In the
last place I advise the Traveler, that if he can have leisure, he join (for
greater ornament) the learning to write the hand of each Nation, with the
knowledge of each tongue, especially of that which is most of use in his
Country.

9 For Englishmen, they shall do well at their first setting forth, to pass
into Germany, and there spend some time: for since we use too much the help of
our servants, so as we will scarcely make our selves ready, and since we use
to despise the company of mean people at bed or board, there we may learn to
serve our selves, where he that comes into a shoomakers shop, must find out
the shoes will fit him, and put them on himself. There we may learn to admit
the company of mean men, where many times poor fellows, yea, very Coachmen
shall be thrust to be our bedfellowes, and that when they are drunk; and like
men will often sit by us at the Table, and in some places (as most part of
Low-Germany) they drink always round, so as we shall be sure to pledge like
men, and drink to them in the same cup; and if we have a servant of our own,
would rather have him sit next us, then any other. There we may learn to feed
on homely meat, and to lie in a poor bed. There among many other things we
may learn, to moderate our aptness to quarrel, whereof I will speak more in
the proper place. To conclude, all in gene all that pass Germany as strangers,
are free among that honest people from all colinages and deceipts, to which in
other parts they are subject above others, especially unexperienced.

10 As it is good before his setting forth, to be reconciled with his enemies,
that they may practice no ill against him or his friends in his absence, and
that his mind may be more religiously composed against all events; so while he
is abroad, let him often write to his friends of his health, which precept if
Thesius had not forgotten, he had not been Author of his most dear Fathers
death, by bearing the false sign of a black sail: And this is no less good
to himself, then to his friends, since he that writes often, shall often
receive letters for answer: for one hand washes another, and the Poet says
well;

Vt ameris Amabilis esto,
Who wilt beloved be, that thou bist loving see.
For indeed, there can hardly be given a more certain sign of love or
contempt, then thr frequent, rare, or no writing, or especially answering of
Letters: whereof the Italians have a Proverb.

Chiscriue a chi non responde,
O egli ematto, o egli ha di bisogno:
Who writes to him, that answers not again,
He is a fool, or need does him constrain.
11 When he will observe the situation of any City, let him (if he may without
jealousy of the Inhabitants,) first climb one of the highest steeples, where
having taken the general situation of the City, he shall better remember in
order the particular things to be seen in the City. To which end, let him
carry about him a Dyall, which may show him the North, South, East, and West,
which known, he shall less err in the description of the City, and this he
may observe publicly only with his eyes, for avoiding of jealousy, and after,
being retired into his Inn, may draw it in paper, if he think good. And lest
for the want of a guide, to show the markeable things in each City, he should
omit any thing worth sight, let him confidently visit some chief Doctor, or
man of principal account, (especially in Germany, where they are most
affable): For if he shall say, that he comes to see them, as the living
monuments of that City, I will be bold to promise, that they will give him a
guide, to show him any thing worth sight, and to instruct him in such things as
are fit for him to know: For as Weomen easily believe such as tell them that
they are fair, though indeed they be deformed, so men of best quality will
easily believe, that their name is known among strangers, and they take these
visitations for honors done unto them, yea, many (especially in some places)
are vitiously proud, that their neighbors should see strangers thus visit them.

12 Many desire to have their Countrymen and friends to be their companions
in these their iourneys: And it is well said;

Comes saeundus in via pro vehiculo,
A pleasant consort by the way.
Is like a Coach that glides away.
But why should he not rather desire consorts of the same Nation, of whom he
may learn the language, and all other things worthy to be observed. My self
could never see any profitably spend their time abroad, who flocked together
with their own Countrymen, neither do I attribute the little proficiency of
the Germans, and their giving themselves to drink, even amongst the sober
Italians, to any thing more, then to their living together in foreign parts.
For an Italian, conuersing abroad with Italians, shall never learn bashful
chastity: How shall any man cast off a vice proper to his Nation, it he do not
disuse it by little and little, which he shall hardly do among his
Contrymen inclined thereunto. Neither is there danger of learning foreign
vices by leaving to converse with his Country men, so he propound to himself
the foresaid end to learn virtues and cast off vices, and if he bend himself
wholly to attain that end. Moreover, in places of danger, for difference of
Religion, or proclaimed war, whosoever has his Countryman or friend for
his companion, does much increase his danger, as well for the confession of his
companion, if they chance to be apprehended, as for other accidents, since he
shall be accomptable and drawn into danger, as well by his companions words or
deeds, as by his own. And surely there happening many dangers and crosses by
the way, many are of such intemperate affections, as they not only diminish
the comfort they should have from this consort, but even as Dogs, hurt by a
stone, bite him that is next, not him that cast the stone, so they may perhaps
out of these crosses grow to bitterness of words between themselves, yea,
sometimes filthily end their old friendship with new injuries, if not in single
combats.

Besides, if this dear friend and consort should happen to dye by the way, and
if other ill accidents should increase this evil, whereof many may be
imagined, as namely, if by dying among enemies or Pagans, he cannot have so
much as the honor of a grave; surely I speak by experience, nothing can be
added to this calamity. This grief threatens sickness unto thee, and to how
many ills that State is subject in foreign parts, I shall show in the Precept
of preserving health. And this event will take from thee all the pleasure of
remembering thy dangers past, after thou returnest home, yea, will make that
bitter unto thee, which uses to be most comfortable to others. Therefore I
commend the English, who withdraw themselves from consorting with their
Countri-men abroad, not shunning them unnaturally out of hate, but only
lodging in diverse houses, and only spending some hours of the week in their
company to nourish acquaintance, that they may bestow the rest of the time
among those of the same Country wherein they live, and so better their
language, and learn the state of the Country. For my part, if I were to
suffer ill, I had rather be alone, then have a friend partner with me,
howsoever the Poet says,

Solamen miseris soicos habuisse doloris.
The miserable man does grieve the less,
If he have partners in his sad distress.
Which is to be understood of enemies, or unknown partners, for I cannot
think that my torment could be assuaged by the like misery of my friend.
Others object, that it is the unspeakable comfort of marriage, that man and
wife like well paired Heyfers, bear all burdens together. Surely if other
kinds of ill could be divided into equal parts, as burdens may, I might be
of their opinion, but many kinds of ill are like the soul, which is all in
the whole body, and all in every part thereof, neither is the torment of the
soul eased, by the bodies suffering with it. Therefore if I were to suffer
poverty, banishment, or torment, I had rather be a single man, then married,
since the compassion of my wifes and childrens suffering with me, would
infinitely increase my misery.

These things being granted, I confess it follows, (for of contraries the
consequence is contrary) that the Traveler is to impart his good successes to
his friends, whereof Cicero in the dream of Scipio so disputes, as if a man
seeing all the pleasures of Paradise, could take no delight therein, if he were
alone, and had no man with whom he might communicate them.

But in conclusion, since Travelers meet with more dangers then pleasures, it
is most fit for them to take such consorts abroad, as the way yields, and to
defer the imparting of their good successes to their friends, till their
happy return home, at which time, as their absence has sharpened their
friends desire to see them, so the discourse of these pleasant accidents, may
sweeten their conversation.

13 In stead of a companion, let the Traveler have always with him some good
Book in his pocket, as we read that Alexander the Great laid Homer under
his pillow, and let this Book be either such, as fits his ends or study, or
such as contains precepts or sentences, which by daily use he desires to make
familiar unto him, always bewaring that it treat not of the Commonwealth, the
Religion thereof, or any Subject that may be dangerous to him: By this
companion he shall make the solitude of the Innes and many irksome things
less unpleasing to him.

14 As we read that Alexander the great set on fire with his own hands the
wanes of carriage taken from Darius, and that by his example all the
Macedonians cast away the spoils they had taken from the Persians, lest they
should hinder them in their expedition against India. So the Traveler
(comparing small things with great) must carry only most necessary things with
him, especially in such places as the Low Countries, where boats and wagons
are changed many times in one days journey, and where (as also in Italy) they
bring him not to his Inn, but only to the water side; or to the gates of the
City: for in such places heavy carriages will be a great burden or charge to
him.

15 Let him enquire after the best Innes, especially in Germany, and also at
night in Italy; for he may take a short dinner in any Inn of Italy, so he
lodge safely at night. In the best Innes, with moderate and ordinary expenses,
he shall avoid the frauds and injuries of knaves, and shall sleep safely, both
for his person and the goods he has with him. In all Innes, but especially in
suspected places, let him bolt or lock the door of his chamber: let him take
heed of his chamber fellows, and always have his Sword by his side, or by his
bed side; let him lay his purse under his pillow, but always foulded with his
garters, or some thing he first uses in the morning, lest he forget to put
it up before he go out of his chamber: And to the end he may leave nothing
behind him in his Innes, let the visiting of his chamber, and gathering his
things together, be the last thing he does, before he put his foot into the
stirrup.

16 Some advise that a Traveler should learn to swim, but I think that
skill is more for pleasure at home, then of use abroad, and yields small
comfort or help in a storm at Sea. Let other men have their free opinion, as
I have mine, yet I know that Caesar delivered himself and his Commentaries
from perishing, by his skill in swimming, but neither are all as fortunate as
Caesar, neither are all Seas like that of Afric. My self have known many
excellent swimmers, whereof some in the sight of the wished Land, have perished
by the rage of the Sea waves, and others have sunk by the weight of their
fearful companions knowing their skill, and so taking hold of them, while at
the same time others, having not the least skill in swimming, but trusting to
the hold of broken parts of the ship, or light chests, have escaped that
danger, and came safely to shore: But if any man put his trust in swimming, let
him conceal his skill, least others trusting therein take hold of him, and
make him perish with them.

17 In like manner some persuade a Traveler to use himself first to
hardness, as abstaining from wine, fasting, eating gross meats, and going
iournies on foot. But in my opinion, they shall better bear these things when
necessity forces, who cherish their body while they may. Neither do I commend
them, who in foreign parts take iournies on foot, especially for any long
way. Let them stay at home, and behold the World in a Map, who have not
means for honest expenses; for such men, while they basely spare cost, do so
blemish their estimation, as they can enjoy no company, but that of such poor
fellows as go on foot with them, who can no way instruct them, or better
their understanding. Besides, that by wearying their bodies, they are apt to
fall into sickness, and basely expose themselves to the dangers of wild
beasts, thieves, and their poor companions. I dare be bold to say, that all
murders in Germany by the high way, are committed upon footmen; for they who
are well brought up, when they are wearied by going on foot, will spend more
to cherish themselves in their Innes, and make longer stays therein, by which
means they not only spend almost as much, as if they had hired horses or
coches, but also bewray their plenty of money to their foot companions, who
being needy, it oftens happens, even among the Germans otherwise of honest
disposition, that they plot mischief against them, which once intended, the
vast solitudes of the Woods in Germany, offer many opportunities to put their
wicked purpose in practice. And it is a hard remedy to be prescribed to one of
good education, that after his weary journey, he should also suffer in his
Inn. Moreover, the Germans account of strangers according to their outward
habit, and their bold or dejected countenance, and do altogether despise
passengers on foot. To conclude, the solitudes of the way, by reason of few
Towns or Villages, make a journey on foot most tedious in Germany. But in
Italy, if any where, this going on foot may be borne with, by reason of the
pleasant and fruitful fields, the frequent Cities, Towns, and Villages, the
safety from thieves, (except it be upon the confines of Princes, where hosemen
and footmen are in like danger) and by reason of the Italians opinion, who
respect a man's behavior, not his habit. Always provided that these iournies
be short, and sweetened with a pleasant companion. But for my part, I think
the best going on foot, is (according to the French Proverb) when a man leads
his horse in his hand, and may mount him at pleasure. And I must confess, that
I have observed some of our Country men to err in this kind, of whom though
few undertake these foot iournies, yet they generally think, that it is a
point of frugalitie to suffer in foreign parts, as if our abode there should
be less profitable unto us, except we should (like Menedemus) vex our selves
with unnecessary sufferings of ill.

18 The Traveler must have great care to preserve his health, neither is it
the last point of wisdom to follow the advice of Cicero, who bids him be an
old man quickly, that desires to be an old man long. But most of all is this
care necessary for a Traveler: for those that are sick by the way, suffer
many discommodities in all places, and our Country men in Italy and Spain
run high dangers, where howsoever being in health, they may discreetly shun
the snares of the Inquisition, yet when they are sick, Confession, the
Sacrament in one kind, and the adoration thereof as changed into the body of
Christ, and Extreme Unction at the point of death, are thrust upon them by the
Priests. Men ready to die can ill dissemble, neither is any weight so heavy, as
that of a wounded conscience, wherewith if the sick man be so affected, as
he professes himself to be of the Reformed Religion, then the Physician and
the Apothecarie are forbidden to help him, and very Kitchen physic is denied
him by the Priests command, and if he recover, he shall be sure to be
brought into the Inquisition: but if he die, his body shall be buried in the
highway, not in any Churchyard: of which events, and the examples thereof, I
shall speak more largely in the Treaty of Religion in Italy. Formerly I have
showed, that sickly men are unfit for this course of life.

Now the preservation of health consists in the use of six things, namely, of
Air, Diet, Purging, Exercise, Sleep, and Accidents, or Passions of the mind.
To shun the incommodities of the Air, he must respect the seasons of the
year fit for iournies, and the changes of diverse climes. The Spring and
Autumn are the most fit seasons for iourneys, and he shall do well, to go
first to cold climes in summer times, and to hot climes in the winter, that he
may use his body by little and little to these changes. They who take iournies
in Countries continually covered with snow, use to wear some green thing
before their eyes, to comfort the sight, and to carry hot odors to comfort the
brain. In Moscony subject to great cold, Men cover their necks, ears, and
vital parts, with furs; and in time of snow, wear a cot or cover for their
noses, and also rub their noses and faces with snow, before they enter into
the hot stoue, lest sudden heat should putrify the same, as men of good
credit report.

On the contrary, in hot regions, to avoid the beams of the Sun, in some
places (as in Italy) they carry Vmbrels, or things like a little Canopy over
their heads, but a learned Physician told me, that the use of them was
dangerous, because they gather the heat into a pyramidall point, and thence
cast it down perpendicularly upon the head, except they know how to carry them
for avoiding that danger: Also in the hot clymes of Turkey, they were thick
garments, but loose, and a thick Tulbant upon their heads, but hollow, and
borne up from their heads, and they shave their heads, all to make the
Sunne-beames to have less power upon their bodies.

Touching the change of diet, as also of the Air, a young man may change them
by little and little, but to old men the least change of them is dangerous.
Therefore let the Traveler use himself before his journey to these changes by
little and little, but in no extremity, which he had better endure only for
the time when necessity forces them, using the best remedies, as Antidotes
against poison, namely warm clothes against cold, and the like: And in this he
must use moderation, for little ill does little hurt. In the morning before he
takes his journey, let him take a small breakefast, that ill smells may not
offend him; let him dine sparingly, lest his afternoones motion hinder
digestion: for the precept to make a light supper, is for those that stay at
home. In his dinner, often drinking and supping warm brothes, helps the
purging faculty: The seasons of the year, and the nature of the clime, are to
be respected in diet, as well as in the change of Air. In Winter and cold
Regions, let him take hot comfortable things, but in Summer and hot Regions,
let him take things that cool the blood: It is dangerous to drink when his
body is heated, except he first make water, and wash his mouth, and when he is
heated, let him not suddenly expose him self to cold. In his Inn let him have
care to dry his feet and neck, if they be wet. The rules of health are
infinite, therefore let him take the Physicians advice, according to the state
of his body: I will only add, that some very curiously think the Art of
Cookery necessary for a Traveler: It is not amiss that he have the skill to
make a Cawdell, or dress some dish he likes. Homer brings in Achilles
dressing his meat in the Camp, and we read that King Antigonus did see the
Poet Antagoras seething a Conger in the Camp, and said to him; that Homer of
Agamemnon spent not his time in dressing Congers, who answered; that Agamemnon
used not to go about the Camp to observe who dressed Congers: And indeed this
Art is more necessary for a Soldier then a Traveler: For the Traveler uses
not to go into barbarous regions, but to civil places, where for the most
part he finds Ministers for this purpose, but the war wastes all Countries,
and carries desolation with it.

Touching the purging of the body, as all repletion is ill, and Socrates well
advised to take heed of those meats, which invited men to eat when they were
not hungry, so when the humors are grown through intemperancy, it is good to
purge them. He that feels any change in his body, let him not neglect it, but
take physike, which doing, he may with a small remedy prevent great sickness,
and keep his body in health afterward, not oppressing himself with meat,
nor enflaming his blood with violent motion. This I speak of experience, for
my self thus taking physike once or twice, had my health in foreign parts
for seven years, after which time at last, care which brings gray heirs had
almost killed me by grief, conceived for the death of my most dear Brother in
Asia. In the morning and at noone let him offer thus to purge naturally, in
which nature, for the most part yields to custom. Nothing is a more certain
sign of sickness growing, then the obstruction of the body, against which in
Italy I took each morning, while I was so disposed, a spoonefull of the sirrop
of Corinthian Currants. Damasco Prunes boiled, and other moist things, as
Butter and Honey, are good for this purpose, as a German Physician writes, whom
I follow in this point. And since my self (God be thanked) was never sickly,
neither have the Art of Phisike, and since I profess in the beginning of this
Book, not only to relate things observed, but also those I have gathered by
reading, I trust I may without offense add the said Doctors advice for
Travelers instruction to my observations. My experience has taught me, that
it is most dangerous to stop the Flux of the body, which experience I dearly
bought, by the loss of my foresaid Brother, and there is no better remedy for
it, then rest. But if it continue many days, and too much weaken the body,
Rice well boiled, hard Eggs, Water tempered with Steel, red and sowrish
Wines, and Marmalate, are good to bind the body.

Touching exercise, since it must be gentle, and only till we raise color
into our faces, not til we sweat, it may seem ridiculous to prescribe the
same to Travelers, who are almost continually in motion. Therefore I will
only admonish the Traveler, to avoid extremity therein, and that he neither
drink when he is hot, nor suddenly expose himself to cold, and that when he
is extremely cold, he likewise warm himself by little and little, not
suddenly at a great fire, or in a hot stoue, and that after dinner he rest a
while.

Touching sleep, breeding by excess raw humors, and watching that dries the
body, they are happy who keep the mean, and they are the Physicians friends,
who delight in extremes, and to their counsel I commend them.

In the last place, touching accidents or motions of the mind, I will only
say, that mirth is a great preserver of health, and sadness a very plague
thereunto. The body follows the temper of the mind, as the temper of the mind
follows that of the body. My self have been twice sick to death in foreign
parts, (...) when I lost my dearest Brother Henry in Asia (whose death I must
ever lament with the same passion, as David did that of Absolon, who wished to
redeem his life with his own death; and surely I freely profess, his life
had been more profitable then mine, both to our friends, and to the
Commonwealth.) The second time I was sick to death at home in England, upon a
less just but like cause, namely, grief. Thus being at the gates of death
twice for grief, I found the Poet to say most truly, that care makes gray
headed; and Seneca no less truly, that he who has escaped Stix, and the
infernal Haggs, to him in care he will show Hell it self.

To speak something of preserving health by Sea: He that would not vomit at
all, let him some days before he take ship, and after at Sea, diminish his
accustomed meat, and especially drink, and let him take the following remedies
against ill smelles and weakness of stomach. Some advise, that he should
drink Sea water mingled with his Wine, and some more sparing, that he drink
Sea water alone, which dries cold humors, and shuts the Orifice of the belly
and stomach. But I think they do ill, who altogether restrain vomiting, for
no doubt that working of the Sea is very healthful. Therefore I would rather
advise him, to use him accustomed diet, till he have sailed one day or two into
the Maine, or till he feel his body weak, and thinks it enough purged, then
let him take meats agreeable to the Sea in small proportion, as powdered Beef,
Neates-tongues dried, and like salt meats, and after eating, let him seal his
stomach with Marmalate. Let him often eat Pomegranates, Quinces, Corianders
prepared, and such meats as are sharp, and comfort the stomach, and let him
drink strong Wines, and sometimes hot Waters, but sparingly, and let him dip a
piece of biscuit in his Wine. And to restrain the extremity of vomiting, till
he be somewhat used to the Sea, let him forbear to look upon the waves of the
Sea, or much to lift up his head. To avoid the ill smelles of the ship, he may
in Summer carry red Roses, or the dried leaves thereof, Lemmons, Oranges, and
like things of good odor, and in Winter he may carry the root or leaves of
Angelica, Cloves, Rosemary, and the foresaid Lemmons, Oranges, and Rose leaves.
To conclude, if there be no Physician in the ship, let him that is sickly,
take counsel of the Physician at home, for the remedies of that weakness to
which himself is most subject, and of diseases most proper to Seamen,
especially if he take any long voyage.

19 To teach the Traveler how to behave himself in foreign parts, is a
large and intricate precept, whereof I will handle many branches in this, and
the next following Precepts. It is an old saying,

Cum fueris Romae, Romano viuito more,
Cum fueris alibi, viuito more loci.
Being at Rome, the Roman manners use,
And otherwhere each places custom choose.
Surely a Traveler must live after other men's fashion, not his own, always
avoiding extremities by discretion, according to the Italian Proverb,

Paese dove vai, vsa comme truoui.
The Country where thou go,
Use thou as do the most.
Now in this so great variety of fashions in all Nations, it seems impossible
to give any set rules, since the French say well,

Tant de payis, tant'de guises.
As many Nations, So many fashions.
And since no man is able to number these diverse events, first, I advise the
Traveler in general to be so wary, as he adventure not to do any new thing,
till the example of others give him confidence. Let him reprove nothing in
another man's house, much less in a strange Common wealth, in which kind it is
not amiss to seem dumb or tongue-tied, so he diligently employ his eyes and
ears, to observe al profitable things. Let him be courteous, even somewhat to
wards the vice of courtesy, to his Host, the children, and his fellow
soiourners in the house. I do not advise him to imitate them, who will put off
their hat to a very Dog; for in all actions baseness must be shunned, and
decency embraced, but it is venial somewhat to offend in the better part,
applying our selves to the diverse natures of men. If he shall apply himself
to their manners, tongue, apparel and diet with whom he lives, he shall
catch their loves as it were with a fish-hooke. For diet, he needs less care,
but for apparel he must sit it to their liking; for it is a good precept
as well at home as abroad, to eat according to our own appetite, but to be
apparrelled to other men's liking. I have observed the Germans and French in
Italy, to live and converse most with their own Countrymen, disdaining to
apply themselves to the Italians language, apparel, and diet, and the English
above all others, to subject themselves to the Laws, customs, language, and
apparel of other Nations.

And hence it is that the conversation of the English abroad, is wonderfully
pleasing unto strangers. Only because they are forced to dissemble their
Country among Papists, I have found by experience, that other Nations, whose
habit and name they take, have reaped the commendation of this their virtue;
and it is certain, that the Germans, whom the English do often personate,
have thereupon been often praised in foreign parts for their temperance, and
other virtues less proper to them. In the mean time the English who are thus
pleasing for this virtue, while they dissemble their Country, are by other
accidents less agreeable to the liking of strangers in diverse places, when
they confess what Countrie-men they are; as in Italy for the difference of
Religion; in the Low Countries, for that many of them have gone away in their
debts; in France and Scotland for the old hatred of both Nations: and in the
Hans or sea-bordering Cities, for the many injuries they pretend to have
received from English men of war at Sea.

Perhaps severe and froward censors may judge it an apish vice thus to imitate
other nations, but in my opinion, this obsequiousnes of conversation, making us
become all things to all men, deserves the opinion of a wise man, and one that
is not subject to pride: but he must always shun extremity, lest while he
affects to be affable, he incur the infamy of a slatterer.

20 He must be humble, so it be with decency, and without balenes; yet I think
in Germany he shall do well to seem, but not to be proud, where they will
take a man to be of base condition, if he be courteous and officious, as in
reaching any thing to another, or doing like offices of service, and where they
respect especially the outward habit, esteeming a frowning proud countenance,
for grave and generous, lastly, where they that sit last at Table, pay the same
shot with the first, who have the best meat, the cleanest beds, and best bed
fellows, which my self experienced, when I did travel from Stoade to the
Low Countries, in the disguised habit of a servant. In the mean time a
stranger may not in any place altogether use the same boldness, as one of the
same Nation may. On the contrary, I would rather offend in humility among the
Italians, who respect nothing less, then the apparel and outward habit, and
are ready to observe with knee and cap a proud stranger, though they scoff at
him behind his back, and the hosts will not fail to put their observance and
reverence into the reckoning, making him pay for his pride. And from hence it
is, that the Polonian Gentlemen (as I said before the sommes of Governors of
Castles for life), being of their own nature proud, do in the space of one or
two years spend all their patrimony among these officious and flattering
Italians, which they do not among the Germans, though many of them live long in
their Universities, and give themselves to drinking as much as the Germans,
though not so daily, and that because the Germans cannot in their nature so
observe them and nourish their pride. In general, he shall do best, that
keeps a mean;

--:neque Altum
Semper vrgendo, neque dum procellas
Cautus horrescit, nimium preanendo
Littus iniquum.
Not always bearing to the Maine,
Nor while to shun storms thou do strain,
Beating too much on shore again.
Liberal modesty is decent, but clownish bashfulnesse disgraceful.

21 And because the youths of our age, as they hold civil behavior to consist
in bold speaking, and proud looks, so they place the opinion of wisdom in the
volubilitie of the tongue, I must remember the Traveler of two god Italian
Proverbs:

In botca serrata may non entro mosca.
Keep close lips, and never fear,
Any flies should enter there.
La lingua non ha os so - mafa rompere il desso.
The tongue is bonelesse, yet does make,
The broken backbone often to ache.
It is an old saying, sometimes it repents to have spoken, never to have held
thy peace, therefore let him have a flow tongue, let his mind be locked up,
but his forehead be clear and cheerful. Let him speak sparingly, and
seldom speak of his own commonwealth, private estate, or good qualities,
which otherwise known will give him more grace, then his own boasting.
Nothing does more preserve a Traveler from falling into dangers, or sooner
deliver him in any danger, then the moderate discreet use of his tongue It is
an old proverb, that men go to Rome by asking the way of those they meet but I
may say, that the way to go thither, and to return safely thence, is silence.
The Italians say well.

Assaisa, chi nulla sa, se tacer' sa.
Who knows no thing, yet knows his fill,
To hold his peace if he has skill.
There is great Art to shun talkatiue companions, or not to seem to hear
their questions. Two things are necessary to be observed; That he have a
cheerful countenance, as an argument of innocence, to free him from suspicion
of any wickedness, or of being a spy. The other, that he shun vicious silence,
as well as Clownish bashfulnesse. He may sparingly and as it were carelessely
inquire after things worthy to be observed, and what he learnes in this kind,
let him diligently note in his Itinearie.

22. Curiosity to see the burning of the Mountain Vesunius (now called Somma)
made Pliny perish, and the like curiosity to see the burning of AEtna, bred
like mischief to Empedocles. Likewise the inquiring after the secrets of
Religion, and desiring to be present at those Rites, has made many perish.
Therefore he must be wary and discreet in this point. Yet I know not how, as
Cicero praised some affectation of speech in a young Orator, so I cannot but
allow some curiosity in a Traveler, and think the same to be of great use to
him, since he runs through the observation of many things in short time, the
infiniteness whereof no memory can comprehend, neither is he like ever to see
them again. Therefore in my opinion, let him be, so he seem not to be
curious.

23 Some dissuade men from being patient in their conversation, saying, that he
inuites a new injury, who bears the old patiently, according to the Italian
proverb:

Chi pecora si fa, il Lupo se la, mangia.
The man who makes himself a sheep,
The Wolf will eat, whilst he does sleep.
But howsoever I may grant, that in thy own Country thou shall be so much
esteemed of others, as thou esteemest thy self, yet he that lives in foreign
parts, must with Diogines beg an alms of an Image, that he may learn
patience. The thunderbolt strikes not that which yields. I advise young men to
moderate their aptness to quarrel, lest they perish with it. We are not all
like Amades or Rinalldo, to encounter an host of men, we have not the
enchanted bodies against wounds, which Aehilles and Orlando had, we shall not
find abroad the same Judges or judgment, which we might have at home, nor
the same indulgence or approved customs of single fights.

In Italy twelve or more armed men will assault one enemy unarmed, and perhaps
sleeping in his bed. For the Italians in our age, having for the most part
placed (...) their happiness in the earthly paradise of Italy, and the
pleasures of this world, are not given in their nature to undergo dangerous
and equal combats, howsoever honorable. And since the Fathers in the Council
of Trent (lest they should seem to have done nothing) did strictly forbid
these combats unto them, they willingly obey therein, to shaddow-their want of
daring, yet can they not put off their natural pride and desire of revenge,
but according to the nature of proud men, are apt to take revenge upon al
dishonorable advantages of number or Arms, and that with strange cruelty; so
as at this day more perish there by these treasons, the^ ever perished before
the Counsel of Trent by single combats. When they have a quarrel, they
presently arm al their bodies, and, as they vulgarly say, their very
shinbones, and hinder parts, with males of Iron, and then, compassed with their
friends, servants, and hired Fencers (called Brani) will not stick to fall upon
their enemy in this sort, though he be an unwary stranger, wanting friends;
and when they have done a murder, they fly without any impediment to the
confines of neighbor Princes, living there as banished men for a time upon
roberies, till they can obtain pardon, which escape a stranger cannot so
easily make. But if they have a quarrel with Italians, using like practices,
it is a thing most ridiculous to see, with what proud bragging they thus walk
armed, and guarded, and with what wariness and foolish tumult the contrary
parts thus walk about the City keeping as far the one from the other as is
possible, till by-the intercession of friends, or authority of the Magistrate,
they be made friends, which must be done with infinite ceremonies, and cautions
of honor, no way blemished but by themselves. Whereas a stranger in Italy may
not without license from the Magistrate, wear a sword in their Cities, no nor
so much as a dagger either in the Cities or highways of the Popes State. How
much less will it be permitted to any stranger thus to arm himself, if he
would (since we are of opinion, that it were better once to dye, then always
to fear death, even in our private chambers, and to be continually so loded
with iron Arms, as a man can hardly walk or breath) Therefore a stranger must
be very wary not to have a quarrel, and if any be thrust upon him, he must be
no less wary to shun the danger, by leaving the place or City in Italy.
Neither would I advise a stranger to sight for his money, if he be assaulted
by thieves (called Banditi) in Italy (except the way from Rome to Naples, where
he has a guard of soldiers to join with) since they are men of desperate
fortune, and when they assail the passenger, have not only their bodies armed
as aforesaid, but carry Muskets, and have ready means of escape, ever lying
upon the confines of Princes But in my opinion, he shall do better to carry
letters of credit for receiving money in great Cities as he passes, and
willingly to yield them that which he has about him, especially since they
use not to kill any not resisting, being content with the spoil of them. Yet
in general for Italy, I remember not that ever I lived in any place, where
fewer wrongs and causes of quarrel are offered then there; for they have a
Proverb,

Portarispetto a tuttie no' hauer' paur a dinessuno.
Give good respect to all, Fear neither great nor small.
So as the Italians offer mutual honor more then is due, and nothing is more
easy then to abstain from words of reproach, which a civil man should hate,
as well in respect of himself, as others. The chief cause of quarrels there,
is either making love to other men's private concubines, or the keeping of a
private concubine to a man's self. For it is prouerbially said,

Chi Asini caccia e done mena,
Non e may senzaguai and pena.
Who drives an Ass, and leads a Whore,
Has toil and sorrow evermore.
And the stranger who will entangle himself in this mischief, seems worthy
to bear the punishment, since there is plenty of grass in the open fields,
though a man never break into enclosed pastures.

As in Italy, so in Germany, Bohemia, the Low Countries, and Denmark, the
Magistrate never pardons any murder, nor manslaughter upon hot blood, nor him
that killes in single combat upon those terms which some call honorable,
neither is there any way to escape punishment, but by flight. And this is common
to all these Nations, that only the Officers of Justice, either stop or lay
hands upon a Murderer or any offender against the Laws. And this makes great
respect of persons, for a poor man having killed one that has rich friends,
shall be pursued with light horses, while either not at all, or slowly, they
follow others, and give way to their escaping. Let a stranger consider, how
difficult his flight will be in a strange Country, and how hotly he is like to
be pursued.

The Germans are apt to quarrel, and sometimes they fight after their fashion,
which is a slash or two with the edge of the sword, and if one of their fingers
be hurt, they straight shake hands, and go to the Tavern to drink, but to
stab or make a thrust is vulgarly called cin schelemstucke, that is, the act of
a villain, and the very judges esteem it a most abominable act. It is
ridiculous, that he which is wounded never so flightly, though it be at the
first encounter, straight shakes his adversary by the hand and both return
again to the City, where he that is hurt pays the Wine to the other, (...)
new or renewed league of friendship. In Germany, Bohemia and Denmark, no man
will part a quarrel, nor put himself between them that are at variance. Neither
will they do it in disputations (that I may mingle jest with cusnest), where
the argument is seldom or never taken up by the Moderator; for in truth they
are not so fierce in any of these kinds, but that they can compose the matter
themselves. The little danger in their manner of fighting, makes their quarrels
very frequent. In these places, as every where, it belieues a Traveler with
his best judgment to shun quarrels, and if he must needs adventure his body,
yet to forecast means of escape after victory. Besides the lie, and such words
as we account most disgraceful, with many in Germany are made familiar speech,
and clounish rudenes esteemed for the neighbor virtue. For the Cochmen, when
they are drunk, will easily give ill words, especially to a stranger, and they
will not stay a minute for him, either in the Inn, if he be not ready to take
Coach, or by the way, if he have any necessary cause to light. Herewith thou
being incensed, think him worthy to be stricken, but the Magistrate thinks
not so, and will rather bear with him and his partakers, if they tumultiously
revenge thy wrong. Who would not with silence and fained deafenes slip his
neck out of such base and dangerous brawles. A stranger needs not fear
thieves in Germany, for they are most rare, but if any such assault him, let
him defend himself the best he can, for they always kill those whom they
rob, either out of their nature apt to insult upon the conquered, or because
their punishments are most cruel by the Law, neither is there any pardon for
capital crimes. The Sweitzers for the most part Soldiers, and stiff
drinkers, yet seldom or never have any quarrels, because the Laws impose
great penalties upon those that offer injury, and the severe Magistrate never
spares them, there being through all Cities and Villages (with most wise and
religious carefulnes) officers appointed, who particularly intend the execution
of this justice. Theenes or murderers are very seldom or never heard of among
them, as well for the severity of the Law, and the serious execution thereof,
as because they are industrious at home, and to shun poverty, are more inclined
to serve in foreign war, then to live by infamous courses at home. In Poland,
the Gentlemen are most prone to quarrels cum bats, and murders, especially if
they be heated with drink, as many times they are, and that because of the
unfit privileges they have above others, and because they have power of life
and death in their own. Territories, neither can be called in question for
criminal matters, but in the public Parliament, held once in three years or
there abouts, where they are also tried by Gentlemen, who for consanguinity,
friendship, or the common cause, are like to be favorable to them. And they
care not greatly upon what unequal terms they offer violence, nor how many
they be that set upon their adversary. Some Gentlemen who have been in
foreign parts, are much more civil then the rest, but in general there is no
place where a stranger ought more to avoid quarrels, especially if he stand
not upon equal terms, as not having one or more Gentlemen on his part. In the
mean time, all that can here offer violence being Gentlemen, to whom the rest
are slaves, either for fear of infamy, or for the abundance they have of all
things for life, robbers by the highway are very rare in Poland, and a
passenger may safely carry ready money about him, especially if he conceal it.

It were in vain to give any precepts for quarrels in Turkey, where a
Christian not only may not quarrel, but not so much as carry a sword, no nor
look a Turk in the face without a Bastinado. For the Turks among themselves,
they seldom or never fight a combat. The Citizens and men of inferior
degrees stand in as humble awe of their soldiers, as the Christians do of
them, neither dare lift up the head or hand against a common Soldier, though
they were one hundred against one. And the Soldiers, howsoever they brawle
among themselves like butter-wiues, yet they never strike one another, the
Laws being most severe in the punishment thereof. Thieves are less to be
feared there, because passengers neither go nor ride alone, but in Carauanes,
that is, a multitude of men and loaded Cammels: yet the Christians commended to
the protection of those that lead the Carauans, not only by friends, but by
bribes, and chancing to meet by the way any Ianizaries, shall be forced to give
them such victuals as they carry, especially wine, except they have a Ianizary
to protect them, whereof one will serve to defend them against the injuries of
a thousand chancing to meet them, but they seldom do the Christian passengers
any other wrong, then this consuming of their provisions. Howsoever in all
events I would advise no Christian of the better sort, having means for fit
expenses, to go any journey without a Ianizarie to protect him, especially
since at Constantinople, from one Christian Ambassador or other, he may easily
obtain a Ianizaric to attend him faithfully, and at a very easy rate. At
which City it is most fit for a Christian to begin his journey into other
parts of Turkey. Howsoever he may likewise obtain such a Ianizaric of some
Christian Consul, either at Halepo in spria, or at Cayro (called also Babylon)
in Egypt, and at other frequented places upon the Sea constable. And this Ianizaric
for some eight Aspers a day wages, will faithfully help the Christian of whom
he is hired, not as a companion, but rather as a free kind of servant.

Englishmen, especially being young and unexperienced, are apt to take all
things in snuff. Of old, when they were senced with Bucklers, as with a
Rampire, nothing was more common with them then to fight about taking the right
or left hand, or the wall, or upon any unpleasing countenance. Clashing of
swords was then daily music in every street, and they did notionely fight
combats, but cared not to set upon their Enemy upon advantages, and unequal
terms. But at this day when no nation labors more then the English (as well
by travailing into fortaine Kingdoms, as by the study of good letters, and by
other means) to enrich their minds with all virtues, I say in these days,
they scorn such men, and esteem them of an idle brain, who for ridiculous or
trifling causes run the trial of single fight, and howsoever they behave
themselves stoutly therein, yet they repute them to have lost as much opinion
of wisdom, as they have gained of daring. Much more do they despise them,
who quarrel and fight in the streets publicly, and do not rather make
private trial of their difference, as also those, who make quarrels with men
of base condition, yea they think them in famous who with disparity of number
do many assail one man, and for this beastly quality comparing them to
Hogs, whereof when one grunts, all the Heard comes to help him, they think
them worthy of any punishment: besides that upon killing any man, mercy is
seldom or never showed them, howsoever in other fair combats, the Princes
mercy has many times given life to the manslayer. And the cause why single
fights are more rare in England in these times, is the dangerous fight at
single Rapier, together with the confiscation of man-slayers goods. So as I am
of opinion, contrary to the vulgar, and think them worthy of praise, who
invented dangerous weapons, as Rapiets, Pistols, Gunnes, and Gunpowder, since
the invention, whereof much smaller number of men has perished, by single
fights, or open war, then in former times: and conquests and such inundations
of barbarous people as were those of the Goths, Hunnes, and Longobards, are
much less to be feared. Nothing did in old time more animate strong Tyrants
and Giants to oppress weaker men, then the huge weight of their Clubs, and of
their arms, where with Goliath had easily quelled David, if God had not put in
his mind to fight against him with a new kind of weapon more suitable to his
strength. I return to the purpose, and do freely profess, that in case of
single fights in England, the Magistrate does favor a wronged stranger, more
then one of the same Nation, howsoever the Law favors neither, and that a
stranger so fighting, need fear no treason, by any disparitie or otherwise.
But in the mean time, here and in all places happy are the peaceable. Let me
add one thing of corrupt custom in England, that those who are not gown men,
never have the opinion of valor, till in their youth they have gained it with
some single fight, which done, they shall after live more free from quarrels:
But it were to be wished, that a better way were found to preserve reputation,
then this of single fights, as well contrary to the Law of God, as a capital
crime by the Laws of men. Thieves in England are more common then in any other
place, so far as I have observed or heard, but having taken purses by the
high way, they seldom or never kill those they rob. The true man, having
strength, arms, and courage, may cheerfully resist them, having the Laws,
Magistrates, People, and all passengers, together with a good cause on his
side: but this is peculiar to the English, that not only the officers of
Justice, but all private men, present or meeting him by chance, are bound to
apprehend a murderer, or any thief, and that the next Constables or under
officers are bound to pursue them by hue and cry, from Village to Village, and
City to City.

And howsoever the English are for a great part descended of the French, and so
partaking with them nature and manners, have also like customs, more specially
in quarrels and single fights, yet in France they have not this custom to
pursue and apprehend malefactors. Only they have Marshals in several
Provinces, to pursue malefactors with light horses, but otherwise only the
officers of Justice use to apprehend them in Cities. And of late, to repress
the malice of men after a long civil war, breaking out into single fights
and murders, they have made severe Laws, and imposed great penalties upon
those that quarrel, especially if any blood be shed, whereas in England only
man slaiers are called in capital question, and small or no punishment is
inflicted upon one that lightly wounds another. For the rest, the French and
English, have the same aptness to quarrels, and the same bravery in these
single fights.

Also the Scots are therein like the English, save that the Scots will take
parts, and assail an enemy with disparitie of numbers and arms, wherein also
the Northern English are not at this day fully reformed.

In this kind the Barbarous Irish do offend in Ireland, but the English and
Irish-English there have the customs of the English. And in times of peace few
or no thieves rob by the high ways of Ireland, but the stealths of Cowes,
Horses, and Sheep, are frequent. All I have said of this subject is only to
this purpose, that the Traveler being informed of the condition of Justice,
Combats, and Roberies in foreign parts, may better learn to apply himself
to patience, and to use moderation, according to the necessity and danger more
proper to him then others, in diverse places.

24 Being to write of simulation, I am at a stay, and grope for passage, as in
a dark Labyrinth: for the voice of the Vulgar, esteems the vice of
dissimulation proper to a Traveler, and highly does reproach him there with.
Shall we then say, that he who knows so to live with Italians, Spaniards, and
very barbarous Pagans, as he can gain their well-wishing, will be at home and
among his friends subject to the odious vice of dissimulation, the very plague
of true friendship? Surely by travel, the good become better in all kinds of
virtue, and the ill more wicked in all vices. But let the indifferent Judge
tell me, if the greater part of Clownes under their rugged cotes, and most
Lawyers, and Merchants, under the shadow of fair words, and sometimes wicked
periuries, have not more skill to dissemble (if that be to deceive) then any
Traualer whatsoever, not excepting Plato himself. No doubt simulation in fit
place and time is a virtue. He that cannot dissemble, cannot live. But he that
so dissembles, as he is accounted a dissembler, indeed has not the skill to
dissemble, but is noted with that infamy, so as another shall better be
believed upon his word, then he upon his oath. Cicero commends the saying of
Epicharmus, Remember to distrust, and calls it the sinew of wisdom, and the
Italians have a Proverb,

Da chi mifido, miguarda Dio:
Da chinon mifido, miguardero io.
From him I trust God help me at my need,
Of him I trust not, my self will take heed.
Antigonus prays God to defend him from his friends. Let me speak of mine
own experience. My self was never deceived by the Italians, whom I suspected,
but by a German (which Nation has a clear countenance, and general
reputation of honesty), I was at Lindaw stripped and cousoned for a time of all the gold I carried about me. Therefore it is a point of art for a Traveler to
know how to avoid deceit, and how to dissemble honesty (I mean to save
himself, not to deceive others.) Let him have a clear countenance to all men,
and an open breast to his friend, but when there is question of his Countries
good, of his enemies lying in wait for him, of his own credit or life, let
him shut his bosom close from his inward friends. That Counsel thou would
have another keep, first keep it thy self. A Traveler must dissemble his
long iourneys, yet only in dangerous places, and among suspected persons. My
self have observed some too wary in this kind, who in most safe ways, used
gross caution, to hide from their near friend the purpose of their journey,
and sometimes in Cities would conceal where and what hour they dined and
supped. In like sort a traveler must sometimes hide his money, change his
habit, dissemble his Country, and fairly conceal his Religion, but this he
must do only when necessity forces. Let me insist upon some examples, which
are most proper to manifest the truth in a dark argument. My self in Italy
many times passed for a German, and then consorted my self with Germans,
faithful companions, as they be all in general, haters of drunkenness, as
some of them be, either drinking altogether water, or using the French diet,
and of the same Religion with me, as those are of the Palatinate of Rheme, and
in some other Provinces. Then I couenanted with these my consorts, that when
any man spoke Dutch to me (though I had some skill in that Language, especially
for vulgar speeches), and most of all if we were in any long discourse, one of
them should take the answer out of my mouth, as being slow of speech, though
it were done somewhat unmannerly. Secondly, that if I were discovered (in any
dangerous place) not to be a German, as I professed, they should say that I was
unknown to them, and by the way fell into their company, and so withdrawing
themselves out of danger by leaving the place, should leave to me the care of
my self. And with these consorts I went to Naples, and there confidently,
though less wisely, in respect of the war between England and Spain, I
entered to view the strong Fort kept by the Spaniards, and after went to Milan.
Another time under the name of a Polonian, I went to the Duke of Loraine his
Court at Nanzi, where being curiously sifted by the guard at the City-gate, and
being asked many questions about the King and Queen and State of Poland, I so
satisfied them, as they admitted me into the City, but when at the very
entrance they bad me hold up my hand, which ceremony the French use in taking
of oaths, I was much affraied, least they should put me to my oath for my
Country, but when they had asked me if I came not from any place infected with
the plague, and I had answered no upon my oath, they let me pass into the City.

There is great art for a Traveler to conceal his Religion in Italy and
Spain, with due wisdom and without offending his conscience: for if a man
would seem (as I may say) a Puritan Papist, (which sort they call piachia
petti, that is, Brest-beaters), there is danger to fall into the suspicion of
an Hypocrite. For the Italians well know,

Chi te carezzapin che far' no' suole,
O Che gabbato to ba, O che gabbar' te vuole.
Who more then he was wont does court and woe,
He has deceived thee, or feign would so do.
And they have often read that of Tacitus.

Quo magis ficta sunt quae faciunt, eo plura faciunt.
The more any do dissemble,
The more to do they are nimble.
Also the Traveler must beware not to fall into such errors, as I observed two
of my familiar friends (yet in a safe place and free of danger) grossly to
fall into. Of which one being a German, and living in the State of Florence,
when he returned after dinner to his lodging, and his hostess asked where he
had been, made answer, that he came from hearing of a Mass, whereas Masses
are only sung in the morning and when the Priests are fasting. The other being
an Englishman, and going to Rome in a disguised habit, did wear apparel of
so many colors, and so strange fashions, as by the same being most strange and
uncomely not only in the sight of his own Countrymen, but also of the
Italians, he drew the eyes of all Jesuits and Romans upon him, so as they
began to inquire after him, and he hardly escaped thence by speedy flight, and
when they pursued him, had fallen into their snares, if he had not been
forewarned of his danger by an Italian friend. To these I will add a third,
who being an Englishman and by freedom of speech voluntarily professing
himself a Frenchman, was discovered by me at that time also disguised, and by
chance falling into his company, but he learning at that time, that nothing
was more safe then silence, afterward escaped dangers, into which otherwise he
might easily have fallen.

My self lived in Italy, and for the space of one year never heard a Mass,
but daily I went out of my chamber in the morning, as if I had gone to the
Mass. At my very first coming into Italy, I presently went to Rome and
Naples, and so at my first entrance passed my greatest dangers, that having
satisfied my curiosity, if perhaps in my return I should happen to fear any
danger, I might more contentedly and speedily escape away. For they who stay at
Paduoa some months, and after go to Rome, may be sure, that the Jesuits and
Priests there, are first by their spies advertised, not only of their coming,
but also of their condition, and the most manifest signs of their bodies,
whereby they may be known. Moreover, I being at Rome in Lent time, it
happened, that some few days before Easter, a Priest came to our lodging, and
took our names in writing, to the end (as he told us) that we might receive
the Sacrament with our Hosts family. Therefore I went from Rome upon Tuseday
before Easter, and came to Sienna upon good Friday, and upon Easter-euen
(pretending great business) took my journey to Florence, where I stayed only
Easter day, and from thence went to Pisa, and before the end of Easter week
returned in haste to Sienna, where I had a Chamber, which I kept when I was at
Rome, and where I meant now to abide for a time. Thus by often changing places,
I avoided the Priests inquiring after me, which is most dangerous about Easter
time, when all men receive the Sacrament. Yet indeed there is less danger of
the Inquisition in the State of Florence, then other where, as there is no
danger thereof at all in the State of Venice to him that can hold his peace,
and behave himself modestly.

One thing I cannot omit, that some few days before Easter, when I was ready
to come from Rome, I adventured to visit Bellarmine, and that in the lesuites
College, professing my self to be a Frenchman, and wearing Italian clothes,
and that after their manner, which is a matter of no small moment; for if I had
not been wary therein, the crastie spies of Rome would easily have known me
by some gesture or fashion of wearing my clothes, which they know to be proper
to the English, as the muffling a man's face with his cloak, or the like. But
especially I took heed, not to gase on the College walls, a manifest sign
of a stranger, nor to look steadfastly in the face of any Englishman chancing
to meet me, whereof some were like to have known me in the University of
Cambridge, least by such beholding of them, I might draw their eyes to look
earnestly on me, for one look inuites another. And with these cautions, I did
happily satisfy this my curiosity. Also upon good judgment I made my self
known to Cardinal Allan, when I first came from Naples to Rome, and when he
had promised me his protection, holding my peace, and abstaining from public
offense, I rested thereupon for the worst events, yet withal, to avoid the
conversation and familiarity of Priests and Englishmen, yea even of those that
were of the Cardinals family, I first left the common Inn, then changed my
hired chamber, taking another in a poor house close under the Popes Palace,
as a place least like to be searched.

I do not commend the curiosity to be present at seeing the rites of a
contrary Religion, which was the death of two young men, and gave occasion to
the first Macedonian war, the people of Rome assisting the murderers, and
the King of Macedon desiring to revenge the death of the two young men.
Informertimes, and now to this day, the Turks use to fling stones at the
Christians (whom they call unwashed dogs, because they use not Baths) when they
come near to their Moschees or their Sepulchers. The Papists do no less
persecute the Reformed Church with fire and sword. And howsoever one of the
Reformed profession may live in Italy, and yet never communicate with them in
their rites, by the foresaid governing of the tongue, by going out of his
chamber each morning, as if he went to Mass (for the Italians generally
think they are not safe till in the morning they have worshipped the Hostia at
the elevation thereof, which their devotion is done in a moment), and by
changing places of abode, with like discreet carriage, yet since it is
dangerous to see their rites, yea, perhaps sinful, why should he not restrain
his curiosity to hear their Masses, and see their ceremonies, especially all
the monuments of the Churches being to be seen at another time of the day. But
if any will needs be present at their Masses, either to please his companions,
or for his own pleasure, as going to see a stage play, or for curiosity,
wherewith many are led. Of two evils he must choose the least, namely, rather to
sign himself with the cross, or negligently to make offer, as if he dipped
his hand (or his glove upon it, as their manner is) into the holy water-Box,
rather then by omitting these common ceremonies, to fall into suspicion, and
being called into question, either be driven to deny his Religion under his
hand writing, or be burned with fire.

Let them stay at home who are so zealous, as they will pull the Hostia or
Sacrament out of the Priests hand. They should do better to avoid the adoring
thereof, by slipping out of the way, or restraining their curious walks: for
inordinate desire of Martyrdom is not approueable, for the avoiding whereof
and all snares, we are bidden join the Serpents wisdom to the Doves
simplicity. Saint Paul was not so furious, for he did not cast down the Altars
in Athens, but taking occasion by the Altar which Epimenides erected in the
time of a plague to an unknown God, he preached Christ peaceably unto them,
though he were an Apostle, and so had greater authority then the blind zealous
of our time. For my part, I know no reason, why one of the reformed Church may
not say his prayers in the Churches of Papists, and I know the greater part of
the Mass (I mean the Divine Office) is good, but the chief mischief is the
adoration or communication of the Hostia. Ismenius an Ambassador of the
Thebans being willed to adore the Persian King, let fall his Ring from his
finger, and taking it up, made a show to adore the King, yet was not judged to
have offended against the Freedom of the Greek Nation.

The Papists at the tinckling of a little Bell, lift up the consecrated Bread,
to be adored for the true body of Christ, at which time all that are present
fall on their knees, and mumble a short prayer, and only the more devout
strike their breasts, but all Papists believe Christ to be there corporally
present. No doubt they err in that thought, but the question is of the outward
reverence exhibited, how far that may offend the conscience of the stranger,
who otherwise knows the truth of that point, and believes it.

The Lutherans, though they do not believe transubstantiation, yet they
believe Consubstantiation, which is a corporal presence, yet I neither read
nor hear any follower of Caluius doctrine, who has positiuely forbidden one
of their profession and living among Lutherans, to communicate in Prayers and
Sacraments with them, if he may not with his own, and am sure that with common
consent they confess, the Lutherans to have true Sacraments. William Perkins a
late Writer of singular learning and piety, does reach, that the preaching of
the Word, and the administration of the Sacraments, differ not in substance,
and that the Word preached by Heretics is the true Word of God, as their
Sacraments also are true. He teaches, that the Pharisees, though in part
heretics, and Apostataes, yet by Christ's command were to be heard, as sitting
in the chair of Moses, so men took heed of their false doctrine. He
concludes, that the Word has his power among heretics. Then so have the
Sacraments, which himself says do not differ in substance from the Word? He
teaches, that some of the Leuits were Heretics, and did teach after a sort
the breach of the Moral Law, and believed Justification by works, and yet
that the Circumcision administered by them was true. He teaches that Judas was
an hypocrite, and was called a devil by Christ, yet that he truly preached
and baptized. From all which points he collecteth, that Infants are not to be
rebaptised, because the Sacraments are true, the right form being used, which
are administered by Papists. Lastly, he concludes, that howsoever the Church of
Rome is no true Church, yet it has true Sacraments, because in that Church the
true Church is, though it lie hidden, to which these Sacraments only belong.
Yet he denies that it follows thereupon, that it is lawful to communicate the
Supper of the Lord with Papists. I will only add one position more of this
godly man, in another discourse of his, namely, that in the external worship
of God, the particular gestures are not prescribed by the word of God, so they
be done decently and modestly, according to the laudable customs of each
Church, either standing, sitting, kneeling, or lying prostrate.

Some may infer from this discourse, and the last positions thereof. That the
Gods of the Gentiles are Idols to Papists, Protestants, and to all Men, but
howsoever the Papists Hostia is an Idol to them, who think erroniously of it,
yet of it self and to others rightly judging of it, that it is a true
Sacrament, and so is to have auereuerence, according to the custom of the
Church wherein a man does live. That in like sort a Papist praying before the
Images of Christ or of the Apostles, does sin, because he bends his knee to
them, and thinks them to be worshipped, but that if another abhorring from
such idolatry, should pray in a chamber or Church where such Pictures are, and
should kneel before them, yet he should not sin, having no mind to worship
them, or kneel to them. That God will be worshipped with holiness, not with
faction: That some honest kind of dissembling Religion (within due limits) is
tolerable; yea, that the outward gesture and reverence used in the Churches of
Papists, even to the Sacrament elevated, is if not lawful, yet not impious.

For my part, God is my witness, that I abhor from denying my Faith, or my
blessed Savior in any point of my Faith, and would not for a World employ my
tongue or pen to give encouragement to any wickedness, yet not to leave the
consciences of such as soiourne among foreign Papists altogether upon the
Rack, give me leave to say: That the former positions being granted, I cannot
but think that there is great difference, between those who superstitiously
worship one true God in three Persons, (which Article of the Trinity cannot be
denied to be held by Papists), and the Heathen Idolators worshipping imaginary
Gods, yea very Devils. That we are not tied to write our Faith in our
foreheads, and thrust our selves into the hands of Inquisitors, but may with
godly wisdom avoid their snares. Yea, that I cannot condemn the bare
kneeling and praying, or outward reverence in the Churches of Papists, as
simply impious, no other circumstances concurring to aggrauate such actions,
especially they being done in foreign parts, where no offense is given to
weak brethren, (which the Apostle 1 Cor. 8. 13, bids us avoid); but rather
the offense of those is avoided, who are Christians, howsoever superstitious.
And this I am the rather induced to think, because none of our Teachers have
(to my knowledge) ever dogmattically forbidden us to hear a Papists Sermon, at
which if we may be present without sin, no doubt we may not without sin
omit the reverence in our gestures due to the word of God from the Chair of
Moses, howsoever spoken by the mouth of Pharyses: But for the maine question of
hearing a Mass, of adoring the Hostia therein, and of communicating that
Sacrament with them, I must confess. That I hold the hearing of a Mass, being
always joined with kneeling to the Hostia, to be questionless a sin, which
the godly must bewail, who by curiosity or any vain affection have been
seduced thereunto, because thereby they have communicated in prayers to Saints,
without precept or promise, and so without faith; and have further exhibited
the reverence of kneeling to the Hostia, which howsoever it is due to God at
the receiving of the Sacrament, yet to beholders only of the elevation, where
the Priest only receives it, no pretense is left for such outward reverence or
worship. Also I must confess, that whatsoever may be concluded out of the
former and like positions to prove that the Papists have a true Sacrament of
Baptism, yet in the Lords Supper they want the true form required by Master
Perkins to make a true Sacrament, and in my opinion this one thing alone, makes
it most unlawful for us to communicate the Lords Supper with them, namely,
that they mangle it and make it lame, by giving it only in one kind of bread,
without the other kind of wine, contrary to the institution. And so much may
suffice for this kind of simulation.

Moreover I advise no man to believe that, which some by woeful experience have
of late found most false, namely, that men of any Religion may freely come to
Rome in the year of Iubily: For the privilege of that year belongs to men
banished and indebted, not to Heretics, (as they term us); In sum they who
fear God from their hearts, who see before their eyes the misery of them that
are infected with the French disease, and who know the chaste pleasures of
marriage, they may with honest dissembling and little art keep their chastity
in Italy, where a stranger is not less esteemed for not being vicious in that
kind, as they commonly are, so he be not an austere and bitter reprouer thereof
to those with whom he lives: yea, rather he shall avoid many dangers by not
being rival to any of them in their love. In like sort, when he lives in
other Countries, nothing is more easy, then by honest dissimulation to avoid
the communicating with them in the proper vices of the Country, only the
Germans are like fire, which conuerteth all into his own element, for singular
art must be used by him, that will preserve himself from drunkenness among
them: And let no man wonder that I say it is easy to preserve chastity in
Italy, and most hard to be sober in Germany, since the first is a solitary
vice, and hates the rival, but the second is communicatiue, and requires the
emulation of companions, wherein they strive for victory as in games for the
wager. Of the art to shun drinking, I shall treat in the following Chapter of
the Germans diet, by which it will appear that some dissimulation is honest
and virtuous, the vice whereof is to be avoided both at home and abroad, and
cannot justly be imputed to a Traveler of this kind. To conclude, he that
will safely live abroad, and so return home, must carry himself wisely and
warily, so shall he not only avoid vices, without the blot of rude austerity,
and shall without danger both converse with Papists, and even be present at
their rites, if he be so affected, but also with Ulysses shall have the skill,
even to steal away the Image of Pallas from the Troyans his enemies, without
fear of surprisall.

25 It remains that to a Traveler returning home with experience, I should
not give precepts, as to a nouice, but friendly admonitions, as to a fellow
Soldier. First his discourse must not be generally and continually in
dispraise of other Nations: for so he shall be wray want of judgment, except
he add some good reason for all general and several imputations: Thus the
Italians err, who coming into England, and seeing the familiar conversation
of our Weomen, do repute them for Harlots, who are much chaster then their
Weomen would be, having like liberty as ours have. Thus strangers may easily
judge amiss, of the weomen in Freesland giving kisses to each man to whom they
drink, and taking kisses of each whom they pledge. As also of the Virgins in
Holland, who hand in hand with young men, slide upon the ice far from their
Fathers house, and there lodge in a strange Town or Village: for these old
customs of particular places, are no certain signs of unchastity. The
Italian Sansouinus grossly erreth in this kind, being otherwise a man of
great wit and judgment, who affirms that Parents in England take the pillowes
from the heads of their children ready to die, out of tender pity and charity,
to put them out of their pain; because perhaps he heard that some weomen,
hired to keep some that were sick of contagious diseases, and therefore sent
with them into solitary places, had sometimes committed this notable villainy.
What could he have said more? if he had lived among the Indians, who eat their
Parents, that the worms may not eat them. I have heard some complain of
England, for the dear rates of diet, and for the peoples in humanity to
strangers, because they had been ill used at Grauesend, (where the very
English are rudely and ill served), and by some obscure Hosts of London, who
use to entertain and wrong strangers, having otherwise never visited the
Citizens of London, the Scholars of the Universities, Gentlemen, or learned
men, nor having ever gone further then London into the Country, which if they
had done; they should have found these men, and the very Country people not
only courteous, but too much given to admire strangers, so they could make
themselves understood, or had with them a guide skilful of the language and
fashions. Others I have heard speak very ill of Italy, whereas there is no
Country in the World more commodious, to him (as they say) Chi sa far'i fatti
suoi, that is, who knows to do his own business: We betray our ignorance or
our self love, when we dispraise foreign things without true judgment, or
prefer our own Country before others, without showing good reason thereof.

They err no less, who like critickes or the Poet Aristarchus, omitting the
virtues of other Nations, discourse only of all their vices. Again, it is no
less unfit to praise foreign things without good judgment, as I have heard
some, beyond measure extol the bridge of Prage in Bohemia, the monuments of
Saint Dennis in France, and poor antiquities of Rome. This argues a vulgar
man, since the vulgar praise small things, admire mean things, and have
altogether no feeling or apprehension of great things.

26 Also I admonish him, after his return home, to renew his old friendships:
and as Soldiers in a good Commonwealth, when the war is ended, return to
the works of their calling, (like the followers of Mercury, as well as of Mars),
so that he returning home, lay aside the spoone and forke of Italy, the
affected gestures of France, and all strange apparel, yea, even those manners
which with good judgment he allows, if they be disagreeable to his
Contrymen: For we are not all borne reformers of the World. Dancing teaches
good carriage of the body, yet we must not always dance; so diverse strange
manners teach us good behavior, yet we must not use inconstancy of manners:
Thou did wisely forbear abroad to offend strangers, with whom thou did
live but from day to day, either with thy apparel or diet, or aulterity of
thy Country manners, and why should not thou much more forbear, at home to
offend thy own Countrymen, with whom thou art to spend all the rest of thy life,
or provoke them to scoff at thee for the foresaid vanities disagreeable to
them. Alexander the Great himself, though he were a most powerful King, and
most gracious in his Subjects love, could not use the Persians apparel and
fashions whom he had overcome, without the great offense and repining of his
Macedonians.

Many at the first sight may judge me to err in that I persuade the Traveler,
when he returns home, not to use those manners which in good judgment he
allows, in case they be not approved, and used by his Contrymen: But this
is good in my judgment, for confirmation whereof I will only yield one
example. The Italian being a great and somewhat viciously curious obseruer of
ceremonious complements, when he has saluted one, and begun to entertain
him with speech, if he chance to espy another man, with whom he has very great
business, yet will he not leave the first man without a solemn excuse: But
an Englishman discoursing with any man, (I mean in the house or any chamber of
Presence, not in the streets), if he spy another man with whom he has
serious occasion to speak, will suddenly without any excuse turn from the
first man, and go to confer with the other, and with like negligence will
leave and take new men for discourse, which an Italian would take in ill part,
as an argument of disrespect. This fashion, and the like curiosities, I would
have an Englishman to leave when he returns out of Italy, as tasting of
affected niceness, and not in use: Except he be of such place, authority,
and grace at home, as he may have confidence to bring any good foreign
custom or manner into use and fashion in his own Country: for we seldom
commend or follow any man of mean sort, taking upon him to bring in new words
into our language, or new manners into practice, or clothes into wearing: And
except he shall leave the foresaid curiosities, his company is like to be
shunned, as of a nice obseruer of men's actions and manners, and most men will
think that he does not so much out of judgment allow foreign things, as out
of pride despise his own.

Yet I do not give this admonition so much, that he may not offend others, as
that he may not be offended himself by others: For I will be bold to maintain
this position against the vulgar opinion, namely, that sharp senses, subtle
wits, curious behavior, and like nice properties, sauouring of either extreme,
are to be accounted among the owners calamities, and that a certain dullness
(in some mean, not in extremity) does give the owner great ease and
quietness. For since all the objects of humane life, are more often
accompanied with noisomeness, then pleasure, it comes to pass, that he who
has a quick smell, is troubled with more stinkes, then he is refreshed with
sweet odours, that an eye offended with any the least error in building, with
the very household stuff never so little disposed out of order, with negligent
attire, (though it be not slouenly or sluttish), and with like unpleasing
sights, is more often offended, and sometimes redeemes the pleasing of his eye
with extraordinary charge to the purse: That one of a nice taste, finding few
things that like his appetite, seldom is pleased with any meat, Cook or Host,
while in the mean time they who have more dull senses, use many things with
pleasure, and are more rarely offended; That a subtle wit, by all arguments and
means enlarging each il accident, makes them seem unsupportable, and
therewith is driven into frenzy, whiles other men of more dull apprehension,
though indeed they be oppressed with worse fortunes, yet being not able to
search the bottom of their distasters, by blockish oblivion give their souls
much rest: For discussing hereof, out of one particular learn to resolve of
all. As honor is not in him that receives it, but in him that gives it, so
love is not the excellency of the party beloved, but the fancy of the lover.
Hence it comes, that witty men wound themselves with the edge of their own
wit, while in the mean time they snort in sound sleep, which are more dull
then that love or like fancies can disturb their rest: yea, since self love
is the very root of love, this blind love of all that our selves do or
think, makes the Ouidian enamoured persons feign in their winding imaginations
a graceful comeliness in mere deformity, as they who see an Ethiopian Woman
black, yet love her upon the conceit of her white teeth and soft skin, and so
they repute their Mistress much fairer and more virtuous then indeed she is,
and the more they feed and nourish these fictions of their own brain, the
more they love her for them, even to desperate madness and mere Idolatry,
while in the mean time the duller lovers more trusting to their eyes, then to
their wits, cannot find out these subtle arguments to deceive themselves, and
so make them love a black More, a squint-eyed, lame, or deformed Mistress.
Hence it is also, that howsoever there is but one true beauty, yet diverse
fancies find several beauties in each complexion, or rather imagine them such
to please their own fancies.

To conclude, hence it is, that he who at home ties himself to the curious
manners of Italy, and finds that others observe not the like toward him, is
often enraged, as if he were disrespected, and so takes every thing for an
injury, being distracted with these falsely conceived offenses, which are taken
by him, but not given by them who observe not the same nice rules of behavior
as he does: And my self, though never very ceremonious, speak this of
experience, which has confirmed my judgment, that a Traveler must cast away
all customs smelling of unpleasing curiosity, and howsoever he does well to
observe curiously all foreign customs and ceremonies, thereby to enritch his
knowledge and confirm his judgment, yet he must use them sparingly in his
conversation at home.

27 Lastly, I advise him, that after his return, he sparingly and not without
entreaty, relate his iourneys and observations. Such must a Traveler be, as
may be hired with a crust of bread to hold his peace or to speak: how little
then does it become him to be so talkatiue, as he would hier one to hear him?
My self have heard many, who had scarce seen the Lyone of the Tower, and the
Bears of Parish-Garden, (as I may well say in comparison of their small
iourneys and experience with other men's), so ingrosse all the talk of the
Table in relating their adventures, as if they had passed the pillars of
Hercules: nothing could be asked which they could not resolve of their own
knowledge, having well learned the precept of Ovid to Louiers:

Et quae nescieris vt been nota refer;
What thou know not, boldly relate, as if thou knew'st thereof the state.
And this they did with great applause of the ignorant, and no less derision
of experienced men, who in their discourse had often found them liars, and well
knew that as many hastening out at one gate, pass more slowly, so vessels full
of good liquor, sound not so much as the empty, and they who understand much,
are not so free in imparting it. And these be the men who have branded
Travelers with the title of Liars, but a wise man ought to distinguish such
sponges, from praise-worthie Travelers. For in all arts, professions, and
courses of life, some take upon them the skill and faculty of the best, who
are commonly most ignorant and impotent therein, and it were great injustice to
ascribe the weaken effe of the one, to any defect in the other, or in the art
and course it self. Therefore,

Nauita de ventis, de Taur is narret Arator.
Let Mariners of the winds force,
And Plowmen of their Bulls discourse.
but I would have a Traveler after his return (like an Orator or Poet) so
well instructed in all subjects of discourse, as nothing should be altogether
strange to him, yet so discreet also, as he should not but upon some fair
occasion speak of those things, whereof he could discourse most eloquently and
iudicially. And since stale Harlots by this art make their putrified wares
saleable, how much more shall Travelers, whose discourse more pleases in the
stomach then in the mouth, make the very stones and insensible creatures to
dance and hang upon their mouths, as they are said to have been moved by the
eloquence and music of Ulysses and Orpheus.

CHAP. III. Of the opinions of old Writers, and some Proverbs which I observed
in firraigne parts by reading or discourse, to be used either of Trauellert
themselves, or of diverse Nations and Provinces.
OLD Writers affirm, that the Northern men, in respect of their heat kept in
by the cold, are generally greater eaters Uoraciti
then Southern men. Thus they prove it; Because all men have a better stomach
in Winter then in Summer, because Northern men passing toward the South,
daily leese their appetite; and because both men and beasts of the South are
more lean, then those of the North. This opinion is of it self true, but the
arguments for proof admit some exceptions; for the Turks toward the South be
fatter generally, then our men of the North, not that they eat more, but that
they are Eunuchs, and given to idleness, I say therefore, that the opinion is
generally true, but by many accidents proves false, namely, in places which
suffer not the extremity of cold in the North, or of heat in the South, and
comparing barren Pastures in the North, with fertile pastures in the South, and
upon like accidents, hindting the true effects.

The fortitude of the mind, and the strength of the body for the same reason
they attribute to Northern men, and show by Histories that hereupon they were
Fortitude and strength.
ever Conquerours, as the Medes against the Assirians, the Assirians against
the Chaldeans, the Greeks against the Persians, the Parthians against the
Greeks, the Romans against the Carthaginians, the Goths aginst the Romans,
the Turks against the Arabians, the Tartars against the Turks, the English
against the French, even in France, though the French called in by the English
could never conquer them.

Lastly, they conclude that the Scythians are most valiant, and the best
Soldiers of the World: The truth is, that the Romans were ouerrunne by
barbarous people of the North, yet not for their want of valor, but by their
dissension, and the vastness of their Empire, falling with his own weight:
yet the same Romans subdued, and long held in subjection many Nations of the
North, as France, the Low Countries, and Britanny. And no doubt the hope of
spoil, not valor or strength, made the barbarous people ouerrunne the Romans,
who might have been quiet from them if they had been poor. No man will fish
with a golden hook for a half penny fish. Again, the riches of the Romans,
made them effeminate, which likewise encouraged the barbarous people to assail
them.

But it were fitter to say, that wisdom and wit, rather then heat or cold,
make men to be valiant. For no man contemnes death, or has due respect of
honor but he, with whom reason preuailes more then nature. Nature has his
force, as the Eagle begets not a Dove, but reason, rather then nature, is the
cause, that when common Soldiers run away, yet Gentlemen choose rather to
dye, then escape by flight. Not so much because they are borne of a Noble race,
as because they will not be a reproach to themselves, and their race. Not
because Gentlemen dye with less pain then the common sort, but because they
better understand that the soul is immortal, that he dies in a good cause who
fights for his Country, and that an honorable death is to be preferred before a
disgraceful life. In all great Empires, valor and learning flourished
together, and decayed together, with the ruins of the Empires following their
decay: as in those of the Assirians, Persians, Medes, and the Empires more
known to us by Histories, of the Greeks, and Romans. Therefore howsoever
strength, and an innated boldness, are propagated, and come by Nature, yet
true fortitude is not found in the North, nor in the South, nor proceeds from
nature, but where learning flourishes, and cowardice is reputed baseness, and
where the word of God teaching the immortality of the soul, and the vanities
of mortal life, most reigns, there men are most valiant.

Also they affirm, that the Southern men are more witty, and more wise, then
Northern, because the barbarous Goths and Northern people, when they got Wit
and wisdom.
great victories, yet could not make true use of them, but lost Provinces for
want of wit and wisdom, in as short a time, as they got them by their valor
and strength.

Surely variable fortune did exercise and toss part of the Goths, and
vandales, yet other part of the Goths, and the Longobards, subdued the plain
Country of Italy, and these settled a long lasting Kingdom, calling it
Lombardie. And though Hannibal were a Southern man, yet of him, after the
field woone by him at Canna, it was first said. Hannibal thou know how to
overcome, but thou know not how to make use of thy victory. Besides that
wit and wisdom cannot generally be thus joined in one subject, except we will
grant that women commonly most witty, are also commonly most wise. There is a
mediocrity required in wisdom. Nolt altum sapere. Be not too wise, cuen as
Solomon advises not to be too lust, (meaning in outward appearance, for the
inward man cannot be too just.) But mediocrity (perhaps) will be judged rather
to be found in the inhabiters of the worlds middle regions. Again, howsoever
we may grant, that the Italians, in the founding of their Empire, by valiant
acts and learned writings, left notable marks and evidences of their wisdom,
yet in our age they may (perhaps) be preferred to others, for some indowments
of Nature, but must yield the pre-eminence of valor and learning to some other
Nations. The vain wisdom of man tires it self in vain, while it attributes
so many and so great changes in the world, to this or that Clime, or Star, or
any natural cause, rather then to look back to the first mouer of all humane
things, and acknowledge his finger in the disposing of them.

They affirm that the Northern people are most cruel, and Tacitus accuses
the Germans, Transsilnanians, and old Britains, of cruelty. Bodine disputes
wittily Cruelty.
against this opinion, first because fat men, as the Northern, are better men
then those who are lean, as the Southern men be, and he calls Caesar to
witness, who was not afraid of the fat men, Anthony, and Dolabella, but of the
lean men, Brutus and Castius.

In my opinion, fat men, whose heat is decayed, are thereby less bold for any
great enterprise. Only I admire Luther, who alone, and weak, did wonderfully
oppose himself to the great multitude of Papists, and power of the Popes. But
I remember that Melancton, a lean man, and skillful in the Greek and Hebrew
tongues, and universally learned, did assist him, yea the Germans say that
Melancton was more learned, and Luther more bold. So as, according to the
course of the world, it is likely, that Melancton did much in that great work,
whereof Luther bare the name. Besides that we must attribute the happy and
wonderful reformation of Religion, to higher causes then those under the
Moon, namely, not to the natural heat of men, but to the boldness
proceeding from the divine heat of the holy spirit.

Bodine affirms, that Northern men, because they are fat, are less prone to
the extremities of good or evil, and so concludes them to be less cruel,
which he shows by examples, in that the Carthaginians, and other people of the
South, used to pull out eyes, to pull off the skin, to burn with a slow
fire, and to impale or set upon stakes, and to use like cruelties toward
condemned men, and that those of America, use to smeare their children with the
blood of their enemies: whereas on the contrary, the Romans were merciful,
first beheading condemned men, then by the law of percins, forbidding Citizens
to be beaten with rods, after punishing by staruing and by banishment. In my
opinion he might have added the lenity of the Britans, being more northward,
where the greatest offenses are punished with hanging, except (...), (...)
drawing and quartering are added, yet the severity thereof is commonly (...),
by letting them hang till they be dead. Bodine adds, that Northern men did
always assail with open force, and were soon pacified, whereas Southern men
assuled with Fox-like craft, and were cruel to those that submitted to them:
But in the end, while he confesses, that the Germans being Northern, break the
bones of condemned men upon the wheel; and that the Greeks being southerly,
put to death by (...) of the Hemlocke, and that in Chios they mingle water to
make them die without pain, by these contradictions he rather obscures then
illustrates that which he would prove.

For my part, while I consider these and like examples, so contrary in both
kinds, together with the great changes of the World in diverse times, so as
they, whom one age were cruel, become in another age merciful. While I
consider the old in egrity of the Romans, when they reproched the Carthaginians
to be breakers of faith, and find them after to become greater breakers
thereof, concluding that no faith is to be kept with Heretics, with which note
they brand any enemy at pleasure and bringing in devilish equivocation, the
plague of integrity, which takes away all faith among men; and lastly, proving
these things not with words, but with fire and sword. Upon these
considerations, I am induced to conclude, not only for cruelty, but for all
vices and virtues: That Southern men, as more witty, if they be good, prove
best, if ill, prove worst, and that the degrees of good or ill, proceed not
from wit, but from the application of it to good or ill. Therefore not the
North, nor the South, but Phylosophicall precepts, godly laws, and the
knowledge of Gods word, or otherwise the wants thereof, make men good or ill,
and where knowledge, religion, and good laws flourish, there virtues are
practiced, but among barbarous and superstitious people, living in Cimerian
darkness, all vices have ever, and will for ever flourish. Abraham conceived
just fear lest for his Wives beauty he should suffer violence and death, only
because the fear of God was not in those places where he soiourned: for this
fear of God in himself merciful, and so commanding his children to be
merciful, does restrain the most fierce natures from offering any wrong to
their neighbors. Also Philosophy did keep the very Heathen within limits of
honesty and Justice, which as the Poet says;

Emollit mores, nee sinit esse feros:
Does soften manners with remorse,
And keeps them from a furious course.
In like sort old Writers affirm, that Northern men are most perfidious: but
nothing persidiousnesse
is more easy then in all sorts of men to find examples of perfidiousnes.
(...) witnesses that the old Egyptians were naturally most perfidious, yet are
they most southerly. In like sort, the Southern Carthaginians were of old most
infamous for treacherous acts. On the contrary, many Histories tax northern
men, for breaking leagues: Also the Northern Goths and Southern Spaniards,
objected mutual breaches of faith one to the other. Therefore (as I said)
knowledge and religion are the causes of all virtues, as ignorance and atheism
or superstition, are the causes of all vices, neither are these causes
hereditary to any clime or nation, but are dispersed through the world by
supernal distribution diversely at diverse times.

They write that Southern men are rather sparing and frugall then covetous,
and that Northern men are prodigal and given to rapine, but the Egyptian
Cleopatra covetousness and prodigality.
passed the Romans and all others in luxury: And at this day nothing can be
added to the rapacitie and covetousness of the Turks, and more specially of
those most toward the South, daily exercised both against Christians and among
themselves. And this seems to be attributed to their corrupt and tyrannical
form of government, and to their ignorance of Religion, as also of liberal
and manual Arts, not to the situation of the Provinces. I confess that in
general Southern men are now more frugall in diet and apparel then
Northern. But the Jews and Southern men are and ever have been great
usurers, extortioners, and amassers of treasure, so as they must also be
reputed covetous. And as the Italians are most frugall, so have the Romans in
their riches been monsters for Luxury. So as the clime cannot be the cause.
But indeed riches are cause of Pride and Luxury, as the examples of all times
and nations do teach. And the same riches are cause of covetousness,
according to the Poet. Crescit amor nummi quantum ipsa pecunia crescit, As
money grows so grows auatice. Prodigality at this day, not for the climes
sake but for some other cauies, may justly be imputed to Northern men, yet
this vice dispersing treasure vitiously, is not so great a vice as that of
rapine and covetousness, hiding those treasures, and burying them from use.

Old Writers tax Southern men most for Jealousy. No doubt the most sharp
usie.
sights are sometimes dimmed, and so for what cause so ever, it must be
confessed, that the sharp witted Southern men are to this day madly jealous,
always tormenting themselves with this restless passion, and using their
wives like slaves, yet no whit more freed thereby from fatal horns, though to
preserve their wives chastity they permit the Stews, and that because they
live among men, who no less vex themselves in finding means to enjoy these
forbidden Loves, then the other are vexed in the courses to prevent their
enjoying thereof, and because their wives so watched, think themselves to
bewray simplicity and ignorant folly, if they omit any occasion of offending
this way, though it were with never so base a man.

Having taxed the witty Southern men with jealousy, yet they in general
conclude, that Northern men are most suspicious, and that upon a contrary
cause, namely Suspicion.
the defect of wit. No doubt they who are most guilty of their own defects,
take in worst part the whisperings and private laughters of those that are in
their company. Yea I will say of experience, that I found the Italians nothing
nice to show their strong Forts to me and other strangers, and that in
Northern parts the same were not to be seen by strangers, or at least with
great difficulty. By which and like arguments casie to be brought, I am induced
to think that want of true judgment is the cause of suspicion, but not the
sole nor yet the chief cause thereof. To omit many other causes, sometimes an
ill conscience makes men suspicious, as we read that our tyrant Richard the
third, upon the least shadow or shaking of a leaf, had his hand upon his
dagger. Again the best and wisest men are justly suspicious, when they live
among wicked men, or have necessary affairs with them. Therefore let
Southern men consider, whether they use not more to wound their own
consciences with guiltiness of wicked deeds, then Northern men use to do,
and whether they be not more justly to be accused of treacheries, poysonings,
and like high crimes, then the other. For no doubt the jealous Southern men by
guiltiness of these crimes in spite of their wit and wisdom, shall become in
all kinds most suspicious.

Old Writers affirm, that Southern men are more prone to madness then the
Northern, and they report that infinite numbers of mad men are found in
Affrique, Madness.
where many Almes-houses are built only to receive the sick of this kind,
and that the South parts of Spain do abound with distracted men. And this is
agreeable to nature, and the Rules of natural Philosophy. For howsoever the
situation of places cannot properly be the cause of any virtue or vice, yet it
is probable, that it may cause diseases or health.

Bodine against the judgment of Hipocrates, proves that Northern men are
more venerious then Southern. First, because our bodies have greater inward
heat in Venerie.
Winter then in Summer, and so in Winter are more apt for the act of
generation, the same reason being of a Northern and Southern body, as of
Winter and Summer. I should think that the hot and dry Southern men are most
prone to venery, but that the cold and moist Northern Men are most potent
therein.

Again Aristotle says, that they who ride most, are most venerious, which
Bodine also obiecteth against Hipocrates, who falsely holds that the Northern
men's riding makes them less fruitful in generation. It is most certain by
our and all men's experience, that great part of Asia, and especially the
Southern Provinces, lie at this day waste or little inhabited, though Poligamy
be permitted among them, (I mean the having of many wives for one man), and
that all Europe on the contrary is wonderfully populous, and especially in the
most Northern parts, though no man has more then one wife allowed him: By
this one argument it is most manifest that the Northern men are most potent
for generation; And it is no less manifest that Southern men have more
desire, by the multitude of their wives, their libidinous using the love of
boys, and all men's consent so general, as it needs no further proof; yea,
men of experience say, that Northern men only traveling toward the South,
are more and more troubled with this restless desire.

Bodine disputes that Southern men are longer lived then Northern, (contrary
to the opinion of Pliny): First because Elephants, who (as Aristotle says)
have the longest (...)
lives of all other, are only found in the South. I remember that the Turks
at this day repute them old weomen, or past the age of love, who are come to
the age of 25 years, and that my self did see few or no men in Asia, who had
gray beards, and it any had gray hayres, it was not for the number of their
years, but because they grow old sooner then Northern men. I cannot so well
speak of other Nations, where I lived a short time, and as a stranger; but I
remember, that in Benerly a Town of Holdernes in England, there lived in our
age one Iemings a Carpenter, whom the men of those parts report, to have lived
120 years, and that he married a young woman some few years before his death,
by whom (being of good fame) he had four children, and that his eldest son
by his first wife, then living, was 100 years old, or thereabouts, but was so
decrepite, as he was rather taken for the father then the son. And lest I
should seem by one Swallow to make summer, as the Proverb is, the men of
Hereford-shire can witness, that such examples are not rare in England, where in
the reign of King James, they made a morris-dance of fifteen persons, all
borne in the same County, or within the compass of 24 miles, who made 1500
years between them, some being little less then 100 years old, and some
fair passing that age. Many such examples are not wanting in England and
Ireland, to prove that Northern men are longest lived. My self have known
some, and have credibly heard of many more weomen, of one 100 years age, in
these Kingdoms. The Irish report, and will swear it, that toward the West
they have an Island, wherein the Inhabitants live so long, as when they are
weary and burdened with life, their children in charity bring them to die upon
the shore of Ireland, as if their Island would not permit them to die. In
ourtime the Irish Countess of Desmond, lived to the age of about 140 years,
being able to go on foot four or five miles to the Market Town, and using
weekly so to do in her last years, and not many years before she died, she
had all her teeth renewed. Again, Bodine may best be confuted with his own
argument: for as he says that Sortherne men are longest lived, so he
confesses that they are most given to venery, whereas they that are like the
Cock Sparrow, cannot be long lived: And whereas old writers affirm that the
Inhabitants of the middle regions are of shortest life, because Southern men
used to great heat, and Northern men used to great cold, can easily bear them
both: but the Inhabitants of the middle regions, being oppressed both with cold
and heat, are subject to these changes of the Air, which breed diseases and
old age. This seems to me as if they should say, that custom makes extreme
things, but not temperate things, to be tolerable; since those of the middle
regions are no less used to the changes of their temperate air, then the
others are to the extremities, and their changes.

Give me leave to say, contrary to the vulgar opinion, that the pureness or any
properties of the air, do not so much cause long or short life, as the
changes of air by long iournies, or by removing men's dwellings from one air
to another, which changes are more powerful, the more violent they are, and
that to men of all climes, whether they journey or remove dwelling, from the
North to the South, or from the South toward the North. This experience
teaches by many examples. First, of great trauailers, whereof infinite nombers
in youth die before they return home. Secondly, of those that dwell in the
Fennes of Lincolnshire, and of Essex in England, where they that are borne, and
live all their days in those Fennes, and in that unhealthful air, live to be
of very old age, and with good health; but it they remove dwelling to a purer
air, soon die, as likewise they that are borne in purer air, and come after
to dwell in those Fennes, live very short time. This in general I say, because
many very aged people are found in those Fennes, but particularly I am
confirmed in this opinion, as by many other, so by one pleasant example, of a
Husbandman, whom my self did see in Essex, who dwelling in the Fennes not
far off, was threescore years old, healthful, and like to live long, and
within few years past had married and buried eight wives, all which he had
brought to his house in the Fennes, upon one Nagge of some forty shillings
price, for these women borne in purer air, soon died after they came to dwell
with him in the Fennes.

Many prove that Southern men are most religious, by their sumptuous Churches
(in which it is a great trespass so much as to sper,) by the very Princes of
Afric entering Religion.
the profession of Monks, by their Fasts, frequent praying, whipping of
themselves, laws made against irreligious persons, and the Pontificiall habit
of their Kings. On the contrary they affirm that Northern men (as women and
children soon make and as soon break leagues of amity) do soon and
greedily embrace any Religion, and no less speedily cast it off again. As the
Ostrogothes and Visigothes, being driven from their seat, became Christians
under the reign of the Emperor Valens, and soon after terrified with
burnings, fell from the Christian Faith. And the Goths in Italy first became
Christians, then Arrians. Yea, Gotland soon received the Christian Faith, and
presently returned to their Idolatry. And the Turks soon fell to the
Arabians Religion. As also Tartares were easily drawn on both hands for the
point of Religion. And lastly, the Germans taxing the Papal frauds (together
with their neighbors) did of their own accord fall from the Popes obedience,
without any force or violent constraining. But on the contrary, that Southern
men ever did slowly embrace any new Religion, and howsoever they were often
divided into Sects, yet could never be drawn to change their Religion without
miracles and force of Arms. So as Antiochus by no torment could draw any one
of seven brethren, or their mother that exhorted them to be constant, so much
as to taste Swines flesh. It is easy to oppose examples and arguments to the
foresaid examples and arguments. If we behold the Temples, Monasteries, Bells,
and other old ornaments or religious vestures of our Northern Island England,
no doubt they far paste those of the South, where neither the present
Churches building, nor the ruins of like old building, show the like (if any)
magniffcence. Yea, rather the Sepulchers then the Moschees (or Churches) of the
South, may be thought sumptuous. Neither want we examples of Northern Kings
(as of the Saxons in England, and Goths in Italy) who put on Monks habits: nor
yet of Nations in Europe, who have violently with much suffering maintained
their rites of Religion. Moreover, see how these men omit to distinguish
superstition from Religion. They confess that the Northern men first
discovered the Papal frauds, yet they will also have them more simple, whence
it follows, that the sharpe-witted Southern men did first see these frauds,
and cover them for fear of the Popes persecutions, or because they esteemed
Religion only a State policy, and knowing the truth yet abstained from
reformation. Surely Petrarch, Dantes, and other free wits of Italy did see the
Papal frauds before the Germans, and though fearfully, yet plainly
pronounced Rome to be Babylox. But our Northern Luther, when at Rome he had
seen the licentious Romans, and their criminal frauds, could not abstain,
but he must needs diuulge these impostures of Religion, and being weak for
his defense, yet could not but oppose himself to most powerful enemies.
Northern men are soon drawn with the love of Religion, the ^ of fear due to
God, they like Foxes, may command over Lions, which our good Epimethei at last
by the events perceiving, do so much abhor all hypocrisy and whorish
painting of Religion, as by no danger they can be frighted from professing
truth, whose constancy in suffering persecution for the same is abundantly
witnessed, by the multitude of them burnt in France, as Sleyden writes of his
own sight, and by the more violent, at least, more lasting persecution of them
by fire under Marie, late Queen of England. Therefore let us say, that
Northern men are easily drawn to the true Religion, and by no terrors can be
kept from reforming corruptions growing therein: for in that without torments,
and of free will they are drawn to profess the truth, this proves them most
religious; and in that Southern men still hold their old opinion, this proves,
that they prefer the peace of the World, before the peace of Conscience. And
in that the Northern Magistrates (I speak of our Reformed Churches) seek
rather to reach and persuade Religion, then to force it by fire and sword, this
proves that they are more godly and mild, then those of the South, who
tyrannically persecute their own subjects differing from them in Religion.
Shall I atribute it to the constancy of the Spaniards, that they dare not lift
up a finger against the tyranny of their Clergy? or rather to the baseness
of their minds, and the unspeakable tyranny of the Inquisition, punishing
innocent and nocent without distinction if they never so little cross the
ambitious pride and covetousness of the Clergiemen. They who live in the
Kings, and generally approved Religion of their Country, inioying all
privileges, these in this particular may rather be thought secure then
religious, and they who dare profess the Religion which they judge to be
true, though it be done against their Kings Edicts, and with loss of goods
and life, (of which kind we have notable examples in Northern parts) these
men do more fear God then man, and truly deserve to be called religious.
Besides it must not be granted, that all Northern people have thus
voluntarily and speedily yielded to the profession of the reformed Religion:
for in Ireland far toward the North, few or none are found of the Natives,
who in this so clear light of the Gospel have cast of the Roman Religion. Yet
is not this to be attributed to their constancy in Religion, but rather to the
lenity of the reformed profession, which thinks that the conscience must not
be forced, or perhaps to the Magistrates fault, having taken small or no good
orders to have the people instructed in the truth, or lastly and most of all to
the ignorant blindness of this Nation, which does not willingly receive any
Rules and Laws of civil life, or religious reformation, or rather frowardly
opposes the same, and so as children prise their bables, they more obstinately
retain the outward Pharisaicall holiness of the South, in burning wax light,
having Images, and external pomp of Copes and Processions, and like humane
traditions. Lastly, if we shall consider well the above mentioned position of
old Writers, namely, that Northern men are more blockish and ignorant, by that
reason it will follow, that Northern men are more hardly drawn from any
received opinion. For ignorant men are also suspicious, and hardly admit any
that bring innouations, the rather because they are less capable of their
persuading arguments. So the Philosopher said of a City in Greece, that the
Citizens were so blockish, as they could not be led by eloquence. In like sort
the Professors of Alchumy seldom deceive any ignorant persons, who would
answer as Cicero speaks of Southsayers: thou promisest me Kingdoms, and
yet beggest a groat of me: but we daily see, that witty men and learned, are
often caught and drawn to expense by their abstruse dark arguments. Therefore
in my opinion it should be said, that the Religion of Southern men, by the
outward ceremonies, is, like Sepulchers, sumptuous without, but that the
Religion of the Northern men is glorious within. Or if, setting humane
experience aside, we will weight this by the holy scales of the Sanctuary, we
shall find undoubtedly, that we can neither in North nor South come to God,
or fly from him at our pleasure, but that God in what Country soever,
imparteth his light to his chosen children, which he hides from potent
Kingdoms, and men more wise and nightie in their own sight.

Old Writers affirm, that Northern men have softer skins then Southern
Softness of skin.
men, as women have them in general softer then men. Whereupon Bodine says,
that the transulpine men coming into Italy, are much troubled with Fleaes, and
biting Flies. But in my opinion, howsoever we may truly say, that Northern
men have whiter skins, and many times by the accident of fatnes softer then the
common sort there, yet the Ethiopians and other people of Affrique dwelling
near the extremest South on this side the line, as they have properly white
teeth, so is their skin (howsoever tanned) far softer then the skins of
any nation whatsoever, by the common consent of all men.

They account Southern men to be most cleanly and neat of body, as well for
their frequent use of Bathing and continual washings, as for that they will
not endure Cleanliness
any the least filth or spot upon their apparel, especially the Turks upon
their Tulbent (or white linen worn upon their heads,) and keep their houses
in like sort from all filth, but above all are curious in keeping their
Churches, in which it were no small trespass so much as to spet, (which in
common conversation they take for an offense, as if he that spets were weary
of their company, and in deed by the Nature of the Clime and continual
bathing in hot Bathes, they take away the rheum, so as they are not troubled
with coughing and spetting.) It any man object that the Germans use bathing,
if not so continually as the Turks, yet very often, surely the Germans use it
not for cleanliness, but to dry up the gross humors which they get by
intemperate drinking, and they are otherwise more slouenly in their apparel,
in their Stoues and all manner of linen, if they be compared with Southern
nations, and nothing less then cleanly if they be compared with other
Northerly nations of Europe.

They write that of old, the Southern men passed all other in luxury, as
well of apparel as diet, and they allege that the Romans had Oysters out of
Britanie, and Luxury.
that Anthony himself being a Roman, and much given to this luxury, yet was
far surpassed therein by Cleopatra, a more Southerly Queen of Egypt. But at
this day it may be confidently said, that they are nothing less then luxurious
in either kind, as shall be showed more at large in this volume, and in the
Chapter treating of the diverse diets and apparel of souerall nations.

The French in Europe, and the Syrians in Asia, but most especially the Greeks
in Europe, being all inhabiters of middle Regions, are by old Writers taxed
with leuity. Leuitie.
Bodine confesses that the French are more quick and nimble, and as
inhabiters of a middle Region, also more cheerful, since the Northern men by
gross humors, and the Southern men by Melancholy, are made more slow, and
in this sense he is content leuity should be imputed to them, for otherwise he
brings many arguments, why Northern men should be light or inconstant,
Southern men should be obstinate, and the inhabiters of middle Regions, (among
whom he contains the French) should be constant. But how soever he cannot have
the patience, to have leuity (that is inconstancy in word and deed)
attributed to the French, yet no doubt by the general consent of Nations, the
French, in apparel, gesture, in counsels of peace and war, and more
specially in the raising of civil watres, are nothing lesie then constant and
grave, if they be compared with the wise Italians, and delatorie Spaniards.
Besides that leuity, which they put in swiftness and nimblenesse, must be
attributed to the Irish, above any Nation, of the middle, or whatsoever Regions.

The old Writers affirm, that the Southern Nations are more fortunate, which
Fortunatenesse.
they prove by many arguments, yet among those, whom they judge thus fortunate,
the Egiptians were ever slaves to more Northern nations, excepting those ages,
wherein their Pharoes, Piolemyes, and Sultans (Rebels to the Emperor,) ruled
over them. And for the most part Southern men have had the fortune to serve
others, and no doubt slavery is no badge of good fortune. If they object the
old saying, that all ill comes from the North, it is true that Northern men
have commonly conquered the South, and so they bring ill to others, rather then
have it themselves, and ill may be said to come from the North, rather then to
be in the North. But if they judge the South happy, because it first had the
knowledge of Gods word, the Art Military, learning, policy, ciuility, and
Empires. Some are of opinion that these, and all good or ill things, are
circularly carried through the world, and communicated to all Nations at diverse
times. And (perhaps) Iustus Lipsius, in our age, observing this, by the reading
of Histories, did thereupon prophecy of an Empire from the West, as if the
Spaniards with their West-Indians, should have the Empireo the World, and all
good things that follow it, which hope of theirs, though formerly feared our
age has broken. I undertake not to know future things, as he did, but for the
old Writers opinion, this I know that the above named fortunate things, came
from the East, rather then the South: And if they will needs have them to come
from the South, yet as it first had them, so it first lost them, neither is it
so great happiness to have had any good, as it is misery to have lost it: so as
the South may be said to have been fortunate of old, but to be miserable now,
and the North now inioying these things to be fortunate for the present, yet
not to have been miserable of old in the want of them, which then they knew
not, and so never desired them: For as the Poet says; Ignoti nulla Cupido:
Unknown, undesired.

Lastly, old Writers affirm, that few or no Devils are in the South, by reason
of the plentiful light, which was thought to drive them away, and the
subtilenesse of the Devils, and the possessed with devils.
Air, which could not bear them, and that whole Armies of Devils and Witches
were in the North. They are very tender hearted to the Devils tormented with
fire, in giving them the cold North to in habit: yet of old, they say the gate
of hell was at the Lake of Auernus, in the territory of Naples: Have the Roman
Bishops possessed this gate with their squadrons, so as Northern men can no
more pass that way? Has wickedness increased? or are they more unkind to us
then the Heathen Romans, that now in the age of the World they force Northern
men to find out a new gate at the Mountain Heela in Iseland? But to speak
seriously: The Platonists, and some of the Christian Fathers following them,
do give bodies both to good and ill Angels. Aristotle and his Peripatetikes,
and our Schoolmen following them, hold that Angels are simple and abstract
intelligences, and substances altogether without bodies Zanchius comparing all
their arguments, concludes, that Angels may take bodies, and are not in many
places at once, but in one place, and move with these bodies as swiftly as the
winds, so as nothing can hinder their motion, being made in time
vnperceiueable by us. By which it may be gathered, that their substances, not
taking any body, are so subtle, as they need not to be sustained by the Air:
And if they imagine that Ayry Devils are sustained by thick Air, yet watery
and earthy Devils, (for such bodies they also give them), are not hindered by
any subtilenesse of Air, to compass the Earth. If Southern men have such
store of light as they write, let me merrily ask them, why the Southern, as
well Papists, as Turks burn so many candles by daylight, which Northern men
use not in these days, nor ever used, but as received from them: but I grant
that the light of the Gospel, (not any other light), drives away Devils, since
the Devil is the Prince of this World, but not of the Cstildren of light: And
the want of the Gospels light makes so many Witches in Lapland upon the Baltike
Sea, which are most rare in England, (so far in the North, as the old Romans
said they were divided from the World). Before the preaching of the Gospel,
the Druydes in France, the Heathen Priests pronouncing Oracles, and the German
weomen foretelling things to come, were as I think witches, but all these
witchcrafts ceased after the coming of Christ. For Witches and Coniurers, I
will not deny them to be here in the North, as in all the World; for the
Devil is every where ready to devour his prey: but profane Histories, and
even the Holy Scriptures witness that the Egyptians and Chaldeans, were of old
most famous Sorcerers: yea, the very Northern Weomen, which go about and tell
fortunes, are for the reputation of their Art called Gypses, and have their
faces tanned, that they may seem to be Surtherne Weomen, (which sort are in
Italy called (...)). In Tripoli of Syria, at Haleppo, and in the Cities of
Cilicia, they show places at this day, where frogs and the very sand are
enchanted, with pillars erected over the places, lest they should grow (...)

Italians love a fearful wench, that often flies from Venus sport.
To her that at the drinking bench challenges love, the Dutch resort.
In love the Germans are said to be ambitious, the French light, the Spaniards
impatient, the Italians jealous to their great torment.

The Germans gesture or behavior is said to be Fencerlike, the Frenchmans
soft and gentle the Italians grave, the Spaniards proud.

The German is said to walk like a dunghill cock, the French in have
speedily, the Italians somewhat slowly, the Spaniards disdainefully.

The Germans look or countenance is said to be fierce, the French man's
flattering, the Italians constant, the Spaniards lofty.

The Germans speech is said to be manly, the Frenchmans sweet and fluent, the
Italians winning the Auditors, the Spaniards flexible.

The Germans manners are said to be rusticall, the Frenchmans light, the
Italians gracious, the Spaniards magnificall.

The Germans apparel is said to be constant without any curiosity, the
Frenchmans luxurious and careless, the Italians neat, the Spaniards decent,
(me thinks their hose and ruffs are nothing less then comely.)

For singing Art, the Germans are said to houle, the Flemmings to sing, the
Spaniards to sob, the French to deskant, the Italians to bleate. Or otherwise:
The Italians to lament, the Germans to cry, the French to sing: or otherwise.
The Spaniards weep, the Italians sigh, the English bleate like Goats, the
Germans bellow, the French sing.

In speech the Germans are said to be simple, the French ready, the Italians
subtle, the Spaniards bragging.

Toward strangers the Germans are said to be vnhospitall (I think otherwise),
the French Gentle, the Spaniards flattering, the Italians officious (no doubt,
if you respect outward Offices)

In conversation the Germans are said to be imperious and intolerable (I
should say they are peaceable when they are sober, and diversely affected
according to their several natures, when they are drunken), the French mild (I
would rather say trifeling and cerimonious), the Spaniards wary, the Italians
wise.

In hatred the Germans are said to be reuengefull (I should grant that they be
cruel upon Victory), the French threatening (sure they depose hatred when the
blood is cold), the Spaniards obstinate, the Italians secret (no doubt, and
both they and the Spaniards great reuengers upon any unequal terms.)

In business, the Germans are said to be industrious, the French careful, the
Spaniards vigilant, the Italians circumspect.

The Germans are said to be singular in manual Arts, the French in Ciuility,
the Spaniards in Navigations, Italians in Learning. But with favor, I should
think the Italians were of old more famous for learning, then now they are.
And howsoever the Spaniards had the fortune to find out the new world, yet they
must yield to the Brittans and Flemmings in the Art, or at least the practice
of Navigations.

The Italians and Spaniards are said to be wise before the act, the French in
the act, th Germans after the act. Otherwise it is said in the Italian tongue:
I Spanuoli paieno sauij e sono pazzi: I Francesi paieno pazzi e sono saueij,
l'Italiani paieno e sono sauij: I Perrtughesi ue paieno ue sono sauij: that is,
The Spaniards seem wise and are fools. The French seem fools, but are wise.
The Italians seem and are wife. The Portugals neither seem nor are wise.

In France the Kings Treasurers, in England Dukes, are said to be fatally
miserable.

The Germans are said to invade their enemies land like Lise (that is slowly),
the French like Fleaes, (now biting, now driven away), the Spaniards like
Crablise (sticking fast.)

The Italian women are said to be given to the study of humanity, the French to
the learning of languages, the Flemmings especially to the skill of languages,
the Germans to household affairs.

In apparel the Italian women are said to be neat and grave (only the
Venetians show their necks and breasts naked) the French light and variable,
the Spaniards proud, the Germans foolish (perhaps because they wear extreme
straight sleeves on their arms, and guard one and the same gown with many and
diverse colored guards), the Flemmings fine (no doubt they, and especially the
Brabanders, excel for white and fine linen, and for general comeliness of
their garments.)

The Italian women are said to be sharp witted, the Spanish blunt (I should
hardly think it), the French simple (I should rather say most crafty, as most
women are every where), the Germans good mothers of family (yea exceeding
good.)

The Spanish women are said to be painted, the Italians somewhat less painted,
the French seldom painted, and sometimes the German Virgins (never that I
observed, except those of Prussen have perhaps borrowed this vice of the
Moscouites their neighbors.)

She is said to be a fair woman, that has the face of an English woman, the
body (from the neck to the navel) of the French, the other parts of the
Flemmish. To this purpose are the verses in Latin;

Triginta haec habeat quae vult formosa vocari
Foemina: sic Helenam fama fuisse refert, etc.
She must have thirty things that fair is counted,
In which they say fair Helena surmounted, etc.
the rest I omit for the wantonness of them.

The Italians say in their tongue; Queste cose sirichiedono nel'viandante,
l'occhio di Prouerbiall speeches of Travelers in general.
Falcone (per veder' lontany), l'orcechie d' Asino (per vdir' been), il viso di
simia (per essere pronto al riso), la hocea di porcello (per mangiar'd' ogni
cosa), le Spalle di Camelo (per portar' some conpatienza) le gambe di Ceruo
(per fuggir' pericolo) evn' sacchone pien' pieno di danari (perch chi ha
danari, signore e chiamato.) That is in English; These things are required in a
Traveler, the eye of a Hawke (to see far off), the ears of an Asle (to
hear the least whispering), the face of an Ape (to be ready to laugh in
soothing), the mouth of a Hog (to eat whatsoever is set before him), the
back of a Camel (to bear burdens patiently), the leg of a Heart (to fly
from danger) a huge great purse top full of gold (because he that has money, is
called Lord) We in England vulgarly say, that a Traveler to Rome must have the
back of an Ass, the belly of a Hog, and a conscience as broad as the Kings
high way.

The Italians say,

Cinque hoar dorme vn' viandante,
Set vn' studiante, noue ogni furfante.
A Traveler five hours does crave
For sleep, a Student seven will have,
And nine sleeps every idle knave.
The Italians advise a Traveler: Ch' il suo cauallo sia gouernato d'amico,
macaualcato danemico: That he should meat and dress his horse like a friend,
but ride him like an enemy.

The Italian Travelers say, Da l'hoste nuouo, and da la putana vecchia Die
ciguarda: From a new host, and an old Harlot, God deliver us.

Of the Cities in Germany, they say in the vulgar tongue: Vlm die reichest,
Augspurg Prouerbiall speeches in particular of Germany, Bohemia, and
Sweitzerland.
die hoffertigest, Trier die eltest, Nurnberg die Witzigest, Strasburg die
edlest. That is: Vlms the richest, Augsburg the proudest, Trier the eldest,
Nurnberg the wittiest, Strasburg the noblest.

That all Germany is blind, only Nurnberg has one eye.

Of the Bishoprics upon the Rheine. That Chur is the highest (because it is
seated upon the highest Alps, near the Spring head of the Rheine), Costnetz
the amplest. Basil the sweetest or pleasantest, Strasburg the noblest (because
no man is a Canon of that Church, which is not an Earl or a Baron of
seventeen discents) Spire the most religious, Metz the most venerable (as the
chief among the Electors Clergymen), Colen the richest, Trier the most
ancient.

The Italian Curtisans say, that a German makes love like a Clown, does that
work like an Ass, and paies like a Prince: which the Germans also say in the
same words of their vulgar tongue; Eine Deutscher bulet wie ein bawer fuchst
wie ein esel, vnd bezalt wie-ein furst.

The Germans say, that Suenia alone has whores, Franconia robbers and beggars,
Banaria pilfering thieves, Heluetia hangmen and Baudes, Frasia and Westphalia
perjured persons, and Saxony drunkards, more then enough to serve al long and
broad Germany.

That the Students of Gena ply the Citterne, those of wittenberg the pot, and
those of Leipzig the playing at Cards.

That the Citizens of Lubeck are Lords, those of Luneburg Gentlemen, those of
Hamburg Clownes, and of the Hamburgers these verses are vulgar,

Hamburgenses sunt velu: erses, semper acuti,
Praelta poscunt, nec been noscunt ensibus vti.
Hamburgers be, like swords we see, sharp to dandle,
Have wars they will, yet have not skill, swords to handle.
That West-Phalians devour gammons of bacon, and have poor Innes (vulgarly
arm wirish iusen), brown bread (vulgarly cranck broat, that is, sick broad),
thin drink (vulgarly dinne bier) and long miles (vulgarly langhen meylen.) And
to this Prouerbiall speech is added in the vulgar tongue; gloubst du night,
lauss da, zu beschawen: that is, If thou beleeuest not, walk thither to try
it.

Of Hessen Land they have this vulgar rhyme.

Hohe berg, vnd less thall, grobe speisse vberall.
Heart bett, vnd sawre wein, were wolt ihm land zu hessen sein.
High Mounts, and Vallyes deep, with gross meats all annoide:
Sour wine, hard beds for sleep: who would not Hessen land avoid?
The Silesians in reproach are called Esellfrasser, that is, deuourers of Asses,
and the Silesians She Ass, is called the mother of Hares. And if any German
will put the Aise upon another cunningly, he will say, that the other was never
in Stlesia.

The Sweitzers are by the Germans in reproach called (...), that is, Cow
milkers, because the men use to milk Cowes.

Bohemia I passed with speed, and was unskillful in the language, so as I
never observed any prouerbiall speech among them of this kind, neither has it
been my chance since that time to read any such speeches in approved Authors.

Among the Cities of Netherland, Harlam is called great (though at that time
the Prouerbiall speeches of Netherland or the Low Countries.
designed building of Amsterdam made it much greater in circuit.) Leyden is
called fair, Delph rich, Terg Catholic. Those of Bruxelles are called
deuourers of Pullin, or Capon-eacers, the Hollanders rude (vulgarly plump) and
the Netherlanders in general hasen kopen, that is, Hare-heads, and because they
feed much on butter, they are called butter mouths, and because daily passing
to and fro in ships, they use for avoiding of greater expenses in Innes, to
carry with them boxes of butter, they are also called butter-boxes by the
English.

As I passed hastily through Denmark and Poland, being ignorent in the
languages, Of Denmark and Poland.
I did never hear any such Prouerbiall speeches among them, neither had I ever
the hap to find any such in approved Authors.

Touching the Cities of Italy, it is prouerbially said among them. Romala
santa, Paduoa Prouerbiall speeches of Italy.
la dotta, venetia la ricca, fiorenza la bella, Milano la grande, Bologna la
grassa, (...) l'antica, Napols gentile, Genoria Superba. That is: Rome the
holy, Paduoa the learned, Venice the rich, Florence the beautiful, Milan the
great, Bologna the fat, Rauenna the ancient, Naples the Gentile, Geneue the
proud.

In general, the Italians are said to be mad twice in the year, at Shroftide
(for their unspeakable luxury in meat, wantonness, and all pleasures), and
in Lent (for the no less wonderful superstitions of that time) For speech the
Hetrutians are said to be elegant, the Milanesi voluble, the Venetians slow,
the Genoesi and Bergmaschi ridiculous. The Milanesi are said to excel in the
study of the Civil Law, the Florentines in natural Philosophy, the Calabrians
in the Greek tongue, the Neapolitans in the Hetrurian or Tuscane tongue, those
of Lucca in Divinity. those of Bologna in the Mathematics, the Venetians in
Music, those of Ferraria, Paduoa and Salernum in Physic, those of Sienna in
Logic, those of Perusium in the Canon Law of the Popes, and those of Pania in
Sophistry. They say, that the Merchants of Florence are crafty, those of Lucca
covetous, the Venetians most bold (hazarding all in one ship), those of Milan
honest (so as if they be put to it, they will confess, that the house they
sell is infected with the plague.) The Calabrians are laid to be officious to
strangers in hope of gain, the Neapolitanes to love all that excel in any
virtue, those of Lucca to reverence strangers, and to defend them from wrongs.
The Florentines to be officious toward them without hope of gain, and to
communicate their fortunes and counsels to them, if they stay long there. The
Venetians to be officious in words. Those of Padnoa to be in hospital, and
likewise those of Genoa, even toward those who have deserved well of them. The
Bergomaschi to be so inhumane as to hate strangers. The Milanesi to be
officious toward them, even to their own damage. Those of Parma to be
tourtous, but within short time to be weary of them. And those of Ferraria to
be secret toward a stranger, though they have eaten a bushel of Salt with
him. The Milanesi are said to be little jealous, and to hate fat women. The
Mantuans to love women that can dance. The Florentines to love a modest woman,
and one that loves home. The Neapolitanes to love a stately high-minded woman.
Those of Lucca are said to love constantly, the Venetians contrarily, and to
desire fat women with great dugs, but to love without choice, and to force them
if others have inioyed. The Ferrarians to hate their rival. Those of Sienna to
be rapt with fair faces. Those of Perusium to love them white teeth and gray
eyes. Those of Padona to love women with little breasts, which makes their women
use the juice of Plantane to keep them from growing. Those of Genoa to love
fervently, and to desire fat women, to be temperate in the use of them, and to
hate those that smell of perfumes. Those of Piacenza to be jealous, and once
offended, to practice the murder of their Mistrisse and rival. Those of
Cremona to love one skillful in musical Instruments. Those of Rauenna one
ruled at a beck. The Pisanes a plain dealing open hearted wench. Those of
Crotona to think themselves never beloved enough, and to kill themselves if
they cannot enjoy their love. Those of Pistoia seldom be jealous, but to hate
the very wife of him that is of another faction. And those of Viterbo when
their lust is satisfied, to set their Mistress to sale for profit. The
Neapolitanes are said to wooc by Horsemanship and tilting. Those of Milan with
feasts, and by slandering the women that refuse them. Those of Ferraria by
praises. Those of Mantuoa by maskes or dancing. Those of Perusium by
threatening. The Venetians by boasting and magnificence. Those of Bologna by
gifts. The Florentines by Sonnets. Those of Sienna by fained tears. Those of
Lucca by obstinate loving. Those of Verona by obsequiousness. The Romans and
Aretines by witty jests. In diet, the Neapolitanes are said to be gorgeous or
honorable (spending more sugar then bread). The Florentines sparing, but
wonderful clenly. Those of Lucca (therein as in all things) to keep the golden
mean. The Tyberine pears, and Martiolane cheeses, are accounted dainties.
Those of Genoa to be of a most slender diet, and no clenlines. The Mantuans to
feed on base pease. Those of Ferraria to be in hospital. Those of Paduoa to
sup with an halfpenny worth of fish. The Venetians to spend little for meat.
Those of Sienna to keep an honorable diet, and to hold Kids flesh, and fresh
Cheeses for great dainties. Those of Milan to have a plentiful diet, and to
inuit appetite with sharp things. The Nouocomians to eat without end, and
drink stoutly Those of Piemont to eat after the French manner, and those of
Ancona to live most basely for their diet. The women of Lucca are accounted
honest, and skillful in Cookery. Those of Sienna fair and well affected to
Poets. The Florentines delicate, and good at the needle, and matters of the
Family. The Pistoians deceivers. The Perusians delicately handed, and
delighting much in fishing. The Nouocomians to bless their husbands with the
Rams horn. The Romans to seem religious. The Cayetans to be painted and
lustful. The Capuans proud, and excellent in nothing. The Neapolitans delighted
in flocks of maid servants and lovers. The Beneuentants to be of rude beauty.
The Picenes desirous to be observed by their husbands. The Bononians to be
somewhat brown colored with a body full of juice, and loving sighs and
tears of their suitors. The Ferrarians robbers of those they love. Those of
Vrbino seeming of a rude nature, but none being more gentle. Those of Parma
covetous and hard. Those of Piemont ever begging. Those of Genoa lecherous,
talkatiue, fair, bountiful to their Lovers, and always adorned with sweet
flowers. Those of Sienna (liseiate fin'alla fossa), painted to the very grave.
The Venetians of a variable disposition, very jealous, and some of them giving
the use of their bodies freely without reward (but I should think there be few
such, for they pleasantly scoft'at our English women, that they give the fruit
of love to their lovers for charity (vulgarly per amor' di Dio, as they give
alms to beggars) and affecting to have yellow hair, white skins, and cherry
cheeks, all by art, and to have short legs. And of the Venetian most famous
Curtizans, it is prouerbially said, Son grass di stracci, bianche di calcina,
rosse di belito alte di zoccole: They are fat with cloutes, white with chalk,
red with painting, and high with shoes. In general it is said of the Italian
weomen: Sono gazze ale port, Sante in Chiesa, capren'i giardini, Diauoli in
casa, Angeli instrada, Sirene alla fenestra. They are Magpyes at the door,
Saints in the Church, Goats in the garden; Devils in the house, Angels in the
street, and Sirens at the window. Of Rome this verse is prouerbiall.

Particularly of the Italian Cities.
La corte Romana non vnol' pecora senza lana, Curia Romana non quaerit ouem
sine lana:

The Court of Rome cannot abide, To have a sheep with a shorn hide.

The old Romans by these letters, S. P. Q. R. did signify Senatum Populum Que
Romanum), the Senate and people of Rome, and they being graven upon the gates
of the City, one did pleasantly thus interpret them: Stultus Populus Quarit
Romans: That is; Foolish people seek Rome. These verses also are prouerbiall.

Roma vale, vidi, satis est (...); reuertar,
Cum Leno, Macus, scurra, Cynedus ere,
Rome farewell, I have thee seen, well for me,
And then I will return again to thee.
When Lecher, Iester, Ingle, Bawdelle be.
Of Genoa it is said Mar' senza (...), montagne senza legni, huomini senza
feed, Done senza vergogna, Mortbianchi, Genoa superba. That is: The sea
without fish, Mountains without wood, Men without faith, Weomen without shame,
white Mores, Genoa the proud. Sienna is said to abound with Fountains, Towers,
and fair women: And they say in the vulgar tongue; Sienna di sei cose piena:
Di Torre e di campane, di scolarie di putane, di becchie di Russiani. Sienna is
full of six things, Towers and Bells, Scholars and Whores, Cuckolds and
Bawdes. They of Sienna have a Proverb: That a stranger once drinking of the
Fountain Brando, must needs stay there (as surprised with the love of the
City). But the Florentines in their reproach say;

Chi beue di Font Brando, diuentamatto.
Who of the Fountain Brando drinks, becomes a Fool.
The Florentines are said stoutly to revenge the breach of Faith, and to be
mindful of benefits, to have Arms of Iron (for their industry), and the
bodies of Antes, (for their spare dict). It is vulgarly said of them: Chi disse
Fiorentino, non disse burla, che ditre cose ti fanno douitia. A Die, A
Reuederci, vuoitu nulla? He that spoke of the Florentine; said well, that they
give plenty of three things: God keep you, Health till we meet again; Will
you any thing with me? It is vulgarly said: I Bergomaschi hanno il parlar'
gross, and il far' sottile: Those of Bergame are gross in speech, but subtle
in action. Again, Il bianco and il nero (cioe pepe and cottone) hanno fatto
venetiaricca. Black and white, (that is, Pepper and Bumbast), have made Venice
rich. Again, Il Podesta di Senigallia, comanda, e poifa. The Mayor of
Senigallia, commands, and then does it himself. In reproach of Modena it is
vulgarly said: Mener l' Orsia Modena. To lead Bears at Modena. Again, Dala
Marca Asinie Pedantifamosi. The Marchians have famous Asses and Schoolemasters:
And they say vulgarly that a great lie is, Bugia Marchiana, that is, a Marchian
lie. As I hastily passed the vast Empire of the Turks, Of Turkey.
and being ignorant of the vulgar languages, I never heard any such Proverb,
neither think that the vnlearued Turks trouble their brains with these
Laconicall sentences. Only among the Italians I heard this Proverb in their
tongue. In Cipro tree cose a buon' Mercato si danno, il Sale, il Zuccaro, e le
putane. In Cyprus three things are good cheap, Salt, Sugar, and Whores. In
France they say prouerbially: Qui feit Picard, il feit la heart (dit le Norman):
Pour pendre le Norman' Couard (dit le Picard) who made a Picard, made a rope
(says the Norman): Of France.
To hang the coward Norman (says the Picard.)

Again, Qui feit Francois, ilseit curtois: Qui feit Breton'il feit larron. He
that made a Frenchman, made a courteous man; He that made a Britan, made a
thief.

The French in reproach to the Normans, salute them with this counterfeit or made
word; Fla-va-gou-la-men, as if they should call him, Flateur, vanteur, goula,
larron, Menteur, that is, flatterer, bragger, glutton, thief, liar.

They vulgarly say, Gascon testeverte: Gascon green head, as rash in anger:
Bourguignon Sale: The salted Burgundian, which reproach grew, of a strange
cruelty used by the Citizens of Aiguesmortes, against a garrison of
Burgundians, who in the Reign of Charles the seventh, and in the year 1422,
by a sudden conspiracy cast out and killed the Burgundians lying there in
garrison, and salted their dead bodies in a vessel of stone, which they show
to this day.

They name three jurisdictions or commonalties, which it seems of old had
foolish and great privileges; La Basoche de Paris: Les Cornards de Rouen: La
Mere Folle de Dijon.

Of the Cities they say; Paris la grande (the Great) Rouen la rich (the Rich)
Orleans la belle (the Fair) Dijon la Folle (the Foolish). Angers, basse ville,
hauts clochers, riches, putaines, pounres Escoliers: Low City, high Steeples,
rich Whores, poor Scholars.

They say vulgarly, Les Badauts, (the Fools, or as we say Cocknies) di Paris:
Les Cornards (the foresaid society of horned) Di Rouen. Les Gue spins, (the
word has some reference to Vespae, a Latin word, signifying those that carry
dead bodies to be buried by night, but the French can hardly give a true
signification of it) d'Orleans. Les Copienx, (the copious, for their art in
ieasting), de Flesche. Les fanx tosmoings (the false witnesses), quatorze pour
vn'fromage (fourteen for a Cheese), du Manz: (...) (the nouices or simple
men), de Solongne, qui s'abusent toussiours a leur profit, (which are abused
always to their own profit, as if under color of simplicity, they were most
crafty).

Of three Cities of Champaigne: Les Graniers, (the Garners as full of Corn),
de Challons. Les Caves, (the Cellars as full of wine), de Reims. Les Bourses,
(the Purses as full of money), de Troyes.

They say vulgarly, Ily a plue de Monmartre a Paris, que de Paris a Monmartre.
This speech Ily a is ambiguous or of diverse significations: vulgarly it should
be thus understood. It is further from Monmartre to Paris, then from Paris to
Monmartre: but in this place it is thus meant. There is more of Monmartre
within Paris, then of Paris upon Monmartre; because almost all the Houses of
Paris are plastered over, and the matter of this plaster is daily brought into
Paris from Monmartre.

Also A Monmartre Ily a plus de Putains, que de vaches: Mais ostes en les
Nonnains, Ily aura plus de vaches que de Putains. At Monmartre there be more
Whores then Cowes: But take away the Nuns, and there will be more Cowes then
Whores. Also, Fromages (Cheeses) d' Auuergne. Angelots (a kind of Cheese) de
Brie. Andouilles (Intrals or Trypes) de Troy. Saueisses (Sawsages) du Pont
l'Euesque. Chapons (Capons) du Man's. Moutarde (Mustard) de Dijon, Pruneaux
(Prunes) de Tours. Marrons (great Chestnuts) de Lion. Pain d'espice (Spiced
Bread) de Reims. Raues (rape roots) de Limosin. Pesches (Peaches) de Corheil.
pain (Bread) de Genesse.

The Italiaus say, that the manner of the French, is; Di non dire quando
vogliono fare, di non legger' come Scriuotio, e di non santare come notano. Not
to speak that they will do, not to read as they write, not to sing as they
prick.

England in general is said to be the Hell of Horses, the Purgatory of
Servants, and England.
the Paradise of Weomen.

The Londiners pronounce woe to him, that buys a Horse in Smyth-field, that
takes a Servant in Pauls-Church, that marries a Wife out of Westminster.
Londiners, and all within the sound of Bow-Bell, are in reproach called
Cocknies, and eaters of buttered tostes. The Kentish men of old were said to
have ray les, because trafficking in the Low Countries, they never paid full
payments of what they did owe, but still left some part unpaid. Essex men are
called calves, (because they abound there), Lankashire egge-pies, and to be
won by an Apple with a red side. Norsorlke wyles (for crafty litigiousnes):
Essex styles, (so many as make walking tedious), Kentish miles (of the length.)
Northumberland men (exercised in roades upon the Scots) are accounted best
light Horsemen. Cornish men best Horse riders and Wrastlers, and most active
men. Lincolneshire Belles and Bag pipes, Devonshire Whitepots, Tewksbery
Mustard, Banberry Cakes, Kings-Norten Cheese, Sheffeld knives, Darby Ale, are
prouerbially spoken of.

I hastily passed through part of Scotland bordering upon England, and had no
skill Poland and Ireland.
in the Irish tongue, so as I observed no such Proverbs in those Kingdoms.

The second Book.
CHAP. I. Of the fit means to travel, and to hire Coaches and Horses.
HEreof I must entreat briefly, and howsoever the subject be large, yet I will
compendiously restrain this my discourse, Germany and Sweitzerland and
Boemerland
praying him that desires more plain instruction in any particular, to read
the following discourse in this third Part of these Nations diet in general,
and expenses in their Innes, as also to gather particular observations for his
use out of my daily iournies, related in the first Part.

The greatest part of Germany is a plain Country, with few Hills, and almost
no Mountains, but it is full of vast Woods, and the soil is either sandy, or
for the most part dry, and little subject to dirt, so as they use commonly
Coaches for their iournies, which are easily to be found in any City, neither
shall a passenger long stay for companions to fill up the Coach, so as by this
constant manner of traveling, he shall not be put to any extraordinary
charge. From Hamburg to Nurnberg, being nine days journey. I remember that
six of us in company, hired a coach for fifty dollers. That five of us for two
days iournies paid five dollers. That four of us for three days journey paid
seven dollers for our Coach. But in our journey from Hamburg to Nurnberg we
paid for our Coachmans diet, himself paying for his horses meat, whereas in
the other iournies he paid also for his own diet. The ordinary Coaches hold
six consorts, but those of Nurnberg receive eight, bearing two in each boot
on the sides. But if companions be not readily found to fill the Coach, the
passengers shall do better in going forward with such company as they have,
and the Coachmen will rather go for less then stay in the Inn, and spend
more in expecting the full number. The top of the Coaches is made with round
hoopes (covered with lether, or for the most part with black cloth) which are
buckled together in the midst when it raines, or the weather is cold, for
otherwise the hoopes fastened with staples of Iron to the body of the coach,
fall backward to the ends, so as the passengers may sit in the open air. In
lower Germany a passenger commonly pays about four Lubeck shillings for each
meal. In middle Germany he shall pay about four Batzen. And in higher Germany
he shall pay about six or seven batzen each meal, and all passengers sit at
one common table. At the foot of the Alps, where the fall of waters make the
ways durty, they use to ride on horseback. Sweitzerland consists of hills
and Mountains, so as they likewise travel on horseback. And there the
passenger shall commonly pay some five or six batzen each meal.

The horses in both places are to be hired for six or seven batzen by the
day, but the travelers expense is doubled, by paying as much for the days in
which the Horse returns empty: Besides, that he must hire a Foote-man to
bring back his Horse, and must also bear his charges by the way, which
greatly increases his expense in these Countries yielding wine, the Foote-men
being as good or better duakers then the Horsemen. In upper Germany a
Horseman shall pay daily about thirty Creitzers for Oats, and about six for
Hey. In lower Germany about (...) shillings for Oats, and almost the foresaid
value for Hey.

This I write more particularly, because he that travels for Italy, cannot take
a more frugall course, then to buy a Horse in Germany, which he may sell for
gain in (...), especially if he sell him by the way, being within few days
of his iourneys end, whence he may pass by hired Coach or Horse to Padoua: For
it he bring his Horse thither, those that are to buy him, are such crafty
knaves, and will so conspire together against him, as he shall be forced to
sell his Horse under hand, being made weary with the great charge of his meat:
but this frugalty has some difficulties if the passenger have no skill in the
tongue, (in which case he must hire an Interpreter), and if he have not
Horsemen to accompany him, because they pass alloy Coaches, yet if this
Horseman will follow the Coach, he may with a small gift induce the
Coachman, to teach him the means to provide for his Horse: but this (...) is
taken away; when he once comes as high as Nurnberg, to which place it is more
easy, though deerer, to pass by Coach.

It is a matter of small moment, yet not unfit to be observed, that the (...)
Coach men of Germany, have this custom, that the Coaches coming down from
the upper parts, give the way to those that come up.

All Men speak strange things of the Alps, and such as will hardly be
believed by The Alps.
those, that have not seen them. The way from Vienna to Padoua is plain, yet
lying between high Mountains, and fetching many compasses, so as it is sit
for Horsemen, but I passed that way in the company of a Coach, which went
slowly in the slony ways, and was hardly by force of men's shoulders kept from
failing. The way from Augsburg to Padoua is like this, and of both
thoseiourneys I have spoken at large in the first Part. My self weary of
expecting companions and violently carried with the desire to return into my
Country, did all a one, without any one in my company, (which I think few or
none ever did), pass over the Alps, from Bergame to Chur, save that sometimes
I hired a Foote-man to run by my Horse, and to guide me for a mile or two.
In this journey through the Grisones Country, I sometimes (not without horror)
ascended very steep passages of Mountains, lying with my face on my Horses
neck, whose bridle I left free to him, holding my self with one hand on his
maine, and the other on the saddle. Woe to me, if any Mares had then passed
that way, at the sight whereof my Horse used to be so surious, as many times at
straight passages, and steep falls of the Mountains into low valleys, I was
forced to light from him, and on foot to hold his bridle; and yet sometimes
he was so fierce, as he plunged out of the way up to the saddle skirts in
snow, so as I could hardly recover him. The passages over the Alps toward
Geneua and Saucy, especially the Mountains called Farca and Gothardo, are most
dangerous of all others. The fittest times to pass the Alps, are the Winter
months, when no snow is newly fallen. and the old snow is hard congealed, or
else the months of sune, July, and August, when the snow near the high ways
is altogether melted: For the middle months are very unfit, either by falling
of new snow, or by melting of the old, neither can any man pass, before the
Officers appointed to have care of the way, have opened the same. My self
passing over the more easy Alps, in the month of June, did often hear
Mountains of melted snow fall into near Valleys, with as violent rushing, as
if whole Cities had fallen by an Earthquake Over the Alps toward Geneua and
Sauoy, passengers are sometimes carried upon sledges, sometimes with gloves and
shoes full of nails, they creep over them on hands and feet, and in both
these kinds, their Guides ever warn them, to turn their eyes from beholding
the steep falls of the Mountains into most deep Valleys. For sometimes it
happens, that in a turning or winding way, the sledge whereon the passenger
sits, is cast out of the way, and hangs down into a most deep valley, with
the passengers head downwards and his heels upward. Woe be to him then, if
he let his hold go, or the harness tying the sledge to the Horse should
break: yea, very Mules and Asses, going most slowly, and so most firmly, yet
sometimes fall into deep valleys, and so perish in the snow. My self in my
journey from Padona to Augsburg, being a less difficult passage, did see an
Horse boggling at a casual noise, tumble half a mile into a valley, with his
heavy load upon his back, yet have no harm, the snow being so congealed as
it bore him up, so as his Master by a large circuit brought him safe again up
to the rest of his Horses, on the Moutaines top.

Bohemia is all plain, but often rising into low and fruitful hills, so as
there (as in Germany) they journey most in Coaches. A passenger in this
Kingdom shall pay some five Bohemian Grosh, or upon the Confines toward
Nurnberg, some eightteene or twenty creitzers, for each meals meat: yet at
Prage in most Innes, the Bohemians themselves use to diet by the meal, but
upon account, the Hosts having little or nothing for diet in the House to sell,
but buying most things without doors for the Guests.

In the Low Countries Travelers pass most in long narrow Country Wagons,
Low Countries.
the sides thereof being like Rackes for Horses, and acrosse over them short
and somewhat narrow boards, being fastened for Passengers to sit upon, two in a
rank, so as they hold some eight or ten passengers; And they have goodly
Mares to draw these Wagons, using their Horses for the troops in their Army,
or exporting them (as sometimes their Mares also) to sell in foreign parts. I
did never see the means of passage so ready in any place, as these Wagons
here at all times are, before the door of the Waggoners Inn nor consorts so
readily found to all places, whereof the numbers are infinite passing both by
Wagon and Boat: Neither did I ever see Travelers pass at so easy rates, (I
mean for their passages, not for the Innes), so they have not heavy luggage:
For in that case, the Wagons being left and taken at the gates of the City,
(as I think not to wear the brick pauements with their wheels), and the
wagons being often changed in each days journey, this carriage to his Inn
and from it so often, must needs be a great burden to his shoulders, or
charge to his purse: The Waggoners being commonly drunken, drive their Mares
like mad men, yet without danger of turning over their Wagons, because the
ways are most plain, fair, and sandy. From Delph to Hage, being two hours
journey, with consorts I paid two stiuers for my Wagon, and alone I paid
seven. The way lies between ditches, and is plain and safe, the Country
people continually repairing it: For otherwise the ways in this low watery
soil, could not be so dry and sandy as they are. And because they cast up
sand upon the passengers, some curious men use spectacles of glass to preserve
their eyes.

On all sides from City to City, they have ditches cut, upon which boats pass
almost every hour to and fro, and give passage at a low rate, and the wind
being fair, they bear sails, otherwise they are drawn by Horses or by
Mariners, with a rope fastened upon a pole, set up in the hinder part of the
boat, and the Mariners being commonly drunk, through their too much have and
negligence, it often happens, that the ropes wherewith the boats are drawn,
catch hold on some posts and stakes by the way, or chance to be entangled with
the horses or roapes of other boats, meeting them, and so ouerturne them in
the water, with no small danger to the passengers The rates of passages by
boat are diverse, but ever small. My self have passed three miles for four
stiuers, seven miles for six stiuers, and fourteen miles (as from Amsterdam
to Harlingen) for eight stiuers. The Mariners use not to deceive strangers in
the rates, neither can they easily do it, they being vulgarly known to every
child. Every day and at a set hour, the Boats must go away with those
passengers they have, and may not stay for more, and if at any time some few
passengers, or any one alone, will pay the whole freight of the Boat, then
they must without any delay transport those passengers or that one man. This I
will illustrate with one example. A Bark must every day at a set hour set
sails from Harlingen a City in Freesland to Amsterdam a City in Holland (and
like are the customs of other Cities for mutual traffic), neither may the
covetous Mariners stay one minute after the hour, and after it is never so
little loosed from the strand, it may not come back to the shore, though
never so many passengers should come suddenly, and desire to be received into
it, but these new passengers must hire another bark, the price whereof is
vulgarly known, and that being offered by them or any one passenger, the
Mariners may (...) to go presently away. Sometimes it happens, that one Bark
receives so many passengers, as the owner gets ten Flemmish guldens for one
freight; for if great number of passengers comes before the appointed hour,
that turns to the Mariners profit. But if one man alone, or few men, do
after the appointed hour, offer to give five guldens for the said passage,
they may not reruse presently to transport him or them. The like custom is
kept in other Cities for small boats and short passages, namely, that ten
conforts (which are most readthe found) shall pay each man three stiuers for
his passage; and if one or two being in haste will pay these thirty stiuers,
the boat without delay must carry him or them. I cannot deny, but these rates
of hiring barks or boats are subject to change. For in the passage from
Harlingen to Amsterdam my self paid eight stiuers for my transporting, which
of old was but five stiuers a man. As likewise for small boats we then paid
three stiuers for a passage, which of old was but one blanck. But in the mean
time these increases are not raised by the Mariners covetousness after their
pleasure, but by the public authority of the Magistrate in lawful and decent
manner.

In the public Innes a passenger paies some ten or fourteen stiuers (...):
but if he drink wine, that will cost as much more, by reason of the great
impositions upon the Wines. Besides that, the Flemmings his consorts drinking
beer stiffely, especially if they light upon English beer, and drink being
put into the common reckoning of the company, a stranger shall pay for their
intemperancy.

The Danes have such and the same wagons, as the Flemmings, which a man alone
Denmark.
or few or more consorts may hire some four miles (being a short days
journey), for 20 or, 24 Lubeck shillings, or about that rate, Travelers use
not to pass on horseback. The Coachmen pay for their own diet and their
horses meat. My self commonly paid each meal for my diet six Lubeck
shillings, reckoning three for beer apart, and in some places jointly for both
four Lubeck (that is eight Danish shillings. Lastly, I was carried in a boat
four miles by the Seacoast for eight Lubeck shillings.

Poland for the most part (or almost all) is a plain Country, fit for the
passing of coches, which may be hired in Cities, and a (...) to those of
Germany. From Dantzke to Poland.
Crakaw (being ten days journey) a coach may be hired for some 44 German
guldens. My self paid there for my part six guldens, leaving the Coach after
four days journey, because the horses were tired. And for my diet two of
those days upon our guides reckoning, my part came to two guldens, but I am
sure he deceived us. In one City by the way, five of us paid 2 dollers for one
supper, but my self after passing alone, commonly dined in villages for 2 or 3
grosh, and supped for 4 or 6 grosh. They use to carry a bed in the Coach, and
to sit upon it in the day time, for otherwise no beds are to be found, but
only in great Cities, which are very rare. And they who will have wine, must
also carry it with them, for it is not to be had but only in great Cities.
Our Horses (as I said) being tired, we left our Coach, and by the Kings letter
or warrant granted to one of our company we took up horses, and that for small
prices, namely, one or two Grosh for a Polish or Dutch mile: But the Polonians
for the most part ride on horseback, and the most convenient and frugall
course for passengers, is to buy horses and sell them in Italy after their
journey, neither shall they want horsemen to bear them company from City to
City: but he that is a horseman, cannot carry his bed, and so must have
patience to rest upon a bench, til he shall find beds upon the confines of
Germany. In the mean time his long horsmans coat (which the Polonians and
Hungarians generally use) may (with straw) make his logding more convenient,
especially if it be lined with Woolues skins, or like furs, for the Winter
time. Neither shall he need to fear any cold, since the Polonians use hot
stoues (as the Germans have), and do also lodge all the family therein at night
upon straw and benches. Horsemeate will cost some two or three grosh at noone,
and some four or five grosh at night.

In Italy they use few or no Coaches, but only in the State of Venice, where,
from Treuiso to Padoua, being twelve miles, my self and my companions hired a
Coach for eighteen Venetian lyres. For other parts of Italy, Traueliers for
iourneys use Italy.
horses or mares in Lumbardy, and otherwhere upon hilly Countries, and in the
Plain toward Naples, they use Mules and Asses much more commonly, then
Horses, and the same beasts in like sort are used for all carriages.
Posthorses are to be hired in every City, and for one they commonly pay a
silver crown, that is seven Venetian lyres, for ten miles. But I do not
remember to have seen any use Posthorses as we do for galloping, the Italians
using to ride a slow pace. And if any passenger think this rate dear, he may
take a more frugall course, by enquiting after Posthorses of return, so
called, because they must return home empty, if they find no passengers by
chance to use them: for these horses may be had at a lower rate, and if the
passenger find them not readily at every stage, it will not be unpleasant for
him to walk on foot to the next stage, where or by the way he shall commonly
find such horses, so as the want of consorts, or heavy baggage, make not his
walking on foot unpleasant; for otherwise the fields and ways are most
pleasant, and the Cities, Towns, or dwellings most frequent. But if he ride
upon a post-horse of return, he must take heed that he light from his horse
at the Towne-gate; for if he ride to the Inn, the Postmaster will force him
to take a new Post-horse, or else to go away on foot, whereas if he come to
the Inn either on foot, or upon an hackny, it is free for the horse-letters
to furnish him and his company with hackney horses. These horse leuers are
called Vettarini, and let their horses at a lower rate, especially if the
passenger have two or three consorts, and they will send a servant on foot to
seed the horses by the way, and to bring them back, except their journey be
short, as of one or two days, in which case they will let a horse to a
passenger being alone, with caution that he shall meat him by the way, and at
the iourneys end leave him at the Inn which they appoint, without further cure
of his meat or return. Yea, if the passenger would ride his horse beyond that
Inn, the Host or his servants, knowing the horse, will stay him, and take the
horse into their keeping. Also ordinary Carriers from City to City use to let
horses, and lead passengers with them My self hired a horse of return from
Bologna to Rimini, being thirty five miles, for ten poali; from Sienna to
Lucca, being forty five miles, a Vetturines horse, for fourteen poali, or
giulij; from Lucca to Pisa, being run miles, for two giulii; from Pisa to
(...) being forty one miles, for apiastro, or silver crown; and from Milan to
Cremona, being fifty two miles, a carriers horse, for five lyres besides
horse-meate. He that has his own horse, or a Vetturines horse left to his
keeping (as I said for a short journey), shall pay for horse-meate after these
rates. At Lucca in the State of Florence, he shall pay each night some twelve
creitzers for oats, and eight creitzers for the stable (that is hay, straw and
stable room) and at Vicenza and in the State of Venice, some eighteen soldi
for Oats, and twenty soldi for the stable. The Italians ride upon most hard
saddles, having commonly a lether cushian of their own to fasten upon the
pummell of the saddle. Touching the charge of diet by the way, a passenger in
the State of Venice shall have his supper and bed for forty soldi, and in the
upper parts of Italy for three giulij, and he may dine conveniently for one
giulio upon reckoning, or at most for a giulio and a half: but if he will
eat at the ordinary, he shall pay three. Many agree with the Vetturine, not
only for horses and horsemeate, but also for their own diet: but for my part,
I would rather live at my own charge and discretion, then at theirs, excepting
the journey from Rome to Naples, in which, for the great have, especially at
dinner times, and for the familiarity which the Vetturines have with the Hosts,
all men use to agree with them, as well for diet as for horses and horse meat,
which if they should not do, they should spend more, and hardly be used so well
In Italy the passenger must be content with a hard flock bed; for by reason of
the heat of the Country, they use no feather beds: He shall have clean
sheets, at least if he be curious to demand them: but because the beds are
suspected for filthiness of the Venerian disease, passengers use to wear
lumen breeches of their own. It is good to lodge in the best Innes, especially
in Italy, for in them he shall be best used, and shall be most safe from
dangers. For other particulars let the passenger read the more full handling
of them, in my daily iournies through Italy, in the first Part, and the
following Chapter of the Italian diet in this third Part.

In the Turkish Empire they travel not, as we do, sometimes one man alone,
sometimes two, three, or more consorts, at pleasure; but as thieves there go
in troops to Turkey.
spoil, so Merchants for their security, join together till they have some
two or three hundred Cammels, loaded with goods, and a convenient number of men
to attend them. And this Company is called vulgarly a Carrauan, to which
passengers join themselves, for their better safety. This Company, to avoid
the heat of the Sun, uses to begin their journey in the evening, and to
continue the same till two hours after Sunne-rise, resting all the day in
Tents: And every man carries his own meat, or prouides it by the way. Malem
signifies one, that leads Merchants goods, and Muccaro signifies him that
looks to the beasts, and to the loading of them; and these Men let Cammels,
Horses, and Mules, to passengers, for the whole journey, at reasonable rates,
and do wait upon the passengers to feed the bealts, and to load them, as
also to buy and dress meat for the Men. My self and my Brother Henry, in our
journey from Tripoli in Syria to Haleppo, paid nine Pyastri for two Asses to
ride upon, and for them meat; and for some tributes (vulgarly Cafars) of
twenty Meidines or thereabouts, due by the way. And in our journey from Haleppo
to Constantinople, we paid to our Muccaro bearing the charge of the beasts
meat, seventy and one Pyastri, for a Horse and a Mule to ride upon, and for a
Cammell to carry our provisions, of Biscuit, Wine, Damask Prunes, and some such
comfortable things: For we pitched our Tents near Villages or Cities, from
whence we bought Eggs, Hens, and Ryce, as we needed them, and sometimes
had opportunity to supply that which we had consumed, of those provisions
which we carried with us. One Cammell will bear a passenger, and good store
of necessary provisions with him, but the pace thereof is very hard, and
shakes the body of the Ryder, the hinder parts of the Cammell being higher
then the fore parts. The Horses either go a foot pace, or gallop, but are not
taught the paces of ambling or trotting: yet in regard that in these iournies
the passenger goes slowly, following loaded Cammels, their Horses are easy
enough to ride upon. The Mules naturally have easy and slow paces, and are
most commodious, especially for sick men. Besides these Carauans, a passenger
may light upon other commodities of taking his journey, namely, when Bashaes or
other Turkish Governors are recalled from their Gouernements, and return with
their families to Constantinople. For these Magistrates are often changed in
Turkey, and so these commodities of passage are frequent. Only the passenger
must be commended to the protection of this Basha or Governor, which upon a
small present or gift he will easily undertake, and swear by his head,
touching it (as their manner is to swear), that he will bring him safely to
his iournyes end. And the passenger who together with this caution, has a
Ianizare to protect and guide him, shall need to fear no danger, so as he
receive this Ianizare from an Ambassador, Consul, or Christian Merchant, who
will ask account of the passengers safety from the Ianizare at his returue.

They have a third commodious way for iourneys, in the company of a Troop of
Horse, (vulgarly called Cassenda), which often carries the Turks Treasure up
to Constantinople. And not only the chief of this Troop, upon a small gift,
will protect any passenger, but also this course of all others is most
commodious for iournies, because they ride a good pace, being not troubled with
loaded Camels, and so come speedily unto their iournies end.

The French seldom use Coaches for iourneys, but at Paris he that will hire a
Coach about the City, shall pay seven or eight ryals by the day. Likewise at
Paris, France.
very Notaries and ordinary men, hire horses and foot clothes to ride about
the City, and they pay ten soulz for the horse, and five for the foot-cloath
by the day. But for iournies, the French have three sorts of horses; The first
is of posthorses, let for a stage of some three miles, shorter or longer, for
which a French man shall pay fifteen, perhaps a stranger twenty soulz, and as
much for a guide, besides some five soulz of free-gift. The second sort are
called Cheuaux derelais, that is, horses to be left at a place. And for the
hiring of these for a like distance of miles, a passenger pays some ten
soulz, and he needs no guide to bring back the horse, because he is to leave
him in a place appointed at the end of the stage. But he may not ride these a
false gallop, as they use to ride posthorses; for if he that receives the
horse, can find either by the note delivered him, or by the swetting of the
horse, that he has ridden an extraordinary pace, he shall pay ten soulz, the
ordinary penalty for that wrong. The third sort are called Cheuaux de louage,
that is, hired horses, and these a passenger may hire to what place he will
for some fifteen or twenty soulz by the day, for so many days till the horse
may be sent back, and at the iournies end he delivers the horse with a note
to some friend of the owner, and by the way he pays for his meat, some five
soulz at noone, and ten at night. I will add one example of my own
experience. From Roane to Diepe are twelve or fourteen miles, to be ridden in
some four hours, but the horses being weak, passengers use to bate at a
Village called Totes in the half way; and howsoever before the civil war, a
horse of hire for this short journey was let for ten soulz, yet at the time
when I passed that way, they demanded and took thirty soulz, reckoning three
days for the journey, and the sending back of the horse. He that hired this
horse from Roane to Diepe, and back again to Roane, paid no more, so he
returned within three days. But if his occasions were to make any stay at
Diepe, or to sail from thence to England, or to journey from thence to any
other place, then he paid the foresaid thirty soulz, and left the horse with an
host, still paying for his meat some eight or ten soulz by the day, till he
could be sent back. Yet passengers are so frequent there, as the host does not
only soon free the passenger of this charge for the horses meat, but easily
gains himself some ten or more soulz from him, that undertakes to carry the
horse back to Roane. In general, the Traveler must be content with hard
saddles, and sometimes with a rope for a bridle, who has them not of his own.
The French in their Innes use to eat at an ordinary table together for the
most part. In Totes the foresaid Village of Normandy before the great civil
war, as soon as a Traveler lighted from his horse, they brought him water to
wash, and presently set bread and wine before him (for without some refection,
the French have not patience to stay for supper.) Then at supper commonly they
gave mutton, a capon or pullet and a patridge, or like meats, with some
banqueting dishes (as apples, cherries, grapes in Summer, and chestnuts, rice;
dried grapes and fruits in winter. Then they brought clean sheets to be aired
before the passenger at the fire. Lastly, in the morning they gave him his
breakfast (as buttered tosts, or some morsel of flesh), and for all this and
his horsemeat, he was wont to pay no more then some 12 soulz. As likewise for
his dinner and horsemeat some 10 soulz. But after the civil war, when I passed
these parts, sometimes I paid 12, sometimes 15 soulz for each meal, and for my
horse-meate at noone five soulz, at night ten soulz; but an horseman paid
nothing for his bed. And if any desired to break his fast, he paid for it
apart, but a small matter. Neither at this time was there any ordinary Table
(which they call Table de l'hoste, the Hosts table), for since Frenchmen use
not to leave it where any such is, I should otherwise have seen it, besides,
that they pay not apart for breakfasts, where Ordinary Tables are held, as we
did in these Innes. The horseman has his bed freely, the footman paies some
three soulz a night. In some places, as upon the confines of France toward
Flanders, the Hosts only give Linen, bread and wine; and when the guests will
eat, Cooks bring in trayes of diverse meats ready for dressing, and when the
guests have chosen their meat, and agreed for the price, they carry it back,
and after it is prepared, bring it in warm with sauces. Is the passenger have
a horse of his own (which he may buy here to sell with good gain in Italy) he
shall pay for his meat (as I said) five soulz at noone, and some ten soulz at
night. The French have also long Wagons covered with cloth (such as our
English Carriers use), wherein women, and such as can endure the slownesse
thereof, use to travel from City to City. My self after I had been robbed in
Champaigne, passed in such a Wagon from Challons to Paris, and paid two gold
Crowns of the Sun for my passage. Always it is to be understood, that in
most Kingdoms and places a stranger shall pay somewhat more, then one that is
borne in the Country.

In England toward the South, and in the West parts, and from London to
Barnick, England
upon the confines of Scotland, Posthorses are established at every ten miles
or thereabouts, which they ride a false gallop after some ten miles an hour
sometimes, and that makes their hire the greater: for with a Commission from
the chief Postmaster, or chief Lords of the Council (given either upon
public business, or at least pretense thereof) a passenger shall pay two pence
halfpenny each mile for his horse, and as much for his guides horse: but one
guide will serve the whole company, though many ride together, who may easily
bring back the horses driving them before him, who know the way as well as a
beggar knows his dish. They which have no such Commission, pay three pence for
each mile. This extraordinary charge of horses hire, may well be recompensed
with the speed of the journey, whereby greater expenses in the Innes are
avoided, all the difficulty is, to have a body able to endure the toil. For
these (...) the passenger is at no charge to give them meat, only at the ten
miles end the boy that carries them back, will expect some few pence in gift.
Some Nobleman has the Office of chief Postmaster, being a place of such
account, as commonly he is one of the Kings Counsel. And not only he, but
other Lords of the Council, according to the qualities of their offices, use
to give the foresaid Commission signed with their hands jointly or severally:
but their hands are less regarded then the Postmasters, except they be
favorites, and of the highest Offices, or the business be important. In the
Innes men of inferior condition use to eat at the Hosts Table, and pay some
six pence a meal: but Gentlemen have their chambers, and eat alone, except
perhaps they have consorts and friends in their company, and of their
acquaintance. If they be accompanied, perhaps their reckoning may commonly
come to some two shillings a man, and one that eats alone in his own chamber
with one or two servants attending him, perhaps upon reckoning may spend some
five or six shillings for supper and breakfast But in the Northern parts, when
I passed toward Scotland, Gentlemen themselves did not use to keep their
chambers, but to eat at an ordinary table together, where they had great
plenty of good meat, and especially of choice kinds of fish, and each man
paid no more then six pence, and sometimes but four pence a meal. One horses
meat will come to twelve pence, or eighteen pence the night for Hay, Oats
and Straw, and in Summer time commonly they put the horses to grass, after the
rate of three pence each horse, though some who ride long iournies, will either
keep them in the Stable at hard meat as they do in Winter, or else give them
a little Oats in the morning when they are brought up from grass. English
passengers taking any journey, seldom dine, especially not in Winter, and
withal ride long iournies. But there is no place in the World where passengers
may so freely command as in the English Inns, and are attended for themselves
and their horses as well as if they were at home, and perhaps better, each
servant being ready at call, in hope of a small reward in the morning. Neither
did I ever see Innes so well furnished with household stuff. Coaches are not to
be hired any where but only at London; and howsoever England is for the most
part plain, or consisting of little pleasant hills, yet the ways far from
London are so durty, as hired Coachmen do not ordinarily take any long
iournies, but only for one or two days any way from London, the ways so
far being sandy and very fair, and continually kept so by labor of hands.
And for a days journey, a Coach with two horses used to be let for some ten
shillings the day (or the way being short for some eight shillings, so as the
passengers paid for the horses meat) or some fifteen shillings a day for three
horses, the Coachman paying for his horses meat. Sixty or seventy years
ago, Coaches were very rare in England, but at this day pride is so far
increased, at there be few Gentlemen of any account (I mean elder Brothers),
who have not their Coaches, so as the streets of London are almost stopped up
with them. Yea, they who only respect comeliness and profit, and are thought
free from pride, yet have Coaches, because they find the keeping thereof more
commodious and profirable, then of horses, since two or three Coach-porses will
draw four or five persons, besides the commodity of carrying many necessaries
in a Coach. For the most part Englishmen especially in long iournies, use to
ride upon their own horses. But if any will hire a horse, at London they use
to pay two shillings the first day, and twelve, or perhaps eighteen pence a
day, for as many days as they keep him, till the horse be brought home to the
owner, and the passenger must either bring him back, or pay for the sending of
him, and find him meat both going and coming. In other parts of England a man
may hire a horse for twelve pence the day, finding him meat, and bringing or
sending him back; and if the journey be long, he may hire him at a convenient
rate for a month or two. Likewise Carriers let horses from City to City,
with caution that the passenger must lodge in their Inn, that they may look
to the feeding of their horse, and so they will for some five or six days
journey let him a horse, and find the horse meat themselves form so me twenty
shillings. Lastly, these Carryers have long covered Wagons, in which they
carry passengers from City to City: but this kind of iournying is so tedious,
by reason they must take wagon very early, and come very: late to their
Innes, as none but women and people of inferior condition, or strangers (as
Flemmings with their wives and servants) use to travel in this sort.

In Ireland since the end of the Civil war, some Lords and Knights have
brought Ireland.
in Coaches to Dublin, but they are not generally used, neither are there any
to be hired, though the ways be most plain and generally good for Coaches.
They ride for the most part upon their own horses, but they are also to be
hired for some twelve pence, or eighteen pence the day, finding the horses
meat, which in the stable will cost some twelve pence each night, and at
grass little or nothing. In every City there be some known houses, where an
ordinary is kept for diet, and beds may be had, and the Ordinary is commonly
twelve pence each meal. By the way in poor Hamlets, at this time of peace,
there be English houses, where is good lodging and diet, and where no such
are, passengers must go to the houses of Noblemen, Gentlemen, and Husbandmen
English, and Irish-English, where they cannot want intertainement in some good
measure, these inhabitants much loving hospitality, but all other houses are
full of filth and barbarousnesse. But there are not any Innes in the very
Cities, which hang out Bushes, or any Signs, only some Citizens are known,
who will give stable and meat for horses, and keep a table where passengers
cate at an ordinary, and some Citizens have cellers, wherein they draw wine,
if not all the year, yet as long as their wine lasts: but they have no Tauerns
with Iuy bushes or signs hung cut, save only some few at Dublin.

In Scotland a horse may be hired for two shillings the first day, and eight
pence the day until he be brought home, and the horse letters use to send a
footeman to bring Scotland
back the horse. They have no such Innes as be in England, but in all places
some houses are known, where passengers may have meat and lodging: but they
have no bushes or signs hung out, and for the horses, they are commonly set up
in Stables in some out-lane, not in the same house were the passenger lies. And
if any man be acquainted with a Townes-man, he will go freely to his house,
for most of them will entertain a stranger for his money. A horseman shall pay
for Oats and Straw (for hay is rare in those parts) some eight pence day and
night, and he shall pay no less in Summer for grass, whereof they have no
great store. Himself at a common table shall pay about six pence for his
supper or dinner, and shall have his bed freesand if he will eat alone in his
chamber, he may have meat at a reasonable rate. Some twenty or thirty years
ago the first use of Coaches came into Scotland, yet were they rare even at
Edenborough. At this day since the Kingdoms of England and Scotland were
united, many Scots by the Kings favor have been promoted both in dignity and
estate, and the use of Coaches became more frequent, yet nothing so common as
in England. But the use of Horse-litters has been very ancient in Scotland, as
in England, for sickly men and women of quality.

CHAP. II. Of the Sepulchers, Monuments, and Buildings in general; for I have
spoken particularly of them in the first Part, writing of my daily iournies.
AMong all the Sepulchers that I have seen in Europe, or in Turkey, that in
Westminster erected to Henry the seventh, Sepulchers in general.
King of England of Copper metal, adorned with vulgar precious stones, is the
fairest, especially considering the stately Chapel built over it. The next to
that in my opinion is the Sepulcher at Winsore, made of the same metal
curiously carved, at the charge of Cardinal Wolfye, had he not left it
unperfected, so as none has yet been buried under it. The next place I would
give to the Sepulchers of the Turkish Ottomans, whereof the fairest is the
monument with the Mosche (or Chapel) built over it, for Sultan Soloman at
Constantinople. The other monuments of the Sultans are built more low, with a
little round Mosche over them, all of the best Marble, the top being a round
Globe of brass or lead, and for the better show, they are commonly set upon
hills. The insides are round, and lightsome with windows, and in the very
midst lies the Sultan, with his sons round about him, which (according to
their custom) are strangled by the command of their eldest brother, as soon as
the father is dead, and his Sultana is laid by his side when she dies. These
are all laid in chests of Cypress, lifted up from the ground, with their
Tulbents over their heads, which living they woare upon their heads, with some
Jewels at the crown. And these chests are compassed with a grate of iron,
without which is a round Gallerie or walking place, spread with Tapestry, upon
which the Zantones or Priests that keep the Sepulcher, continually sit, as if
the Sultans would not be left alone without attendance when they were dead. I
speak not of the Turks common Sepulchers, which have no beauty, being in
common fields, with three stones erected, at the head, the breast, and the
feet. Neither did I see any other stately monuments erected to the Turkish
Visiers and Bashaes. In the next place is the monument of the Saxon Elector
Mauritius, at Friburg in Germany (being of black Marble, three degrees high,
with fair statuaes) and the monuments of English Noblemen in Westminster, and
Saint Paul's Church at London (of greater magnificence and number, then I have
seen any otherwhere.) In the next place are the Sepulchers of the French Kings
at Saint Dennys, near Paris, and of the Palatine at Heydelberg in Germany. I
speak not of the Prince of Orange his Sepulcher at Delph in Holland, which is
a poor monument, far unfit for so worthy a Prince, who deserved so well of
the Low Country men. But they have few or no stately monuments, nor almost any
ordinary Sepulchers erected to the dead. Of the same degree with the French
Kings Sepulchers, or rather to be preferred before the most of them, are the
Sepulchers of Italy, but they are of another kind. Some of them at Rome, and
that of the King of Aragon at Naples, and some few other, are stately and
beautiful. The rest are crected little from the ground, and sometimes
Pyramidall, but the Altars built over them, are adorned with rare pictures,
Porphery, Marble, and Lydian siones, and upon these Altars they sing Masses and
prayers the dead lying under them.

As I said that all the Turks, excepting the Sultans or Emperors are buried
in the open fields, so I have seen in Germany some fields without the Cities,
compassed with fair square walls of stone, wherein Citizens were buried. Of
these the fairest is at Leipzig, the walls whereof are built with arched
Cloisters, under which the chief Citizens are buried by families, the common
sort only lying in the open part of the field, and at one corner of the wall
there is a Tarras, covered above, but open on the two sides toward the field,
and paued on the ground, wherein stands a Pulpet. This place is called Gotts
aker, that is, that Aker or field of God. The like burying place I have seen
at Geneua, without the walls of the City. At Pisa in Italy they have a public
place of burial like in fashion to these, but within the walls of the City,
and the building compassing it, is very stately, and much to be preferred
before that of Leipzig. This place is called Campo santo, that is the holy
field, either of the use, or because the Emperor Frederick Barbarossa,
returning from the holy Land, and taking that earth for ballast of his ships,
did after lay the same in this place.

The Exchange, or public place for the meeting of Merchants, and for the
selling Public buildings for Merchants to meet.
of smaller or richer wares at London, being built of Freestone by Sir Thomas
Gresham Knight and Merchant, is the most starely building in that kind that I
have seen in Europe or Turkey. For that of Antwerp, in imitation whereof this
is said to have been built, was never seen by me, and I have heard many
prefer this before that. Ancona in Italy has such a place, much less, but
very beautiful, and that of Hamburg in Germany is much to be commended. That
of Constantinople called Besensteine, is markable rather for the precious wares
and jewels, then for the building, which is only of Brick, and therein also
they sell captives for slaves.

For public houses built for the meeting of the Senate, there be many in
Germany Senate-houses.
which are very starely, and among them that of Hamburg seemed to me the
fairest.

The Germans, Low-countrimen and Sweitzers, have in each City public houses,
Public places for recreation.
where the Citizens meet to walk, and for exercises, as shooting in the piece
and Crossebow, and where they also drink and feast together. Those of
Sweitzerland are less sumptuous for building, but much more pleasant, having
trees, within the boughs whereof they have rooms or arbours built upon the
bodies of the trees, whereof diverse contain three or four Tables, besides
that water is drawn up by pipes to the top of the tree, for washing of
glasses, and like uses.

Among the Stables of Princes, that of the Duke of Saxony at Dresden in
Germany, is Stables.
the fairest of all other, and a rare building for that purpose.

For Clocks, that of Strasburg in Germany is most artificial, and to be
wondered at, and is much to be preferred before that of Lubeck, or any other in
the Clockes.
World.

In Italy there be many wonderful ruins of old Theaters, water Conduits, and
Theaters and water Conduits.
like monuments in many places: but these ruins belong not properly to this
discourse, and there be few like built of late. Only the water Counduit at
Rome, newly built by Pope Sixtus Quintus, is a Kingly work. And the Theater at
Vicenza now standing and in use for Comedies, is fair and starely. The
Theaters at London in England for Stageplaies, are more remarkable for the
number, and for the capacity, then for the building.

The Bridge at London is worthily to be numbered among the miracles of the
world, Bridges.
if men respect the building and foundation, laid artificially and stately over
an ebbing and flowing water, upon 21 piles of stone, with 20 arches, under
which Barks may pass, the lowest foundation being (as they say) packs of
woll, most durable against the force of the water, and not to be repaired, but
upon great fall of the waters, and by artificial turning or stopping the
recourse of them. Or if men respect the houses built upon the bridge, as great
and high as those of the firm land, so as a man cannot know that he passes a
bridge, but would judge himself to be in the street, save that the houses on
both sides are combined in the top, making the passage somewhat dark, and that
in some few open places the River of Thames may be seen on both sides. In the
second rank, is the bridge of our Lady at Paris in France. The next place
belongs to the bridge of Venice, called Realto, consisting of one, but an high
Arch, and built partly of marble, partly of freestone, and to be ascended by
many stairs on both sides, and having low shoppes upon the ascents and on the
top, and for the building of the whole bridge, being more stately then that of
Paris. In the fourth rank is the bridge of Florence, over the river Arno; and
for bare bridges, having no buildings upon them, the bridge of Dresden in
Germany, and many other bridges in England, in my opinion might be preferred
before that of Florence, had it not those houses built upon it: But the bridge
of Rome, called Sant' Angelo, is not worth the naming, howsoever the Italians
(after their bragging manner) have made the same appear famous to men that
never saw it, as likewise they have spread the fame of the Roman River Tyberis,
which at Rome and running under this bridge, deserves rather to be accounted a
little brook, or a ditch, then a River. And as for the inundations thereof,
they are rather to be attributed to the narrowness of the bed, then the
greatness of the River, only increasing upon the fall of rain, or melted
snow from the neighbor mountains, and making no Haven at the very mouth,
where it enters into the Sea.

Surely howsoever the Italians were of old very magnificent in many things, yet
by obtruding their Latin tongue to all Nations they conquered, they did
likewise make them conceive of every spring, brook, and porch, as of the
Worlds miracles. And there be some among them at this day, who in their sleeves
laugh at Travelers, curiously searching after these Antiquities, thus made
famous by old Writers, and who take pleasure to delude this their simplicity,
(for such they esteem it, howsoever we do but by the way search after them,
having more profitable ends of our iournies into Italy).

There be some other bridges of exceeding length, as those of Strasburg and
Wien, (more known by the name of Vienna) in Germany, but they being only
built of timber, and laid over with loose pieces of timber, (that upon danger
of Armies and inundations, they may be more easily broken and built up again),
and so being nothing less then durable, I do only here mention them.

The Goldsmiths shops at London in England, (being in diverse streets, but
especially that called Cheapc-side), are exceeding richly furnished continually
with gold, and silver Goldesmiths shops.
plate and Jewels. The Goldsmiths shops upon the bridges at Florence and Paris,
have perhaps sometimes been as richly or better furnished, for the time or
some nuptial Feast of the Princes or like occasion, with Plate and Jewels
borrowed of private persons for that purpose: but I may lawfully say, setting
all love of my Country apart, that I did never see any such daily show, any
thing so sumptuous in any place of the World, as in London.

I will not speak in this place of Churches and Academicall Colleges, but
refer them to their proper places, where in the last Part, I shall treat of
Religion and Universities. Churches and Colleges
Only here it shall suffice in a word to say; that the Churches in England,
and Colleges in the Universities thereof, (considering due circumstances) are
to be much admired, and preferred before any in the World.

Munster affirms that the Romans built in Germany beyond the Rivers Danow and
Rheine, more stately Cities, then are to be seen in other parts thereof: But
for my part Buildings in Germany
I would say that Nurnberg, Dresden, Brestawe, (the chief City of Silesia) and
the Cities upon the Sea Coast toward the North, (called Hans stetten, that is,
free Cities), are much fairer, and far more magnificently built, then those
that he names. The Cities within land (excepting Ertford, those of Hessen, and
some like, which are built of timber, clay, and plaster, or of dirt, and
covered with tiles of wood), are built of great polished and carved free
stones, four or five stories high, with an high roof bearing windows, and
covered with tiles. Some of the foresaid Cities on the Sea Coast are built of
free stone, but for the most part of brick, and in the lower fore room being
commonly large, they have great doors (like gates) toward the streets, which
being open by day, expose to the eyes of passengers, the bright puter dishes,
and other like vessels of tin and brass, which use to be set forth in the
upper end of that room: And not only the private houses, but the public
streets, are notable for clenlinesse, uniformity, and beauty. The houses and
buildings upon the Alps (excepting some few Cities, which are equal to the
foresaid built within land, as Insprucke, lying in the way between Augsburg
and Padoua) are built much lower, most commonly of freestone, and covered with
tiles of wood, and for three parts of the year, they are continually covered
with snow; and as through all Germany the casements of the windows are little,
so in these parts they are much less, so as a man can hardly put his head out
of them, and the windows on the Inside are all to be shut close with wooden
windows, they using all possible art to keep the cold out, and to retain the
heat of the stoaues within. Noblemens Castles in Germany, are for the most part
answerable to the building of the Cities within Land, but they show more
antiquity, and are more built for strength then beauty: And the more stately
Palaces of Cities, and these Castles, in some places (as my self observed at
Augsburg) but very rarely, are covered with copper, which Germany yields, but
never with lead, whereof they have none of their own. The building of houses
in the Towns, is for matter like to that of the Cities, but lower, and the
Villages for the most part are built of timber, clay, and plaster, or dirt, and
covered with tiles of wood, or the worst of them with straw. In general, at
the most frequented doors of every house, they have ropes, that men without by
the ringing of a bell may be let in, and those within may open the doors by the
pulling of a roape without going to them, and the doors likewise by waights are
made to shut of themselves at the heels of him that comes in, without the
help of any hand. The windows in general are of a thick glass, with little
casements closed in wood, not in iron, which they seldom open, that the
stoaues may be kept warm. To conclude, Germany yields to no place in the World
for the number or stately building of Cities, yet so as respecting the
greatness thereof, it has not so frequent and little distant Cities, as
Netherland, and other less Dominions have.

Among the Cities of Sweitzerland, the building of Bern is most uniform and
fair; being of freestone, with arched Cloisters toward the street, (as in
some parts Of Sweitzerland.
of Italy), under which men walk dry footed after the greatest rain: but
most of the Cities (as of the Towns and Villages) are fairly built with
timber, clay, and plaster, and commonly are seated on the declining sides of
Mountains and hills.

Of the last sort, are the houses of Boemerland, save that the walls and
foundations Of Boemerland.
are made of whole bodies of trees, as they are cut down, even covered with
the bark, and joined together with clay and mortar: And these houses are
generally covered with tiles of wood, not with slates.

In the united Provinces, the houses are most of brick, as well in Cities as in
Villages, and so uniform, as if they had all been built at a time, and by the
same workmen. Low. Countries.
The fronts of them toward the streets are commonly narrow, (excepting some
few that are broad and high), and so are built inward in length, with narrow
windows, and nothing at all cast out from the walls, and the roofes have
windows for use of the rooms, being covered with tiles, or pieces of wood in
the same form. At Leyden and Delph the houses are built very high of many
stories, and the roofes are steep, and have also windows for use. At the
Hage, being a most pleasant Village, where the States keep their residence,
the building is like; but the Castle in which Count Maurice dwelt, and some few
Gentlemen's houses, are built of freestone, and in some outlanes many houses are
covered with straw. The wares of Merchants, the vessels of tin and brass,
(being kept most clean) and like ornaments, lie open in the lowest and
greatest room, by large doors to passengers view, (as I formerly said of the
Cities on the Sea coast of Germany). They build with very slender timber, so as
the new built, threaten falling, and upon little force totter and shake. The
floares are paued with plaster, boards being more costly, and apt to take fire.
And these floares are daily cast over with sand, to keep them from dirt, only
by sweeping away the sand at night.

In the Kingdom of Denmark, there is only one City compassed with walls,
called Of Denmark.
Kopenhagen, in which (as in the other little Cities, Townss, and Villages) the
houses of the Citizens are for the most part of timber, clay and plaster,
seldom of freestone. The Kings Castle there is built of free stone, but with
no magnificence. His second Castle at Elsenure, is very stately built of
freestone, and also strongly fortified, to command one side of the straight
sea, where great tribute is exacted of all ships entering or going out of the
Sound.

In Poland there be but few Cities for so large a Kingdom, but the houses of
them Of Poland.
are built of free stone, much like to the Inland Cities of Germany, save that
in some places the houses are arched toward the street, like the Cloisters of
Monasteries. Some of the houses in the Villages are of timber, clay and
plaster, but the greatest part of mere dirt, and covered with straw. Few of
the Noble men's houses are of free stone, but the greater part of timber, clay,
and plaster.

The Italians are exceeding rich in their own commodities, and by traffic,
Of Italy.
which the Gentlemen and Princes scorn not to use, and they spending little in
housekeeping or apparel, all their pride is to build stately houses, water
Counduits, Fountains, and to have rich Jewels, and like permanent things. All
the buildings have Thrasonicall inscriptions, either engraven or painted upon
them of the founders praise, and almost of his pedigree. The houses of
Citizens, and of the common sort are of unpolished stone, and commonly of
little flints, lowly built, with a roof almost lying flat (without windows),
and covered with tiles. The Gentlemen's Palaces are most frequent, and are
built (as well in Cities, as in the Country) of carved freestone and marble,
and most of them altogether of diverse colored Marbles. For they have many
Quarryes of marble, so as the same being not far fetched, the magnificence of
their building is rather in show, then in charge, to be preferred before our
buildings of polished freestone. Many of their Palaces seem fit to receive a
King with his Court for the stately building, but not for the capacity, the
Italian Families being small and solitary. The building of them is in such
fashion, as the first upper chamber is large, and as long as a gallerie, fit to
intertaine great companies, with feasts and dancing, the windows being great,
and lying open to admit air, and covered with Arras to lean upon, and having
on the inside windows of wood to close by night. The rest of the Chambers are
on each side of this Gallerie, richly furnished with Hangings, Beds imbrodered,
and sumptuous furniture, and Tapestrie spread under feet where the chayres
stand, but the rooms are narrow, and have little windows covered, but not
with glass. For the windows of all Italy are covered with linen cloth, or
paper, only the City of Venice boasts of the singularity, that the windows
thereof are commonly glazed, yet so are also the windows of some few Palaces
in other parts. The Italians more willingly spend their money in building
(wherein they delight to have cool chambers, with open Tarrasses, lying upon
waters and shades, on the sides of the house where the Sun least comes), and
likewise in adorning Fountains with shade, seats and images, in making caves
under the earth, and water-conduits, then in any earthly thing, their mistress
always excepted. And because they cannot endure labor (for their diseased
joints, or the heat of the Country), they strive to make their stairs very
easy, and by much compassing to raise the ground by little and little, wherein
they use so great Art, as in some places a horseman may with ease, and almost
insensible ascent, ride up to the top of high Towers. The floares of their
upper chambers are not boarded, but paued with plaster, or with a matter made
of lime and tiles. Some Cities, as Bologna, Padona, and others in the Dukedom
of Mantua, are built with arches toward the street, like Cloisters of
Monasteries, and how soever the street is durty, yet under them is pleasant
and dry walking, even in rainy weather. For other Cities, the streets whereof
lie open, at Rome they are paued conveniently with flints, at Sienna
beautifully with brickes, at Florence, Pistoia, Lucca and Naples, stately with
Freestone, very broad and easy.

Touching Tarky, in the Greek Islands, in Asia and Affricke, commonly the
houses Of Turkey.
are built of unpolished stones and flint, only one roof high, and many times
with arches toward the street, always with windows not glased or covered but
open, and the floare on the top of houses, is beaten plain with plaster, and
compassed with a wall, indented on the top some yard high. And here in the open
air they eat, and walk by day, and lodge at night, so as a man may see all
his neighbors in bed about him. For they are seldom (some once or twice in
the year, about September) troubled with rain. Particularly at Jerusalem, for
their locks, the keys be made of wood, not of Iron. At Constantinople and in
the Provinces adjoining, the houses are commonly of impolished stone and flint,
or of timber and clay plastered, or of earth formed like brick, but not
hardened by fire, and are built some two stories high, and with a roof almost
lying flat, without windows, and covered with tiles, much after the common
building of Italy. In general the houses have large windows, not closed with
glass, or other thing, but altogether open, only by night to be closed with
wodden windows, after the Italian manner. The streets of Constantinople are
narrow, raised on each side for the passage of men and women, but there also
narrow, the middle part of the streets being so broad, as one Ass or like
beast loaded may pass, for they use no Coaches or Carts. The Sultans or
Emperors Palace (vulgarly called Saray, and by the Italians Seraglio) is of
some three square Courtyards, built round about of Freestone, and pieces of
Marble, with arches toward the yard like Cloisters, which are paued with broad
stones, and this Palace has a very spacious Garden round compassed with a
stone wall. Some few Palaces of the Visiers or Bashaes in this City, are built
of polished Freestone, two roofes high with the highest roof almost flat,
after the manner of the Italian Palaces. And it is worth the observation, that
each Mosche (or Turkish Church) rising in the top with diverse Globes, and they
being covered with brass or Copper, they make a beautiful show, especially
the Sun shining, and more especially, because they are seated upon hills.
The Turkish Bashacs laugh at them, who tell how beautiful and stately the
Christians Palaces are builton the outside, as if they only respected the
inward magnificence. But Christians do also desite this inward beauty, some
more some less. And that the Turks neglect outward beauty, the desire of
inward beauty is not the true reason thereof. For as they place all religion in
the show and outward things, so no doubt they would in this also greatly
respect the outside, were it not that they live under such a tyrannical
Government, which makes all the Empire full of desolation, so as they do not
preserve the houses they conquered from Christians in their wonted
magnificence, much less themselves erect such stately building' yea dare not
have any rich housholdstuffe, at least to be vulgarly seen, lest their riches
should make them a prey to their Magistrates or soldiers, finding nothing so
safe unto them, as the sordide show of poverty. And this is the cause that
many of them hide and bury their treasure under the earth, whereof the free use
would prove dangerous to them, and as the Poet says,

Quo mihi diuitiae? Sinon conceditur vti.
What do riches profit me?
Who to use them am not free.
But the Turks, and especially the Christians subject to them, being borne and
from infancy bred under the yoke of perpetual slavery, and having never tasted
the sweetness of liberty, do bear with ease this burden, which we think
unsupportable.

In France the houses of Paris are of unpolished great stones, covered over
with plaster, and are built stately three or four, sometimes six roofes high
(with the Of France.
highest roof, which has windows), and they are covered with tiles. The
building of other Cities, is commonly of timber, clay and plaster, sometimes of
freestone, and four or five roofes high, whereof each as it is higher, so is
more proiected into the street, much darkening the same, and causing the rain
to fall into the midst thereof. The streets are no broader then for two
Carts to meet, and pass one by the other. Almost under every house is a
Cellar to lay up wine, Perry, Cider, and alll kinds of drink, and few of the
windows are glazed, which are also darkened with grates of wood, the rest are
altogether open, to be shut by night with windows of wood. The building of the
Villages is like ours in England, commonly of timber and clay, and thatched
over. The Gentlemen's houses are built like those in the Cities, whereof I have
spoken: but the Palaces of great Lords for the most part are stately built of
free stone; yet more beautiful and stately are the Kings Palaces, commonly of
free stone curiously carved, with pillars of marble, and sometimes of brickes,
with pecces of marble in the parts most open to the eye. Among these Palaces
of the King, that of Fontainebleau, is the most stately and magnificent that I
did see, and most pleasant for the gardens and sweet Air.

Caesar in his Commentaries, says; that buildings of England were then like
those of France. Now at London the houses of the Citizens (especially in the
chief streets) Of England
are very narrow in the front toward the street, but are built five or six
roofes high, commonly of timber and clay with plaster, and are very neat and
ommodious within: And the building of Citizens houses in other Cities, is not
much unlike this. But withal understand, that in London many stately Palaces,
built by Noblemen upon the River Thames, do make a very great show to them
that pass by water; and that there be many more like Palaces, also built
toward Land, but scattered, and great part of them in back lanes and
streets, which if they were joined to the first in good order, as other Cities
are built uniformly, they would make not only fair streets, but even a
beautiful City, to which few might justly be preferred for the magnificence of
the building. Besides, that the Aldermens and chief Citizens houses howsoever
they are stately for building, yet being built all inward, that the whole room
toward the streets may be reserved for shoppes of Tradesmen, make no show
outwardly, so as in truth all the magnificence of London building is hidden
from the view of strangers at the first sight, till they have more particular
view thereof by long abode there, and then they will prefer the buildings of
this famous City to many that appear more stately at the first sight. Great
part of the Towns and Villages, are built like the Citizens houses in London,
save that they are not so many stories high, nor so narrow in the front toward
the street. Others of them are built in like sort, of unpolished small stones,
and some of the Villages in Lincolneshire and some other Countries, are of
mere clay, and covered with thatch; yet even these houses are more commodious
within, for clenlinesse, lodging, and diet, then any stranger would think them
to be. Most of the houses in Cities and Towns, have Cellers under them, where
for coolness they lay Beer and Wine. Gentlemen's houses for the most part are
built like those in the Cities, but very many of Gentlemen's and Noblemens
Palaces, as well near London, as in other Countries, are stately built of
brick and free stone, whereof many yield not in magnificence to like
buildings of other Kingdoms, as Homby, built by Sr Christopher Hatton, Tybals
lately belonging to the Earl of Salisbury, seated near London, and the Earl
of Exceter his house near Stamford: by which Palaces lying near the high way,
a stranger may judge of many other like stately buildings in other parts. The
Kings Palaces are of such magnificent building, so curious art, and such
pleasure and beauty for gardens and fountains, and are so many in number, as
England need not envy any other Kingdom therein. Among them being many, a
stranger may see near London, the King Palaces, of Hampton Court, of
Richmond, of Greenewich, of Nonsuch, of Otelands, of Schene, of Winsore, and in
London the Palace of White Hall.

In Scotland the City Edenborough, is fairlie built of unpolished stone, but
the galleries of timber built upon the fronts of the houses, do rather obscure
then adorn them: Of Scotland
And the Kings Palace at one end, and the fortified Castle at the other end of
the City, are more stately built then the rest, but all the beauty of the
City confirsts of one large street, the by lanes being few, and full of
beggary. The houses in Villages, and scattered in the Country, are like to
those in England, but the Gentlemen's and Noblemens houses are nothing so
frequent, nor so stately built as the better sort of the English. Neither are
their I ownes and Cities in number, building, or pleasantness, comparable to
those in England. Lastly, the Villages of clay covered with straw, are much
more frequent then in England, and far less commodious within. Among the
Kings Palaces, that at Edenburg, and that of Sterling for the building, and
Fawkland for the pleasure of hunting, are the chief.

The houses of the Irish Cities, as Cork, Galoway and Lymrick (the fairest of
them for building) are of unwrought free stone, or flint, or unpolished stones,
built some two Of Ireland.
stories high, and covered with tile. The houses of Dublin and Waterford, are
for the most part of timber, clay and plaster, yet are the streets beautiful,
and the houses commodious within, even among the Irish, if you pardon them a
little slouenlinesse, proper to the Nation. In general, the houses very
seldom keep out rain, the timber being not well seasoned, and the walls
being generally combined with clay only, not with mortar of lime tempered. The
Irish have some quarries of Marble, but only some few Lords and Gentlemen
bestow the cost to polish it. Many Gentlemen have Castles built of free stone
unpolished, and of flints, or little stones, and they are built strong for
defense in times of rebellion, for which cause they have narrow stairs, and
little windows, and commonly they have a spacious hall joining to the Castle,
and built of timber and clay, wherein they eat with their Family. Neither are
many of these gentle men's houses void of filth, and slouenlinesse. For other
Irish dwellings, it may be said of them, as Caesar said of the old Brittanes
houses. They call it a Town, when they have compassed a skirt of wood with
trees cut down, whether they may retire themselves and their cattle. For the
mere barbarous Irish either sleep under the canopy of heaven, or in cabbines
watled, and covered with turfe.

The Germans long inioying settled peace, the French and the Nitherlanders for
Of Forts in general.
many years distracted with wars, have many Cities strongly fortified with
ditches and earthen walls. The Turks, Polonians, Sweitzers, Bohemians, Danes,
English, Scots and Irish have few Forts or fortified places. The Kings of
England, have caused such to be dismantled and pulled down, as encouragement to
the Nobles to contemn their authority, only at Barwick against the bordering
Scots, and at (...) against the neighboring French, they have maintained
fortifications to hinder incursion. The Turks neither fortify themselves, nor
maintain the strong places they have conquered from Christians. In Denmark
the Citic Kopenhagen, and in Poland Crakaw and Warsaw are in some sort
fortified. And in Ireland the English of late have made small Forts upon some
few Havens to prevent foreign invasion, and in some inland territories to
suppress the rebellious inclination of some Irish Lords. Otherwise in the said
Kingdoms, if any Cities be compassed with walls, they are ready to fall for
age, and are rather fit to resist the first fury of ill armed mutiners, then to
endure a sharp siege, or the very sight of the Cannon. Like are most of the
Cities in Italy, only at Naples and at Milan there be two strong forts, and at
Rome a strong Castle, and in Lombardy, and especially in the State of Venice,
many Cities and some Forts made as strong, as huge charge and exquisit art can
make them.

CHAP. III. Of Germany, Boemerland and Sweitzerland, touching the Geographicall
description, the situation, the fertility, the traffic, and the diet.
THE Geographers search out the greatness of the Globe, and of all the parts
in the superficies thereof, by the help In general of Geography.
of the Celestial circles, fitted to the Conuex or bending of the earth. The
circles of heaven are of two sorts, the greater and the less. The greater are
six in number, the Equator, Zodiake, two Colun, Meridian and Horizon. Of
which the Geographers in the description of the World, only make use of the
Equator and Meridian. The Equator,
Equator compasses the middle swelling of the (...) Sphere between both the
Poles of the world, and the greatest conuexitie or bending thereof, from the
East toward the West, to which circle when the Sun is come by his proper
motion (in each year twice) it makes two Equinoctials (that is, day and night
of equal length), one in the Spring, the other at the fall of the leaf. The
circle in the conuex or bending superficies of the earth, that is directly and
perpendicularly under the said Equator, is called the Equator of the earth,
and compassing the earth from the East to the West, diuides it into two
Hemispheres (that is, half Spheres), the Northern and the Southern The
Meridian Circle is drawn through the Poles of the Heaven (in which the
Meridians meet) and through the vertical point (that is the Meridian.
point right over head) of each place, whether the Sun being come by his
accidental motion (in each day) it makes noone above the Horizon, and midnight
under the Horizon (or with the Antipodes.) The Circle in the conuex or bending
of the earth, directly and perpendicularly under this circle Meridian, passing
by the extreme points of the earth that are under the Poles, and by any
appointed place in the superficies (or upper face) of the earth, is called a
Meridian of the earth. And because there is no certain number of particular
places on the earth, it follows that the Meridians are innumerable, so as every
place distant from another toward the East or West, has his own peculiar
Meridian, diverse from the Meridian of another place. Yet for making of maps,
and like uses, the Geographers appoint one hundred eighty Meridians, namely,
ninty Easterly, and nintie Westerly.

The lesser circles are called Paralells, that is, equally distant, because
having relation Paralells.
one to the other, or to any of the great circles, they are in all parts
equally distant For all lesser circles have relation to one of the greater, and
are called the paralells of this or that greater circle. But here only mention
is made of the Paralells referred to the Equator, which are lesser circles
drawn near the Equator, from East toward West, or contrary, by the vertical
points of several places in heaven, or by the places themselves in the upper
face of the earth, and they are the greater, the nearer they are to the
Equator, the lesser as they are more distant from the same toward either
Pole, and the Geographeis call them Northern Paralells, which are near the
Equator in the Northern Hemisphere and Southern Paralells, which are so
drawn in the Southern Hemisphere. Also as there is no certain number of
particular places, so the Paralells are innumerable, in so much as each place
upon the upper face of the earth, distant from another toward the North or
South, has his pecular vertical Parallel. Yet usually the Geographers number
180 Paralells, namely, ninty Northern, and ninty Southern. Of this number are
the four Paralells which include the four Zones (or The five Zones.
girdles), by which the upper face of the earth is distinguished into Climes,
and the Equator in the midst of them, and greatest of them is joined to
them, and makes the fifth Zone. The whole circle of the Equator or Meridian,
contains 360 degrees, whereof each Degrees
consists of 60 minutes. About 500 stadia make a degree, 125 paces make a
stadium, an Italian mile makes 8 stadia, a French mile 12, a German mile 32, so
as 1 degree contains 62 Italian miles and a half, or 15 common German miles,
and a half, and half quarter.

Although the earth be conuex (or bending) and sphericall (orround), yet in a
certain respect they give to the same, from West to East, or contrarily, a
Longitude in Longitude and Latitude
the Equator and Paralells; and like wise from the South to the North, or
contrarily, a Latitude in the Meridians. And howsocuer the earth in his upper
face, by nature has neither beginning nor ending, yet they appoint the
artificial beginning of the Longitude in the Meridian Circle, drawn by the
Fortunate or Canary Islands; and therefore call it the first Meridian, and so
proceeding from it toward the West or the East, they reckon the Longitude of
the earth. For example, two Meridians being drawn, the first by the Canary
Islands, the second by any place whose situation is inquired, as many degrees as
are sound in the Parallel circle proper to the said place, from the first
Meridian to the proper Meridian of the place, of so many degrees is the
Longitude of that place said to be. In like sort the circle Equator and the
Parallel circle of the place whose situation is inquired being drawn, as many
degrees as are included in the Meridian circle of that place, from the Equator
to the Parallel of the place, of so many degrees is the Latitude of that place
said to be. As the Paralells are of two sorts, so is the Latitude, namely,
Northern from the Equator toward the Northern Pole, and Southern from the
same toward the Southern Pole. Also the Longitude in like sort, but
imaginarily, is said to be Easterly and Westerly, beginning at the first
Meridian. The places situated under the Equator, are said to have no latitude
and the places under the first Meridian, no longitude. The Zones compassing the
earth Zones
like girdles, according to the Longitude thereof, divide it by the Equator,
and four paralells into five parts, whereof two are temperate, and three
intemperate. One of the intemperate, being the middle, lies under the Equator,
between the two Paralells called Tropici, and this is called the Torride or
burnt Zone, because it being under the Ecliptic line, of the Suns yearly
course, is continually burnt with the beams thereof. This Zone in the
Superficies or upper part of the earth, contains the greater part of Afric
toward the South, yea, almost all Afric, (excepting Egypt, and Mauritania,
toward the Northern Pole, and the furthest parts of Afirick toward the
Southern Pole), and it contains the chief Islands of the East Indies. Next to
this middle torride Zone, toward the North, lies one of the temperate Zones,
seated between the two Paralells, called the Tropic of Cancer, and the Artick
circle, and it contains the greatest part of America, the Northern part of
Afric and almost al Europe and Asia. The other temperate Zone lies by the
middle torride Zone, on the other side of the Equator toward the South,
seated between the two Paralells, called the Tropic of Capricorn, and the
Antartick circle, and contains the part of America called Peru and the extreme
Southern parts of Afric, and great part of the Southern World as yet
undiscovered. Next to these temperate Zones lie the other two Zones called
intemperate for cold, as the first are for heat, and one of them lies under
the Northern Pole of the world, containing Noruegia, and the part of Tartaria
lying within the Artick circle, the other lies under the Southern Pole, which
part of the World is not yet discovered.

Clymes are tracts compassing the earth circularly from the West to the East,
and they are much more narrow then the Zones, and not of equal Latitude among
themthemselues, Clymes.
but as Zones are the greater, the nearer they are to the Equator, and the
narrower, the more they are distant from the Equator, toward either of the
Poles, so are the Clymes. The Latitude of each Clyme is so great, as from the
beginning to the end of it, the greatest Solstitial day may increase half an
hour. And because this variation of the day, in parts most remote from the
Equator, happens in shorter distances of the earth, therefore the Clymes also
most remote from the Equator, are made more and more narrow. In our age
wherein great parts of the World are discovered, which were of old unknown,
this distribution of the earth from the Artick circle to the Antartick, may be
made into 23 clymes, the Equinoctial clyme not being numbered. But this property
must ever be observed, that the Solsitiall day of the following clime, is ever
half an hour longer, then the solstitial day of the foregoing clime. The first
clime as well from the Equator toward the North, as from it toward the South
is placed, where the greatest day contains 12 hours and a half, and that is
next to the Equator on either side. The second where the greatest day
contains 13 hours. The third where it contains 13 hours and an half. The
fourth where it contains 14 hours. And so forward, till you have numbered the
23 clime, making the day of 23 hours and a half, and so come to one of the
said circles, Arctick toward the North, or Antartick toward the South, where
in the Solstitial day of the one half of the year, the Sun shines 24 hours
above the Horizon, and the night is but a moment, and on the contrary, in the
solstitial day of the other half of the year, the Sun is hidden 24 hours
under the horizon, and the day is but a moment: but beyond these circles, this
distribution of the earth into climes cease, because after the day is no more
increased by half hours, but the oblique horizon, on both sides, hides
certain portions of the Ecliptic, about the solstitial points, which are
perpetual appearings or hidings, and when the Sun passes them, it makes
continual day for some weeks, yea, for some months, or the like continual
night, til you come to one of the Poles, under which there is continual day for
the six summer months, and likewise continual night for the six winter
months. The Earth is divided into five parts, Asia, Africa, Europe, America,
and Terra Australis, or Southland (not yet discovered). Now I must speak of
the parts of Europe. Parts of the World.
and Asia, seated in the temperate Zone toward the North, and under the
Northern latitude and Easterly longitude, which must always be observed for
the understanding of the descriptions now following. The oriental longitude,
(namely from the first meridian toward the East) of Germany, with Sweitzerland
and Boemerland, from the 23 degree Of Germany, Sweitzerland, and Bohemia.
to the 46 degree, extends it self 23 degrees. The Northern latitude, (namely
from the Equinoctial to the North), of the same Countries, from the parallel of
45 degrees and a half, to the parallel of 55 degrees and a half, extends it
self 10 degrees. Germany is divided into the upper and the lower. The upper
lying upon the Alps, and near the River Danow, is subdivided into 11
Provinces, Austria, Styria, Carinthia, Athesis, Rhetia, Vindelicia, Bauaria,
Sucuia, Heluetia, (or Sweitzerland) Alsatia, and the Tract upon the River Rhein
to Metz. 1 Austria was of old called the upper Pannonia, of the bridges, or of
Upper Germany, containing Sweitzerland:
the Peones coming out of Greece to inhabit it) and also Auaria, now it is
vulgarly called Oestreich, that is, the Easterly Kingdom. Danow the great
river of Europe (which going on the course, is called Isther) runs through it,
and diuides it into Austria on this side, and on the far side of Danow. It has
many ancient and famous Cities, whereof the chief is Uienna, (vulgarly Wien)
built upon the bank of Danow, famous not so much for the University, and the
traffic of the place, as for that it is most strongly fortified to keep out
the Turks, and it is subject to the Emperor, as he is Archduke of Austria. 2
Styria of old called Valesia and Iapidia, is a small region in the midst of the
Alps, and was at first only a Marquisate, whereupon it is vulgarly called
Stoirmark, but after by the Emperor Frederick Barbarossa, was raised to a
Dukedom, and was at this time subject to a Prince of the House of Austria, by
division of inheritance. The Cities thereof are Volenburg, Hal, and Griets,
(the chief City.) It has two Rivers, Mour and Draw.

3 The Inhabitants of Carinthia, are called Carni, vulgarly Kerntheine. The
Easterly and Southerly part thereof is called Carniola, vulgarly Krein, and the
inhabitants thereof were of old called Iapides. Here are the spring heads of
the Rivers Drauus and Sauus, in the midst of the Alps. The Cities Philac and
Clagefort are of small moment. 4. The Athesine Province lies under Banaria
toward the Alps, between Carinthia and Heluetia (or Sweitzerland) and has
the name of the river Athesis, vulgarly called Etsch, which runs into Italy by
Trent and Verona, and is there called l'Adice, and so falls into the River Po.
This Province is commonly called the County of Tyrol, the Cities whereof are
Brixia and AEnipons (vulgarly Inspruck, a fair City.)

5. The names of Rhetia, Vindelicia and Norira, in these days are out of use,
and the limits of them are often confounded. That is properly Rhetia, which
lies between the lake of Constantis (or Costnetz toward the North, and the
high top of the Alps toward the South, whose chief City is Bregants, and the
inhabitants of these Alps are vulgarly called Grisons.)

6 Vindelicia is the other part of that tract, lying between the Danow and the
Alps, which has fair Cities, as Augusta Vindelicorum, (vulgarly Augsburg, a
famous City), Vlme, Ingolstad, Ratisbona, (vulgarly Regenspurg) and Passaw.
Observe that the old limits of Rhetia, did reach to Verona and Como in Italy,
but now great part of it is laid to Sueuia in Germany, as namely the Cities,
Augsburg and Vlme, aforesaid.

7 The Countries of Bauaria, and of the Bishopric of Saltzburg, were of old
called Vindelicia Noricum, and the Inhabitants thereof, Taurisci, and it has
these Cities, Scherdung, Saltzburg, and Lintz.

8 Sueuia stretches into old Vindelicia, and that which at this day is so
called, contains the greater part of Rhetia and Vindelicia. The Sueuians
(vulgarly Schwaben) of old forsook their dwelling upon the River Elue, and
invaded upper Rhetia, which to this day they hold. The Cities thereof are
Nerlingen, Gepingen, and the foresaid Vlme and Augsburg.

9 Heluetia (or Sweitzerland) was of old part of Gallia Belgica, now is
reckoned as part of Germany. The head spring of the Rheine, (the second River
of Germany, next in greatness to the Danow), is in the highest Alps of
Heluetia, where it rises in two heads, and the Northerly head falling from the
Mountains Furca and Gotardo, is called the fore Rheine, and the Southerly
head, falling from the Lepontine Mountains, is called the hinder Rheine, both
which running toward the East, are united at Chur, and then with the name of
Rheine, it falls toward the North violently from the Mountains. Heluetia has
many and very famous Cities, namely, Schaffhusen, (as the houses of boats or
ships) Constantia (vulgarly Costnetz), Tigurum (vulgarly Zurech) Solodurum (or
Solothurn), Bern, Lucern, and Geneua, with Losanna, which two last of old were
reckoned in Sauoy, but now are confederate with the Sweitzers. The Inhabitants
of Heluetia are commonly called Sweitzers, and among themselves they will be
called Eidgenossin, that is; partakers of the sworn league. The part of
Heluetia between the Rheine and the lake of Constantia, is called Brisgoia,
vulgarly Brisgaw, ( Bris signifies a price, and Gaw a meadow), and therein is
the springhead of the River Danow, and the Towns thereof are Rotwill,
Brisach, Friburg, (an University) Basil (a famous University), of old belonging
to Alsatia, now confederate with the Sweitzers.

10 Alsatia, so called of the river Illa running through it, is divided into
the upper and the lower: The upper from Basil to Strasburg is called Singaw,
and the Inhabitants of old were called Tribocchi, and Tribotes: some hold
Strasburg of old to have been the chief City thereof, but it has now three
Cities, Basil, Selestade, and Rusach. The lower lying above Strasburg to the
Mount Vogasus, has these Cities, Haganaw and Sabern.

11. For the Tract upon the Rheine: first, above Alsatia toward Metz, the
Nemetes (whose chief City is Spira), and the Vangiones (whose chief City is
Worms), possess the West side of the Rheine. The tract adjoining is called
Vetus Hannonia (vulgarly Alt-henegaw.) Something further from the Rheine
toward the Dukedom of Luxenburg, are these Provinces. The County Sweybrucken
(also called Bipoutanus in Latin, of two Bridges), and the Cities are
Sweybrucken and Sarbrucken. Secondly, Austracia (vulgarly Vestreich, as a vast
Kingdom.) Thirdly, the Territory of the Elector Bishop of Trier, whereof the
chief City is Treueris (vulgarly Trier.)

On the other side of the Rheine toward the East, the Marquisate of Baden lies
next to Heluetia, whose inhabitants of old were called Vespi. Next lies the
Dukedom of Wirtenburg, the Cities whereof are Tubinga and Sturcardia, whereof
the former is an University. Then follows the Palatinate of Rheine, the
Inhabitants whereof were of old called Intuergi and Phargiones, and are now
called Phaltzer, and Heidelberg, seated upon the River Neccar is the chief
City, and the seat of the Palatine 19 Provinces of lower Germany, among which
Bohemia is reckoned.
Elector.

The lower Germany is divided into nineteen Provinces, Franconia, Bohemia,
Morauia, Silesia, Saxonia, Lusatia, Misnia, Turingia, Marchia, the Dukedom of
Branswicke, the Dukedom of Meckleburg, Hassia, Iuliacum, Cliuia, Westphalia
Frisia Orientalis, Pemerania, Borussia, and Linonia, (for I omit Gallia Belgica
to be handled in his proper place.)

1 Franconia is an ancient and noble Nation, the inhabitants whereof driving the
Romans out of Gallia, possessed the same, and gave the name of France to that
Kingdom. This Province has old and fair Cities, namely, Bamberg (a Bishops
seat), Rotenburg, Francfort (famous for the yearly Marts or Faires),
Wirtzberg (a Bishops seat), Mentz or Metz (the seat of the chief Elector
Bishop), and Nurnberg (a famous City, which some hold to be in Bauaria, but the
Citizens do more willingly acknowledge themselves to be Franckes.) All the
Province (excepting the free Cities, and the three Cities belonging to Bishops)
is subject to the Margraue of Brandeburg.

2 Bohemia has a language proper to it self, and has two Provinces belonging
to it, Morauia (having his proper language), and Silesia (using the Dutch
tongue) and these three make a Kingdom, which is subject to the Emperor, and
it is joined by Geographers to the Provinces of Germany, because the same
compasses it almost round about. Bohemia is not divided into Counties, but
according to the Teritories, belonging to the King, or to Noble men and
Gentlemen; this being called the Kings land, that the land of the Baron of
Rosenberg, or the land of the Popells, and so of the rest. The chief City and
seat of the Emperor their King, is Prage. The River Blue has his head spring
in Bohemia, being the third River of Germany, and it runs through Saxony to
Hamburg, and after falls into the sea. The inhabitants of Bohemia came out of
Dalmatia, as their language witnesses.

3 Morauia was of old inhabited by the Marcomanni, and had subject to it
Bohemia, Silesia, and Polonia: but at this day it is only a Marquisate,
subject to Bohemia, and has the name of the River Moraua. The chief City
thereof is Bromia, vulgarly Prim.

4 The inhabitants of Silesia were of old called Lugij, Dantuli, and Cogni. The
River Viadrus, or Odera, runs through it into Pomerania, and so falls into
the sea. Silesia is annexed to Bohemia, and so is likewise subject to the
Emperor, as King of Bohemia, and the chief City thereof is Vratislauia,
vulgarly Bressell, and the inhabitants of this Province are Germans, as well in
language as manners.

5 Saxony contains all that lies between Hassia, Silesia, Polonia, Bohemia,
and the Baltic sea, so as at this day, Lusatia, Misnia, Turingia, both the
Marks, and the Dukedomes of Brunswick, and of Meckleburg, are contained
therein.

6 Lusatia is a little Region, annexed to the Kingdom of Bohemia. In the upper
part are the Cities Gurlitz (an University), and Pautsan, and Siltania. In the
lower, Sorauick and Cotwick, and the River Sprea runs through them both.

7 Misnia was of old inhabited by the Hermondari, and Sorabi, of the Sclauonian
Nation. It is a fertile Region, and therein begin the Mountains which ptolomy
calls Suditi, in which are mines of metals, and especially of silver. The
Cities thereof are Misnia (vulgarly Misen), Torg, Leipzig, and Witteberg (two
Universities), Fryburg (the fields whereof have rich mines of silver), Dresden
(the seat of the Saxon Elector), Remnitz, and Suicania.

8 The Province of Turingia is said of old to have been inhabited by the
Goths, because the chief City is called Gota. The Metropolitan City is
Erford, being large and ancient, and one of the free Cities of the Empire. This
Province is subject to the Duke of Saxony, with the title of Langraue, as
Misnia is also, with the title of Marquis.

9 The River Odera has his head spring in Marchia, and runs through it,
dividing it into the new Mark, and the old. The chief City of the old is
Franckford upon the Odera, (so called in difference of the more known
Franckford upon the Maene. The new Mark has these Cities, Berlin, the seat
of the Elector, and Brandeburg, of which the Elector of Brandeburg has that
style, and both the new and old are subject to the said Elector.

10 Brunswick gives the name to that Dukedom, and has the name of Bruno that
built it, and is a free City of the Empire, strongly fortified, and not any
way subject to the Duke of Brunswick, though upon some old title he has the
name thereof, and possesses the rest of the Dukedom, holding his Court at
Wolfenbriten, not far distant from Brunswick.

11 The Dukedom of Meckelburg, was of old inhabited by the Pharadini, as
Ptolomy writes. It has two Cities, both on the Seaside, Wismar, and Rostoch
(an University.)

12 Hassia is a mountanous Country, in which Ptolomy places for old
inhabitants the Longobardi, the Chatti, the Teucteri, and the Chriones. At this
day it is subject to the Family of the Landgraues of Hassia. It has these
Cities, Casseits (the chief seat of the elder brother of that Family)
Hersphild, and Marpurg (an University.) The tract upon the River Louia, is
divided into the County of Nassaw (whereof the chief Town is Dillenberg) and
the County of Catzmelbogen (so called of the Chatti inhabitants, and Melibots a
famous Mountain.) The Bishopric of Colen gives title to one of the Clergy
Electors, and was of old inhabited by the Vbij, of whom the chief City was
first called Vbiopolis, which Marcus Agrippae repaired, and called it Agripina
Augusta: but Marcomirus King of the Francks or French, conquering it, called it
Colonia. It is a small Country, and the Bishop Elector has most part of his
revenues from other places.

13 Iuliacum is a little Region, and has title of a Dukedom.

14 The Dukedom of Cleue was of old inhabited by the Vstpetes, and the City
Cleue is the seat of the Duke.

15 Westphalia is a large Region, inhabited by the Cherusci, Teucteri,
Bructeri, and the Vigenoues, and it has these Cities, Padeborn, Munster (which
the Anabaptists held in time of Luther), Breme (a free city of the Empire,
fairly built upon the River Visurgis), and Mindawe.

16 Easterly Freesland lies upon the River Aniesus, vulgarly Emms, and is a
County, subject to the Count of Emden, who has his name of the chief City
Emden: but of late upon some difference he was for a time driven out of that
City, so as it seems he has not absolute power over it.

17 Pomerania was of old inhabited by the Hermiones, and lies upon the Baltike
sea or Oest sea, and is subject to the Duke thereof. It has these Towns,
Stetin, coberg; (both on the Seaside), Sund, Stutgard, and Grippwalt (which
lies also on the sea, and is an old University, but has few or no Students.)

18 Bornssia or Prussia, is at this day subject to the King of Polonia, by
agreement made between the Polonians and the Knights of the Tentonick order,
but the inhabitants are Germans, both in speech and manners. The chief Cities
are these, Dantzk (a famous City, acknowledging the King of Poland for
tributes, yet so, as they will not receive him into the City, but with such a
train as they like.) Another City is Konigsperg (the seat of the Duke of
Prussen, who is of the Family of the Elector of Brandeburg, but has the
Dukedom in Fee from the Kings of Poland, to whom it falls in want of heirs
males.) The other Cities are, Marieburg, Elbing and Thorn (which lies upon the
confines of Poland, and witty Copernicus was borne there.)

19 Ltuonia is a part of Germany, but has neither the speech nor the manners
thereof. It was subdued some two hundred years past, and was brought from the
worshipping of Idols and Devils, to Christian Religion, yet in the Villages
they have not at this day fully left their old Idolatry. It is inhabited by
the old Saxons, and has these Cities, Refalia (on the seaside) Derbt (within
land), and the Metropolitan City Riga (on the seaside, which the Duke of
Moscony has often, but in vain, attempted to subdue)

Old Writers affirm (as Munster witnesses) that the Germans had perpetual
Winter, and knew not Harvest for want of fruits. This opinion no doubt
proceeded The situation of Germany.
rather from their neglect or ignorance of tyllage and husbandry, then from
the indisposition of the air or soil. Yet I confess that they have far
greater cold then England lying more Northerly, especially in lower Germany and
the Provinces lying upon the Baltic or Oest Sea, more especially in Prussen
(part of that shore, which the more it reaches toward the East, does also
more bend toward the North) where in September my self did feel our Winters
cold.

And since the Baltic sea is little subject to ebbing and flowing, and the
waters thereof are not much moved, except it be upon a storm, it is daily
seen, that in winter upon a North or North-West wind, this sea for a good
distance from the land is frosen with hard ice, to which the inland Rivers are
much more subject, which argues the extreme cold that this part of Germany
suffers. Also near the Alps, though Southerly, that part of Germany, having
the said Mountains interposed between it and the Sun, and feeling the cold
winds that blow from those Mountains perpetually covered with snow, does much
less partake the heat of the Sun, then others under the same parallel,
having not the said accidents. Upon these Alps (whereof I have formerly spoken
in this book) the snow lies very deep, and couers all the ground for nine
months of the year, yet notwithstanding the vallyes and discents of them
lying open to the South Sun, and taking life from the heat thereof, are very
fruitful. Lastly, in general through all Germany, the abundance of Lakes and
Mountains, does increase this cold of the air in diverse places, except they
be something defended from the same by Woods adjoining, and in some places (as
namely at Heidelberg) where the Cities are almost fully enclosed with
Mountains, the cold winds in Winter do more ragingly break in on that side
the Mountains lve open, the more they are restrained and resisted on the other
sides. As likewise by accident the Sun beams in Summer reflecting against
those Mountains (though in a cold Region) are so violently hot, as the Cities
at that time are much annoyed with multitudes of flies, which not only vex
men, but so trouble the horses, as they are forced to cover them with clothes
from this annoyance. The foresaid intemperatenesse of cold pressing great part
of Germany, in stead of fire they use hot stoues for remedy thereof, which are
certain chambers or rooms, having an earthen oven cast into them, which may
be heated with a little quantity of wood, so as it will make them hot who come
out of the cold, and incline them to swetting if they come near the oven. And
as well to keep out cold as to retain the heat, they keep the doors and
windows closely shut; so as they using not only to receive Gentlemen into
these stoues, but even to permit rammish clownes to stand by the oven till
their wet clothes be dried, and themselves sweat, yea, to endure their little
children to sit upon their close stools, and ease themselves within this close
and hot stoue (let the Reader pardon my rude speech, as I bore with the bad
smell), it must needs be, that these ill smelles, never purged by the
admitting of any fresh air, should dull the brain, and almost choke the
spirits of those who frequent the stoues. When my self first entered into one
of them, this unwonted heat did so wind about my legs, as if a Snake had
twined about them, and made my head dull and heavy: but after I had used them,
custom became another nature, for I never inioyed my health in any place
better then there. This intemperatenesse of cold, is the cause that a Laurel
tree is hardly to be found in Germany, and that in the lower parts toward
Lubeck, they keep Rosemary within the house in eartherne pitchers filled with
earth, as other where men preserve the choice fruits of the South, yet can they
not keep this Rosemary (when it prospers best) above three years from
withering. For this cause also, they have no Italian fruits in Germany, only
at Prage I did see some few Orange trees, preserved in pitchers full of earth,
by setting them fourth in the heat of the Summer days, and after drawing them
into houses, where they were cherished by artificial heat. And the like
fruits I did see at Heidelberg in the Pallatine Electors Garden, growing open
in Summer, but in winter a house being built over them, with an oven like a
stoue, and yet these trees yielded not any ripe fruit, when as at London and
many parts of England more Northerly then those parts of Germany, we have Musk
Mellons, and plenty of Abricots growing in Gardens, which for quantity and
goodness are not much inferior to the fruits in Italy. Also this cold is the
cause, that in Misen (where they plant vines) and in the highest parts of
Germany on this side the Alps (where they make wine thereof) the Grapes and
the wine are exceeding sower. Only the wines upon Neccar, and those upon the
West side of the Rheine, are in their kinds good, but harsh and of little heat
in the stomach.

The cherries called Zawerkersen, are reasonable great, but sower. And the
other kind called Wildkersen, is little and sweet, but has a black juice,
unpleasing to the taste. They have little store of pears or apples, and those
they have are little, and of small pleasantness, only the Muskadel pear is
very delicate, especially when it is dried. And the Germans make good use of
those fruits they have, not so much for pleasure when they are green, as for
furnishing the table in Winter. For their Pears, and Apples, they pare them,
and dry them under the Oven of the stoue, and then dress them very fauorly
with Cynamon and Butter. In like sort they long preserve their cheries dry,
without sugar, and the greater part of their cheries they boil in a brass
cauldron, full of holes in the bottom, out of which the iuce falls into
another vessel, which being kept, grows like marmalade, and makes a delicate
sauce for all roasted meats, and will last very long, as they use it. The
Italians have a Proverb, Dio da i panni secondo i freddi; that is, God gives
clothes according to the colds, as to the cold Muscouites he has given
futtes, to the English wool for cloth, to the French diverse light stuffes, and
to Southerlie people stoore of silks, that all Nations abounding in some
things, and wanting others, might be taught, that they have need of one
another help, and so be stirred up to mutual love, which God has thus
planted between mankind by mutual traffic. For this must be understood not
only of clother, but also of all other things necessary for human life.

Germany does abound with many things necessary for life, and many commodities
The fertility of Germany
to be transported. For great Cities, and Cities within land (of which Germany
has store) those argue plenty of commodities to be transported, and these
plenty of food to nourish much people. And since that paradox of Cicero is
most true, that small causes of expense rather, then great revenues, make men
rich, surely by this reason the Germans should be most rich. They never play
at Dice, seldom at Cards, and that for small wagers. They seldom feast, and
sparingly, needing no sumptuary Law es to restrain the number or costlinesse
of dishes or sawces. They are apparrelled with homely stuffes, and wear their
clothes to the uttermost of their lasting, their household stuff is poor, in
gifts they are most sparing, and only are prodigal in expenses for drinking,
with which a man may sooner burst, then spend his patrimony. They have Corn
sufficient for their use, and the Merchants in the Cities upon the sea coast,
export Corn into Spain, as well of their own, as especially of that they buy
at Dantzke. They want not Cattle of all kinds, but they are commonly lean and
little, so are their horses many in number, and little in stature, only in
Bohemia they have goodly horses, or at least great and heavy, like those in
Freeseland: but I remember not to have seen much cattle, or great herds
thereof, in the fields of any Town, the reason whereof may be gathered out of
the following discourse of the Germans diet. Their sheep are very little,
bearing a course wool, and commonly black, which they export not, but make
course cloth thereof for the poorer sort, the Gentlemen and for the most part
the Citizens wearing English cloth. The liberty of hunting commonly reserved
to Princes, and absolute Lords, and they have great store of red Dear, feeding
in open Woods, which the Princes kill by hundreds at a time, and send them to
their Castlas to be salted, using them in stead of beef for the feeding of
their families. They have no fallow Dear, except some wild kinds upon the
Alps. They have great store of fresh fish in Lakes, Ponds, and Rivers, among
which the Lakes of Sweitzerland are most commended. At Hamburg they catch such
plenty of Sallmons, as it is a common report, that the servants made covenant
with their Masters, not to be fed therewith more then two meals in the week,
and from thence great plenty of Sturgeon is exported. Either the cold drives
away birds, or else they labor not to take them; for I did seldom see them
ferued at the table, but only Sparrowes, and some few little birds.

In all their Rivers I did never see any Swannes, yet they say, that at Lubeck,
and about private Castles of Gentlemen, they have some few. They say that they
have some mines of Gold: but surely they abound with mines of Silver above all
Europe, and all metals where so ever found, are by a Law of the Golden Bull
appropriated to the Emperor, and to the Electors, in their several dominions.
Also they abound with copper and brass, where with they cover many Churches,
but within forty years past, the English have brought them Lead, which they
use to that and other purposes. Also they have great plenty of Iron, and they
have Fountains yielding most white Salt, in Cities far within the land,
which Cities are commonly called Halla. Austria beyond the Danow yields
excellent Saffron, and at Iudiburg in Styria grows store of Spica Celtica (as
the Latin Herbalists call it.) In the season of the year yellow Amber is
plentifully gathered upon the Sea coast of Prusfia and Pomerania. The Germans
export into foreign parts, and there sell many curious and well prised works
of manual Art. And it is worth the consideration, that the Citizens of
Nurnberg, dwelling in a sandy and baeren soil, by their industry, and more
specially by their skill in these manual Arts, live plentifully, and attain
great riches, while on the contrary, the inhabitants of Alsatia the most
fruitful Province of all Germany, neglecting these Arts, and content to enjoy
the fatness of their soil in slothful rest, are the poorest of all other
Germans. Moreover, the upper part of Germany abounds with Woods of Fur, which
tree (as the Laurel) is green all Winter, and it has many Oaks also upon the
Alps, and not else where, and lower Germany, especially toward the Baltic
Sea, abounds with Woods of Oak. They convey great store of wood from the
Alps into the lower parts, by the River Rheine, cutting down whole trees, and
when they are marked, casting them one by one into the River, to be carried
down with the violent stream thereof, or otherwise binding many together, to
floate down, with men standing upon them to guide them. And at many Cities and
Villages, they have servants, which know the trees by the marks, and gather
them up in places, where they may best be sold.

The Cities that are one the Seacoast on the North side of Germany, have very
great Of the trafick of Germany.
ships, but more fit for taking in great burden, then for sailing or fighting,
which the Netherlanders more commonly fraught with their commodities, then the
Germans themselves, neither are the German Mariners much to be commended. The
German Sea in good part, and the Baltic Sea altogether, are free from Pirates,
which is the cause that their ships are little or not at all armed, only some
few that trade into Spain, carry great Ordinance, but are generally made large
in the ribs, rather fit for burden, then fight at Sea. I never observed them
to have any common prayers morning or evening, as our English ships have while
they be at Sea, but the Mariners of their own accord use continually to sing
Psalms, and they are punished by the purse who swear, or so much as once name
the devil, from which they abhor.

And herein they deserve to be praised above the Holanders, in whose ships a
man shall hear no mention of God or his worship. The said free Cities of
Germany lying on the Seacoast, are called Hansen-stetten, that is, free
Cities, because they had of old in all neighbor Kingdoms great privileges, of
buying any wares as well of strangers as Citizens, and of selling or exchanging
their own wares to either sort at pleasure, and to bring in or carry out all
commodities by their own ships, with like immunities equal to Citizens in
all the said Dominions, and no less prejudicial to them, then aduantageous to
themselves.

In England they were wont to dwell together at London, in the house called the
Stilyard, and there to enjoy these liberties, which long since have lain dead,
the Germans seldom bringing ought in their ships into England, and the English
having now long time found it more commodious to use their own shipping, and
justly complaining, that the English had not the like privileges in the said
free Cities; for which cause the privileges of the Germans were laid dead in
England, though not fully taken away. Caesar witnesses, that the Schwaben
inhabiting Suenia, then containing great part of Germany, admitted Merchants
not to buy any thing themselves, but only to sell the spoils they got in
war. But Munster a German writes, that these Sueuians or schwaben are now the
only forestallers of all things sold in faires or Markets, and that for this
cause they are excluded from buying any thing through Germany, except it be
sold in their own Towns of traffic.

In general, the Germans do apply themselves industriously to all traffic
by land, which only the free Cities on the Seacoast exercise somewhat coldly
by sea. At home the Germans among themselves spend and export an unspeakable
quantity of Beer with great gain, which yields great profit to private
Citizens, and to the Princes, or public Senate in free Cities, there being no
Merchandise of the World that more easily finds a buyer in Germany, then this.
For the Germans traffic with strangers, I will omit small commodities (which
are often sold, though in less quantity, yet with more gain then greater)
and in this place I will only speak of the commodities of greater moment,
as well those that the Country affords, as those that buy in foreign parts to
be transported in their own ships. The Germans export into Italy, linen
clothes, corn, wax (fetched from Dantzk and those parts) and coined filuer of
their own, which they also exchange vncoined with some quantity of gold. Into
England they export boards, iron, course linen clothes (and of that kind one
sort called Dyaper, wrought in Misen), and bombast or cotton. Into Spain they
export linen cloth, wax, brass, copper, cordage, Masts for ships,
gunpowder, bombast or cotton, and Nurnberg wares (so they call small wares.)
Again, they receive all kinds of silks from Italy, whereof they use little
quantity for their own apparel, but send great store over land, to those
Cities on the Seacoast, where the English Merchants reside, to be sold unto
them.

For the English Merchants had their Staple first at Emden, the Count whereof
used them well, yet in the war between England and Spain, this place grew
dangerous for them, for the enemy often took their goods, and made them
prisoners, at the very mouth of the Harbor. Whereupon they removed to Hamburg,
where being oppressed with new impositions, and being denied the public
exercise of their Religion, they went from thence, and settled their Staple at
Stoade. In like sort the English Merchants trading for Poland and those parts,
first had their Staple at Dantzk in Prussen (by Staple I mean their residence
in a City, giving them privilege to stop any foreign wares, intended to be
carried further, and to force the Merchant to sell them there, except he had
rather return with them to the place from whence he came.) But when the
Dantzkers under pretense of the Sueuian war, exacted of them a doller for
each woollen cloth, and as much for a last of any other goods, and after when
the war was ended, would remit nothing of this imposition. And further when
they forbad the English by a Law to dwell in Poland, the commodities whereof
were only sold there, left they should learn the language, and find the
mysteries of the trade. And lastly when they exacted as much weekly of an
Englishman dwelling in the City, as they did of a Jew dwelling there. The
English made agreement with the Senate of Meluin for eleven years, to pay them
six grosh for each cloth, or other last of goods, and to pay as much more in
the City Kettle, to the Duke of Prussen, for his giving them free passage to
Meluin, and so they settled their Staple there. Whereupon the Dantzkers being
offended with the Citizens of Meluin, and the Hamburgers no less with those of
Stoade, procured the free Cities by a public writing to outlaw, not only
Meluin and Stoade for receiving the English, to the common prejudice of the
rest, but also Koingsperg (the seat of the Duke of Prussen), and the free
City Lubeck, for favoring the English in this course, and permitting them
being strangers to sell their goods to any other, then the Citizens of each
several City.

But I will return to the traffic of Germany. I formerly said, that the
Germans received all kinds of silk stuffes from Italy. From the English they
receive woollen clothes, lead, and such like things. From Spain they bring in
their own ships wine, fruits, oil, salt, wool, and more commonly coined
silver. And because the trade of Prussen (a German Province, but lately annexed
to Poland) is of great importance with all strangers, I will add this, that
the English bring thither great quantity of tynne, and woollen clothes, with
copper, and like things. And that they bring from thence Pitch, liquid Pitch,
Hemp, Flax, Cables, Masts for ships, boards and timber for building, Linen
cloates, Wax, mineral Salt (which in Poland they dig out of pirs like great
stones, and the same being put to the fire is made pure, and being black, his
color is more durable, and less subject to giving again, then our boiled
salt.) Also they bring from thence pine ashes for making of Soape, and great
quantity of Corn. Yet the English seldom have need of their Corn for the
use of England, which many times of their own they transport to other Nations,
but they buy it as the free Cities do, to transport it to others, and the
Low Country men buy it as well for themselves, as to serve Spain therewith,
so as great quantity thereof is distracted into all parts of Europe. The Amber
that is brought from these parts, is not gathered at Meluin or Dantzke, but on
the sea side of Konigsperg (where the Duke of Prussen holds his Court), and all
along the Coast of Curland, where howsoever it lies in great quantity scattered
on the sand of the Sea, yet is it as safe, as if it were in warehouses, since
it is death to take away the least piece thereof. When it is first gathered, it
is all covered over with dross, but after it is polished, becomes
transparantly bright. At Dantzke I did see two polished pieces thereof, which
were esteemed at a great price, one including a frogge with each part clearly
to be seen, (for which the King of Poland then beiyg there, offered five
hundred dollers), the other including a newt, but not so transparant as the
former. Some think this Amber to be a gum distilling from trees, and by
these pieces falling upon frogs and like things, this opinion should seem
true, but those trees from which they hold this Amber to distill, abound in
Germany, yet Amber is only found upon this Coast of the Balticke Sea Others
think rather that Amber is generated by the Sea, and it is most certain that
Mariners sounding far from the Land, often find sand of Amber sticking to
their plummets, whereof my self was an eye witness. And Munster holds them to
be deceived, who think Amber to be a gum distilling from trees, and because
it is fat, and burns being put to the fire, concludes it to be a fat clay, or
bituminous matter, affirming that it is not only found upon the Sea Coast, but
often caught at Sea in nets, and he adds that being liquid, it often falls upon,
and includes little beasts, which grow with it to the hardness of stone, and
that it smells of mirh.

The diet of the Germans is simple, and very modest, if you set aside their
intemperate drinking: For as they are nothing sumptuous, but rather sparing in
their apparel The Germans diet.
and household stuff, so they are content with a morsel of flesh and bread, so
they have store of drink, and want not wood to keep their stoaues warm. And
in general, since they affect not foreign commodities, but are content with
their own commodities, and are singular as well in the Art as industry of
making manual works, they easily draw to them and retain with them foreign
Coins. The free Cities use to have always a years provision of victuals laid
up in public houses, to serve for homely food for the people, in case the City
should happen to be besieged. They commonly serve to the Table sower Cabbages,
which they call Crawt, and beer (or wine for a dainty) boiled with bread,
which they call Swoope. In upper Germany they moreover give veale or beef in
little quantities, but in lower Germany they supply the meal with bacon and
great dried puddings, which puddings are sauory and so pleasant, as in their
kind of mirth they wish prouerbially for Kurtz predigen, lange worsten, that
is; Short sermons and long puddings. Sometimes they also give dried fishes, and
apples or pears first dried, then prepared with cinnamon and butter very
sauourily. They use many sawces, and commonly sharp, and such as comfort the
stomach offended with excessive drinking: For which cause in upper Germany the
first draught commonly is of wormwood wine, and the first dish of little
lampreys, (which they call mine augen, as having nine eyes) served with white
vinegar; and those that take any journey, commonly in the morning drink a
little Brant wein, (that is, their Aquauita) and eat a piece of Pfeffer
kuchen, (that is, Ginger-bread) which uses to be sold at the gates of the
City. They have a most delicate sauce (in my opinion) for roasted meats, of
cherries sod and bruised, the juice whereof becomes hard like Marmalade, but
when it is to be served to the Table, they dissolve it with a little wine or
like moisture. And as they have abundance of fresh fish in their Ponds and
Rivers, so they desire not to eat them, except they see them alive in the
Kitchen, and they prepare the same very sauourly, commonly using anniseeds to
that purpose, especially the little fishes, whereof they have one most delicate
kind, called Smerling, which in Prussen I did eat, first choked, then sodden
in wine, and they being very little, yet sixty of them were sold for nineteen
grosh. The foresaid sauce of cherries, they thus prepare and keep, They gather
a dark or blackish kind of cherry, and casting away the stalks, put them into
a great cauldron of brass set upon the fire, til they begin to be hot, then
they put them into a less cauldren full of holes in the bottom, and press
them with their hands, so as the stones and skins remain in this cauldron,
but the juice by the foresaid holes does fall into another vessel. Then again
they set this juice upon the fire, continually stirring it, lest it should
cleave to the bottom, and after two hours space, they mingle with it the best
kind of pears they have, first cut into very small pieces, and so long they
boil it and continually stir it, till it wax hard, and notwithstanding the
stirring begin to cleave to the vessel. This juice thus made like a
Marmalade, may long be preserved from moulding in this sort. They which desire
to have it sweet, mix sugar with it, and others other things according to the
taste they desire it should have. Then they put it into earthen pitchers; and
if it begin at any time to wax mouldie, they put these pots into the Oven,
after the bread is baked and taken out. Also these pitchers must be close
stopped, that no air may enter, and must be set where no sun or continual
heat comes. Lastly, when they will make ready this sauce, they cut out a piece
of the said juice, and mingle with it a little wine to dissolve it, (with
vinegar, or sugar, or spices, according to their several appetites), and so
boil it again some half hour.

In Saxony, Misen, and those parts, they sometimes serve to the Table a calves
head whole and undivided into parts, which to us strangers at the first sight
seemed a terrible dish gaping with the teeth like the head of a Monster, but
they so prepare it, as I never remember to have eaten any thing that more
pleased my taste. They use not for common diet any thing that comes from the
Cow, neither have I observed them to have any butter in Saxony, or the lower
parts of Germany, but they use a certain white matter called smalts in stead
of it, not tasting like our butter. They do not commonly eat any cheese,
neither remember I that I ever tasted good cheese there, excepting one kind of
little cheese made of Goats milk, which is pleasant to eat: but salt and
strong cheeses they sometimes use to provoke drinking, for which purpose the
least crum is sufficient. These Cheeses they compass round with thread or
twigges, and they begin them in the midst of the broad side, making a round
hole there, into which hole, when the cheese is to be set up, they put some few
drops of wine, that it may putrify against the next time, when they eat the
moldy pieces and very creeping maggots for dainety morsels, and at last the
cheese becomes so rotten and so full of these worms, that if the said binding
that compasses it chance to break, the cheese falls into a million of crumbs no
bigger then moates. They have a kind of bread brownish and sowrish, and made
with anniseeds, which seemed very sauoury to me. They serve in stead of a
banquet, a kind of light bread like our fritters, save that it is long, round,
and a little more solid, which they call Fastnacht kuchen, Shroftide baking,
because then and upon S. Martini day, and some like Feasts they use to make it.
They use not in any place almost, to offend in the great number of dishes,
only some few Innes of chief Cities give plentiful meals. And for the
Saxons, they for the most part set on the pot or roast meat once for the whole
week: Yet in the golden bull they have a law, that Hosts shall not serve in
more then four dishes, the price of them to be set by the Magistrate, and that
they should not gain in the reckoning more then the fourth or at most the
third penny, and that the guests should pay severally for their drink, the
Germans drinking so largely as it was impossible to prescribe the rate thereof.
It were to be wished by strangers, that not only drink shouid be paid for a
part from meat, but that each man should pay the share himself drinks, and
no more, so the charges of sober passengers in Germany, having all things
reasonably cheap, would not in such measure increase, as otherwise they do
through their companions intemperancy. The said Saxons set the dishes on the
Table one by one, for the most part gross meats, whereupon I have heard some
merrily compare them to the Tyrants of Sirily, of whom one being dead, still a
more terrible Monster succeeded him. Here and in these parts of the lower
Germany, they use to serve in sower crawt or cabbage upon a void circle of
carved Iron standing on three feet, under which they serve in one large dish,
roast flesh and pullets, and puddings, and whatsoever they have prepared, which
dish a Country man of mine did not improperly compare to the Arc of Noah,
containing all kinds of Creatures. Also in Saxony, for the first dish they
serve in stewed Cherries or Prunes, then tosted or sodden Pullets, or other
flesh, and last of all Bar con to fill his belly that has not enough. Almost
all their Tables are round, and of so great a compass, as each dish being
served one by one, (not as we use to have the Table fully furnished with
meat), they that sit at the corners of the Table, are forced to stand on their
feet as often as they cut any meat. The Germans seldom break their fasts,
except it be in iournics, with a little Ginger-bread and Aquauity. They sit
long at Table, and even in the Innes as they takes iournics, dine very largely,
neither will they rise from dinner or supper, till though slowly, yet fully
they have consumed all that is set before them. And they cannot speak more
reprochsully of any Host, then to say; Ith hab mich da nicht satt gefressen,
that is, I did not eat my belly fu'l there: Yea, at Berne, a City of
Sweitzerland, they have a Law that in Feasts they shall not sit more then five
hours at the Table. And at Basell, when Doctors and Masters take their
degrees, they are forbidden by a Statute, to sit longer at Table, then from ten
of the clock in the morning, to six in the evening, yet when that time is
past, they have a trick to cozen this Law, be it never so in dulgent to them,
for then they retire out of the public Hall into private Chambers, where they
are content with any kind of meat, so it be such as provoke drinking, in
which they have no measure, so long as they can stand or fit. Let the Germans
pardon me to speak freely, that in my opinion they are no less excessive in
eating, then drinking, save that they only protract the two ordinary meals of
each day, till they have consumed all that is set before them, but to their
drinking they can prescribe no mean nor end. I speak of their ordinary diet,
especially at Innes by the way as they travel: In Feasts their provision is
rather full then sumptuous. At Leipzig for mere curiosity, I procured my
self to be invited to a marriage Feast, in one of the chief Citizens houses,
the marriage was in the afternoon, and at supper they served in a piece of
roasted beef hot, and another cold, with a sauce make with sugar and sweet
wine, then they served in a Carpe fried, then Mutton roasted, then dried Pears
prepared with butter and cinnamon, and therewith a piece of broiled Salmon, then
bloted Herrings broiled, and lastly a kind of bread like our fritters, save
that it is made in long roules, and more dric, which they call Fastnacht kuchen,
that is, Shroftide baking, together with Cheese. And thus with seven dishes a
Senators nuptial Feast was ended, without any flocks of foul, or change of
fishes, or banqueting stuff, which other Nations use, only their was
endless drinking, whole barrels of Wine being brought into the Stoaue, and set
by us upon a Table, which we so plied, as after two hours, no man in the
company was in case to give account next morning, what he did, said, or saw,
after that time. To nourish this drinking, they use to eat salt meats, which
being (upon ill disposition of my body) once displeasing and unwholesome for me,
and I complaining thereof to my Host, he between jest and earnest replied, that
the use of Salt was commended in Scriptures, alleging that text: Let allyour
speeches be seasoned with salt, and then said he much more should our meats be
thus seasoned. Salt thus pleases their pallat, because it makes the same dry,
and prouokes the appetite of drinking. For which cause also, when they meet to
drink, as they dine with dried pork, and beef heavily salted, together with
cheese sharp like that of Parma, so when the cloth is taken away, they have
set before them raw beans, waternuts, (wstich I did see only in Saxony), and
a loaf of bread cut into shiues, all sprinkled with salt and pepper, the
least bit whereof will inuit him to drink that has least need. And to say
truth, Porke dried, or Bacon, is so esteemed of the Germans, as they seem to
have much greater care of their Hogs then of their Sheeps, or other Cattle.
For in the morning when they turn them forth, they scratch them with their
fingers, as Barbers do men's heads, and bless them that they may safely
return, and in the evening when they are to come back with the Heard, a
servant is commanded to attend them, who washes the dust from them as they
pass by the fountain, and so follows them till they come home of their own
accord, without any beating or driving. The price of a fat Sow is at least
five, sometimes fourteen Guldens, yea, at Heidelberg, it was credibly told
me, that a Sow, being so fat, as she could not at one feeding eat a raw egg,
all her intrels being closed up with fat, had lately been sold for fifty
Guldens. With this fat they larde many roasted and broiled meats, as well flesh
as fish: And they never eat any Pigges, but nourish them to full growth, so as
my self and some of my Contrymen at Wittenberg, desiring to eat a Pigge,
hardly bought one for half a doller, and were our selves forced to kill,
dress, and roast it, the servants abhorring from such a strange work, neither
could we entreat any one to eat the least bit thereof. When they roast a
shoulder of Mutton, they beat the upper part thereof with the backe-side of an
Hatchet, or like Instrument, before they put it on the Spit, to make that part
tender, which they carue as the most dainty part: yet use they seldom to carue
any man, lest they should seem to desire that morsel themselves, for they
hold it a point of ciuility not to take that is carved, but to force it upon
the Caruer. They dip their bread in sawces, but think it ill manners to dip
meat therein, as likewise to reach bread with the point of a knife, and not
rather to call for it by hand. Lastly, when the Table is to be taken away, they
think to offer him courtesy whose trencher they offer to take up, and put into
the Voyder, and will in courtesy strive to do it. He that will abide in any
City, may easily obtain to be entertained for bed and board at a
conuenientrate, by some chief Citizen or Doctor, as I have formerly said.

Now something must be said of Innes by the high way. Erasmus Roterodamus
faith, that the Inn keepers of Germany are sordide, that is, base or slouenly:
but I would rather sav, they are churlish and rudely proud, or rather grave and
surley. When you come in, you must salute the Host, and happy you if he salute
you again. You must drink with him, and observe him in all things. For your
carriage, you must lay it in the common eating room, yet there it shall be
most safe; and if you will put off your boots, you must do it in the same
room, and there lay them aside. You must expect the hour of eating, for they
nothing regard him that desires either to hasten or protract it. You must take
in good part what is set before you, demanding nothing for your own appetite.
The shot demanded, must be paid without expostulation, for the Hosts seldom
deceive strangers or others, and never remit one half penny of that they
demand. Above the table hangs a bell (especially through all lower Germany), by
founding whereof they call the servants to attend. And at Nurnberg there hangs
such a little bell under the table, which they found if any man speak
immodestly of love matters or any like subject, and though it be done in
sport, yet it serves to remember a wise man of his error. In lower Germany
after supper, they lead the guests into a chamber of many beds, and if any man
have no companion, they give him a bedfellow Lastly, all things must be
desired and entreated, as if the guests were entertained of free cost, for the
Host thinks you beholden to him for your intertainement, without any
obligation on his part.

Through all Germany they lodge between two fetherbeds (excepting
Sweitzerland, where they use one bed under them, and are covered with woollen
blankets) and these fetherbeds for softness and lightness are very
commodious, for every winter night the servants are called into the warm
stoue, whereof such feathers as are reserved, they pull the feathers from the
quill, using only the softest of them for making of beds. The bed lying under
is great and large, and that above is narrow and more soft, between which they
sleep as well in Summer as Winter. This kind of lodging were not incommodious
in Winter, if a man did lie alone but since by the high way they force men to
have bedfellowes, one side lies open to the cold, by reason that the upper bed
is narrow, so as it cannot fall round about two, but leaves one side of them
both open to the wind and weather. But in Summer time this kind of lodging is
unpleasant, keeping a man in a continual sweat from head to foot. Yet in
Country Villages, and many parts of Saxony, passengers have no cause to
complain of this annoyance, since all without exception, rich and poor,
drunken and sober, take up their lodging among the Cowes in straw, where
sometimes it happens, that he who lying down had a pillow of straw under his
head, when he awaketh finds the same either scattered or eaten by the Cowes:
yea; where they have beds, I would advise the passenger to wear his own
linen breeches, for their sheets are seldom or never clean. They advise well,
who wish passengers to offer the servant drinking money, that he may show them
the best bed, yet when that is done, this best bed will prove far unfit to be
entered naked, though perhaps the servant will judge it very pure and cleanly.
This by experience I often found, once with extreme laughter observing the
servants special courtesy to me, who taking my reward, brought me to a bed
with clean sheets as he called them, wherein he swore deeply that no body had
lien but his own mother, which was an old trot of 90 years age. These
servants in Innes expect as it were of duty drinking money from all passengers,
and boldly demand it, as if it were their right whether the passenger will or
no, which they do rudely in the lower parts of Germany, by offering them a pot
to drink at parting, and more ciuilly in the upper parts, the maid servants
offering a nosegay to each several guest. This is peculiar to the Germans,
none serve or attend more rudely, none more boldly challenge reward.

I have formerly advised English Travelers, first to pass by Germany, that
they may there learn patience by serving themselves. For if you come to a shop
to buy shoes, the Master bids you to find out your self those that will fit
you, and then to put them on your self, which done, he asks the price,
whereof he will not bate one half penny, and when you have paid his asking,
then the Prentices challenge drinking money as of duty, and the like manner is
observed in all other shops, wherein you buy any thing. In the mean time, if
in your Inn, you bid the servant reach any thing to you, the same man that
when you take horse will in this sort exact drinking money of you, will not
reach that you call for, but mumbling that you have as many feet and hands as
he, will go away, as if he heard not, or regarded not what you said. The
Germans of Prussia near Poland, are much to be praised for Hospitality, who
not only entertain strangers at a good rate, and which much cleanliness, and
good fare and lodging, (wherein they give clean sheets, and if the passenger
stay long, change them often, as once each week, which in so cold a clime may
seem less requisite), but also have in custom, (I speak of the Cities of
Meluin and Dantzke), to give their guests weekly a bath to wash their feet,
and as often besides as they return from any journey, which courtesy I never
remember to have been offered unto me, but once in Germany at Lubecke. The
Innes of Germany hang out no signs at their gates, but they are vulgarly
known, and so may be easily found out, besides that many of them may be
known by thn Arms of Noblemen and Gentlemen: For they hold it a point of
reputation, to pass other Innes in the number of these Arms, fixed on the
front of their Inn, and upon the walls of the common eating room, so as I have
numbered three hundred or four hundred such Arms in one Inn. Howsoever
Germany abounds with all necessaries for life, yet the expense by the way is
greater, by reason of the Dutchmens large drinking. In lower Germany, where
they drink beer, a passenger shall pay each meal commonly three or four
grosh, or about 4 lubeck shillings. In upper Germany, where they drink wine,
he shall pay commonly six or seven batzen each meal, and if he have a
servant, he shall pay as much for him as for himself. I passed from Stoade to
Emden, in the disguised habit of a servant, where I first by experience found,
that he who vilifies himself, does not thereby save one penny, since poor
fellows sit at the same Table with Gentlemen, and pay to the uttermost
farthing as much as they, howsoever they sit lower, and as well at board as for
bed, are more coursely handled. Yet I say not but such a man may save the poor
expense of drinking money, which the servants perhaps will not expect from men
of base condition. All Dutch consorts drink stiffely, and as soon as ever the
cloth is taken away after supper, except you presently rise before they set the
pot of Schlaffdruncke, (or sleeping cup) on the Table, and if you do but slip
one drop, you shall besides your ordinary pay, equal share with those that
drink all night, till they be drunk and sober again.

And to say truth, the Germans are in high excess subject to this vice of
drinking, scarce noted with any other national vice, so that as their Doctors
and Artisans, affecting the knowledge only of one science, or manual art, do
become excellent therein, so this nation in general, and every part or member
thereof, practicing night and day the faculty of drinking, become strong and
invincible professors therein. In Saxony, when the gates of the Cities are to
be shut, while they that dwell in the subburbs, passing out, do reele from one
side of the street to the other, as if it were too narrow for them to walk
in, while they stumble and fall in the dirt, while they by stradling with their
legs as if a Cart should pass between them, do for the most part bear up
them selves from falling, yet iostle every post, pillar, and passenger by the
way, while the gates of the City seem not wide enough for them to pass,
except the walls also were pulled down.

Spectatum admissi risum teneatis amici?

Friends sdmitted to behold, from laughter can you then withhold.

For howsoever the richer sort hide this intemperance for the most part, by
keeping at home, surely the vulgar yield this daily spectacle. Yet in truth it
is no shame, especially in Saxony, even to spew at the Table in their next
fellows bosom, or to piss under the Table, and afterward in their beds. And
I know not how the fellowship of drunkards is so pleasing to them, as a man
shall with no other quality make so many friends as with this, so as he that
will be welcome in their company, or desires to learn their language, must
needs practice this excess in some measure. When they drink, if any man
chance to come in and sit in the room, though he be a stranger of another
Nation, they do not only conjure him to pledge them by the bond of
friendship, of his Fathers Nobility, and his Mothers chaflity, but (if need be)
compel him by force thereunto, vulgarly crying, Kanstunight sauffen vnd
fiessen, so kanstu keinem hein wol dienen; If thou can not swill and devour,
thou canft serve no Master well. In the mean time, they like not to drink
grear draughts, wherein our Country men put them down, but they will spend an
Age in swoping and sipping. Their Coachmen are in this kind so tender hearted
to their Horses, that out of a fellow feeling of thirst, they will suffer them
to drink in standing water, scarce covering their shoes, when they sweat by
the high way. The Germans repute it such honor to them to have abundance of
wine, as the very Princes strive, as for a Princely pre-eminence, who shall
have the hugest and most capable vessels in his Cellar. Some of these vessels
contain more then a thousand measures, each of seventy Cans or Pots, and are
ascended by twenty or thirty stairs. Out of this vessel they daily draw wine,
and being half emptied, they fill it up again: but at the birth of a child,
or any like feast, they turn this Monster loose for all comers, to tame it,
and drink it out to the bottom. Passengers in the Innes of lower Germany, so
make their reckoning at dinner, as they reserve a grtat proportion to drink
before they take Coach. Once I observed that my self and seven consorts after
dinner upon a full gorge, had sixteen great pots to drink at parting, at
which time one of our consorts being a Horseman, and not fit to ride, was taken
into our Coach, and sitting by me, now laughing, then weeping, and often
knocking his head against mine, at last defiled me by casting his stomach in
my bosom, with no reproach to himself among his Countrymen, but unspeakable
offense to me. When they are sit down to drink, if any man come in by chance,
each one at the Table salutes him with a Cup, all which garausses he must
drink as for a fine, before he can be admitted into their number, for they are
very jealous that any man being sober, should behold their quaffing, so as a
man had better fall among the thickest of his enemies fighting, then into the
company of his friends drinking. He that reads this, would think that they
drunk sweet Nectar at the least, or some like drink inuiting excess; but in
lower Germany, sometimes and rarely they drink Rhenish Wine, commonly Beer,
and that so thick and ill smelling, and sometimes medicinal, as a stranger
would think it more fit to be eaten (or cast into the sink), then to be
drunk, whereof a drop once falling on my hand, seemed to me foul puddle water.
Their Wines in general are sharp, and those of the Rheine small, which are to
be had in their Cities, and when I first passed to Leipzeg, and being ignorant
of the language, was forced to commit my self to a Conducter, and after my
covenant with him for my diet, desired him to carry some glass bottels of wine
in our Coach, yet he could not in the way use it temperately, but either would
allow us no wine at all, or at one meal drunk off a whole great bottell, as
if he thought it a shame to taste it, and not drink all out at once. Thus as
often it falls out in Princes Courts, that a stranger may die of thirst, but he
that is acquainted in Court, shall hardly escape sober, so he gave me either no
wine, or too much. In upper Germany for the most part they drink wine, and
that with some less excess, then is used in the lower parts, yet so as in
this vice they degenerate not from their Countrymen. The Germans of Prussia
formerly praised by me, must pardon me if I task them with this vice as much
as the rest. When I passed from Meluin to Dantzke, my companion by the way
showed me a Towr called Groske, where certain Husbandmen being upon a wager to
drink twelve measures of wine, which we call lasts, and use for proportions of
Merchants wares, not for wine or beer, did roast upon a spit one of their
consorts, because he left them before the task was performed, and to save
their lives for this murder, paid their Prince as many silver grosh as could
lie between that Tower and the City of Dantzke. In general, the Germans want
not many exemplary punishments and effects of this vice: For many quarrelling
in drink are killed and he that kills, never escapes if he be taken. I remember
that a Gentleman of Brunswicke, riding from Hamburge to his home, when he was
extremely drunken, was next day found torn in many pieces, by the striking of
his Horse when he fell out of the saddle, which was a miserable and exemplary
kind of death. And the like mischief befell another while I was at Torge in
Misen. And a Physician a familiar friend of mine, told me that many Germans
dying suddenly upon excess of drinking, were ordinarily (for hiding of the
shame) given out to die of the falling sickness. In their drinking they use
no mirth, and little discourse, but sadly ply the buisinesse, sometimes crying
one to the other, Seyte frolich, Be merry, Drink aus, Drink out, and as
(according to the Proverb) every Psalm ends in Gloria, so every speech of
theirs, ends in Ich brings euch, I drink to you. For frolicks they pinch, and
that very rudely their next Neighbors arm or thigh, which goes round about
the Table. So for equality they drink round, especially in Saxony, except in
courtesy they sometimes drink out of course to a Guest; and this equal manner
of drinking, they say had his first original from a pleasant or rather wicked
Act, of an undutiful Son, who receiving a box of the care from his Father,
and daring not strike him again, did notwithstanding strike his next Neighbor
as hard a blow as he received, desiring him to pass it round about the Table
as a frolic, in these words: Lasset vmb gehen, so kriagt der vatter auch
(...), Let it go round, so my Father shall have it in his course, and so more
modestly or less wickedly he revenged himself. While all drink in this
manner circularly out of one and the same pot, they scoff at him that drinks
the last remainder, saying prouerbially that he shall marry an old trot. At
Nurneberg, and some other Innes of higher Germany, each guest has his peculiar
drinking glass set by his trencher, which when he has drunk out, if he set
it down with the mouth upward, it is presently filled again, (in which
filling the servants use a singular dexterity, standing in great distance from
it), but if he turn the mouth downward, they expect till in sign of thirst
it be turned upward; for they are such Masters in this Art of drinking as they
are served by dumb signs without speaking a word. In Saxony two use to begin
a pot to two, and when each receives the pot, or gives it to his fellow, they
curiously look upon certain pegs or marks set within of purpose, that they
may divide the drink by the equal balance of Justice. Sometimes they take
three glasses at once upon 3 fingers, and beginning to another, drink them all
of at once, which kind of karaussing they call the crowning of the Emperor. If
you begin to any man, you must fill the cup for him with your own hands, or at
least deliver it to him your self, or otherwise for a panelty you must drink
it again, and some do willingly make these errors, that they may seem to be
compelled to this pleasing penalty. When they are extraordinarily merry, they
use a kind of garaussing, called kurlemurlebuff, wherein they use certain
touches of the glass, the beard, some parts of the body, and of the Table,
together with certain whistlings, and phillippings of the fingers, with like
rules, so curiously disposed in order, as it is a labor of Hercules to observe
them. Yet he that erres in the least point of ceremony, must drink the cup of
again for penalty. They hold it a point of reputation, if themselves having
sense and memory, can send their guests home void of sense or reason, or full
(as they more gently call drunkenesse); and the better to perform this, they
will now and then go out of the warm stoue to ease their stomachs by casting,
which use makes easy and familiar to them. They seldom or never drink with
their hats on, for sitting in a warm stoue bare headed, they find their heads
more speedily eased of the vapors that arise from drinking. Many of the
Germans going to sleep, do by the advice of the Physician, put little stones
into their mouths, to keep them open: for as a boiling pot better secthes the
meat if it be covered, so the fire be moderate: but if it be extraordinarily
great and hot, the potlid must be taken off, lest it boil over; so it is good
to help a man's concoetion, if he sleep with his mouth shut, so his diet be
sparing or moderate: but in such excess as the Germans use, not only the
mouth, but (if it might be) the very breast is to be opened, that the heat of
the inward parts may have vent. The Germans sparingly and rarely give any gifts
to those with whom they drink: but if they do, then (contrary to the custom
of the Turks and Polonians) they willingly make them good when they are sober.
And for the most part Merchants, and all traffiquers of business, make all
their contracts of buying and selling and otherwise with the counsel of the
pot. Likewise when they sell houses or lands, they bring a tun of beer or
vessel of wine into the strecte, and seal the bargain by drinking with their
neighbors, in like sort concluding all their contracts, which agreed upon when
they are half drunken, yet are confirmed by them when they are sober.

At Prage I remember the Germans did scoff at a Polake Gentleman, to whom a
Dutch Abbot giving a gold ring in his cups, the Polake in requital gave him
his horse of price, and though he did earnestly refuse so great a gift, by
instance forced him to accept it, yet in the morning being sober sent for his
Horse again. To conclude, hardly any man will give his daughter in marriage to
a man whom he has not seen drunken, by which in a moment they are confident
to conjecture what life she shall lead with him, since in drink men lively
bewray their dispositions, which they can cloak and dissemble when they are
sober. And they find by experience, that in drink cholerikemen are prone to
quarrels, sanguine men to dancing and embracing, men possessed with melancholy
to tears and complaints, and they who are flegmatike to dull astonishment and
spewing. The trade of brewing is more commodious among the Germans, then any
other traffic. So as at Torg, (where the best beer is brewed and from thence
distracted to other Cities) only the Senate has the privilege to sell the
same by small measures (as also to sell wine), and in the rest of lower
Germany, as only the Senate buies and selles wine, so the chief Citizens by
turns brew bear, admitting troops of poor people into their houses to
drink it out. As the gain of brewing is great, so Princes raise great
impositions from it, and the most rich Citizens or Aldermen (as I said) not
only disdain not to brew, but even greedily expect their turn, at which time
they also sell it by cannes, and have their lower rooms full of drinking
tables for the common people, where every man pays for his drink before his
can be filled, that at least their purse may teach them measure, which
otherwise they cannot observe. Yea, my self, not without wonder, have seen in
a Senators house, poor souls pawn their cloths for drink, and go home
half naked, yet sufficiently armed with drink against the greatest cold.

The beer of Torge is most esteemed in higher Saxony, and the most part at
Leipzig drink no other, yet for their servants brew a small beer called beer
of the covent, and a kind of most small beer, which the students call Rastrum,
that is rake. Their is an Imperial Law in the golden Bull against Hosts,
Mariners, and Carters, who either in Cellers, or Carriage by the highway,
mingle brimstone or water with wine, wherein notwithstanding they daily offend,
putting in brimstone to make it heady strong, and water to fill up the measure.
There be in the same golden Bull many Laws made against drunkenness, at such
time as the Germans having war with the Turks, began to look into
themselves, for reforming of notorious vices, wherein it is decreed, that
Courtiers given to this vice, should be expelled the Courts of Princes, and
that all Magistrates should search out drunkards, and severely punish them: But
give me one Prince free of this vice, who may thus punish his Courtiers. My
self being at a great Dukes funeral, did see a Prince his near cozen, drink
so stiffely to expel sorrow, as all his senses and almost his spirits were
suffocated there with, and of many Princes there present, (pardon me to speak
truth) I did not see one sober at this funeral Feast, what would these Princes
have done at a Marriage? Princes have a custom to drink by Attorney, when
they are sickely or ill disposed, and many times they reward this substitute
strongly bearing much drink, as for a good service to the Common wealth, yet
except they be very sick, few are found which will not in person perform
their own task. Give me one Magistrate of so many thousands, who with his
own innocence is armed with boldness to punish others. Give me one, (I am
ashamed to say it, but truth is truth); I say give me one Minister of Gods
Word, who preaches against excess of drinking. My self have heard some
hundreths of their Sermons, yet never heard any inuectiue against this vice.

Turpe est Doctori, came eulpa redurguit ipsum,
The teacher needs must be ashamed,
Who for the same offense is blamed.
Only the Weomen of Germany are most temperate in eating and drinking, and of
all I did ever see, most modest in all kinds of virtue: yet the Weomen of
Bohemia use as great (or little less) excess in drinking, as Men, not without
a stain to their reputation of chastity. The Weomen of Germany have a custom
to help their Husbands or Friends, by sipping of the cup; but I did never see
any chaste woman, (as most of them are) drink largely, much less to be
drunken: But for Men of all sorts whatsoever.

Si quoties peccant, toties sua fulmina mittat
Princeps, exiguo tempore inermis erit:
If the Prince smite, as often as they offend,
His Sword and Arm will fail him ere the end.
Thus howsoever the Germans be honest, deceiving neither stranger nor Country
man, and have abundance of all things to sustain life, yet strangers, by
reason of the general in temperance of the Nation, are either allured to
participate this vice of drinking with them, or at least by ill custom are
drawn to partake their punishment in paying of the shot, and through their
churlish rusticity are ill entertained, and yet forced to reward the servants,
whose attendance deserves nothing less.

It remains that I should inform passengers how to apply themselves to the
Germans in this drinking custom, so as at least with less hurt or offense,
they may pass throught their territories. For those who pass suddenly through
the same without long abode in any place, nothing is more easy then to shun
all participation of this nice, by consorting themselves with fit companions in
their journey, so as they being the greater part as well in the Coach, as at
the Table, may rather draw the lesser part in sobriety, then be induced by them
to excess. But they who desire to converse with the (...), and to learn their
language, cannot possibly keep within the bounds of (...), and must use art to
shun great or daily excess. Such a passenger sitting do (...) Table, must
not presently drink of all the Cups begun to him from others: for the
Germans are so exceeding charitable to all Men, as they will furnish him
presently with new Cups on all hands for fear that he should suffer thirst.
He shall do better to set the cups in order before his trencher, and first to
drink of, those of lesser quantity, but ever to keep one or two of the
greatest, to return in exchange to him that drinks to him. For this kind of
revenge (as I may term it) the Germans fear, more then the Irish do great
gunnes, and to avoid the same, will forbear to provoke him with garausses.
For they love not healths in great measures (which they call Infloribus), but
had much rather sip then swallow In this kind I remember a pleasant French
Gentleman much distasted them, who invited to a feast, and admonished, that he
could not possibly return sober, did at the very beginning of supper, drink
great garausles, of himself calling for them, besides the small healths
commended to him from others, which unwonted kind of skirmishing when they
disliked, he presently replied: Why should we leese time? since we must be
drunken let us do it quickly, the sooner, the better; and therewith he so
tired those at the table, as he found no man would in that kind contend with
him. But to the purpose. If the cups set about his trencher increase in
number, he may easily find occasion (as when his consorts go out to make
water) either to convey some of them to their trenchers, or to give them to the
servant to let away. After supper he may nod and sleep, as if he were drunken,
for,

Stultitcam simulare loco prudentia summa.
Sometimes the fool to play,
Is wisdom great they say.
And so he shall be led to a bed, which they have in all their stoues, and
call the Faulbett, that is, the slothful bed. Otherwise he may feign
headache, or fear of an ague; or if these excuses prevail not, as seldom
they do while he states in the room, because they cannot endure to have a
sober man behold them drinking, then as if he went out to make water, or
speak with some friend, he shall do best to steal away, and howsoever he
have confidently promised to return, yet to come no more that night, no not to
fetch his cloak or hat, which are always laid up safely for him, especially
if he foresee the skirmish like to be hot. But above all, let him take heed
of the old fashion to take leave of his companions and bid them good night, for
the Germans upon no entreaty or excuse will suffer any man to go to bed so
sober. If there be music and dancing, their dances being of no Art and small
toil, he had much better dance with the women till midnight, then return to
the table among the drinkers, for one of these four he must do, drink,
sleep, dance, or steal away, no fifth course remains. Lastly, let him
warily choose his companions of that Nation, with good trial of their honest
dispositions. But with strangers, as English, French and Polakes, let him
carefully eschew excess of drinking. For these, and especially the English,
when they are heated with drink, are observed to be mad in taking exceptions,
and in the ill effects of fury, being more prone to quarrels then the Dutch,
and having no mean in imitating foreign vices or virtues, but with Brutus,
that they will, they will too much.

For Bohemia and Switzerland, that seated in the center of Germany, this on the
Boemerland and Sweitzerland.
Northwest side of the Alps, I have contained their Geohraphicall description
in that of Germany, and have spoken something of them in this discourse of
Germany. It remains to add something of them, touching the particular
subjects of this Chapter. The Bohemians drink the Wines of Hungary, being
much better then those of Germany, and have much better Beer, in regard they
have great plenof Corn, and the Sweitzers drink the delicate Wines of Italy.
Neither of their Of both in general!.
traffickes is comparable to that of Germany, because Bohemia is far within
land and has no great commodities to be exported, and Sweitzerland is
addicted to the mercinarie service of foreign Princes in their wars,
changing their cattle for the VVines of Italy, and content with their own, so
they want not plenty of good drink.

Some Cantones of the Sweitzers make great gain of spinning wool, whereof
they Sweitz. particularly.
make pieces of cloth some 134 else long, and lest covetousness of private men
might prejudice the common good, they appoint overseers to this trade, who
punish all frauds severely and some capitally. For food, they abound with
Honey, Butter, and Milk, and have plenty of Venson found in the wild Alps,
and especially of excellent sorts of fish, by reason of their frequent Lakes.
In public Innes a meal is given for six or seven batzen. They are hospital
toward strangers, and among themselves, they have public houses where they
meet, and shoot with Crosebow and musket, with like exercises. There they
sometimes eat together and inuit guests to these houses as to a Tavern. And
to the end all things may there be done with more modesty, the tables of the
Magistrates and all other sorts of men, are in one and the same room. In
meats they use moderation, and for drinking use far less excess then the
Saxons, somewhat less then they of upper Germany. They have strict laws to
imprison Drunkards for a year, and at solemn feasts, the vulgar sort are
admonished to behave themselves modestly, yet drunkenness has such patronage
among the best sort, as it cannot be banished. They brag of their ancient
temperance, and say, that excess came into the Commonwealth, together with the
accepting of military stipends from foreign Princes.

Bohemia abounds with Corn, Cattle, Fish (as plenty of Salmons), Woods, good
Horses, but heavy like those of Freesland, and with Niter, which it is death to
carry out, Dohemerland particularly.
yet for gain of fifty in the hundred, there want not who hazard that danger.
I say it has the commodities, and also produces Wines, but very sharp and
unpleasant, and has some mines of metals. Howsoever it be much more
Southerly then England, yet the Italian fruits (as figs) are there most rare,
which in Winter they keep in cellers, and only in Summer time set them abroad
in Gardens, and in like sort, but with great difficulty they preserve Rosemary,
but they have no Laurel at all. The men drink (if it be possible) more then
the Germans, and are much more subject to gluttony, and their women swill Wine
and Beer daily, and in great excess, which to the Germans is most
reproachful. In the Innes they give large diet for some five Bohemish grosh a
meal, and upon the confines of Germany toward Nurnberg, for some twenty
creitzers a meal. But the Bohemians eat often in the day, and sit almost
continually at the Table, and since at Prage, and in many other places, all
things are sold out of the Innes, after the manner of Poland, the Bohemians
seldom eat at an ordinary, but demand what meat they will upon a reckoning.
For the rest, Boemerland and Sweitzerland little differ from Germany, for the
diet, the Hosts, the Innes, excess of drinking, or any like things.

CHAP. IIII. Of the united Provinces in Netherland, and of Denmark and Poland,
touching the said subjects of the precedent third Chapter.
THE longitude of Netherland lies, or extends seven degrees and a half, from
the Meridian of twenty two degrees and a half, to that of thirty degrees, and
the Latitude lies or extends five degrees, from the parallel of forty eight
degrees and a half, to that of fifty three degrees and a half. It is called
Netherland, as a Country lying low, and the people for language and manners
has great affinity with the Germans, both being called Dutchmen by a common
name. Of old this Country was a part of Gallia transalpina (that is, beyond the
Alps from Italy) which was subdeuided into Comata and Narbonensis, and again
Comata (so called of the peoples long hair) was subdeuided into Aquitanica and
Celtica, or Lugdunensis, and Belgica. This part called Belgica, contains the
Lowcountries, whose dominion has been by marriage derived from the Burgundian
family to that of Austria, and some divide this Country into seventeen
Provinces, whereof some still remain subject to the King of Spain, others (of
which I am to speak) being united in league, have recovered their liberty by
the sword, and at this time did make war with the Spaniard about the same.
But some Maps, among these seventeen Provinces reckon the County of
Valkenburg, which is part of the Dukedom of Limburg, other Maps make Mechlin
and Antwerp to be Provinces, which are both contained in the Dukedom of
Brabant. Therefore I better approve those, who divide the whole Country into
fifteen Provinces, namely, the Counties of Artois, of Flanders, of Hanaw, of
Zeland, of Holland, of Zutphan, and of Namurs, and the Dukedomes of Luxenburg,
of Brabant, of Limburg, and of Gelderland, and the territories, of
West-Freesland, of Groaning, of Vtrecht, and of Transisola.

1 The County of Artois has many fair Cities, whereof Arras is the chief,
giving the name to the Province, and to those rich hangings, wherewith our great
men adorn their Palaces.

2 Flanders is the largest County, the chief Cities whereof are Ghant (where
the Emperor Charles the fifth was borne), and Bruges (whether great concourse
of Merchants was made of old, so as the strangers hearing no other name but
Flanders, did by custom impose the name of Flanders on all the fifteen
Provinces, and the name of Flemmings on all the inhabitants.) Flanders has
other Cities, namely, Calleis, Dunkerk, Ostend, and Sleuse, all lying on the
Sea coast; whereof Sleuse is a Municipall Village of Bruges, but at this time
was it self strongly fortified, and Ostend taken from the Spaniards by the
States of the united Provinces, was at this time committed by them, and under
their pay, to the custody of an English Garrison under Sir Edward Norreys
Knight. This Province yields plenty of Corn and Flax, and is very rich with
making Linen and Woollen Clothes. It has excellent pastures, and is enriched
with Cheese, Butter, Oil made of Rape-rootes, Salt, and the fishing of
Herrings, but it yields no Wine. The famous Wood Arduenna lies in the confines
thereof toward land, where it abounds with Wood, but toward the Sea they
burn Turfe, made of earth, and also burn Cow dung.

3 The County of Hanaw has the Principality of Arscot, united to the Dukedom
of Brabant, by which the Dukes son has the title of Prince. The chief
Cities of this County are Mons and Valinciennes. It has mines yielding Lead
and Marble of many colors, and a good kind of Coals.

4 The County of Zeland is by situation, the first of the United Provinces,
consisting of many Islands, whereof seven are principal, and the chief is
Walcherne, the chief City whereof is Midleburg, famous for traffic, and the
Staple for Spanish and French Wines. Near that is the City Vlishing, strongly
fortified, being the chief of the Forts then engaged to the Crown of England,
and kept by an English Garrison, under the command of Sir Robert Sidney Knight
(for the second Fort engaged to England, lies in another Island, and is called
Brill, being then kept by an English Garrison, under the command of the Lord
Barrows.) All these Islands are fertile, and yield excellent Corn, more
plentifully then any other Province, so as one aker thereof is said to yield
double to an aker of Brabant. But they have no sweet water, nor good air, and
for want of wood burn turffe. They take plenty of sea-fishes, which they Salt,
and carry into other Countries. Madder for dying of wool, grows there
plentifully, which likewise they export, and grow rich by selling these
commodities, as likewise Spanish and French Salt, and like traffic.

5 The County of Holland called of old Battauia, and inhabited by the Chatti
(as Tacitus writes), is in situation the second of the united Provinces, but
the first in dignity. The Cities whereof are Amstelrodam (famous for
traffic), Rhoterodam (where Erasmus was borne), Leyden (an University),
Harlem, Dort (the staple for the Rhenish Wines), and Delph, all very fair
Cities. And I may not omit the most pleasant Village of the Hage, called
Grauenhage, because the Counts Court was there, and it is now the seat of the
united States, wanting only walls to make it numbered among the most pleasant
Cities, being no doubt a Village yielding to none for the pleasant seat. This
Province does so abound with lakes, pooles of water, and artificial ditches,
as it gives passage by water as well as by land to every City and poorest
Village, (which are infinite in number). And these ditches itoweth for the most
part to the River Rheine.

For the Rheine of old running toward Leyden, did fall a little below it into
the Sea, but at this day by reason the Land is low and subject to ouerflowings
it has changed the bed, and at Lobecum in the Dukedom of Cleue, deuides it
self into many branches. The first runs to Arnheim, (a City of Gelderland)
then to Vaua, Rena, and Battouodurum, where Lecca receives his waters, and
takes away the name from the Rheine, The first branch of Rheine.
yet so as a little branch thereof still holds the name of Rheine, which
running to Mastricht, there deuides into two, one whereof falls into Vecta, and
so into an arm of the Sea near Munda, the other runs by Woerden, and after
a long course, necre Leyden is divided into five little branches, whereof three
fall into a lake, and the fourth turns to Renoburg, and leeseth it self in
mountains of sand, near the Village Catwicke. I remember that the water
falling through Leyden is called Rheine, so as I think it probable that all
the standing waters lying between the several pastures there, come from the
Rheine after it has lost the name. I said that the Rheine at Battouodurum is
called Lecca, which runs to Culenburg and to Viana, where in a ditch is the
fountain of Isala, which runs to (...). Thus (to omit the little branch at
Battouodurum) the first branch of the Rheine is lost in the Rivers Lecca and
Isala. The second branch bends from Lobecum to Neomagum, and falls into the
Brook Meroutus (taking the name of The second branch.
the old Family of Kings among the Gals, where is an old Castle compassed with
the Brook, and of the same name), then running to Dort in Holland, it receives
the foresaid Lecca and Isala, and so near Rhoterodame falls into the Mosa, and
under that name falls near Brill into the German Sea. The third branch of the
Rheine running from Lobecum, within two miles of Arnheime, falls into the ditch
of Drusus, (or rather of The third branch.
Germanicus) and so runs to Dewsborows (the City of Drusus) where it receives
the old Isala, (springing in Westphalia), and by the name of Isala or Isell,
running to Zutphane, and then to Deuentry, falls into Tatus at Amstelrodame, and
by an arm of the Sea is carried to West-Freesland, and so falls into the German
Sea near the Island Fly.

5 To return to my purpose, Holland is little in circuit, but abounds with
people and dwellings, and being poor of it self, is most rich by industry,
and wanting both Wine and Corn, yet furnishes many Nations with both. Neither
Wool nor Flax grow there, but of both brought in to them, they make linen
clothes much prised and also Woollen, both carried to the very Indies. I need
not speak of Holland Cheeses so vulgarly known and much esteemed. Lastly,
Holland is famous for the traffic of all commodities, and the Romans so
highly esteemed the Fortitude and faithfulness of the old Battani, as they had a
Band of them for their Guard.

6 The County of Zutphane is accounted part of Gelderland, and subdued by the
States Arinie, was joined to the united Provinces in the year 1591.

7 The County of Namures so called of the Cheese City, has Mines of Iron and
plenty of stony Coal, contrary to all other Coals in that it is quenched by
the infusion of Oil. It has also an ill smell, which they take away by the
sprinckling of Salt, and it burns more clear having water cast upon it. This
County has also quarries of Freestone, and of Marble of diverse colors.

8 The Dukedom of Luxenburg has the name of the chief City, and the
inhabitants of the upper part are Germans, but they of the lower parts, are
like the French in language and Manners.

9 The Dukedom of Brabant has fair Cities, namely Antwerp, most famous before
the civil War, because Maximilian, of Austria, brought thither from Bruges in
Flanders, the famous traffic of all Nations, by a ditch drawn to Sluice
(only to be failed upon at the flowing of the Sea tides). At this day
forsaken of Merchants, it lies ouergrowne with grass, and the said traffic
inricheth Holland and the united Provinces. The next City is Brissell, of old
the seat of the Dukes, and now of the Spanish Governors. Then Louan a famous
University. Then Mechlin subject to the united States. Then Bergen-ap-zome a
fortified City, at this time committed to the custody of Sir Thomas Morgan
Knight, with an English Garrison. The Inhabitants of this Dukedom were of old
called Tungri.

10 The Dukedom of Limburg has Mastricht for the chief City, and the
Bishopric of Licge pertaines to it, wherein the City of Liege is the Bishops
seat, and the territory thereof yields a little quantity of a small wine, and
has Mines yielding a little Iron, some lead, and brimstone, and a very little
quantity of good gold. The Mountains yield a black Alablaster, with marble and
other stones, especially stony coals in great quantity, which being there
found at first, are now called generally Liege Coals.

11 The Dukedom of Gelderland, was of old inhabited by the Menappij and
Sieambri, and abounds with excellent pastures and meadows, so as great
Herds of Cattle brought thither out of Denmark to be sold, are for great part
fatted there. The chief City is Nimmengen, the second Harduike, a fortified
City subject to the united States, and the third Arnheim, also subject to them.

12 The Territory of West-Freessand is divided, as Holland, with artificial
ditches, and abounds with eocellent pastures for fatting of the greatest
herds of Cattle, and yields it self all kinds of cattle of extraordinary
bigness, as Horses of Freesland vulgarly known. It has many Cities, where of
the chief are Lewerden, Dockam, Fronikar (an University) and Harlingen, not to
speak of nine other Towns, fortified with walls and ditcbes. This Territory is
subject or associated to the united States.

13 The Territory of Groningen, made part of Freesland by Cosmagraphers, is
also subject to the States, and has the name of the chief City, strongly
fortified and seated in a fenny soil.

14 The Territory of Vtrecht is also associated under the same united States,
whose chief and very pleasant City is called Vtrecht.

15 The Territory of Transisole, vulgarly called De land over Ysseli (the Land
beyond Yssell) is also associated to the united States, whereof the chief City
is Deuentry, which besieged by the States Army in the year 1591, was then
subdued, and it lies nearer to the Sea. It has another City called swoll.

The united Provinces of Netherland, (through which only I did pass) have a
most intemperate Air, the Winter cold being excessive, and the Summers heat
far exceeding The situation.
the ordinary heat of that clime. The reason of the cold is, that the
Northern winds of themselves ordinarily cold, do here in a long course on all
sides glide upon the German Sea, thereby gathering far greater cold, and so
rush into those plain Provinces, no where stopped either by mountains or
woods, there being no Mountains, scarce any hills, no woods, scarce any groves,
to hinder them from violent passage with their uttermost force. Like reason may
be given for the heat: For the same open Plain, no way shaddowed from the
beams of the Sun by opposition of Woods or Mountains, must needs in Summer
be subject to the heat of the Sun and winds from land. Add that in Winter
the frequent Rivers, Lakes, and Pooles or standing waters, in finitely increase
the coldness of the air. These waters as well running as standing, are almost
all Winter frosen over with a thick ice, so as they will bear some hundreths
of young men and women, sliding upon them with pattins, according to their
custom. Yea, the Arm of the Sea called Zwidersea, lying within land, between
Holland and Freseland, though it be large and deep, having only two flats or
shoales, yet being compassed with Islands and the Continent, is many times in
Winter so frosen over, as Victualers erect Tents in the midst of it, having
Beer and Wine, and fire made upon iron furnaces, to refresh such as pass upon
sledges, or sliding upon iron patterns from one shore to the other. This cold
is the cause, why their sheep and cattle are kept in stables, to bring forth
their young. And howsoever the same be done in Italy, subject to great heat,
yet it is not of necessity, as here, but out of the too great tenderness of
the Italians, toward the few cattle they have And this is the cause, that how
soever they use not hot stoaues, as the Germans do, yet the Weomen, as well at
home, as in the Churches, to drive away cold, put under them little pannes of
fire, covered with boxes of wood, boared full of holes in the top. And this
sordid remedy they carry with them, by the high way in wagons, which the Danes
or Mosconites use not, though oppressed with greater cold: only some of the
more noble Weomen, disliking this remedy, choose rather to wear breeches, to
defend them from the cold.

In this distemper of Air, it cannot be expected that there should be plenty
of flowers The fertility of the united Provinces.
and summer fruits. No doubt, in regard of the fatness of the soil, watered
with frequent ditches, and through the foresaid heat of the Summer, they might
have plenty of flowers and fruits, were it not impossible or very difficult to
preserve them from perishing by the winters cold, and were not the Inhabitants
careless of such dainties, though in later times, as they have admitted
foreign manners, so luxury has more power with them; then formerly it had. I
have often seen one Apple sold for a blancke, and those great Cherries which are
brought into England, grow not here, but in Flaunders, and the Territories
within Land. They have abundance of Butter, Cheese, and Roots, and howsoever
they have not of their own full sufficiency of other things to maintain life,
yet they abound with the same brought from other parts. Some provinces, (as the
Bishopric of Vtrecht) yield corn to be transported, but in general the
united Provinces (of which only I discourse in this place) have not sufficient
corn for their own use, yet by traffic at Dantzke, they furnish themselves
and many other nations therewith. They have little plenty of River fish,
excepting only Eales, but in the Mosa, as it falls from Dort to the sea, they
have plenty of Salmons, and other fish, which fishing did of old yield great
profit to the Prince and Merchants. And for Sea fishes salted and dried, they
make great traffic therewith. My self lying for a passage in the Island Fly,
did see great quantity of shellfish sold at a very low rate. Great herds of
Oxen and Calves, are yearly brought into these parts out of the Dukedom of
Holst, united to the Kingdom of Denmark, (in which parts they feed most on
dry and salt meats), and these Herds are fatted in the rich pastures of
Gelderland and Freesland. There is great abundance of Sea Fowls, (especially
in West-Freesland) and they want not land Fowls. They carefully nourish
Storkes, as presaging happiness to an Aristocraticall government, making them
nests on the tops of public houses and punishing any that drive them away, or
trouble them. In which kind also they preserve Hernes making nests in those
groves, which are only in few Cities. They have a race of heavy Horses, and
strong, which they sell in sorraigne parts, using only their Mares to draw
Wagons, and for like uses at home. The Provinces on the Sea Coast (as I
formerly said) burn their own earth, by the frequent digging whereof, they
say the Sea or lake at Harlem was first made. And of these tnrffes they make
fires, both clear and of good smell, without smoke, and commodious to dress
meat, to starch linen, and like uses.

They are notable Mariners, yet in that to be blamed, that being at Sea, they
use no public prayers, that ever I heard: And several Cities have great
numbers of ships, The traficke.
wherein they trade with such Industry and subtilty, as they are in that point
envied of till Nations.

The very Italians, who in foreseeing wisdom, would be accounted Promethei,
were by them made Epimethei, wise after the deed, too late repenting, that when
they came first to settie their trade in Flaunders, they took youug youths of
that Nation to be their Cassiers, who by writing letters for them, learned the
secrets of that trade, and after, to the Italians great prejudice, exercised it
themselves. Some three Flemmings, brethren or partners, use to settle
themselves in as many Cities of great trade, where they keep such
correspondency, as by buying all things at the well head, where they are
cheapest, and transporting them far off, where they are dearest, and
especially by living sparingly, both in diet and apparel, and not shaming to
retaile any commodity in small parts (which great Merchants disdain to sell,
otherwise then by whole sale), they have attained the highest knowledge and
riches of trading. Thus they buy raw silk of the Turks, and weaue the same
into diverse stusses in Italy, which they sell not there, but transport them
into England, and the Northern parts, where they bear highest price, and
there retaile them by the smallest proportions. They have of their own, very
fine Linen, and Woollen clothes, of diverse kinds, and many clothes of
Cotton, Arras hangings, plenty of Hops (as well on the Seacoast of Beabant, as
in the East part of Holland) and great store of Butter, Cheese, and Fish salted
and dried, all which they transport. Again they bring from Dantzke store of
Hemp, whereof themselves make Ropes and Cables, neither transport they any rude
matter, but by working it at home, enrich many populous Cities. Also from
Dantzke they bring corn, all kinds of pitch, and other commodities of that
place, and from Italy many kinds of silk stuffies. Also by the diligent
fishing, especially of Hertings, on the Seacoast of England, they grow rich,
selling the same to all Nations, and to the very English, who are not so
industrious in that trade. Lastly, they draw the commodities of all Nations to
them, and fetch them from the very Indies, and in like sort they transport them
to the remotest parts, where they yield most gain.

It is not amiss to add the very words of Marchantius, writing of the old
trade of Burges in Flanders, since what I have written, is only to be
understood of the united Provinces. Thus he says. Lodouicus Crassus in the
year 1323. granted a staple to Bruges, which his son Malanus confirmed. The
Staple is a privilege of staying foreign Commodities in the place, except the
seller and bringer choose rather to return whence they came. Bruges has a
Market place, with a house for the meeting of Merchants at noone and evening,
which house was called the Burse, of the houses of the extinct Family Bursa,
bearing three purses for their Arms, engraueu upon their houses. The Merchants
of England, Scotland, France Castilia, Portugal, Aragon, Nanar, Catnlania,
Biscaia, the Hans Cities of Germany; (namely Lubeck, Hamberg, Rostoch, Dantzk,
eRiga, Renel, and diverse other Cities,) the Merchants of Venice, Florence,
Genoa, Luca, and Milan (namely fifteen Nations,) had each their College or
house here. The Italians brought Chamblets and Grogram in made of Goats hair,
in Galatia a province of the Lesser Asia, they brought Hides, thread of Silk,
of Silver, and of Gold, and clothes made of them, they brought Jewels, Wines
of Candia, Alum, Brimstone, Oil, Spices, Apothecary Wares, Mithridate,
Rhubarb, Mummy, Sena, Cassia, and the soil of Brass. The French brought Salt,
Red and white Wines, Oil, and Paper. The English brought Wool, Lead, Tynne,
Beer, Woollen clothes, especially those so make vailes for the Low country
women. The Scots brought skins of sheep Conneys and other, and course
woollen clothes. The Spaniards and Portugals, brought grain for Scarlet Dye,
Gold, Silver, raw Silk, thread of Silk, the wood Guiacum, Salsaparilla,
Unicorns Horn, and Spices. The Germans, with the Danes and Polakes, brought
Honey, Wax, Corn, Saltpeter, Wool, Glass, rich Furs, Quicksilver, Arms,
Rhenish Wines, Timber for building. Again, they exported out of Flanders,
fair and great Horses, fat Beenes, Butter, diverse kinds of Cheese, pickeld
and fumed Hertings, diverse Sea-fishes salted, Woollen and Linen clothes,
Tapestry of great variety and beauty, rare pictures, and all manuary works.
Thus Flanders gave the name to all Netherland. Bruges (...) in the year 1414.
got a privilege, that they who were free of that City, by Birth, Gift, Buying
or Marriage, should be free from all confiscation of their goods, which
exceeds the privileges of any other City in Netherland, for those of Ypre
having the like, yet loose it upon any Force offered to the Prince. The trade
at Bruges began to decay in the year 1485, partly for the narrowness and
vnsafety of the Port of Sluice and the River leading from thence to Bruges,
partly by the Fame of the large and commodious River Scaldis at Antwerp, and
partly by the civil Wars. For first the Portugals having taken Callicut in
the East Indies, carried their famous Spices to the Fair of Antwerp in the
year 1503. and contracting with that City, drew the Fuggari and Welfari
German Merchants thither. And after the Merchants of Florence Lucca, and the
Spinolae of Genor, and those of other Nations (excepting part of the Spaniards)
leaving Bruges, seated themselves at Antwerp about the year 1516. And they
were invited thither by the privilege of Marriage Dowries, which became
shadows to many frauds. For when Husbands either break in life time, or be
found banckerouts at death, the Wives are preferred to all debtors in the
recovery of their dowry. Notwithstanding Bruges at this day by the third
general tax of Flaunders yet in use, pays something more then Ghant for
public uses. These be the words of Iacobus Marchantius.

The foresaid trade of the united Provinces, has at home much commodity and
increase by the Rivers, (as the Rheine bringing down the commodities of
Germany), and by the standing or little moving waters, which are most frequent,
and by channels or ditches wrought by hand, and bearing at least little boats
for passage to each City and Village: but these waters for the most part ending
in standing pooles, by reason they fall into a low ground near the Sea, the
Air is unwholesome, the waters are neither of good smell nor taste, neither do
they drive Mils, as running waters do elsewhere, of which kind they have few
or none. My self in a dark rainy day passing one of these said narrow
channels, numbered an hundred little boats at least, which passed by us, (and
are hired at a low rate) whereby the great trade and singular industry of the
Inhabitants may be coniectured. Add that besides, the German Sea, lying upon
diverse of these Provinces, they have many Arms of the Sea, that run far
within Land. All the Rivers fall from Germany, which in this lower soil often
ouerflowing, have changed their old beds, and falling into ditches made by
hand, do no more run with their wonted force, but (as I have said in the
description of Holland) do end (as it were) in lakes. By reason of the
foresaid industry of the people inhabiting the united Provinces, the number of
their ships, and the commodity of their Seas and waters, howsoever they want of
their own many things for necessity and delight, yet there is no where greater
abundance of all things, neither could any Nation endowed with the greatest
riches by nature, have so long borne as they have done a ciuell war, and
intolerable exactions and tributes, much less could they by this mischief
have grown rich, as this people has done. One thing not used in any other
Country, is here most common, that while the Husbands snort idly at home, the
Weomen especially of Holland, for traffic sail to Hamburg, and manage most
part of the business at home, and in neighbor Cities. In the shops they sell
all, they take all accounts, and it is no teproch to the men to be never
inquited after, about these affairs, who taking money of their wives for daily
expenses, gladly pass their time in idleness.

Touching this peoples diet, Butter is the first and last dish at the Table,
whereof they make all sawces, especially for fish, and thereupon by strangers
they are merrily Dict.
called Butter-mouths. They are much delighted with white meats, and the Bawers
drink milk in stead of beer, and as well Men as Weomen, passing in boats
from City to City for trade, carry with them cheese, and boxes of butter for
their food, whereupon in like sort strangers call them Butter boxes, and
nothing is more ordinary then for Citizens of good account and wealth to sit at
their doors, (even dwelling in the market place) holding in their hands, and
eating a great lump of bread and butter with a lunchen of cheese. They use to
sees little pieces of flesh in Pipkins, with roots and gobbets of fat mingled
therewith, without any cutiosity; and this they often sees again, setting it
each meal of the week on the Table, newly heated, and with some addition of
flesh roots or fat morsels, as they think needful, and this dish is vulgarly
called Hutspot. They feed much upon roots, which the boys of rich men devour
raw with a morsel of bread, as they run playing in the streets. They use
most commonly fresh meats, and seldom set any salt meats on the board,
except it beat Feasts to provoke drinking. They use no spits to roast meat, but
bake them in an earthen pipkin as in an oven, and so likewise sees them: And
these meats being cold, they often heat and serve to the Table, so as I have
come into an Inn, and being in the Kitchen, could see nothing ready for
supper, yet presently called to supper, have seen a long Table furnished with
these often heated meats, which smoaked on the outside, yet were cold on the
inside. This people is prouerbially said to excel in baked meats, especially
in baking of Venison; yet to my knowledge they have no red Dear in these
Provinces, neither have they any enclosed Parkes for fallow Dear, nor any
Connygrees. Only Count Mauritz has of late had out of England some Buckes and
Does of fallow Dear, which run in the grove at the Hage, and there be some
Connies near Leyden upon the sandy bank of the Sea, which are not sufficient
to serve the Inhabitants of those parts, but are accounted good and pleasant to
eat. Neither in foreign parts do they much desire to feed on Connies, either
because they are rare, or because the flesh is not sauoury. They use to eat
early in the morning, even before day, and the cloth is laid four times in the
day for very servants, but two of these times they set before them nothing but
cheese and butter. They sees all their meat in water falling of rain, and
kept in Cesternes. They eat Mushromes and the binder parts of frogs for
great dainties, which frogs young men use to catch and present them to their
Mistresses for dainties. I have seen a hundredth of Oysters in diverse Cities
sold sometimes for eight or twelve, yea for twenty or thirty stiuers. They
dress fresh water fish with butter more then enough, and salted fishes
sauourly with butter and mustard: where they eat not at an Ordinary, but upon
reckoning (as they do in Villages and poorer Innes), there they weigh the
cheese when it is set on Table, and taken away, being paid by the weight; and I
have known some waggish Soldiers, who put a leaden bullet into the Cheese,
making it thereby weigh little less then at first sitting down, and so
deceiving their Hosts: But in the chief Innes, a man shall eat at an
Ordinary, and there Gentlemen and others of inferior condition sit at the same
Table, and at the same rate.

The Innes are commodious enough, and the Cities being frequent scarce some
eight miles distant one from the other, commodities of lodging are as frequent,
yea, they hang out signs at the door, (which fashion is not in use in may
Cities of Germany, in Denmark, Poland, Scotland, and Ireland, where the Innes
are only known by fame); and this made me marvel, that notwithstanding this
sign obliging them to lodge strangers, my self though well apparelled, have
diverse times been refused lodging in many of those Innes, which seemed to me a
scorn and flat injury. At the fair City of Leyden not wanting many fair
Innes. I was refused lodging in six of them, and hardly got it in the seventh,
which made me gather that they did not willingly entertain Englishmen: neither
did I attribute this to their in hospital nature, but to the licentiousness of
our Soldiers, who perhaps had deserved ill of them thereby, or perhaps by ill
payment, for which I cannot blame the English in that case, butrather the
unequal Law of England, giving all to the elder brothers, lying sluggishly at
home, and thrusting the younger brothers into the wars and all desperate
hazards, and that in penury, which forcibly drives the most ingenious
dispositions to do unfit things. By reason of the huge impositions (especially
upon wines, the passengers expense is much increased, for the exactions often
equal or pass the value of the things for which they are paid. And though a
man drink beer, subject to less imposition and less dear then wine, yet he
must understand that his companions drink largely, and be he never so sober in
diet, yet his purse must pay a share for their intemperance. After supper
passengers use to sit by the fire, and pass some time in mirth, drinking upon
the common charge, and to warm their beer till it have a froth: yet do they
not use these night drinkings so frequently nor with such excess, as the
Germans do.

I remember that having been at Sea in a great storm of wind, thunder, and
lightning, about the month of November, when such storms are rare, and being
very weary and sad, I landed at Dockam in West-Freesland, where at that time
some young Gentleweomen of that Country, passing through that City toward
Groaning, according to the fashion of those parts, we did eat at an ordinary
Table, and after supper sat down by the fire, drinking one to the other; where
after our storm at Sea, the custom of Freesland did somewhat recreate us: For
if a woman drink to a man, the custom is that she must bring him the Cup and
kiss him, he not moving his feet nor scarcely his head to meet her, and men
drinking to them are tied to the like by custom. A stranger would at first
sight marvel at this custom, and more specially that their very husbands
should take it for a disgrace, and be apt to quarrel with a man for omitting
this ceremony toward their wives, yet they interpret this (...) as if they
judged their wives to be so foul or infamous, or at least (...) as they (...)
them unworthy of that courtesy. In the first Book of this third Part and in
the Iournall of the first Part, I have particularly set down the rates of
expenses for (...) through those parts. They greatly esteem English Beer,
either for the (...) wine, or indeed the goodness thereof; and I have observed
some in their cups thus to magnify it, English Beer, English verstant,
English bear makes an English wit. So in the Sea towns of England they sing
this English rhyme; (...) of mutton and English Beer, make the Flemmings tarry
here. They say that there be (...) brewers at (...), and there they imitate the
English Beer, and call that kind Delphs English. But with no cost could they
ever make as good as the English is, though they provided to have English
Brewers, either by reason of the difference of the waters, or rather (as by
experience I have found), because our Beer carried over Sea (whereby it work
a new, and goes a better favor) does drink much better then that we have at
home. They say that of old there were more then 700 brewers at Torgaw, till
upon the water (...) or corrupted, they forsook that place. It is not lawful
to sell Rhenish wine and French white wine in the same tavern, lest they should
be mixed: but one man may sell French (...) wine and Rhenish wine, which cannot
well be mixed, without being (...). And for the same cause they may not sell in
one place diverse lands of the same country wine, and of the same color. The
Netherlanders use less excess in drinking (...) Saxons, and more then other
Germans. And if you ask a woman for (...), she takes it for an honest excuse,
to say he is drunken and sleeps. But I will truly say, that for every day
drinking, though it be far from soberness, yet it is not with so great
excess as the Saxons use, neither in tauerns (where they, and specially the
common sort most meet) and in private feasts at home, do they use so great
excess as the Saxons. Neither do drunken men reele in the streets of
Netherland so frequently, as they do in those of Saxony. Only I did once see,
not without astonishment, a man of honorable condition, as it seemed by his
apparel, of Velvet, and many rings on his fingers, who lay groueing on the
ground, close by the carte rutt of the highway, with two servants distending
his cloak between the Sun and him, and when we lighted from our wagon, to
behold more nearly this spectacle, thinking the man to be killed or sore
wounded, his servants made signs unto us, that we should not trouble him, who
was only drunken, and would be well as soon as he had slept a little. At this
we much wondered, and went on our journey. At feasts they have a fashion to put
a Capons rump in the saltseller, and to contend who shall deserve it, by
drinking most for it. The best sort at feasts for a frolike will change hats,
whereby it happens that Gallants shall wear a Burgers cap, and a Burger an hat
with a feather, crying, Tousfoiz a mode de Liege, All fools after the fashion
of Liege. Some wanting companions to drink, lay down their hat or cloak for a
companion so playing themselves both parts, of drinking to, and pledging, till
they have no more sense or use of reason then the cloak or (...) has. Lastly,
all bargains, contracts, and solemnities whatsoever are done in (...) caps.

The longitude of Denmark and Norway, extends 8 degrees and a (...), from the
Meridian Denmark.
of 27 degrees and a half, to that of 36 degrees. And the latitude extends 10
degrees, from the parallel of 58 degrees, to that of 68 degrees. The Kingdom
of Denmark is divided into six parts, Finmark, Norway, Gothia, Scandia, Seland
and Iutland.

1 Finmark reaches toward the North, beyond the Artick circle, to the Castle
Warthouse, and therefore must needs be desert and barren.

2 Norway in the Germans tongue signifies the way to the North, and it is so
large, as of old it had and still retains the name of a Kingdom, and toward
Finmark it reaches to the Artick circle. The Cities are named, (...) not far
from the narrow Sea, called Der Soundt, and Nidrosia, formerly called Trondia.
lying upon the same sea, and Bergis the seat of a Bishop, and Solzburg a City
of traffic. In Norway they catch great store of Stockfish, which they beat
with cudgels, and dry with cold, and great store of a fish, from the Greek
word called Plaise, for the breadth thereof, and they sell great quantity of
this fish to the German Cities upon the sea, which they keep to feed the
people, in case the cities should be besieged.

3 The Island Gothia is annexed to the Crown of Denmark, yet the Succians took
it in our time, but the Danes recovered it again. Histories, report, that the
Goths came out of this Island, yet old Writers under the name of Scandia
contain all the tract of the neck of Land, lying from the Hyperborian Sea,
between the Northern Ocean, and the Bodick Gulf; from whence it is more
probable, that the Goths came out, then only from this little Island, who
after seated themselves upon the Euxine sea, and the bank of Danow, and from
thence made incursions upon the Roman Empire. And hereupon the said tract,
containing not only Scandia and Gothia, but all Norway and Suecia, was by old
Writers called the shop and sheath of Nations. The Island Gothia yields the rich
Furs called Sabels.

4 The Island Scandia is also called Scondia, and Scandinauia, and Schonlandia,
that is, fair land, the beauty whereof the Danes highly extol, and for the
firtiltie prefer it to Sealand, though it pass the same in the buildings of
the Kings Court and other houses. The Cities thereof are Helsenburg, Lanscron,
and London the Metropolitan City.

5 The Island of Seland, (whence they hold the Zelanders of Netherland to have
come into those parts), is beautified with the City Copenhagen (that is, the
Haven of Merchants) where the King has his Court, and there is an University.
It has also the strong Castle Cronemburg, built in the Village Elsenar, and
the City Roschild, so called of a Fountain, being the seat of a bishop, where
the Kings are buried. Between the Castle Cronembirg in Seland, and the Castle
Helsenburg in Scandia, is the famous straight of the Sea, called Der Soundt, by
which the ships enter into the Baltic Sea, and returning from Dantzk and
Righa, laded with precious commodities, pay great tributes to the King of
Denmark, both at the entry and going (...) of that Straight.

6 Iutland signifying a good land in the German language, is the Northern part
of the Cimbrian Chersonesus (that is, neck of land) whence the Cimbri came,
who made war upon the Romans. And this Iutland with the foresaid Seland, are
properly called Denmark, the other parts being peculiar Regions, at diverse
times annexed to that Crown. The chief Towns of Iutland, are Aleburg,
Nicopia and Wiburg. The rest of the tract of the Cimbrian Chersonesus,
contains the Dukedom of Holst, vulgarly called Holstein, which of old was
part of Saxony, but so, as the Danes often forced it to the paying of tribute,
and at last about the year 1465 they fully subdued it. Part of this Dukedom
lying upon the Brittan Sea, between the Brook Idera and the River Elue, is
called Ditmarcia, all fenny, so as by casting down certain banks, they may
drown all the Country, and by this strength, the inhabitants keeping their
enemies out, long preserved a rude or rural liberty, but at last in our time,
Frederike King of Denmark, upon advantage of a great frost in those Fennes,
suddenly assailed and subdued them, joining that Country to the said Dukedom
of Holst. Of which Dukedom the chief Towns are Flensburg, Slesuick (where of
old the Dukes held their Court) being seated on the Sea toward the East, and
Gottorp, and Meldorp in Ditmarcia upon the Sea toward the West. Upon the
confines of Holst lie the fair Imperial free Cities Lubeck and Hamburg, to
the freedom whereof the Dukes of Holst were great and near enemies,
challenging the same to be built in their soil, for which cause the Kings of
Denmark possessing that Dukedom, are much suspected by these Cities, whom they
more and more fear, as their power more increases. Some reckon the Islands
Orcades for part of Denmark, and they say, that the inhabitants speak the
Goths language: but Histories witness, that howsoever of old they belonged to
the Danes, yet they have long been subject to the Kingdom of Scotland.

Denmark lying near the Artick circle, must needs be subject to great cold,
howsoever the mistie air, caused by the frequent Isles, does in some sort
mitigate the extremity The situation.
thereof.

In regard of the clime, it cannot be expected, that fruits should grow here,
which are only ripened by the heat of the Sun. They have corn sufficient
for their own The Fertilty
use, and plenty thereof (as of all other commodities) is brought to them from
Danizk and all other parts, by reason of the frequent concourse of Merchants
into the Sounat, which they enjoy at good rates, and with much ease.

The Danes exchange great plenty of dried and salted fishes, and of other small
commodities; The traffake.
for necessaries to clothe and feed them; and being in both these kinds frugal
and sparing (as the Germans are) they also attain to some small riches by this
poor traffic. And since they feed for the most part on dried fishes, bacon,
and salt meats, and little use fresh meats as veale and mutton, they carry
great herds of oxen and calves out of Holst into Netherland. Lastly, since
they have no other commodities of their own to transport, and Merchants that
pass the Baltike Sea, of necessity landing at Elsenar, bring them all
necessaries from foreign parts, and also take of them such commodities as
they can spare, surely howsoever the ships of Denmark are in strength sailing
and lasting next to the English, yet their Merchants seldom make any other
voyages then toward the Northern Isles to take fish. In diet they are much
like The (...).
the Germans and especially the neighboring Saxons. Their dainties are bacon
and salt meats, but the common people feeds much on diverse kinds of dried
fishes, which at the first view of them a strangermay well perceive, by their
lean and withered faces, and they likewise feed on bread very black, heavy
and windy. I did see no common Innes at Copenhagen, Elsenar, or Rosehilde, but
some are there licensed to keep Tauerns for selling of wine, where the common
table for that purpose is always ready covered with linen. But passengers
must obtain diet and lodging with some Citizen, and in their houses they shall
find honest manners, moderate diet, and clean beds and sheets. To conclude,
the Danes pass (if it be possible) their neighbor Saxons in the excess of
their drinking.

Poland has the name of Pole in that language signifying a plain, and is a
vast kingdom. Poland.
The longitude thereof extends 16 degrees from the Meridian of 38 degrees, to
that of 54 degrees, and the latitude extends 9 degrees from the parallel, of 47
degrees to that of 56 degrees. It is divided into the greater and the less.

1 Of the greater Poland these are the chief towns Bosnan seated on the
Brook Barta, and Genesua, and Ladistauia seated upon the River Vistula or
Wexel.

2 The lesser Poland lies toward the South, wherein is Craconia (vulgarly
Crakaw) the seat of the Kings. The inhabitants come of the Scithians, and the
manners of the common people at this day little differ from the old Sarmatians.
This Region is fenny, and great part thereof is woody, but it so abounds with
corn and pastures, as it supplies all Europe with corn, and the neighbor
Countries with herds of Cattle. It has no vines, but it yields plenty of
pit-coale, and much wax and honey, and it no less abounds with many kinds of
the said cattle, as well wild as tame.

Other Provinces are annexed to this Kingdom, namely, Samogitia, Massouia,
Lithuania, Volhinia, Russia, and Podolia, for I omit Borussia, though subject
to this Kingdom under a free yoke, because I formerly said, that it is numbered
among the Provinces of Germany, the inhabitants being Germans in language and
manners, and because I have in that place formerly described the same.

3 Samogitia has no walled Town, but the people live in Cottages, and being
rude and of great stature, only apply themselves to the plough, and feeding of
cattle, not knowing any use of money, scarce the service of God.

4 The Metropolitan City of Massouia is Warsouia (vulgarly Warsaw), where the
Parlaments of the Kingdom are held.

5 Lithuania gives the title of Great Duke, and is a most large Province, fenny
and woody, so as in Summer there is no passage into it, but in winter when the
Fenns are frozen, Merchants trade with the inhabitants. Vilna is the
Metropolitan city, and seat of the Bishop. It has very few Towns, and the
Villages are commonly distant 20 German miles one from the other. They have
plenty of honey, wax, a kind of beast like an ox called Alce, wild beasts and
rich furs, but they scarce know the use of money.

6 Volhinia is the most fertile province of that Kingdom, and fullest of fair
towns and Castles.

7 Russia or Reutenia has many Towns, whereof the most known is Leopolis
(vulgarly Leimpurg) and it is famous for swift and good horses, not to speak
of the rich furs and other commodities.

8 Lastly, Podolia abounds with excellent Pastures, but has few Cities or
Towns.

In general, Poland is subject to as great cold, as the lower part of Germany,
lying under The situation.
the same Parallel, and the Countries, as they lie more Northerly, so they
suffer more cold; for the coast of the Baltike Sea, the more it lies toward
the East, the more it still bends to the North, besides that, the plainenes of
the Country, and the frequency of Lakes and Fennes, do more increase the
cold. They use stoues heated with earthen ouens, for remedy against cold, as
the Germans do.

The reuenews of the King and Gentlemen are moderate, scarce sufficient to
maintain a plentiful table, and to exchange with Merchants for Wines and
Spices (which The fertilty
they much use, especially in dressing of fish) and for foreign Stuffes and
Clothes of Silk and Wool. Poland abounds with beasts, as well wild as tame,
and yields excellent horses, not great, but quick and stirring. Neither do
the Gentlemen more delight in any thing, then in their horses, so as they hang
gold chains and lewels at their ears, and paint them half over with
exquisite colors, but in that uncomely, that they are not natural for horses,
as the Carnatian color, and their hinder parts they adorn with rich Furs
and skins of Lions and Leopards and the like, as well to terrify their
enemies, as to adorn and beautify their horses. Poland likewise abounds
with Flesh, Whitemeate, Birds, fresh-water-Fish (it being far within land),
and al kind of Pulse, as Pease and the like. It has some, but very few mines
of Gold and Silver toward the Carpatian Mountains of Hungary, and of Iron and
Brimstone. It abounds with Honey, which they find in hollow trees and caves of
the earth, besides the Husbandmans hiues. It yields great quantity of Wax,
Flax, Linen clothes made thereof, Hemp, Pich of both kinds, Mafts for
ships, Bears and Timber, rich Furs, Salt dug out of pits, Amber,
Soape-ashes, and all kind of Grain, especially Rye, which has made Daniske
famous, for relieuing all Nations therewith in time of dearth.

No marvel then if Merchants bring unto them Silks of Italy, Cloth of
England, Wine of Spain, and the very Spices of India, with most remote
commodities, since The traffic.
they not only sell them at what price they list, but also bring from thence
such precious foresaid commodities. Poland is all far within land, excepting
Borussia (vulgarly Prussen), which with immunities is subject to this Kingdom,
though I have described it among the Provinces of Germany, because the people
are Germans in language and manners. And the very inhabitants of Borussia have
but few ships, using strangers to export their commodities. Poland abounds
with the foresaid most necessary commodities, and the people live content with
their own; yet are they not rich, because they want the foresaid foreign
commodities far brought, and so dear. And they have so little Gold and
Silver, as despising all in respect of it, they sell all commodities at a most
low rate, especially those which are for daily food, and unfit to be exported.

And in truth, my self having in Poland and Ireland, found a strange
cheapenesse of The dyot:
all such necessaries, in respect they want, and so more esteem, Silver. This
observation makes me of an opinion much contrary to the vulgar, that there is
no more certain sign of a fluorishing and rich commonwealth, then the dear
price of these things (excepting the years of famine), nor any greater
argument of a poor and weak State, then the cheap price of them, and it
makes me confident to conclude, that old wives snared with papisticall
superstition, do foolishly attribute the late dear prices to the change of
Religion in our time, while they ignorantly extol former times, wherein twenty
four Eggs were sold for a penny: for in our Age, our Kings have more royal
Tributes, our Nobles far greater reuenews, our Merchants much greater wealth,
then ever our progenitors had, and this is the cause that all things for diet
and appartell, and our very wanton desires, are sold at much higher prices then
in former ages, because our riches make us not able to want any thing to serve
our appetite, at what price soever it is set. Again for Italy, it has no
great store of flesh, birds, fish, and like things for food, in regard of the
populousness thereof, yet the Inhabitants holding it no disgrace to be sparing
in diet, and modest in apparel (so it be clenly), in regard of this general
temperance, and that the Nobility disdaineth not to weaue silks, and trade for
them, being the sinew of that Country, howsoever all things are sold there at
most dear prices, yet no Princes (considering things to be considered) no
Gentlemen, no Merchants of the universal World, have greater treasures and
wealth, then those of Italy. I have said that Poland does abound with all kinds
of flesh, whitmeates, fresh water fish, and all things necessary for food, and
that it yields no Wine, which the Inhabitants seldom drink, but in place
thereof they use Beer, which they of Dantzk brew very strong and good, and
they make a drink of Honey, which they esteem almost as much as wine, and the
best composition thereof is made in the Province of Masjouia. They have such
store of Butter, as I have seen them anoint Cart wheels therewith, but it is
more white and less sauoury then ours. This Kingdom has few Cities, and if a
stranger will for a time soiourne in any of them, he shall easily find a German
or Netherlander to be his Host, who will entertain him more commodiously then
any of that Nation, though perhaps at extraordinary rates, as my self found,
abiding with a Netherlander at Crakaw.

The Innes in the chief Cities, afford convenient beds, and plenty of flesh
and fresh water fish. And these fish they dress with pepper and spice more
then enough, for which kind of Cookery, the Polonians are praised above the
Germans or any other Nation, yet the spite being far brought and dearly
sold, makes the sauce far more costly, then the fish it self. There is
scarce any Gentleman who has not the skill, and does not use to dress fish
for his own eating. In Villages and small Cities, by the highway a passenger
shall find no bed, but he may carry a bed in his Coach, and fit upon it
conucnicntly. Others use to sleep upon straw, lapped with a furred horsemans
coat, which they use to wear, and if they have no such coat, they must be
content to sleep upon clean straw: And all the passengers lie together in the
warm stoaue, with those of the Family, both Men and Weomen. Neither shall they
find in such places any Wine or choice meats, which they use to bring from
Cities in their Coaches. For the Innes in such places are poor naked houses,
having nothing to sell, but close by them are the shambles, the Bakers and
Brewers houses, where the passengers buy beer and such meat as they like, and
bring it to the Inn, which a poor Hostess will dress, affording them only
fire, and a course Tablecloth. And it seemed to me, that the Lord of the place
uses to impose upon some vassal this charge to entertain strangers: for the
Hostess will give her labor for nothing, except in courtesy you desire her to
eat with you, and if you freely give her a small reward, as three pence for
the whole Company, she will think you deal bountifully with her, but she
will ask you nothing Also you may freely carry away in your Coach, flesh,
bread, wine, or any thing that remains, which I have seen done many times.
No Country in Europe affoordes victuals at'a lower rate. My self and a
Companion, did in a Country Town inuit two Guests, and our dinner for four
persons came but to four Grosh and a half. I have formerly set down the
ordinary expenses generally, in a Chapter treating of that Subject in the first
Book of this third Part, and particularly, in the journey through Poland in
the first Part. Now I will only add, that in the Villages and little Cities
by the high way, I have bought ten Eggs for one Grosh, a Goose for three, a
Partridge for two, a loine of Mutton for two, a Pigge for three Grosh, and all
like things at a very small price. So as if a passenger have a Cook in his
company, or have himself any skill to dress meat for his own appetite. I
think he shall there want nothing for necessary or delicate food. But he
may not expect, that a Country Hostess should seek out, or curiously dress
any daineties for him.

Lastly, the Polonians are as stout drinkers as the Germans, and pass them
all, excepting only the Saxons, yea above all that ever I observed given to
this vice, they seemed to me to be mad in this kind, that in drinking they are
prone to quarrels, brawling and fighting. Give me leave to add one
observation, which to me seemed very strange. At Meluin and Dantzke in Prussen,
between Michaelmas and Christmas, the Country people bring in sledges laded
with dead Hares, all foozen over, which are so preserved as well and better,
then if they were powdered with Salt, till our Lady day in Lent, about which
time the frost begins first to break. And if they will eat a Hare in the
mean time, they thaw it at the fire, or the oven of the warm stoue, or by
casting it into water, and so they presently set it to the fire, either to be
roasted or boiled. In like sort they preserve Phesants, or any kind of flesh,
being frozen over, as well as if they were salted. And if any man think this a
Travelers fiction, let him know, that a most credible person told me, of his
certain knowledge and experience, that the Moscouites in Russia, bring the
dead bodies of men in winter thus frozen over, and so lay them on heaps in the
Bellfrees of the Churches, where they lie without rotting, or ill smell, till
about our Lady day in Lent the Snow begins to thaw, and the earth to be fit for
digging (for till that time the earth is covered with deep and hard snow, and
if it were not so covered, yet is so hard by continual frosts, as it cannot
be dug.) And at that time each family takes the bodies of their dead, and
takes care to bury them.

CHAP. V. Of Italy touching all the subjects of the third Chapter going before.
THE Longitude of Italy extends fourteen degrees and a half from the Meridian
of twenty seven degrees and a Italy.
half, to that of forty two degrees. And the Latitude extends eight degrees
from the parallel of thirty eight degrees to that of forty six degrees Italy
of old was called Saturnia, Ianicula, Oenotria, and Ausonia, and lastly it had
the name of Italy. It was called Saturnia of Saturn, who banished from his
Country, taught the Inhabitants of this Country the Art of Husbandry, as Poets
fable, and is accounted the first King of this people, then called Aborigines,
as borne there, not coming from any foreign part to inhabit there It was
called Ianicula of Ianus or Noha, whom they affirm to have come thither after
the deluge, and to have taught them the art to plant vines and sow corn, and
to have built the City Ianua, now called Genoa. It was called Oenotria, either
of the excellent wines, or of Oenotrius King of the Sabines, as likewise it had
the name (...) of Ausonius, the son of Ulysses. Lastly, it was called Italy of
Italus King of Sicilie, or of an old Greek word signifying oxen, and showing
the inhabitants to have been Heardsmen. Ptolomy describes it in the form of a
Chersonesus (that is, neck of land) or Peninsula (that is, almost an Island),
and Pliny in the form of an Oaken leaf, but others more aptly compare it to a
man's leg, from the thigh to the sole of the foot.

Old Writers dividing Italy from Gallia Cisalpina, or togata, enclose Gallia
with a line drawn from the River Varus beyond Genoa, by the Apenine Mountain
to the Brook Rubico, where it falls into the Sea near Rauenna, and this line
is obliquely stretched from the East to the West, and so they divide it from
Italy, and make Picmount, the Dukedom of Milan, the Dukedom of Ferrara, the
Treuisan Marquisate, and all Histria, to be a peculiar part of Europe. But
these Provinces being at this time part of Italy, it is better enclosed and
confined by a line drawn from the head of the Brook Varus, through the
Coccian Alps to the Mountain Adula, (which lies upon the Alps of Furca or
Mount Gothard) and so through the Rhetian Alps toward the East, to the Brook
Arsia, (confining Histria), and the rest of Italy is compassed with the Sea.
Also the Mount Appenine derived from the Alps, runs all the length of Italy,
in the form of a fishes back bone, and almost in the midst deuides it into
two tracts, one lying toward the upper or Adriaticke Sea, the other toward
the nether of Tyrrhene Sea. For howsoever the Appennine about Ancona, seems to
bend toward the Adriaticke Sea, and there to end; yet after it turns from
thence, and deuides the rest of Italy, till it ends upon the straight of the
Sicilian Sea. Italy worthily called the Queen of Nations, can never be
sufficiently praised, being most happy in the sweet Air, the most fruitful
and pleasant fields, warm sunny hus, (...) thickets shaddowing groves, Havens
of the Sea, watering brooks baths, wine, and Oil for delight, and most safe
forts or defenses as well of the Sea as of the Alps. Neither is any part of
Europe more inhabited, more adorned with Cities and Castles, or to be compared
thereunto for tillage and husbandry.

The Provinces thereof are numbered 14. First beyond the Appenine toward the
Tyrrhene Sea, lie five Provinces, Liguria, Tuscia, Campania (suodeuided into
Vmbria, Latium, and Campania, the happy): Lucania (vulgarly (...)), and
Calabria, (the upper and the lower). Also on this side the Appenine toward the
Adriaticke Sea, lie five Provinces, (going back from the East to the West),
Salentinum, Apulia, Samnium, vulgarly Abrotzo), Ptcaenum, (vulgarly Marca
Ancomtana) and Flaminia (vulgarly Romandiola), whereof part beyond the brook
Rubico, reaches into Gallia Cisalpina. Again in the part called of old Gallia
Cisalpina, are four Provinces, Lombards, Marca, Trenisana, Forum Iulij, and
Histria.

1 The chief City in Liguria, is Genoa, a free City, (or at least having the
show of liberty), to which all this Province is subject, which heth all upon
the Tyrrbene Sea, and is now vulgarly called La Riuiera di Genoa, being of all
Italy the most rocky and barren tract: yet whether by Husbandmens art and
labor, or by lying upon the South Sun, I know not; but sure I am, and well
remember, that passing that way in the beginning of Winter, I took great
pleasure in the plenty and goodness of the fruits thereof: Besides that, all
Men extol the fertility of Mount Ferrate, (a part of Liguria, enclosed and
watered by the Rivers Tanoro and Po.)

2 Tuscia had the name of Franckensence, which they used for Incense, and was
formerly called Hetruria, at this day named Toscana. It was an old Dukedom
erected by the Longobards, and after was divided into many territories of free
Cities and Commonwealths, the liberty whereof (namely of Florence, Pisa, and
Sienna) the Family of Medici, invaded in the time of the Emperor Charles the
fifth, and now possesses all Toscany with title of great Duke, only the City
of Lucca still preserving the old liberty of that Commonwealth. It has very
many Cities, of which these are the chief; Florence, Pisa, (an University),
Sienna, and Lucca, (which still is free City).

3 Campania (vulgarly Campagna) is subdeuided (as I said) into Latium, Vmbria
and Campania the happy. Latium has the name of the Fable of Saturn, lurking
there in banishment, and it is the Fountain of the famous Latin tongue, and
the head City thereof is Rome, which City together with the whole Province, is
at this day subject to the Pope, and the Province is vulgarly called Campagna
di Roma. The second part is Vmbria, which was held part of Latium, and lies
beyond Rome, amidst the Mount Apenine of whose shadow it had the name of
Vmbria, but is now called the Dukedom of Spoleto, to which dignity it was
raised of old by the Lombards, and it is subject to the Pope of Rome. The
Cities thereof are Volgineum, Assisium, Spoletum, Perusium, and Otricoli. The
third part is Campania the happy, vulgarly called Terra di Lauorae, having the
name of the most fertile Plain of Capua, seated upon the bank of the River
Volturnus, and to that City it was of old subject, but at this day it is the
chief Province of the Neapolitan Kingdom, the head City whereof is Naples,
of old called Parthenope, and Dysiarchia, now adorned with stately Palaces, of
Dukes, Earls, and Gentlemen, especially those of the Duke of Grauina, and the
Prince of Salerno, these Noble men dwelling there the greatest part of the
year. The Capuan delights, corrupting the Army of Hanniball, are known to all
the World. This Province is an earthly Paradise, where Bacchus and Ceres strive
for principality. I pass over Cuma, of old a famous City, and Linternum,
famous for the banishment and Sepulcher of Scipio the Africane, since at this
day only remain some ruins of Cuma, and scarce any memory of Linternum.
Necre Suessa, is the Mountain Valerius or Falernus, famous for the wine it
yields, and the famous Mountains Gaurus, Massicus and Vesunius. The
Mountain Vesunius is now called Somma, out of the top whereof, of old great
flames broke out, burning the neighbor places, in which flames Pliny (living
in the time of Traian) was choked and perished, while he curiously searched
the cause of those flames. In our age this Mountain burned, and now daily fire
breaks out of it. Here the beauty of all the World is gathered as it were
into a bundle. Here be the famous dwellings of the Romans, in the Territory of
Napies. Here are the Acherusian Fennes, the Lake of Auernus, the Ditch of Nero,
the Bridge of Caligula, and other wonders celebrated by Poets. The Kingdom of
Naples is subject to the King of Spain, which together with the Dukedom of
Milan, also subject to him, is thought to contain more then half Italy,
besides the Island of Sicily, annexed to this Kingdom, whereof this is the
chief Province, and the bounds of it reach to the Sea, and so lie backward on
this side the Apennine toward Samnium, where it is confined, and divided from
the Mark of Ancona, by the Brook Truento.

4 Lucania, vulgarly Basilicata, is a small Territory, the Cities whereof are
Folia and Laina.

5 Calabria a Province of this Kingdom, is divided into the upper and the
lower. The upper is called great Graece, being of old inhabited by the Greeks,
and using still that language corrupted with the Italian. The Cities thereof
famous of old, are Rudia (where Ennius was borne), Croto (where Milo was borne,
who carried an Ox), Tarentum now the chief City, and Locris. The lower
Calabria is called Brutium, the chief City whereof is Reghio, so called,
because Sicily is said to have been there divided from Italy by an Earthquake.

6 Salentinum vulgarly Terra di Ottranto has the Cities Ottranto, and
Brundusium.

7 Apulia vulgarly Puglia, is divided into Peucetia and Daunia.

In Pencetia or Mesapia, vulgarly called Terra di Barri, are the Cities Basigno
and Bitonto. In Daunia, vulgarly called Puglia Piana, are the Cities
Mansfredonia, Beneuentum (made a Dukedom by the Lumbards), Asculum, and the
Village Cannae, famous by the old defeat of the Romans. And here is the
Mountain Garganus, vulgarly called Sant' Angelo.

8 Samnium of old called Aprusium, at this day has the name of Abrozzo, where
is Sulmo, in which Oxid was borne, and here the Kingdom of Naples is confined
on this side the Apenine Mountain.

9 Picaenum, vulgarly Marca Anconitana is subject to the Pope, and has the
name of the chief City Ancona, so called of the crookedness of the Haven,
which is held the best Haven of Italy. Pesaurum, vulgatly Pesaro, belongs to
this Province.

10 Flaminia or Romandiola, vulgarly Romagna, has fair Cities, Vrbinum,
subject to the Duke thereof (which some make part of Ptcanum), Rimini, Bologna,
subject to the Pope, and ancient Rauenna, which with the greatest part of this
Province is subject to the Pope, who erected Vrbine from a County to a
Dukedom, with covenant of vassalage (which the Popes seldom omit) yet some
part of the Province is subject to the Venetians.

11 Lombardy of old was part of Gallia Cisalpina, which the River Padus
(vulgarly Po, and of old called Eridanus) diuides into Cispadan (on this side
the Po) and Transpadan (beyond the Po.) Cispadan (of old called Emilia, now
vulgarly di qua del' Po) contains Pigmont (so called, as seated at the foot
of the Mountains), whereof the chief City is Turin (of old called Augusta
Taurinorum), and this Province is subject to the Duke of Sauoy, Also it
contains the Territory of Parma, subject to the Duke thereof, wherein are the
cities Parma and Piacenza. Transpadane, vulgarly di la del' Po, contains the
Dukedom of Milan, the chief City, whereof is Milano, and it has other
Cities, namely Como, where both Plimes were borne, seated on the most pleasant
Lake (...) vulgarly di Como, abounding with excellent fishes. Also Tic. number
vulgarly (...), (where the French King Francis the first, was taken prisoner by
the Army of Charles the fifth). Lastly, Cremona, among other things famous for
the Tower. This Dukedom is the largest and richest of all other, (as Flaunders
is among the Counties) and it is subject to the King of Spain.

12 Also Transpadane Lombardy contains the Dukedom of Mantua, (subject to the
Duke thereof) and Marca Treuisana, or Triuigiana (subject to the State of
Venice). Mantua is the chief City of the Dukedom, and Marca Treuisana has
the famous Cities, Venice, Padoa, (...), Verona, Vicenza, Brescia, and Bergamo
The (...) of old inhabited all Cisalpina Gailia, who gave the name to the
Iyrrhene Sea and were expelled by the Galls, and of them the Insubres
inhabited the Transpadan part, and there built Milano, and the Senones
inhabited the Cispadane part.

13 Histria is divided into Forum Iulij, and Histria, properly so called. Vorum
Iulij vnlgarly Frieli, and Patria (because the Venetians acknowledge they came
from thence), was a Dukedom erected by the Lombards, the chief City whereof
is the most ancient Aguilegia adorned with the title of a Patriarchate, which
at this day is almost fallen to the ground. Near that City is a Town, in
which they write that S. Mark penned his Gospel: Now the chief City is
Frioli. The confines of this Region lie upon Marca Trenisana, and all the
Province to the River (...), is subject to the State of Venice. The other part
is subject to the Archdukes (...) Austria. Here grows the wine Pucinum, now
called Prosecho, much celebrated by (...)

14 Histria, properly so called, is almost in the form of a Peninsule (almost
an Island) and the chief City is Iustinopolis, vnlgarly Capo d'Istria, and all
the Province is subject to the State of Venice.

Italy in Winter time, (namely the months of December, January, and February)
has The situation.
a temperate cold, with little or no frosts or Ice: And howsoever my self did
see, not only the Rivers of the State of Venice, but the very Inland Seas of
Venice, frozen and covered with thick ice, for the space of three weeks, yet
the Venetiaos find it was a rare accident. In Summer the heat is excessive,
and the dew falling by night is very unwholesome, as also thunderings and
lightnings are frequent, which do great hurt both to man and beast then
abroad, as sad experience often shows them. But in the Dog-daies no man is so
hardy as to put his head out of his doors, or to go out of the City. For they
prouerbially say; Quando il Sole alberga in Leone, (...) sano, guadagna assai:
that is, When the Sun lodges in the Sign of the Lion, he that preserues his
health, gains enough. This excess of heat they carefully avoid, by
inhabiting upon the sides of the Mountains and Hills toward the Sea, which
cools the winds, and by retiring into vaults under ground, or open Tarrasses
lying upon Rivers, and free from the Sun. Yea, some have found the means, by
an artificial Mill, to draw Wind into a vault, and from thence to disperie it
into any room of the house. All Italy is divided with the Mount Apennine, as a
back is with the bone, and upon both sides thereof, as well toward the North
as South, the Hills and Plains extend toward the Tirrhene and Adriatike
Seaes, in so narrow compasses, as many times a man may at once see both the
Seas, from the top of the Mountain, so as the fresh winds blowing from each
Sea, do not a little mitigate the heat of the clime. For the Sea winds
blowing from any quarter whatsoever, while they gather cold by long gliding on
the water, must needs refresh where they blow, as on the contrary, winds
sweeping upon the earth, increase the heat. Thus in the West part of Sicily,
when the South East wind blows, and sweepes upon the plain, parched by the
Sun, it brings excessive heat, yet the same wind, yea the very South wind in
his nature most hot, when they sweep upon the Sea, and after beat upon the
Mountains of Liguria, do bring a pleasant coolness with them.

Touching the fertility of Italy, before I speak of it, give me leave to
remember, The (...),
that Jerome Turler writing of Travel into foreign parts, relates that a
Prince of Naples having a kinseman to his pupil, who desired much to see
foreign Kingdoms, he could not deny him so just a request, but only wished
him first to see Rome, whether he went, and after his return, the Prince took
an account of him, what he had seen, and finding him sparingly to relate his
observations in that place, he made this answer to his request: Cozen, you
have seen at Rome fair Meadows, Plains, Mountains, Woods, Groves,
Fountains, Rivers, Villages, Castles, Cities, Baths, Amphitheaters,
Play Houses, Temples, Pillars, Statuaes, Colosses, triumphall Arkes, Pyramides,
Academies, Gardens, Water-Conduits, Men good and ill, learned and unlearned,
more you cannot see in the universal World; then be content, and stay at home.
And so he restrained the young Man in his desire to travel, wherein perhaps he
rather sought to get liberty then experience. This I write, to show that the
Italians are so ravished with the beauty of their own Country, as having by
sharpness of wit more then the true value of things, magnified and propounded
to strangers admiration, each Brook for a River, each vice for the neighbor
virtue, and each poor thing, as if it were to be extolled above the Moon,
they have thereby more wronged themselves then us. For we passing through
Italy, though we find our selves deceived in the fame of things, yet still we
hear and see many things worthy to be observed; but of the Italians, holding
Italy for a Paradise, very few sharpen their wits with any long voyage, and
great part of them have not seen the Villages and Cities within ten miles of
their dwellings. Hence it is that great part of the Italians have nothing to
boast of, but their natural wit, while our Nations beyond their Alps, besides
natural gifts, have wisdom gained by experience. Italy is most populous, so
as Gentlemen's Palaces and Lands belonging to them, are commonly confined within
some few enclosures. The Castles, Cities, Villages, and Palaces, are most
frequent, whence it is, that the Land being narrow, and not well capable of so
much people, they plant and sow in the very ditches of the high ways, in the
furrows of Land, upon the walls and ditches of Cities and Castles, yea, to the
very doors of private houses, fitting each least corner, as well to profit as
beauty. Only Lombardy has large and open fields, with pastufes to feed Sheep
and Cowes, and with plenty of whitmeats: For they have delicate Butter, which
is not otherwhere to be found, except in the valey of Pisa, (or of the River
Arno), all other places using Oil in stead of it. Near Parma and Piacenza, it
yields excellent Cheese, much prized of very Princes in foreign parts,
whether great quantity thereof is transported, and greater extracted into other
parts of Italy.

Lombardy also affoords sheep to Toscany, and other parts of Italy, as Sicily
does Corn, whereby of old it deserved to be called the Garner of Rome. Italy
has great store of Goats, the milk whereof is so nutritive, as they give it
to the weakest bodies for a restoratiue. Great Herds of cattle are brought
into Italy out of Hungary, and from diverse Countries of the Alps, but the
Hungarian Oxen growing lean with driving far, and finding in Italy no
Pastures wherein they may be fatted, this makes Italians basely to esteem of
Beef. Out of Lombardy the Italians have few or no Catle, all Italy being like
a most pleasant Garden, and having few Pastures: And this makes the Italians so
tender toward the few Cattle they have, as for fear of cold forsooth in that
hot Clime, they lead them into stables, when they are to bring forth their
young. In the plain Country of Lombardy they use Horses, and especially
Mares, (of an exceeding little race) to ride upon, and for bearing of burdens;
and Oxen to draw Carts, and sometimes Caroches, (vulgarly Carozzi): but in the
Mountains and hilly Countries they use Asses and Mules, seldom Horses to ride
upon, and for burdens. In the Roman territory I have seen mauy Beasts called
Buffols, like Oxen, but greater and more deformed, having great horns with
foul nostrels cast up into the Air: It is a slow and dull Beast, yet being
provoked, has malice enough, and the back thereof is commonly bare of hair,
and ever almost galled. They eat not the flesh thereof, but trade with the
hides, as with those of Oxen, and this beast is held commodious for Husbandry
and patient of labor. They have no race of Horses for beauty or service, but
only in the Kingdom of Naples. Asses are commonly sold for 10 crowns a
piece, and a Mule for 50 or 60 gold crowns, which Beasts are only used in all
Italy, excepting only Lombardy. Of the Mule I observed, that he will go under
a heavy burden from day-breake in Summer, to dark night, without any bating
or rest by the way, only his meat is tied in a net before his mouth, so as he
eats while he goes, and his pace is slow, and when his burden is taken off at
night, he tumbles and rubs his back in the dust to cool it, and is thereby
more refreshed from weariness, then a Horse can be with lying half the night,
otherwise he lies not down in the stable scarcely once in six months. A Mule
is begotten between a Horse (...) and a she Ass, but a Mule mounting a she
Mule, an Ass, or any beast whatsoever, does never in gender of them, and the
heat of his seed is yielded for cause thereof. Narrow Italy cannot bear red
or fallow Dear, only the woods of Toscany yield some few wild Boares, which
are preserved for the great Dukes game, otherwise a few wild beasts might soon
make great spoil in so rich and well tilled fields, as be these of Italy.

The hills and mountains thereof lying upon the South Sun, are in general
most fertile or fruitful of all other, such are the fields and hills or the
Neapolitane territory, such are the mountains and hills of Liguria, lying upon
the Tyrrhene Sea, such is the territory about the Lake of Gardo, (vulgarly Il
lago di Gardo) lying at the feet of the South Side of the Alps. The fields of
Lombardy are less happy in yielding fruits, but give excellent pasture and
corn, where the Husbandman makes use of the very furrows between the Akers,
for as in the Aker he sows Corn, so in the furrows he plants Elm Trees,
the loppings whereof serve him to burn, and likewise plants Vines, which
shoot up in height upon the bodies of those trees, but these vines yield but a
small wine, by reason they grow so high, and in a plain Country. In the upper
part of Italy, they plant in one and the same field, Olive and Almond trees,
and under them sow Corn, and in the furrows plant Vines, which shoot up,
resting upon short stakes, and yield strong wine of diverse sorts, because they
grow not high, and the ground being hilly, has more benefit from the Sun
beating upon it. The soil of Toscany being hilly and stony, seemed to me at
the first sight to be barren, but after I found it not only to yield fruits
plentifully, but also good increase of Corn, as of one measure sowed, commonly
eight or ten measures, often fourteen, and sometimes twenty five; neither do
they give the ground rest by laying it fallow, as we do, but each second year
they sow part of it with Beans and Pulse, yielding plentiful increase, and
then burying the stubble to rot in the ground, make it thereby fat to bear
wheat again. My self observed, that at the foot of the South Side of the
Alps, they gather Wheat and Rye in the month of June, and then sow the same
fields with lighter kinds of Grain, which they gather in the month of
October: yet by reason of the multitude of the people, and the narrowness of
the Land, the Italians not only carry not any grane into foreign parts, but
also the Merchants bringing grane to them, are cherished by the Princes, with
fair words and rewards, that they may come again, more specially by the Duke
of Florence, who takes care to provide for his Country, not only grane from
Sicily and all other parts, but also sheep out of Lombardy, which he diuides
among his Subjects, at what price he list, taking this charge upon him to see
that his people want not victuals, as well for the public good, as his own
great gain. Italy yields plenty of Oranges, which Tree is most pleasant to
behold, yielding fruit three times each year, and bearing at one time ripe and
green Oranges, and buds. They have like plenty of Citron, Limon, and Cedar
trees, which in Lombardy grow upon the brick walls of Gardens, as Vines do
with us, and are kept in earthen vessels, but upon the mountains and hills of
upper Italy, the fields abound with these Trees, which both in body and fruit
are as big as our Appletrees, and they transport great store of these fruits
into foreign parts. There be many woods of Chestnuts, which they little
esteem, only poor people eating them, and with the rest they feed Hogs, as
with Acornes. The Chestnut tree is not unlike the Oak tree, but that it is more
small, high, and straight There be some woods of Pine trees, which are high,
without any boughs or leaves to the very top, where they have a round tuft, and
they bear at one time the fruit of three veeres, one pine Apple round and
sharp at the top, having some hundredth or more knobs like hasell nuts, in
which knob the kernel is of little bigness, but of such virtue to provoke
wantonness, as they serve it at all feasts. All the fields are full of
figtrees, not small as with us, but as big in the body as some Appel-trees, and
they have broad leaves. The fruit has the form of a long (...), and a black
skin, and a red juice, being to be sucked like sugar in taste. Neither do I
think any fruit to be more pleasant then this pulled from the tree, I say
pulled from the tree, because the dry figs exported are not in taste
comparable thereunto. In the fields of upper Italy are great plenty of Almond
trees, so as you would say, that a whole Province is but one Garden. Like
plenty have they of O iue trees, which yield a sweet oil, used by them in
stead of butter, and in sorraigne parts for wholsomnesse, yet I cannot think
that it can be whok some when it is heated, as the Italians use it to fry
meats. They have some, but not to great plenty of Pomegranates, which tree is
not unlike that of the white Role, but the leaves are little, and the flowers
and the buds of a red color. The Husbandmen make ditches about the roots of
all these fruit trees, and the inhabitants of pleasant taly are notable in all
kind of husbandry. The Cypress, Popler and Oak trees, grow in many places,
but are little esteemed, as bearing no fruit. Italy upon the Hills and
Mountains lying toward the Sun, yields rich Wines, and very nourishing, yet
some out of experience say they are not wholesome for fat men, as causing
obstructions, and hindering the passage of the urine, and other cuacuations: but
I am sure they are more pleasant in taste, then any other wine whatsoever
brought into England that ever I tasted. But of all the kinds of Wine to be
named in my following discourse, I have spoken more at large in the first Part,
writing my iournall through Italy.

I have seen Pease, Artichokes, cloued Gilly flowers, and other flowers of the
best kinds, sold in the Marketplace of Saint Mark in Venice all the month of
February, but they had not the odoriferous smell of Summer-flowers. Also at
Genoa in the month of December, I did see the same flowers and fruits sold,
and many of them for one bolineo, yea the flowers were odoriferous in smell,
and newly gathered, which made me think, that those I did see at Venice, were
preserved by Art, and not newly gathered. And they of Genoa acknowledge, that
they learned the art to make flowers grow in Winter, of Cowes by chance
nipping-offsome budds in Summer, which they observed to bud and put forth
again in Winter for the Gareners upon this observation, did themselves nip
offsome buds newly put forth in Summer, and forbearing to water that root all
Summer time, did upon approach of Winter dig about the route, and sow cloves
about it, to make the Winter-flowers have the better (...), and then covering
the root with earth, began daily to water it, and with this Art sooner or
later used, they make the earth yield Roses, or any flowers in what month of
the year they will, to that the ground lie upon the South Sun, and fenced
from cold winds.

The Gulf of Venice affoards fishing to serve that City in good plenty, the
Sea of Rome affoards less, and that of Genoa none at all. But in the Sea of
Genoa near the Islands Sardinia and Corsica, they fish Cora's, sold at Genoa
for three lyres the ownce. In the markets at Venice they have great ovsters,
but in no great plenty, and diverse kinds of shel-fish, as Cockles, Scalops, and
Rasers, called in the Italian tongue Cape tonde, (round Cape) Cape Sante (holy
Cape) and Cape long (long Cape), and these they have in more plenty, then in
most parts of England: but the Oysters are very dear, some twenty for a lyre;
and I do not remember to have seen shelfish in any other City of Italy, but
only in Venite. Neither have the Italians any store of fresh water fish, so as
most of their Markets are furnished in very Lent-time with salted and dried
fishes, or at least newly dead, which the Germans cannot endure, using to see
them alive before they will cate them. They have at certain times of the year
reasonable plenty of birds, but not great in number or variety of kinds, but
Hens, and especially those of Turkey or the Indies seem more plentifully
served in the Markets, because the common sort feeds only upon roots, diverse
kinds of pulse, herbs, and small meats dried or salted. I remember not to
have seen any Storkes in Italy, no not in the free Cities and States, where
fabulous Writers say, they most willingly live, as under more just Lords and
Governors. The Italian Gentlemen much delight in the art to catch birds, and
in Gardens fitted to that purpose, with nets, bushes and glades, sparing no
cost or industry in that kind.

Not only the Gentlemen, but even the Princes of Italy openly prosesse to be
Merchants (which our men, with leave may I say, foolishly (...)) and only
permit the The traffic
retailing of their goods to men of inferior sort, keeping all trade in grosle
or whole sale to themselves, or at least by their treasures (commonly great)
and authority (such as it is) drawing the chief profit thereof into their
own purses. And by this course they keep the Patrimonies discending from
their Ancestors, and daily increase them (while our Gentlemen prodigal in
expense, and ashamed to make honest gain, destroy their Families.) But of all
trades, they are most enriched by silk and clothes made of it, especially they
of Florence and Lucca, where the Gentlemen for exercise of this trade, keep
open shops.

The Silke-wormes are vulgarly called Farfalli, which infold themselves in a
piece. Silk worms
of silk they weaue of an ouall form and yellow color, and some of them so
infolded, are let out for preservation of the kind, by clipping that piece of
silk they weaued; the other pieces are set in the Sun, that the infolded
worms may die, whereby (...) is made excellent, which otherwise would be
little worth. They feed on the leaves of Mulberry trees, and the Duke of
Florence plants these trees in the ditches upon the highway, from which if any
passenger pull a bough, he paies a great penalty. Wondering at this making of
silk, and the art to weaue the same, after I returned into England, by
acquaintance with some that for experience kept these worms, I found, that
about the month of August they cast seed upon paper or linen cloth whereon
they are laid, and soon after die. That this seed laid aside al winter, is set
forth in the Sun the next May, or as soon as the Mulbery trees yield leaves to
feed the worms. That by the Suns heat, the worms take life of that seed in
the form of an horse hair at the first; after growing to a strange bigness,
feeding greedily upon those leaves. That they begin then to be sick, and
growing of a yellow color leave their feeding. That they are then put into a
place fitted for their work, with corners little distant one from the other:
that they then weaue and infold themselves in their webs (as I said.) That part
of the webs are laid aside to preserve the worms, out of which they eat out
their way, and come forth winged like butterflies, but little use the wing, and
these webs yield no silk thread, but being dressed and severed, do serve for
baser uses. That the rest of the webs are put into an oven, to choke the
worms, which webs yield excellent silk, disloluing it self into small
threads Lastly, that the worms preserved by spoiling their webs, out of which
they eat their way, do (as I said) cast a seed or glutinous matter upon a
paper or linen cloth, and then die. And that all these things, namely, to come
to life to be fed up, to weaue their web, to leave seed for generation, and to
die, are finished in the space of four months.

After taking my journey into Turkey, I did see infinite numbers of these
worms in the greater and lesser Asia, where I found, that these worms grow to
full bigness from the month of February to the month of May, then leave their
meat, then have houses made of reeds for them of purpose like the hiues for
Bees, but more large, where (as I said) they inuolue themselves in their own
webs, which being set in the Sun, the worms die within them, and the webs
moistened with hot water, are with wheels drawn into small threads. That some
of these webs for preservation of the kind, are laid aside within the houses,
where the worms eat out their way, and coming forth winged, are laid upon a
linen cloth, upon which they leave the foresaid seed or glutinous matter, and
so die. That these clothes are laid aside in winter, but in the month of
February next following, are set out in the sun, or more frequently carried in
the bosoms of country people, both men and women, by which heat the seed yields
worms at first no greater then a grain of mustard seed, but after growing to
the length of a man's hair as he usually wears it on his head, and to the
thicknes of a man's little finger. Formerly in the chapter of Proverbs, I said
that prouerbially the Mercha^ts of Florence were called crafty, those of Lucca
greedy, those of Venice bold (ventring al in one vessel) The traffic
those of Milan faithful (professing if need be, that the plague is in the
house they desire to sell.) And I there mentioned this proverb of the Venetian
traffic; Ilbianco and il Nero (cioe pepe and cottone) hanno fatto venetia
ricca. Black and white (that is, pepper and cotton) have made Venice rich.
English Merchants bring into Italy Tin, Lead, Herrings (especially dried,
which they esteem among dainties), Conny skin, Veches, Kersies, and sometimes
English Corn. They also bring thither diverse commodities from Dantzk, as
Cordage, Hemp, Cauiale, Tallow, Wax, Indian Hides, and like commodites of
Poland and Moscouy. The Netherlanders bring into Italy dried fishes, and the
commodities of all Nations (with which they trade both here and in all places.)
Into England, Netherland, and over parts, the Italians send Veluets of Genoa,
Taffaties of Florence and Lucca, Sattens of Bologna and other Cities, Stuffes
of Milan as Fustians, and diverse kinds of Silk wouen and in thread, Gold and
Silver, Clothes of gold and silver, Alom, and like commodities brought to
Venice out of Turkey. From the Islands of the Mediterranean Sea subject to
Venice, they send to us Malmsies and Muskedine wines of Candia, Corrands of
Zant and Cephalonia. The ships of our parts which bring Corn or any victuals
into Italy, are received with all courtesy, especially by the Duke of Florence
in the haven of Ligorno, and even by the Pope in the haven of Ciuita Vecchia.
The Italians have great traffic with the Turks in the Mediterranean Sea
(whereof we shall speak more hereafter) but out of the straights of that Sea,
they trade little in our age, or nothing at all, (except sometimes into Spain)
with their own ships. And for Navigations (whereof I must speak in the Chapter
of Commonwealths) they have small skill in that art. Their ships are of great
but then to receive commodities, and well furnished with Ordinance against the
Turkish Pirates, but they are slow, and not easily turned, so as sometimes the
Turks less daring at sea, yet take some great Venetian ships with their small
barques or gallyes. For the Italians and Turks make their Nauall fights with
galleys, and no other ships, whereof the Venetian and Spaniard have great
numbers in this Sea. We read, that the Pope made league with the Venetians
and Spaniards for bearing some charge of war against the Turks, and it is
likely he has some galleys, in that one sole haven of Ciuita Vecchia belonging
to him, but I never chanced to see any of the Popes galleys. The Duke of
Florence at this time had ready armed to spoil the Turks some 5 or 6 galleys:
the other Princes have none at al. These galleys are much different in bigness,
and have their names of the number of the oars rowing them, as Trtremes of
three oars on each side. Quindeciremis of fifteen oars, and the
Mediterranean Sea, being subject to small ebbings or flowings of tides, and
little subject to storms, these galleys safely row between the neighboring
shoares, and every night put into some Haven or Baye. The Italians are so much
inamored of their own land, as they desire to see no other soil, and abhor
from venturing themselves at Sea, so as they seldom prove expert in
Navigations, never bold. The Venetians have a Law, that every ship shall carry a
young Gentleman of Venice in it, allowing him diet and a stipend, and also
shall bring up a Venetian boy in (...). Thus their wise Progenitors took care,
that neither Gentlemen, nor the inferior sort should be ignorant in
Navigations. But the Gentlemen at this day so they may have the benefit of the
Law, by receiving the stipend and the value of their diet for the Voyage, care
not for the experience, and rather desire to stay at home, then trouble the
ship any further. And for this cause the Venetians altogether use Greeks
as well for common Mariners as for Officers and Masters of their ships. And
these Greeks (as I have often found by experience) except they can see the
shore (which by reason of the narrowness of the Sea, and frequent Isles, may
often be seen), are often in doubt, sometimes ignorant where they are, and the
least storm arrising, make such a noise and confusion, as they bewray their
ignorance and want of courage. Our English ships coming forth of the Harbor
of Venice together with a Venetian ship, will sail into Syria and return
back again, before the Venetian ship can come thither. Whereof two reasons
may be given. One that the English Mariners are paid by the voyage, not by
the days or months of absence, contrarily the Greeks are paid by the
Italians after the days of absence not after the voyage. The other reason is,
that not only the Italian ships are huge and great and slow of sail, but also
the Masters, upon the first change of wind, or foreseeing of ill weather,
either for fear, or because they are paid by the day not by the voyage,
presently put into some Haven, whence commonly they cannot come forth, but with
one or very few winds, whereas the English on the contrary have not only
nimble swift ships, but themselves are so expert and bold, as in regard their
loss Is the greater the longer they are from home, they either sail if the
wind be any whit favorable, or lie at hull, if the wind be full contrary, and
so are reedy to take the first blast of wind serving their turn.

Concerning the diverse kinds of diet in diverse Italian Cities, I have before
related Their diet.
these things prouerbially said. The Neapolitans are magnificall, spending more
sugar then bread. The Florentines are of spare diet, but wonderful
clenlinesse. Those of Lucca keep golden mediocritic in all things. The
Tyberine Pears and Martioline cheeses are great dainties. Those of Genoa are
of most spare diet, and no clenlines. The Mantuans feed on base beans. The
Ferrarians are in hospital. The Padoans sup with half a penniworth of fish.
The Venetians live sparingly. The Siennesi magnifically, and their dainties are
Goats flesh, and fresh cheese. The Milanesi live plentifully, and provoke
appetite with sharp sawces. The Nouocomenses eat without end, and drink
stoutly. Those of Piemont diet after the French manner, and those of Ancona
basely.

And these things may perhaps be truly said, if the Italian Cities be compared
one with the other, but many things may seem less aptly said, if generally
they be compared with the Cities of foreign parts.

The Italians generally compared with English or French, are most sparing in
their diet. Generally they require small preparation or furniture of their
table, they eat neately and modestly but as they are not like the Spaniards,
who are said to eat sparingly at their own cost, largely at other men's
tables, so howsoever they are not so great flesh-eaters as the Northern men,
yet if the bread be weighed, which one of them eats at a meal, with a great
Charger full of herbs, and a little oil mixed therein, believe me they have
no cause to accuse Northern men for great eaters.

They seldom make feasts, but if they make any, then out of their innated
pride, disdaining to be surpassed by any, they make them sumptnous, and that
much more then ours, always making the comparison equal of one degree against
the other. And this is most certain, that they infinitely pass us in the
expenses about their Gardens, in fitting places for birding, in drawing water
to them, and adorning the Conduits head with Imagry, in Chapels, and other
buildings, of which things some yield them fruit, the other last perpetually:
for they bestow their money in stable things, to serve their posterity, where
as our greatest expenses end in the casting out of excrements, which makes me
less commend our expenses in great provisions of meat, as well at feasts as
daily diet.

And give me leave to hold this paradox, or opinion against that of the common
sort; that the English were never more idle, never more ignorant in manual
Arts, never more factious in following the parties of Princes or their
Landlords, never more base (as I may say) trencher slaves, then in that age,
wherein great men keept open houses for all comers and goers. And that in our
age, wherein we have better learned each man to live of his own, and great men
keep not such troops of idle servants, not only the English are become very
industrious, and skillful in manual Arts, but also the tyranny of Lords and
Gentlemen is abated, whereby they nourished private dissentions and civil
Wars, with the destruction of the common people. Neither am I moved with the
vulgar opinion, preferring old times to ours, because it is apparent, that the
Cloisters of Monks (who spoiled all, that they might be beneficial to few),
and Gentlemen's houses (who nourished a rabble of servants in idleness, and in
robbing by the high ways) lying open to all idle people for meat and drink,
were cause of greater ill then good to the Commonwealth. Yet I would not be so
understood, as if I would have the poor shut cut of doors, for I rather
desire, that greater works of charity should be exercised toward them, to
which we should be more enabled by honest frugalitie, then by foolish
prodigality; I call it foolish, and think the vulgar sort of prodigals worthy
of all ignominy, who with huge expenses keep many kennels of dogs, and casts
of hawks, and entertain great numbers of strangers, sometimes not known by
name, often scoffing at the entertainer, always ungrateful, and so not only
use them to live unlawfully without labor or sweat of their brows, but also
in the mean time themselves will have a brother for their Buttler, and are so
niggardly toward their kinsmen, yea, children and wives, as they provide not
necessaries for them, and have no care of their advancement, education, and
means to live, but prefer vainglory before these religious cares. How much
better were it for these prodigal men to lay aside some good part of their
revenue to nourish learned men, to procure good Preachers for their companions
and guides, to relieve virtuous men in their wants, and to spend the same to
like noble and princely ends.

But I return to my purpose. A stranger may live in Italy with less expense,
then in Germany, where he must bear the charge of his consorts excessive
drinking. And if any object the dearth of victuals, and wickedness of Hosts in
Italy, he shall find, that this is his own want, not any ill of the Country;
and when he has experience to do his own affairs there, he will be of my
opinion. The Italians have small moneys of brass, and for the least of them a
man may buy bread, little papers of spice, or any such thing that is to be
sold. These small moneys, the abundance of people in a narrow land, and the
common peoples poverty, but most of all their innated pride, such as they had
rather starve for want, then beg, these things make them do any service for a
stranger for a small reward, and make the passages of Rivers, or Channells (as
at Venice), and all necessaries, to be affoorded for a small piece of money.
Neither is it a small commodity of these little brass moneys, that it makes
the meaner sort more ready to give alms. This benefit the English may well
know by the want of like moneys, whereby the hire of Porters, all rewards and
each alms being given in silver money, and the small pieces thereof being
rare, all expenses are much increased. The women of Italy know not the price of
any thing, or ever go to Markets (scarce are allowed to go to Church) neither
do they trust their servants to make their market, but the richest of all
Italy, and most noble (especially in Venice) daily buy their own victuals and
other necessaries. And in all Marketplaces stand little boys with baskets, to
carry any thing that is bought to their houses, which they easily find, knowing
all streets and allies, and never fail to perform this honestly, though the
buyer leave them, and (according to their custom) go about his other
affairs; for if they should fail, they cannot escape punishment, being easily
to be found in the Markets where they use daily to stand, and well known by
face and name. Yet in truth the Italians diet is so sparing, as almost
strangers alone use these little Porters, and the very Gentlemen of Venice
(which notwithstanding arrogate to themselves a pre-eminence above all
Gentlemen of Italy with the singular title of Clarissimi), carry home what they
buy to eat, either in the sleeves of their gowns, or in a clean handkercher.
They spend much bread and oil, and the very Porters feed on most pure white
bread, almost without any other meat, except it be some roots. And those that
are richer, do for the most part feed on bread, neither remember I to have
ever seen brown bread in Italy, only they eat sailets of herbs with their
bread, and mingle them with oil. And I remember that I saw a barrel of oil
sold for twenty lyres, and a bushel of Wheat (containing forty eight
measures, called Sata by the Latins, and used by the Hebrews) for 120 lyres,
but the very Gentlemen buy their bread of the Bakers. Many times, especially in
short days of Winter, they will break their fasts with a bit of cake-bread or
sweet bread (called vulgarly pasta reale, ciambolini, and generally
Gentilezze), and a cup of sweet Wine, and so abstain from dinner.

For the most part at table they use black or bay salt, which the Venetians
having of their own; for bid the use of any white salt brought into the
territory, so as it is only sold by stealth, and with danger of penalty. The
Magistrate daily uses to set the price of flesh, and all things sold in the
Market, especially in the upper parts of Italy, and namely at Sienna, where
strangers live very commodiously, and by this custom, a stranger can no more
be deceived, then one of the Country. In the State of Florente, and especially
at Sienna, a stranger may live more commodiously, then in any other part of
Italy, because the inhabitants are most courteous (so as at Sienna they admit
strangers to converse and dance with the chief Gentlewomen of the City), and
because the language, especially at Sienna, is held the most pure, as also for
that victuale are very cheap, and strangers need not stand in fear of being
murdered, as in Lombardy they do. In the State of Milan, there is plenty of
all kinds of flesh, especially of mutton, and abundance of whittmeates, being
commended above all other parts of Italy for delicate butter (not to be had
otherwhere, except in some few large Valleys), and excellent cheeses (whereof
great quantity is transported into foreign parts.) And they no less then the
Netherlanders, serve in butter and cheese every meal for the first and last
dishes. In the Market places of Venice, there is plenty of mutton and veale,
sold in little portions and by weight (there as in all Italy), and there is
also plenty of fish, hens, eggs, Turkey hens, and some store of birds,
with great abundance of red herrings and pickled herrings, Sardelle, anchone,
and like pickled fishes, of Cauiale (a salt liquor made of fish) and Botargo
(as I think the rone of a fish), of Piacentine cheese, and cheese of Parma, of
mushroms, snailes, the hinder parts of frogs (all held for great dainties). And
these things are to be had in more abundance, because the common sort eat
little or no flesh, or fish, or birds, but only herbs, pulse, snailes, and
roots, with white bread. I have spoken formerly of their fishing at Sea, and
their shell-fishes (which they much esteem), and Sea-fishes are indeed rarely
found, but only at Venice. Also they have little store of fresh water fish,
only there is great abundance of eeles, where the River Po ends in a Lake,
near the Adriatic Sea, in the Dukedom of Feraria. The upper parts of Italy
yield the same things, but in a far less quantity, and in Toscany they
frequently eat young Goats flesh, which is very good and sauory, and
sometimes there will be wild Bores to be sold, and they delight much in fresh
curds newly pressed, and made into little cheeses. The Italians sell al kinds
of flesh in little pieces, and all things for diet in little portions, that the
meaner sort, if they list, may at least taste the greatest dainties. The inner
parts of Goats (vulgarly Animale), and the stones of Rams and Regles,
(vulgarly Granella), are esteemed great dainties, especially in Toscany, which
we cast away, being very good meat fried. And because the land is more
populous then plentiful in victuals, they eat lays and other birds, which
we esteem unwholesome.

In general the Italians, and more specially the Florentines, are most near
at the Table, and in their Innes from morning to night the Tables are spread
with white clothes, strewed with flowers and fig leaves, with Ingestars or
glasses of diverse colored wines set upon them, and delicate fruits, which
would inuit a Man to eat and drink, who otherwise has no appetite, being all
open to the sight of passengers as they ride by the high way, through their
great vnglased windows. At the Table, they touch no meat with the hand, but
with a forke of silver or other metal, each man being served with his forke
and spoone, and glass to drink. And as they serve small pieces of flesh, (not
whole ioints as with us), so these pieces are cut into small bits, to be taken
up with the forke, and they sees the flesh till it be very tender. In Summer
time, they set a broad earthen vessel full of water upon the Table, wherein
little glasses filled with wine do swim for coolness. They use no spits to
roast flesh, but commonly stew the same in earthen pipkins, and they feed much
upon little fishes and flesh cut and fried with oil. They have no skill in the
Art of Cookery, and the meat is served to the table in white glistering and
painted dishes of earth (whereof the finest are much esteemed with us.) They are
not willingly invited to eat with other men, esteeming basely of those, who
live at other men's trenchers, calling them vulgarly seroccatori d'ipasti,
shifters for meals. And the reason hereof is, that they would not be tied to
inuit others again, which in their pride they would do, if they should be
invited to them, and this is the chief cause that makes them nice to converse
with strangers. Of the Florentines, though most courteous, yet sparing, other
Italians jest, saying, that when they meet a man about dinner time, they ask
Vos' Signoria ha desinato, Sir, have you dined? and if he answer, I, they
reply as if they would have invited him to dinner: but if he answer no, they
reply Andate Signor, ch'eotta, Go Sir, for it is high time to dine. They
think it best to cherrish and increase friendship by meetings in Market places
and Gardens, but hold the table and bed unfit for conversation, where men
should come to eat quickly, and sleep soundly. Thus not provoking appetite
with variety of meats, or eating with others for good fellowship, they must
needs be more temperate, then others intised by these means to eat beyond
hunger. In Cities, where many take chambers in one house, they eat at a common
table, but each man has his own meat provided, the Hostess dressing it, and
serving each man with his own napkin, glass, forke, spoone, knife, and
ingestar or glass of wine, which after meat are severally and neately laid up
by the Hostess. And at the table, perhaps one man has a hen, another a piece
of flesh, the third potched eggs, and each man several meat after his diet:
but it is no courtesy for one to offer another part of his meat, which they
rather take to be done in pride, as if he thought that he that had a sallet or
eggs, could not have a hen or flesh if he listed for want of money. To
conclude, they hold it no honor or disgrace to live plentifully or sparingly,
so they live of their own, and be not in debt, for in that case they are
esteemed slaves. Thus living of their own, they give due honor to superiors,
so they return due respect to them, otherwise they despise him that is richer,
saying in scorn, Let him dine twice a day, and wear two gounes if he will, it
is enough for me to have convenient diet and apparel. They have a very
delicate sauce for roasted meats, called Sauore, made of slices of bread,
steeped in broth, with as many Walnuts, and some few leaves of Marioram,
beaten in a mortar, and mingled therewith, together with the juice of
Gooseberries, or some sharp liquor put in when it is set on the table.

In some Cities and Universities, especially for the Germans soiourning there,
and unwilling to buy their own meat, they have ordinary tables to be paid by
the week or month, at the rate of some eight or ten Crowns the month, which
living they call a la dozina (that is, by dosens or by the great); but it is
much more commodious for him that has some experience and skill in the tongue,
to buy his own meat, since in Camere locande (that is, hired chambers) the
Hostess at a reasonable rate of the chamber, is tied to dress his meat, and
give him napkins with like necessaries, and there wants not good commodity to
buy al things he wants, and to live cheapely, as I have showed in the expenses
of my iournies through Italy.

The Italian Hosts are notable in fawning and crouching for gain, so as they
meet passengers at the Cities gates, and emulously inuit them to their
houses, with promise of all dainties, as if they would give them for naught,
but when they are once come into the houses, all things threaten famine, and
for that meat they have, if the passenger first agree not for the price, they
extort so unreasonably, as nothing can be added to their persidiousnesse and
covetousness. The Germans say, these are fairespoken, and most obsequious men
in all things, till they come to the shot: for if any man love honorable
titles, capping, bending of knees, and an humble look, they will observe him
to the full, but in the end the shot will be intolerable, and he shall pay for
their sained courtesy and lowliness. And this extortion is not to be avoided
by the best experienced, if they stand not continually upon their guard with
these Fencers, especially in both the Marks (or Marquisates) where they are not
Hosts, but deuourers of passengers: And howsoever the Italian Hosts are more
excusable in their extortions, because the Princes granting licenses to keep
these Innes, do not sheare but indeed devour them, and he that buys, must
needs sell, yet the Marchians inhospitall nature is singular and above all
others. For the Florentines oppressed with like or greater exactions, yet use
strangers much more courteously. I would advise the unexperienced passenger,
that there being in these Italian Innes two ordinary courses of eating, one
alconto, that is upon reckoning, the other al pasto, that is, by the meal at a
set rate (seldom exceeding three Giulij) the passengers for cheapnes should
take his breakfast upon reckoning, or carry about him some almonds, figs dried,
or Raysons, that dining upon reckoning, in case the Hosts set an excessive
price on me it (for woe to him that eats without first knowing the price), he
may seem content to eat of his own, taking only bread and wine, (whereof
the prices are known and ordinary), and so may contain their rapacity within
some reasonable bounds: But at night because of his bed, he shall do well to
sup at the Ordinary, and before supper to know his bed and get clean sheets:
yet he must not expect a feather bed, which that clime bears not, as too hot
for the (...), but an hard mattresse, only he shall have clean sheets, at
least if he curiously demand them. Howsoever against the worst event, he shall
do well to carry linen breeches, and to wear them in the ordinary sheets;
for the Italians if they have no kind of the French pox, yet for the most (...)
are troubled with an itch, witness the frequent cry in their streets of
Vnguento per (...), Ointment for the Itch. I formerly said that a passenger
needs have no care of his Horse by the way, for it is the custom to agree for
their meat as well as hire with the Vetturines, (so they call those that let
Horses, and go on foot or send a servant to meat them): But since the same
Vetturines will also offer a passenger to agree with him in like fort for his
own diet, surely (as I have said in the Chapter of the manner to take
iournies) the passenger is in ill case, that is dieted by them, neither would I
advise any so to do, except only in the way from Rome to Naples and back
again, where a passenger in such a tumultuary journey, and by reason of that
old custom, should otherwise be worse entreated. Lastly, a passenger shall do
wisely, especially at nighe to go to the best Inn and of most fame, that he
may be more safe from the loss of his money or hazard of his life.

The Italians hold it a great shame to be drunken, they sometimes salute one
another with a cup, in manner of a health, but leave it to his pleasure when he
will pledge them, and then he salutes him that drunk to him, as well as him to
whom he drinks, saying; Faccie ragione a vos' signoria, brindisia vos
Signoria. Sir I pledge you, and I drink to you Sir. The word Brindisi comes of
the Dutch phrase, Ich brings each, I will bring it to you, used when they
drink to any man, and this shows the custom is borrowed from the Germans,
and used by the obsequious Italians to please them, yet abhorring from
drunkenness, so pleasing to the Germans.

Italy yeeldes excellent Wines, and the common red wine is held very
nourishing, so as the fairest Weomen will diue with the same, and a sop of
bread dipped in it, thinking it will make them fat, (which kind of Women the
Venetians most love, all things else being equal), yea, and more fair: So as
they Prouerbially say; Chibeue branco, piscta bianco, a chi beue rosso, auanza
il color. He that drinks white, pisses white, he that drinks red, gains the
color: These are the most famous Wines of Italy. (...) di Christ, (the tear
of Christ) and like wines near Cinqueterre in Liguria: La (...), and the white
Muskadine, especially that of Montefiaschoni in Toscany: Cecubum and Falernum
in the Kingdom of Naples, and Prosecho in Histria. In general the grapes that
grow high upon Elme-trees in the plain, as in Lombardy, and especially the
grapes of Modena, yield very small Wines, but those that grow upon hills and
mountains, resting on short stakes, yield very rich Wines. In the shops where
they sell Muskadines, there be continually boys attending with little wigges
of sweet bread and Iunkets, which the Italians dip in the wine; and having
thus broke their fasts in winter time, they commonly eat no more till supper.

The third Book.
CHAP. I. Of the Geographicall description of Turkey, the Situation, Fertility,
Traffic, and Diet.
THE Longitude of Turkey extends fifty five degrees and a half, from the
meridian of forty four degrees and a half, to that of an hundred degrees, and
the Latitude extends forty degrees from the Parallel of ten degrees, to that
of fifty degrees. The Provinces of this Empire in Europe, are thus numbered.
Illyris, Albania, Epirus, Gracia, Macedonia, Thessalia, Thracia, Mysia, Dacia
(or I ransiluania), Hungaria, and the Islands under him, that lie in Europe.

1 Illyris a part of Sclauonia, is subject partlv to the Turks, partly to the
House of Austria; the chief Cities whereof are Zara, (which together with the
territory thereof, the Turks took from the Venetians, the rest of the
Province being still subject to the House of Austria): and Scordona, lying upon
the Sea, as does the former City, and all the Province: Also Croatia vulgarly
Cranaten, and of old called Liburnia, belongs to this Province. 2 Albania has
these known Cities, Dirachium, (vulgarly Dorazzo, of old called Epidaurus),
and Vallona. 3 Epirus has these Towns Chimera, Meiandria, Butrinto, Cestrina,
and Nicopolis. Of old part of Epirus was called Acarnania. Of the royal blood
of this Province was Alexander Scanderbeg, who brought up in the Great Turks
Court, and upon occasion falling from him, did so much trouble that vast Empire!

4 Gracia was of old divided into Peloponesus and Helles. Peloponesus, of old
called Aiggealia, Appta, and Pelasgia, is at this day named Morea, and it is a
Chersonelus, that is, a neck of Land almost an Island, only joined to the
continent with an Isthmus, that is a narrow piece of Land. The rest is
compassed with the Sea, and was of old divided into Sutionium (which has the
Cities Sution and Carinthus); Argo'is (which has the Cities Argos and
Neapolis), Achaia or Elis, (whereof the chief City was Elis); and Arcadia
(whose chief Towns are Psofis and Arcomenus.) And here the River Emaus, or
Erimanthus, springs, and joining with the Brook Alpheus, falls into the gulf
of Arcadia. Also the River Inachus springs in the Mountain Parthenius, and
falls into the gulf of Neapolis. Moreover Peloponesus has a fifth Province
called Lacedemonta or Laconia, (whereof the chief City was Lacedemon or
Sparta, most famous of old). The sixth Province is Messena, in which is the
City Metona, now called Modon. The straight neck of Land joining Peloponesus
to the Continent, was against the Turks fortified with a wall by the
Christians, but the Turks cast down the wall, and took all the Province.
Helles or Achaia, the second Province of Greece, contains Attica, Megaris,
Boetia, Phocis, Regio Locrorum, and AEtolis. Attica is more famous then the
rest, in which was the famous City Athens. Megaris is a small Region, the
chief City whereof was Megaria, in which Euclides was borne Boetia is a very
large Region, so called of an Ox leading Cadmus thither, who built the Boetian
Thebes, so called for difference from nine other Cities called Thebes. The
Mountains Thermopula, derived from the Mountains Acroceraunij, lying upon
Epirus, divide Greece from the West to the East, (as the Apenninediuides
Italy), and the famous mountains Otris Pelion and Ossa, are parts thereof. Of
old Aulis was a famous City of Boetia, in which Iphigenia Daughter to Agamemnon
was sacrificed. Phocis is a small Region, the towns whereof were Elatea, and
Delphis seated at the foot of the Mountain Parnassus, having the Temple of
Apollo, not in the Town, but upon a Rock of the Mountain, where springs the
Castalian Fountain, sacred to the Muses, and the Mount Helicon lies near the
same. The Region of the Locri is small, and the chief City is now called
Lepanto. Of old a people called Pieres, coming out of Thrace, dwelt under
Farnassus, of whem it was called the Pierian Mountain, and the Muses were
called Pierides. Doris pertaines to the Region of the Locri, and the chief
City is Doricum, whence came the Doric Dialect. The last Province of Helles and
of all Greece, is AEtolia, divided from Eptrus by the River Achelons, falling
from the Mount Pindus, and the chief Towns thereof are, Naupactus, now called
Lepanto, near the gulf whereof, the Christian Navy under the commaud of Don
Iuan of Austria, gave a famous overthrow to the Turkish Navy in our Age. The
other City is called Chaledon, whence was the Chaledonian Boar, sung of the
Poets.

5 The fifth Province of Turkey is Macedonia, of old called Migdonia, and
Emathea, the chief City whereof is Thessalonica, vulgarly now called
Saloniche, to the Citizens whereof S. Paul wrote his Epistle. The Mountains of
this Province Olimpus Pelion Ossa, are famous by the fables of the Giants, and
Athos is fained to pass the clouds with his top. 6. The lower part of
Macedonia is called Thessalia, or AEmonia, of Thessalus the son of AEmon, (or
as others say of Jason) the chief Town whereof was Pharsalos, whose fields
are famous by the victory of Caesar against Pompey. 7 Thracia has fair
Cities, Trimontium (of old called Poneropolis and Philippopolis), Adrianopolis,
and the head City Constantinopolis, (of old called Bysantium, now Stambol)
seated upon the Bosphorus of Thracia. It has famous Mountains, Rhodope, Mela
and Ismarus: Upon Propontis the Thracian Chersonesus (or neck of Land) lies
upon the Hellespont, in which are the Towns Sesto and Callipolis. 8 The upper
Mista is divided into three parts, Rascia, Bosnia and Seruia, and the lower
Misia into three parts, Bulgaria, Wallachia and Moldauia. In Bulgaria the River
Danubius begins to be called Isther, which falls into the Euxine Sea, with
four strong and three lesser channels. 9 Dacia or Transiluania, was of old
possessed by the Saxons, who there built seven Cities or Castles, of which the
Province is called Septem-Castrensis, vulgarly Sieben burgen, and of old it
belonged to the Kingdom of Hungary, but at this day is tributary to the Turks.
10 Hungaria so called of the people Hunnt, was of old called Fannonia the
lower, and of right belongs to the German Emperor, but of late the Turks have
subdued the greater part thereof. It has many and strongly fortified Cities,
as Debrezinum, Varadinum, Segedinum (vulgarly Seget); Castrum (taken by the
Turks) Strigonium vulgarly (...) (taken by the Turks in the year 1543) Alba
Regalis (at that time also taken by them) Quinquecclesiae (the feate of the
Bishop) Buda seated upon the Danow; (twice or thrice taken and regained on both
sides, of old the Kings seat) called vulgarly Offen, and Pesta (seated on the
other side of Danow) vulgarly called New offen. The Hungarian Nation yields to
none in strength and courage, not unlike the Scithians in language and manners.

11 The Islands of Europe, in the Ionian Sea are these, Corcira (vulgarly Corfu)
Cephalania, and Zaintos, (in Latin Zacinthus, vulgarly now called Zante); all
three subject to the Venetians. All the Islands in the AEgean Sea, are subject
to the Turk, being innumerable, among them are the Cyclades, so called because
they lie round together, the chief whereof are Cytnos, Cyphnos, (vulgarly
Sifano); Parus (now called Paris, famous for the Marble), Tenos (now called
Tenasa), Naxus, Andros, and Delos the chief of all, where Apollo and Diana
were borne. Next them, are the Sporades, so called of lying dispersed, among
which are Melos, Lera, Nicaria, AEgina, and Lemnos (vulgarly Stalemine, whether
they fable that Vulcane was cast down.) The Island Ibea, now vulgarly
Negroponte is attributed to Greece, being separated from the continent with so
little distance, as it can hardly be named an Island, and it lies close to the
City of Athens.

The Turk has great part of Asia, divided into Asia the lesser and Asia the
greater. The lesser is now called Natolia or Anatolia of a Greek word
signifying the East, being a kind of Isthmus or neck of land, lying between
two Seas, the Euxine toward the North, and the Mediterranean toward the
South, as it has the Thracian Bosphorus (as passable by an Ox swimming) and
Propontis (as lying before the Sea) and Hellespont and the AEgean Sea) toward
the West, and is confined with the River Euphrates toward the East. This
lesser Asia is all subject to the Turk, and has 16. Provinces. Bithinia,
Fo^tus, Paphlagonia, Capadocia, Gallatia, Frigia (the greater and lesser)
Misia, Ionia, Charia, Lidia, Pamphilia, Lacaonia, Licia, Cilicia, the lesser
Armenia and Chomagena.

1 Bithinia is at this day called Migtonia, and the chief Cities thereof are
Nicea (the Metropolitan City, famous for the Council in the year 314. of
318. Bishops meeting to beat down the Arrian heresy, and there making the
Nicene Creed), Lybissa (where Hannibal was buried,) Chalcedo (where one of the
eight old Councels was held by 530 Bishops,) Heraclia, Nicomedia, Phrasso,
(where Esculapius was born,) and Bursa seated over against Constantinople,
where some Turkish Emperors lie buried, and thither the great Turks eldest
son is sent to govern, (or in a kind of exile, for he never sees his Father
more till he be dead,) and thither he is sent as soon as he is circumcised. 2.
Some account Pontus for part of Bithinia, 3. Paphlagonia is the third Province.
4. Capadocia the fourth so called of the River Capadocis, and the chief City
is Trapesuntium, now called Genech. And here the Amazones are said to have
lived from the destruction of Troy, to the time of Alexander the Great. 5
Frigia the lesser was called Frixis of Frixus son to the King of Thebes,
flying with his sister from his stepmother, who mounted on a Ramm with a golden
Fleece (perhaps a Ship so called) his sister being drowned, and giving the name
to Hellespont, and he came himself to this part of Asia, which at this day is
called Palormi, and yields a most excellent Wine, and in this Province are
Illium (or Troy) the Mountains Ida and Tinolus, and the River Pactolus. The
ninth Sybilla that prophesied of Christ, was a Frigian, and here reigned King
Tantalus by covetousness leesing the use of his goods, of whom the Poets so
fable. The greater Frigia is within Land. 6 The chief Cities of Misia are
Traianopolis built by Traian and Adramitbium, whereof mentiou is made in the
seventeenth Chapter of the Acts of the Apostles, and where Gallene was borne,
who lived 140 years. 7 Gallatia or Gallogrecia, was possessed by the Gals
under Brennus, whereof the chief City is Laodicia, and to this Province
belongs Pisidia, the chief City whereof is Antiochia. 8 The chief Cities of
Ionia are Ephesus, (where was the Temple of Diana; which Erostrates a Gothe did
burn, to be famous), Miletum (where Thales and Anaximines were borne) and
Smyrna. 9 The chief City of Charia, was of old Halicarnassus (in which was the
Sepulcher of Mausolius the King, held for one of the seven miracles of the
World). 10 The chief City of Lydia was Sardis, where Craesus reigned. 11 The
chief City of Pamphilia was Zelotia, and in this Province is the Mountain
Chimera, upon the wild top whereof Lions were found, as in the middle part
yielding grass, Goats did feed, and in the bottom were Serpents, whereof
came the fiction of the Monster. 12 In Lacaonia of old were these cities,
Iconium (Metrapolitan) and Lysire, where Timothy Saint Paul's Disciple was
borne, and the River Xanthus runs through this Province 13 Licia lies upon
the Sea, between Pamphilia and Charia. 14 Cylicia lies under the Mountain
Taurus, upon the furthest bosom of the Mediterranean Sea, or Iccian Gulf,
where Alexander the Great overcame Darius, and there is Tarsus, now called
Bias, in which Town Saint Paul was borne. 15 Armenia the lesser, is thought by
some to be the Land Ararat, upon the Mountains whereof the Arc of Noah rested
after the deluge. Under this Province some comhrehend 16 Chomagena, being full
of Mountains, and confining upon Asia the lesser toward the East.

The Geographers divide Asia the greater into five parts, according unto five
Empires, the first of the Duke of Moscouia, the second of great Cham over the
Tartars, the third of the Persian King, the fourth of diverse Indian Kings, the
fifth of Ottomen over the Turks. And this last only belongs to my purpose,
therefore omitting the rest, I will speak of it. The great Turk has these
Provinces in Asia the greater, namely, Syria, Arabia, Babylonia, Chaldea,
Assyria, and diverse Islands.

Siria is vulgarly called Sorya, and contains Palestina, Phaenitia,
Caelosyria, Damaseena, Sirophaenitia, (and as some account) Mesopotamia,
Palestina of old called Canaan, is subdeuided into Idumaea, Iudaea, Samarta,
Galilea. Idumea of old called Edom, is not vnfertil, and abounds with
Palme-trees, but where it confines upon Arabia, is said to be barren, and
there are the Mountains called Sur in Scriptures. It had these chief Cities
of old, Maresa, Ascalon, Asotos. Judea is the second Province of Palestina, so
called of the Tribe of Iudae, and Jerusalem the chief City thereof is at this
day called Chutz. The most famous places thereof are Bethlehem, Bethania, Mount
Oliuet, Ierico, Ioppe where S. Peter raised Dorcas from the dead,) Lydda (where
he healed the man sicko of the Palsy,) Arimathia (where Joseph was borne), and
Hebron (where Saray the wife of Abraham and four Patriarchs lie buried), The
Hebrews say, that the valley called Sittim by Moses, was most (...), where now
is the Lake Asphaltis, and in this valley stood Sodom and Gomora. Beyond Jordan
is the desert of Betabora, where John baptized, and the Land Gilliad, where the
Amonites and Moabites dwelt of old. Samaria the third Province of Palestine,
had these Cities, Sichim, Capernaum, seated upon the Lake Geneseret, Nahim,
where Christ raised the widows son, Betzaida and Coratzen, and beyond the Lake
Gadera is Samaria, the chief City of the ten Tribes, that fell from Judah.
Galilea the last Province of Palestine, is divided into the upper and the
lower. The upper called Gallile of the Gentiles, contains the Kingdom Basen,
and has these Cities, Chana the Greater, Cesarea Philippi, Seleutia, and
Gaulon, and this Province had the title of Tetrarch. The lower had the same
title, and contains the Regions of Decapolis, and Traconitis, beyond Jordan.
The chief Cities thereof were Betsaida, Chana the lesser, and Nazaret. And
here is the Mount Tabor, where Christ was transfigured: And the River Jordan
running through all Palestine, has two heads, Iar and Dan upon the Mount
Antilibanus, and running thence into the lake Asphaltis, by the way makes two
Lakes, Samachonitis (upon the confines dividing the two Galilies), and
Genezaret or Tyberias, (upon the confines between the lower Galily and
Samaria). Phenicia the second part of Syria, lies upon the Sea, and reaches to
Serophenicia, from the City Dora upon the Sea, to the Mount Carmelus, where it
is confined with the Mount Lybanus. The chief Cities thereof were, Dora,
Ptolemais, Acon, Tyrus, Sarcpta, and Sydon. Selosiria the third part of Syria,
so called as crooked or hollow, had of old the title of Tetrarch, in which is
the City Damascus, which gives the name Damascena to the fourth part of Syria,
and here Allabaster grows, of which they make vessels. Damascus is thought to
be built by the servants of Abraham, and near the City is a place, where
Christ appeared to Saint Paul, and the Sepulcher of Zachartas is said to be
there; and they show a place, where Caine is said to have killed Abell. The
soil is most fertile, so as Writers and the consent of all Men witness, that
grapes grow there all the year, and that there is plenty of Quinces, Figs,
Almonds, and Damasco Prunes. Sirophenitia the fifth part of Syria, has these
Cities, Beritum (of old called happy Iulia) Biblus, Iripolis, Landicia,
Antiochia (of old called Reblatha) which after it had been decayed by a great
Earthquake, was rebuilt by the Emperor Justinian and called Theopolis, a
famous City in which the Professors formerly called Disciples, first had the
name of Christians, and Histories testify that Saint Peter was the first
Bishop thereof. Mesopotamia the last part of Syria, is so called as lying
between two Rivers, swift Tygris (so called of the swiftness, Tygris in the
Medes tongue signifying an Arrow) and Euphrates. And by the yearly ouerflowing
of these Rivers after the Solstice (as Egypt by that of Nilus) the soil is
made most fertile, whereof Writers report wonders, namely that one measure
sowed, yeeldes fifty and in some places sixty measures, and that plants
perpetually flourish there, yet that the inner parts want water, so as the
Inhabitants finding a spring, use to keep it secret, that it may not be known
to their enemies. At this day the Turks call this Province Diarbecke, the
Cities whereof are Edessa and Carra (which Moses in the twelfth Chapter of
Genesis calls Haram) where Abraham dwelt when he came out of Chaldea.

2 Arabia is the second part of the Turkish Empire in Asia the greater, which
is subdeuided into Petrea (rocky), desert, and happy Arabia. The Israelites
lived forty years in rocky Arabia, being full of Mountains and barren,
whereof proceeded their murmurings. There is famous Mount Sinay, upon which
Gods Law was published, and over against it Mount Horeb. In Sinay is the Region
Nabathea, and the City thereof Petra (after called Arech) is in the Scriptures
called Petra of the desert, and near it lies the Region Agra or Agara, the
Inhabitants whereof were called Agarens, as coming of Hagar Concubine to
Abraham. Desert Arabia is barren, destitute of waters and covered with deep
sand, the Inhabitants whereof do live in Tents, having no certain abiding;
but near Euphrates some dwellings are, where is the famous Town Tapsacum,
after called Amphipolis. Happy Arabia lies almost in the form of a Chersonesus
or neck of Land, between the two great gulfes of the Sea, the Arabian gulf
and the Persian, and it yields Cinnamon, Franckensence, Mirh, the Gum
Ladanum, and other precious Odours, and abounds with Honey, Wax, and all kinds
of Cattle, excepting Swine only. It is said that Granes of Gold as big as
Acorres are found here among the cloddes of the Earth. It has the Bird
Phaenix, of which kind there is never more then one only, which by striking
of stones together, kindles a fire and burns her self in her nest of myrh,
and of the Ashes comes a worm, which becomes a Bird and so the Phaenix lives
again. They fish pearls in the Arabian gulf, and Jewels are found upon the
Sea shore. The Nation of the Sabaeans, is more famous then any other in this
Province, whose Region called Saba, is celebrated for plenty of Franckensence,
and it has woods of Trees, which being cut, yield a frothy humor that turns
into that odor. The Cities of happy Arabia are, (...) Tolnaby (that is, the
City of the Prophet, because Mahomet is said to have written his Alcorane
there) and Mecha (famous by Mahomets Sepulcher.) The Kingdom of Ormus is part
of happy Arabia, having a peculiar King but tributary to the King of Spain, as
he is King of Portugal, the Metrapolitane City whereof rich in trade, is
called Ormus.

3 Babilonia the third part of the Turkish Empire in Asia, has the
metrapolitane City of old called by the same name, but in these days called
Bagdet.

4 Chaldea the fourth part lies on the East side of Babilonia, whereof the
chief City is called Vhrr in the Scriptures, from whence Abraham upon Gods
commandment went to Haran a City of Mesapitania.

5 Assiria the fifth part is so called of Assure the son of Shem, whereof the
chief Cities are Ninus, called Niniue in the Scriptures, (the old seat of the
Kings, built by Assure) and Aruela (famous by the victory of Alexander the Great
against Darius the Persian King.)

6 The Islands of Asia are the sixth part of the Turkish Empire in Asia the
greater, and they lie either in the Mediterranean Sea, or in the Archipelagus,
or in the Indian Seas. In the Mediterranean Sea, lies Candia (of old called
Creta) famous of old for having one hundred Cities, and by the labyrinth of
Daedalus, and it was called Creta of the Earths whiteness, from whence great
quantity of Muskadine Wines are exported into diverse parts of Europe, and it is
subject to the State of Venice. Rhodes lies in the same Sea, and was of old
famous for the residence of the Knights of Jerusalem, but at this day is
possessed by the Turks driving out those Knights, (who now have their
residence in Malta an Island, near that of Sicily). Cyprus is an Island in the
same Sea, and is most fertile, yielding Canes of Honey, whence Sugar is made,
and rich Wines, and aboundiug with many things required for life and for
pleasure, and this Island the Turks in the last Age took from the Venetians by
force of Arms, the chief Cities whereof are Famagosta and Nicosia. The
Archipelagus has innumerable Islands, whereof the principal and most fruitful
are, Tenedos (small in circuit) but famovs by the Navy of the Greeks
harboring there at the siege of Troy) Lesbos, Lemnos, Mitelene, (at this day
called Metalon of the chief City); Samnus of old called Sicania, (where
Hypocrates was borne) and Chios (now called Zio) more esteemed then any of the
rest, for the Marble, Malmesey wine, Masticke, (the juice or gum of the tree
called Lentiscus), and no less for the many rich commodities it yields, then
for the goodness and largenes of the soil.

The Islands of the Indian Sea belong not to the Turks, and therefore I will
omit them.

The Turkish Empire stretches it self yet farther, containing great part of
Africa, which by the Grecians was called Libia, and the word in the Greek
tongue signifying horror and cold, gave the name to Africa, as being void of
cold. The Mountain Atlas in Afric (as Taurus in Asia, which in some parts is
called Caucasus and Imaus, as the Mountains of Europe are generally called the
Alps), does divide this Country into many parts, stretching it self toward
the East, and so forward to Nilus, which parts or Provinces are known by these
names; Mauritanta, Africa the lesser, Syrenaica, Marmarica, AEgyptus, Lybia,
AEthiopia, the Regions under the Mountains of Luna, and the Islands.

1 Mauritania Tingitana, contains two Kingdoms, Fessa (whereof the King of
Spain holds some part) and Morcco (subject to the Turks.) Of old it had these
towns Tingis (Metropolitan) and Luxon, (near which are the Gardens
Hesperides, which the Poets fable to have Aples and trees of gold.) At this day
the two chief Cities are called Fessa and Morocco. At the Straight Sea,
between Spain and Affricke, the mountains Abila in Afric, and Calpa in
Spain, are of that form, as men would judge they were once joined, whereupon
the Poets fable, that Hercules divided them, and did let in the Ocean, and so
made the Mediterranean sea, and for this cause the Straight is called the
narrow Sea of Hercules, and the Pillars of Hercules were erected on Affrickes
side, which the Emperor Charles the fifth added to his Coat of Arms.
Mauritania Caesariensis, was also called Numidia; for the people being rich in
Cattle, and dwelling in Tents, and when they had eaten the grass of one
place, then removing to another, were of their pastures called Nomades, and
after changing a letter, became to be named Numidae.

2 Africa the less, a most fertile Region of old, is at this day called the
Kingdom of Tunis, and the chief Citis, are Hippon (Metropolitan, where Saint
Austin was Bishop), Vtica (renowned for having Cato a Citizen), Carthage (where
Tertullian was borne), Tunis (at this day chief), Madaura (where Lucius
Apuleius was borne), and Iacapa (where the Vines are said to yield Grapes twice
in the year.) The Brook Rubricatus is famous for the Serpent killed there by
Attilius Regulus in the time of the first Punike war. The quicksands or
sholes of the Sea adjoining, are much feared of Mariners, lying sometimes
deep, sometimes shallow, as the sands are driven into diverse parts, by diverse
winds blowing and storms, and they are two. The less not far from Carthage,
the greater toward Syrenaica. At this day all this Seacoast is called
Barbary, and is subject to the Turkish Ottoman.

3 Sirenaica has the name of the chief City Syrene, which of old had
emulation for greatness with Carthage, and therein were borne, Aristippus the
Philosopher, Calimachus the Poet, and Eratostines the Mathematician, and
(assome say) Simon who carried the Cross of Christ.

4 Marmarica is sandy, and of old therein was the Temple of Jupiter called
Hammon of the sands, and these two Provinces are annexed to Egypt.

5 Egypt is most fertile, the very garner of the universal World, and famous
for the antiquity of the Kingdom. The upper part thereof was called Thebais,
the lower (toward the Mediterranean Sea) was called Deltica, of the letter
Delta. The Cities thereof no less famous in these days then of old are these.
Alexandria, built by Alexander the great at the mouth of the River Nilus (whose
body there buried, was seen by Augustus), and here Ptolomy was borne, who did
gather in this City the famous Library of seven hundred thousand volumes,
which were all consumed by fire. The next chief City is Canopus, where stood
the Temple of Syrapis or Osyris. Then Pelusium, at this day called Damiata,
seated upon the mouth of Nilus called Pelusium. Lastly, the chief City of
all, is Babylon, built by the Babylonians permitted to dwell there, which at
this day is hugely increased, and is called Alcaiero (that is, This Caiero),
from whence some forty stadia distant toward the North, lie the three famous
Pyramides. Three days journey toward the East, in a Garden called Matarta,
being well fortified, of old grew, and still grows the herb Balsamum,
sweating Balsam out of the boughs, and being cut with a knife, yielding the
more precious Opobalsamum, and at this day the same is found even at Caiero in
the Gardens of the richer sort. They say also that Corrall is found in the Red
Sea. I had almost omitted the City Arsinoe, also called the City of the
Crocodiles, because the Crocodile was there worshipped. Nilus falls into the
Mediterranean Sea in seven great Arms, which have the names of the adjacent
Towns, namely, Heracleoticum (or canopicum), Boluiticum, Sebamticum,
Patinicum, Mendesium, Caniticum, and Pelusiacum: the first and the last whereof
are one hundred and seventy miles distant one from the other. The Nilus does
yearly ouerflow, and thereby gives incredible fertility to the ground, and the
snow melting upon the Mountains of Luna, or the constellation of the Moon and
Mercury, are thought to be causes of this ouerflowing. And the same happening
to be greater or less then usual, or coming later or sooner then usual is
a sign of dearth to them, whereof Pliny says, that Egypt in twelve cubits
height of the flood, feels famine, atthirteene cubits is hungry, but that
fourteen makes them merry, fifteen safe, and sixteen brings plenty and
dainties. It is strange, that all other Rivers eating and consuming their
banks, Nilus rather increases them, by bringing with it a mud, that couers
the sand, and does as it were dung the fields, to make them more fertile. In
sixty days after the flood, the fields are clear of water. The flood
increases from the Summer Solstice, to the Suns entering into Libra, and after
the water retires into his own bed. About the twelfth of October they sow
their fields, and in May following reap their harvest. Egypt with the
Provinces belonging to it, has long been subdued by the Turks.

6 Lybia has diverse Provinces. Biledurgeret, that is, the Region of Dates, is
inhabited by the black Getuli. From thence toward the River Niger, lie the
Deserts of Lybia, waste, and full of Lions, Pardes, and other fierce and
venomous beasts (whereof came the fictions of Medusa and Persues.) The
inhabitants of Atsanaga, are of a color between tawny and black. At the
Promontory called the white Cape, is the City called Argen, where the Arabians
and Portugalls trade together. At the Promontory, called the green Cape, the
River Niger falls into the Atlantic Ocean, and the inhabitants are called
Nigrite. This tract contains many Kingdoms, namely, Senige, Gambrey, Tambot,
Guangara (where the Garamantes dwelt of old), two Kingdoms of Nubia, and other
Kingdoms, which I omit as subject to their Kings, or to Pretz Ian, and so not
belonging to our purpose.

7 AEthiopia is divided by Nilus into inward and outward. Inwad AEthiopia is
divided by old Writers into AEthiopia properly so called, Trogloditica, and
Barbaria, and in the mids thereof is the Island Meroe, made by Nilus, in which
was a City called Meroe, the seat of the old Kings, after called Saba, whence
was the queen which came to Solomon, and the Eunuch of Queen Candaces, whom
Philip baptized. The Troglodites live in caves of the earth, and their kingdom
is at this day called Adel. Barbaria extends eight degrees beyond the Equator,
from the promontory called Capo di (...), to the Gulf of Barbary, and was so
called of old. The outward AEthiopia is called AEgisimba by Ptolomy, and
contains the Kingdom of Amatzen, and of Vangue, seated under the
AEquinoctiall line. All AEthiopia, and part of Libia, are said to be subject
to Pretz Ian, therefore I say no more of them, nor of the Kingdoms under the
Mountains of Luna, as pertaining not to my purpose.

8 Only of the many Provinces under the Mountains of Luna beyond the
Equinoctial line, I will add, that the inhabitants of Capo dibuona speranza
(the cape of good hope) are exceeding black, and nothing different from the
AEthiopians and Lybians, though they have a greater latitude by thirty degrees
toward the South, equal to the latitude of the farthest part of Spain, and
live under the temperate Zone.

9 The greatest Island of Afric called Madagascar by the inhabitants, and
Saint Laurence by the Spaniards, is of the Mohammedan Religion, and is said to
abound with the medicinal wood Santalum, with Amber and Elephants. The Canary
Islands called of old the fortunate Islands are six (or more as some write) in
number, whereof Canaria the greatest gave the name to the rest, which are
subject to the King of Spain, as are likewise the Hesperides, little Islands
seated over against the green Cape. The Turkish Emperor has (to my
knowledge) no other I Will of Affricke under him.

The Turkish Empire being so vast, and containing great part of Europe, Asia,
and Afric, the temper of the air can not be otherwise described, then by
particular parts The situation.
thereof. But out of the description of this Empire (in the iournall of the
first Part), and by comparing the particular Provinces, with others of the same
longitude and latitude, and by the fruits and exported commodities here to be
mentioned, the temper of the air may be known, or at least coniectured more
easily. To this purpose I will only add, that I landing in Palestine about
the end of May, found their wheat harvest almost inned, and in the Haven of
Ioppa, bought about a thousand Abricots for six Aspers. And the year
following when I sailed from Constantinople toward Italy, that about the
middst of March, I did eat pease and other pulse in the Greek Islands.

Lastly in Palestine, Cyprus and those parts, partly I understood by others,
partly I found by experience, that it seldom raines, and that about September
and October only, and not often at that time, but so violently for the time,
as if it would beat down the very houses, falling (as it were) by palefulls
at once, and that the fields are watered with night dewes, at the fall whereof
no man stirs out of doors, but with his head well covered, for danger of
sickness, all men using to keep in the house till the dew be dried, while in
the mean time by day the heat is so excessive, as a man can hardly endure his
apparel, though it be of linen or silk, if it hang not loose but be close
about him.

The fertility of the soil generally through this Empire, is exceeding great,
and the goodness and variety of the fruits, equalleth and in some places
passes Italy. The fortility.
The wines of Greet, of Mount Libanus, and especially of Palormo in Natolia,
are exceeding rich and good. Yet have the Turks less plenty of all things
then Europe, for they very sparingly and only to serve necessity, either set
plant or sow, great part of the people being wasted with wars, and they that
remain, having not free fruition of their own goods, in the great tyranny
under which they live, as well of the Emporour, as of vnder-Gouernours changed
at least once a year, and the general rapacity and licentiousness of the
soldiers. Hence it is that there be vast solitudes and untilled Deserts on all
sides, where yet the ground of it self brings forth diverse wild fruits without
tillage. They have diverse kinds of grain, Wheat, the grain called Milet,
Barley, Oats, Rye, Pease, and al kinds of Pulse, which for the kinds are like
those of Europe, but the Wheat for the bigness of the grain, and so the
rest, are to be preferred before them. There is great abundance of Rice, Flax
and Cotton growing in the fields. They have good plenty of all kinds of
Cattle, yet are no more industrious in grasing and feeding herds, then in
sowing or planting, and so they have Eggs, Hens, Rice, Honey (which in a
composition they drink), Fruits and Bread for daily food, they desire no
other dainties or greater riches, since they can neither enjoy their goods
while they live, nor yet bequeath them at death, and nothing is more dangerous,
then to be accounted rich. The Caloiri or Greek Monks in Candia, with whom I
abode for a time, showed me sields, which the year past had yielded them
ninety five measures of grain for one sowed: but Candia, though it lie in the
compass of the Turkish Empire almost on all sides, yet is subject to the State
of Venice.

The Island Chios (vulgarly Zio) is subiest to the Turks, and is famous for the
pleasantness, as also for the fertility, yielding Mastick (the fruit of the
tree Lentiscus), and having abundance of Patridges, and of all kinds of foul.
I have in my Iornal of the first Part spoken of the most fertile Islands, Cyprus
and Mettilene.

In Syria they have sheep of strange bigness, whereof many have tails
weighing twenty, and some thirty pounds, bearing wool, and being wrethed to
their heels, more then the horns of Rams are, And let no man think this
incredible, since the same is reported of Sheep in Afric; and this is
confirmed by consent of all, who have been in these parts. Mules are somewhat
rare, but they have innumerable Camels, a beast most apt to carry burdens, and
lying patiently down to receive them, and most able to bear hunger, and
especially thirst. When the male and female engender, they lie down on their
bellies, with tail to tail, and their heads many Eiles distant one from the
other, and in the time of the year when they are naturally prone to
generation, they are fierce with a kind of madness, so as their masters then
take heed of any violence they may do them. The Turks also have many
Dromedaties, a kind of beast not unlike the Cammell, but far passing horses
in swiftness, and very Cammels in patience of labor. Their Horses are rather
fair then strong, and they make their skin shine, by laying them upon their
own dung dried. These horses either run, (which often they put them to for
spurts, and in bravery) or go a foot pace (as they use to follow laded
Cammels in iournies), but they are not taught either to trot, or amble, as ours
are, and are good for short iournics, but not able to endure so long iournies
as ours do. Therefore the Turkish Caualtery for war is of more swiftness
then strength, and the Germane horses being heavy, they easily overtake them
flying, and as easily fly when they are beaten.

The Turks have great plenty of sea and fresh water fish, and of birds and all
foul, and for Christian buyers (whereof are great multitudes, especially at
Constantinople) they furnish their markets therewith. And in truth at
Constantinople, there is as great variety and goodness of these kinds as can
be wished. Only the Oystors, though pleatifull, yet have not the delicate salt
taste that ours have, the Mediterranean Sea being nothing so salt as the Ocean.
But in general, the Turks, by reason of the foresaid tyranny, and of their
temperance in diet, do little use fishing or fowling, or any like exercise.

Yea, by reason of the same tyranny of the Emperor, Governors and Soldiers,
The traffic
the Turks carelessly and coldly exercise traffic with Merchants. I grant,
that they trade in Natolia, and other parts of their own Empire after a cold
manner, but they make no voyage by sea into foreign parts, excepting some few
that come to Venice. For they do not labor in any kind more then necessity
forces, and are so far from the insatiable desire of riches, as they avoid
nothing more, then the opinion to be rich. So as the Jews, the Greeks
subject to the Turks, and other confederate Christians, exporting their
commodities, they themselves have very few ships, the Emperor only having
some twelve great ships, well armed, to bring him necessaries from Egypt to
Constantinople. In like sort they have few Marrines, and those unexperienced
and fearful, using the Greeks their vassals, and other slaves taken in
ward, to that purpose, and they much esteem (that is gently treat) captives
skillful in Navigations. Some Towns keep at their private charge a few small
Galleys and Barks, to rob the Christians, and the great Turks Navy consists
all of Galleys, nothing comparable to those of Venice, and they winter at
Constantinople, and another Haurn in Greece, whereof I shall write more largely
in the discourse of the Turks. Commonwealth.

Among other Cities of trade, they have two very famous, one in Asia, the other
in Afric. That of Asia is called Haleppo, and it being within-land, the Port
thereof is called scanderona by the Turks, and Alexandretta, by the Christians,
whence the commodities of Merchants are carried upon Cammels, and the fifth day
arrive at Haleppo, whether the commodities of Persia are brought by the River
Euphrates, and upon Cammels backs, from the City Taurus; of old subject to
the Persians, but in our age subdued by the Turks. The Indian commodities are
brought thither by the red sea, and the Gulf of Arabia. The famous City for
trade in Affricke was called Babylon, and now is named Alcatero, whence the
commodities of India, Egypt, and all Affricke are exported. Moreover, upon the
mouth of the greatest arm of the River Nilus, the City Alexandria is seated
upon the Sea, some few days sail from Aleaiero.

The Venetians bring into Turkey woollen clothes, which they call broad, being
died Scarlet, Violet, and, of all colors, and they are so strong and well
made, as they will last very long, so as the Turks prefer them before out
English clothes And because the Venetians furnish them in great quantity, they
use few other clothes of that kind. Also the Venetians bring to them Sattins,
and Damasks (made in Italy of Dalmatian silk) and great quantity of Gold and
Silver, to buy the precious commodittes of Turkey. Whence they carry out raw
silk. For by reason of the foresaid tyranny, as the Turks are negligent in
Husbandry and trade, so are they in manual Arts, not drawing their Silk into
threads, nor weauing the same into clothes. And howsoever they have infinite
numbers of Silke-wormes, especially at Tripoli, and in most parts of Asia,
which make great quantity of Silk, (as I formerly said in the discourse of
Italy), yet they sell this Silk raw and vnwonen, and buy of the Venetians the
foresaid clothes made of their own silk, so as the silkewormes, may well be
said to be more diligent, and more to promote the public good, then the
inhabitants; for they swarming in all Gardens, diligently finish their web,
while the idle inhabitants yield the commodity thereof to strangers.

The Venetians also export from Turkey, Spices, and Apothecary wares, and great
quantity of the Dye called Indico. They export Galls, Cotton, wool, Cotton
threads, Chamlets or Grograms, made of the finest hairs of Goats, not sheared
but pulled off from their backs, and wouen in Galatia, a Province of the
lesser Asia. They export Turkey Carpets, Goats skins wrought, and died into
diverse colors.

The English bring to the Turks Kersies wrought and dyed of diverse colors and
kinds, but they bring little Broad-cloth, wherewith they are abundantly
furnished from Venice. They also bring to them Tin, and black Conni-skinnes
in such quantitic, as the Turks admiring the same, a Frenchman merrily taxing
our women's affability, said, that in England there was such plenty of Connyes,
and they so tame, as they were taken in the Tauerns. The English export from
them Spices and Apothecary wares (for the Trade into the East Indies was not
then set up), they also export the foresaid commodities, raw silk, Indico, and
other precious Dies of Scarlet, Purple and the like, Galls, Mastick growing
only in the Island Zio, Cotton, and the thread thereof, Turkey Carpets for
tables, Chamlets, Grograms of Goats hair. The Merchants coming to
Constantinople, hardly find there any commodities to export; therefore the
English ships having vnladed there, sail empty to Alexandretta, and there
receive the commodities of Haleppo. Again, the Italians who bring much gold
and silver to Haleppo for the commodities there to be sold, do again receive
gold and silver for such commodities as they bring to Constantinople, and carry
the same back to Venice. The English lying at the Islands of Zant and
Cephalonia, subject to the Venetians, and at Petrasso, seated in the Gulf of
Corinth, and subject to the great Turk) export Corrands: others from Algier (a
Port of Barbary) export Sugar: others from the Island Candia (subject to the
Venetians) export Muskadines: and others from diverse Islands export earthen
dishes and vessels painted, which for the pureness are much esteemed and used
in Italy, and in our parts Northward.

The swords of Damasco are famous for the metal, piercing iron, and cutting a
nail in pieces, but the exportation of them is forbidden, though out
Christians supply the Turks with all warlike munitions, which they might shame
to have particularly named in this discourse of traffic. The precious
Oriental commodities of Persia and the East Indies, have made the Trade of
Turkish Cities to be famous, namely, their spices and rich dies, and Jewels,
which notwithstanding the Turks have in part of their own. For I formerly
said, that Arabia yields Frankincense, Mirrh, Cinnamon, and Jewels, and Egypt
yeeldes Balsam, and Opobalsam (the more precious gum of the Balmetree) in
great quantity, omitting many commodities, which besides they have of these
kinds. I speak not of Thessalonica a City of Macedonia, now called Saloniche,
nor other Havens and Cities of traffic in Greece, as being of less moment.
All the precious traffic of Turkey, by reason of the inhabitants
slothfulness, is in the hands of jews and of Christians, and was long in the
sole hands of the Venetians, but the French in the age past, and the English in
our age, have had (as I may say) a traffickiug league with the Turks, and so
partake that trade. And these three States only (not to speak of the Germans,
who at this time had war with the Turks, and never sail so far to
exercise traffic) among so many States of Christians, have their Ambassadors
at the Turkish Court. And if any other Christians arrive in that Empire (as the
Flemmings often do), they used at this time to come under the Banner of one of
these three Nations. The Reader must understand, that when I was in Turkey, the
English and Flemmings had not as yet begun their traffic in the East Indies,
which is like to destroy the traffic in Turkey, bringing many rich
commodities from the well head.

For their diet the Turks live sparingly, I had said slouenly, but that I
remembered Their diet.
their frequent bathings and washings, and the curious clenlinesse of the
linen, and all other clothes which they wear: but I will be bold to say,
they feed negligently, and without any pomp or magnificence. The richer sort
do fit at meat like Tailors with their knees bended, upon carpets, or upon
the grass when they eat by Rivers sides and in Gardens, as they do more
frequently then in the house. And their table is so low, as they may well reach
to it sitting upon the ground. About this table they cast a long towell to wipe
their hands, but passengers by the highway, and generally the ordinary sort of
Turks, use grass in stead of this towell. Others carry about a table of
leather colored red or yellow, which table shuts and opens like a purse, and
upon it they can set but one dish at once, it hanging hollow upon certain
buckels. Commonly they eat by the highway upon the ground, and always with
their knees bended like our Tailors. They sees their meat till it be very
tender, so as they may break it with theit fingers, for they have no knives,
neither have they variety of dishes set before them, but all sitting in a
circle, fall upon one dish. Taking meat, they all together say a short prayer
or grace, and talk not whilst they eat, but silently fall hard to their
work. They have abundance of all things for food as well of flesh (excepting
swines-flesh) as of birds, and other meats, but they abstain from fish. They
have plenty of Corn (at least sufficient for their temperate diet), which is
exceeding good, and far bigger then ours. They are ignorant of the Arts of
birding, fouling, hunting, or cookery, and having no lasciuicus apetite
provoking them to gluttony, are content with simple meats. Their sobriety in
this kind cannot sufficiently be commended, and since their greatest men can
be content to feed on rice, and drink water, it is no marvel, that with
ease they keep great Armies in the field.

All the Turkish housholdstuffe is contained, in one poor pot to sees meat
in, one spoone of wood, one cup of leather or wood to drink in, a poor bed or
matresse, yea often a single couerled alone, and the earth serves them for
bedsteed, table and stools. They have no need of a troop of cooks and
scullions to dress meat, and make clean dishes. They willingly eat curds
turned sower and mingled with bread and water, commonly called Mishmish, and
fresh cheese or curds, and have plenty of milk, as well of cowes as of goats.
In stead of bread, they eat unleavened cakes, baked on the cinders, which
commonly are mingled with a kind of seed. They feed commonly on hens, and
rice (either sod alone, or with a hen or mutton, in a vessel full of holes,
without any liquor put in when it is set on the fire, so as there being no
other iuce, but that of the meat, the rice is made very thick.) Within these
narrow bounds is their most costly feeding restrained. In time of the year
they feed much upon fruits, and keep grapes all winter, so as you would judge
them fresh. They abhor from swines flesh, as the Jews do, for the rest I did
never see, nor hear by relations of others, that the richest of them did
affect any other variety of meat, then I have named, and I have often seen
Men of the better sort eating out of the seething pot, without any dish set
before them. The above named flesh of Muttons is very sauoury, and the sheep
of Syria and the adjoining parts of Asia, are of such greatness, as many times
a tail of them, hanging to their heels, and very woolly and fat, and close
wouen in many plights, does weigh thirty or more pounds. They have also
Venyson, for in the woods there be many wild Goats dispersed, and I have
seen a kind of fallow Dear in Syria called Gazelle, of which kind I have
seen some brought out of Barbary into England.

And they much delighting in fruits, have excellent of many kinds, and in
great quantity, namely Abricots, and musk Melones, and diverse kinds of
Pumpions, whereof one called Angouria, as big as our Pumpions, is exceeding
full of a very cold juice, being most pleasant for the coolness in any great
heat, which coolness though I take to be unwholesome for one sick of an ague,
yet my self almost wasted with the burning of that disease, did vehemently
desire to eat of this fruit, and found it nothing hurtful or rather
healthful to me. In the Haven of Alexandretta (or Scanderona) a Grecian the
Master of a Venetian ship, gave me a present of four or five Apples, which he
called (as they vulgarly do) the Apple of Adam, and I never in my life tasted
so delicete a-fruite. It was of form like a long Pear, or rather for the
crookedness like a Cucumer of the lesser sort, and it had a most thin
skin, of color like a Peeches skin, the least part whereof being opened,
the juice was easily to be sucked out, which was very pleasant, and not much
unlike to the juice of a fig newly pulled from the tree. If I should
particularise all the kinds of pleasant fruits, I might be infinite therein.

The Turks when they have eaten, not while they eat, go like good fellows
together, and like Horses at once drink for that meal, as greedily as if the
water were turned into wine, which kind of drink those that are zealous of
their Law, and those that journey by the high way, more specially, and all
Turks in general most commonly use, for which cause, those that journey use
to pitch their tents, upon the banks of pure fountains or running waters, which
they no less know, or as curiously search out, as we do the best Innes or
Tauernes: Besides commonly they have a cup (if I may so call it, being a purse
of leather that opens or shuts with strings) hanging at their Horses saddle
pomell, which as they sit on Horseback, they put down into the fountains,
and draw water to drink, not omitting to taste a good spring of water, no more
then we would a piece of rare Wine. Their water, especially in Provinces lying
near the Sun, is in this property contrary to ours, that it loosens the body
no less, then the rice binds it. In Cities diverse kinds of drinks are to be
sold, some esteemed as much as wine with us. One kind I remember presented unto
us in Palestine by the Sobasha of Ramma, which was made of medicinal herbs,
to purify and cool the blood, and they drink it hot, so as it seems a very
physical potion. They drink sugar or honey mingled with water, and water
sodden with grapes, rosewater, and honey: and they have whole Tons of the
juice of Cytrons and Limons, which they willingly drink; and all these kinds
are to be sold in their Ctties, Wine is forbideen by Mahomets law, which
permits Aquauite vulgarly called Harech, which Aquauite they often drink even
to drunckennes. And whether it be out of the common error of mankind to desire
forbidden things, or out of the licentiousnes of Soldiers, which every day
grows greater then other, howsoever in Idleness they obey their law in not
planting Vines, yet not only the Ianizaries, but even the religious men, will
drink wine largely, even to drunkenness, with Christians as well Ambassadors
as others, yea, if Christian passengers carry wine by the way for their own
drinking, and have a Ianizary to protect them, yet they will familiarly come to
drink with them, and if they have no protector, they will take their wine and
whatsoever they have else at their pleasure, so as their false Prophet has
only provoked vice by forbidding it. Many Provinces yield rich wines, the
chief whereof are the Greek wines, (which notwithstanding seemed to me for the
most part to be corrasiue, fretting the stomach and entrals); and as well the
white as red wines of Mount Lybanus and Antilibanus, which are carried to
Tripoli, and as far as Haleppo, (the wines about Jerusalem being sharp and
small): but the best wine of all is the white wine of Palorme in Natolia, which
is like the Spanish sack, but more pleasant to the taste, being not so sweet
as the Canary wines, nor so harsh and strong as the Sherry sack. This Wine is
carried to Constantinople, where also good wines grow, planted by Christians
there, but this is most esteemed: For only Christians plant Vines, and make
wine, howsoever the Turks are content to take part of them at the Christians
charge.

The Turkish Soldiers being to fight, if they can find no wine, drink the
juice of black poppy, called Opium, to raise their spirits to a kind of fury,
thinking them selnes made more valiant thereby: For howsoever we think this
herb, especially taken largely, to be dangerous for the health, yet there is
not a Turk from the highest to the lowest, who does not as it were daily use
it, nothing being more frequently sowed, nothing more plentifully growing,
especially in Natolia, nothing more easily finding a buyer: yea, if their
Cammels and Dromidaries fail by the way, or upon necessity must go further
then they use to journey, as sometimes it falls out in Armies and other
Iourneys, then they give them this herb, by which they report their spirits
so to be stirred up, as they will go till they fall down dead.

In this vast Empire I did see no Iunes, no not in their Cities, and a man
shall rarely find any beds among Christians, and if he do, yet the sheets are
made of cotton, intolerable for heat: For in Turkey generally they lie upon
Tapestry Carpets, and sometimes in Cities upon a mattresse, with a quilt to
cover them, and by the high way they lie upon straw, hey, or grass. And in all
places near Palestine, they either by night lie upon the house tops on a
plastered floare, or in yards upon the earth and in open Air, having the
spangled Heavens for their Canopy. And not only passengers, but all Turks
daily wear linen breeches, so as in these Provinces not subject to cold, a
man may better endure this poor kind of lodging: But the Turkish passengers,
in stead of Innes, have certsine Hospitals, built of stone with Cloisters after
the manner of Monasteries, where by charitable legacy of Alms, all passengers
may have meat for certain meals or days, especially the Pilgrims toward
Mecha, for whose sake they were especially founded: And these houses are
vulgarly called Kawne (or as others pronounce Cain) and the covered Cloisters
of them, (built after their manner but one roof high), are common as well to
Turks as any other passengers to lodge in openly, and like good fellows
altogether, upon such mattresses as they carry, or upon the bare ground, if
straw be not to be had. For Christian passengers carry such mattresses and
necessary victuals, which failing, they supply them in Cities and every day in
Villages may buy fresh meats, but they must dress their own meat.

Neither is the Art of Cookery greater in Turkey then with us in Wales, for
toasting of Cheese in Wales, and seething of Rice in Turkey, will enable a man
freely to profess the Art of Cookery.

No stranger uses to travel without a Ianizary or some other to guide him,
who knows the places where most commodious lodging is to be had: but
passengers by the way use not to go into Cities, but only to buy fresh
meats, which done they return to the Tents of their Carrauan, which use to be
pitched in some field adjoining. In hot climes near the Sun, (as I have said
in the first Part writing my journey through Turkey) the Turks there dwelling
use to begin their iourneys toward the evening, and to end them two or three
hours after the Sun rising, resting in their Tents all the heat of the day.
Christian passengers shall do well to go to the Italians Friars at Jerusalem,
and to Merchants their Countrymen, or at least to Christians in Cities of
traffic, and to the Ambassadors or Merchants of their own Country at
Constantinople, who being themselves strangers, and not ignorant of the evils
incident to strangers, will no doubt in courtesy direct them to get convenient
lodgings and other necessaries.

CHAP. II. Of France, touching the particular subjects of the first Chapter.
THE Longitude of France extends thirteen degrees from the Meridian of
sixteen degrees to that of twenty nine degrees, and the Latitude extends eight
degrees from the Parallel of forty two degrees to that of fifty degrees. France
of old was divided into Cisalpina and Transalpina. In the description of Italy
I have formerly spoken of Cisalpina, which was also called Togata of Gowns the
Inhabitants wore, and Tonsa because they had short hair.

1 Transalpina, was subdeuided into Comata and Narbonersis. Comata so called of
their long hair, was again subdeuided into Belgica, (of which I have spoken
formerly (...).
in the description of Netherland), into Aquitanica and Celtica, or
Lugdunensis. Aquitanica the second Part of Comata, was of old called Aremorica,
lying upon the Mountains Pyrenei, and they differ in Language from the French,
being more like to tie Spaniards: next to the Pyreni dwelt the Ansi or
Ansitani, called vulgarly Guascons, coming from Spain. Their chief City is
Tolouse, where is a famous University, and the Parliament of that Province.
Another City called Bordeaux, has also an University, but is more famous by
the general concourse of Merchants trading for French Wines. Beyond the River
Garumna running through the midst of Aquitania, dwell the Santones, an ancient
people, whose Country is called Santoigne. Next lie the Pictones or Pictaui
upon the River Loyer, whose Country is called Posctou, abounding with Fish,
Foul, and all Game for Hunting and Hawking. It has three chief Cities, all
seats of Bishops, Poictiers, Lusson, and Maillezais. The neck of Land
adjoining is called Aulone, and the Islands, Noir de Chauet, De Dieu, and Nosire
Dame De Bouin, etc. yield great quantity of Salt to be transported. The
Country of the Bituriger is called Berry, and the chief City Burges, of old
called Auaricum, being an University, and the Citizens at six Faires in the
year, sell great quantity of woollen cloth: for the Country has rich
pastures, feeding many flocks of sheep, of whose wool this cloth is made,
besides that it abounds also with Wine, Corn, and all kinds of cattle. The
City is within Land, and is called in Lattin Biturigum of two Towers. Next the
same lies the Dukedom Burbonois, and other small territories.

Celtica or Lugdunensis another part of Comata, contains the part of
Transalpina, that lies between the Rivers Loyer and Seyne, beyond which last
River France of old extended, and included good part of Netherland. First
toward the West lies the Dukedom Bretaigne, which has three Languages in it
self, all differing from the French. The first is of the people called Bretons
Bretonnant, coming from the English or Cornish Brittons the first Inhabitants,
and the chief Cities are Saint Paul, and Treguiers. The second people are
called Bretons Galot, being of Language near the French, and the chief Cities
are Rhenes, (where is the Parliament of the whole Dukedom), and Dol, and Saint
Malo. The third is mixed of the two former, and the City thereof called Nantes,
is the Dukes seat, and chief City of the Dukedom. From the Sea Coast thereof
great quantity of salt made by the heat of the Sun is transported, and there
by mines of Iron and Lead. Toward the East lies Normandy, so called of Men of
the North; namely the Cimbri there inhabiting, and the chief City is Roane.
Within Land lies Turroyne, upon the Loyer, and the chief City is Orleance Next
lies the little Country of France, like an Island between two Rivers, so
called of the Franckes a people of Germany, conquering and giving that name to
the whole Kingdom. The chief City and seat of the Kings is Paris. Picardy
lies toward the North, and the chief City is Amiens. Upon France within Land
toward the East lies the Province Champaigne. Next to it lies the Dukedom of
Lorrayne, the Dukes whereof bear their Arms, an Arm armed breaking out of
Clouds, and holding a naked Sword, to signify that the Dukes have supreme
power from God alone. And the chief Cities of the Dukedom are Nancy (the
seat of the Dukes), and Toul, and Neufchastell. The next Country of old
esteemed part of Lorrayne, was inhabited by the Lingones, and by the
Mediomatrices, and the chief City by the Lattines called Mediomatricum and
Metis, is now vulgarly called Metz, which City the King of France took in the
year 1551 from the Empire, in the time of the Emperor Charles the fifth, who
besieged the same long, but in vain, the Kings of France still holding it. The
Dukedom of Burgundy belonged of old to the Empire, but is now subject to the
Kings of France, the chief City whereof is Dijon, where the Parliament of the
whole Dukedom is held. It has other Cities, namely Beaulue, Challon,
Chastillon, Noyres, and a place called Bourgougne, which gave the name to the
Dukedom, yet others write that it had the name of Bourges, (that is Towns).
The County of Burgundy belonged of old to the Empire, but is now subject to the
King of Spain, whose progenitor married the daughter and heir of the Duke of
Burgundy, at which time the Kings of France took the foresaid Dukedom from
the said daughter and heir. And this County is vulgarly called Franche Conte,
as free from tributes. It has two free Cities, Dole (an University) and
Besancon.

2 The second part of Transalpina Gallia is Narbonensis; (which only at this
day, yet not all, may truly be called Gallia): It was of old called Braccata,
of the Inhabitants apparel, and is called Narbonensis of the chief City
Narbona, lying upon the River Athesis, near the Mediterranean Sea, which
Strabo witnesses to have been of old a famous City for traffic. The River
Rhodanus runs through it, which falling from the Alps, and increased by
Araris, but still retaining the first name, falls into the Mediterranean Sea.
This part called Narbonensis, by the benefit of the Air and Sun, yields
Figs, Grapes, Cytrons, Peaches, Pomegranates, Chessenuts, rich Wine, and all
delicate fruits, and all the fields are made odoriferous by wild Rosemary,
Myrtels, Palmetrees, and many sweet herbs: and the Inhabitants have lately
planted Canes of sugar. To conclude, the Province is very pleasant and
plentiful in all things. On the West side of Rhodanus, the Tectosages dwelt of
old in the Province called Languadoc, having that name, because the Inhabitants
use Oc for the French Ouy. The chief Cities thereof are Narbona (aforesaid)
Mompeliers (of old a famous University) and Clermont. The Dukedom of Sauoy
lies in a corner, from the alps to the mediterranean Sea, of old inhabited by
the Focuntij and it lying on the same side of the Alps with France, is
reckoned a part thereof, but the Duke thereof is an absolute Prince, and the
chief City is Chambery. The Province is very fertile, and where it is more
barren, yet affoordes excellent fruits and all things for food at a
convenient price. Dolphiny lies between the River Rhodanus and the Dukedom of
Sauoy, and gives the name of Dolphin to the French Kings eldest son. Prouence
is a most sweet Territory, and has the Cities, Marseile, (famous by trade
with the Turks), Arles, and Auignon (subject to the Pope; for when many Popes
were at one time, John the two and twentieth did long sit in this City, given
by Ioane Queen of Naples to the Popes in the time of Clement the sixth,
alienated from the Kingdom of Naples by her, and annexed to the Patrimony of
Saint Peter, in the year 1360.) The Principality of Orange is an absolute
dominion, having the chief City of the same name, and seated between
Languedoc, Dolphiny, and the Popes Territory of Auignon.

The air of the Northern part of France is purer then that of England, and
being not covered with clouds drawn out of the Sea as England is, for that
cause in winter becomes The situation,
more cold, and in summer more hot, and far less annoied with mists and
rainy weather. But on the other side, more and less according to the clyme,
the parts of France lying toward the Mountains Pirenei and nearer to the
Equinoctial line, are subject to intemperate heat, yet often allaied by the
winds blowing from the Sea, and by the shadow of the Mountains. This
Southerly part yeeldes all the fruits of Italy, and in the Northerly parts as
in Normandy, they have abundance of Apple and Pear trees, of which they make
great quantity of Sider and Perry, and this part as toward the Sea it yields
also plenty of Corn, so within Land it affoords the like of Wines. And in the
very Northerly Island called France, they have plenty of Grapes upon pleasant
hills watered with sweet Rivers, but the wine made of them is small and sharp.
All France is most pleasant, and not only about Narbona, but in many other
territories (according to the commodity of the clime), it yields great plenty
of red and white wines exported in great quantity, which are held excellent to
be drunk, the white in the moaning, and the red with meat, which red is
otherwise reputed unwholesome, as provoking and causing rhumes. France abounds
with all things necessary for food, as well Corn as Cattle, red Dear, Foul,
and also with all kinds of Fish, by reason it is partly compassed with the Sea,
and upon all sides is watered with sweet Rivers. For fire they use wood and
coals, yet have they no pit coals or sea coals, but have their sea eoales
out of England for their Smiths Forges, and where they have less store of wood
within land, there they burn straw, furs, and other kinds of stubble. They
have good races of Horses, which the greater part use in the War, who are not
able to buy Neapolitan Coursers, Spanish lanets, or English Coursers, bred of
the Neapolitan Horses and English Mares: but for their iournies they have no
Gueldings or ambling Nagges, as we have, but commonly use trotting and stoned
Nagges.

The Gentlemen do not meddle with traffic, either because it was of old
forbidden The fertility and traffic.
to great Lords and Gentlemen, lest the Kings impositions should thereby suffer
damage, they being by singular privileges exempted and freed from all such
burdens, or because in deed they think such traffic ignoble and base, and
so unfit fot them, which error the French no less dearly buy then the
English, (as I have showed in the discourse of Italy, and shall again prove in
that of England). In general, the French are less studious of Navigations or
industrious in that kind, because they abound almost with all things for
plentiful food and rich attire, and if they want any thing strangers gladly
bring it to them, and exchange it for their wines, salt, and course linen
clothes; neither have I heard or read, that they ever did any brave exploit by
sea. They have in time of war some few men of war for piracy, and some few
ships to export their commodities, but they sail only to neighbor Countries,
as out of Normandy and Bretaigne, into England, Ireland, and the Low Countries,
and only those of Marseile, to Tripoli in Syria. As for the Colonies which in
our Age they have led into the West Indies, their unhappy success therein,
has discouraged them from like new attempts. And whosoever sees their rich
Cities within Land, witnessing that their wealth consists in native
commodities, more then trading by Sea, may easily guess, that they are not
much addicted to Navigations. The French have many commodities by which they
draw foreign Coins to them, but four especially, Wine; Salt, Linen course
cloth, and Corn, which in that respect some call the loadestones of France.
Neither is it a matter of small moment, that they have many Riners, giving
commodity to the mutual traffic of their Cities.

They have plenty of Flax and Hemp, whereof they make canuas, sails, ropes,
and cables: Neither want they wool, whereof they make cloth, little inferior
to the English cloth, but not in quantity to be exported. Bourdeaux is a famous
City for exportation of Wines, as Rochell and the neighbor Ports are no less
for Salt. France yields Saffron, and Oade for dying, which they call Du
Pastell, and many small commodities to be exported, as Cards, Pinnes, Paper,
and the like: yea they export into Spain, linen clothes made thin with
wearing, and sell them there for a good price. The Spaniards bring into France
some quantity of wool, raysons, Olives, Oil, Cytrons, and other fruits,
whereof France needs no great quantity, and Cochenillo for dying. The
Fortingals bring into France holy Thistle, (an herb like a white thorn,
having leaves like cotton on them) and sugar, and diverse kinds of Indian wood,
as (...), Schomache, Fustocke, and Logwood, and a small quantity of Dates. And
these carry out of France great quantity of Linen cloth, which we call white
Roanes, and greater quantity of vittree Canuas, and Paper, some woollen cloth,
much Corn, especially Wheat, good quantity of wax and cards, and the like
commodities. The English bring into France great quantity of woollen-cloaths,
called Kersies and Cottons, Lead, Tynne, English Vitriall, or Shooemakers
black, sheep skins, and by stealth other Hides, forbidden to be exported,
great quantity of Hearrings, and new found land Fish dried, of wool (though
forbidden to be exported), Oil, Soape tunned, Soape ashes, old worn cloakes,
and (I know not to what use) very old shoes, with other native and foreign
commodities. And they bring from thence Linen clothes, called white Roanes,
and Vitree Canuas, Paper, white and red wines in great quantity, Thread,
Saffron, Wax, and from Paris Gold and silver. The Hollanders bring into France
two or three kinds of their Linen clothes, Copper, Feathers, and Wier, and
they carry thence the foresaid Linen clothes, Wines, Prunes, Paper, and the
above named commodities. The French carry into Italy Tin, Lead, dry fish,
called Poor John, (brought to them by the English), and their own above named
commodities. And they bring out of Italy silk clothes, and other Italian
commodities. Among the French, only those of Marseile traffic with the
Turks, and their greatest trade is only at Tripoli in Syria, who carry into
Turkey Spanish silver, and French Linen clothes, and bring from thence raw
silk, spices, gals, cotton, and Indico for dying.

Old Writers relate that the Gals used to lie on the ground, to feed on milk
and Their Diet.
Swines flesh, and to be given to gluttony. At this day none eat less Bacon
or dried flesh for ordinary diet, then the French, yet I cannot commend their
temperance, since all, as well Men as Weomen, besides dinner and supper, use
breakefasts and beuers, which they call collations and gouster, so eating four
times in the day. All France abounds with necessaries for food, as well all
kinds of Cattle, as fruits not inferior in some places to those of Italy, and
wild Boares, and Red Dear, (for they have no fallow Dear); and Birds and
Foul, and all kinds of Fish, affoorded by the Sea, and their many pleasant
rivers, but their Beef is neither very good, nor much used. Their Sheep are
less then ours in England, but the flesh of them is sweet and sauoury. In the
Innes they have greater plenty of Partridges, and diverse kinds of Birds,
because the Country people neither do nor may eat them, and the Gentlemen
are generally sparing in their ordinary diet, so as great plenty of these
dainties is brought to the chief Innes. Howsoever England be happy in all
abundance, and has some dainties for food proper to it self, as God wits,
and some other kinds of Sea Foul, and especially fallow Dear and Brawne:
Though it passes France generally in plenty of Sea Fowls, and as well the
variety as plenty of Sea fishes, yet has it not such abundance as France has
of Land Foul, or such as haunt the woods and fields, as Partridges, Feasants,
Woodcocks, and the like, or at least by reason of the common sort not feeding
thereon, and the said spare ordinary diet of the Gentlemen, France seems much
more to abound with them, being common in all the chief Innes. I speak of
England in general, for in some places they so abound with us, as they bear
little or no price.

The French are commended and said to excel others in boiled meats, sawces,
and made dishes, vulgarly called Quelques chooses, but in my opinion the larding
of their meats is not commendable, whereby they take away all variety of
taste, making all meats savor of Porke; and the French alone delight in
mortified meats. They use not much whitmeates, nor have I tasted there any
good Butter, which our Ambassadors cause to be brought unto them out of
England, and they have only one good kind of Cheeses called Angelots,
pleasing more for a kind of sharpness in taste, then for the goodness. As
well the Gentlemen as Citizens live more sparingly then the English in their
ordinary private diet, and have not their Tables so furnished with variety and
number of dishes. They dine most with sodden and liquid meats, and sup with
roasted meats, each having his several sauce: but their Feasts are more
sumptuous then ours, and consist for the most part of made fantastical meats
and sallets, and sumptuous compositions, rather then of flesh or birds. And the
cooks are most esteemed, who have best invention in new made and compounded
meats. And as in all things the French are cheerful and nimble, so the
Italians observe that they eat or swallow their meat swiftly, and add, that
they are also slouenly at meat, but I would rather say they are negligent or
careless, and little curious in their feeding. And to this purpose I remember
an accident that happened to a Frenchman, eating with us at the Masters table
in a Venetian ship governed by Greeks, and sailing from Venice to Ilierusalem,
who turning her foul trencher to lay meat on the clean side, did so offend
the Master and all the Mariners, as well the best as common sort, as they
hardly refrained from offering him violence. For Mariners in general, but
especially the Greeks are so superstitious, as they took this his negligence
in turning his trencher, (being of like opinion for the turning of any thing in
the ship vpside down) as if it had been an ominous sign, that the ship should
be cast away.

In a Village of Normandy half way between Roane and Diepe called Totes, and
in like sort in all the Innes of those parts, before the civil war, as soon
as passengers lighted from their horses, the Host gave them water to wash, and
bread and wine; for the French have not the patience to expect their supper
without some refection. Then at supper the table was served with Mutton, a
Capon or Pullet, Patridges and like meats, with a kind of banquet, as in
Summer, Apples, Cherries, and Grapes, and in Winter, Chessenuts, Rice, Raysons,
and stewed Prunes. Then they gave their guests clean sheets, drying them at
the fire in their presence, and in the morning gave them for breakfast some
buttered tostes, or motsell of meat, and for all this together with
horsemeate, each man paid some twenty two or twenty five soulz; as likewise the
bating at noone for horse and man, cost each some ten soulz. After the civil
war I passed through these parts, and commonly each meal paid twelve or
fifteen soulz, with worse interertainment, and for breakefasts paid severally,
but no great rate. Toward the confines of Flanders, the Hoasts only cover the
table, and a side table, upon which every passenger has his glass, for the
French are curious not to drink in another man's cup, and the Hoasts are only
to be paid for this service. Otherwise at times of eating, they call the
Cooks dwelling near the Innes, who bring the best meats they have, and when
the guests have chosen their meat, and agreed for the price, they carry it
back to dress it, and so send it warm with sawces. In general, through the
Cities of France, passengers seldom dine at their Innes, but with some
companions go to the Tauernes or Cooks shops: but at night they must eat
with the Host that gives them beds, where they shall have clean sheets, and
see them dried before their faces, but they are of course cloth, and very few
chambers are private, but most have three or four beds, wherein they lie not
single, but for the most part with bedfellowes. Also the guests as well
Merchants and Gentlemen, as those of common sort, eat at an ordinary table,
and for supper commonly large with diverse roasted meats, each man pays some
fifteen soulz. He that hiers a chamber in Cities, which he may have well
furnished at Paris for some two Crowns a month, he must buy his meat at
Cooks shops, which are frequent and very cleanly, neither is it any disgrace,
as with us, to buy a morsel of meat there, and to agree for the price before
it be eaten. And they that hier chambers can have no better conueniency for
diet, either at Paris, or in other Cities. But he that stays long in a City,
may agree in a Citizens house, or an Inn for his diet and lodging by the
year, which he may have at Paris in extraordinary sort for some one hundred
fifty Crowns yearly, and ordinarily for less; and at Rone for one hundred
twenty, or one hundred Crowns, and in many Cities for eighty Crowns, and in
many good Innes for sixty Crowns yearly. Drunkenness is reproachful among
the French, and the greater part drink water mingled with wine, and always
French wines, not Sack or Spanish wines (which are sold as Physic only by
Apothecaries) or other foreign Wines, whereof I remember not to have seen
any in the Northern parts of France. Yet Mariners, Soldiers and many of the
common sort used to drink Perry and Syder to very drunkenness, yea, I have
seen many drink wine with like intemperance, and when these kinds of men sit
at drinking, they use much mirth and singing (in which art they take great
delight), as the French in general are by nature cheerful and lively. Women
for the most part, and virgins always (except by stealth they offend against
the custom) use to drink water, except it be in the Provinces yielding Perry
and Syder, which all sorts use to drink without exception. And at Paris I
remember to have seen a poor woman to beg a cup of water, which being given
her, she drunk it off, and went away merrily, as if she had received a good
alms.

CHAP. III. Of England, touching the particular subjects of the first Chapter.
THE Longitude of England extends nine degrees and a half from the meridian of
thirteen degrees and a half England.
to that of twenty three degrees, and the latitude extends fix degrees from
the parallel of fifty degrees and a half to that of fifty six degrees and a
half. Learned Camden (whom I gladly follow in this description of England)
makes the circuit of all Britany to be one thousand eight hundred thirty six
miles. This is the most famous Island of all the World, and is divided into two
Kingdoms, that of England, and that of Scotland. England is subeuided into
diverse Counties or Shyres and Islands.

1 In the description whereof I will first begin with Cornmall, of old
inhabited by the Danmonij. It is for the most part a Mountanous Country, but
the soil is not vnfirtile, besides that the people incredibly fatten the same
with laying upon it the owes of the Sea, called Orwood, and a certain mud. The
Sea coast (as Camden writes, whom I follow) is beautified with very many
Towns, which have much shipping. The inward parts abound with a rich vain of
Metals, where wonderful quantity of most pure Tin is dug up, and not
only Tin, but Gold and Silver with it, and Dyamonds formed into Angles by
nature it self, which we call Cornish Dyamonds. Eringo grows plentifully all
along the Sea side, and with great labor of the Husbandman, they have such
abundance of Corn, as great quantity of wheat is yearly exported thence
into Spain. Also the inhabitants make great gain by the fishing of Pilchards,
which they salt and dry in the smoke, and export an huge multitude of them
yearly into Spain and Italy. Here is the famous Mount Michael (of old called
Dinsol, and by the inhabitants the Rock Cana.) This Rock is somewhat high and
craggy, upon the top whereof is a Chapel, dedicated to Michael the
Arch-Angell. The Town Falemouth has a fair Haven, capeable of very many
ships, and most safe from storms, where the Rocks do fortify two Castles,
built by Henry the eight, and this Haven is by Ptolomy called Ostium Cenionis.

2 Devonshire likewise inhabited by the Danmonij, has fairer Havens, being no
less rich in the veins of Tin, and beautified with frequent Towns. In no
part of England the ground requires more expense, for in many places it is
barren, till it be fatted with the Owes or sand of the Sea, which makes it
wonderfully fruitful, but in the remotest parts from the Sea, this sand is
dearly bought? The River Plimus gives the name to the Town Plimmouth, of old
called Sutton, which grew from a fishers Village to a fair Town, by the
commodity of the Haven, being most safe even for great ships, as well in the
said River, as in another called Tamera. Not far from thence is the place,
where they fable, that Coryneus wrastled with Gogmagog, and in this Town was
borne Sir Francis Drake Knight, the chief glory of our Age for Navigations, who
for two years space did with continual victories as it were besiege the Gulf
of Mexico, and in the year 15^-^-, entering the straight of Magellan, compassed
the World in two years and ten months, with many changes and hazards of
Fortune. The Town Dortmouth is much frequented with Merchants and strong
ships, for the commodity of the Haven, fortified with two Castles. The City
Excester called Isen by Ptolomy and of old called Monketon of the Monks, is
the chief City of the County, and the seat of the Bishop.

3 Dorsetshire was of old inhabited by the Durotriges. The Town Weymouth has
a Castle built by Henry the eighth, to fortify the Haven. Dorchester is the
chief town of the County, but neither great nor fair.

4 Sommersetshire was of old inhabited by the Netherlanders, and is a large and
rich County, happy in the fruitful soil, rich Pastures, multitude of
Inhabitants, and commodity of Havens. The chief Town Bridgewater has the
name of the Bridge and the water. In the Island Auallon, (so called in the
Britans tongue of the Apples), which the Latins calls Glasconia, flourished the
Monastery Glastenbury, of great antiquity, derived from Joseph of Arimathta.
Dunstan casting out the ancient Monks, brought thither the Benedictines of a
later institution, and himself was the first Abbot over a great multitude of
Monks, endowed with Kingly revenues. In the Church yard of this Monastery,
they say that the great worthy of the Britans Prince Arthur has his Sepulcher.
The Episcopal little City called Wells of the Wells, or Fountains, has a
stately Bishops Palace. The City Bathe is famous for the medicinal Baths,
whereof three Fountains spring in the very City, which are wholesome for bodies
nummed with ill humors, but are shut up certain hours of the day, that no
man should enter them till by their sluices they be purged of all filth. The
Bishop of Wells buying this City of Henry the first, removed his Episcopal
seat thither, yet still keeping the old name of Bishop of Wells, and there
built a new Cathedral Church. The City Bristowe is compassed with a double
wall, and has so fair buildings, as well public as private houses, as next
to London and York, it is preferred to all other Cities of England.

5 Wilshire was also inhabited by the Belgae or Netherlanders, and lies all
within land, rich in all parts with pastures and corn. Malmesbury is a fair
Town famous for the woollen clothes. The Town Wilton, of old the chief of
this County, is now a little Village, beautified with the stately Palace of
the Earls of Penbroke. The City of Salisbury is made pleasant with waters
running through the streets, and is beautified with a stately Cathedral
Church, and the College of the Deane and Prebends, having rich Inhabitants in
so pleasant a seat, yet no way more famous then by having John Jewel a late
worthy Bishop borne there. Some six miles from Salisbury, is a place in the
fields where huge stones are erected, whereof some are eight and twenty foot
high, and seven broad, standing in three rows after the form of a crown,
upon which other stones are so laid acrosse, as it seems a work hanging in
the Air, whereupon it is called Stoneheng vulgarly, and is reputed among
Miracles, as placed there by Merlin, there being scarce any stone for ordinary
building in the Territory adjoining.

6 Hamshire of old was inhabited within Land by the Belgae or Netherlanders,
and upon the Sea coast by the Regni. William the Norman Conqueror, made here
a Forest for Dear, destroying Towns and holy buildings for some thirty miles
compass, which ground now well inhabited, yet serving for the same use, we
call New-Forest. Southampton a fair little City, lies upon the Sea.
Wintchester of old called Venta of the Belgae, was a famous City in the time of
the Romans, and in these days it is well inhabited, watered with a pleasant
Brook and pleasantly seated, and has an old Castle; wherein there hanges
against the wall a Table of a round form vulgarly called Prince Arthurs round
Table: but Gamden thinks it to have been made long after his time. It has a
Cathedral Church, and large Bishops Palace, and a famous College founded for
training up young Scholars in learning, whence many learned men have been
first sent to the University, and so into the Church and Commonwealth. In the
Town or Port of Portsmouth, lies a Garrison of soldiers, to defend those
parts from the incursions of the French by Sea.

7 Barkshire was of old inhabited by the Atrebatij. Newbery a famous Town
enriched by woollen clothes, had his beginning of the ancient Town Spina.
Windsore is famous by the Kings Castle, neither can a Kings seat be in a more
pleasant situation, which draws the Kings often to retire thither, and Edward
the third kept at one time John King of France, and David King of Scotland,
captives in this Castle. The same Edward the third built here a stately Church,
and dedicated it to the blessed Virgin Mary and to S. George the Capadocian,
and first instituted the order of Knights, called of the Garter, as an happy
omen of victory in war (happily succeeding), who wear under the left knee a
watchet Garter buckled, having this mot in the French tongue graven in letters
of gold, Honey soit qui mal'y pense, and the ceremonies of this order he
instituted to be kept in this Church.

8 The County of Surry was of old inhabited by the Regni. Otelands is
beautified with the Kings very fair and pleasant house, as Richmond is with
the Kings stately Palace.

9 The County of Sussex, of old inhabited by the Regni, has the fair City
Chichesler, and the Haven Rhie, known by being the most frequented passage
into France.

10 The County of Kent is rich in medows Pastures and pleasant Groves, and
wonderfully abounds with Apples and Cherries. It has most frequent Towns,
and safe Harbors for ships, and some veins of Iron. William the Norman
Conqueror, after the manner of the Romans, instituted a Warden of the five
Ports, Hastings, Dover, Hith, Rumney, and Sandwiche, to which Winchelsey and
Rye, the chief Havens, and other Towns are joined as members, which have
great privileges, because they are tied to serve in the wars, and the Warden
of them is always one of the great Lords, who within his jurisdiction, has in
most things the authority of Admiral, and other rights. Detford Town is well
known, where the Kings ships are built and repaired, and there is a notable
Armory or storehouse for the Kings Navy. Not far from thence upon the shore,
lie the broken ribs of the ship, in which Sir Francis Drake sailed round about
the World, reserved for a monument of that great action. Greenewich is
beautified with the Kings Palace. Eltham another house of the Kings is not
far distant. The Town Grauesend is a known Road. The City Rochester is the
seat of a Bishop, and has a stately Cathedral Church. Canterbery is a very
ancient City, the seat of an Archbishop, who in the Hierarchy of the Roman
Bishop, was styled the Popes Legate, but the Popes authority being banished out
of England, it was decreed in a Synod held the year 1534, that the Archbishops
laying aside that title, should be called the Primates and Metrapolitanes of
all England. Before the Rode of Margat lie the dangerous shelfes or flats of
sand, whereof the greatest is called Goodwin sand. Dover is a Port of old very
commodious, but now less safe, only it is more famous for the short cut to
Callis in France. The Town Rumney one of the five Ports, in our Grandfathers
time lay close upon the Sea, but now is almost two miles distant from the same.

11 Glocestershire was of old inhabited by the Dobuni. William of Malmesbury
writes, that this County is so fertile in Corn and fruits, as in some places
it yields a hundredth measures of grain for one sowed: but Camden affirms this
to be false. The same Writer affirms that the very high ways are full of
Appell trees, not planted, but growing by the nature of the soil, and that the
fruits so growing, are better then others planted, both in beauty, taste, and
lasting, being to be kept a whole year from rotting. He adds, that it yielded
in his time plenty of Vines, abounding with Grapes of a pleasant taste, so as
the wines made thereof were not sharp, but almost as pleasant as the Fench
wines, which Camden thinks probable, there being many places still called
Vineyards, and attributes it rather to the Inhabitants slothfulness, then to
the fault of the Air or soil, that it yeeldes not wine at this day.
Tewkesbury is a large and fair Town, having three Bridges over three Rivers,
and being famous for making of woollen cloth, for excellent mustard, and a
fair Monastery, in which the Earls of Gloucester have their Sepulchers. The
City of Gloucester is the chief of the County, through which the Seuerne
runs, and here are the famous Hills of Cotswold, upon which great flocks of
sheep do feed, yielding most white wool, much esteemed of all Nations.
Circester is an ancient City, the largeness whereof in old time appears by
the ruins of the walls. The River Onse springs in this County, which after
yeeldes the name to the famous River Thames, falling into it.

12 Oxfordshire also was inhabited by the Dobuni, a fertile County, the plains
whereof are bewtified with meadows and groves, the hills with woods, and not
only it abounds with corn, but with all manner of cattle, and game for
hunting and hawking, and with many Rivers full of fish. Woodstocke Town is
famous for the Kings House and large Park, compassed with a stone wall, which
is said to have been the first Park in England, but our Progenitors were so
delighted with hunting, as the Parkes are now grown infinite in number, and
are thought to contain more fallow Dear, then all the Christian World
besides. Histories affirm, that Henry the second, for his Mistress Rosamond of
the Cliffords house did build in his house here a labyrinth impassable by any
without a thread to guide them, but no ruins thereof now remain. The Town
itself has nothing to boast, but that Ieffry Chancer the English Homer was
borne there. Godstowe of old a Nunnery, is not far distant, where Rosamond
was buried. Oxford is a famous University, giving the name to the County, and
was so called of the Foorde for Oxen, or of the Foorde, and the River Onse.

13 Buckinghamshire was of old inhabited by the Cattienchiani (which Camden
thinks to be the Cassei), and it has a large and pleasant town called
Ailsbury, which gives the name to the Valley adjoining. The city Buckingham is
the chief of the County, and the Town of Stonystratford is well known for
the fair Innes and stately Bridge of stone.

14 Bedfordshire had the same old inhabitants, and has the name of Bedford the
chief Town.

15 Hertfordshire had the same old inhabitants, and the chief Town is
Hertford. In this County is the stately house Thibaulds, for building, Gardens
and Walks. Saint Albons is a pleasant Town, full of fair Innes.

16 Midlesex County was of old inhabited by the Trinobants, called Mercij in
the time of the Saxon Kings. In this County is the Kings stately palace
Hamptencourt, having many Courtyards compassed with sumptuous buildings.
London, the seat of the Brittans Empire, and the Chamber of the Kings of
England, is so famous, as it needs not be praised. It has Colleges for the
study of the municiple Laws, wherein live many young Gentlemen Students of
the same. The little city Westminster of old more then a mile distant, is now
by fair buildings joined to London, and is famous for the Church (wherein the
Kings and Nobles have stately Sepulchers) and for the Courts of Justice at
Westminster Hall, where the Parliaments are extraordinarily held, and
ordinarily the Chancerie and Kings Bench, with like Courts. Also it has the
Kings stately Palace called Whitehall, to which is joined the Park and house
of Saint James. The City of London has the sumptuous Church of Saint Paul,
beautified with rich Sepulchers; and the Burse or Exchange a stately house
built for the meeting of Merchants: a very sumptuous and wonderful Bridge
built over the Thames: rich shops of Goldsmiths in Cheapeside, and innumerable
stately Palaces, whereof great part lie scattered in unfrequented lanes.

17 Essex County had of old the same inhabitants, and it is a large Teritorie,
yielding much Corn and Saffron, enriched by the Ocean, and with pleasant
Rivers for fishing, with Groves, and many other pleasures: It has a large
Forest for hunting, called Waltham Forest. Chensford is a large and fair
Town, near which is New-Hall the stately Palace of the Rateliffes Earls of
Sussex. Colchester is a fair City, pleasantly seated, well inhabited, and
beautified with fifteen Churches, which greatly flourished in the time of the
Romans. Harewich is a safe Haven for ships. Saffron. Walden is a fair Town,
the fields whereof yield plenty of Saffron, whereof it has part of the name.

18 The County of Suffolk was of old inhabited by the Iceni, and it is large,
the soil fertile, pleasant in groves, and rich in pastures to fat Cattle,
where great quantity of Cheese is made and thence exported. Saint Edmondsberry
vulgarly called Berry, is a fair Town, and so is Ipswich, having stately
built Churches and houses, and a commodious Haven.

19 The County of Norfolk had of old the same Inhabitants, and it is a large
almost all Champion Country, very rich, and abounding with sheep, and
especially with Conies, fruitful and most populous. The City Norwich chief of
the County, deserves to be numbered among the chief Cities of England, for the
riches, populousness, beauty of the Houses, and the fair building of the
Churches. Yarmouth is a most fair Town, fortified by nature and diligent Art,
and has a very fair Haven. Upon the bay which Ptolomy names, AEstuarium
Metaris, vulgarly called, the Washes, lies the large Town of Linne, famous
for the safety of the Haven, most easy to be entered, for the concourse of
Merchants and the fair buildings.

20 Cambridgeshire had of old the same Inhabitants, and consists all of open
corn fields, (excepting some places yielding Saffron), and it gives excellent
Barley, of which steeped till it spring again, they make great quantity of
Malt to brew Beer, in such quantity as the Beer is much exported even into
foreign parts, and there highly esteemed. Cambridge is a famous University,
seated upon the River Grant, by others called Came, of which and the Bridge
over the same, it is called Cambridge. The Northern part of this County
consists of Islands green and pleasant in Summer, but all covered with water in
the Winter, whereof the chief called Ely, gives the name to all the rest,
called (as if they were but one Island,) the I Will of Ely, the chief Town
whereof called also Ely, is famous for being the seat of a Bishop.

21 Hunting donshire had of old the same Inhabitants, the chief Town whereof
is Huntingdon.

22 Northamptonshire was of old inhabited by the Coritani, and is a Country
most painefully tilled and full of Inhabitants. Northampton is the chief City
large and walled. Peterborow is the seat of a Bishop. Near Stamford is the
stately Palace Burleigh, built by William the first, Lord Burleigh.

23 Leycestershire had of old the same Inhabitants, a Champion Country and
fruitful in bearing Corn. In Lutterworth a little Town of Trade, John
Wickliffe was Pastor or Minister. Leicester the chief City, has more
antiquity then beauty.

24 Rutlandshire had of old the same Inhabitants, and is the least County of
England, and had the name of the red Earth. The Town of Vppingham deserves no
other mention, then that it is the chief Town of the County.

25 Linconshire had of old the same inhabitants, and is a very large County,
rich in Corn and Pastures, and abounding with Foul and Fish, and all things
necessary for food. The great Washes of Holland when the Sea flows are
covered with water, but when it ebbes, the ground is discovered to be passed,
but not without danger and with a good guide. Lincoln the chief City, was of
old one of the most populous Cities of England, and one that had greatest
trade, and has a sumptuous Cathedral Church.

26 Nottinghamslire had of old the same inhabitants, the chief City whereof is
Nottingham pleasantly seated. In the Western part is the Wood called
Shirewood, feeding infinite numbers of Fallow and Red Dear, whether the Kings
of old were wont to retire for hunting.

27 Darbyshire had of old the same inhabitants, the chief town whereof is
Darby, fair and well inhabited, the Ayle whereof is for goodness prouerbially
preferred before that kind of drink in any other Town. The Western part has
high Mountains, called Peake, yielding Lead, which they make into Sowes, and
stibium in his proper veins is there found. Likewise there Mil-stones are out
out, and there is the old Castle, called the Castle in the Peake, near which
is a great hole or cave in the Mountain gaping wide, and having many inward
caves, and this hole (with reueuerence be it spoken) is vulgarly called, The
Devils ars at Peuke, of which many fables are told, and the place is accounted
among the miracles of England. The like fables are told of (...) hole not far
distant, very steep and deep.

28 Warwickshire was of old inhabited by the Cornauij; wherein is Couentry a
large, fair and walled City, so called of the Covent of Monks, and at this
day it is the fairest City within-land, whereof the chief trade of old was
making round caps of wool, but the same being now very little used, the trade
is decayed. Warwick is the chief City of the County, and near the same upon
the hill Blacklow, Peter of Gaueston was beheaded by the Lords of the Kingdom.
Not far thence is a transparant and pleasant, but little Wood, and there be
clear Fountains, which place yields sweet solitude for the Muses, and there
they report, that the famous worthy Guy of Warwick after many adventures
achieved, did first live an Heremites life, and was after death buried.

29 Worcestershire had of old the same inhabitants, which after in the time of
Beda were called Wiccij, either of wic, signifying a corner or bay, or of
wyches signifying (...) in the Saxons tongue. And there are excellent salt pits
or Brooks, and new fountains of salt are daily found. The Country is happy in
the healthful air, tertility of soil, and sweet Rivers, but especially
yields abundance of Pears, of which they make Perry a counterfeit wine, but
cold and flatuous, as all those kinds of drink are. Worcester the chief City
of the County was built by the Romans, and is compassed with a wall, and has
the seat of a Bishop, and a fair Cathedral Church, with the Monuments of
John King of England, and Arthur Prince of Wales. It is also beautified with
many inhabitants, rich trade of woollen cloth, fair buildings, and the number
of Churches.

30 Staffordshire had of old the same inhabitants, and toward the South it
has pitcoales, and some veins of Iron (but the greatest quantity and best
kind of pit-coales is in Nottinghamshire.) Stone is a Town of Traffike.
Lichfeild is a large and fair City, so called, as the field of dead bodies,
and it is beautified with the seat of a Bishop, his Palace, and the house of
the Prebends. My self passing that way, did read these Epitaphes in the
Cathedral Church. The first of a Deane;

Sis testis Christ, quod non iacet hic lapis iste
Corpus vt ornetur, sed spirittus vt memoretur.
O Christ me witness bear, that this stone lies not here,
To grace the vile body, but the souls memory.
And another excellent Epitaph but superstitious and I know not whose.
Quisquis eris, qui transieris, sta. perlege, plora,
Sum quod eris, fuer amque quod es, pro me precor ora.
Who ere thou be, that passest by, stand, read, and houle,
Such shall thou be, I was like thee, pray for my soul.
Yet I remember not well, whether these were two Epitaphes, or only one and
for one man.

31 Shropshire had of old the same inhabitants, and was a fortified and manned
frontyer against the Welsh then divided from the English and their enemies, and
thereupon was named the Marches. Ludlow is a Town of more beauty then
antiquity, beautified with the Palace of the King (or rather of the Prince of
Wales), and there is a Counsel or Court of Justice erected for Wales and the
borders, not unlike to the French Parliaments, and instituted by Henry the
eight. It consists of the President of Wales there residing, of a Secretary, an
Attorney, a Solicitor, and four Justices of the Counties of Wales, and as many
Counselors as the King shall please to appoint. In Hackstow Forest, at the
hill Stiperstons, are great heaps of stones, which the vulgar sort dream to
have been the devils bridge. Wrockceter of old the chief City burt by the
Romans, is now a pretty village, and from the decay thereof grew the well known
City Shrewesburie, now the chief City, fortified by art and nature, rich by
making woollen cloth, and trading with the neighboring Welchmen, where Henry
Percy the younger with his forces, was overthrown by Henry the fourth.

32 Cheshire is a great County of Gentlemen, no other County having so many
Knights houses. Westchester is a fair City, where the twentieth Legion called
victrix lay in Garrison, in the time of Vespasian the Roman Emperor. Most white
Salt is made at Nantwich, and less white made at Middlewich and Norwich. It is
rich in Pastures, and sends great quantity of cheeses to London. I know that
Worcester cheeses are most esteemed, but there is not such quantity to
transport them. I know that Suffolk and the Fennes of Essex yield huge cheeses
in great number to be exported, but they are not so pleasing to the taste as
these. I know that in all the Counties, some quantity of very good cheeses is
made for private men's uses, but not in proportion to be exported. Whereas
Cheshire yields great quantity of very good cheeses, comparable to those of
Holland, serving the greatest part of London therewith, and exporting the same
into other parts. When the heirs males of this County faced, Henry the third
added this large patrimony to the Crown, so as the Kings eldest son should
be Earl of Cheshire. And Richard the second, of a County made it a
Principality, and himself was called Prince of Cheshire: but Henry the fourth
reduced it again to a County Palatine, and at this day it has Palatine
jurisdiction, administered by a Chamberlain, a special Judge, two Exchequer
Barons, three Serieants at Law, a Sheriff, an Attorney, an Escheator, etc.

33 Herefordshire was of old inhabited by the Silures, and it so much abeundeth
with all things necessary for the life of man, as it is not content in that
respect to have the second place among all the Counties of England. Hereford is
the chief City thereof, Lemster justly boasts of the Sheep wool feeding
in those grounds, with which no part of Europe can compare, excepting Apulia
and Tarentum. It yields excellent Fiax, and so good Wheat, as the bread of
Lemster, and drink of Weabley (a neighbor Town) are prouerbially praised
before all others.

34 Radnoxshire had of old the same inhabitants, and is the first County of
Wales, The shires of Wales.
whereof Radnox is the chief Town.

35 Brechnocshire the second County of Wales, had of old the same inhabitants,
and has the name of the chief Town, seated in the midst thereof, where
Henry the eight instituted a Collegiate Church.

36 Monmouthshire had of old the same inhabitants, and is so called of the
chief Town, no way so glorious, as in that Henry the fifth Conqueror of
France was borne there. It has also another fair Town called Chepstow.

37 Glamorganshire the fourth County of Wales, had of old the same inhabitants,
and the chief City Caerdiffe has a commodious Haven.

38 Caermardenshire the fifth County of Wales, was of old inhabited by the
Dimetae, and is fruitful in Corn, abounds in Sheep, and in some places
yields Pit-coale. It has the name of the chief City, where Merlin was borne,
begotten by an Incubus Devil, whom the common people took for a most famous
Prophet.

39 Pembrookeshire the sixth County of Wales, had of old the same inhabitants.
Here a long neck of land makes an Haven, called Milford haven, then which
Europe has not a more noble Haven, or more safe, or more large, with many
creekes and safe roades, made more famous by the landing of H. the seventh.
Pembrook is the chief Town of the County. The Flemming having their Towns
drowned by the Sea, had a Territory of this County given them to inhabit by
Henry the first, before Wales was subdued, and they ever remained most
faithful to the Kings of England.

40 Kardiganshire the seventh County of Wales, and had of old the same
inhabitants, and has the name of the chief City.

41 Montgomeryshire the eight County of Wales, was of old inhabited by the
Ordouices, and has the name of the chief Town.

42 Mertonethshire the ninth County of Wales; had of old the same Inhabitants,
where upon the mountains great slockes of sheepefeede, without any danger of
the wolf: for the wolves were destroyed through all England, when Edgar King
of England imposed the yearly tribute of three hundredth wolves upon (...)
Prince of Wales. The little and poor town Bala, is the eheefe of this
Mountenous people.

43 Caernaruonshire the tenth County of Wales, had of old the same Inhabitants,
and was called Snodenforest, before Wales was reduced into Counties, so called
of the mountains, whose tops are always white with snow, deserving to be
named the Alps of Britany; and it is certain that there be lakes and standing
waters upon the tops of those Mountains. The walled City Caernaruon checfe of
the County, has a most fair Castle, built by Edward the first, wherein his
son Edward the second was borne, and named thereof. Bangor (that is, fair
Chancell) is the seat of a Bishop. Aberconway deserves the name of a strong
and fair little City, rather then of a Town, save that it is not full of
Inhabitants.

44 Denbighshire the eleventh County of Wales, had of old the same Inhabitants,
and has the name of the chief Town, well inhabited. The little Village
Momglath had the name of the mines of lead, which that pleasant territory
yields. Not far thence is the Town Wrexham, bewtified with a most saire Tower,
called the Holy Tower, and commended for the musicali Organes in the Church.

45 The little County Flintshire the twelfth of Wales, had of old the same
Inhabitants, the fields whereof the first year after they have line fallow,
yield more then twenty measures for one, in some places of Barley, in other
places of Wheat, and generally of Rye, and after for four or five years,
yield Oats Holiwell (named of the sacred Fountain) is a little Town, where
is the Fountain of Winefrede a Christian Virgin, who being defloured by force,
there was killed by the Tyrant, and this Fountain is far and greatly famous
for the Moss there growing of a most pleasant smell. A fair Chapel of Free
stone is built upon the very Fountain, and a little stream runs out of it
among stones, upon which a certain bloody humor grows. The Castle Flint gave
the name to the County.

46 I will omit Anglesey the thirteenth County of Wales, because it is to be
described among the Islands.

47 Yorkshire is the far largest County of all England, and was of old
inhabited by Other shires of England.
the Brigantes. In the Forest called Hatfield Chase, are great Herds of red
Dear and Hearts. The Towns of Sheffeld and Dancasler are well known, but of
all other Hallifax is most famous, for the Privileges and the rare Law, by
which any one found in open theft, is without delay beheaded, and boasts that
John de sacrobosco (of the Holy Wood) who writ of the Sphere, was borne there.
Wakefield is a famous Town for making Woollen cloth. Pontfreit named of the
broken bridge, is a town fairly built and has a Castle as stately built as
any can be named. Near the little Village Towton are the very Pharsalian
fields of England, which did never see in any other place so great Forces, and
so many Nobles in Arms, as here, in the year 1461, when in the civil wars,
the faction of York in one battle killed five and thirty thousand of the
Lancastrian faction. Near the Castle Knarshorow, is the Fountain called
Droppingwell, because the waters distill by drops from the rocks, into which
any wood being cast, it has been observed, that in short space it is covered
with a stony rind, and hardens to a stone. Rippen had a most flourishing
Monastery, where was the most famous needle of the Archbishop Wilfred. It was a
narrow hole, by which the chastity of women was tried, the chaste easily
passing through in, but others being detained and held fast, I know not by what
miracle or art. Near the little town Barrobridge, is a place, where stand
four Pyramides, the Trophces of the Romans, but of (...) workmanship. York
the chief City of the Brigantes, is the second of all England, and the seat
of an Archbishop. The Emperor Constantius Chlorus died there, and there begat
his son Constantine the great of his first wife Helena, whereof may be
gathered, how much this scare of the Emperors flourished in those days. By a
Pall (or Archbishops cloak) sent from Pope Honorius, it was made a
Metropolitan City over twelve Bishops in England, and all the Bishops of
Scotland, but some five hundred years past, all Scotland fell from this
Metropolitan fear, and it self has so devoured the next Bishoprics, as now
it only has primacy over four English Bishops, of Durham, of Chester, of
Carlisle, and the Bishop of the I Will of man. Henry the eight did here institute a
Council (as he did also in Wales) not unlike the Parliaments of France, to
give arbitrary justice to the Northern inhabitants, consisting of a President,
Counselors, as many as the King shall please to appoint, a Secretary, etc.
Hull a well known City of trade, lies upon the River Humber, where they make
great gain of the Iseland fish, called Stockfish. Upon the very tongue, called
Spurnchead of the Promontory, which Ptolomy, calls Ocellum, vulgarly called
Holdernesse, is a place famous by the landing of Henry the fourth. Scarborrough
is a famous Castle, where in the sea is great fishing of Herrings.

48 Richmondshire had of old the same inhabitants, and the Mountains
plentifully yield lead, pit-coales, and some brass, upon the tops whereof
stones are found, which have the figures of shelfishes and other fishes of the
neighboring sea. Near the Brooks Helbechs (as infernal), are great herds of
Goats, Fallow and Red-Deare, and Hearts (notable for their greatness, and the
spreading of their horns.) Richmond is the chief City of the County.

49 The Bishopric of Durham had of old the same inhabitants, and the land is
very grateful to the plower, striving to pass his labor in fruitfulness. It
is pleasant in Meadows, Pastures and groves, and yields great plenty of dug
Coals, called Sea-coales. The Bishops were of old Counts Palatine, and had
their royal rightes, so as Traitors goods sell to them, not to the Kings.
Edward the first took away these privileges, and Edward the sixth dissolved
the Bishopric, till Queen Mary restored all to the Church, which it inioies
to this day, but the Bishop in Queen Elizabeth's time, challenging the goods of
the Earl of Westmerland rebelling, the Parliament interposed the authority
thereof, and for the time judged those goods to be confiscated toward the
Queens charge in subduing those Rebels. Durham is the chief City of that
County.

50 Lancashire had of old the same inhabitants, and has the title of a
Palatinate. Manchester an old town, fair and well inhabited, rich in the trade
of making woollen cloth, is beautified by the Marketplace, the Church, and
College, and the clothes called Manchester Cottons are vulgarly known. Upon
the Seacoast they power water upon heaps of sand, till it get saltness, and
then by seething it, make white Salt. There be some quicksands, wherein
footmen are in danger to be wrecked, especially at the mouth of Cocarus.
Lancaster the chief Town has the name of the River Lone. The Dukes of this
County, obtained the Crown of England, and Henry the seventh Duke of
Lancaster, united this Duchy to the Crown, instituting a Court of Officers to
administer the same, namely, a Chauncelor of the Duchy, an Attorney, a
Receiver, a Clarke of the Court, six Assistants, a Pursuiuant, two Auditors,
twenty three Receivers, and three overseers.

51 Westmerland had of old the same inhabitants, and Kendale the chief Town
well inhabited, is famous for making of woollen cloth.

52 Cumberland had of old the same inhabitants, and has mines of Brass and
veins of silver, in all parts yielding black lead used to draw black lines.
Carleile a very ancient City is the seat of a Bishop. In this County still
appear the ruins of a wall, which the Romans built to keep out the Pictes
from making incursions, being so poor as they cared not to subdue them. And
the Emperike Surgeons (that is, of experience without learning), of Scotland
come yearly to those fields of the borders, to gather herbs, good to heal
wounds, and planted there by the bordering soldiers of the Romans, the virtue
of which herbs they wonderfully extol.

53 Northumberland was of old inhabited by the Ottadini, and the inhabitants of
our time, now exercising themselves in war against the Scots, now resisting
their incursions upon these borders, are very warlike and excellent light
Horsemen. In very many places this County yields great quantity of Sea coals.
Newcastle is a fair and rich City, well fortified against the incursions of
the bordering Scots, whence abundance of Sea coals is transported into many
parts. Barwicke is the last and best fortified Town of all Britany, in which a
Garrison of Soldiers was maintained against the incursions of the Scots, till
the happy Reign of James King of England and Scotland.

To describe breefly the Islands of England. In the narrow Sea into which the
Seuerne falls, are two little Islands 1 Fatholme, and 2 Stepholme, and the 3
Island Barry, which gave the name to the Lord Barry in Ireland. There is also
the 4 Island Caldey, and that of 5 Londay much more large, having a little Town
of the same name, and belonging to Devonshire.

On the side upon Pembrookeshire, are the Islands 6 Gresholme; 7 Stockholme and
8 Scalmey, yielding grass and wild thime. Then Northward follows 9 Lymen,
called Ramsey by the English, and Saint David's Islands, right over against the
seat of the Bishop of Saint Dauy. Next is the 10 Island called Enhly by the
Welsh Britans, and Berdsey (as the I Will of Birds) by the English, wherein they
report that twenty thousand Saints lie buried.

Next lies 11 Mona, (that is the shadowed or dusky Island) which after many
years being conquered by the English, was by them called Anglesey, (as the
Island of the English). It is a most noble Island, the old seat of the Druides
(Priests so called of old), and so fruitful, as it is vulgarly called the
Mother of Wales, the chief Town whereof is Beaumarish. Near that lies 12
Prestholme, (that is, the Priests Island), whereof the Inhabitants and
Neighbors make incredible reports for the multitude of Sea Foul there
breeding.

Next follows 13 Mona or Monoeda, (as the farther Mona), which we call the I Will
of Man, the Inhabitants whereof are like the Irish in language and manners, but
have something of the Norway men. It yeeldes abundantly Flax and Hemp, has
pleasant Pastures and Groves, and is fruitful of Barley, Wheat, and especially
of Oats, the people feeding on Oaten bread, in all parts are multitudes of
Cattle, but it wants wood, and for fire uses a kind of Turffe. Russia which of
the Castle we call Castle-Towne, is the chief Town, and has a Garrison of
Soldiers; but Duglas is the most frequented and best inhabited Town, because
it has an excellent Haven easy to be entered. In the Western part Bala-curi
is the seat of the Bishop under the primacy of the Archbishop of York, and
there is the Fort called the Pyle, wherein a garrison of Soldiers is kept.
Upon the Southern Promontory lies a little Island, called the Calfe of Man,
which abounds with Sea Birds, called Puffins, and a kind of Duckes engendered
of rotten wood, which the English call Barnacles. In general the Inhabitants
have their proper Tongue and Laws, and had their proper Coin. They abhor
from stealing, and from begging, and are wonderfully religious generally, and
most readily conforming themselves at this day to the Church of England, and
the people in the Northern part speak like Scots, and in the Southern part
like Irish. Edwin King of Northumberland, subdued the Northern people, and
subjected them to the Crown of England, yet with many changes of Fortune, this
Island long had their own Kings, even since the Normans conquered England, and
since the time that John King of England passing into Ireland, by the way
subdued this Island about the year 1210, till the Kingdom came to the Scots in
the year 1266. After that time, Mary the daughter of Reginald the last, laid
claim to the Island before the King of England, as supreme Lord of Scotland,
and when sheecould not prevail, William Montague her Kinseman took the Island
of Man by force, which his Heir sold for a great sum of money in the year
1393, to William Scroope, who being beheaded for Treason, the Island fell by
right to Henry the fourth King of England, who assigned the same to Henry
Pearcy Earl of Northumberland, with prouiso that he and his Heirs at the
coronation of the Kings of England, should carry the Sword, (vulgarly called
Lancaster Sword) before the King, but the same Persey being also killed in
civil war, the King gave that Island to Stanlye, from whom descend the Earls
of Darby, who kept the same, till Ferdinand Earl of Darby dying without heir
male, and the Earldom falling to his Brother, but this Island to his
Daughters, as Heirs general, Queen Elizabeth thinking it unfit that Women
should be set over her Soldiers there in garrison, gave the keeping thereof
to Sir Thomas Gerrard. But King James the foureteenth of August in the fifth
year of his Reign, granted by Letters Pattents this Island with all things
thereunto appertaining, to Henry Earl of Northampton, and Robert Earl of
Saltsbury, their Heirs and Assigns for ever, they upon doing homage for the
same, presenting his Majesty with two Falcons, and his Heirs and Successors
at their Coronation in like sort with two Falcons. And howsoever no use or
intent of this grant be mentioned in these Letters Pattents, yet no doubt the
grant was made to the use of those upon whose humble petition to his Majesty
the Letters Pattents were granted, as therein is expressly declared, namely of
William Lord Stanly, Earl of Darby, heir male to John Lord Stanly, and of
Elizabeth Countess of Huntington, Anne wife to the Lord Chandois, and Francis
wife to Sir John Egerton Knight, being the Heirs general of the said John
Lord Stanly.

The famous River Thames falls into the German Ocean over against Zeland, and
before it falls into the same, makes the (14) Island Canuey upon the Coast of
Essex, so low as it is often ouerflowed, all but some higher hills, to which the
sheep retire, being some four thousand in number, the flesh whereof is of
delicate taste, and they are milked by young men. Near that is the (15) Island
Sheppey, so called of the sheep, wherein is Quinborrough a most fair Castle
kept by a Constable. Without the mouth of Thames, lie the shelfes or sands
dangerous to Sea men, which of the greatest, are all called Goodwin sands,
where they say an Island the patrimony of the same Earl Goodwinn was devoured
by the Sea in the year 1097.

In the Britan Sea lies the (16) I Will of Wight, having in the Sea most
plentiful fishing, and the Land being so fruitful, as they export Corn,
besides that in all parts it has plenty of Conies, Hares, Partridges, and
Feasanes, and has also two Parkes of Fallow Dear. Also the sheep feeding
there upon the pleasant hills, yield wool in goodness next to the Fleeces of
Lemster and Cotswold Flocks. It has six and thirty Towns and Castles, and
the Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction thereof belongs to the Bishop of Wintchester.
Toward the West lie other Islands pretented to be French, but subject to
England, namely, (17) Gerzey (whither condemned men were of old banished) and
(18) Garnsey, neither so great nor so fruitful, but having a more commodious
Haven, upon which lies the Town of Saint Peter: both Islands burn a weed of
the Sea, or Sea coals brought out of England, and both speak the French
Language. I omit the seven Isles called Siadae, and others adjoining, and will
only add that the Islands lie near Cornwall, which the Greeks called
Hesperides, the English call Silly, and the Netherlanders call Sorlings, being
in number some 145 more or less, whereof some yield Wheat, all abound with
Conies, Cranes, Swannes, Hirnshawes, and other Sea Birds. The greatest of them
is called Saint Mary, and has a Castle wherein Soldiers lie in Garrison,
committed in our time to the keeping of Sir Francis Godolphin, and after to his
son Sir William Godolphin, being of a noble Family in Cornwall. Also many of
the said Islands have veins of Tynne, and from hence was Lead first carried
into Greece, and the Roman Emperors banished condemned men hither, to work in
the Mines of metal.

The air of England is temperate, but thick, cloudy and misty, and Caesar
witnesses, The situation.
that the cold is not so piercing in England as in France. For the Sun
draws up the vapors of the Sea which compasses the Island, and distills them
upon the earth in frequent showers of rain, so that frosts are somewhat rare;
and howsoever Snow may often fall in the Winter time, yet in the Southern
parts (especially) it seldom lies long on the ground. Also the cool blasts of
Sea winds, mittigate the heat of Summer.

By reason of this temper, Laurel and Rosemary flourish all Winter, especially
in The fertility and traffic.
the Southern parts, and in Summer time England yields Abricots plentifully,
Musk melons in good quantity, and Figs in some places, all which ripen well,
and happily imitate the taste and goodness of the same fruits in Italy. And
by the same reason all beasts bring forth their young in the open fields, even
in the time of Winter; and England has such abundance of Apples, Pears,
Cherries, and Plummes, such variety of them, and so good in all respects, as no
country yields more or better, for which the Italians would gladly exchange
their Citrons and Oranges. But upon the Sea coast, the winds many times blast
the fraites in the very flower.

The English are so naturally inclined to pleasure, as there is no Country,
wherein the Gentlemen and Lords have so many and large Parkes only reserved
for the pleasure of hunting, or where all sorts of men alot so much ground
about their houses for pleasure of Gardens and Orchards. The very Grapes,
especially toward the South and Westare of a pleasant taste, and I have said,
that in some Countries, as in Glostershire, they made Wine of old, which no
doubt many parts would yield at this day, but that the inhabitants forbear to
plant Vines, as well because they are served plentifully, and at a good rate
with French wines, as for that the hills most fit to bear Grapes, yield more
commodity by feeding of Sheep and Cattle. Caesar writes in his Commentaries,
that Britany yields white Lead within land, and Iron upon the Seacoasts. No
doubt England has vnexhaustible veins of both, and also of Tin, and yields
great quantity of Brass, and of Allom and Iron, and abounds with quarries of
Freestone, and Fountains of most pure Salt; and I formerly said that it
yields some quantity of Silver, and that the Tin and Lead is mingled with
Silver, but so, as it does not largely quit the cost of the labor in
seperating or trying it. Two Cities yield medicinal Baths, namely, Buxstone
and Bathe, and the waters of Bathe especially, have great virtue in many
diseases. England abounds with Sea-coales upon the Seacoast, and with Pit
coals within land. But the Woods at this day are rather frequent and pleasant
then vast, being exhausted for fire, and with Iron-milles, so as the quantity
of wood and charcoale for fire, is much deminished, in respect of the old
abundance; and in some places, as in the Fennes they burn Turffe, and the very
dung of Cowes. Yet in the mean time England exports great quantity of Seacoale
to foreign parts. In like sort England has infinite quantity, as of Mettalls,
so of Wool, and of VVoollen clothes to be exported. The English Beer is
famous in Netherland and lower Germany, which is made of Barley and Hops; for
England yields plenty of Hops, howsoever they also use Flemish Hops. The Cities
of lower Germany upon the sea, forbid the public selling of English Beer, to
satisfy their own brewers, yet privately swallow it like Nectar. But in
Netherland, great and incredible quantity thereof is spent. England abounds
with corn, which they may transport, when a quarter (in some places containing
six, in others eight bushels) is sold for twenty shillings, or under; and this
corn not only serves England, but also served the English Army in the civil
wars of Ireland, at which time they also exported great quantity thereof into
foreign parts, and by Gods mercy England scarce once in ten years needs
supply of foreign Corn, which want commonly proceeds of the covetousness of
private men, exporting or hiding it. Yet I must confess, that daily this
plenty of Corn decreaseth, by reason that private men finding greater
commodity in feeding of Sheep and Cattle, then in the Plough, requiring the
hands of many servants, can by no Law be restrained from turning corn fields
into enclosed Pastures, especially since great men are the first to break
these Laws. England abounds with all kinds of foul, as well of the Sea, as of
the land, and has more tame Swannes swimming in the Rivers, then I did see in
any other part. It has multitudes of hurtful birds, as Crows, Ravens, and
Kytes, and they labor not to destroy the Crows, consuming great quantity of
Corn, because they feed on worms and other things hurting the Corn. And in
great Cities it is forbidden to kill Kytes or Ravens, because they devour the
filth of the streets. England has very great plenty of Sea and River fish,
especially above all other parts abundance of Oysters, Makrell, and Herrings,
and the English are very industrous in fishing, though nothing comparable to
the Flemmings therein.

The English export into Italy great quantity of red Herrings, with gain of
two or three for one, (not to speak in this place of other commodities which
they export with great gain), and in this fishing they are very industrious,
as well in the Sea upon the coasts, as in the Northern Islands. To conclude,
they export in great quantity all kinds of salted fishes, and those dried in
the smoke and pickled, as Pilchards Poor John, Cauiale, Botargo, and the like,
which they sell in Italy, and those parts at a dear rate. England abounds with
pulse of all kinds, and yields great quantity of Saffron and of Flax, whereof
they have also great quantity from Dantzke, whence also they have like plenty
of Pitch, and of Fur trees for Masts of ships, which two things if England
wanted not, I durst say that this Island (or part of an Island) abounds with all
things necessary for honest clothing, large and dainty feeding, and for war
by land and sea. As for war, it has not only the aforesaid mettalls, but
also great quantity of Saltpeter. Besides the famous Broad cloth, it yields for
clothing many Stuffes, whereof great quantity is also exported. And I will not
omit, that howsoever it has silk from foreign parts, yet the English silk
stockings are much to be preferred before those of Italy, Spain, or any part
in the World.

England abounds in Cattle of all kinds, and particularly has very great
Oxen, the flesh whereof is so tender, as no meat is more desired. The Cowes
are also great with large vdders, yielding plenty of Whitmeates, no part in the
World yielding greater variety, nor better of that kind. And the hides of Oxen
are (contrary to the common good) exported in great quantity by unjustifiable
licenses, though strictly forbidden by many Statutes. The flesh of Hogs and
Swine is more sauoury, then in any other parts, excepting the bacon of
Westphalia, and of the Southern Islands, where they commonly feed on Roots
and Chestnuts. The goodness of the Sheep may be coniectured by the excellency
of the wool, and woollen clothes, which Sheep are subject to rotting, when
they feed on low wet grounds, excepting the Marshes ouerflowed by the sea,
which for the saltness are held very wholesome for them, and these rots often
destroy whole stocks, for they seldom drink, but are moistened by the dewes
falling in the night. And the feeding of Sheep, upon like accident of
discases, often undoes the ownet in his estate, but more commonly preferued
from that ill, they enrich many, so as it is prouerbially said, He whose Sheep
stand, and wives die (the husbands gaining their dowries) must needs be rich.

The Kings Forests have innumerable herds of Red Dear, and all parts have
such plenty of Fallow Dear, as every Gentleman of five hundredth or a thousand
pounds rent by the year has a Park for them enclosed with pales of wood for
two or three miles compass. Yet this prodigal age has so forced Gentlemen to
improve their reuenews, as many of these grounds are by them disparked, and
converted to feed Cattle. Lastly (without offense be it spoken) I will boldly
say, that England (yea perhaps one County thereof) has more fallow Dear, then
all Europe that I have seen. No Kingdom in the World has so many Doue-houses.

I formerly said, that the Wolves were altogether destroyed in England and
Wales, so as the Sheep feed freely in the fields and Mountains. England has
much more Dogs as well for the several kinds, as the number of each kind,
then any other Territory of like compass in the World, not only little
Dogs for beauty, but hunting and water-Dogges, whereof the bloud-Hounds and
some other have admirable qualities. It has infinite number of Conies, whereof
the skins (especially black and silver haired) are much prised, and in great
quantity transported, especially into Turkey. The Nagges and Gueldings are
singular for the Gentle ambling pace, and for strength to perform great
iournies. So are the hunting Horses of exceeding swiftnes, much esteemed in
foreign parts, especially in France and Scotland, and of both kinds the
number is infinite. The great Horses for service, and to draw Coaches and
carts, are of like number and goodness, and one kind for service, called the
Corser (as bred of the Neapolitan Corsers and English Mares) yields not for
bravery of race to the Neapolitan Corsers, or Spanish Gennets. I said that they
are all strong, and the horses for iornies in defatigable, for the English,
especially Northern men, ride from day break to the evening without drawing
bit, neither sparing their hories nor (...), whence is the Proverb, that
England is the Hell of Horses, the Purgatory of Servants, and the Paradise of
Women; because they ride Horses without measure, and use their Servants
imperiously, and their Women obsequiously.

The Gentlemen disdain traffic, thinking it to abase Gentry: but in Italy
with grauer counsel the very Princes disdain not to be Merchants by the
great, and hardly leave the retailing commodity to men of inseriour sort. And
by this course they preserve the dignity and patrimony of their progenitors,
suffering not the sinew of the Commonwealth, upon any pretense to be wrested
out of their hands. On the contrary, the English and French, perhaps thinking
it unjust, to leave the common sort no means to be enriched by their industry,
and judging it equal, that Gentlemen should live of their reuenews, Citizens
by traffic, and the common sort by the Plough and manual Arts, as diverse
members of one body, do in this course daily sell their patrimonies, and the
buyers (excepting Lawyers) are for the most part Citizens and vulgar men. And
the daily feeling of this mischief, makes the error apparent, whether it be
the prodigality of the Gentry (greater then in any other Nation or age), or
their too charitable regard to the inferior sort, or rashness or
slothfulness, which cause them to neglect and despise traffic, which in some
Commonwealths, and namely in England passes all other commodities, and is the
very sinew of the Kingdom. I have at large related in this book treating of
Poland, the English traffic in the Baltic Sea, and treating of Germany,
their traffic with the Hans Cities, and so treating of other several States,
the English traffic with each of them, so as it were lost labor to repeare it
again. Only for Spain, whereof I had no cause to speak touching their
traffic with England, I will add, that the English carry into Spain Woollen
clothes, Saffron, Wax and Corn, and bring from thence Oil, Fruits, Sacks and
sweet wines, Indian spices with God and Silver.

And in general I will observe, that England abounds with rich commodities of
their own, and exports them with their own ships, from very Iseland and
Moscouye to both the Indies, and at this day buy not so much of the Turks as
they were wont, but by long Navigations fetch Spices and like commodities from
the farthest East Indies. So as the shipping of England must needs be very
great in number and strength. But of Englands Nauall glory, I must speak at
large in the discourse of that Commonwealth. In the mean time I freely
profess, that in my opinion the English Mariners are more daring then any
other Nation, in storms of winds, raging of Seas, and thundering of Ordinance
in Nauall fights. And if any stranger take me of too much boasting in this
point, I desire him to consider of Martin Furbushers attempts in the frozen
Sea, of Sir Francis Drakes, and Sir Thomas Candishes dangerous Nauigations
round about the world; and if these things shall not move him, the worst I wish
him is, that in person he may experience their courage and art in a fight upon
equal terms.

Caesar in the fourth Chapter and fifth book of his Commentaries, writes thus
of Their diet.
the Britans diet. It is unlawful for them to taste Hares, Geese, or Hens,
yet they keep them all for their pleasure, and the inward parts sow no Corn,
but live upon milk and flesh. At this day the English inhabitants eat almost
no flesh more commonly then Hens, and for Geese they eat them in two
seasons, when they are fatted upon the stubble, after Harvest, and when they
are green about Whitsontide, at which time they are held for dainties; and
howsoever Hares are thought to nourish melancoly, yet they are eaten as
Venison, both roasted and boiled. They have also great plenty of Connies, the
flesh whereof is fat, tender, and much more delicate then any I have eaten in
other parts, so as they are in England preferred before Hares, at which the
Germans wonder, who having no Venison (the Princes keeping it proper to
themselves, and the hunting of Hares being proper to the Gentlemen in most
parts), they esteem Hares as Venison, and seldom eat Connies, being there
somewhat rare, and more like roasted Cats then the English Connies.

The English Husbandmen eat Barley and Rye brown bread, and preserre it to
white bread as abiding longer in the stomach, and not so soon disgested with
their labor, but Citizens and Gentlemen care most pure white bread, England
yielding (as I have said) all kinds of Corn in plenty. I have formerly said,
that the English have abundance of Whitmeates, of all kinds of Flesh, Foul
and Fish, and of all things good for food, and in the ducourle of the French
diet, I have showed, that the English have some proper daintics, not known in
other parts, which I will in a word repeat. The Oysters of England were of old
carried as far as Rome, being more plentiful and lauorie, then in any other
part. England has abundance of Godwits, and many Sea-fowles, which be rare,
or altogether unknown elsewhere. In the seasons of the year the English eat
Fallow dear plentifully; as Bucks in Summer, and Does in Winter, which they
bake in Pasties, and this Venison Pasty is a dainty, rarely found in any other
Kingdom. Likewise Brawne is a proper meat to the English, and not known to
others. They have strange variety of Whitmeates, and likewise of preserved
banqueting stuff, in which Preserues France only may compare with them. It
is needelesse to repeat the rest, and I should be tedions, if I should search
particularly like dainties, which the English have only, or in greater
abundance the^ other Nations. In general, the Art of Cookery is much esteemed
in England, neither do any sooner find a Master, then men of that profession,
and howsoever they are most esteemed, which for all kinds are most exquisite in
that Art; yet the English Cooks, in comparison with other Nations, are most
commended for roasted meats.

As abundance of all things makes them cheap, so riches (preferring a
gluttonous appetite before Gold), and the prodigality of Gentlemen (who have
this singular folly, to offer more then things are worth, as if it were a point
of dignity to pay more then others), and lastly the great moneys of silver, and
the not having small coins or brasle moneys to pay for small matters, these
things (I say) in this great plenty make us poor, and greatly increase the
prices of all things. Also the said abundance, and the riches vulgarly
increased, and the old custom of the English, make our tables plentifully
furnished, whereupon other Nations esteem us gluttons and deuourers of flesh,
yet the English tables are not furnished with many dishes, all for one man's
dier, but severally for many men's appetite, and not only prepared for the
family, but for strangers and relief of the poor. I confess, that in such
plenty and variety of meats, every man cannot use moderation, nor
understands that these several meats are not for one man, but for several
appetites, that each may take what he likes. And I confess, that the English
custom, first to serve gross meats, on which hunger spares not to seed, and
then to serve dainties, which inuit to eat without hunger, as likewise the
long sitting and discoursing at tables, which makes men unawares eat more,
then the Italians can do at their solitary tables, these things (I say) give
us just cause to cry with Socrates, God deliver me from meats, that inuit to
eat beyond hunger. But the Italian Sansouine is much deceived, writing, that
in general the English care and cover the table at least four times in the
day; for howsoever those that journey, and some sickly men staying at home, may
perhaps take a small breakfast, yet in general the English eat but two meals
(of dinner and supper) each day, and I could never see him that uses to eat
four times in the day. And I will profess for my self and other Englishmen,
passing through Italy so famous for temperance, that we often obseraed, that
howsoever we might have a Pullet and some flesh prepared for us, eating it
with a moderate proportion of bread, the Italians at the same time, with a
Charger full of herbs for a sallet, and with roots, and like meats of small
price, would each of them eat two or three pennyworth of bread. And since all
fullness is ill, and that of bread worst, I think we were more temperate in
our diet, though eating more flesh, then they eating so much more bread then
we did. It is true that the English prepare largely for ordinary diet for
themselves and their friends coming by chance, and at feasts for invited
friends are so excessive in the number of dishes, as the table is not thought
well furnished, except they stand one upon another. Neither use they to set
drink on the Table, for which no room is left, but the Cups and Glasses are
served in upon a side Table, drink being offered to none, till they call for
it. That the old English Hospitality was (I will boldly say) a mere vice, I
have formerly showed in the discourse of the Italian diet, which let him read,
who shall think this as dissonant from truth, as it is from the vulgar opinion.

If any stranger desire to abide long in a City or University, he may have his
Table with some Citizen of the better sort, at a convenient rate, according to
his quality, from ten pound to twenty pound yearly.

I have heard some Germans complain of the English Innes, by the high way, as
well for dearness, as for that they had only roasted meats: But these
Germans landing at Granesend, perhaps were injured by those knaves, that flock
thither only to deceive strangers, and use Englishmen no better, and after
went from thence to London, and were there entertained by some ordinary Hosts
of strangers, returning home little acquainted with English customs. But if
these strangers had known the English tongue, or had had an honest guide in
their iournies, and had known to live at Rome after the Roman fashion, (which
they seldom do, using rather Dutch Innes and companions), surely they should
have found, that the World affoords not such Innes as England has, either for
good and cheap entertainment after the Guests own pleasure, or for humble
attendance on passengers, yea, even in very poor Villages, where if Curculio
of Plautus, should see the thatched houses, he would fall into a fainting of
his spirits, but if he should smell the variety of meats, his starueling look
would be much cheared: For as soon as a passenger comes to an Inn, the
servants run to him, and one takes his Horse and walks him till he be cold,
then rubs him, and gives him meat, yet I must say that they are not much to be
trusted in this last point, without the eye of the Master or his Servant, to
ouersee them. Another servant gives the passenger his private chamber, and
kindles his fire, the third pulls of his boots, and makes them clean. Then the
Host or Hostess visits him, and if he will cate with the Host, or at a common
Table with others, his meal will cost him six pence, or in some places but
four pence, (yet this course is less honorable, and not used by Gentlemen):
but if he will eat in his chamber, he commands what meat he will according to
his appetite, and as much as he thinks fit for him and his company, yea, the
kitchen is open to him, to command the meat to be dressed as he best likes; and
when he sits at Table, the Host or Hostess will accompany him, or if they have
many Guests, will at least visit him, taking it for courtesy to be bid sit
down: while he eats, if he have company especially, he shall be offered
music, which he may freely take or refuse, and if he be solitary, the
Musicians will give him the good day with music in the morning. It is the
custom and no way disgraceful to set up part of supper for his breakefast: In
the evening or in the morning after breakefast, (for the common sort use not to
dine, but ride from breakefast to supper time, yet coming early to the Inn
for better resting of their Horses) he shall have a reckoning in writing, and
if it seem unreasonable, the Host will satisfy him, either for the due price,
or by abating part, especially if the servant deceive him any way, which one of
experience will soon find. Having formerly spoken of ordinary expenses by the
high way, as well in the particular iournall of the first Part, as in a Chapter
of this Part purposely treating thereof, I will now only add, that a
Gentleman and his Man shall spend as much, as if he were accompanied with
another Gentleman and his Man, and if Gentlemen will in such sort join
together, to eat at one Table, the expenses will be much diminished. Lastly, a
Man cannot more freely command at home in his own House, then he may do in
his Inn, and at parting if he give some few pence to the Chamberlin and
Ostler, they wish him a happy journey.

England has three public Feasts of great expense and pompous solemnity,
namely the coronation of the Kings, the Feast of S. George, as well upon his
day yearly, as at all times when any Knight of the Order is installed, and the
third when Seriants at the Law are called. The Lord Mayor of the City of
London, upon the day when he is sworn and enters his Office, keeps a solemn
Feast with public shows of great magnificence, besides that he and the
Sheriffs of the City, daily keep well furnished Tables, to entertain any
Gentleman or stranger that will come to them, to the great honor of the City,
in this particular passing all other Cities of the World known to us.

For the point of drinking, the English at a Feast will drink two or three
healths in remembrance of special friends, or respected honorable persons,
and in our time some Gentlemen and Commanders from the wars of Netherland
brought in the custom of the Germans large garaussing, but this custom is in
our time also in good measure left. Likewise in some private Gentlemen's houses,
and with some Captains and Soldiers, and with the vulgar sort of Citizens and
Artisans, large and intemperate drinking is used; but in general the greater
and better part of the English, hold all excess blame worthy, and drunkenness
a reproachful vice. Clownes and vulgar men only use large drinking of Beer or
Ale, how much soever it is esteemed excellent drink even among strangers, but
Gentlemen garrawse only in Wine, with which many mix sugar; which I never
observed in any other place or Kingdom, to be used for that purpose. And
because the taste of the English is thus delighted with sweetness, the Wines
in Tauernes, (for I speak not of Merchants or Gentlemen's Cellars) are commonly
mixed at the filling thereof, to make them pleasant. And the same delight in
sweetness has made the use of Corands of Corinth so frequent in all places,
and with all persons in England, as the very Greeks that sell them, wonder
what we do with such great quantities thereof, and know not how we should
spend them, except we use them for dying, or to feed Hogs.

CHAP. IIII. Of Scotland touching the Subjects contained in the first Chapter.
THE Longitude of Scotland extends five degrees from the Scotland.
Meridian of sixeteene degrees to that of one and twenty degrees, and the
Latitude extends four degrees from the Parallel of fifty six degrees and a
half, to that of sixty degrees and a half. In the Geographical description
whereof, I will briefly follow the very words of Camden (as near as I can),
being an Author without exception.

1 The Gadeni of Scotland were of old next neighbors to the Ottadini of
Northumberland in England, and inhabited the Country now called Teyfidale,
wherein is nothing memorable but the Monastery of Mailors.

2 In Merch, (so called as a bordering Country) the Castle Hume is the old
possession of the Lords of Hume, near which is Kelso the ancient dwelling of
the Earls of Bothwell, which were long by inheritance Admirals of Scotland,
and the Merch is mentioned in Histories for nothrng more, then the valor of
the said Earls.

3 Laudania of old called Pictland, shoots out from Merch toward the
Scottish narrow Sea, called the Frith, and is full of mountains, but has few
woods. In this Country are these little Cities or Towns, Dunbarre, Haddington,
and Musleborrow, places wherein has been seen the warlike virtue of the
English and Scots. Somewhat lower and near to the foresaid Frith, lies
Edenborough, which Ptolomy calls Castrum Alatum, a rich City of old compassed
with walls, and the seat of the Kings, whole Palace is at the East end in a
valley, over which hangs a mountain, called the Chair of Arthur (our Britan
Prince) and from this Palace is an easy ascent to the West end, where the
length of the City ends in a steep rock, upon which is built a most strong
Castle, called the Maidens Castle, the same which Ptolomy calls Alatum. This
City was long under the English Saxons, and about the year 960, ( England
being invaded by the Danes) it became subject to the Scots. Leth is a mile
distant, and is a most commodious Haven, upon the narrow Scottish Gulf,
vulgarly called Edenborough Frith.

4 Toward the West lay the Selgouae upon another Gulf, running between
England and Scotland, vulgarly called Solway Frith, of the said Selgouae,
inhabiting the Countries called Eskedale, Annandale, and Nidtsdale (in which is
the little Town Dunfrise.)

5 Next lay the Nouantes in the Valleys, where Gallway and Whitterne (which
City Ptolomy calls Leucopibia) are seated.

6 In the little Country Caricta having good pastures, is the little Town
Gergeny, which Ptolomy calls Rerigonium.

7 More inward lay the Damnij, where now Sterling, Merteth and Claidsdale are
seated. Here the River Cluyde runs by Hamelton (the seat of the Hameltons
Family of English race, of which the third Earl of Arran lives in our days)
and after by Glascow (the seat of an Archbishop, and a little University.)
Here is the Territory called Lennox, whereof the Stewards have long time been
Earls, of which Family the late Kings of Scotland are descended, and namely
James the sixth, who raised this Earledom to a Dukedom, giving that title to
the Lord d'Aubigny, and these Daubignij serving in the French and Neapolitane
wars, were honored by the Kings of France, with addition of Buckles Or in a
field Gueules, to their ancient coat of Arms, with this inscription Distantia
Iungo (that is, Distant things I join.) Sterling, or Striuelin lies not far
off, a little City of the Kings, having a most strong Castle upon the brow of
a steep rock.

8 Next these toward the North lay the Caledonij, somewhat more barbarous then
the rest (as commonly they are more rude toward the North), where not only
the air is cold, but the Country wast and mountanous. And here was the
Caledonian Wood, so known to the Roman Writers, as it was by them taken for
all Britany, and the Woods thereof. At this day this Region is called by the
Scots Allibawne, and by the Latins Albania, and contains the Bishopric
Dunkeledon, and the Territory Argile (so called as near the Irish), of which
the Cambellan Family has the title of Earls of Argile, who are the general
Justices of Scotland by right of inheritance, and Great Masters of the Kings
Household.

9 Toward the West lay the Epidij, inhabiting a wast and Fenny Country, now
called Cantire (that is, a corner of land), and next lies Assinshire.

10 Next lay the Creones, which Region is now called Strathuaern.

11 Next lay the Cornouacae, at the Promontory Hey.

12 On the East Side of the Caledonians lay the Vernicones, in the fruitful
little Region called Fife, where is the Town of Saint Andrew, Metropolitan of
all Scotland.

13 The little Region Athol is fertile, of which the Stuards of the Family of
Lorne have the title of Earls. Here is Strathbolgy the seat of the Earls of
Huntly, of the Family of the Seatons, who took the name of Gordan by the
authority of a Parliament.

14 Next lies Goury, having fruitful fields of Wheat, whereof John Lord
Rethuen was of late made Earl: but Arrell in this Region, has long given the
title of Earl to the Family of Hayes.

15 under Fife lies Angush, where is Scone, famous for the Kings consecration.
Montrose has his Earls of the Family of the Grahames: but the Douglasses
Earls of Angush, of an honorable Eamily, were made Governors by Robert the
third of this Region; and these Earls are esteemed the chief and principal
Earls of all Scotland, and it is said, that they have right to carry the Kings
Crown at the solemn assemblies of the Kingdom.

16. 17 Next lie the two Regions of Marnia and Marria upon the sea, where is
Dunetyre, the chief seat of the Family of the Keythes, who by warlike virtue
have deserved to be the Marshalls of the Kingdom, and Aberdene (that is the
mouth of the Dene) is a famous University. And Queen Mary created John Ereskin
Earl of Mar, who lately was the Regent of Scotland, and is by inheritance
Sheriff of the County of Sterling.

18 Next lay the Taizeli, where now Buquhan is seated.

19 Then toward Murrey Frith, the V ocomagi of old inhabited Rosse murray and
Nesseland. 20 More innerly is the Gulf Vararis, right over against the Town
Inuernesse.

21 The Cantae possessed the corner of land shooting toward the Sea, where is
the most safe Haven Cromer. 22. 23 Yet more inwardly where Bean, Rosse, and
Southerland are seated, the Lugi and Mertae of old inhabited. Thus far Edward
the first King of England subdued all with his victorious Army, having beaten
the Scots on all sides. In Southerland are Mountains of white Marble, (a very
miracle in this cold clyme), but of no use, the excess and magnificence in
building having not yet reached into these remote parts. 24 Further near
Catnesse the Catni of old inhabited, the Earls of which Country, are of the
ancient and Noble Families of the Sint-cleres.

25 Vrdehead is thought the remotest Promontory of all Britany, where the
Cornabij of old inhabited.

26 I will in one word mention the Islands. In the Gulf Glotta, or Dunbritten
Frith, The Islands.
lies the Island Glotta, called Arran by the Scots, giving the title to an
Earl. Next that lies Rothesia, now called Buthe, whence are the Stewards Kings
of Scots, as they say. Then Hellan the Island of the Saints. Without the
foresaid Gulf, many Islands lie thick together, vulgarly called the Western
Islands, and numbered forty four, being of old called by some Hebrides, by
others Inchades, and Leucades, and by many (as Ptolomy) Ebudae. Ina one of
these Islands have a Monastery, famous for the burial of the Kings of Scotland,
and for the habitation of many holy men, among which was Columbus, the Apostle
of the Picts, of whose Cell the Island was also named Columbkill. The Scots
bought all these Islands of the Norwegians, as a great strength to the Kingdom,
though yielding very little profit; the old inhabitants (whether Scots, or
Irish) being of desperare daring, and impatient of being subject to any laws.
Near these lie the Orcades (vulgarly Orkney) about thirty in number, yielding
competent quantity of Barley, but no Wheat or trees. The chiese whereof is
Pomonia, well known by the Episcopal seat, and yielding both Tynne and
Lead. These Orcades Islands were subject to the Danes, and the inhabitants
speak the Goths language, but Christiern King of the Danes sold his right to
the King of Scotland. Five days and nights sail from the Orcades, is the
Island Thule, so often mentioned by Poets to express the furthest corner of the
World, whereupon Virgill says; Tibi seruiet vltima Thule: that is, The
furthest Thule shall thee serve. Many have thought, that Iseland was this
Thule, condemned to cold air and perpetual Winter: but Camden thinks rather,
that Schotland is Thule, which the Mariners now call Thilensall, being subject
to the King of Scotland. In the German Sea, toward the coast of Britany, are
few Islands, save only in Edenburg Frith, where these are found, May, Basse,
Keth, and Inche-colme (that is, the Island of Columbus.)

Scotland reaching so far into the North, must needs be subject to excessive
cold, yet The situatio
the same is in some sort mitigated by the thickness of the cloudy air and
sea vapors. And as in the Northern parts of England, they have small
pleasantnes, goodness or abundance of Fruits and Flowers, so in Scotland they
have much less, or none at all. And I remember, that coming to Barwick in the
month of May, we had great storms, and felt great cold, when for two months
before, the pleasant Spring had smiled on us at London.

On the West side of Scotland are many Woods, Mountains and Lakes. On The
fertility
the East side toward the Sea, I passed Fife, a pleasant little Territory of
open fields, without enclosures, fruitful in Corn (as be all the parts
near Barwick, save that they yield little wheat, and much Barley and Oats),
and all a plain Country, but it had no Woods at all, only the Gentlemen's
dwellings were shaddowed with some little Groves, pleasant to the view.
Scotland abounds with Fish, and has plenty of all Cattle, yet not so big as
ours, and their Horses are full of spirit, and patient of labor, but very
little, so as the Scots then would give any price for one of our English
Gueldings, which notwithstanding in Queen Elizabethe time might not upon great
penalty be sold unto them.

The Navy or shipping of Scotland, was of small strength in the memory of our
Age, neither were their Mariners of greet experience, but to make them more
diligent The traffic
Merchants, their Kings had formerly laid small or no impositions or customs
on them: And while the English had war with the Spaniards, the Scots as
neutrals by carrying of English commodities into Spain, and by having their
ships for more security laden by English Merchants, grew somewhat richer and
more experienced in Navigations, and had better and stronger ships then in
former time. And surely since the Scots are very daring, I cannot see why their
Mariners should not be bold and courageous, howsoever they have not hitherto
made any long voyages, rather for want of riches, then for slothfulness or
want of courage. The Inhabitants of the Western parts of Scotland, carry into
Ireland and Neighboring places, red and pickeled Herrings, Sea coals, and
Aquauitae, with like commodities, and bring out of Ireland Yarne and Cowes
hides or Silver. The Eastern Scots, carry into France course clothes, both
linen and woollen, which be narrow and shrink in the wetting. They also carry
thither Wool, Skins of Goats, Weathers, and of Conies, and diverse kinds of
Fishes, taken in the Scottish Sea, and near other Northern Islands, and after
smoked, or otherwise dried and salted. And they bring from thence Salt and
Wines: but the cheese traffic of the Scots is in four places, namely at
Camphire in Zeland, whether they carry Salt, the skins of Weathers, Otters,
Badgers, and Martens, and bring from thence Corn. And at Bordeaux in France,
whether they carry clothes, and the same skins, and bring from thence Wines,
Prunes, Walnuts, and Chessenuts Thirdly, within the Balticke Sea, whether they
carry the said Clothes and Skins, and bring thence Flax, Hemp, Iron, Pitch
and Tar. And lastly in England, whether they carry Linen clothes, Yarne,
and Salt, and bring thence Wheat, Oats, Beans, and like things.

The Scots have no Staple in any foreign City, but trade in France upon the
League of the Nations, and in Denmark have privileges by the affinity of the
Kings, and stock in great numbers into Poland, abounding in all things for
food, and yielding many commodities. And in these Kingdoms they lived at this
time in great multitudes, rather for the poverty of their own Kingdom, then
for any great traffic they exercised there, dealing rather for small fardels,
then for great quantities of rich wares.

Touching their diet: They eat much red Colewort and Cabbage, but little fresh
meat, using to salt theit Mutton and Geese, which made me more wonder, that
they The diet
used to eat Beef without salting. The Gentlemen reckon their revenues, not
by rents of money, but by chauldrons of victuals, and keep many people in
their Families, yet living most on Corn and Roots, not spending any great
quantity of flesh.

My self was at a Knights house, who had many servants to attend him, that
brought in his meat with their heads covered with blew caps, the Table being
more then half furnished with great platters of porredge, each having a little
piece of sodden meat; And when the Table was served, the servants did sit
down with us, but the upper mess in steed of porredge, had a Pullet with
some prunes in the broth. And I observed no Art of Cookery, or furniture of
Household stuff, but rather rude neglect of both, though my self and my
companion, sent from the Governor of Barwicke about bordering affairs, were
entertained after their best manner. The Scots living then in factions, used to
keep many followers, and so consumed their reuenew of victuals, living in some
want of money. They vulgarly eat harth Cakes of Oats, but in Cities have also
wheaten bread, which for the most part was bought by Courtiers, Gentlemen, and
the best sort of Citizens. When I lived at Barwicke, the Scots weekly upon the
market day, obtained leave in writing of the Governor, to buy Pease and
Beans, whereof, as also of Wheat, their Merchants at this day send great
quantity from London into Scotland.

They drink pure Wines, not with sugar as the English, yet at Feasts they put
Comfits in the Wine, after the French manner, but they had not our Vinteners
fraud to mix their Wines. I did never see nor hear that they have any public
Innes with signs hanging out, but the better sort of Citizens brew Ale, their
usual drink (which will distemper a strangers body), and the same Citizens
will entertain passengers upon acquaintance or entreaty. Their bedsteads were
then like Cubbards in the wall, with doors to be opened and shut at pleasure,
so as we climbed up to our beds. They used but one sheet, open at the sides
and top, but close at the feet, and so doubled. Passengers did seek a stable
for their Horses in some other place, and did there buy hors-meat, and if
perhaps the same house yielded a stable, yet the payment for the Horse did not
make them have beds free as in England. I omit to speak of the Innes and
expenses therein, having delated the same in the Itinerary of the first Part,
and a Chapter in this Part, expressly treating thereof. When passengers go to
bed, their custom was to present them with a sleeping cup of wine at
parting. The Country people and Merchants used to drink largely, the Gentlemen
somewhat more sparingly, yet the very Courtiers, at Fcasts, by night meetings,
and entertaining any stranger, used to drink healths not without excess, and
(to speak truth without offense), the excess of drinking was then far
greater in general among the Scots then the English. My self being at the
Court invited by some Gentlemen to supper, and being forewarned to fear this
excess, would not promise to sup with thembut upon condition that my Inuiter
would be my protection from large drinking, which I was many times forced to
inuoke, being courteously entertained, and much provoked to garaussing, and so
for that time avoided any great intemperance. Remembering this, and having since
observed in my conversation at the English Court with the Scots of the better
sort, that they spend great part of the night in drinking, not only wine, but
even beer, as my self will not accuse them of great intemperance, so I cannot
altogether free them from the imputation of excess, wherewith the popular
voice charge them.

CHAP. V. Of Ireland, touching the particular subjects of the first Chapter.
THE Longitude of Ireland extends four degrees from the Ireland.
Meridian of eleven degrees and a half, to that of fifteen and a half, and
the Latitude extends also four degrees from the Parallel of fifty four degrees
to that of fifty eight degrees. In the Geographicall description I will follow
Camden as formerly.

This famous Island in the Virginian Sea, is by old Writers called Ierna
Inuerna, and Iris, by the old Inhabitants Eryn, by the old Britans Yuerdhen, by
the English at this day Ireland, and by the Irish Bardes at this day Banno, in
which sense of the Irish word, Auicen calls it the holy Island, besides Plutarch
of old called it Ogigia, and after him Isidore named it Scotia. This Ireland
according to the Inhabitants, is divided into two parts, the wild Irish, and
the English Irish, living in the English Pale: but of the old Kingdoms five in
number, it is divided into five parts.

1 The fast is by the Irish called Mowne, by the English Mounster, and is
subdeuided into six Counties, of Kerry, of Limricke, of Corcke, of Tipperary,
of the Holy Cross, and of Waterford, to which the seventh County of Desmond is
now added. The Gangaui a Scithean people coming into Spain, and from thence
into Ireland, inhabited the County of Kerry, full of woody mountains, in which
the Earls of Desmond had the dignity of Palatines, having their House in
Trailes, a little Town now almost uninhabited: Not far thence lies Saint
Mary Wic, vulgarly called Smerwicke, where the Lord Arthur Gray, being Lord
Deputy, happily overthrew the aiding troops sent to the Earl of Desmond from
the Pope, and the King of Spain. On the South side of Kerry lies the County of
Desmond, of old inhabited by three kinds of people, the Lucens (being
Spaniards), the Velabri (so called of their seat upon the Sea waters or
Marshes), and the Iberns, called the upper Irish, inhabiting about Beerehauen
and Baltimore, two Havens well known by the plentiful fishing of Herrings, and
the late invasion of the Spaniards in the year 1601. Next to these is the
County of Mec Carti More, of Irish race, whom as enemy to the Fitz-geralds
Queen Elizabeth made Earl of Glencar in the year 1556. For of the
Fitz-Geralds of the Family of the Earls of Kildare, the Earls: of Desmond
descended, who being by birth English, and created Earls by King Edward the
third, became hateful Rebels in our time. The third County has the name of
the City Cork, consisting almost all of one long street, but well known and
frequented, which is so compassed with rebellious neighbors, as they of old
not daring to marry their Daughters to them, the custom grew and continues to
this day, that by mutual marriages one with another, all the Citizens are of
kin in some degree of Affinity. Not far thence is Yoghall, having a safe
Haven, near which the Vicounts of Barry of English race are seated. In the
fourth County of Tipperary, nothing is memorable, but that it is a Palatinate.
The little Town Holy-Cresse, in the County of the same name, has many great
privileges. The sixth County has the name of the City Limerike, the seat of
a Bishop, wherein is a strong Castle built by King John. Not far thence is
Awue the seat of a Bishop, and the lower Ossery, giving the title of an Earl
to the Butlers, and the Town Thurles, giving them also the title of Vicount.
And there is Cassiles, now a poor City, but the seat of an Archbishop. The
seventh County has the name of the City Watersord, which the Irish call
Porthlargi, of the commodious Haven, a rich and well inhabited City, esteemed
the second to Dublyn. And because the Inhabitants long faithfully helped the
English in subduing Ireland, our Kings gave them excessive privileges, but
they rashly failing in their obedience, at King James his coming to the
Crown, could not in long time obtain the confirmation of their old Charter.

2 Lemster the second part of Ireland is fertile, and yields plenty of Corn,
and has a most temperate mild Air, being divided into ten Counties, of
Catterlogh, Kilkenny, Wexford, Dublyn, Kildare. the Kings County, the Queens
County, the Counties of Longford of Fernes and of Wickle. The Cariondi of old
inhabited Caterlogh (or Carloo) County, and they also inhabited great part of
Kilkenny, of upper Ossery and of Ormond, which have nothing memorable, but the
Earls of Ormond, of the great Family of the Butlers, inferior to no Earl in
Ireland, (not to speak of Fitz pairic Baron of upper Ossery) It is redicnious,
which some Irish (who will be believed as men of credit) report of Men in these
parts yearly turned into Wolves, except the abundance of melancholy humor,
transports them to imagine that they are so transformed. Kilkenny giving name
to the second County, is a pleasant Town, the chief of the Towns, within
Land, memorable for the ciuility of the Inhabitants, for the Husbandmens
labor, and the pleasant Orchards. I pass over the walled Town Thomastowne,
and the ancient City Rheban, now a poor Village with a Castle, yet of old
giving the title of Barronet. I pass over the Village and strong Castle of
Leighlin, with the Country adjoining, usurped by the Sept of the Cauanaghs,
now surnamed Omores. Also I omit Kosse, of old a large City, at this day of no
moment. The third County of Wexford, (called by the Irish County Reogh) was of
old inhabited by the Menappij, where at the Town called Banna, the English
made their first descent into Ireland, and upon that Coast are very dangerous
flats in the Sea, which they vulgarly call Grounds. The City Weshford,
Weisford, or Wexford, is the chief of the County, not great, but deserving
praise for their faithfulness toward the English, and frequently inhabited by
Men of English race. The Cauci, (a Seabordering Nation of Germany), and the
Menappij aforesaid, of old inhabited the territories now possessed by the
Omores and Ohirns. Also they inhabited the fourth County of Kildare a fruitful
soil, having the cheese Town of the same name, greatly honored in the
infancy of the Church by Saint Briget. King Edward the second, created the
Giralds Earls of Kildare. The Eblani of old inhabited the territory of Dublin
the fifth County, having a fertile soil and rich pastures, but wanting wood,
so as they burn Turffe, or Seacoale brought out of England. The City Dublyn
called Diuelin by the English, and Balacleigh (as seated upon hurdles) by the
Irish, is the chief City of the Kingdom and seat of Justice, fairly built,
frequently inhabited, and adorned with a strong Castle, fifteen Churches, an
Episcopal seat, and a fair College, (an happy foundation of an University
laid in our Age), and endowed with many privileges, but the Haven is barred
and made less commodious by those hills of sands. The adjoining Promontory
Hoth-head, gives the title of a Barron to the Family of Saint Laurence: And
toward the North lies Fengall, a little Territory, as it were the Garner of
the Kingdom, which is environed by the Sea and great Rivers, and this
situation has defended it from the incursion of Rebels in former civil wars
I omit the Kings and Queens Counties, (namely Ophaly and Leax) inhabited by
the Oconnors and Omores, as likewise the Counties of Longford, Fernes, and
Wicklo, as less affoording memorable things.

3 The third part of Ireland is Midia or Media, called by the English Methe, in
our Fathers memory divided into Eastmeath and Westmeath. In Eastmeath is
Drogheda, vulgarly called Tredagh, a fair and well inhabited Town. Trym is a
little Town upon the confines of Vlster, having a stately Castle, but now much
ruinated, and it is more notable for being the ancient (as it were) Barrony of
the Lacies. Westmeath has the Town Deluin, giving the title of Baron to the
English Family of the Nugents, and Westmeath is also inhabited by many great
Irish Septs, as the Omaddens, the Magoghigans, Omalaghlens, and MacCoghlans,
which seem barbarous names. Shamon is a great River, in a long course making
many and great lakes (as the large Lake or Lough Regith), and yeeldes
plentiful fishing, as do the frequent Rivers and all the Seas of Ireland.
Upon this River lies the Town Athlon, having a very fair Bridge of stone,
(the work of Sir Henry Sidney Lord Deputy) and a strong fair Castle.

4 Connaght is the fourth part of Ireland, a fruitful Province, but having
many Boggs and thick Woods, and it is divided into six Countyes, of Clare, of
Letrim, of Galloway, of Rosecomen, of Maio, and of Sugo. The County of Clare or
Thowmond has his Enrles of Thowmond, of the Family of the Obrenes the old
Kings of Connaght, and Toam is the seat of an Archbishop, only part but the
greatest of this County was called Clare of Phomas Clare Earl of Gloucester.
The adjoining Territory Clan Richard (the land of Richards sons) has his
Earls called Clanricard of the land, but being of the English Family de Burgo,
vulgarly Burck, and both these Earls were first created by Henry the eight. In
the same Territory is the Barony Atterith, belonging to the Barons of the
English Family Bermingham, of old very warlike: but their posterity have
degenerated to the Irish barbarism. The city Galway giving name to the County,
lying upon the Sea, is frequently inhabited with civil people, and fairly
built. The Northern part of Connaght is inhabited by these Irish Septs, O
Conor, O Rorke, and Mac Diarmod. Upon the Western coast lies the Island Arran,
famous for the fabulous long life of the inhabitants.

5 Vlster the fifth part of Ireland is a large Province, woody, fenny, in some
parts fertile, in other parts barren, but in all parts green and pleasant to
behold, and exceedingly stoared with Cattle. The next part to the Pale, and to
England, is divided into three Countyes, Lowth, Down, and Antrimme, the rest
contains seven Counties, Monaghan, Tyrone, Armach, Colrane, Donergall,
Fermanagh, and Cauon. Lowth is inhabited by English-Irish, ( Down and Antrimme
being contained under the same name), and the Barrons thereof be of the
Berminghams family, and remain loving to the English. Monaghan was inhabited
by the English family Fitzursi, and these are become degenerate and barbarous,
and in the sense of that name are in the Irish tongue called Mac Mahon, that
is, the sons of Bears. I forbear to speak of Tyrone, and the Earl
thereof, infamous for his Rebellion, which I have at large handled in the
second part of this work. Armach is the seat of an Archbishop, and the
Metropolitan City of the whole Island, but in time of the Rebellion was
altogether ruinated. The other Countyes have not many memorable things,
therefore it shall suffice to speak of them briefly. The neck of land called
Lecale, is a pleasant little territory, fertile, and abounding with fish, and
all things for food, and therein is Down, at this time a ruined Town, but the
seat of a Bishop, and famous for the burial of S Patrick, S. Bridget, and S.
Columb. The Town of Carickfergus is well known by the safe Haven. The River
Bann running through the Lake Euagh into the Sea, is famous for the fishing of
Salmons, the water being most clear, wherein the Salmons much delight. The
great Families (or Septs) of Vlster, are thus named, O Neale, O Donnel, (whereof
the chief was lately created Earl of Tirconnel) O Buil, Mac Guyre, O Cane, O
Dogharty, Mac Mahown, Mac Gennis, Mac Sorleigh, etc. The Lake Ern, compassed
with thick Woods, has such plenty of fish, as the fishermen fear the
breaking of their nets, rather then want of fish. Toward the North in the
midst of vast woods (and as I think) in the County Donergall is a lake, and
therein an Island, in which is a Cave, famous for the apparition of spirits,
which the inhabitants call Ellanui frugadory, that is, The Island of Purgatory,
and they call it Saint Patricks Purgatory, fabling that he obtained of God by
prayer, that the Irish seeing the pains of the damned, might more carefully
avoid sin.

The land of Ireland is uneven, mountanous, soft, watery, woody, and open to
winds and floods of rain, and so fenny, as it has Bogges upon the very tops
of Mountains. The funatio^
not bearing man or beast, but dangerous to pass, and such Bogs are frequent
over all Ireland. Our Matriners observe the sailing into Ireland to be more
dangerous, not only because many tides meeting, makes the sea apt to swell
upon any storm, but especially because they ever find the coast of Ireland
covered with mists, whereas the coast of England is commonly clear, and to be
seen far off. The air of Ireland is unapt to ripen seeds, yet (as Mela
witnesses) the earth is luxurions in yielding fair and sweet herbs. Ireland
is little troubled with thunders, lightnings, or earthquakes, yet (I know not
upon what presage) in the year 1601, and in the month of November almost
ended, at the siege of Kinsale, and few days before the famous Battle, in
which the Rebels were happily overthrown, we did nightly hear and see great
thundrings and lightnings, not without some astonishment what they should
presage. The fields are not only most apt to feed Cattle, but yield also
great increase of Corn I will freely say, that I observed the winters cold to
be far more mild, the^ it is in England, so as the Irish pastures are more
green, and so likewise the gardens al winter time, but that in Summer, by
reason of the cloudy air, and watery soil, the heat of the Sun has not
such power to ripen corn and fruits, so as their harvest is much later then in
England. Also I observed, that the best sorts of flowers and fruits are much
rarer in Ireland, then in England, which notwithstanding is more to be
attributed to the inhabitants, then to the air. For Ireland being often troubled
with Rebellions, and the Rebels not only being idle themselves, but in natural
malice destroying the labors of other men, and cutting up the very trees of
fruits for the same cause, or else to burn them. For these reasons the
inhabitants take less pleasure to till their grounds, or plant trees, content
to live for the day in continual fear of like mischiefs. Yet is not Ireland
altogether destitute of these flowers and fruits, wherewith the County of
Kilkenny seems to abound more then any other part. And the said humility of
air and land, making the fruits for food more raw and moist: hereupon the
inhabitants and strangers are troubled with loosenes of body, the Country
disease. Yet for the rawnes they have an excellentremedy by their aquauitae,
vulgarly called Vsqucbagh, which binds the belly, and dries up moisture, more
then our Aquauitae, yet in flameth not so much. Also inhabitants as well as
strangers are troubled there with an ague, which they call the Irish. Ague, and
they who are sick thereof, upon a received custom, do not use the help of
the Physician, but give themselves to the keeping of Irish women, who starve
the ague, giving the sick man no meat, who takes nothing but milk, and some
vulgarly known remedies at their hand.

Ireland after much blood spilt in the Civil wars, became less populous,
The fertility and traffic
and as well great Lords of countries as other inferior Gentlemen, labored
more to get new possessions for inheritance, then by husbandry and peopling of
their old lands, to increase their revenues, so as I then observed much grass
(wherewith the Island so much abounds) to have perished without use, and either
to have rotted, or in the next springtime to be burnt, lest it should hinder
the coming of new grass. This plenty of grass, makes the Irish have infinite
multitudes of cattle, and in the heat of the last Rebellion, the very vagabond
Rebels, had great multitudes of Cowes, which they still (like the Nomades) drove
with them, whither soever themselves were driven, and fought for them as for
their altars and families. By this abundance of cattle, the Irish have a
frequent, though somewhat poor traffic for their hides, the cattle being in
general very little, and only the men and the Greyhounds of great statute.
Neither can the cattle possibly be great, since they eat only by day, and
then are brought at evening within the Bawnes of Castles, where they stand or
lie all night in a dirty yard, without so much as a lock of hay, whereof they
make little for sluggishnesse, and that little they altogether keep for their
Horses. And they are thus brought in by nights for fear of thieves, the Irish
using almost no other kind of theft, or else for fear of Wolves, the
destruction whereof being neglected by the inhabitants, oppressed with greater
mischiefs, they are so much grown in number, as sometimes in Winter nights
they will come to prey in Villages, and the subburbes of Cities. The Earl of
Ormond in Mounster, and the Earl of Kildare in Lemster, had each of them a
small Park enclosed for Fallow Dear, and I have not seen any other Park in
Ireland, nor have heard that they had any other at that time, yet in many Woods
they have many red Dear, loosely scattered, which seem more plentiful,
because the inhabitants used not then to hunt them, but only the Governors
and Commanders had them sometimes killed with the piece. They have also about
Ophalia and Wexford, and in some parts of Mounster, some Fallow Dear scattered
in the Woods. Yet in the time of the war I did never see any Venison served
at the table, but only in the houses of the said Earls, and of the English
Commanders. Ireland has great plenty of Birds and Fowls, but by reason of
their natural sloth, they had little delight or skill in Birding or Fowling.
But Ireland has neither singing Nightingall, nor chattering Pie, nor
undermining Moule, nor black Crow, but only Crows of mingled color, such as
we call Royston Crows. They have such plenty of Pheasants, as I have known
sixty served at one feast, and abound much more with Rayles: but Partridges
are somewhat rare. There be very many Eagles, and great plenty of Hares,
Conies, Hawks called Gosse-Hawkes, much esteemed with us, and also of Bees, as
well in Hiues at home, as in hollow trees abroad, and in caves of the earth.
They abound in flocks of Sheep, which they sheare twice in the year, but
their wool is course, and Merchants may not export it, forbidden by a Law made
on behalf of the poor, that they may be nourished by working it into cloth,
namely, Rugs (whereof the best are made at Waterford) and mantles generally
worn by men and women, and exported in great quantity. Ireland yields much
flax, which the inhabitants work into yarne, and export the same in great
quantity. And of old they had such plenty of linen cloth, as the wild Irish
used to wear 30 or 40 else in a shirt, al gathered and wrinckled, and washed
in Saffron, because they never put them off til they were worn out. Their
horses called hobbies, are much commen ded for their ambling pace and beuty:
but Ireland yields few horses good for service in war, and the said hobbies are
much inferior to our geldings in strength to endure long iournies, and being
bred in the fenny soft ground of Ireland, are soon lamed when they are brought
into England. The hawks of Ireland called Goss-hawks, are (as I said) much
esteemed in England, and they are sought out by money and all means to be
transported thither. Ireland yields excellent Marble near Dublin, Killkenny,
and Cork; and I am of their opinion, who dare venture all they are worth, that
the Mountains would yield abundance of Metals, if this public good were not
hindered by the inhabitants barbarousnes, making them apt to seditions, and so
unwilling to enrich their Prince and Country, and by their slothfulness, which
is so singular, as they hold it baseness to labor, and by their poverty, not
able to bear the charge of such works, besides, that the wiser sort think
their poverty best for the public good, making them peaceable, as nothing
makes them sooner kick against authority then riches. Ireland has in all
parts pleasant Rivers, safe and lange Havens, and no less frequent Lakes of
great circuit, yielding great plenty of fish. And the sea on all sides yields
like plenty of excellent fish, as Salmonds, Oysters (which are preferred
before the English,) and shel-fishes, with all other kinds of Seafish. So as
the Irish might in all parts have abundance of excellent sea and fresh water
fish, if the fisher men were not so possessed with the natural fault of
slothfulness, as no hope of gain, scarsely the fear of authority can in
many places make them come out of their houses, and put to sea. Hence it is,
that in many places they use Scots for Fishermen, and they together with the
English, make profit of the inhabitants sluggishnesse. And no doubt if the
Irish were industrious in fishing, they might export salted and dried fish with
great gain. In time of peace the Irish transport good quantity of Corn, yet
they may not transport it without license, left upon any sudden rebellion, the
Kings forces and his good subjects should want Corn. Vlster and the Western
parts of Mounster yield vast woods, in which the Rebels cutting up trees, and
casting them on heaps, used to stop the passages, and therein, as also upon
fenny and Boggy places, to fight with the English. But I confess my self to
have been deceived in the common fame, that all Ireland is woody, having found
in my long journey from Armah to Kinsale, few or no Woods by the way, excepting
the great Woods of Ophalia, and some low shrubby places, which they call
Glinnes. Also I did observe many boggy and fenny places, whereof great part
might be dried by good and painful husbandry. I may not omit the opinion
commonly received, that the earth of Ireland will not suffer a Snake or
venomous beast to live, and that the Irish wood transported for building, is
free of Spiders and their webs. My self have seen some (but very few)
Spiders, which the in habitants deny to have any poison: but I have heard some
English of good credit affirm by experience the contrary. The Irish having in
most parts great Woods or low shrubs and thickets, do use the same for fire,
but in other parts they burn Turfe, and Sea coals brought out of England.
They export great quantity of wood to make barrels, called Pipe-staues, and
make great gain thereby. They are not permitted to build great ships for
war, but they have small ships in some sort armed to resist Pirates, for
transporting of commodities into Spain and France yet no great number of them.
Therefore since the Irish have small skill in Navigations, as I cannot praise
them for this Art, so I am confident, that the Nation being bold and warlike,
would no doubt prove brave Seamen, if they shall practice Navigations, and
could possibly be industrious therein. I freely profess, that Ireland in
general would yield abundance of all things to civil and industrious
inhabitants. And when it lay wasted by the late Rebellion, I did see it after
the coming of the Lord Montioy daily more and more to flourish, and in short
time after the Rebellion appeased, like the new Spring to put on the wonted
beauty.

Touching the Irish diet, Some Lords and Knights, and Gentlemen of the
English-Irish, The Diet,
and all the English there abiding, having competent means, use the English
diet, but some more, some less cleanly, few or none curiously, and no doubt
they have as great and for (...) part greater plenty then the English, of
flesh, foul, fish, and all things for food, if they will use like Art of
Cookery. Alwases I except the Fruits, Venison, and some dainties proper to
England, and rare in Ireland. And we must conceive, that Venison and Foul
seem to be more plentiful in Ireland, because they neither so generally affect
dainty food nor so diligently search it as the English do Many of the
English-Irish, have by little and little been infected with the Irish
filthiness, and that in the very cities, excepting Dublyn, and some of the
better sort in Waterford, where the English continually lodging in their
houses, they more retain the English diet. The English-Irish after our manner
serve to the table joints of flesh cut after our fashion, with Geese, Pullets,
Pigges and like roasted meats, but their ordinary food for the common sort is of
Whitmeates, and they eat cakes of oats for bread, and drink not English
Beer made of Malt and Hops, but Ale. At Corck I have seen with these eyes,
young maids stark naked grinding of Corn with certain stones to make cakes
thereof, and striking of into the tub of meal, such relics thereof as stuck
on their belly, thighs and more unseemly parts.

And for the cheese or butter commonly made by the English Irish, and English
man would not touch it with his lips, though he were half starued; yet many
English inhabitants make very good of both kinds. In Cities they have such
bread as ours, but of a sharp favor, and some mingled with Annisseeds, and
baked like cakes, and that only in the houses of the better sort.

At Dublyn and in some other Cities, they have tauerns, wherein Spanish and
French Wines are sold, but more commonly the Merchants sell them by pintes and
quartes in their own Cellers. The Irish Aquauitae, vulgarly called Vsquebagh,
is held the best in the World of that kind; which is made also in England, but
nothing so good as that which is brought out of Ireland. And the Vsquebagh is
preferred before our Aquavita, because the mingling of Raysons, Fennel seed,
and other things, mitigating the heat, and making the taste pleasant, makes it
less in name, and yet refresh the weak stomach with moderate heat, and a
good relish. These Drinks the English-Irish drink largely, and in many
families (especially at feasts) both men and women use excess therein. And
since I have inpart seen, and often heard from others experience, that some
Gentlewomen were so free in this excess, as they would kneeling upon the knee,
and otherwise garausse health after health with men; not to speak of the wives
of Irish Lords, or to refer it to the due place, who often drink tell they
be drunken, or at least till they void urine in full assemblies of men, I
cannot (though unwilling) but note the Irish women more specially with this
fault, which I have observed in no other part to be a woman's vice, but only in
Bohemia: Yet so as accusing them, I mean not to excuse the men, and will also
confess that I have seen Virgins, as well Gentlewomen as Citizens, commanded
by their mothers to retire, after they had in courtesy pledged one or two
healths. In Cities passengers may have featherbeds, soft and good, but most
commonly lousy, especially in the high ways; whether that came by their being
forced to lodge common soldiers, or from the nastie filthiness of the nation
in general. For even in the best City, as at Corck, I have observed that my
own and other English men's chambers hired of the Citizens, were scarce swept
once in the week, and the dust then laid in a corner, was perhaps cast out once
in a month or two. I did never see any public Innes with signs hanged out,
among the English or English-Irish; but the Officers of Cities and Villages
appoint lodgings to the passengers, and perhaps in each City, they shall find
one or two houses, where they will dress meat, and these be commonly houses
of Englishmen, seldom of the Irish: so as these houses having no signs hung
out, a passenger cannot challenge right to be entertained in them, but must
have it of courtesy, and by entreaty.

The wild and (as I may say) mere Irish, inhabiting many and large Provinces,
are barbarous and most filthy in their diet. They skum the seething pot with an
handful of straw, and strain their milk taken from the Cow through a like
handful of straw, none of the cleanest, and so cleanse, or rather more defile
the pot and milk. They deu our great morsels of beef unsalted, and they eat
commonly Swines flesh, seldom mutton, and all these pieces of flesh, as also
the intralles of beasts unwashed, they sees in a hollow tree, lapped in a raw
Cowes hide, and so set over the fire, and therewith swallow whole lumpes of
filthy butter. Yea (which is more contrary to nature) they will feed on Horses
dying of themselves, not only upon small want of flesh, but even for pleasure.
For I remember an accident in the Army, when the Lord Mountiey, the Lord
Deputy, riding to take the air out of the Camp, found the buttocks of dead
Horses cut off, and suspecting that some soldiers had eaten that flesh out of
necessity, being defrauded of the victuals allowed, them commanded the men to
be searched out, among whom a common soldier, and that of the English-Irish,
not of the mere Irish, being brought to the Lord Deputy, and asked why he had
eaten the flesh of dead Horses, thus freely answered, Your Lordship may please
to eat Pheasant and Patridge, and much good do it you that best likes your
taste; and I hope it is lawful for me without offense, to eat this flesh that
likes me better then Beef. Whereupon the Lord Deputy perceiving himself to be
deceived, and further understanding that he had received his ordinary victuals
(the detaining whereof he suspected, and purposed to punish for example), gave
the soldier a piece of gold to drink in Vsquebagh for better disgestion, and
so dismissed him.

The foresaid wild Irish do not thresh their Oats, but burn them from the
straw, and so make cakes thereof, yet they seldom eat this bread, much less
any better kind especially in the time of war, whereof a Bohemian Baron
complained, who having scene the Courts of England and Scotland, would needs
out of his curiosity return through Ireland in the heat of the Rebellion; and
having letters from the King of Scots to the Irish Lords then in Rebellion,
first landed among them, in the furthest North, where for eight days space he
had found no bread, not so much as a cake of Oats, till he came to eat with
the Earl of Tyrone, and after obtaining the Lord Deputies Pass to come into
our Army, related this then want of bread to us for a miracle, who nothing
wondered thereat. Yea, the wild Irish in time of greatest peace impute
covetousness and base birth to him, that has any Corn after Christmas, as if
it were a point of Nobility to consume all within those festival days. They
willingly eat the herb Schamrock, being of a sharp taste, which as they
run and are chased to an fro, they snatch like beasts out of the ditches.

Neither have they any Beer made of Malt and (...) nor yet any Ale, no, not
the chief Lords, except it be very rarely: but they drink Milk like Nectar,
warmed with a stone first cast into the fire, or else Beefe-broath mingled with
milk: but when they come to any Market Town, to sell a Cow or a Horse, they
never return home, till they have drunk the price in Spanish Wine (which they
call the King of Spaines Daughter), or in Irish Vsqueboagh, and till they have
out-slept two or three days drunkenness. And not only the common sort, but
even the Lords and their wives, the more they want this drink at home, the
more they swallow it when they come to it, till they be as drunk as beggars.

Many of these wild Irish eat no flesh, but that which dies of disease or
otherwise of it self, neither can it escape them for stinking. They desire no
broth, nor have any use of a spoone. They can neither sees Artichokes, nor
eat them when they are sodden. It is strange and ridiculous, but most true,
that some of our carriage Horses falling into their hands, when they found Soap
and Starch, carried for the use of our Laundresses, they thinking them to be
some dainty meats, did eat them greedily, and when they stuck in their teeth,
cursed bitterly the gluttony of us English churles, for so they term us. They
feed most on Whitmeates, and esteem for a great dainty sower curds, vulgarly
called by them Bonaclabbe. And for this cause they watchfully keep their
Cowes, and fight for them as for religion and life, and when they are almost
starued, yet they will not kill a Cow, except it be old, and yield no Milk.
Yet will they upon hunger in time of war open a vain of the Cow, and drink
the blood, but in no case kill or much weaken it. A man would think these men
to be Scythians, who let their Horses blood under the ears, and for
nourishment drink their blood, and indeed (as I have formerly said), some of
the Irish are of the race of Scythians, coming into Spain, and from thence
into Ireland. The wild Irish (as I said) seldom kill a Cow to eat, and if
perhaps they kill one for that purpose, they distribute it all to be devoured
at one time; for they approve not the orderly eating at meals, but so they may
eat enough when they are hungry, they care not to fast long. And I have known
some of these Irish footmen serving in England, (where they are nothing less
then sparing in the food of their Families), to lay meat aside for many
meals, to devour it all at one time.

These wild Irish as soon as their Cowes have calued, take the Calves from
them, and thereof feed some with Milk to rear for breed, some of the rest
they (...), and sees them in a filthy poke, and so eat them, being nothing
but froth, and send them for a present one to another: but the greatest part of
these Calves they cast out to be eaten by Crows and Woolues, that themselves
may have more abundance of Milk. And the Calves being taken away, the Cowes
are so mad among them, as they will give no Milk till the skin of the Calfe
be stuffed and set before them, that they may smell the odor of their own
bellies. Yea when these Cowes thus madly deny their milk, the women wash
their hands in Cowes dung, and so gently stroke their dugges, yea, put their
hands into the cowes tail, and with their mouths blow into their tails, that
with this manner (as it were) of enchantment, they may draw milk from them. Yea,
these Cowes seem as rebellious to their owners, as the people are to their
Kings, for many times they will not be milked but of some one old woman only,
and of no other. These wild Irish never set any candles upon tables; What do I
speak of Tables? since indeed they have no tables, but set their meat upon a
bundle of grass, and use the same Grass for napkins to wipe their hands. But
I mean that they do not set candles upon any high place to give light to the
house, but place a great candle made of recdes and butter upon the flower in
the midst of a great room. And in like sort the chief men (...) in their
houses make fires in the midst of the room, the smoke whereof goes out at
a hole in the top thereof. An Italian Friar coming of old into Ireland, and
seeing at Armach this their diet and nakedness of the women (whereof I shall
speak in the next book of this Part, and the second Chapter thereof) is said
to have cried out,

Ciuitas Armachana, Ciuit as vana,
Carnes crudae, mulieres nude.
Vain Armach City, I did thee pity,
Thy meatesrawnes, and women's nakedness.
I trust no man expects among these gallants any beds, much less fetherbeds
and sheets, who like the Nomades removing their dwellings, according to the
commodity of pastures for their Cowes, sleep under the Canopy of heaven, or in
a poor house of clay, or in a cabin made of the boughs of trees, and covered
with turffe, for such are the dwellings of the very Lords among them. And in
such places, they make a fire in the midst of the room, and round about it
they sleep upon the ground, without straw or other thing under them, lying all
in a circle about the fire, with their feet toward it. And their bodies being
naked, they cover their heads and upper parts with their mantels, which they
first make very wet, steeping them in water of purpose, for they find that
when their bodies have once warmed the wet mantels, the smoke of them keeps
their bodies in temperate heat all the night following. And this manner of
lodging, not only the mere Irish Lords, and their followers use, but even
some of the English Irish Lords and their followers, when after the old but
tyranicall and prohibited manner vulgarly called Coshering, they go (as it
were) on progress, to live upon their tenants, til they have consumed all the
victuals that the poor men have or can get. To conclude, not only in lodging
passengers, not at all or most rudely, but even in their inhospitality toward
them, these wild Irish are not much unlike to wild beasts, in whose caves a
beast passing that way, might perhaps find meat, but not without danger to be
ill entertained, perhaps devoured of his insatiable Host.

The fourth Book.
CHAP. 1. Of the Germans, Bohemians, Sweitzers, Netherlanders, Danes, Polonians
and Italians apparel.
ONE thing in general must be remembered touching the diverse apparel of
diverse Nations: That it is daily subject to change, as each Commonwealth by
little and little declines from the best constitution to the worst, and old
manners are daily more and more corrupted with new vices, or as each
Commonwealth is by due remedies purged and reformed.

The most rich among the Germans (as old Writers do Germany.
witness) used of old straight apparel, expressing to life the lineaments of
the whole body (which kind of apparel the Schwaben or Sueui use at this day),
and the women were apparrelled as men (of which wicked custom we find at this
day no remainder, except the soldiers wives following the Camp may perhaps
somewhat offend that way.) They add that the Sueui (under which name the
Romans comprehended all the Germans) used of old to be clad in skins. No
doubt the Germans, as they (...), so are at this day, in their apparel,
constant, and modest (and I had almost said slouenly.) Surely if a man observe
the time they spend in brushing their apparel, and taking out the least
spots, as well at home, as abroad when they come to their Innes, they will seem
cleanly, but if we behold their apparel, so worn to proof, as the nap of
the cloth, and that somewhat course) being worn off, the ground plainly
appears, and spotted with grease and wearing, especially the sleeves, which
they wear large, and at table not without cause, lift up with one hand, while
they take meat with the other, lest they should fall into the dish, no doubt
(without offense be it spoken), they are somewhat slouenly. And for this
imputation of old laid on the Germans, I appeal to Tacitus, writing to this
purpose in the Latin tongue. The slouenly and naked Germans live in the same
house among the same beasts. And he that at this day looks upon their Schwartz
Reytern (that is, Black Horsemen) must confess, that to make their horses and
boots shine, they make themselves as black as Collyers. These Horsemen wear
black clothes, and poor though they be, yet spend no small time in brushing
them. The most of them have black Horses, which while they painefully dress,
and (as I said) delight to have their boots and shoos shine with blacking
stuff, their hands and faces become black, and thereof they have their
foresaid name. Yea, I have heard Germans say, that they do thus make themselves
al black, to seem more terrible to their enemies. I have often heard their
Preachers declame against the common inconstancy in apparel: but they do
herein according to the art of lefting, which is ever most pleasing, when it
taskes men with vices whereof they are not guilty, but never with those that
may be truly imputed. For Drunkenness, the famous, yet almost sole vice of the
Germans, is in the mean time silently passed over by them in their Pulpits, or
else out of a guilty conscience slightly reproved.

No doubt the Germans are of all other famous and great Nations least
expencefull in apparel, whether a man consider the small prices of the
garments, or their long lasting. By an Imperial Law, Husbandmen are forbidden
to wear any stuffes, that cost more then half a Gulden the ell, and men that
live by their Art and Hand, are forbidden to wear any thing that costs more
then the third part of a Gulden the ell, and servants to wear any ornament of
Gold, Silver, or Silk, and gentlemen to wear any Gold, or more then two
ounces of silver, and Doctors of the Civil Law, (who have many privileges
from the Heralds, and are much respected in Germany), and likewise Knights,
not to wear more then two ounces of gold upon their Apparel, and lastly
Citizens are permitted to face their garments with silk or velvet, but are
forbidden to wear any gold or silver. By the same Imperall Statutes enacted in
the year 1548, Noble women, (that is Gentlewomen), are permitted to wear a
chain of gold worth two hundred Guldens, and ornaments of the head worth forty
Guldens, and the Doctors of the Civil Law are permitted to wear like
chains, and their wives have the same privilege with Noblewomen. In the
Statutes of the year 1530 Citizens Wives are permitted to wear gold chains
of fifty Guldens, and silver girdles of thirty Guldens, and their Daughters to
wear Ornaments of ten Guldens upon their heads. And these Laws are wisely
made to restrain that Nation, though by nature and custom most modest in
Apparel, because the richest things they are to wear, be not made in the
Empire, but to be bought with money. They have not so much as woollen or linen
cloth of their own, but such as is course, which makes them that wear silk
or velvet, as well as others, wear shirts of course cloth. I did see Rodolpus
the Emperor when he mourned for his sister, apparrelled in English black
cloth, who otherwise used to wear for the most part the same cloth of a
watchet or some light color, seldom wearing any richer Apparel, and the
scabbard of his sword was of leather, not of velvet, as we use. The men in
Germany wear shirt bands of course linen short and thick, only in Prussia I
observed them to wear long ruffes, with rebatoes of wire to bear them up,
such as our women use, which seemed to me less comely, because they were
seldom made of fine cloth, as cambricke or lawne, but of their own course
linen, such as I have often seen the Spaniards to wear.

Their handkerchers are very large, and wrought with silk of diverse light
colors, with great letters signifying words, as for example D. H. I. M. T.
signifying Der her I st mein Trost, that is; The Lord is my comfort, so as they
seem more like wrought saddle clothes, then handkerchers. Many of the Saxons
wear thrummed hats, which are called Brunswicke hats, as most used in those
parts, being so stiff as a sword will hardly pierce them, especially with the
brass hatbands they wear about them, and being so heavy as they lie upon the
ears, and make them hand down with small comeliness. Few wear feathers in
their hats, yet the Doctors of the Civil Law have the privilege to wear
them, and my self have seen many Students in the Universities, and most
Coachmen of Germany, wear feathers costing each some twelve or sixteen
batzen. The mention of the said shirt bands, used in Prussia, makes me remember
that the Citizens of Dantzke, seated in that Province, do generally wear more
rich Apparel, then any other Germans. And I remember that their said shirt
bands or ruffes were little less then a quarter of an ell long, and hung upon
their shoulders, notwithstanding they had stays to bear them up, which mad
fashion, but not so long, the English used of old, and have long since laid
aside. The men in these parts commonly wear silks and veluets, without any
decent distinction of degrees, and the women seemed much prouder in apparel
then the men. I have seen married women not of the richest sort, daily wear
hats of velvet, though some wear also felt hats, and others to wear frontlets
of velvet, and others wearing hats, had their hatbands all set with pearl, and
many of their Daughters did wear chains of pearl, worth three hundred
guldens, yea some of these Virgins have showed me their chains of five hundred
guldens value, being the Daughters of Citizens and Merchants. As well married
as unmarried women in the chief Cities of that Province, did wear short
cloakes, and for the greater part of silk or satin, (the use whereof is
vulgar among them), and that of changeable or light colors, with Petticoates
and Aprons of like colors, but not so frequently of silk; and I have seen
Virgins of ordinary rank in those Cities, daily wear silk stockings.

But I return to the general discourse of the Germans Apparel: Citizens and
men of inferior rank, wear course cloth of Germany, and only the richer
sort use English cloth; and this cloth is commonly of a black or dark color,
and they think themselves very fine, if their cloakes have a narrow facing of
silk or velvet. The Gentlemen delight in light colors, and when I persuaded a
familiar friend that black and dark colors were more comely, he answered me,
that the variety of colors showed the variety of Gods works: And the
Gentlemen wear Italian silks and veluets of these colors, but most commonly
English cloth, for the most part of yellow or green color. The Saxons in
stead of Swords, carry Hatchets in their hands, being very skillful in the use
of them, so as they will hit any small mark therewith, and they wear hanging
daggers with massy sheaths of silver or iron. The Gentlemen, and others that
have the privilege to wear Swords, as the Doctors of Civil Law, have plain
pommels to them, never gilded; and the scabbards (not excepting the Emperor)
are always of leather. Many of the Germans in steed of hats, wear caps lined
with furre, and they use large stomachers of furre or lambeskinnes, keeping
their stomachs very warm, either for the coldness of the clime, or rather
because their stomachs need more cherrishing, in regard they are often
oppressed with excess in drinking. Most of them wear great large breeches,
excepting the Sueui (vulgarly Schawbon) who wear such straight breeches as our
old men use, with stockings of the same cloth, fastened to them: And generally
their doublets are made straight to the body, upon which in Winter time they
wear Ierkins lined with furre.

Few men or women wear gold rings, pearls, or Jewels: but Bohemia yields
false stones like the oriental precious stones, yet of small or no value, and
I have seen some Gentlemen wear these false stones, and brass rings gilded
over, the wearing whereof is held disgraceful with us. At Magdeburg I did see
a young-Gentleman having all his fingers loaded with rings, which I thought to
be of gold, till my self saw him buy a ring of three hoopes for some fifteen
pence in English money, and so found his foolish pride. The Statutes (as I
formerly said) permit Noblewdmen (that is Gentlewomen) to wear chains of
gold, which notwithstanding they wear very seldom: And in like sort their
Earls, (vulgarly called Graves) and their Knights, sometimes wear gold
chains, made of extraordinary great linkes, and not going more then once about
the neck, nor hanging down further then the middle button of the doublet. The
Germans in great part measure a strangers dignity by the richness of his
Apparel, and by his grave or (to speak plainly) proud look. Citizens Wives
in some places wear upon their heads little caps, in the form of an
Oyster-shell, and they wear short cloakes, reaching no further then their
elbowes. Citizens daughters and Virgins of inferior sort, wear nothing upon
their heads, but their hair wouen with laces, and so gathered on the forepart
of the head, with the forehead stroked up plain; and upon the forepart of the
head the Gentlewomen wear a border of pearl, and all other from the highest
to the lowest, commonly wear garlands of roses, (which they call Crantzes.)

For they keep Roses all Winter in little pots of earth, whereof they open one
each saturday at night, and distribute the Roses among the women of the house,
to the very kitchen maid; others keepethem all in one pot, and weekly take as
many Roles as they need, and cover the rest, keeping them fresh till the next
Summer. And the common sort mingle gilded nutmegs with these Roses, and make
garlands there of: Only women wear these Garlands in Winter, but in Summer
time men of the better sort wear them within doors, and men of the common
sort wear them going abroad. They keep Roses all Winter in this sort, they
choose the closest and thickest buds of all kinds of Roses, but the Damask
Roses best keep the smell, and other kinds the color. Then they take a pot
of earth, and sprinckle some bay salt in the bottom, and lay these buds
severally, not very close one to the other, in two rows one above the other,
which done they sprinckle the same, and wet all the buds with two little
glasses of Rhenish Wine, and again sprinckle them with bay salt in greater
quantity, yet such as it may not eat the leaves. In like sort they put up each
two rows of buds, till the pot be full, which they cover with wood or lead,
so as no air can enter, and then lay it up in a cold cellar, where no sun
comes. When they take out the buds, they dip them in luke warm water, or put
them into the Oven when the bread is taken out, which makes the leaves open
with the turning of the buds between two fingers, then they dip a feather in
rhenish wine, and wipe the leaves there with, to refresh the color, and some
do the like with rose water, to renew the smell. Give me leave by the way to
relate, (though out of due course), that I observed women at Leipzig, in like
sort to keep Cherries all Winter, after this manner. They enclose some
Cherries in a glass, so as no air can enter, and then fasten the glass to
some low shrub or bough of a tree, so as the glass may hang in a brook,
running gently.

Now I return to my former discourse. Many of the said Virgins have their
neckbands set with spangles, such as some children with us wear. The married
women wear their gowns close about the breast and neck, with a very short
ruff about their necks, (such as men also wear) set with poking sticks as
small as reeds, and they wear little hats upon their heads. The Virgins in
general, wear linen sleeves about their arms, as close as they can be made,
for they esteem it the greatest grace to have the smallest arms, and their
petticoates are guarded with some ten or more fringes or laces of silk or
velvet, each fringe being of a different color one from the other, making the
skirts thereof as variable in color as the Rainbow. Citizens wives put off
their ruffes when they go out of the house, covering their necks and mouths
with a linen cloth for fear of cold. And they wear great heavy purses by
their sides, with great bunches of keys hanging by chains of brass or
silver: and all generally, as well married women as Virgins, go with bare
legs: and I have seen a Virgin in Saxony, refuse a pair of silk stockings
offered her of gift: and the maid servants and married women of the inferior
sort wear no shoes except they go out of the house, and great part go also
abroad bare footed. The married women hide their naked feet with long gowns,
but the maid servants wearing short gowns, and girding them up into a roll
some handful under the wast about their hippes, (especially in the lower parts
of Germany), many times offend chaste eyes with showing their nakedness,
especially when they stoop for any thing to the ground. And in those parts of
Germany the Citizens wives, like our little children, wear red and yellow
shoes, and gilded at the toes. In general, it is disgraceful to married
women or Virgins (excepting at Augsburg, and some few other Cities), to go out
of doors without a cloak, which commonly is of some light stuff, as Grogram,
or the like, faced with some furs, and at Hidelberg they never go abroad
without a little basket in their hands, as if they went to buy something,
except they will be reputed dishonest. The married Women always have their
heads covered, in some Cities with a piece of velvet, other where with little
caps of velvet, silk, or felt, or with some like fashion, according to the use
of the Country. And very many wear such crosse-clothes or forehead clothes as
our Women use when they are sick. In many places the ordinary Citizens Wives
have their gowns made with long trains, which are pinned up in the house, and
borne up by maid servants when they go abroad, which fashion of old only
great Noblemen used with us: And in many Cities, as well the married as unmarried
Women, wear long fardingales, hanging about their feet like hoopes, which our
Women used of old, but have now changed to short fardingals about their hippes.

The Bohemians are apparrelled much like the Germans, and delight in green,
yellow, and light colors, but more frequently wear silks and veluets then
the Germans, Bohmerland
and also false Jewels of their own. And many times they wear black cloth
with many laces or fringes of light colors, each fringe differing in color
one from the other. And in respect of foreign Ambassadors coming from all
parts to Prage, and of Italian Merchants frequenting there, the Bohemians are
more infected with foreign fashions, then the Germans. The married Gentlwomen
attire their heads like our Virgins, and in like sort bear up their hair on
the forehead with a wier. They use with the Germans to make their gowns with
trains, or to bear them out with long fardingals, and to wear short cloakes.
Citizens wives wear upon their heads large gray caps, rugged like gray Connie
skins, and formed like the hiues of Bees, or little caps of velvet close to
the head; of a dunne color, with the hinder skirt (or hinder part) cut off and
open: And upon their legs they wear white buskins, wrought with velvet at
the toes; but upon their arms they wear large sleeves, and contrary to the
Germans, think them to be most comely.

The Sweitzers, being Citizens (for their nobility is long sincerooted out by
popular seditions) wear large round caps, (such as are used by our Prentices
and Students Sweitzerland.
in the Innes of Court), and together with them they wear cloakes (whereas
with us they are only used with gowns), yea, and Swords also (which seemed
strange to be worn with caps). They wear great large puffed breeches,
gathered close above the knees, and each puff made of a diverse light color;
but their doublets are made close to the body. The married Women cover their
heads with a linen coyfe, and upon it wear such caps as the men use, (which
are broader then we used in England), and commonly wear a linen crossecloth
upon the forehead. To be brief, the Virgins go bare headed with their baire
wouen up, and use short cloakes, and as well married as unmarried Women, as also
the Men, are apparrelled like the Germans, and affect nothing less then pride
in their attire.

In the united Provinces, the Inhabitants being for the most part Merchants and
Citizens, the Men use modest attire of grave colors, and little beautified
with lace or Netherland
other ornament. They wear short cloakes of English cloth, with one small lace
to cover the seames, and a narrow facing of silk or velvet. Their doublets are
made close to the body, their breeches large and fastened under the knees
commonly of woollen cloth, or else of foam light stuff, or of silk or velvet.
They use very little lace, no imbrodery, yet the Hollanders of old accounted
the most rude of the other Provinces, at this day increased in wealth, and
reputation of the State, do by little and little admit luxury, and their
sons apply themselves both to the apparel and manners of the English and
French. Women as well married as unmarried, cover their heads with a coyfe of
fine holland linen cloth, and they wear gowns commonly of some flight stuff,
and for the most part of black color, with little or no lace or guards, and
their neck ruffes are little (or short) but of very fine linen. For as well
men as women for their bodies and for all uses of the Family, use very fine
linen; and I think that no clownes in the World wear such fine shirts as they
in Holland do. Some of the chief Women not able to abide the extreme cold,
and loath to put fire under them for heat (as the common use is) because it
causes wrinckles and spots on their bodies, do use to wear breeches of
linen or silk. All Women in general, when they go out of the house, put on
a hoyke or veil which couers their heads, and hangs down upon their backs to
their legs; and this veil in Holland is of a light stuff or Kersie, and
has a kind of horn rising over the forehead, not much unlike the old pummels
of our Women's saddles, and they gather the Veil with their hands to cover all
their faces, but only the eyes: but the Women of Flanders and Brabant wear
Vailes altogether of some light fine stuff, and fasten them about the hinder
part and sides of their cap, so as they hang loosely, not close to the body,
and leave their faces open to view, and these Caps are round, large, and flat
to the head, and of Velvet, or atleast guarded therewith, and are in form like
our potlids used to cover pots in the Kitchen: And these Women, as well for these
Vailes, as their modest garments with gowns close at the breast and neck, and
for their pure and fine linen, seemed to me more fair then any other
Netherlanders, as indeed they are generally more beautiful.

I did see the King of Denmark entered a days journey in his progress toward
Holsatia (vulgarly Holst), and he wore a loose gippoe of black velvet,
sparingly adorned Denmark.
with gold lace, and in the Town he wore a large broad brimmed felt hat, with
the brimmes in part buttoned up, but in his Coach he wore a rough Brunswicke
hat, used in the lower parts of Germany, and had a large chain of gold hanging
under one arm so low as it was folded about his girdle: And when he walked
abroad, he carried his Sword upon his shoulder with the point in his hand, and
the hilts hanging down behind him. His chief Courtiers and his younger
brother were all attired in an English cloth, which they called Kentish cloth,
we call Motley, but much finer then that whereof we make cloakebags, and of
purpose made for them, costing some two dollers the ell. They wore gold
chains, so short as they reached not further then the sixth or seventh button
of their doublets, but the linkes were great, and they had a Tablet of gold
annexed to them. They carried their swords as the King did, with the hilts
hanging over the shoulder, and they wore daggers with heavy sheaths of silver,
like those used in Saxony. The Kings Guard wore huge breeches puffed, and of
diverse colors like the Sweitzers hose. In general, the Danes are apparrelled
like the Germans, and especially like the Saxons, constantly and modestly, and
they so abhor from strange fashions, as the Kings Father lately deceased, was
reported to have given the strange apparel of certain Gentlemen newly
returned from foreign parts, to the infamous Hangman, that they might be
despised of the Gentry. Gentlewomen Virgins go with their heads bare, and
their hair wouen and adorned with rows of pearl. And the married Gentlewomen
go with their heads covered with a fine linen coyfe, and wear upon their
foreheads a French shadow of velvet to defend them from the Sun, which our
Gentlewomen of old borrowed of the French, and called them Bonegraces, now
altogether out of use with us; and they adorn their heads with borders of
Gold. Women as well married as unmarried, Noble and of inferior condition,
wear thin bands about their necks, yet not falling, but erected, with the
upper bodies of their outward garment of velvet, but with short skirts, and
going out of the house, they have the German custom to wear cloakes. They
also wear a chain of Gold like a breast plate, and girdles of silver, and
gilded.

At Dermind the Haven of Dantzke in Prussen, I did see the King of Poland ready
to sail into Sueuia or Suecia, his Fathers Kingdom of Inheritance, for whom
lately The Polonians.
dead, he then wore mourning Apparel, namely a long black cloak of woollen
cloth, and a cap or low hat of black silk with narrow brimmes, with a falling
band about his neck, a black doublet close to his body, and large breeches
fastened under the knee. The Queen being of the House of Austria, was attired
like the Noblewomen of Germany, and being then ready to take ship, her head was
couerd with a coyfe of fine linen, and upon her forehead she wore a
crossecloth almost down to the nose. The Kings Courtiers wore two long coats,
the upper coat (or cloak with sleeves was longer then the other, the skirts
whereof on the right side, were so fastened on the shoulder with silver
buttons, and so cast upon the left shoulder, as they had their right arms
altogether free; and this upper coat was of English cloth, faced before with
silk. The lower or inner coat was of silk or some light stuff, hanging
down on one side to the knees, on the other side doubled and fastened to the
girdle, and both coats were of light colors, but without any lace of Gold or
Silver, or other ornament whatsoever. They wore breeches and stockings of the
same cloth, like those of our old men, or the truses of Ireland, and their
shirts were of much finer linen then the Germans use. And they wore a fine and
very large linen handkercher, fastened to their Girdles behind: but they had
no ruffes nor any bands of linen about their necks, which are only used by
some few Gentlemen, who have lived in foreign parts, but the (...) of their
coats wear raised with a peake behind to keep the neck warm. They wore
extraordinary little caps, hardly covering the crown of the head, and in them
wore some six feathers, not of mixed or light colors, nor broad, as we wear
them, but white and narrow, such (or the same) as are pulled from Capons
tails. The Polonians shave all their heads close, excepting the hair of the
forehead, which they nourish very long and cast back to the hinder part of the
head. They carry for Arms a Turkish Cemeter, and wear shoes of leather and
also of wood, both painted and both shodde under the heel and toes with pieces
of Iron, making great noise as they go. The Gentlemen wear chains of gold
folded about their girdles, and carry in their hands a little hammer of silver,
and perhaps gilded, and these of inferior sort one of Iron. The Hungarians in
their attire differ little from the Polonians, but no Hungarian may wear a
feather, except he have done some noble act, and according to the number of his
brave actions, so many feathers he may wear, to witness his valor. At Crakaw
I did see the Castellani (that is, Keepers of Castles) and many Gentlemen
riding to the Court, and other places in the City, and the Gentlemen attending
them, went on foot before their Horses, with Feathers in their little caps, and
the vulgar attendants followed their Horses. The buttocks of their horses were
covered with cloth of gold, or the skin of some wild beast, or some like
ornament, and about many of their Horses ears, hung chains of gold or silver,
their bridles were gilded, and set with buttons of gold, and the horsemen not
only wear swords by their sides, but also every Horseman (especially riding
in the highway, or being in foreign parts upon any Embassage or in like
pompes, has another, and some a third sword (or Cimeter) fastened to their
saddles and girthes, besides that both on foot and on horseback they carry a
hammer in their hands.

The Gentlewomen, after the Netherlanders fashion, cover the head with a coyfe
of fine linen, and wear a crosscloth upon the forehead, and as the men, so
they wear no ruff or linen band about the neck, but many have about their
necks chains of Pearl worth two hundred, yea, five hundred Dollers, and some
line the collar of the upper body of their Gowns with furre, and so cover the
nakedness of the neck behind. The unmarried women wear aprons of fine
linen, and go with bare heads, having their hair wouen, as our women use,
with a narrow piece of Velvet crossing the midst of their heads, and going
out of the house, they cast a white Veil upon their heads and backs, but show
their faces open. The meaner sort of married women either wrap their heads and
mouths with a narrow long piece of linen, or only cover their mouths with
linen, and wearing a low hat cast a Veil from it, to cover the hinder part of
the head, and all the back, and they wear loose Kirtles over their other
apparel, which are tied behind with strings. The common sort of Country women
cover themselves all over with linen cloth or skins of beast.

The Prussians are tributary to the King of Poland, and upon free conditions
acknowledge themselves subject to the Crown of Poland, and their attire as
also language little differs from the Germans, save that their apparel is
more sumptuous, but of them I have formerly spoken in the discourse of the
Germans attire.

Of the Italians it is prouerbially said, that the Venetians are gowned, yet by
night Italy
going to visit their Mistresses, wear short Spanish cloakes. That those of
Terrara and Mantua are proud in their attire, with their caps set with gold
buttons. That the Florentines are ridiculous, (yet I observed none more
modestly attired.) That those of Genoa are neat and comely in attire, but
wear no gowns, nor lace, nor gardes. That those of Milan are decent, and the
Neopolitans are glittering and sumptuous. Surely the Italians in general,
respect the conueniency more then ornament of their apparel. When they take
iourneyes, they wear large boots, that they may fling off being untied, but
such as keep them dry in all weathers; and to the same end they wear thick
felt hats, and shortfelt clokes, which no rain can pierce, respecting the
health, not the ornaments of their bodies. And howsoever their apparel is
soft and delicate, yet they only wear cloth and stuffes made at home, not any
brought from foreign parts. Their garments are commonly of silk, but seldom
embrodred, and never laid with gold or silver lace, and commonly of black
color. And howsoever all those mixed colors which we so highly esteem, come
from thence, yet are they not invented by the Italians, but by the Factors of
our Merchants, who lie there of purpose, to feed the fantastical pride of our
Youth, in new Stuffes, or at least new colors and names.

The Citizens of Genoa, wear gold Chains, and might seem proudly attiredin
garments of Velvet, save that we must remember, that they are not only
Merchants but Gentlemen, and some of them Princes.

The Venetians, by reason of their strict Laws from all antiquity restraining
excess in apparel, howsoever many times they wear sumptuous garments, yet
are they hidden under their gowns, not to be seen but by their Mistrisses at
night. They make woollencloth of such lasting, as they bequeath their gowns by
their last testaments. All the Gentlemen, not one excepted, wear black cloth
gowns, buttoned close at the neck, with the sleeves put on over their
doublets, as well young as old men, but some under this civil gown we are rich
furs, and imbrodred garments. And the Senators, Doctors, and Knights, we are
Scarlet gowns, with large sleeves, lined in winter with rich furs And their
Senate is no less or more glorious in public pompes, then the Roman Senate
was of old. And the Gentlemen constantly wear these gowns, either in singular
pride to be known from others, (for no Citizen, nor any Gentlemen of other
Cities wear gowns), or for obedience to the Law, or out of an old custom,
which the most wise Magistrates permit not to be broken. And for the same
cause, all the Gentlemen, none excepted, wear little caps of Freese or Cloth,
hardly covering the crown, or the forepart of the head.

All other Italians in general wear stuff cloakes, and commonly of Silk in
summer, and cloth in winter, and light felt hats with narrow brimmes, and large
breeches, sometimes wide, and open at the knee, after the Spanish fashion, but
more commonly tied under the knee, and a loose coat or gippo, but not wide,
and a doublet close to the body, both of silk, and lined with silk, and silk
stockings. Also many wear Jewels, but as it were hidden, to be seen only by
chance. Lastly, in great wisdom they care not to have rich apparel, but hold
it honorable to live of their own. They make no fine linen, and therefore use
course linen, both for shirts, and other uses of the Family, and commonly
wear little falling bands, and many times ruffes of Flanders linen, sometimes
wrought with Italian Cut-worke, much used with us, but their ruffes are not so
great as ours, and they have little skill in washing, starching, or smoothing
linen. They wear very short hair, as all Nations do that live in hot
climes, the contrary vice of wearing long hair being proper to the French,
English, and Scots, but especially to the Irish. The Italians clothe very
little children with doublets and breeches, but their breeches are open behind,
with the shirt hanging out, that they may case themselves without help. Among
other Princes of Italy, I did see Ferdinand the third, Duke of Florence, who
did wear a cloak of English cloth, with one little lace, and breeches of
Veluct without any ornament, and stockings of leather, and a leather scabbard
to his sword, and his Coach was lined with old green Veluct, and the Horses
seemed taken out of the Plough.

The women in general are delighted with mixed and light colors. The women of
Venice wear choppines or shoos three or four hand-bredths high, so as the
lowest of them seem higher then the tallest men, and for this cause they
cannot go in the streets without leaning upon the shoulder of an old woman.
They have another old woman to bear up the train of their gown, and they are
not attended with any man, but only with old women. In other parts of Italy,
they wear lower shoes, yet somewhat raised, and are attended by old women,
but go without any help of leading. The women of Venice wear gowns, leaving
all the neck and breast bare, and they are closed before with a lace, so open,
as a man may see the linen which they lap about their bodies, to make them
seem fat, the Italians most loving fat women. They show their naked necks and
breasts, and likewise their dugges, bound up and swelling with linen, and all
made white by art. They wear large falling bands, and their hair is commonly
yellow, made so by the Sun and art, and they raise up their hair on the
forehead in two knotted horns, and deck their heads and uncovered hair with
flowers of silk, and with pearl, in great part counterfeit. And they cast a
black veil from the head to the shoulders, through which the nakedness of
their shoulders, and necks, and breasts, may easily be seen. For this attire
the women of Venice are prouerbially said to be, Grande dilegni, Gross di
straci, rosse dibettito, bianche di calcina: that is tall with wood, fat with
rags, red with painting, and white with chalk. The women of Genoa are
attired much after the French fashion, and by reason of neighborhood, borrow
diverse manners from France, (which is also to be understood of other Cities
lying under the French Alps), and they go abroad either alone, or attended by
men, not by women as in other parts; yea, by night, and early in the morning to
the Church, (which suspected fashions other Italians cannot endure) They wear
nets and black vailes, covering there with their faces, contrary to the French
manner, without which the poorest woman goes not abroad.

In general the Women of Italy, (for diverse Cities have some fashions
differing from other) most commonly (but especially the wives of shopkeepers)
wear gowns of silk and light stuffes, yea, wouen with gold, and those close
at the breast and neck; with a standing collar, and little ruffes close up to
the very chinne, and showing no part naked. And Gentlewomen in general, wear
gowns loose behind, with a close collar, hiding all nakedness, and with
trains borne up by waitingmaides, and sometimes with open hanging sleeves. The
married women wear their heads bare, or covered with a fine linen coyfe, and
a hat, and a veil hanging down from the hinder part of the head to the back.
The unmarried have their heads bare, with their hair knotted like snakes, and
tied with gold and silver laces, or else they are covered with a gold netted
cawle, and they wear also gold chains. The married women wear chains of
pearl about the head and neck, which in some places are forbidden to Virgins;
and these pearls are many times (especially at Venice) counterfeit, and made of
glass, but very beautiful to the eye. Widows and Women that mourn, cover
all their head and shoulders with a black veil, and upon the forehead they
wear a shadow or bongrace, and about their necks a white veil, hanging down
before to their feet.) The Country wenches wear upon their heads gold and
silver cawles, or at least seeming such, and straw hats, and gilded girdles,
and for the rest as other women are delighted with light colors.

The City Virgins, and especially Gentlewomen, cover their heads, face, and
backs with a Veil, that they may not be seen passing the streets, and in
many places wear silk or linen breeches under their gowns. Also I have
seen honorable Women, as well married as Virgins, ride by the high way in
Princes trains, apparrelled like Men, in a doublet close to the body, and
large breeches open at the knees, after the Spanish fashion, both of carnation
silk or satin, and likewise riding astride like men upon Horses or Muses, but
their heads were attired like Women, with bare hairs knotted, or else covered
with gold netted cawles, and a hat with a feather. And many times in the Cities
(as at Padua) I have seen Curtizans (in plain English, whores) in the time of
shrouing, apparrelled like men, in carnation or light colored doublets and
breeches, and so playing with the racket at Tennis with young men, at which time
of shrouing, the Women no less then Men, (and that honorable women in
honorable company,) go masked and apparrelled like men all the afternoon
about the streets, even from Christmasse holydaies to the first day in Lent.
The Women wearing Men's breeches, have them open all before, and most part
behind, only buttoned with gold or silver buttons: And the Curtizans make all
the forepart of their gowns in like manner open, to avoid wrinckling.

Lastly, the Italians use to tie themselves upon a vow for recovery of health,
or like cause, to wear certain apparel for a time or for life; and if the
vow be in repentance of sin, the color is ash color, vulgarly Beretino,
which I have seen some wear for long time constantly, with purpose to wear
them during life.

CHAP. II. Of the Turks, French, English, Scottish, and Irish Apparel.
THe Turks shave their heads, but only in the very crown, where they leave a
tuffr of hair; and they do not now as Turkey.
of old, only nourish the hair of the upper lip, but all the beard growing
round. They cover their head thus shaued with a close cap of Scarlet, and above
it wear some twelve or twenty else of fine white cotton cloth, wouen into a
round globe, which in their tongue is called a Tulbent, and by some Tsalma:
neither do they ever uncover their heads in honor to any man, but salute by
bending the body, and laying their left hand on their right side. This cap (or
this head, as they call it) is hollow, and so admits air, being borne up by
little hoopes, and so cooles the head, yet being thick, keeps out the Sun
from piercing it, and being of most fine linen, is much lighter then our hats.
All the Orders or degrees among the Turks, are known by the ornament of the
head (or by their heads, as they speak.) The Azimoglanes wear Pyramidall
caps like sugarloues, of a mingled color and light stuff. The Ianizares wear
the said Tulbent, but have also a cap peculiar to their Order, vulgarly called
Zarcola, which they wear going abroad into the City, being a standing cap,
plain at the top, with an hood hanging down behind (like that part of our
French hoods), with a gilded horn of brass upright above the forehead. The
Ianizares that are Courtiers, wear a Feather hanging down from the hinder
part of the head to the very heels. The Chausses, and all degrees upward to
the very Emperor, wear the said Tulbent or Cap, with a little piece of red
velvet appearing at the very crown, upon which they set Jewels and Feathers,
whereby these higher orders and degrees in the war are distinguished. Like
white Tulbents, but altogether plain, are worn by inferior Turks, that are
not Soldiers, and they cannot be more provoked, then by casting any spot upon
their white heads, which they wear as an holy badge of their Religion, placing
the purity of the foul for a great part in the outward purity of the body,
Tulbent, and garments. All these Tulbents be of pure white; but the Greeks and
other Christians, as well subjects as strangers, wear Shasses, that is, striped
linen (commonly white and blew), wound about the skirts of a little cap. Such
a Shasse my self did wear, costing fifteen Mcidines.

The Persians wear such Tulbents for the form, but the cloth is of green
color. And the Turks (as I think) called Seriffi, and by others called
Hemir, namely, the Kindred or race of Mahomet, (who make great show of
hereditary holiness, and are of singular reputation), do not only wear
green Tulbents, but all garments of the same color, yet some of them wear
garments of other colors, with a green mark to be known from others. They
say, that Mahomet used to wear green garments, whereupon in superstition they
only permit this color to his race; and if any chance to wear a shoo-string
or garters of that color, by ignorance of this rite, they will fly upon him,
and beat him with cudgels, and if he still wear them, will punish him more
severely. My self ignorant of this rite, passed most part of Turkey, with my
dublet lined with green taffety, but sleeping by nights in my dublet, and
hiding the silk, lest they should think me rich; by great chance this error
of mine was never detected, till I came to Constantinople, where our
Ambassador observing it, and telling me the great cruelty they use toward
such as wear any green thing, did much astonish me, yet did I still wear the
same, being safe in the privilege of the Ambassadors house, till I went into
a Venetian ship, to sail into Italy. Besides these hypocrites of Mahomets
race, (for that cause so much respected, as the witness of one of them auailes
more then of ten common Turks), they have other orders of religious men,
whereof the chief, and (as it were) Metropolitan Bishop is called Mophty, whom
the Emperor highly respects, and takes counsel of him when he goes to war.
Also the Cady is a chief Judge of Ecclesiastical causes: And all these wear
silk gowns of sky colored blew, which color is esteemed next green, and
proper to some such orders. And these religious men wear their gowns long to
the ground, with close sleeves, and their tulbents are larger, but flatter,
then other Turks wear.

Neither men nor women of the Turks, wear any neck bands or collars, but
their gowns are cut close to the lowest part of the neck, and there made
fast, so as all the neck is naked. And the gowns of men and women little
differ, save that the men have them large, the women close at the breast. They
hate the black color, as infernal, and much used by Christians In general,
the men wear a long coat to the knee; and upon it a long gown with gathered
sleeves, hanging to the calfe of the leg, and buttoned at the breast, and a
third longer gown hanging behind to the ground, with sleeves close to the
arm. They wear a girdle of silk or linen twice or thrice about the waste,
or of fine leather with plates of gold and silver. Their breeches and stockings
are of one piece of Kersey, like Irish Trouses, but larger, the stockings
hanging loose without any garters. They wear their shirts hanging over their
breeches, under which they have linen breeches, which they wear also by
night, in stead of sheets: And they pull out their shirts by day, lest they
should be spotted by their privy parts, making it a point of religion, to keep
their garments clean. Lastly; they wear red and yellow shoes, of most thin
leather, pointed sharp at the toes; and two fingers high at the heel, with
pieces of iron under the soles, or else leather buskins; and both these they
put off within doors; sitting upon the ground, spread with Carpets, crossing
their naked feet like our Tailors. Their upper gown and breeches are commonly
of English or Venetian cloth, and many times of satin or damask, or some
light stuff: And their coats are loose, and commonly lined with black Conie
skins, brought out of England, and much esteemed by them; as being soft, and
cool, and keeping out the Sun in a loose garment, and also warm in a close
garment. Thus they wear the finest cloth, silks, and stuffes, but not one is
found so prodigal or ridiculous, as to wear any lace, and much less to cut
any stuff, all wearing them plain, and laughing at our contrary fashions.
They have no glooues, and I remember that my self in Syria being poorly
attired, yet was taken for a great man, only for wearing gloves. They wear
very large hand-kerchers, and wrought all over with silk of light colors,
which they hang by their sides about the girdle. They use linen cloth or
cotton cloth very thin and fine, but of brown color, for thinness not
unlike our boulting cloths, but most pure and clean, in which they are curious
for all things worn about the body. The chief pride of the Turks, is in having
the pummels of their Cemeters (or short and broad Swords) set with Jewels,
which are many times counterfeit, and commonly of small value, and likewise in
having good Horses, with bridles and saddles rich and set with like Jewels. I
never observed any Turks to wear gold Rings or Jewels on their fingers,
excepting only some Soldiers in Syria, whom I have seen wear great rings of
white bone upon their thumbs. But the great men highly esteem Christian
Iewellers, not to wear the Jewels, but rather to have their treasure portable,
and easy to be hidden. The Turks wear no Swords in the Cities, but only in
the Camp, or in Iournies: For Ianizaries and other Soldiers have such
authority without arms, as no man dares resist them so as carrying only a
long and heavy cudgel in their hands, one of them will therewith beat
multitudes of Turks, like so many dogs: yet the Ianizaries in Syria wear at
their girdles short and heavy Knives, like daggers.

The Turkish women wear smocks (of which fashion also the men's shirts are) of
fine linen, wrought with silk at the wrests, upon the sleeves, and at the
skirts; and a long cote of silk, wrought with needle-worke, and edged, with
sleeves close to the arm, and at the breast, with their necks naked. The
women's gowns are much like those of the men, for cloth and fashion, and in
like sort without lace, and plain without cutting, and open before, so as the
smock is seen; and they wear linen breeches as men, by day and night, or
else such breeches of cloth, as men wear, and both these open at the knee; and
as the men, so likewise the women, have no collar of any garment, but their
necks be naked, and the women have Pearls hanging in their ears. But they
seldom wear shoes or flockings like men, but commonly Buskins of light
colors, adorned with gold and silver, or with Jewels if they be of the richer
sort, or wines of great men; and these they wear only abroad, for at home
their feet be naked, and as men, so they sit crosselegd upon carpets. They
weaue up their hair in curious knots, and so let them hang at length, and deck
the hair with Pearl and buttons of gold, and with Jewels and flowers of silk
wrought with the needle. The women in Syria cover their heads with little
pieces of coined moneys joined together with thread, instead of a linen coife.
No Turkish woman, that ever I observed in that vast Empire, at any time goes
forth to buy any thing, or for any business of the family, but when upon other
occasions they go forth, then they cover their heads and foreheads with a white
veil, their eyes with a black Cipers, and muffle their mouths and necks
with white linen, and hide their very hands under their vailes, though their
hands be all painted over with a red color, made of an herb, which in the
Eastern parts is held a great ornament, so as the very men in some places
paint their hands. Also the women, over their garments (be they costly or
poor) wear a gown of a dark colored cloth, which both rich and meaner
women all generally use of the same kind of cloth and the same color,
whenever they go out of the doors, so as thus muffled and covered, they
cannot be distinguished in condition or beauty. Neither go they abroad in any
pomp to be seen, nor without the leave of their husbands, to whom, and to no
other at any time, they show their face open, and their hands unpainted, except
they will by immodesty procure their own danger. Under the neck of this gown
covering all their apparel, they thrust the end of their white veil hanging
down from the hinder part of the head; yet the Greekish women wear this veil
loose over that gown. And this singular modesty is attributed to these women,
that they blush to come into Market places, or public meetings, or great
companies, and are not displeased to be strictly kept at home. Lastly, in
respect of their frequent bathing, and their faces covered when they go
abroad, and so never open to the Sun, wind, or any ill weather, the Turkish
and Greekish women have most delicate bodies, and long preserve their beauties.

The French, if we respect the time of these late Civil wars, wear light
stuffes and woollen cloth, with a doublet close to the body, and large easy
breeches, and all things France.
rather commodious for use, then brave for ornament; and scoffed at those who
came richly attired to the Camp, or wore long hair. But if we consider their
apparel before the misery of the said civil wars, we shall find them
authors to us English, of wearing long hair, doublets with long bellies to the
navel, ruffes hanging down to the shoulders, and breeches puffed as big as a
tun, with all like wanton leuities. In time of peace, Gentlemen wear mixed
and light colors, and silk garments, laid with silk lace, and sattens,
commonly raced, and stockings of silk, or of some light stuff, but never
woollen or worsted (which only Merchants wear,) and imbrodered garments, with
great inconstancy in the fashion, and negligently or carelessely, which the
Germans call slouenly, because they many times go without hatbands and
garters, with their points untrust, and their doubtless vnbutned. The sumptuary
laws forbid Gentlemen to wear cloth or lace of gold and silver, but when the
King proclaims an honorable war against any fortaine Prince, he permits any
bravery to his soldiers, yet so, as the war ended, after a fit time to wear
out that apparel, they must return to their former attire, except the king be
so weak, as he cannot give life to these laws. As Well men as women commonly
wear course linen, and Gentlemen's Lacqueis or servants ruffle in plain
rags. In general, men and women (excepting Courtiers and some of the Gentry)
wear light stuffes, and rather delicate then sumptuous garments. And howsoever
the Law forbids to wear silk lace upon silk stuff yet the execution of the
Law being neglected, they ever offend more or less, according to the liberty
of the time, against this old Law, never yet abolished, but rather in time
worn out of respect. Merchants wear black garments of cloth, or light
stuffes of silk, commonly after a modest fashion. The Senators wear cloakes
and hats (not gowns and caps as ours use), and only the Presidents and
Counselors of Parlaments wear scarlet gowns, and that only at solemn
times, as the first day that the Court sits, and all the Procurators daily
wear gowns. The Country people commonly used to wear blew cloth, in loose
coats and close breeches, with stockings hanging over their shoes. But they
have left this fashion, and now for the most part, wear close doublets, and
large breeches, with a large coat hanging down to the knees, all of light
stuffes made at home, and stockings of course wool. And their wives in like
sort attyred, have their heads all ouer-wrapped in linen.

In general the women, married, cover their heads with a coyfe or netted
cawle. The Gentlewomen bear up their hair on the fore-heades with a wier, and
upon the back part of the head wear a cap of other hair then their own, over
their cawle, and above that they wear a coyfe of silk, lined with Velvet, and
having a peake down the forehead. Or else the Gentlewomen and wives of rich
Merchants, with small difference of degree, wear upon their heads a black
veil of Cipers, peaked at the forehead, with a velvet hood hanging down
behind; only the Gentlewomen wear this hood gathered, and the Merchants wives
plain. Women of inferior sort wear like hoods of cloth, and sometimes of
silk, or a light stuff. And some Merchants wives and women of ordinary
condition, wear a white coife of linen (fine or course according to their
condition) with certain high and not very comely horns, wreathed up on the
forehead. Both men and women lately used falling bands, which the better sort
starched, and raised up with wier, showing their necks and breasts naked. But
now both more commonly and especially in winter, wear thick ruffes.
Gentlewomen and Citizens wives when they go out of doors, wear upon their
faces little Maskes of silk, lined with fine leather, which they always vnpin,
and show their face, to any that salutes them. And they use a strange badge of
pride, to wear little looking glasses at their girdles. Commonly they go in
the streets leaning upon a man's arm. They wear very light gowns, commonly
black, and hanging loose at the back, and under it an vpper-body close at the
breast, with a kirtle of a mixed or light color, and of some light stuff,
laid with many gardes, in which sort the women generally are attired They wear
sleeves to their gowns borne out with whalebones, and of a differing color
from the gown, which besides has other loose hanging sleeves cast backward,
and as well the vpperbodies as the kirtles, differ from the gown in color and
stuff. And they say, that the sleeves borne up with whale-bones, were first
invented, to avoid men's familiar touching of their arms. For it was related
unto me (I know not how credibly), that by Physicians advice the French make
issues in their arms for better health, as the Italians use to make them under
the knees covered with a close garter of brass. In France as well men as
women, use richly to be adorned with Jewels. The men wear rings of Diamonds,
and broad Jewels in their hats, placed upon the root of their feathers. The
Ladies wear their Jewels commonly at the breast, or upon the left arm, and
many other ways; for who can contain the mutable French in one and the same
fashion? and they commonly wear chains of Pearl, yea, the very wives of
Merchants wear rings of Diamonds, but most commonly chains of bugell and like
toys of black color.

The Gentlemen have no plate of silver, but some spoones and a salt, much less
have they any plate of gold. But the great Lords or Princes eat in silver
dishes, and use basins and ewers of silver, and no other kind of plate, using
always to drink in glasses, and each several man to have a glass by
himself.

Caesar reports that the old Britans were apparrelled in skins and wore long
hair, England.
with the beard all shaven, but the upper lip. Now the English in their
apparel are become more light then the lightest French, and more sumptuous
then the proudest Persians. More light I say then the French, because with
singular inconstancy they have in this one age worn out all the fashions of
France and all the Nations of Europe, and tired their own inventions, which
are no less buisie in finding out new and ridiculous fashions, then in
scraping up money for such idle expenses: yea, the Tailors and Shopkeepers
daily invent fantastical fashions for hats, and like new fashions and names
for stuffes. Some may think that I play the Poet, in relating wonderful but
incredible things, but men of experience know that I write with historical
truth. That the English by Gods goodness abounding at home with great variety
of things to be worn, are not only not content therewith, and not only seek
new garments from the furthest East, but are besides so light and vain, as
they suffer themselves to be abused by the English Merchants, who nourishing
this general folly of their Countrymen, to their own gain, daily in foreign
parts cause such new colors and stuff to be made, as their Masters send
painted out of England to them, teaching strangers to serve our lightness with
such inventions as themselves never knew before. For this cause the English of
greater modesty in apparel, are forced to cast off garments before they be
worn, since it is the law of nature, that every man may eat after his own
appetite, but must wear his apparel after the vulgar fashion, except he will
look like an old picture in cloth of Arras. I have heard a pleasant fable,
that Jupiter sent a shower, wherein whosoever was wet, became a fool; and that
all the people were wet in this shower, excepting one Philosopher, who kept his
study: but in the evening coming forth into the market place, and finding that
all the people mocked him as a fool, who was only wise, was forced to pray
for another like shower, that he might become a fool, and so live quietly
among fools, rather then bear the envy of his wisdom. This happens to many
wise men in our age, who wearing apparel of old and good fashion, are by
others so mocked for proud and obstinate fools, till at last they are forced
to be foolish with the fools of their time. The English I say are more
sumptuous then the Persians, because despising the golden mean, they affect
all extreamities. For either they will be attired in plain cloth and light
stuffes, (always provided that every day without difference their hats be of
Beuer, their shirts and bands of the finest linen, their daggers and swords
gilded, their garters and shoe roses of silk, with gold or silver lace,
their stockings of silk wrought in the seames with silk or gold, and their
cloakes in Summer of silk, in Winter at least all lined with velvet), or else
they daily wear sumptuous doublets and breeches of silk or velvet, or cloth
of gold or silver, so laid over with lace of gold or silk, as the stuffes
(though of themselves rich) can hardly be seen. The English and French have
one peculiar fashion, which I never observed in any other part, namely to wear
scabbards and sheaths of velvet upon their rapiers and daggers: For in France
very Notaries use them in the Cities, and ride upon their footecloaths, or in
Coaches (both hired), and in England men of mean sort use them. In the time of
Queen Elizabeth the Courtiers delighted much in dark colors, both simple and
mixed, and did often wear plain black stuffes; yet that being a brave time of
war, they, together with our Commanders, many times wore light colors,
richly laced and embrodered, but the better sort of Gentlemen then esteemed
simple light colors to be less comely, as red and yellow, only white
excepted, which was then much worn in Court. Now in this time of King James
his Reign, those simple light colors have been much used.

If I should begin to set down the variety of fashions and foreign stuffes
brought into England in these times, I might seem to number the stars of
Heaven and sands of the Sea. I will only add, that the English in great
excess affect the wearing of Jewels and Diamond Rings, scorning to wear
plain gold rings, or chains of gold, the men seldom or never wearing any
chains, and the better sort of women commonly wearing rich chains of pearl,
or else the light chains of France, and all these Jewels must be oriental and
precious, it being disgraceful to wear any that are counterfeit. In like
manner among the better sort of Gentlemen and Merchants, few are sound, who
have not cupbords of silver and gold plate, to the value of two hundred pounds
at the least. And if a feast last longer then one day, they seldom use the
same plate of silver or gilded: yea, not only the great Lords, but the better
sort of Knights and Gentlemen, use to eat in silver dishes. And whereas the
French and Italians use to drink in glasses, and have few vessels, no pots or
boles of silver, and the Germans drink in peuter or stone pots, having little
or no plate; most of the householders in England of any reasonable condition,
drink in silver: yet howsoever the Gentlemen are served with pots and boles of
silver, they rather delight to drink in glasses of Venice, only the common
sort using other kinds of glasses.

In the general pride of England there is no fit difference made of degrees;
for very Bankrouts, Players, and Cutpurses, go apparrelled like Gentlemen.
Many good Laws have been made against this Babylonian confusion, but either
the Merchants buying out the penalty, or the Magistrates not inflicting
punishments, have made the multitude of Laws hitherto unprofitable. Like (...)
is the excess of all ages and sexes, but (God be thanked) not of all
particular orders; for only the Merchants and Students of the Universities,
with great comeliness, and no less neatenesse, are apparrelled in light
stuffes, or silk or cloth of grave colors, and much keep their old fashions,
or at least are not curiously addicted to new. The wives of Merchants, though
little yielding to others in pride or expense, yet have long used, and still
retain a decent attire, with little or no inconstancy in the fashion. They
wear a gown of some light stuff or silk gathered in the back, and girded
to the body with a girdle, and decked with many gardes at the skirt, with which
they wear an apron before them, of some silk or stuff, or fine linen. They
wear upon their heads a coyfe of fine linen, with their hair raised a little
at the forehead, and a cap of silk, or a little hat of beauer, yet without fit
difference of estate or condition, and some wear light French chains and
necklaces of pearl. The grauer sort of Citizens wear gowns and caps, others
wear hats and cloakes, and their prentises cloakes and caps. No Citizens wear
any swords in the City. At public meetings the Aldermen of London wear
Scarlet gowns, and their wives a close gown of skarlet laid with gards of
black velvet.

Husbandmen wear garments of course cloth, made at home, and their wives wear
gowns of the same cloth, kirtles of some light stuff, with linen aprons, and
cover their heads with a linen coyfe, and a high felt hat, and in general
their linen is course, and made at home.

Gentlewomen virgins wear gowns close to the body, and aprons of fine linen,
and go bareheaded, with their hair curiously knotted, and raised at the
forehead, but many against the cold (as they say) wear caps of hair that is
not their own, decking their heads with buttons of gold, pearls, and flowers
of silk, or knots of ribben. They wear fine linen, and commonly falling
bands, and often ruffes, both starched, and chains of pearl about the neck,
with their breasts naked. The grauer sort of married women used to cover their
head with a French-hood of Velvet, set with a border of gold buttons and
pearls: but this fashion is now left, and they most commonly wear a coyfe of
linen, and a little hat of beauer or felt, with their hair somewhat raised at
the forehead. Young married Gentlewomen sometimes go bare headed, as virgins,
decking their hair with Jewels, and silk ribbens, but more commonly they use
the foresaid linen coyfe and hats. All in general, wear gowns hanging loose
at the back, with a Kittle and close vpper-body, of silk or light stuff, but
have lately left the French sleeves borne out with hoopes of whalebone, and the
young married Gentlewomen no less then the Virgins, show their breasts naked.

The servants of Gentlemen were wont to wear blew coats, with their Masters
badge of silver on the left sleeue: but now they most commonly wear clokes
guarded with lace, all the servants of one family wearing the same liuerie for
color and ornament; and for the rest, are apparrelled with no less pride and
inconstancy of fashion then other degrees.

The Husbandmen in Scotland, the servants, and almost al in the Country did
wear course cloth made at home, of gray or sky color, and flat blew caps
very broad. The Merchants in Cities were attired in English or French cloth, of
pale color or mingled black and blew. The Gentlemen did wear English cloth,
or silk, or light stuffes, little or nothing adorned with silk lace, much
less with lace of silver or gold, and all followed at this time the French
fashion, especially in Court. Gentlewomen married did wear close upper bodies,
after the German manner, with large whalebone sleeves after the French manner,
short cloakes like the Germans, French hoods, and large falling bands about
their necks. The unmarried of all sorts did go bareheaded, and wear short
cloakes, with most closelinnen sleeves on their arms, like the Virgins of
Germany. The inferior sort of Citizens wives, and the women of the Country,
did wear cloakes made of a course stuff, of two or three colors in Checker
work, vulgarly called Plodan. To conclude, in general they would not at this
time be attired after the English fashion in any sort, but the men, especially
at Court, follow the French fashion, and the women, both in Court and City, as
well in cloakes, as naked heads, and close sleeves on the arms, and all other
garments, follow the fashion of the women in Germany.

In Ireland the English and the English Irish are attired after the English
manner, Ireland.
for the most part, yet not with such pride and inconstancy, perhaps for want
of means: yet the English Irish forgetting their own Country, are somewhat
infected with the Irish rudeness, and with them are delighted in simple light
colors, as red and yellow. And in like sort the degenerated Citizens are
somewhat infected with the Irish filthiness, as well in lousy beds, foul
sheets, and all linen, as in many other particulars; but as well in diet as
apparel, the Citizens of Dublyn most of all other, and the Citizens of
Waterford and Galloway in some good measure, retain the English cleanliness.
Touching the mere or wild Irish, it may truly be said of them, which of old
was spoken of the Germans, namely, that they wander slouenly and naked, and
lodge in the same house (if it may be called a house,) with their beasts. Among
them the Gentlemen or Lords of Countries, wear close breeches and stockings of
the same piece of cloth, of red or such light color, and a loose coat, and a
cloak or three cornered mantle, commonly of course light stuff made at home,
and their linen is course and slouenly. I say slouenly, because they seldom
put off a shirt till it be worn: And these shirts in our memory before the
last Rebellion, were made of some twenty or thirty else, folded in wrinckles,
and colored with saffron to avoid lowsinesse, incident to the wearing of foul
linen. And let no man wonder, that they are lousy, for never any barbarous
people were found in all kinds more slouenly then they are, and nothing is more
common among them, then for the men to lie upon the women's laps on green hills,
till they kill their lice, with a strange nimblenesse, proper to that Nation.
Their said breeches are so close, as they expose to full view, not only the
noble, but also the shameful parts, yea they stuff their shirts about their
privy parts, to expose them more to the view.

Their wives living among the English, are attired in a sluttish gown, to be
fastened at the breast with a lace, and in a more sluttish mantell, and more
sluttish linen, and their heads be covered after the Turkish manner, with many
else of linen, only the Turkish heads or Tulbents are round in the top: but
the attire of the Irish women's heads, is more flat in the top and broader on
the sides, not much unlike a cheese mot, if it had a hole to put in the head.
For the rest, in the remote parts where the English Laws and manners are
unknown, the very chief of the Irish, as well men as women, go naked in very
Winter time, only having their privy parts covered with a ragge of linen, and
their bodies with a loose mantell, so as it would turn a man's stomach to see
an old woman in the morning before breakefast. This I speak of my own
experience, yet remember that the foresaid Bohemian Barron, coming out of
Scotland to us by the North parts of the wild Irish, told me in great
earnestnes, (when I attended him at the Lord Deputies command,) that he coming
to the house of Ocane a great Lord among them, was met at the door with
sixteen women, all naked excepting their loose mantles; whereof eight or ten
were very fair, and two seemed very Nimphs: with which strange sight his eyes
being dazelled, they led him into the house, and there sitting down by the
fire, with crossed legs like Tailors, and so low as could not but offend
chaste eyes, desired him to set down with them. Soon after Ocane the Lord of
the Country came in all naked excepting a loose mantle, and shoes, which he
put off as soon as he came in, and entertaining the Barron after his best
manner in the Latin tongue, desired him to put off his apparel, which he
thought to be a burden to him, and to sit naked by the fire with this naked
company. But the Barron when he came to himself after some astonishment at
this strange right, professed that he was so inflamed therewith, as for shame
he durst not put off his apparel.

These Rogues in Summer thus naked bear their arms, girding their swords to
them by a with in stead of a girdle. To conclude, men and women, at night going
to sleep, lie thus naked in a round circle about the fire, with their feet
toward it, and as I formerly said, treating of their diet, they fold their
heads and upper parts in their woollen mantles, first steeped in water, to
keep them warm. For they say that woollen cloth wetted, preserues heat, (as
linen wetted preserues cold) when the smoke of their bodies has warmed the
woollen cloth.

CHAP. III. Of the Germans, and Bohemians Commonwealth, under which title I
contain an Historical introduction; the Princes pedegrees, and Courts, the
present state of things, the tributes and reuenews, the military state for
Horse, Foot, and Navy, the Courts of Justice, rare Laws, more specially the
Laws of inheritance, and of women's Dowries, the capital Judgments, and the
diversity of degrees in Family and Commonwealth.
COnstantine the great made Emperor about the year 306, The historocall
introduction.
removed his seat from Rome to Constantinople, and at his death divided the
Empire among his children. And howsoever the Empire was after sometimes united
in the person of one Prince for his reign, yet it could never be again
established in one body, but was most commonly divided into the Eastern and
Western Empires. In the time of Augustulus Emperor of the West, the remote
Countries of the Empire recovered their liberty by the sword, and barbarous
Nations in great armies, invaded the Empire, till they possessed Italy, so as
this Emperor was forced to depose his Imperial dignity about the year 476.
And thus the Western Empire ceased, till Charles the great, King of France,
about the year 774 subdued the Lombards, and was at Rome saluted Emperor of
the West by Pope Leo the third, and the Princes of Italy. From which time the
Empires of the East and West, of old divided by inheritance among brothers and
Kinsmen, had no more any mutual right of succession, but began to be
severally governed. Histories write, that Charles the great, King of France,
was descended of the Germans, and that all Gallia Transalpina (that is beyond
the Alps) and upper Germany, as far as Hungary, were by a common name called
France, only divided into Eastern and Western France. And the diverse Nations
of Germany, formerly governed by their Kings and Dukes, were at this time first
united under this Charles the great. About the year 911. Conrade the first,
Ion to the Duke of Franconia (a large Province of Germany), was first out of
the race of Charles the great saluted Emperor of the West, by the Princes of
Germany, though Charles the Simple, and others of the race of Charles the
great, still reigned France to the year 988, yet with less reputation then
their progenitors had, and troubled with many confusions. Thus Germany dividing
it self from France, drew to it self the Empire of the West, whereof in our
age it retains rather the shadow then the old glory. Four Dukes of Saxony
succeeded Conrade in this Empire, and in the time of Otho the third Duke of
Saxony and Emperor, contrary to the former custom, whereby the Emperors
succeeded by right of blood, or the last testament of the deceased Emperor, or
by the consent of the Princes of Germany, the election of the Emperor was in
the year 984 established hereditary to seven Princes of Germany, called
Electors, by a law made by the Emperor and the Pope. From that time the Empire
has remained in Germany, with free election, yet so as they most commonly
therein respected the right of blood, in which respect the house of Austria
has long continued in the possession of the Empire. And the Emperors of
Germany for many ages, by this right governed Italy, and received their Crown
at Rome, till wearied and worn out by the treacheries of the Popes, and forced
to bear the public burden upon their private revenues, they were made unable
to support their former dignity. For these causes Rodulphus of Habsburg of the
house of Austria chosen Emperor in the year 1273, first laid aside all care
of foreign matters. Then the riches of the Emperors daily decreasing, and
the riches of inferior Princes no less increasing, the Emperors in process
of time, for great sums of money, sold liberty and absolute power to the
Princes and Dukes of Italy and Germany, yea, their very right of inuesting, to
the Princes of Italy.

Most of the Cities in Netherland, and all the Cantons of the Sweitzers, were
of old subject to the German Emperors, till by the dissentions between them
and the Popes, they found means to gain their liberties. Of old nintie six
greater Cities thus made free, still acknowledged the Emperor in some sort:
but after many of them, leagued with the Sweitzers and Netherlanders, quite
forsook the Emperor, many of the rest, and many less Cities, either pawned
to Princes for money borrowed, or given to Princes for their good service to
the Emperors in their wars, became subject to diverse Princes by the Emperors
consent: so as at this day there be only sixty Cities, all seated in Germany,
which are called Free and Imperial Cities, having absolute power within
themselves; and howsoever these in a sort acknowledge the Emperor their chief
Lord, yet they little or not at al fear or respect his weak power.

Hitherto the Roman Bishops, not enduring a superior Lord, first cast the
Emperors of the East out of Italy, and after by all means weakened their
power, till Mahumet the second Emperor of the Turks, about the year 1453,
swallowed that Empire within his foul jaws. Hitherto the said Bishops, that
they might reign alone, sometimes bewitched the barbarous Kings, which had
destroyed the Empire of the West, and then reigned in Italy, for Religions sake
to promote the Church of Rome, and at other times oppressed them with open
treacheries, till they had conferred the Kingdom of Lombardy and the Empire of
the West upon Charles the Great, King of France. Hitherto the same Bishops, for
the same causes, had troubled the Empire of the West with Civil dissentions,
till at last Italy (as I said) having bought liberty of the Emperors, and the
said German Emperors containing themselves at home, (for no Emperor after the
said Rodulphus of Habsburg, but only Lodwick the Bauarian, did ever lead any
Army into Italy), they now thought good to rage no more against this dejected
Empire, but rather to cherrish it, converting themselves wholly to bring all
Christian Kings under their yoke. And now the Turkish Emperors began to
threaten ruin to the German Empire, and in very Germany, the Popes stage,
where they had played their bloody parts, by continual raising of civil
wars, the reformation of Religion began freshly to spring, and to pull the
borrowed plumes of the Popes. Therefore the Emperors from that time to this
our age, have been wholly busied in resisting the Turks, and composing the
domestical differences of Religion.

And from the same time forward, the Court of Rome was continually distracted
with the factions of France and Spain, till the Popes, skillful to use the
ambitious discussions of Princes to their own profit and greatness, made them
all subject to the Roman yoke. And the Kings on the contrary labored nothing
more, then to have the Pope on their party, at whose beck all Christendom was
governed, to which end they gave large bribes to the Cardinals, who had now
assumed to themselves the election of the Popes. To conclude, the Popes to make
their own power transcendent, kept the power of the Princes in equal balance,
by sowing dissentions among them, and favoring now one now the other party,
till for scare of the reformed Religion now also springing in France, they
could no longer keep this equality, but were forced to forsake the Kings of
France distracted with civil wars, and to advance the Kings of Spain, as
protectors of the Church, whose Clients at last got the power to govern all
things in Rome at their pleasure: And the Spaniard at this time distracted
abroad with the French and English wars, and besieged at home with the power
of the Jesuits and religious men, seemed less to be feared by the Romans in
that respect, as likewise the Kings of Spain doubted not to maintain the
awful authority of the Popes, which they knew must always be favorable to
their designs, as well for the protection which they gave to the Roman Church,
against the reformed Religion, as for that the massy gold of Spain, bore so
great sway in the Colleage of the Cardinals, that by strange success, the
Popes less inclined to the Spanish faction, were soon taken away by untimely
death. To omit many other, I will only mention Pope Sixtus Quintus, who lived
happily in that Chair, so long as he favored Spain, but as soon as he was
thought to decline from that faction, and when he saw a white Mule presented
him for the tribute of the Neapolitane Kingdom, was said to weep, that so
little a Mule should be given for so great a Kingdom: he lived not long after,
but suddenly vanished away. At Rome are two Images called Pasquin and
Marphorius, upon which libels use to be fixed: And of late when the Pope by the
mediation of the King of France, had made peace with the Venetians, contrary to
the liking of the King of Spain, a white sheet of paper was fixed on Pasquin,
and another demanding what that paper meant was fixed on Marphorius, and a third
paper was fixed on Pasquin, answering, that the clean paper was for the Pope
to make his last Will and Testament, as if he could not live long, having
offended the Spanish faction. Yet in our age the Kings of France, after the
civil wars appeased, began to recover their former power in the Roman
Court: but I leave these things as somewhat straying from my purpose, and
return to the affairs of Germany.

In the said Family of Austria, the Western Empire has grown old and weak,
The House of Austria.
by little and little from that time to this our age: For howsoever the Emperor
Charles the fifth of the said Family, heir to eight and twenty Kingdoms, in
respect he was borne at Gant in Netherland, and so reputed a German, was
chosen Emperor in the year 1519, by the Electors, rejecting the King of
France Francis the first, as a stranger, and at that time the power of this
Emperor seemed fearful to the Italians, at the first blush: yet the Pope of
Rome in the Triumuirall war of England, France, and Spain, did with such art
support the weaker part, and by contrary motions in one and the same cause, so
favored now one, now the other side, and so dispensed with the breaking of
oaths on the part they took, as while the power of these Kings was weakened by
mutual wars, Italy in the mean time received small or no damage. True it
is, that Charles the fifth by subtle art and open force, had almost subdued
Germany distracted by dissentions of religion, and had almost brought the free
Empire into the form of a subdued Province, till Mauritius Elector of Saxony,
obtained help of the King of France Henry the second, who came with a great
Army to the confines of the Empire, professing himself the Champion of the
Germane liberty. At which time Mauritius besieging Magdeburg with the Emperors
army, received that City into the protection of the Empire and of himself, and
lest he might seem to deal persidiously with the Emperor, if he should
assail him with forces under his own pay, dismissed the whole Army, yet so,
as himself presently entertained in his own pay the greatest part thereof,
willing to serve him: And with these forces he so speedily came to Insprucke,
where the Emperor then lay, as his sudden repair made the Emperor hastily
fly out of the Empire into Italy. Thus Mauritius caused the captive Princes of
the reformed religion to be set at liberty, gave peace to the reformed
religion, and restored liberty to the oppressed Empire: And how soever he
cunningly had advanced himself and his posterity, by the deiection of his own
kinsemen suffering for the reformed religion and for the liberty of the Empire,
yet he repaired the public losses of his Religion, and of his Country. But
they who more iudicially observed the affairs of this age, confess that
nothing has more kept the house of Austria from subduing the West, then those
of the same House. For the foresaid confident proceeding of Mauritius, was
caused by the distrusts and iealousies between Charles the fifth and his
brother Ferdinand, springing from the following cause, namely that Charles the
elder brother, to the end that he might keep the Empire in his own Family, had
caused his brother Ferdinand, at Colen in the year 1531, to be chosen King of
the Romans, (so they call him that is chosen in the Emperors life to succeed
him) hoping that when his son Philip should come to age, his brother for some
increase of his patrimony, would be induced to surrender his right in the
Empire: But Ferdinand at this time having had large offers made him to resign
the same, could not be induced to do that wrong to his children: And because
he suspected that Charles the Emperor might force him thereunto, he is said to
have gladly borne the adverse fortune of his said brother, and all troubles
rising against him, yea, (if men of experience may be believed) to have
himself encouraged Mauritius to the foresaid attempt. Therefore Charles
failing of his hope, and for age and weariness of the World, retiring himself
to a private life in a Monastery of Spain, in the year 1558, his brother
Ferdinand took possession of the Empire, which remains to this day in his
posterity, the Electors always using to respect the right of blood, in
choosing the new Emperor. And under their poor estate and unwarlike minds,
the Empire at this day languisheth like a spark lapped in ashes: And the Popes
held for Gods upon earth, have no more feared the Emperors authority, but
rather supported it against the reformed religion, and the invasions of the
Turks, the Emperors always acknowledging this unprofitable servant of their
Progenitors for their Benefactor and spiritual Father. The Emperor Rodolphus
at this time living, is of the House of Austria, whose pedigree I will set
down. The first Family of the House of Austria gave many Emperors The Empe
rours pedigree.
to Germany, but that was extinguished in Conradine the son of Frederick,
few years before Rodolphus of Habspurg, came to the Empire, who is the root
of this second Family of Austria.

Rodulphus of Habsburg, of the House of Austria, was chosen Emperor in the
year 1273.
Albert the first, Heir of the Dukedomes of Austria, Stiria, and Carniola,
(after his Father had subdued the Kingdom of Bohemia, and joined it to the
Empire), was chosen Emperor, and dyed in the year 1308. Rodulphus Duke of
Austria died in the year 1308. Frederick made Duke of Suenia and Morania by
the Emperors gift, dyed in the year 1330. Leopold Duke of Austria. Albert the
second, Count of Tyroll by the Marriage of his Son to the Niece of the King
of Bohemia, died in the year 1359. Albert the third, Duke of Austria, died in
the year 1395. Albert the fifth, Emperor, and by marriage of the Daughter of
the Emperor Sigismond, made King of Hungaria and of Bohemia, died in the year
1439. Frederick the third, Emperor died in the year 1493. Maximilian the
first, Emperor, after the death of Mathias King of Hungary, recovered that
Kingdom, which he had usurped, then retaining to himself the right of
succession yielded it to Ladrslaus, and marrying the daughter of Charles Duke
of Burgundy made that Dukedom, and all the Provinces of Netherland hereditary
to the House of Austria. He died in the year 1519. Philip marrying the
Daughter of Ferdinand King of Spain, became Heir to those Kingdoms, and died
young before his Father, in the year 1506. Charles the fifth, Emperor, died in
the year 1558. By his Wife Isabella, daughter to the King of Portugal.
Philip, King of Spain. This is the first Family of the Archdukes of Austria,
to this day reigning in Spain.
Philip King of Spain, borne of Anne of Austria in the year 1578. Two
sisters, Catherin-borne of Isabella of Valoss, wife to the Duke of Sanoy; and
Isabella Clara Eugenia wife to Archduke Albert, and borne of Anne of Austria.
By Anne of Austria. James died of nine years of age. Ferdinand died a child.
Charles Dentatus, by Marie of Portugal, by his Fathers permission, put to
death by the Inquisition anno, 1568.
Ferdinand died an Infant. Two Sisters, Mary, wife to the Emperor Maximilian
the second; and Ione, wife to the King of Fortugall.
By Ione his concubine Don Iuan, Victor of the Turks in naual fight, dying an.
1578. Ione, wife to the Duke of Florence; Marie, wife to the Duke of Parma.

Four Daughters, Elinora married to Francis the first, King of France, died
ann. 1558. Isabel, wife to the King of Denmark, died ann. 1525. Mary, wife to
the King of Hungary, and after governing Netherland, died ann. 1558. Catherine,
wife to the King of Portingall. Ferdinand Emperor after the unhappy death of
Lodonicus King of Hungary, in a battle against the Turks, in the year 1526,
by the right of his wife, sister and heir to (...), and the said contract made
by Maximilian I, Emperor, was crowned King of Hungary, and also by his said
wives right K. of Bohemia, and died anno 1564. Maximilian the second, Emperor,
married to Mary, sister to Philip King of Spain, died anno 1576. This is the
second Family of the Archdukes of Austria, to this day succeeding in the
Empire of Germany.
Ferdinand died a child in the year 1552. Rodulp. 2 of that name, and the
eighth Emperor of this Family, chosen King of the Romans, 1575, Emperor 1576.
succeeding King of Hungary, 1572, King of Bohemia 1575. He was at this time
Emperor, and lived unmarried. 3. Son Ernestus governed Netherland, and died
unmarried. 4. Matthew, unmarried. 5. Maximilian, unmarried. 6. Albert
surrendered his Cardinals Hat, married Isabel daughter to the K. of Spain, and
gouernes Netherland, but has no children. 7. Wencestaus. 8. Frederick. 9.
Carolus, al three died young. Four sisters, Anna, married to the King of
Spain, anno 1563, died anno 1580. Elizabeth married to Charles the 9, King of
France, anno 1570. Mary and Margaret died young.
Five sisters, Elizabeth married to the King of Poland, died an. 1545. Anne
wife to the Duke of Bauaria; Marie wife to the Duke of Cleue. Magdalen
unmarried, and Catherine wife to the Duke of Mantua, and after to the King of
Poland. Ferdinand of Ispruck, so called of that City, wherein he holds his
Court. He married the daughter of the Duke of Mantua, by whom he had some
daughters, but no heir male. But by a Citizens daughter of Augsburg his wife,
he had two sons. This is the third Family of the Archdukes, called of
Ispruch, the City wherein they live.
Charles Marquis of Burgh. Andrew a Cardinal.
John died a child. Six sisters, Leonora, wife to the Duke of Mantua.
Barbara, wife the Duke of Feraria. Margareta, Vrsula, Helena, and Ioanna.
Charles of Gratz, so called of that City where he held his Court. He is the
fourth son of the Emperor Ferdinand by Marie, the daughter of the Duke of
Bauaria. He begat twelve children, and dying in the year 1519, left two
sons, besides diverse daughters. This is the fourth Family of the Archdukes
of Austria, called Zu Gratz, of that City wherein they hold their Court.
Ferdinand zu Gratz. Carolus Posthumus.


Margeret governed Netherland and died in the year 1530.



Leopold the second, Duke of Austria, died in the year 1386. Frederick
proscribed in the Counsel at Constantia, died in the year 1440. Sigismond
dyed in the year 1497.
Ernestus of Iron, died in the year 1435. Ladislaus Posthumus, King of Bohemia
(under George Pochibraccius his Tutor), and King of Hungary, (under John
Huniades Tutorage) died in the year 1457.



Thus I have showed, that besides the branch of the House of Austria now
reigning The house of Austria.
in Spain, there remain three branches thereof in Germany, the first of the
Emperor Rodolphus and his brethren Ernestus (dying in his life time) Mathias
and Maximilianus and Albertus, Whereof four lived unmarried, the fifth named
Albertus has long been married, but has no child. The second branch is that
of Ferdinand of Ispruch, waa married Philippina the daughter of a Citizen in
Augsburg, whereupon his kinsmen difdaining that her ignoble Issue should
enherit with them, forced him to agree, that the County of Tyroll should not
descend upon his son, whereupon his eldest son by her named Charles,
possesses only the City and territory of Burgh, (which was in his Fathers
power to give) with title of the Marquess of Burgh, and the said County at the
Fathers death fell back to the Emperor. His second son Andrew Cardinal of
Brixia, besides the spiritual possessions of that County, has also the
Bishopric of Costnetz in Sueuia: But Ferdinand, of his second wife daughter
to the Duke of Mantua, had some daughters, but no heir male. The third branch
is of Charles of Gratz, who besides his heirs males, left eight daughters,
whereof one is now married to Sigismund King of Poland by election, and of
Suecia by inheritance, the second to the Prince of Transiluania, the third to
Philip King of Spain.

The Emperor by right of his own inheritance, (not of the Empire) is Lord of
many and large Provinces, namely, King of Hungary, King of Bohemia, with the
annexed The Emperors Dominions.
most fertile Provinces, of Morauia, Silesia, and Lusatia. Also toward the
Alps he has by Inheritance many large Provinces, gotten by his Progenitors,
(as appears by his Pedigree), namely, the Arch-Dukedome of Austria, the
Provinces of Styria, Carinthia, Carmola, Tyroll, and other large territories in
Sueuia and Alsatia, besides great jurisdictions among the Sweitzers called the
Grysons.

Ferdinand the Emperor, brother to the Emperor Charles the fifth, married the
sister Bohemia.
and heir of Lodouicus King of Hungary and Bohemia, and after the unhappy
death of Lodouicus, killed in the field by the Turks, in the year 1526, was
chosen King of Bohemia, which Kingdom with the Empire, descended to his
heirs. And this Kingdom is exempted from the Parliaments and Contributions of
Germany, by a privilege granted by Charles the fourth Emperor, and King of
Bohemia, of whom the Germans complain, as more respecting Bohemia then the
Empire. In which point he is less to be taxed, because howsoever that Kingdom
freely elects their Kings, yet the heir is therein always respected before
any other, and being an Infant, yet is commonly chosen King, with a Tutor for
his Nonage. The three States of Barrons, Knights, and Citizens, choose the King;
but Ferdinand the Emperor in his life time, caused his son Maximilian to be
chosen King. In like manner this Emperor Rodolphus was chosen King of Bohemia,
and also King of Hungaria, while his Father lived: And howsoever he being
unmarried, has less care of his Successor, yet custom and the public good
have such force, as Bohemia seems hereditary to the House of Austria, either
for fear of so great a Family bordering upon the Kingdom, or because they
justly triumph to have the Emperors sent at Prage, the cuecfe City of
Bohemia, especially since no Prince out of that Family is able to bear the
burden of the Empire, if they observe the Law, binding the Electors to choose
an Emperor among the Princes borne in Germany. As the said three States choose
the King, so they choose a Viceroy for life, to govern the Kingdom at the
Kings death, and to be one of the Electors as King of Bohemia, at the choice of
the Emperor, dead in the same person. Yet commonly before this time, wherein
the unmarried Emperor neglects the succession, the Germans were wont while the
Emperor lived, to choose his successor, entitled King of the Romans: At this
time the Baron of Rosenburg was Viceroy of Bohemia for life, who held his Court
near Lintz upon the confines of Austria, and was said to have the keeping of
the Kings Crown, in a Castle called Carlstein.

Touching Hungary, it had the name of the people called the Hunns, who under
Hungary.
their King Geysa, received the Christian Religion: his son Stephen was
chosen King in the year 1002, from whom in order many Kings have been chosen,
so as due respect was always had of the eldest sons to the deceased, who
sometimes refused, did stir up civil wars. King Andrew about the year
1230, first gave great privileges to the Nobility, which their Kings to this
day have used to confirm, as soon as they were elected. King Vladislaus in
the year 1490, first joined the Kingdoms of Bohemia and Hungary together,
whose son Lodouicus perished in the unhappy battle against the Turks in the
year 1526: At which time Ferdinand of the House of Austria, brother to the
Emperor Charles the fifth, and successor to him in the Empire, was chosen King
of Hungary, as well by the covenant which the Emperor Maximilian the first
made with Mathias Huniades, as by the right of his wife, being sister and heir
to the said Lodouicus, and he caused his son Maximilian the second, to be
chosen King in his life time, as his son Rodolphus at this time Emperor, was
chosen King' while his Father lived: and under them, through civil
dissentions, and the fearful neighborhood of the great Turk, great part of
this Kingdom has been subdued by that Tyrant, and for the rest, the Emperor
Rodolphus, to the great reproach of the Empire, was forced to send yearly
tribute to Constantinople, till the free Cities of Germany slacking to pay this
tribute, the Great Turk took that wished occasion to make war against the
Christians, and finding none weaker to resist him then the Emperor, has in
our age horribly wasted Hungary, and subdued the greatest part of that
Kingdom. The said tribute was said to be seven tons of gold each three
years, as I have heard by grave and learned men, but I know not how conversant
in matters of State.

Rodolphus the Emperor was of a middle stature, somewhat corpulent, with a
ruddy The Emperor and his Court.
but sower countenance, a short thick beard, and brown colored hair: At
that time mourning for his dead sister, he wore black garments of small price:
He was said to love solitariness, and to exercise the Arts of Alchumy and
Painting. He was most easy of access, and very affable, so as every man
spoke to him with small reverence, and in the Chamber of Presence the Courtiers
and strangers gave no reverence to the Chair of Estate, the Sword, and the
Scepter, but stood by with their heads covered, yea, laid their hands or leaned
upon the cushion, without any ceremony of reverence. He was esteemed sparing of
speech, and liberal in his nature, so as he rewarded his Courtiers honorably,
though slowly, for want of money, which made him not able to show any
magnificence. Nothing was more common in every man's mouth, as well German as
Bohemian, then that he was much addicted to the warfare of Venus, bearing in
his body strange scarres and privy maimes thereof, but abhorred from the war
of Mars.

At Vienna I did see Ernestus and Mathias, brothers to the Emperor, eating at
one Table together, for they admit all subjects and strangers to come into the
room where they eat, at the times of dinner and supper. Before the Archdukes
came in, all stood with their heads covered: Then the Caruer making himself
ready to serve at the Table, laid his hat upon the Chair of Estate, contrary
to our English manner, who give reverence to that Chair, though our Princes be
absent. When the Archdukes sat down at Table, all the standers by bended
their knees: They both sat on one side, with their backs to the wall, and each
had a Fool to stand by him, one at the Tables end, another on the opposite
side, to whom with their own hands they gave largely to eat, which they
greedily devoured. The two Archdukes did both together feed on spoonemeates:
For other dishes liking either of them, each called for them by a beck or
dumb sign, and so refused other: but if any one dish liked them both, it was
first set before Ernestus, and after before Mathias. Both had one taster, but
each had his Cupbearer. They spoke not a word one to the other, or to any
attending, and Ernestus did swallow his drink, Mathias did sip it. Ernestus
was somewhat like the Emperor his brother, save that his hair was blacker,
and his countenance more warlike. Mathias was very slender with a more
effeminate face, and a thin or no beard, and whitish hair: Their apparel
was nothing less then sumptuous. These brothers of the Emperor, had no
possessions of inheritance allotted unto them, but were content to have their
expenses borne by the Emperor.

Many Pensioners lived in the Emperors Court, but few had diet and lodging
therein. The Emperor had one hundred Hascheres, to whom he gave for diet to
each twelve Rhenish Guldens by the month, and for apparel to each four and
twenty Guldens by the year. He had one hundred for his Guard, (called
Trabantoes), of which each one had eight Guldens by the month for his diet,
and if any one of them had served ten years, to him the Emperor used to give a
pension above his wages, granted for life, and to dispose them in Monasteries
when they grew old and unfit for service. Ten Hascheres and twelve Trabantoes
attended each day, and watched the night in the Court, who for that time had at
the Emperors charge plenty of bread and wine. Many Gentlemen had pensions to
keep Horses, to the number of some 1500, and for each Horse they were allowed
ten guldens by the month: but these stipends being paid but once in two
years, and then not fully, they kept not these Horses at all times in full
number, but only when they heard that the payment was like to be made, and
because they were so paid, the officers never mustred them but at that time.
Some few had diet and lodging in the Court, as 6 Gentlemen of the Chamber,
whereof each had a pension of forty Guldens by the month, and six under them,
who had twenty Guldens by the month. Likewise sixty Truxes, who had each a
Pension of thirty Guldens, and sixty Horsemen called Hofdiener (that is,
Servants at Court), who were allowed for each horse (as I formetly said) ten
Rhenish Guldens by the month, and no man had allowance for more then three
horses. Likewise a Master of the Wardrobe had twenty Guldens, and a Controler
had the like pension. Sixteen Boys, the sons of Gentlemen were Pages to the
Emperor, to whom he gave apparel and diet in the Court. The very chief
Counselors had yearly pensions from the Emperor. He had three Favorites, a
Bohemian Barron of the Popells, the Lord of Firstemburg a German, and Rumpf a
Gentleman of Ausirta, who was in chief grace with him, and was said to have a
pension of five hundred Dollors by the month, and to have received by gift in
the space of one year eighty thousand gold Guldens. The wages and pensions
were very uncertainly paid, so as the Courtiers used diligently to observe,
when the reuenew of any Province was brought in, that by such opportunity they
might get part of the money due to them. But when the Emperors cofers were
full, these paiments were easily obtained, so as I have known forty thousand
Dollers distributed for wages, and Pensions at one time. The Emperor had five
stables, and in one sixty heavy horses of Germany, in the second twenty
Spanish Genets, and in the other three 60 foreign horses of the best races.

From Charles the Great the Western Emperors were either appointed by the
dying The (...) rors Election.
Emperors Testament, or chosen by the general consent of the Princes, in both
which courses the next heirs were commonly preferred, till the reign of Otho
3. in his time his Kinsman Brenno a Saxon was chosen Pope, taking the name of
Gregory, and he first instituted the seven Electors of the Emperor, which
institution some attribute to Pope Silnester. But whether Gregory made this
Law or confirmed it, no doubt about the year 1002 the Electors were
established, about which time many tumults were at Rome between the Emperors
and the Roman Prince Crescentius, for the choice of the Pope, and the common
opinion is, that Pope Gregory in the year 997 made this Law of seven Electors
to choose the Emperor, and that Pope Siluester restrained it to certain
Families. And this Institution seemed to give great strength to the Empire,
since the former seditions were thereby taken away, and it was likely these
Princes would choose a man of the greatest virtues and power. But Charles the
fourth chosen Emperor, with condition not to meddle with Italy, first obtained
of the Electors to choose his son to be Caesar in his life time, and so made
this Institution of no effect, all Emp. after him chiefly laboring as much as
they could, to make the Empire hereditary by like means. And the successor
thus chosen in the life of the Emp. was called King of the Romans, and after
his death receiving the Crown, was styled Emp.

Of the Electors, 3 are Churchmon and Archbishops, 3 are Lay-Princes of
Germany, and least by faction of six Churchmen and Laymen the voices should be
equal, the The institution of the Electors, and diverse constitutions of the
Empire, concerning the Electors and other Officers, and the Emperor himself.
King of Bohemia was added for the seventh Elector. The Archbishop of Trier,
Chauncellor for France, sits before the Emperor. The Archbishop of Mentz
Chansellor sor Germany, sits at the Emperors right hand, in all places but in
the Diocese of Colon, where he gives place to the Archbishop thereof. The
Archbishop of Colon Chancellor for Italy, sits on the Emperors right hand in his
own dioces, but on his left hand in all other places. The K. of Bohemia
Arch-butler of the Empire, sits next the Archbishop of Mentz, on the right hand
of the Emperor. The D. of Saxony, the Marshal of the Empire, carrying the sword
before the Emperor, sits on his left hand next the Archbishop of Colon. The
Count Palatine of the Rheine carries the first dish at the feast of the Emp.
coronation, and sits on his right hand next the K. of Bohemia. And the
Marquisse of Brandeburg Great Chamberlain, sits on the left hand of the Emp.
next to the D. of Saxony. It is to be remembered, that for long time, the
Emperor having been also King of Bohemia, to the end that upon the death of the
old Emperor, there should not be wanting one to supply the place of the King
of Bohemia at the Election of the new Emperor, the Bohemians have always a
Viceroy chosen for life, who not only supplies that place, but also gouernes
Bohemia, till the new Emperor be chosen, and after received for King at Prage.

The Emperor Charles the fourth, made many Laws concerning the Emperor, and
the Electors, which Laws are all collected together, and by the Germans called
the Golden Bulla, and it will not be impertinent to remember some of them. It
is decreed, that no Elector shall lie in ambushment for another Elector,
coming to choose the Emperor, neither shall deny him safe conduct through his
Country, under the pain of perjury, and loss of his Voice for that Election.
Under the same penalty, that no man whosoever, lie in wait to intercept the
person or goods of any Elector: That the Archbishop of Meuts shall apdoint the
day of the Election by letters Pattents, so as the Electors, or their Deputies
having full power, may meet for that purpose at Franckfort upon the Meyne,
within three months, and if the Archbishop fail to appoint the day, yet that
the Electors uncalled, shall meet there within that time. That no Elector nor
Depute shall enter the City attended with more then two hundred horsemen, nor
above fifty of them armed. That the Elector or Deputy called, and not coming,
or departing before the Emperor be chosen, shall loose his Voice for that
time. That the Citizens of Franckfort, if they protect not those that come to
the Election, shall be proscribed and deprived of their privileges and goods.
That no man be admitted into the City, besides the Electors and their
Deputies, and the horsemen attending them. That the next morning early after
their entry, Mass be sung in the Church of Saint Bartholmew, and that done,
the Archbishop of Mentz at the Altar give an oath to the Electors in these
words: I N. N. swear by the faith that I owe to God and the sacred Empire,
that I will choose a temporal Head of Christian Princes, and give my Voice
without any covenant, stipend, reward, or any such thing howsoever it may be
called, as God help me, etc. That if they shall not agree of the Election
within thirty days, they shall eat bread and water, and shall not go out of
the City, till the Election be finished. That the greater part be held for a
general (...) consent. That the Elector slacking his coming, shall
notwithstanding be admitted, he come before the Election be finished. That the
person elected shall presently swear in the royal name of King of the Romans,
to the Electors, Princes Secular and Spiritual, and to all the Members of the
Empire, that he will confirm all privileges, customs, etc.; and that after
his Coronation he shall swear the same in the name of Emperor. That an
Elector shall have his Voice in the choice of himself to be Emperor. That the
Archbishop of Mentz shall ask the Voices, first, of the Archbishop of Trier,
then of the Archbishop of Colon, then of the King of Bohemia, then of the
Palatine, then of the Duke of Saxony, then of the Marquis of Brandeburg, and
lastly that these Princes shall ask the Voice of the Archbishop of Mentz.
That the Empire being vacant, the Count Palatine shall be Prouisor of the
Empire in Sueuia and Franconia, as well in Judgments, as in conferring
Church-liuings, gathering of Rents, inuesting of Vassals (which inuesting
notwithstanding is to be renewed by the Emperor when he is chosen), and
Alienations, etc. That the Duke of Saxony shall have the same right in his
Provinces. That when the Emperor must answer any cause he shall answer before
the Palatine, so that be in the Imperial Court. That no man in the Court shall
sit above the Electors. That to a Secular Prince Elector his eldest Lay son
shall succeed, or for want of sons, the first of the fathers Line; and if he be
under age, that the eldest brother to the deceased father shall be his tutor,
till he be eighteen years old, and that this Tutor for that time shall have
all his right, which he shall then restore to him, and for want of heirs
males, that the Emperor shall give the Electorship to whom he will, excepting
the King of Bohemia, who is to be chosen by the Bohemians. That mines of
metals found in the Territories of any Elector, shall be proper to himself.
That the subjects of the Electors shall not be bound to answer the Law out of
their own Province, nor may appeal to any Court but their Lords, except
Justice be denied, in which case they shall only appeal to the Chamber of
the Empire. That the Electors shall meet in some City once in the year,
where they shall have no feasting, to the end that the causes may be heard with
more expedition. That the privileges of Cities and Universities in any thing
derogating from the right of the Electors, shall be revoked, and made void,
notwithstanding the Letters Pattents may except all eminency of persons. That
the resignation of fees, except they be personally made, shall make the vassals
infamous in denouncing enmity to their Lords. That conuenticles of Cities, made
to the prejudice of their Lords, shall be punished with loss of fame, goods,
and privileges. That no Citizens subjects to Princes, and incorporating
themselves in free Cities, shall enjoy the privileges thereof, except they
dwell there, under a great penalty to be imposed on the City receiving them
with any other condition. That the Fees of the Electors or Officers of the
Empire, shall not be divided by their heirs. That they who conspire the death
of any Elector, shall be guilty of treason, and their sons deprived of their
Inheritance even from the mothers side, shall live infamous, and they shall be
noted who make intercession to restore them to grace; but that the Daughters
less daring for the weakness of the sex, shall have part of the
inheritance, and that no enfranchisement of sons, or alienation of goods,
shall frustrate this Law. That all accessaries shall be so punished, only he
that bewrayes the conspiracy may be held worthy of pardon. Also this penalty
shall be of force against those that are dead, if the crime be not known till
after their death.

In solemn Court, that the Emperor shall sit in his throne, and the Duke of
Saxony At Coronation and like Feasts.
laying an heap of Oats as high as his Horses saddle, before the Court gate,
shall with a silver measure of twelve marks price, deliver Oats to the chief
Quirry of the stable, and then sticking his staff in the Oats, shall depart,
and the Vice-Marshall shall distribute the rest of the Oats. That the three
Archbishops shall say grace at the Emperors Table, and he of them who is
Chancellor of the place, shall lay reverently the Seals before the Emperor,
which the Emperor shall restore to him, and that the staff of the Chancelorship
shall be worth 12 marks of silver. That the Marquis of Brandeburg, sitting upon
his Horse with a silver basen of 12 marks weight, and a towel, shall light from
his Horse, and give water to the Emperor. That the Count Palatine sitting upon
his Horse, with four dishes of Silver with meat, each dish worth 3 marks,
shall light, and set the dishes on the table. That the King of Bohemia sitting
upon his Horse, with a silver Cup worth twelve marks, filled with water and
wine, shall light, and give it the Emperor to drink. The Gentleman of
Falkenstein, vnder-Chamberlaine, the Gentleman of Norsemberg, Master of the
Kitchen, and the Gentleman of Limburch Vice-Buttler, or in their absence, the
ordinary Officers of the Court, shall have the said Horses, Basin, dishes, Cup,
Staff, and measure, and shall after wait at the Emperors table. That the
Emperors table be six foot higher then any other table, where he shall sit
alone, and the table of the Empress shall be by his side, three foot lower.
The Electors tables shall be three foot lower then that of the Empress, and
all of equal height, and three of them shall be on the Emperors right hand,
three on his left hand, and one before his face, and each shall sit alone at his
table. When one Elector has done his Office, he shall go and stand at his
own table, and so in order the rest, till all have performed their Offices,
and then all seven shall sit down at one time. The Emperor shall be chosen at
Franckfort, crowned at Aquisgranum (vulgarly called Ach), and shall hold his
first Court at Nurnberg, except there be some lawful impediment. The Deputy of
an Elector absent, howsoever he has his voice in choosing the Emperor, yet at
the said feast shall not sit at the Electors table. Princes receiving their
fees, shall pay sixty marks to the Officers of the Court, excepting the
Electors, who are not bound to give any thing, but of free will, since the
Officers are their Substitutes, and the Horse upon which the Prince sits when
he is invested in his fees, shall be given to the Marshall, or to the
Vice-Marshall. The Electors are presumed to be Germans, and their sons at
the age of seven years shall be taught the Grammar, and the Italian and
Selauonian tongues, so as at 14 years age they may be skillful therein, and be
worthy Assessors to the Emperor. These things for this purpose, taken out of
the Golden Bulla, shall suffice.

Touching the present general estate of the Empire. The Emperor and his
brethren The general date of the Empire.
were not much esteemed among their own subjects, and had little or no
authority in the rest of the Empire. The Germans confess, that the House of
Austria is most fit to bear the burden of the Empire, especially since no
stranger may be Emperor, the Law binding to choose a Prince borne in Germany;
and because the Empire has no principality belonging to it, nor any certain
revenues, but only some accustomed Subsidies, which upon some occasions were
of old granted by Parliament, and these occasions being taken away, the
subsidies for them have also in latter times been discontinued, so that the
common affairs are to be administered with the charge of the Emperors private
inheritance. And lastly, because they justly fear, if any other Prince of
Germany should be chosen Emperor, that the House of Austria, having in a long
line succeeded in the Empire, and possessing large Dominions by inheritance,
would either altogether separate it self from the Empire, or at least their
inheritance in Hungary, Germany, and Bohemia, through mutual dissentions
between them and the Emperor, would be a prey to the Turkish Tyrant, only
kept back by the House of Austria, according to the weak means it has, from
inuading Germany at this day: But when the Germans do particularly observe the
persons of the Princes of the House of Austria, they judge again none more
unfit to bear up the Empire, and to defend it from the Turks invasions; and
this common diffidence is infinitely increased, by the mutual iealousies of
Germany. There want not iealousies in the House of Austria between themselves,
were they not forced to compound them by fear of the Turks. In general, the
Gentlemen fear the conspiracy of the common people, lest after the example of
the Sweitzers, they should root out the Gentry, or at least yield either none
or voluntary obedience, at their own pleasure. The Princes fear the free
Cities, so as they dare not exact absolute obedience of the Cities subject to
them, least they should thereby be provoked, to make leagues with the free
Cities, and so make themselves free: And this cause alone makes the Princes
less able to give strong helps to the Emperor, if they were willing to do
it. Again, the free Cities fear the ambition of the neighboring Princes: For
as most of the Cities of old subject to the Emperor, or to particular Princes,
got their freedom in civil wars, by assisting one of the parties, or else
by privileges, granted by favor, or bought for money, or else by open force
of arms, so they think it likely, that the Princes, upon the change of the
state of things, will omit no fit occasion to bring them again into
subjection. And the said Princes do not only fear the said free Cities, for
combyning with their Subjects, but have also mutual iealousies among
themselves, as well for inheritance, as for the difference of Religion. Lastly
all, and each of these states, fear the power of the Emperor, least he
should break the absolute power they have in their own territories, or least
he should by force of arms make them more obedient to himself, or least he
should oppress them in the cause of Religion, either of his own motion, or by
the instigation of the Pope. Hence it is, that he who dares not make war
upon the Emperor, yet dares deny to help him, and he that dares not deny
help, yet dares either fail in performance, or by delays make it
unprofitable. Besides that by nature, the decrees and counsels of many heads,
are carried with less secrecy, and are seldom executed with convenient speed,
and that for which many care, each one neglects, as Piato faith, disputing
against community. Also the Emperors power is many other ways weakened: First
that the Germans in the very war against the Turks, slowly grant, or
plainly refuse any contributions or subsidies, and would little rejoice that
the Emperor should have a great victory against the Turks, partly least he
should turn his Forces upon the absolute Princes or Cities of Germany, partly
least the Emperor then being (as they openly professed) should spend the money
contributed in his private lusts, not in the public affairs, and lastly,
because the charge of the War should be common, but the profit of the
Conquest should only be to the advancement of the House of Austria: For which
causes the Princes and Cities used to deny contributions of money toward the
Turkish wars, and rather chose to send and maintain bands of Soldiers in
Hungary, under their own pay for a set time: And these bands were so commonly
sent without order or mutual consent, and so slowly, as when some of the bands
came to the Army, other bands having served out the appointed time, desired
leave to return home. Thus they seldom met together to attempt any brave
enterprise, and while part of the forces was expected, the occasions of good
adventures were lost: Secondly, the Emperor is more weak; because the
meetings of Parliaments (which they call Dytetaes) require the expectance of
some months, besides the delays of Counsels after the meeting, and the
contrariecy of opinions, which must needs be great in minds so ill united.
Thirdly; because the Germans unwisely think, that the tyranny of the Turks
hanging over them, yet is a less and more removed evil, then the jealousy of
their private estates, and fear to be oppressed in the cause of Religion.
Lastly, because the Germans think it not equal, to be at public charge, to
recover the private Cities of the House of Austria from the Turks. These
things make the great power of Germany so weak, that as the whole body pined
away, while the hands denied meat to the belly, so not only the Empire, to
the general shame of Christians, draws the last breath under the Turkish
tyranny, while the disagreeing and sluggish Christian Princes deny help in
this case to the House of Austria, and oppose the weaker branch of that House
to the most powerful force of the Turks; but also it may justly be feared
lest other Kingdoms and the very name of Christians, should be utterly
consumed in this fire daily creeping and increasing upon us, which God in his
mercy forbid.

Next to the said vassals to the Emperor, a King, a Palatine, a Duke, a
Marquess, The state of certain Princes.
and three Archbishops, the seven Electors, of old were instituted four Dukes
of the Empire, namely, the Dukes of Bauaria, of Brunswicke, of Sueuia and of
Lorayne, and four Langraues, and of each degree four, whereof some are at
this day extinguished, and many other have since been created by diverse
Emperors. In like sort of old were instituted four Metropolitan Cities of the
Empire, namely, Augsburg, (called of the Vandals for difference), Aquisgranum
(vulgarly Ach), Mentz, and Lubecke. Of Cities.
Bishops sprirituall Princes were of old twenty seven in number, whereof some
Of Bishops.
have secular Dominions, only by habit distinguished from secular Princes:
but the Churchmen knowing no mean, not content with tithes, but scarce leaving
that portion to the Laymen, have caused Princes first to make Laws against
inordinate guists to the Church, and then by other vanities provoked them to
reform this abundance of their riches, the impurity of their lives, and the
falsehoods of their Doctrines; so as at this day many Bishoprics are in the
hands of secular Princes, within their own Dominions, under the title of
Administrators. In this sort (to pass over the rest) the eldest son of the
Marquess of Brandeburg, was in his Fathers life time called the Administrator
of Halla. Not only the Emperor, but also many Of secular Princes.
Princes of Germany, as well secular as spiritual, have Kingly power in their
own Dominions, and these absolute Princes are so many in number, as a
passenger in each days journey, shall observe one or two changes of Prince,
Money, and Religion. Furthermore in free Cities, here the Patritian Order,
there the common people, and Of free Cities.
other where both with mixed power, govern the City, in such absolute
freedom, as most of the Cities have regal rights, of making peace or war,
of coining Moneys, and of like privileges: But the Plebeans among them, prove
they never so rich, cannot have any higher degree, and their gouernements are
with such equity, equality, and moderation, as no degree is subject one to the
other, but all equally to the Law. Of these Princes secular and spiritual, and
of the Deputies for free Cities, meeting in Of the Dietaes.
Parliaments (which they call Ditetaes) is the true Image of the Empire, where
they deliberate of great affairs, and impose contributions, from which only
the King of Bohemia is free, by privilege granted from Charles the fourth
Emperor and King of Bohemia, as I have formerly said.

The form of the Commonwealth in the Empire is Aristocraticall, over which the
Of the Empires Commonwealth in general.
Emperor should be as head, appointing the meetings with the consent of the
Princes, and causing the Decrees to be put in execution. But at this day the
name of the Emperor is become a mere title, and his authority has no
sinews, so as he can neither call them if they think not good to come, nor
decree any thing if they be unwilling, nor compel those that are refractory.
And the very Princes are not constant to their own judgment, if you respect
the iminent dangers from the Turks, nor active in their own motions concerning
the public cause, but are diversely distracted between fear to increase the
suspected power of the Emperor by helping him, or to stir up Civil wars,
to the ruin of the dis-vnited State, by making open opposition to his
authority. In the mean time nothing is more frequent with them, then boldly to
refuse either appearance in the Emperors Court, or obedience to any other of
his commandments, that are unpleasing to them. And give me leave to say, that
my self there observed, that a great Prince of Germany (for good respect
namelesse), to whom the Emperor had engaged certain Cities for money borrowed
of him, when the Emperor lending the money by Ambassadors, desired restitution
of the towns, not only refused to restore the same, but could not be induced
to appear at Prage by his Substitute, to compound this difference; and it
seemed more strange to me, that diverse other Ambassadors coming to the City
the same time, had all audience before those from the Emperor, who staid long
before they were admitted to speak with the said Prince.

The declining generositie of the Princes of Austria, and the fearful danger
hanging over them from the Turks, nourish this confidence in the Princes of
Germany; and indeed the Turkish war does so employ, or rather bind the hands
of the Princes of Austria, as were they never so valiant, yet they should be
forced, rather to suffer any thing from these Christian Princes, then by
opposing them, to be devoured by Infidels. Neither can the private calamity of
Germany, and the public misery of all Christians in this point, be
sufficiently bewailed. I say the private calamitic of Germany, because the
members being most strong, if they were united, yet are without sinews thus
disioyned, and have no common force, though in each part they be strong. I say
the public calamity of Christians, because howsoever the private Princes of
Germany be of great power, yet the whole body of the Empire being weak, the
daily victories of the Turks, threaten destruction not only to Germany, but
to the name of Christians. The Dukes of Florence, of Sauoy, and of Mantua, and
all the Princes of Italy, whom the Pope has not drawn to be his vassals, the
Dukes of Lorayne, of Burgundy, with diverse Dukes and Earls of Netherland,
after a sort acknowledge the safe and far removed patronage of the Emperor;
but they neither come to the Parlaments about the affairs of the Empire (as
not pertaining to them) nor contribute any money to uphold the dignity
thereof, except perhaps sometimes in the common cause of the Turkish war,
they lend the Emperor some money, which no doubt all other Christian Princes
would no less do, who have no bond of subjection. The King of Denmark, by a
double bond of his Kingdom and of the Dukedom of Holst, the King of Swetia,
the Cantons of the Sweitzers, and the Grisons inhabiting the Snowy Alps, were
of old members of the Empire: but in time these Feathers plucked from the Eagle,
have grown into new bodies, and at this day do not at all acknowledge the
Emperor.

In Germany the Tolles and Taxes are frequent, as the number of absolute
Princes is The Taxes, Impositions and Renenews.
great, who impose them in their several Territories upon all passengers, and
kinds of Merchandise or very small packs, Scholars of Universities only
excepted, who pass free for their persons and goods. But above all other
Princes, the Elector of Saxony (as shall be showed in his due place) seems
best to have learned the art of shearing his subjects, so as he not only
imitates, but is equal in this point to the Princes of Italy. Boterus relates,
that the Emperor of his own hereditary dominions, has the yearly rent of
two thousand five hundred thousand Crowns, and besides exacts five hundred
thousand Crowns ordinarily, and as much more by extraordinary means. Men of
good credit have affirmed to me, that the Province of Silesia alone subject to
the Emperor as King of Bohemia, yields him each quarter of the year 60000 gold
Guldens or Crowns; by which may be coniectured what he receives of his other
large Dominions. Yet Silesia yields more then any one of the rest, in respect
that of the twelve Dukedoms therein contained, eight are fallen to the
Emperor, for want of heires-maies. The Bishop of Silesia is called the Golden
Bishop, and the same Province has thirty Abbeys, being most rich in that and
all other respects. At Prage, subject to the Emperor, as King of Bohemia, I
observed, that every house paid him yearly three Dollers; but this burden
equally imposed on thatched houses and stately Palaces, seeming unequally
shared, the Citizens agreed among themselves of a more equal division thereof;
so as I remember, that my Hosts house, purchased for three hundred Dollers,
paid yearly to the Emperor nine Dollers, besides other charges of maintaining
poor Scholars; of Watches, and the like, imposed upon each Master of a Family,
in each several parish, for which he also paid two Dollers yearly. In the
Dominions of the Emperor, the Brewers of Beer for each brewing, paid six
dollers to the Emperor, which tribute in one City of Prage, was said to pass
five hundred Dollers weekly. Also the Emperor exacted of his subjects, for
each Tun of Wine drawn, a Doller, and ten Grosh; for each bushel of Corn,
bought in the Market (not the private Corn of their own, spent in their
houses) one silver Grosh. These and like tributes were at first granted for
certain years, by consent of the three Estates: but Princes know well to
impose exactions, and know not how to depose them. The Emperor gives a City to
the Jews for their dwelling at Prage. (who are admitted in no City of Germany,
excepting only at Franckfort, where they have assigned to them a Street for
their dwelling), of which Jews upon all occasions he borrowes money, and many
ways sheares those bloud-suckers of Christians. The Germans impose great taxes
upon all foreign commodities brought into their Havens, and not only upon
men's persons, and upon commodities laded on beasts to be distracted from City
to City, but even upon small burdens to be carried on a man's shoulder, as they
pass through their Forts or Cities, which they use to build upon their
confines to that purpose, and only Scholars of Universities are free from
these frequent exactions, for their bodies and goods.

Touching the reuenews of the Empire it self, Boterus relates, that it
receives yearly seven thousand thousand Crowns, or gold Guldens; and this
reuenew is of small moment for such great affairs, if he contain all the
Princes of Germany under this taxation, since otherwise a communication of
treasure cannot be expected from so disunited minds as they have. He adds,
that the free Cities of the Empire yield a small yearly tribute to the
Emperor of fifteen thousand Guldens. It is well nowne that those Cities of
old custom maintained twenty thousand foot, and four thousand Horses for the
Emperors Army, when he went to be crowned at Rome: but this custom by long
discontinuance is vanished, since the Emperors for many ages have forborne
this expedition. The matter of greatest moment is the contribution, which for
the doubtful affairs of the Empire has been accustomed to be granted by the
three Estates in Parliament. And these, such as they are, yet are more easily
or hardly obtained of that free Nation, as the Emperor has more or less
reputation with them. But that it may appear, that the Empire wants not
treasure, the sinew of war, let us gather by one particular example, what may
generally be judged of this subsidy. In the time of the Emperor Maximilian
the first, the following subsidy was granted in a Diet or Parliament at Worms
by consent of the Estates, for the use of the Commonwealth, and especially for
the war against the Turks, which at that time much less pressed Germany,
then it does in these our days. First, it was decreed, that for four years
next following, each person of any sex or quality howsoever possessing (through
long and broad Germany), or being worth by all means 500 gold Guldens, should
yearly pay half a gold Gulden to this purpose, and each one of less value
should pay a quarter of a gold Gulden, and all Jews, as well men as women and
children, should pay yearly by the Pole one gold gulden. That Princes and
Barons for decency, yet of their free will should contribute much more. And
that this collection should be made not only in the private Dominions of the
Emperor, but in the private Teritories of al Princes, and the money first
delivered to the Superintendents or chief Ministers of Gods word, and by them
be conveyed to seven Treasurers residing at Franckfort (the first appointed by
the Emperor, the second by the Electors, the third by other Princes, the
fourth by the Prelates, the fifth by the Earls and Barons, the sixth by the
Knights, the seventh by the free Cities), all which were to take their oaths
for the faithful execution of this office. After it was again decreed in the
Diet held at Nurnberg, that for the Turkish war, each 40 inhabitants
(reckoning the husband, wife and children for one person) should maintain one
Footeman. That men and maid servants should give the sixth part of their
yearly wages, and each one having no wages, should pay a shilling of Germany.
That spiritual persons, men and women (that is, Nuns as well as others)
should for each forty Guldens value, pay one gold Gulden, and in like sort the
spiritual Orders of Knights, and namely those of Saint John, and all
Monasteries and Almes-houses, and whatsoever spiritual communities, should
give the like contribution, excepting the four Orders of Mendicant Friars, of
which each five Monasteries were to maintain one Footeman. That men and
maid-seruants of Spiritual persons, should pay as much as those of the Layety.
That no Elector or Prince should maintain less then five hundred Horses, and
each Earl should maintain one Horseman. That Knights should contribute
according to their estates. That the Jews should pay by the Pole one gold
Gulden yearly, the rich paying for the poor. That all Preachers should in the
Pulpit exhort men willingly to give these contributions, giving hope that they
shall be diminished according to the booties gotten by victories. And that
Bishops should make collection of this money, and deliver it over to the
Counselors of the States. Twenty Noble men were at that time chosen to have
care of the Commonwealth for matters of peace and war, who in difficult
accidents were to call unto them the six Electors (the King of Bohemia in the
Emperors person not reckoned), and certain other Princes. And this must
always be understood, that these collections are made in Germany with great
severity or strictness, where he that dissembles his full wealth, shall be
forced to repair all the damage the Commonwealth has sustained thereby, and
shall be also deeply fined, when the fraud is made known, which at least
will appear at the death of each private man, by his last will and testament.
So as these subsidies must needs be of great moment. But the Germans in our
days, though ready to be devoured by the Jaws of the Turkish Tyrant, yet for
the aboue-named causes, very unwillingly grant these contributions, yea, for
the very Turkish war.

The Germans for the said mutual iealosies, at this day in the greatest Peace
at Their warlike provision in time of peace.
home, yet live as in the time of a Civil war, at least in common fear of
surprising, so as almost in all Cities, they have victuals laid up in
Storehouses to bear a years siege; and besides this public provision, all
householders are commanded to make their private provisions before hand, of
dried fishes, corn, and like things to eat, of fuel to burn, and of all
necessaries to exercise their manual trades. The Cities have Watchmen
continually dwelling with their families on the top of high Steeples and
Towers, who by sound of Trumpet, and by hanging out flags of diverse colors,
one for horsemen, another for footmen, continually give warning what people
approach to the Town, and in what number, and besides these Watchmen are
enjoined to sound their Trumpets at certain hours of the day and night. The
very recreations of the Citizens are no other, then shooting in Pieces and
Crosebowes at marks in public houses, and thus they exercise themselves on
Holidaies and at all idle times, shooting for wagers, both private and public,
and for like rewards and prises. So as they must needs be thereby much better
trained up for war. Yet their footmen in war do not so much use the Piece
as the Pike, and their Horsemen contrary to the custom of other Nations, are
generally armed with two short Pistols, not at all with Lances. To conclude, if
any man in this time of peace, shoot ofa piece within the walls of a City, he
shall no less then in a Town of Garrison, be drawn by the Serieants before
the Magistrate, and be sure to pay a mulct for his error.

Caesar reports, that the Schwaben (or people of Sueuta, a great Province in
Germany, Their Ward fare of old.
most part of upper Germany having been so called of old) were most warlike,
yet at the first hearing, so feared the Romans, as some thought to leave their
dwellings, some made their last wills, and all mourned and were sad. He reports
also, that the half part of this people was employed and nourished in Arms,
and the other half gave themselves to Husbandry, and that so by yearly course
they were one year Husbandmen, another year Soldiers. That none of them had
any private fields, nor dwelt in one place more then a year. Lastly, that
freedom in youth, and hunting after they came to ripe years, made them of
huge stature. Many witness, that the Germans of old, in feasting took
counsel of Peace and War, thinking the vigor of the mind then to be most
enlarged, when they were warmed with Wine. They were wont to promise their
neighbors that they would overcome in fighting, or else die valiantly, and so
were led forth to the war with the peoples acclamations, exhorting them to
valor, and at their return were not praised, except they showed scarres
gotten in fighting. It was infamous for any of them to lose his shield, so as
many for that cause hanged themselves; for it was not lawful for them to be
present at their Sacrifices or Counsels. Being ready to fight, they called upon
Hercules, and their Horsemen used Target and Lance, their Footmen Darts. Their
Army lay compassed with Chariots and Carts, in stead of trenches. Lastly in
Counsels, they signified consent by shaking of their Spears, and dissent by
murmuring.

At this day the Horsemen of Germany are vulgarly called schwartz Reytern, that
is, Their horsemen at this day.
black Horsemen; not only because they wear black apparel, but also for
that most of them have black Horses, and make their hands and faces black by
dressing them, and by blacking their boots, wherein they are curious; or else
because custom has made blackness an ornament to them; or else because they
think this color to make them most terrible to their enemies. For the Germans
using more to brawle then fight, and rather to chide, then fight themselves
friends, desire rather with fierce looks to strike fear into their enemies,
then by concealing their strength, to draw them to fight. The best Horses and
Horsemen are of the Territories of Brunswick, Cleave, and Franconia: but
howsoever their Horses are strong, yet they have less courage, because they
are taken from the Plough, and are of an heavy race. Neither the Horses nor the
Horsemen are armed, so as both may easily be hurt by Footmen. Thus being
Light-horsemen, yet are they less fit for that service, by reason of their
heavy Horses, unapt to follow the enemy flying, or to save themselves by speedy
retrait. And this has often been observed in their war against the Turks,
having swift Horses, whom they could neither overtake in flight, nor escape
from them, when they pursued. Such and so heavy Horses are throughout all
Germany, excepting Westphalia and those parts, where their Wagons are drawn
with very little Horses, though perhaps they have greater for service in war.
These Horsemen carry each of them two short pistols at their saddles, with a
sword, and like short weapons, but without any Lances, and their saddles are
little, such as are commonly used by passengers, not such as our Horsemen use
in war, so as they may easily be cast from their Horses, and have the
disadvantage, being assailed with Horsemen bearing Lances.

Their Footmen are vulgarly called Lantzknechten, that is, Servants with
Lances, Their footmen at this day.
and the best of them are those of Tyroll, Sueuia, and Westphalia. Commonly
they are corpulent, and of a dull or less fiery spirit, yet are of great
strength in fighting a battle, by reason of their strong members, and the
constant order they use in fighting. And they are armed with Lances most fit
for their strength, rather then with Caliuers, requiring nimblenesse in
charging and discharging.

In general, the Germans willingly hear themselves compared to Bulls: for as
Their warfare in general at this day.
Bulls bearing their horns on the ground, with firm foot attend the assault
of the Dogs; so the Germans, neither rush fiercely on their enemies, nor can
easily be broken by any charge. The Provinces of Germany being populous, and
the soldiers being Mercenary, foreign Princes commonly supply their Armies
with them. And for the faithfulness of the Nation, and the strength of their
bodies, the Princes of France and Italy willingly entertain them for the guard
of their persons. The Princes of Germany levy soldiers by absolute command,
in their own wars, but only voluntary men are sent to foreign wars,
which they willingly undertake, out of all men's general affection to the
dissolute liberty of the wars, and because the Germans have ever been
mercenary, besides that the pleasant wines of France and Italy draw them to
those wars. In our age, the French having had civil wars between the
Papists and Protestants, both parts have often hired the Germans. And they
being for the most part Lutherans, and so hating both parts, as well the
Papists, as the Caluinists, (so I call them for distinction, being so termed by
their common enemies, though they follow neither Calvin nor Luther further,
then they agree with the Word of God); I say that they hating the Papists, and
most of all the Caluinists, nearest to them in Religion (as the Potter hates
the Potter, and the beggar hates the beggar, and each one his next neighbor,
more then any other), and being blamed for serving them, they would freely
profess, that it was all one to them, to serve the one devil as the other,
(so they called them both.) Thus serving more for booty then for love, they
demeaned themselves so frowardly in those wars, as they much impaired the old
reputation of their Nation in warfare. The French, I say, having justly no
confidence in their own footmen, for the most part used the Germans (as also
the Sweitzers) in that service, and found by experience, that the firm and
constant body of their foot, was most fit to receive the loose wings of the
French, chearefully assaulting, but soon driven back; and that after the
first fury of the French, the body of the Dutch Foot, like the Triarij among
the Romans, stood firm. And the great Victory of the French at Rauenna,
against the Spaniards and Italians, was in great part attributed to the German
Footmen, who received the French Foot, and namely the Guascons (the best
Foot of France) into their body, when they were put to flight. But they are
most unfit to besiege strong Forts, and have been found no less unfit to
defend them being besieged; whether it be, for that they are less serviceable
in things requiring witty resolution, and fury in sudden assaults, then in a
firm and constant strength; or for that, contrary to their old reputation,
they are not found able in this our age to bear hunger, thirst, cold and
watching, the necessary evils of a siege. And it is certain, that the
Netherlanders, using them in this kind, as the course of their war consists,
especially in defending and assailing Forts, have taxed them with bitter ieasts
on this behalf, which I willingly pass in silence, desiring more to express
virtues then to impute vices. Yet the Germans have many very strong and well
fortified Cities, of which some are judged impregnable, in which they place
greatest hope of safety from the incursions of the Polonians, or of the Turks.
For the Polonians trusting to their famous strength of Horse, brag that they
despise the force of the Germans in open field, and the Turkish Horse, praised
for swiftness, seems not to fear the heavy horses of Germany.

Surely, though I do not think the Germans to degenerate from the valor of
their old Progenitors, yet I have read the Histories, and have heard the
Gentlemen of France in our time, much inueighing against them: First, that
being in neutrall or friends Countries, far distant from the enemy, they
consumed wine and victuals, as if they had been borne to no other end, and
spoiled all men's goods: but when the enemy drew near, that not content with
their former spoils, they would then murinie for pay, and refuse otherwise to
fight, when the Princes had no present means to satisfy them; yea, and for
want of it, would threaten to leave their party, and go to the enemy, bearing
no more affection to the one then the other, Secondly, that in all Armies,
wherein their strength was predominant, and especially upon the approach of the
enemy, they were prone to threatenings and seditious demeanor. Thirdly, that
the horse having given one assault without success, could by no entreaty, no
reward, no hope of victory, be induced to give a second charge. Fourthly, that
once put out of order and routed, they could never be gathered again together.
Fifthly, that in the battle of Mountcontour, by confused fear, they had almost
exposed themselves and the whole Army to the sword; and that in the next
battle, having the victory, they spared neither man, woman, nor child, but
like Bears raged against their yielding suppliants, still crying Mountcontour,
Mount contour, for the word of revenge. Lastly, that the leuies of the^ are an
excessive charge, that they consume abundance of victuals, and especially wine,
and cannot bear with any want of the least of them, and are a great burden to
an Army with their baggage. Touching victuals, I have heard the Citizens of
Vienna, being themselves Germans, yet freely professing, that when the Turks
made a show to besiege them, and encamped on one side of the town, they
suffered far greater loss by the soldiers received into the Town to help
them, then by the enemies spoiling all abroad. Touching their baggage, every
footeman has his wench, that carries on her back a great pack, and a brass
pan, while the soldier himself goes empty, carrying nothing but his Arms.
And at Strasburg I did see certain troops of horse enter the Town, sent from
the Marquis of Brandeburg, to aid the Citizens against the Duke of Loraine,
which horsemen had an unspeakable number of carts, to carry their Arms and
other necessaries, and upon each cart sat a Cock, which creature, as most
watchful, the Germans have of most old custom used to carry with them to the
wars.

I cannot pass in silence the judgment of an Italian well known, though by
me unnamed, who because the Germans in our age have had some ill successes in
the war, does attribute the same to the impurity of the reformed Religion
prosessed by them, wherein he sophistically obtrudes the false cause for the
true; not much unlike the old man recorded in our Histories, who being asked
(for his age and experience) what he thought to be the cause of Goodwyn sands,
near the mouth of the Thames, answered, that he thought the building of
Tenterton Steeple was the cause thereof, because no such sands were seen, till
the time when it was built. Nothing is more manifest, then that the Germans of
the reformed Religion, nothing yield. or rather much excel, the Germans
continuing Papists; in all manual Arts, Liberal Sciences, and all indowments
of Nature; which may clearly be proved by one instance of the Norenbergers and
Sweitzers, professing the reformed Religion, who in all Arts, and the military
profession, pass all other Germans whatsoever. Neither am I of the same
Italians opinion, who to make the Germans active in war, thinks they must
have an Italian, or some foreign Prince for their General, which none in the
World can less endure, since they not only most willingly hear, read, and
obey the Preachers, Authors, and Superiors of their own Country, but above
all other Nations singular in self-love, do also despise all strangers
compared with themselves, (though otherwise they be not vnhospitall toward
them.)

They have one commendable custom, proper to them with the Sweitzers only,
namely, that after a years or longer warfare, they return home uncorrupted
with the dissolute liberty of the wars, and settle themselves to their
manual trades, and tillage of the ground. The Emperor Charles the fifth did
lead against the Turks an Army of ninety thousand foot, and thirty thousand
horse. And the Emperor Maximilian the second, did lead against the Turks an
Army of one hundred thousand foot, and thirty five thousand horse. And in the
Civil war between the Emperor Charles the fifth, and the Protestants,
besides the Emperors Army consisting partly of Germans; partly of Italians and
Spaniards, the Protestant Princes had of their own Country men an Army of
eighty thousand foot, and ten thousand horse. And in all these Armies there was
no complaint of any the least want of victuals. So as by these examples it
appears, that the Empire can leauie and nourish a most powerful Army.

And for better understanding of their warfar, I will ad the decree of the
Emperor and the Electors in the Expedition against the Turks in the year 1500.
Albert Palatine of the Rheine was confirmed General of the Empire, and six
Counselors were chosen to assist him. And it was further decreed, that the
General should not make war upon any without direction from the Council of
the Empire, then chosen and consting of six spiritual, and six temporal
Princes, three Abbots, six chosen by the people, and eight chosen by the free
Cities. That the soldiers should swear obedience to the General, and he give
like oath to the Emperor and the Empire. That the General should have the
command of three hundredth Horse, with eight Guldens by the month allowed for
each Horse. That the General should further have one thousand three hundredth
Guldens by the month, or more by consent of the Council. That each Horseman
should have eight Guldens by the month, and each Poorman four Guldens. That
the General should have twenty four for his guard, with five Guldens by the
month for each of them. That the General should have pay for thirty two
carts, each cart drawn with four horses, and allowed two Horsemens pay. That
the General happening to be taken by the fortune of the war, the Empire
should readily pay his ransom and redeem him. That no peace should be made
without the consent of the General. Lastly, that the General should depose
this dignity when he should be directed so to do by the Council, within
three months if he were within the Empire, or within six months, if he
should then be out of the confines of the Empire. To conclude, he that shall
particularly visit and behold the Armories and storehouses for military
provisions, as well of the Princes as free Cities, shall be forced to wonder at
the quantity, variety and goodness thereof, which if they were all under the
command of one Prince, no two of the mightiest Kings of Christendom might
therein compare with him.

It remains briefly to add something of the Nauall power of the Germans.
Almost Their Nauall power at this day.
all Germany being within land, only the Cities upon the Northern Ocean, and
upon the Baltike sea, have any exercise of Navigations. And I did never read or
hear that any of them did ever undertake any long and dangerous voyage by sea,
nor can their Mariners be praised for their experience or boldness, compared
with the English and Netherlanders. The City of Dantzk (which for agreement of
tongue and manners, I reckon among the Cities of Germany, though it be in some
sort annexed to Poland), howsoever it is famous for concourse of Merchants, and
rich commodities, yet not using to export them in their own ships, but rather
to sell them to strangers, or to lade their ships, and especially those of the
Hollanders, I could not understand, that forty ships belonged to that City.
Among the other Cities, Lubeck and Hamburg are far more powerful in this
kind, then all the rest joined together. The Haven of Hamburg has commonly
great number of shipping, and they said, that more then six hundred ships did
then belong to the City. But they being vast, and built only for burden are
held unfit for war. The City of Hamburg and the other Cities upon the
Northern Ocean, having long inioyed peace, as neutrals, while all their
neighbors have made war one with the other, and none of the Cities,
excepting Hamburg, sending out ships further then upon the coast, it cannot be
that the ships should be strongly armed. At Hamburg I did see a ship then
building for a man of war, of one thousand two hundred tons, and among the
other ships belonging to that City, the greatest was called the golden Lion,
strongly built, and bearing eighteen brass pieces on each side, which they
named their Admiral. But our best Sea men thought them both more fit to defend
the Haven, as Forts, then to make any fights at Sea. In our age thirty seven
ships of Hamburg were laded by the Flemmings with Dantzk Rye for Spain (where
they had free traffic in the heat of the war between England France,
Netherland and Spain), and of these ships six perished in the very going out
of the Elue, by tempest while English and other ships safely put to sea; and
the rest despaiting of the Voyage into Spain were vnladed. Not long before my
being there, they had sent some eight or ten ships into Spain, whereof only
one returned in safety to Hamburg. The City Lubeck has a greater number of
ships then Hamburg: but they commonly trading within the Baltic sea, (seldom
troubled with war or Pirates), and their ships being only built for burden,
are slow of sail, and unfit to fight at sea. Besides that for the foresaid
reason, they carry few or no pieces, or other arms. To conclude, while I was
at Lubeck, a great ship of that City of one thousand four hundred tuns,
called the Eagle, and laded with salt, perished in the return from Spain.
Whereupon I then heard our best Seamen impute great ignorance to the German
Mariners of those Cities. This shall suffice for their skill in Navigations,
whereof I have formerly spoken in the third Book of this Volume or Part,
treating of the traffic of Merchants in Germany.

Touching their Laws and judicial courses in general: Of old the Magistrates
of Germany were as Captains of Cities, who determined of Civil causes at
home, and had public meetings yearly for that purpose, most commonly in the
month of May, or at the times of the full and new Moons. They came armed to
these meetings not all together, but every man at his pleasure, and as it
pleased the multitude, so they sat in judgment. Silence was commanded by the
Priests, who had power to punish them. Then the Prince or King, or any eminent
person in eloquence or in favor, was heard to speak, yet as persuading, not
commanding; and if the speech pleased, the people showed consent by murmuring,
or otherwise dissent by striking their spears together. Here they determined
all controversies, and chose new Captains or Governors. They had a custom,
that if any man complained of another, he should make a supper for a hundred
men, who duly examined the cause; and if the plaintiff had the right, the
defendant paid the charge, otherwise he escaped free. They gave of free will to
their Prince of their Cattle and Corn, as much as they thought fit for his
honor and necessity. Tacitus writes that the old Magistrates of Germany did
nothing unarmed, publicly or privately: And the Germans themselves confess,
that their old Progenitors seldom tried injuries by Law, but commonly revenged
them with fire and sword, and that they shamed not to take preyes by stealth or
sorce. Quintilianus Varus appointed Governor of Germany by the Emperor
Augustus; did first appoint the judgment of Scabines, (which in the Hebrew
tongue signifies a Judge: for he had formerly been Governor of Jury). These
Scabines determined all controversies, and to this day the Germans in most
places so call their Judges. The lower and upper Saxony has a provincial Law,
yet determines also many causes by the civil Law. The Statutes of the Diots or
Parliaments bind all, but the Statutes of private Princes only bind their own
subjects.

The greatest part of Germany is governed by the Civil Law: And therefore the
Doctors of the Civil Law are much esteemed among them, and are Counselors of
Estate as well to the Emperor as to other Princes, which place they think
unfit to be conferred on any Doctors of Divinity. Yea, the Princes of Germany
have this peculiar fashion, that no son uses his Fathers old counselors,
but rather new chosen by himself. The said Doctors of the Civil Law have
privilege by their degree, to wear chains of gold about their necks, and
feathers in their hats.

There be in Germany four kinds of Law giving, or rather four chief Courts
of Justice. The first is that of the Diets or Parliaments, vulgarly called
(...), that is, Days of the Kingdom, which meetings by the Law should be made
once in the year, and last no less then a month at least, no man having
liberty to depart from them without leave of the Council: Neither may the
Emperor or his son, or the elect King of the Romans, make any war or
league, without consent of the same. The second Court is called Landgericht,
that is, the Justice of the Land, wherein the chief men of each Province are
to be called together thrice in the year, and are to sit three weeks, to
determine the chief affairs of the Province, as the Parliaments handle the
chief affaies of the Empire. The third Court is vulgarly called Camergerichl,
that is, the Justice of the Imperial Chamber, which is held at Spirt four
times each year, each time lasting forty days, to determine the general
causes of the Empire. The fourth Court is the Burgraues right, by which debts
by specialty are recovered.

The Kingdom of Bohemia has a provincial Law, derived from the Law of
Saxony, and for that cause there be few Students of the Civil Law: but because
the Emperor has instituted three Chaunecries, one for the Law of Saxony,
(which Province lies upon the North side of the Kingdom:) the second for the
Law of Bohemia: the third for the Civil Law, (in respect of the Emperors
subjects of Austria, lying on the South side o. Bohemia,) for this cause there
be many Doctors of Civil Law, and they also much esteemed in the Emperors
Court. If a Bohemian have a cause in any Court of the Germans, he is tried by
the Civil Law, or by the Law of Saxony; and if a German answer in the Court of
the Bohemians; he is tried by the provincial Law of Bohemia; and the Defendant
draws the cause to his own Court. Morauia, a Province incorporated to
Bohemia, uses the Language and Law of that Kingdom. In the old City of Prage,
howsoever almost all speak Dutch, yet the Law is given in the Bohemian tongue,
by a statute lately made. Silesia, a Province incorporated to Bohemia, has the
manners and language of Germany, and Justice is there administered by the Law of
Bohemia, derived from the Law of Saxony; but for the greater part by the Civil
Law. Generally in Germany, if a cause be received into any Court, and the
defendant escape to another City, the Magistrate of the place must send him
back, to answer the Plaintiff his accuser.

The causes of the Empire (as I formerly said) are handled in the Imperial
Chamber The Imperial Chamber.
at Spire. And therefore it will not be amiss to relate some Statutes made in
the Imperial meetings, which are collected into a Book, vulgarly called Reichs
abscheidt, that is, the Epitome or abstract of the Kingdom; but I will only
set down breefly some of the chief statutes. It was decreed in the year
1556, that no subjects of the Electors, nor any Inhabitants, or Earls of their
Provinces, should appeal from them to this Court of the Imperial Chamber. The
Emperor Frederick the third, in the year 1442, made these statutes: That no
Prince should by arms right himself against another, before Justice have
been denied to him in this Imperial Court. That the Judge of the Chamber
should be a Prince or Barron, and of sixteen Assessors, half should be Civil
Lawyers, and half of the Knightly Order. That the greater part should carry
the cause, and the voices being equal, the Judges voice should cast it. That
the Judge should not be absent without leave of the Assessors, nor they without
his leave, and that without some great cause, more then four of them should
not be absent at one time: That in absence they should have no voice: That the
cheef Judge being sick, shall substitute a Prince in his place, who shall
first take his oath. The Procters and Advocates shall take no more of their
Clients, then the Judges shall appoint, and shall swear to avoid slander and
malice. The Notaries shall execute the judgments in the name of the Emperor.
Appeals shall be of no force, except they be made in order to the next
superior Court, and so ascending. All that belong to this Chamber, shall be
free from all payments, but not one of them shall either keep an Inn, or
trade as a Merchant. The Judge shall deliver over to the Senate of the City,
those that are guilty of death. By the same decree, all fees for writing and
processes are set down, so as the Clyent swearing poverty, shall go free, so
as he swear to pay the fees when he shall be able. Further it was decreed,
that the seat of this Chamber or Court, should not be changed but by the
consent of the Imperial diot or Parliament. That the Defendants hiding
themselves, the Princes or Citizens to whom they are subject, shall swear upon
a set day, that they are not privy to any of their actions, or else shall
satisfy all damages. That the Procters shall speak nothing but to the
purpose, and for ieasts or impertinent things in word or writing, shall be
punished by a mulct in money, and by being put to silence in that cause. By the
Emperor Charles the fifth, in the Diot at Augsburg, the year 1518, two new
Assessors were added, and it was decreed, that Charles as Emperor, should
appoint the chief Judge, two Assessors of the Law, and two Gentlemen
Assessors, and as heir to his patrimony, should appoint two learned Assessors.
That three Gentlemen Assessors should be named by the three secular electors,
three learned by the three spiritual Electors, and three Gentlemen with three
learned, by the common consent of the six Communities. (For the Empire was
divided into six Communities, vulgarly called Kreysen, for the collection of
tributes aad like duties, as other Kingdoms are divided into Counties; and
since that time in the year 1522, for the same purposes, the Empire was
divided into ten Communities). Further it was decreed, that twenty two persons
should with like equality be named yearly to visit this Chamber or Court. That
no appeal should be admitted into this Court under the value of fifty
Guldens; and that the executions of judgments should be done by the next
Magistrates, and they not willing or not daring to do it, should be referred
to the Emperor. At a Parliament in the year 1522, it was decreed, That no
stranger should be appointed chief Judge: That for absence the pensions should
be abated, after the rate of the time, and be distributed among the present:
That the Judges should swear to take no gifts; not to prolong causes, and to
do right without respect of persons; and that the Procters should take no
fees, but such as are set down by statutes. At the Parliament in the year
1555, it was decreed, that no Assessors should be of any other Religion, then
of the Roman, or the Confession of the Protestants, made at Augsburg. That one
Assessor should not interrupt the speech of another, nor should rise to
confer one with the other, and that all speeches of anger should be punished,
and all be sworn to keep secret the Acts of the Council: That Advocates
should not be more then four and twenty in number: That any man should be
admitted to speak for himself, first swearing to avoid slander: That this
Chamber or Court should be yearly visited, upon the first of May, by the
Archbishop of Mentz, as substitute to the Emperor; by three other, each chosen
by one of the Electors, by two Princes, one temporal, the other spiritual,
and by one Counselor, chosen by each order, (namely one by the Earls, and one
by each free City) to whom the complaints should be presented upon the first of
March. That no man should forbid his subjects to appeal to this Court, except
they should willingly renounce the appeal; but that all froward appeals for
unjust causes should be punished, by paying charges, and being fined; and that
no appeal should be admitted under the value of fifty Guldens, excepting
those who have privilege to appeal for less sums, and that no appeal be
made for corporal punishments: That the Chamber should be held at Spire, till
it be otherwise decreed by Parliament, but that in time of famine or plague,
they may for the time choose another place: That two brothers should not be the
one an Assessor, the other a Procter: That the Judges shall meet three days
in the week, and eight of them at the least shall be present: That execution
of judgment shall first be required by letters of the Court, to which if the
Defendant shall not yield obedience, he shall be cited to appear, and shall be
condemned in costs, and the Plaintiff shall be put in possession of his goods,
and the Defendant by the Popes privilege granted to this Court, shall be
excommunicated, and then execution shall be desired from the Magistrate of the
Community, or in case the defendant be powerful, it shall be desired from the
Emperor himself. Lastly, that no appeal nor petition against the judgment
of the Chamber shall be admitted.

And thus much breefly written of the Imperial Chamber or Court, shall
suffice. Only I will add, that appeals were of old granted to the Electors
subjects, and at this day in some cases and above a certain value, are granted
to the subjects of Princes and Cities; and that in difficult causes, the
Germans often refer them, to beiudged by the Colleges of civil Lawyers in
the University: but since Princes and Cities weekly hold Courts of judgment,
so as execution is done before appeal can be made, and since many Cities and
Princes have privileges against appeals, granted to them from the Emperor,
these appeals are many times and by diverse means made void. In this Chamber
the Emperor himself may be accused, and many times a Gentleman, or any man of
inferior condition, having difference with a Princes gains the cause against
him, and the great differences of Princes, wont to break into war, use
quietly to be composed in this Court. The chief Judge, if he be Earl or
Barron, has two thousand Guldens yearly, by the statute made in the year
1548, and has more if he be a Prince. An Assessor, if he be an Earl or
Barron, has yearly by the same statute seven hundred Guldens; if he be a
Doctor of the Civil Law, or a Gentleman, he has five hundred Guldens, and
each Advocate in Exchequer causes, has yearly three hundred Guldens; and by a
statute in the year 1557, they receive for each Gulden 77 Creitzers, for
bettering of their pensions, whereas formerly each Gulden was valued at
sixteen Batzen, or sixty four Creitzers.

Touching capital judgments. By the Civil Law, in most heinous offenses,
Capital judgments.
the affection is punished, though it take no effect: yet in common custom,
and after the form of the Statutes of Italy, he that has a mind to kill, is
not punished, except he do kill. The old Law of Saxony respects the fact, not
the will: but of late the Electors of Saxony have made a Statute (which is yet
in vigor), that he that prouokes a man to fight, or threatens death to him,
shall dye, though he never assail him. The Germans hold it reproachful to
apprehend any malefactor, which is only done by the Serieants of the Hangmans
disgraceful Family. My self observed, that a young man, Kinsman to the Consul
or Mayor of a City, having killed a Gentleman, remained two hours in the
City, and then fled, without any stop by the Serieants, who notwithstanding
did afterward for fashion sake pursue him, some few hours. Yet I must needs
confess, that the Germans are generally most severe in Justice, sparing not
the Inhabitants more then strangers, yea, in some cases favoring strangers
more then the Inhabitants, (as in debts, which a stranger cannot stay to
recover by long process.) My self having a suit for money at Lindaw, my
advocate would by no means take any fee of me, and the Judge gave me right
with great expedition. In criminal offenses they never have any pardons from
Court; (which are common in foreign Kingdoms), but the punishment is known
by the fact, so the malefactor be apprehended. For all hope of safety is in
flight, yet I deny not that favor is often done in the pursuit. For since
only the Serieants can apprehend, there is no place, where more malefactors
escape by flight. In the City of Lubeck, most honored for Justice, the common
report was, that the very Judges and Senators, had lately wincked at a
Gentleman's breaking of prison and flight with his keeper, whom being imprisoned
for a murder, they could neither execute; without greatly offending the King
of Denmark, nor otherwise set free, without scandal of Justice. A man
suspected of any crime, or accused by one witness, is drawn to torture, yet
is never condemned upon any probability, till himself confess the fact, which
confession is easily extorted, because most men had rather dye, then endure
torment. So as many times innocent men have been after known to have perished
by their own confessions, as with us sometimes innocent men have been known
to dye, being found guilty by a Jury of twelve sworn men. And because it
cannot be that the judgments of men should not often err; hence it is that
the Civil Lawyers have a strange, yet good saying, that a mischief is better
then an inconueniency, namely, that it is better one innocent man should dye by
trial, then many nocent persons should escape for want of trial. In Germany
not only men but women also being accused, are put to torture. And for diverse
great crimes, the Law judges them to death with exquisite torments. And
because they can hardly be endured with Christian patience, lest the condemned
should fall into despair, the very Preachers, when they have heard their
confessions, and settled their minds in true faith, by rare example of too
great charity, permit and advise, that they be made drunken, to stupifie their
senses, so as thus armed, they come forth with more bold then holy minds and
looks, and seem not to feel insufferable torments of death.

Near Lindaw I did see a malefactor hanging in Iron chains on the gallows,
with a Mastiue Dog hanging on each side by the heels, so as being starued,
they might eat the flesh of the malefactor before himself died by famine. And
at Franckford I did see the like spectacle of a Jew hanged alive in chains,
after the same manner.

The condemned in Germany lose not their goods, but only in case of Treason
against their absolute Lords. But in Bohemia the goods of the condemned, fall
to the Emperor, as he is King of Bohemia, in the Territories belonging to the
King; and to the Princes and Gentlemen, in the Territories whereof they are
absolute Lords (as they are all, in their own lands.)

In Germany Courtiers and Students of Universities, have their proper Judges
and Prisons, so as by singular privilege they may not be tried in any other
Court. And of old the Students of many Universities had such privileges (at
this day not fully allowed), as for murder they could not be punished further,
then with expulsion. In Germany they have a custom to give a condemned man to
a Virgin that desires him for her husband, but according to the circumstances
of the crime, they grant or deny the same.

The office of the hangman is hereditary, so as the son cannot refuse to
succeed his father: And of late the hangmans son of Hamburg being a Student,
and learned if not a graduate, in the University of Basil, after his Fathers
death, was called home by the Senate of Hamburg, and forced to do his Fathers
Office, which is most ignominious, but of great profit: For the Germans hold it
reproachful to take off the skin of any beast, dying of it self, so as the
hangman doing that Office, has the skins for his labor. The Germans are so
supersticious, as they think it a great reproach to touch the head or body of
any put to death, and think it most ridiculous for any man to salute the
hangman, or speak courteously to him, and esteem it a foul fault to eat or
drink with them, or any of his Family. Therefore the Hangman and those of
their Family, who help them in their Office (and succeed them having no
children) do all wear a green cap, or some apparent mark, by which they may
be known, or at least are tied to profess their quality, when they come into
any company, left any man should offend in the former kinds. And in public
Tauernes they have Tables proper to them, at which the basest body will not sit
for any reward. If they perform not their Office with dexterity, they fear to
be stoned by the people, whose rage many times in that case they have hardly
escaped; but being expert in doing their Office, and having most sharp Swords,
they commonly show great dexterity in beheading many at one time, and (as it
were) in a moment. They are commonly thirsty of blood, so as the common report
was, that the hangman of Torge beheaded some of his companions with the Sword
of Justice, because they would not pledge him, when they were so fully drunken,
as they could no more; whereupon the Sword was taken from him, and is to this
day kept in the Senate House, and only delivered to him at times of execution:
And that this rascal could not live a week without drinking the blood of some
Beast. Besides at Breme not long before this time, forty freebooting soldiers
being beheaded at one time, and the hangman having failed in giving a foul
wound to the first man executed, and having with much difficulty appeased the
peoples anger for the same, he presently drunk some of the man's blood that
was dead, and after he had fetched a friske or two, beheaded all the rest with
strange dexterity (as it were) in a moment.

Of old among the Germans manslaughter was punished by a mulct of cattle, but
no man escaped death for adultery. At this day (as after will appear) they
punish man-killers more severely, and adultery in most places is death, and in
no part of Germany free from severe punishment. Not only the free Cities of
the Empire have the privilege of the Sword, or capital Justice granted to
them by Emperors; but also many Cities subject to inferior Princes have that
privilege granted by some of their Lords: and those Cities that have it not,
yet upon accidents of capital offenses, obtain it for the time by petitionary
letters at Court, so as the Prince permits Justice, the City gives sentence,
and sees execution done in the place where the crime was committed, and
presently after the fact, never using (as we do) to send Judges from County to
County at set times of the year: For casual manslaughter, or by chance medly
(as we term it), the Civil Law gives arbitrary punishment; but the Law of
Saxony punishes it with a certain and express mulct, namely of one Wehrgeld,
and by the Civil Law not only the principal, but every one that is
accessory, pays the whole mulct, whereas by the Saxon Law, if it be not known
which of them killed him, all jointly pay but one mulct. Killing in sudden
anger (which we call manslaughter) is punished with beheading through all
Germany and Bohemia, and that without delay: for if the offender be
apprehended, he shall within few hours, or next day be beheaded, and put in
the same Coffin with him that he killed, and so both are buried with one
funeral pomp, and in the same grave: and if upon escape, the manslayer live
within the confines of the Empire, whenever his fact is known, he shall be
sent back to the place where he committed it, contrary to the custom of
Italy, where the Princes cherrish, or at least give safe aboade to the banished
men of the next Countries: Only I must except the Lords and Gentlemen of
Bohemia, who upon capital offenses are not presently judged, but are referred
to the next Parliament. In free Cities I have observed this form of judgment
and execution. The Judge sits before the tribunal, covered with black cloth,
and the Senators and Consuls sit upon a bench above him; and this place of
Judgment is commonly in a Porch or Terras under the Senate House, having one
side all open toward the market place. Then the Crier, who carries the Sword
before the Judge, calls out the accuser; and the hangman coming forth, accuses
the Malefactor, which done, the Crier leads the Malefactor before the
Tribunal, where he is again accused, and confesses the fact, according to
his confessions formerly made either in torture or before the Senators
appointed to examine him: Then the Judge gives sentence, and breaks his white
rod. This done, the Hangman repeates the sentence in the market place, and
presently the Malefactor is brought forth to be beheaded. This manslaughter in
sudden sury, is very frequent among the Germans, by reason of their excessive
drinking. In the City of Hamburg I observed thirty seven to be thus killed in
the space of six weeks, and only three of the manslayers to be beheaded, the
rest escaping by flight. And at Prage in Bohemia, I observed fifteen servants
of the Polonian Ambassador (whereof many were Gentlemen), and thirteen
Bohemians and Germans, to be wounded to death in their cups, within the space
of three weeks, all the manslayers escaping, excepting one poor clown, who
was executed. It is true that Posthorses are kept for the Sergeants to pursue
Malefactors, yet they slowly follow Gentlemen, or those that have good friends,
howsoever they would soon apprehend a stranger, or a poor offender, neither
use they earnestly to pursue any, except they be hired by the friends of him
that is killed, or be otherwise terrified by the Magistrate.

For combats in Germany, read the precept of patience in the Chapter of
Precepts, being the second chapter of this 3 Part. Here I will only say, that
in combat very few, or no Germans are killed, few hurt, and that lightly; which
I rather attribute to their peaceable nature, not apt to take things in
reproach, then to their severe Laws. I have said that manslayers die without
hope of pardon, if they be apprehended, but otherwise the Germans have no
severe Laws to punish injuries, (in which Justice the Sweitzers of all Nations
excel), without which Laws, no capital punishment can keep men from
revenge, especially in a warlike Nation, and impatient of reproach: Only at
Augsburg I remember severe Laws, made to keep the Garrison Soldiers from
combats, where they have a plat of ground, to which they call one another to
fight upon injuries; but it serves more to make show, then proof of their
valor: For a Soldier wounding another, pays four Guldens: He that draws
his Sword, though he draw no blood, pays two Guldens: He that upon challenge
and the greatest provocation, kills another, is banished: And the Magistrate
gives such real satisfaction to the wronged by deed or word, as they may with
reputation forbear revenge: yea, he that does a wrong, is bound under great
penalty, that he himself shall presently make it known to the Magistrate,
craving pardon, and submitting himself to punishment, howsoever the wronged
never complains.

At Prage in Bohemia, manslaughters committed by Gentlemen against strangers,
and those of meaner condition, are much more frequent, because Gentlemen can
only be judged in Parliaments, which are not often called, and are then tried
by Gentlemen, who are partial in the common cause, and commonly acquit them,
or delude Justice by delays: Otherwise the Bohemians punish manslaughter,
murder, robbery, and like crimes, as the Germans punish them.

By the Civil Law the punishment of a boy for manslaughter, is arbitrary, but
he is not subject to the Cornelian Law, or capital punishment, except he be
capable of malice. By the Law of Saxony, a boy for manslaughter is punished by
the foresaid mulct, if he be capable of malice, otherwise he is subject to no
punishment, and in like sort if he deprive one of the use of any member: but in
custom if he be seventeen years old, he may be, and is commonly put to
death. By the Civil law, the punishment of real and verbal injuries is
arbitrary, and as many wounds as are given, so many are the punishments. But by
the law of Saxony, he that strikes another, so as he leeseth the use of a
member, is punished by a mulct of money uncertain, which is given always to
him that is maimed, and if he die not, a thousand wounds or maimes are punished
only with one mulct, except they be done at diverse times and places, in which
case several mulcts are inflicted. Always understand, that these judgments
are given, where the offender is ciuilly accused, for if these wounds be given
of set malice, and if he be capitally accused, he shall dye, according to the
circumstances, which the Germans much regard. Thus at Lubeck a man was
beheaded, for striking a Citizen in his own house. And in the way from Stoade
to Breme, I did see a sad monument, of a wicked son, whose hand first, and
then his head was cut off, for striking his father. He that killes a man of set
malice, and like heinous murderers, have all their bones broken upon a wheel,
and in some cases their flesh is pinched off, with hot burning pinsers, and
they that kill by the highway, are in like sort punished. And many times for
great crimes, the malefactors some few days before the execution of judgment,
are nailed by the ears to a post in a public place, that the people may see
them. After the execution, the bones and members of the malefactor are gathered
together, and laid upon the wheel, which is set up in the place of execution
(commonly where the crimes were committed), for eternal memory of his
wickedness, with so many bones hanging on the sides of the wheel, as he
committed murders or like crimes; and my self have numbered sometimes
eighteen, often fourteen bones thus hanging for memory of so many murders,
or like crimes committed by one man. These marks long remaining, and crosses
set up in places where murders were committed, though the murderer escaped by
flight, make passengers think these crimes to be frequent in Germany; yet the
highway is most safe, and the nature of the people abhorring from such acts,
which are never committed by Gentlemen, but only by rascals against footmen in
the highway, and those that dwell in solitary houses. Yet the severity of
punishments, and the more fierce nature of the Germans (retaining some kind of
fiercenes from their old progenitors) make such as are thus given over to
wickdnes, to be more barbarous and unmerciful, and when they have once done
ill, to affect extremity therein. To conclude, I have said, that the law of
Saxony condemns a man to death, who threatens to kill another, though he never
do the act. By the Civil law, difference is made between a day and a night
thief, because we may not kill him that steals by day, but may kill him that
robs by night, if we cannot spare him without danger to our selves. By the law
of Saxony, he that by night steals so much as a little wood, shall be hanged:
but stealing that or like goods by day, shall only be beaten with rods. In the
civil law, it is doubtful whether theft is to be punished with death or no, and
most commonly it concludes, that only theft deserves not death, if it be not
accompanied with other crimes. But the law of Saxony expressly condemns a
thief to be hanged, if he steal above the value of five Hungarian Ducates of
gold, or under that value to be beaten with rods, and to be marked with a
burning iron, in the ears or cheeks and forehead, and so to be banished. And
howsoever generally a thief may not be hanged by the Civil Law, yet in some
cases it condemns him to be hanged. By the law of Saxony the thing stolen must
be restored to the owner, and may not be detained by the Magistrate, and they
who wittingly receive stolen goods, or give any help to thieves, are subject
no less then the thieves to the punishment of hanging. In Germany there be
very few robberies done by the highway, and those only upon footmen; for
they that pass by coach or horse, carry long Pistols or Carbiners, and are
well accompanied. But if any robbers affaile, in respect of the severe
punishment, they commonly kill. In Germany they who are hanged for simple theft
hang in iron chains upon the gallows till they rot and consume to nothing,
but in Bohemia after three days they are cut down and buried. I did see one
that had stolen less then five gold guldens, whipped about the town, one that
consented being led by his side for ignominy, but not whipped. I did see
another small offender led to the gallows with a condemned man, that he might
beware by that example. And I have seen others for stealing under the said
value, put in a basket, and thrice ducked in the river, for a warning upon the
first fault. And I have often heard them tax our English Justice, for hanging
those that steal above the value of thirten pence halfe-peny, which will
hardly buy a rope. By the Civil Law he that finds any thing, and for gain
keeps it, is guilty of theft; for he ought to make it publicly known, and to
restore it being owned, or other wise if he be poor to keep it, if he be rich,
to distribute it among the pore.

By the Law of Saxony, it is a theeuish thing not to make publicly known any
thing that is found; but he that so does, shall not suffer death or any
corporal punishment, because he did not of purpose take it away: but if he
that lost it, do cry it in the Church or marketplace, then if it be more then
the value of five shillings, he is thought worthy to be beaten with rods, or
to endure such arbitrary punishment, according to the value of the thing found.

By the Civil Law, he that cuts down trees secretly, shall pay the double
value: but by the Law of Saxony, the mulct is according to the value. By the
Civil Law, they that steal the necessaries belonging to husbandry, shall
restore four fold, and also incur infamy. But one Law of Saxony condemns
them to have their bones broken with wheels; and another Law makes the
punishment arbitrary. The Civil Law confiscates goods for which custom is not
paid, but the Law of Saxony imposes Fine as well upon those which pay not
customs and duties, as upon those that pass not the beaten way, where they
are paid, but go some by way, to defraud the Prince. By the Civil Law,
sacrilegious persons are beheaded: but by the Law of Saxony their bones are
broken upon the wheel, and marks are set up according to the number of their
offenses in that kind. By the Civil Law, no offender may be burnt in the
forehead, because the face may not be dissigured, as created to the similitude
of God: but in Saxony, those whch are beaten with rods, or banished, are also
many times marked, by being burnt in the hand, or by cutting off their ears,
or by pulling out their eyes, or by being burnt in the cheeks, so as the hair
may not cover the mark but it may be manifest to strangers in foreign parts.
Yet the interpreters of that Law, think at this day, that offenders can not be
so punished by that Law, and that a thief ought not so to be marked. By the
civil Law, witches doing any act whereupon a man dies, are to be beheaded, but
by the Law of Saxony, they are to be burnt. Yet by a late Statute of the
Elector, they are sometimes beheaded, (for you must understand that in all
places, the Provincial Law is daily increased by new Statutes of Princes) And
by the Law of Saxony, a witch having done no hurt by that art, is punished
arbitrarily. And the Germans credibly report, that there be many witches in the
Countries lying upon the Baltic sea, and especialy upon the Northen side
thereof, as in Lapland, being part of the kingdom of Suetia; and that in those
places they have general meetings, and Colleges of witches, who will tell any
man what his friends do at anytime, in the remorest parts, one of them falling
down as in ecstasy, and when he comes to himself, relating the particulars
thereof, and that they ordinarily sell winds to the Mariners, to carry them
out of the haven to the maine sea.

In Germany those that set houses on fire, either hired thereunto, or of there
ownemalice, and also witches use to be burnt, or if their crime be heinous,
use to be put to death with a (...) iron on spit, thrust into their hinder
parts. Coins of counterfeit money, are by the Law to dye in boiling lead. By
the Civil Law the goods of a banished man may be seized to repair any loss,
but it is not lawful for any man to kill him, neither is he infamous. But by
the Law of Saxony, he that is banished by the Empire, may be killed; because he
broke the peace, and after a years banishment, he is infamous; always
understanding, that he is lawfully banished, By the Civil Law, a traitor to
his country, is to be burned to death; but by the Law of Saxony, his bones are
brokn upon the wheel, and by custom many torments are in some crimes added to
this punishment. By the Civil Law, he that steals a virgin, widow, or Nun,
and all that help him in that rape, are beheaded: but by the Law of Saxony,
besides the beheading of the offenders, the places are to be laid waste where
the force was offered, and the beasts to be killed that helped to do the force,
as the horses which carried them away; yet this is not observed, but in
practice only he is put to death that offered the force.

Of old the women of Germany, were wont to purge themselves from suspicion of
adultery, by the combat of champions, or by treading on shares of hot burning
iron with their naked feet, with out taking any harm, and this purgation
should still be observed; neither is it abrogated in Saxony, but only is
vanished by difusing. And the Germans have not only of old been severe
punishers of breaches in wedlock, so as it was lawful for the husband to
expel his adulterous wife out of his house before all his neighbors, with her
body naked and her hair shorn, and so to beat her with rods through the
streets; but also even to this day, the chastity of wives, through the severity
of the Law against the incontinent, is no where so preserved, as in Germany. If
a married person lie with one that is unmarried, as well on the man as the
woman's side, the married party is put to death, and the unmarried is punished by
the purse, and with ignominy; and if both parties be married, boh die. And our
age has seen two notable examples of this Justice in Germany, one of a
Duchess, who by authority of her husband and of her own brother, was for this
crime forced to drink poison secretly, for preserving of all their honors.
The other of another Duchess who was bricked up in a most narrow room, having
an hole in the wall by which she received her meat, to prolong her miserable
life, while her husband had another wife and lived with her in the same Castle,
in which she thus languished. In most places of Germany this sin is punished
no less then with death; yet in some places, and upon some circumstances, (as
of a man having an old and barren wife) the delinquent sometimes escapes with a
mulct of money: and otherwhere the judgment is drawn out with delays of the
suit, to spare the parties without manifest breaches of the Law. In Bohemia
adultery is also punished with death. In Germany I did see a poor knave
hanging and rotting on the gallows, being condemned to that death for having
two wives at one time in two several Cities, and I did see another beheaded
for lying withhis wives sister.

In Civil causes, I observed these laudable customs in Germany, namely that
in many Courts, they that go to Law lay down a caution or pledge, which he
loses, Civil Judgments.
who in the end of the trial, is found rashly and unjustly to have sued the
other. That the Fees of Lawyers are limited, and that icasts or impertinent
speeches are punished, and they are tied to speak nothing that is not to the
purpose.

Of old, no beauty, age, nor riches, helped a defloured virgin, to get any
husband at any time. And no doubt virgins to this day are no where so careful
of their good name as in Germany; no where virgins more modestly behave
themselves, no where virgins live to so ripe years before they be married, as
in Germany. At Wittenberg I did see harlots punished by standing at the Altar
with a torch lighted in their hands, and by being whipped with rods, while many
drums were beaten, and basins tinckled about them. At Heidelberg I did see an
harlot put in a basket, and so ducked into the river Neccar; and because she
whooped and hollowed as in triumph, when she rose out of the water, she was for
that impudency ducked the second time. At Prage in Bohemia, howsoever harlots
be there as common as in Italy, and dwell in streets together, (where they
stand at the doors, and by wanton signs allure passengers to them) yet I did
see some men and women of the common sort, who for simple fornication, were
yoked in carts, and therewith drew out, of the City the filth of the streets.
But while the Bohemians thus chasten the pooter sort, I fear the greater Flies
escape their webs.

In Germany at the time of public Faires, after the sound of a bell, it is
free for debtors, harlots, and banished people to enter the City; but they
must have care to be out of the territories before the same bell sound again
at the end of the Fair, they being otherwise subject then to the Law. At
Leipzig I did see an harlot taken after this second sound of the bell, who had
been formerly banished, with two of her forefingers cut off; and she, not for
incontinencie, but by the law of banishment, was next day beheaded. Whiles I
lived in the same City, it happened that a virgin of the better sort being
with child, and cunningly concealing it, was surprised with the time of birth
in the Church upon a Sunday, and silently brought forth the child in her pew or
seat, covering it with rushes being dead, which was unknown to all in the body
of the Church, only some young men sitting in a roode or loft with the
Musicians, perceived the fact, and accused her for murdering the child: In the
mean time, she went home from the Church, in the company of the other
virgins, without any show of such weakness, and after, upon the said accusation
being imprisoned, the report was that she should be judged to death, after
the old Law mentioned by the Poet Propertius, namely, being sewed in a steke
with a living cat (in steed of an Ape), and a living Cock, Snake, and Dog, and
so drowned in the river with them. But delay being used in the judgment, and
her honorable friends making intercession for her, and the murder of her
child being not proved, when I left the City after six months she remained
in prison, and it was not known what would become of her.

As Well in Germany as Bohemia, bastards are excluded from public profession of
liberal or mechanical arts, only they may exercise them in the houses of
private Gentlemen, (in which course of life as servants they commonly live) but
never in open shops. All graduates in Universities take an oath, that they were
begotten in lawful matrimony. And if any man ignorantly should marry a woman
great with child, howsoever the child be borne in marriage, yet it shall
inherit nothing from the husband. Bastards cannot be sureties for any
imprisoned or delinquent man, nor enjoy the extraordinary benefits of the law,
and are commonely named of the City or Town where they were borne, for a
mark of ignominy, not after any man's surname. But the public Notaries by
privileges granted to them from Emperors and Popes, have power to make their
posterity legitimate.

In the lower part of Germany, which was all named Saxony of old, a debtor
shall not be received into prison, except the Creditor allow the Iaylor two
pence by the day to give him bread and water, and after a years imprisonment,
if the debtor take his oath that he is not able to pay, he shall be set free,
yet the creditor has still his right reserved upon his yearly wages for his
labor, and upon his gains by any art or trade, and upon any goods whatsoever
he shall after possess. And before any debtor be imprisoned, the Magistrate
gives him eighteen weeks time to pay his debt, and commits him not till that
time be past. And in some places the debtor lines at his own expense, and
shall be tied to pay his creditors charges, if he be able to do it.

In some places, especially at Lubecke, I have observed that strangers being
Creditors, have more favor then the Creditors of the same City against a
Citizen debtor, because strangers by reason of their traffic, and have
homeward, cannot well expect the delay of suits, in which respect their debtors
shall presently be imprisoned, whereas mutually among the Citizens, they give
the foresaid or like time of payment, before they will imprison them: Debts
without specialty are tried by Oath. In Bohemia the debtors are imprisoned
presently, and maintain themselves, not being released till the creditors be
satisfied.

In Germany, if any man draw other men's moneys into his hands, and being able,
yet pays not his debts, he is guilty of capital punishment; but that ingenious
and honest Nation has few or no such bankerouts. By the Law of Saxony, he that
deceiues by false weights and measures, is to be whipped with rods.

The Emperors of old granted the privilege of coining Money, to many Princes
and free Cities; and the Emperor in the Diet or Parliament of the year 1500,
commanded all Princes, Persons, and Bodies so privileged, to send their
Counselors to him at Nurnberg, and that in the mean time all Coining should
cease, under the penalty to leese the privilege of Coining. In the same place,
the year 1559, many Laws were made for coining Moneys, whereof I will relate
some few. First the weight and purity of the metal was prescribed, together
with the Inscriptions to be set upon the Coins. Then it was decreed, that
after six months no strange Moneys should be current, whereof many are
particularly named. That all foreign Gold should after the same time be
forbidden, excepting the Spanish single and donble Ducats, the Portugal
Crowns with the short cross, the Crowns of Burgundy, Netherland, France,
Spain, and Italy, to each of which pieces a certain value was set. Moreover
it was decreed, that counterset coining or melting, should be punished
according to the quality of the offense. That uncoined gold and silver should
be delivered by each man into the Mints of his own Prince. That it should be
lawful to Goldsmiths for exercise of their trade, (and no more) to melt gold
and silver, and to divide it into parts, so as they export none of it. That no
man should sell or pawn the privilege of Coining, heretofore granted him from
the Emperors, and that like privileges hereafter to be granted, should be of
no force, without certain conditions there prescribed. Other Laws of Coining
I have formerly set down in the Chapter of Coins.

Germany has few or no beggars, the Nation being generally industrious,
excepting leprous men, who live in Almes-houses, and standing far off, beg of
passengers with the sound of a bell, or of a wooden clapper, but no man denies
alms to him that begs, they having small brass moneys of little value. The
Law forbids any to beg, but those that are lame, and charge Magistrates to
bring up their children in manual Arts. The Laws wisely provide against all
frauds in manual Arts and in Trades, and since no Trade can do more hurt then
the Potecaries, for the preservation of health, or the less hurt of the sick,
the Law prouides that their shops be yearly visited, and purged of all
corrupted drugges, which the visiters see burned. The Germans freely permit
usury to the Jews, who at Franckfort, at Prage, in the Province of Morauia,
and in many places under Princes of the Papacy, have Cities, or at least
streets to dwell in, where they live separated from Christians, and grind the
faces of the poor with insatiable avarice. For they take fifty in the hundred
by the year, with a pawn of gold or silver, and one hundredth in the hundredth
by the year, with a pawn of apparel or household stuff, never lending any
thing without a good pawn. But the Germans among themselves cannot by the Law
take more then five or fix in the hundredth for a years use. Yet among
Christians, there want not some, who use both the name and help of the Jews,
to put out their money with greater gain.

Of old among the Germans, with out respect to last Wills and Testaments, the
The Laws of Inheritance.
sons lawfully begotten succeeded alone in the Inheritance, and for want of
them, first brothers; then uncles. Caesar in his Commentaries writes, that the
fields were yearly divided by the Magistrate, no man having fees or
inheritance proper to him, lest husbandry should take away their warlike
dispotion, or they should become covetous; and adds, that they loved vast
solitudes upon their consines, as if no people durst dwell near them; or at
least to the end they might live more safe from sudden incursions of enemies.
At this day all barbarousnesse being abolished, they succeed according to the
laws in the Fees and inheritances of their parents and Kinsmen, and affect
peace as much as any other Nation. But they trust not so much to solitudes or
the naked breast for defense from their enemies, as in strong forts and well
fortified Cities.

By the Civil Law, as the son, so the nephew, or sons son, (representing
his father) succeeds in land granted by fee. By the Law of Saxony, only the
son succeeds, excluding the nephew: and if there be no son, the Fee
retournes to the Lord. But howsoever the old Interpreters have so determined,
yet the later Interpreters, iudgeing it most unequal so to exclude the nephew,
so interpret the Statute of the Saxonicall Law, as they make the Fee granted to
the Father and his children, to extend to the nephews (or the sons of any his
son,) so as the sons cannot exclude them. By the Feudatory Civil Law,
brothers and collateral cosens, succeed in the Fee of the Father, sometimes to
the seventh degree, sometimes infinitely: for the Interpreters extend the
succession of the right line without end, but the succession of the collateral
line only to the seventh degree. But in the Law of Saxony, collateral kinsmen
have no right of succession in the Fee, except they have it by right of joint
inuestiture. These Laws differ in numbering the degrees. For the Saxons make
the first degree in cosen-germans by the fathers side, namely the sons of two
brethren; and the second degree in the sons of two cosen-germans: whereas in
the Civil Law, cosengermans are in the fourth degree of consanguinity. By the
Civil Law, brothers dividing a fee, prejudice not themselves in mutual
succession; so as two brothers dividing, and after one of them dying without a
son, the part of him that is dead, shall return to him that lives. But by
the Law of Saxony, the succession depends upon using it in common, from which
if they depart, they are judged to have renounced the mutual right of
succession; so as one brother dying after the division, the other has no right
to his part: therefore by custom one brother uses to retain the fee, and to
satisfy his brethren in money and goods, commonly with condition that this
money and goods shall be bestowed in getting another fee. By the Civil Law, if
the vassal have built houses, or bestowed money in bettering the old houses,
the Lord of the Fee shall either satisfy the heir according to the estimation
of the expense, or shall suffer him to carry away the houses. But by the Law of
Saxony, the fee lies open to the Lord, with all the houses built, one case
excepted. By the Civil Law, if the vassal die without heir male before the
month of March, the fruits of that year pertain to the Lord: but if he die
after the Calends of March, before the Month of August, the fruits pertain to
the heirs. But by the Law of Saxony, if the vassal live past the day when the
rent is due, the heirs shall enjoy the fruits of his labor. By the Civil
Law, if the Fee upon the death of the Lord, fall to all his sons, either
equally or otherwise, the inuestiture must be desired of all: but by the Law of
Saxony, it suffices to ask it of one son of the dead Lord. By the Civil
Law, a servant or a clown may be invested in a Fee; which done, the clown
becomes a Gentleman, if the nature of the fee require it: But by the Law of
Saxony, only he that is borne of the knightly order by father and mother is
capeable of a fee, though custom prevail to the contrary. By the Civil Law,
if the vassal leave an heir, he cannot refuse the inheritance, and retain
the fee, but must hold or refuse both: but by the Law of Saxony, he may retain
the fee, leaving the inheritance, and in that case is not bound to satisfy
creditors. By the Civil Law, a man may give or sell his land to a Prince or
Prelate, and take it again of him in fee. But by the Law of Saxony, except the
Prince or any buyer whatsoever, retain the land a year and a day, before he
grants it back in fee, he that gave or sold it, or his heir, has right to
recover the land. By the Civil Law, if the vassal have lost his horse or
arms in war, he has no remedy against the Lord, because he is tied by duty
to help him: but by the Law of Saxony, the Vassal is not tied to serve the
Lord any longer, except he repair his loss, and the Lord is tied to pay a
certain ransom for his captive Vassal. By the Civil Law, the Lord, or the
Father of the Vassal being dead, the Vassal is bound to ask inuestiture
within a year and a month: but by the Law of Saxony, either of them being
dead, he must ask it without delay. By the Civil Law, the Vassal must serve
the Lord at his own charge: but by the Law of Saxony, he is only tied to
serve him six weeks, and by custom the Lord must feed him and his horse, or
give him a competent allowance.

By the Civil law, the pupil is excused from the Lords service: but by the law
of Saxony, the Tutor must serve in his place. By the Civil law, a Fee falling
to a Monk, belongs to the Monastery during his life: but by the law of Saxony,
it returns to the Lord. And touching the succession of Monks in any
inheritance whatsoever, though by the Civil law they are accounted dead, yet
the same law admits the^ to succeed with the children of the intestate father:
but by the law of Saxony, they are not capable of any inheritance; yet this Law
seeming unjust to the Popes, it was corrected, so as their succession was given
to the Monastery. But in our age, the Judges have pronounced a Monk himself to
be capeable of inheritance, notwithstanding the Papal Law gives his
inheritance to the Monastery, and that because the Monkish Vows being against
the word of God, the persons of Monks are free to take inheritance. By the
Civil Law, the Vassal is bound to accompany his Lord when he goes with the
King of the Romans, to take the Crown of the Empire at Rome but by the Law of
Saxony, he may redeem this service with paying the tenth part of his yearly
rent; and since, the golden Bulla has restrained this service, to twenty
thousand foot, and four thousand horse, and the payment of them has since
been equally divided through Germany, allowing a horseman twelve Guldens, and a
footeman four Guldens. By the Civil Law, he forfeites his Fee, who cuts down
fruitful trees, or pulls up vines, but by the Law of Saxony, it is free to the
possessor, to make the lands or houses of the Fee better or worse, at his
pleasure. By the Civil Law, if the Lord deny inuestiture, it must be asked
often and humbly: but by the Law of Saxony, if the Vassal ask it thrice, and
has witnesses that the Lord denied his service, afterward, so he have good
witnesses thereof, he and his heirs shall possess the Fee, without any bond
of service, and his heir is not bound to ask inuestiture. By the Civil Law,
if two Lords of one Vassal shall both at one time require his service, he is
bound to serve the most ancient Lord: but by the Law of Saxony, the person of
the Vassal must serve the Lord that first calls him, and he is to pay a sum
of money (as the tenth pound) to the other.

By the aforesaid Laws and daily practice, it appears, that the Territories
of Princes (according to the old Feudatory Laws) either fall to the eldest son
(who gives his brothers yearly Pensions, or according to his inheritance,
recompenceth them with money, or other lands), or else are equally divided
among the brothers. Yet some Fees are also feminine, and fall to the daughters
and their husbands, and some may be given by testament: but others, (as those
of the Electors) for want of heirs males are in the Emperors power, who with
the consent of the Princes of the Empire, commonly gives them to the husbands
of the daughters, or to the next heirs by affinity, if there be none of
consanguinity. I have heard of credible men, that the Dukedom of Austria first
falls to the sons, then to the cousens, and for want of them to the daughters.
The Duke of Wineberg and the Duke of Coburg (sons to Frederick Duke of
Saxony and Elector, but deprived of his Electorship by the Emperor Charles the
fifth, for his Religion), did equally divide their fathers inheritance, (the
Electorship being given away, the inheritance whereof could not be divided): but
I did observe, that the brother to that Duke of Coburgs son being unmarried,
had no inheritance sub-diuided to him, which was said should be done, when he
took a wife. The Count Palatine of the Rheine, not long before this time
deceased, did divide all the inheritance with his brother Duke Casimere,
excepting the Palatinate; which with the style and dignity of Elector, belongs
to the eldest son. But they say that many times the Knights and chief men of
the Province, will not for the public good, lest the Princes power should be
weakened, permit this division among their Princes, but force the younger
brother to take money or yearly pension for the part of his inheritance; and
that this division is also many times forbidden by the dying fathers last
Testament. And they seem to do this not without just cause, since the great
number of children often oppresses diverse principalities. Thus 17 brothers, al
Princes of Anhalt (for the title is common to all the younger brothers with the
eldest, even where the patrimony is not divided) dividing their fathers estate
between them, were said to have each of them ten thousand gold Guldens by the
year; and if all these brethren should have children, it was probable that the
Principality could not bear so many heirs. I remember that I did see one of
them at Dresden, in the Court of Christian Elector and Duke of Saxony, who
received of him a pension to maintain certain horses, and was one of his
Courtiers. The like happened in our time to the Counts of Mansfeild, whereof
twenty seven lived at one time, and some of them followed the wars of
Netherland, the revenues of so narrow a County sufficing not to bear up the
dignity of their birth, howsoever it yields Mines of Silver, which were at
that time pawned for money to the Fuggari of Augsburg.

I observed that the younger sons of Protestant Princes, whose Fees could not
be divided, yea, and the eldest son during his fathers life, inioyed the
revenues of Bishoprics as Administrators (being so called), besides money and
pensions, and some lands of inheritance, and otherwise for better maintenance
followed the wars. In this sort when the Elector Christian Duke of Saxony
died, his three sons being yet under age, inioyed three Bishoprics, namely,
those of Misen, Nauberg, and Mersberg, though the Emperor and the Gentlemen of
those parts in a Provincial meeting, were instant to have three Bishops
chosen, and the Emperor desired that dignity for one of his brothers. The same
three Princes yet being under age, I did see coins of Gold and Silver bearing
the images of all three: but when they came to age, the Electorship and the
Inheritance belonging to it, fell to the eldest son, the younger retaining
the said Bishoprics for life, and their part of other lands that might be
divided, for inheritance to them and their children.

The Fees of Princes are given by the Emperor, and the Fees of many Gentlemen
and of some Earls are given by Princes: but I return to the Laws of
Succession.

By the Civil law, they that disscend of the right line, have the first place
in succession, al which without respect of sex or fatherly power, do succeed
equally, the sons by the Pole, the nephews to their part, namely, to the part
which their father should have had, if he had been then living; so as it
seems, that four or more nephews, the sons of a third brother dead, dividing
with two brothers living, all the nephews shall only have a third part,
belonging to their father being dead, and each of the two living brothers shall
have another third part. The Law of Saxony changes nothing touching the
persons, but differs in the succession of goods: For the daughters shall by
privilege have their mothers apparel, and other ornaments, with all
vtensiles (or household stuff), so as they shall be valued to them in their
due parts. And the niece, borne of one of the sisters being dead, has the same
right with the other sisters for her mothers part: but none can have these
vtensiles, save the women on the mothers side, (vulgarly called Spieimagen),
for the brothers daughter has no right to them. And I have heard of learned
men, that these vtensiles cannot be alienated by the last testament, namely,
vessels of brass (but not of pewter), linen, beds (excepting the heirs of
Inne-keepers, whose chief wealth commonly consists in such furniture) also
sheep, geese, jewels of gold, and like ornaments of the mother, excepting the
seal ring of gold, and pearls, and other jewels, which men use to wear as
well as women. By a Law made in the Dukedom of Meckelburg, because the women
in the year 1388 redeemed theeir captive Prince wirh their Jewels, many
privileges of succession are granted to women. By the Law of Saxony, as the
vtensiles belong to the daughters, so besides the decree of the Civil Law, in
the Knightly Order all goods of expedition (as Arms, and the like) belong to
the sons, and the sword is always given to the eldest son. But these
things are not observed among those of common or plebean rank, except custom
have made them as Law, so as the Daughters by custom have the vtensiles, and
the eldest son have the chief horse for the plough. I have formerly said,
that by the Law of Saxony, the nephew is excluded from succeeding in a Fee with
his uncle on the fathers side (that is, his fathers brother), but that in our
days the nephew is admitted according to the Civil law. I have said, that in
the succession of moveable goods, the sons succeed the father by the Pole:
but the nephews (or sons of another son deceased) succeed their
Grandfather only in the part belonging to their father. I have said, that the
Law of Saxony changes nothing touching the persons, but only differs in the
succession to some goods, as the vtensiles. Now I add further, that the
nephews succession and equal division with his fathers brothers, is decreed
by an Imperial Law, abrogating all contrary customs.

By the Civil Law, brothers on both sides, and together with them, the
children of their dead brothers and sisters, are then first called to
inheritance, when the deceased has no heirs in the right line discending or
ascending: but without any respect to the Imperiallisaid Law, (as speaking of
custom, not written Law), or to the last Civil Law, the Law of Saxony
decrees, and of old custom it is observed among the Saxons, that in the
succession of Collaterals, the living brother excludes the children of his dead
brother, (I say in freehold, not in fee) and the brother on both sides excludes
the brother on the one side only in the third degree, and the brother on both
sides excludes the children of his dead brother in the third degree. But I have
observed that this law is thus practiced among the Saxons, as imagining there
be three brothers, Thomas, John, and Andrew, and it happening, that Thomas
first dies leaving a son, and then John dies unmarried, or without issue, the
goods of John at his death shall not fall to the son of Thomas his eldest
brother, but to his brother Andrew yet living; and Andrew dying last, as well
his own as his brother John's goods fall to his own son: but if he have no
son, then they fall to the son of Thomas. And again putting the case, that
Thomas and John are both dead and each of them has left a son or sons, if
Andrew die without a son, the son of Thomas succeedes him, without any
respect to the son of John. By the Civil law, the uncle of the deceased by
the fathers side, is not only excluded by the brother of the deceased, but
also by the brothers children: but by the Law of Saxony, since the right of
representation simply has no place, and these persons are in the same degree,
namely, in the third degree, they are called together to the inheritance, yet
the Scabines (or Judges) of Leipzig, have pronounced the contrary to this
judgment of the Judges in the highest Court of the Duke of Saxony rather
following the Civil Law, which preferres the brothers son, before the uncle
on the fathers side. By the Civil Law in the successions of Collaterals, the
brothers of both sides are for a double bond preferred to the brothers by one
parent only, so as the privilege be not extended to things in Fee, but to
things in freehold; because in Fees the bond on the mothers side is not
regarded. By the Law of Saxony a brother on both sides excludes a brother by
one parent, as nearer by one degree.

By the Civil law Bastards are admitted to the inheritance of the mother, and
the brother lawfully begotten is called to the inheritance of a dead bastard
brother by the said mother, but by the Law of Saxony, as a bastard cannot be
admitted to inherit with one lawfully begotten, so he that is lawfully
begotten, cannot succeed a bastard, that is not legitimated, and by the law of
Saxony a mother having a bastard daughter, and dying without any other child,
cannot leave her vtensile goods to that daughter. Yet in all cases concerning
bastards, the Judges leave the law of Saxony as unequal, and judge after the
Civil law, so as in Saxony bastards both succeed, and are succeeded unto, and
always part of the goods is given, if not by law, yet by equity, to maintain
the bastards, and the Interpreters will have the law of Saxony understood of
those, that are borne in incest, who have not the benefit of legitimation. By
the Civil law he that is borne in the seventh month after marriage, is
reputed lawfully begotten: but by the law of Saxony, he is reputed a bastard
that is borne before the due time; yet because Physicians agree, that the
seventh month may be called due time, in custom and practice the law of
Saxony agrees with the Civil law.

By the Civil Law the Testament is broken by the birth of a Posthumus, (that
is, a son borne after his fathers death), if it give no part to this child;
so the birth be proved by two witnesses: but by the Law of Saxony four men by
hearesay, and two women by sight, must testify the birth. In the Civil Law it
is controuerted how sons of brothers shall succeed the uncle by the fathers
side; and the greater part says, that they succeed to the parts of the
brothers: so as one child of a brother shall have as much as two or more
children of another brother: but by the Law of Saxony when the inheritance falls
to any that are not brothers and sisters, they succeed by pole, so as one
brother having many children, each of them shall have equal part with the
only child of another brother; and if they be further off in degrees, those
that are equal in degree, have equal portions. But both these Laws are made
to agree by a Statute of the Emperor Charles the fifth in the year 1539,
whereby it is determined that the sons of brothers shall not succeed to
parts, but by pole, to the Uncle by the Fathers side; not withstanding any
Statute or custom to the contrary.

By the Civil Law the division of Inheritance must be made by Lots, and if the
parts be not so made equal, the Judge must determine it; but by the Law of
Saxony, if there be only two persons, the elder deuideth, and the younger
chooses, and if there be more persons, then according to the Civil Law, the
inheritance is divided equally, and they cast lots for their parts.

In this division I have observed such equity among the Saxons, as if one son
of a Citizen, have been brought up in the University, or instructed in any Art
or Science at the Fathers charge, something shall be taken from his part, and
given to the other brothers wanting like education, or being tender in years:
And the Germans being less apt to disagreement, seldom go to Law about
inheritance, and if any difference happen, an Arbiter is appointed, and the
Magistrate determines it with expedition. By the Civil Law the Son of a
banished man is deprived of his Fathers inheritance, but by the Law of Saxony
he shall enjoy it.

By the Civil Law the degrees of Consanguinity, end in the tenth degree,
excepting Barrons and noble persons, who dying without heirs, the kinsmen
succeed, though it be in the hundredth degree; and if all the Family of a King
should die, and leave no man nearer then one of the old blood removed a
thousand degrees, yet he should succeed in the Kingdom. The degree of
Consanguinity by the Law of Saxony, ends in the seventh degree, for that is the
tenth by the Civil Law, the sons of two brothers being by the Law of Saxony
in the first degree, who by the Civil Law, are in the fourth degree. By the
Civil Law Cities howsoever privileged, cannot possess the vacant goods of
men dying without heirs, but they fall to the Emperor; but by the Law of
Saxony Cities that have absolute power, confiscate these goods by custom, so
as the goods of a stranger, or any dying without heirs, are brought to the
Judges of the place, who keep them for one whole year: yea, they challenge
immovable goods, but with prescription of years: And these goods use to be
converted to godly uses, and I have observed some to be deeply fined, for
fraudulent detaining these goods.

By the Civil Law he that is of age, so he be in his wits, and no prodigal
person, may freely sell, give, or by any course alienate his goods: but by the
Law of Saxony this power is restrained, for no man without the consent of the
next heirs can alienate immovable goods gotten by his Progenitors, (vulgarly
called Stamgutter), but only for godly uses, or dowries given upon marriage,
(for contracts of dowry are of force for use and property without consent of
the heirs, though made after the marriage, if the gift be confirmed by the
giuers death): but if any man will sell his Progenitors goods, first by the
Civil Law he must offer them to be bought to the next heirs, and they
refusing to buy them, he may then freely sell them to any man, and if they were
never offered to the heirs, notwithstanding the possession is transferred, but
the heirs have an action for their interest.

By the Civil Law, weakness (as of old age) does not make the gift of less
force: but by the Law of Saxony, a man or woman sick to death, cannot without
the consent of the heirs, give any goods above the value of five shillings, so
as a certain solemnity is required among the sick, and also those that are
healthful, in the gift of any moveable or immovable goods: For among the
sick or healthful, he that will give any goods, if he be of Knightly Order,
he must be of that strength, as armed with his Sword and Target, he can upon a
stone or block an ell high mount his horse, and his servant is admitted also to
hold his stirrup. If he be a Citizen, he must beable to walk in the way, to
draw his Sword, and to stand up right before the Judge, while the gift is made:
And a Clown must be able to follow the Plow one morning. Lastly, a woman must
be of that strength, as she can go to the Church of a certain distance, and
there stand so long till the gift be made: but these things are understood of
gifts among the living, not of gifts upon death. By the Civil Law gifts are
of force, though made out of the place where the goods are seated: but by the
Law of Saxony for immovable goods the gift must be made in the place, and
before the Judge of the place, where the goods are seated, only some cases
excepted.

By the Civil Law, the heir that makes no Inuentory, is tied to the
Creditors, above the goods of Inheritance; but by the Law of Saxony he is
neither tied to make an Inuentory, nor to pay further then the goods of the
deceased extend. By the Civil Law, within ten days, and by the Law of Saxony,
within thirty days after the death of him that dies, the heir may not be
troubled by the creditors. An Imperial Statute decrees, that he who makes a
Testament, must be in his right mind, so as he speaks to the purpose, and must
have witnesses, who have no profit by his Testament, and such as themselves
have power to make a Testament. He that disinherites the next heir, is bound
to give him a lawful legacy according to his goods. By the Civil Law leprous
persons and borne imperfect, are not excluded from inheriting: but by the Law
of Saxony, the lame, dumb, blind, leprous, and the like, are not capable of
inheritance, or see, yet if any man after his succession shall become leprous,
he shall enjoy the inheritance.

By the Law of Saxony, Tutorage belongs only to the Kinsmen, by the Fathers
side, and not (as by the Civil Law) to all in the same degree, but ever to the
next, and if many be in the same next degree, then to the eldest of them only,
yet so as the danger of Tutorage belongs to all together. Thus Christian Duke
of Saxony dying, the Duke of Winberg only, (not the Duke of Coburg in the same
degree with him); was Tutor to his children, though the Electorship was taken
from their Grandfather, and given to this Family with great and just envy by
the Emperor Charles the fifth. In common judgment, especialy respecting such
cases, the kinsmen on the mothers side seem more fit to be Tutors, who have no
profit, but rather loss by the death of the Pupil, whereas the kinsmen on the
Fathers side are heirs to him. Yet the common practice to the contrary, (as in
this particular example) produces no tragical events among the Germans, being
of a good and peaceable nature. By the Civil Law, a Pupil is said to be in
minority till he be five and twenty years old, and the tutorage cease, and
the Pupil is capable of inuestiture at ripe age, namely the Male at fourteen,
the female at twelve years age: but by the law of Saxony the Pupil is said to
be in minority till he be 21 years old, and the Male is capable to be invested
in his fee when he is 13 years and six weeks old: for the Saxons make
difference between these two things, Binnen Iahren vnnd binnen Tagen, that is,
under years, and under days: for the Pupil is held under years for
inheritance til he be foureteen years old, and for Fees till he be thirteen
years and six weeks old: but he is held under days or in minority, till he
be twenty one years old. The Imperial law of the golden Bulla not
withstanding, makes the Electors sons to be of ripe age, and free from Tutors
at eighteen years age. I have observed that Tutors in Saxony allow the Pupils
five in the hundredth for all their money which they have in their hands.
Females are under Tutors till they marry, and they cannot marry without their
consent, but refusing to give consent, they are bound to yield a reason thereof
before the Judges, lest they should fraudulently deny consent. By the Civil
Law the Tutor is not bound to give account, till the Tutorage be ended, but the
Administrator may yearly be called to account, and the eldest brother must
give account to the younger, of the inheritance which he administreth
undivided: but by the Law of Saxony, if the Tutor be not heir to the Pupil,
(as the Kinsman by the Fathers side, while the Mother lives, who excludes him
from succession), he is tied yearly to give account, but if he be heir to the
Pupil, he is not bound to give account, which notwithstanding is restrained to
Parents and Brothers, who for reverence of the blood, and natural affection,
are freed from suspicion of fraud or fault, especially where the administration
is of goods, which either they possess with the Pupils undivided, or in which
they have right of succession. Also by the Law of Saxony, the elder brother
(when his brother has no mother living) as heir to his brother, is not tied
to give account to his brother, or to his joint heir for the administration of
a common and undivided Inheritance. In like sort by the Civil Law, the Tutor
is bound to give sureties or sufficient caution, for preserving the Pupils
goods; but by the Law of Saxony, (as formerly), if the Tutor be heir to the
Pupil, or joint heir with him in undivided Inheritance, he is not tied
thereunto. By the Civil Law whatsoever falls to the son in the power of the
Father, of his mothers goods, either by Testament of the Mother, or from her
dying intestate, the Father shall have the use and full administration thereof
for his life, and for the confidence and reverence of a Father, he is not tied
to give sureties or caution for using or restoring those goods to his son, as
others having like use thereof are bound to do, yet so as in regard of this
use for life, the Father is bound according to his power to give a gift in
marriage to his son leaving him: but the mother has no, right to the use of
her sons goods. By the Law of Saxony, the use is so long granted to the
Father, till his children depart from him: but the Lawyers so interpret this,
if the Father because of the separation; for if the Son will depart of his
own motion, except he be out of minority, and will take upon him the care of a
Family, the Father shall retain the use, and is bound after to restore these
goods, except they perish by mistortune without his fault. And the same Law, is
for the Mother also, touching the goods of her Son, when the Father is dead:
but the Law concerning the Father, must be understood of the immovable goods
falling unto the Son from the Mother.

By the Civil Law the Father and Mother, or others in the ascending line,
succeed the Son or Daughter dying, in equal portions with the Brothers and
Sisters: but by the Law of Saxony, the Parents of the Son dead, or if they be
dead, the Grandfather and Grandmother, or any ascendants whatsoever, exclude
brothers and sisters by both Parents, and collaterals whatsoever; and indeed by
the Law the Father alone succeeds the dying Son or Daughter, excluding the
Mother, excepting the vtensile goods, in which the Mother is preferred: but by
the late Statute of the Electors, this Law is changed, so as the Father and
Mother succeed together: yet these things must be understood of the goods in
freehold; for in Fees they of the ascendant line succeed not the descendants,
but as every stranger may succeed, by contract expressed in the inuestiture. By
the Civil Law the Father cannot make a gift to the Son being under his
power: but by the Law of Saxony he may, yet the son receiving the gift, is
bound to acknowledge it when his Father dies, and to abate so much of his
portion in the division with his brothers, if it be of any value, and not given
to supply his wants at that time: And by both Laws the gift is good from the
Father to the Son going to warfare:

By the Civil Law the Wife in time of marriage, may have goods, in which the
Husband has no right, either to alienate or to administer them, as those goods
which she brings to her Husband above her dowry, and never gives them to him:
but by the Law of Saxony the Man and Wife have all goods in common, so as all
are said to be the Husbands, and the Wife can call nothing her own, and the
Husband has the use of all without exception, even while they live together,
for the burdens he bears, yet he has not the property of these goods, only
they both possess them undivided so long as they live together. The Husband at
marriage takes his wife and all her goods into his tuition, but this tuition is
only understood for the use, which ends when the wife dies, but the wife has
not like use in her husbands goods: And the husband in administering the goods
of his wife, must deal honestly, and neither sell nor engage them, because he
is only her Tutor. By the Civil Law the wife has power, without the presence
or consent of her husband, to give or alinate her moveable or immovable goods,
only during the marriage she cannot give away her dowry to the prejudice of
her husband, without his consent; but by the Law of Saxony, the wife cannot
give her immovable goods, nor sell or alienate any goods without her husbands
consent, because she is under his power as her Tutor. Yea, the wife cannot
give her goods to her husband, because he being her Tutor, cannot be actor to
his own profit: but if before the Magistrate she choose another Tutor, by
whose authority the gift is made, then it is of force. For in all cases in
which a gift between man and wife is of force by the Civil Law, in the same
cases at this day by custom it is of force among the Saxons, so as the former
manner be observed: But all these things of the Wives gift to her Husband, and
of alienating her goods by contract, (which she cannot make without the
consent of the Husband her Tuter), are not understood of the alienation by her
last Will and Testament. For by the Law of Saxony it is controuerted, whether
the wife may give a gift to her husband at her death, without the authority of
the foresaid Tutor chosen by her, and if it be given without the same, whether
after the death of the wife, (according to the Civil Law) this gift be
confirmed. And some interpreters say, that the same authority of a chosen
Tutor, and the same solemnity is required, as in a gift between the living,
others determine that the gift at death without a Tutor is of force, so it be
made before the Judge, because it is not a simple giving, but participates some
thing of the last Will and Testament, and for that cause five witnesses are
required to it, or that it be registered, which done, the gift is of force,
because favor is to be given to the last Testament, which must not be
captious, but free. Also because he that is of ripe age, but in minority,
though he cannot give or contract without the authority of his Tutor, yet he
may give for death. And so it is concluded, that in doubtful cases the gift
must be favored, that it may subsist, rather then be made void. Lastly, the
Law of Saxony in this, consents with the Civil Law; that a wife may make a
Will, and for death give her immovable goods to any other but her husband,
without the consent of the husband her Tutor. But by the Statute of the
Elector, the gift of vtensile goods made to the husband in prejudice of her
next kinswoman, is of so little force, as with death it is not confirmed,
except it be remuneratory. Yet among the living, this gift of stuff (as some
restrain it, so it be not to the husband) is of force, if it be made before a
Notary, and with witnesses. By the Civil Law, the husband may not have the
care of his wives goods, lest she upon affection should remit his ill
administration, and so should be in danger to loose the goods of her dowry: but
by the Law of Saxony, presently upon marriage, the husband is lawful Tutor to
his wife. By the civil law the dowry of the wife given by her father, upon the
death of the wife, returns to the father, except it be couenanted to the
contrary in the contract of the dowry: but by the law of Saxony, the husband
upon his wives death, gains all moveable goods, and so much of the dowry as
was in ready money, except it be expressly couenanted to the contrary in the
contract of the dowry, and all the goods of the wife above that she brought in
dowry, fall to the husband, nothing excepted, but only the vtensile goods, yet
this Law is not extended to the perpetual and yearly rents of the wife, which
are reputed immovable goods. By the Civil Law, if either the man or the wife
marry the second time, the party may in no case give more to the second husband
or wife, then to the children of the first marriage: but among the Saxons this
Law is abolished by contrary custom, so as not only the Step mothers use to
have much more of the husbands goods, then the children of the first marriage,
but on the other side also, the second husbands upon the death of the second
wife, being to have all her moveable goods, excepting the vtensiles, commonly
gain more then her children of her first marriage.

By the Civil Law, a Widow retains the dwelling house, honor, and dignity
of her Husband deceased, till she marry to another, and by the Law of Saxony
the dead Husband leaves his widow the right of his Family and blood, and
custom so interprets this Law, as all privileges and dignities are thereby
granted, as by the Civil law. Widows and Virgins by the Law of Saxony, if they
be of such age as they have no Tutors, may give or alienate their goods, which
a wife cannot do, being under the Tutorage of her husband yet the interpreters
restrain this to mouable goods, being otherwise in immovable goods, but by
last will and testament they may dispose of both.

By the Civil Law, if there be no Letters of Dowry or Iointure, the Husband
dying, the Wife must have the fourth part of his goods: but in some parts of
Saxony the custom is, that the Wife being a Widow, shall have the third part
of her Husbands goods, as it is in all Misen: but in other parts, as in
Thuring, the Civil Law is observed, and she has the fourth part, if the
Husband leave but 3 or four children, but if he have more, then the widow
has only an equal part with each of them: But in Misen the wife has not the
vtensile goods, which use nor to be given to women having a third part. And
moreover the widow is tied not only to leave her own goods, but her part of
goods gotten in marriage by her husband, and whatsoever her friends gave to her
in the life of her husband, or she any way gained, to their children at her
death, whether she gave them to her husband in time of his life, or no, for it
is always presumed that she got these things out of her husbands goods: And
if in any place there be no custom to determine this, then the widow besides
her fourth, or equal part, has also the vtensile goods. And in case the
husband leave no children, then the widow has her choice, whether she will
receive the third part, or renouncing the same, will retain vtensile goods, and
all other her own goods mouable or immovable, together with her dowry. But if
the husband leave children, the widow has not this choice, but must renounce
all the rest, and stick to her third part. And by custom of the Country, her
dowry and gift for marriage is doubled; so as she that brought one thousand
guldens for her dowry, shall have two thousand guldens in the division of her
husbands inheritance. And the right which married parties by statute have in
one another goods, cannot be taken from them by last Will and Testament.
Discoursing with men of experience, I heard that the widows of Princes, whiles
they remain widows, possess all their husbands estate (excepting the
Electorships, which the next kinsman by the Fathers side administers by his
right, during the minority of the son) and enjoy also the tutorage of their
children: but if they marry again, the country frees it self from them, with
giving them a tun of gold for Dowry. And that the Daughters of Princes have
Dowries from the subjects by subsidies collected, and use to swear before the
Chancellor, that their husbands being dead, or upon any accident whatsoever,
they will not return to burden the Country. That the Daughters of Gentlemen
never marry to any of inferior degree then Gentlmen, (which is constantly kept
by both sexes) and are commonly bestowed with a small Dowry: and since by the
Law they cannot succeed in fees, have at the parents death only a part of their
mouable goods with the vtensils proper to them: and one sister dying, her
portion goes not to the brothers or their children: as also the married Sister
dying, and leaving no Daughter, her portion goes not to her own sons, (except
living and in health she bequeathed it to them in her Testament) but to the
Niece on the Mothers side. Lastly, that in case the goods of a dead woman are
neither given by her last Testament, nor any Kinswomen to her on the Mothers
side can be found, her goods go not to her own Sons or male-Kinsmen, but
are confilcated to the Prince, or in free Cities to the Commonwealth.

It is said that the Roman Emperor Caracalla was wont to say, that only that
Nation knew how to rule their wives, which added the feminine article to the
Sun, The degrees in Family.
and the masculine to the Moon; as the Germans do, saying; Die Son (...) der
Mont. And no doubt the Germans are very churlish to their wives, and keep them
seruily at home: so as my self in Saxony have seen many wives of honest
condition and good First the Wives.
estate, to dress meat in the kitchen, and scarce once in the week to eat
with their husbands, but apart with the maids; and after the meal, to come
and take away their husbands table; and if they came to sit with him at table,
yet to sit down at the lower end, at least under all the men. My self have
seen husbands of like quality to chide their wives bitterly, till they wept
abundantly, and the same wives (of good rank) very soon after to bring a
chair to the husband, and serve him with a trencher and other necessaries. The
men being invited to friends houses, or any solemn feasts, never go in
company with their wives, who go alone with their faces covered. It is no
nouelty for a husband to give a box on the ear to his wife. And they scoff at
the Law in Nurnberg, which fines the husband three or four Dollers for striking
his wife, as a most unjust Law. It is ridiculous to see the wives of German
foote-soldiers going to the war, laded with burdens like she-Asses, while
the men carry not so much as their own clokes, but cast them also upon the
women's shoulders. And I should hardly believe that the Germans can love their
wives, since love is gained by loveliness, as the Poet says:

vt ameris amabilis esto.
He that for love does thirst,
Let him be loving first.
But they while they command all things imperiously, in the mean time neither
for dulnes court them with any pleasant speech, nor in courtesy grace them in
public, so much as with a kiss. It is a common saying,

Dotem accepi, Imperium vendidi.
I took a Dowry with my Wife,
And lost the freedom of my life.
But howsoever the Germans have great Dowries in marriage, and their Wives have
power to make a Testament, for disposing their goods, with many like
privileges; and howsoever they be also provoked with these injuries, yet the
men keep them within terms of duty. May not we then justly marvel, that
Englishmen having great power over their Wives, so as they can neither give any
thing in life, nor have power to make a will at death, nor can call any thing
their own, no not so much is their garters, yea, the Law (I must confess too
severely) permitting the Husband in some cases to beat his Wife, and yet the
Husbands notwithstanding all their privileges, using their Wives with all
respect, and giving them the chief seats with all honors and preheminences,
so as for the most part, they would carry burdens, go on foot, fast, and
suffer any thing, so their Wives might have ease, ride, feast, and suffer
nothing, notwithstanding, no people in the World, (that ever I did see) bear
more scorns, indignities, and injuries, from the pampered sort of Women, then
they do. Surely either these our Women want the modesty of the Wives, or else
our Men have not. I will not say the severity, (which I less approve), but
rather the gravity and constancy of the Husbands in Germany.

But while the Germans thus use their Wives like Servants, they behave
themselves Of servants.
as Companions toward their Servants, who bring in meat to the Table with
their heads covered, and continually talk with their Masters without any
reverence of the cap or like duty:

The Germans are neither too indulgent, nor too stern to their sons and
daughters, Of Sons and Daughters.
yet they give them no tender education, but as they bring their children naked
into the hot stoaues, so they expose them naked to frost and snow. Neither do
they exact any humility or respect from their children, who in all places are
familiar with their Parents, and never stir their hats when they speak to them,
and when they go to bed they ask not blessing on their knees, as our children
do, but shake hands with them, which is a sign of familiarity among friends
in Germany, as in most other places.

A Gentleman never so poor, will not marry the richest Merchants Daughter, nor
The degrees in Commonwealth.
a Gentlewoman upon any condition any other then a Gentleman: Neither is there
any iuster cause of disinheriting, then base marriage, which pollution of blood
the Kinsmen will not suffer, as in our age has been seen by notable
examples: One in the House of Austria, whereof the Arch Duke of Inspruch
married the Daughter of Gentleman.
a Citizen in Augsburg, which his Kinsmen would not suffer, till he
conditioned, that her children should not succeed him in his Fees, as they did
not, though at this time they were living. The other of an Earl, who marrying
the Daughter of a Citizen in Nurnberg, was cast in prison by his Kinsmen till
he left her. He is not accounted a Gentleman, who is not so by four descents
at the least, both by the Fathers and the Mothers side; and I remember that the
Monks of Luneburg by Statute may not admit any man into their number, who has
not eight degrees on both sides: yea, the Germans are so superstitious in this
kind, as a Gentleman may have an action against him, who says he is no
Gentleman. For the better conjecture of Gentlemen's estemation in Germany, I
remember one of the chief called Von (of) Shulenburg, whom I did see, and he
was said to have fourteen thousand gold Guldens yearly rent, and never to
ride without forty or fifty Horse to attend him: But I cannot sufficiently
marvel, that the Gentlemen, howsoever sometimes learned, yet proudly despise
Graduates of the University, no less or more then Merchants, which I found,
not only by common practice, but also by my private experience: For converting
with a Gentleman, he perceiving that I spoke Latin better then he thought
became a Gentleman, asked me how long I did study in the University; and when
I said that I was Master of Arts, (which degree our best Gentlemen disdain
not), I found that he did after esteem me as a Pedant, whereupon finding by
discourse with others, that Gentlemen despise these degrees, I sorbore after to
make this my degree known to any: And it seemed more strange to me, that
Gentlemen first rising by learning, warfare, and traffic, they only judge
warfare worthy to raise and continue Gentlemen: but indeed the traffic of
Germany is poor, being chiefly of things wrought by manual Artists, which
they have some pretense to disdain, whereas in Italy traffic is the sinew of
the Commonwealth, which the most noble disdain not: And it were to be wished,
that in England (where traffic is no less noble) the practice thereof were
no stain to Gentry. When I told an English Gentleman the pride of the
Gentlemen in Germany, despising degrees of Learning, and he heard that the
Gentlemen were vulgarly called Edelmen, he pleasantly said, that they were so
called of the English words, Idle Men. The Gentlemen of Germany bear the Arms
of their Mother, though she be no Heir, as well as of their Father, and
commonly they join to them, in steed of a mot or sentence, certain great
letters, that signify words, as D. H. I. M. T. signifying Der herr Is It Mein
Trost, that is; The Lord is my comfort, and likewise F. S. V. signifying Fide
sed vide, that is, Trust, but beware. Also Citizens and Artists, bear Arms of
their own invention, and tricked out fully as the Arms of Gentlemen, only
the helmet is close, which Gentlemen bear open.

Among the general Orders of Knights, into which Gentlemen of all nations are
The general Orders of Knights.
admitted, the Templaries in the year 1124, were confirmed by Pope Honorius,
being so called of the Temple at Jerusalem, in part whereof they dwelt.
Histories report that Pope Gregory the ninth incited them to do great damage
by their treachery to the Emperor Frederick, making the holy war in Asia.
At last the inducing of heathenish Religion, all kinds of lust and
intemperance, and the suspicion of their conspiring with the Turks, or the
fear of their too great power, made Pope Clement the fifth, a Frenchman, and
residing at Auignon, first to extinguish the Order in France, then in all
Christendom, in the year 1312; The second Order of the Iohanites (or Saint
John), was instituted by Balduine the second King of Jerusalem. Then in the
year 1308, they took the I Will of Rhodes, and were called the Knights of
Rhodes, till they were expelled thence by the Turks, in the year 1522, and
then possessing the Island of Malta, they are to this day called the Knights of
Malta: And great part of the Templaries rents, was given to this Order, into
which of old none but Gentlemen were admitted. The third Order of the
Teutonikes, that is, Germans, was instituted in the year 1190, in the time of
the Emperor Henry the sixth. They were The Order of the Germa^ Knights
called Hospitals of the Hospital which they kept near the Sepulcher of
Christ, to entertain Pilgrims: At last all Christians being driven out of
Palestine, they removed their seat to Venice, whence being called by the Duke
of Moscouy against the Prussians, they seated themselves in Prussia, Liuonia,
and Curlandia. They were all borne of noble Parents, and did wear a white
cloak, with a black cross. The Polonians in the year 1410, killed the Master
of the Order, and many thousands of the Knighs. When many Cities under the
protection of the King of Poland, sought their liberty in the year 1450, and
this Order had won a battle against the King, at last because the Citizens
refused to pay the Soldiers, the Knights themselves betrayed their Cities to
the Polonians, and after much blood shed on both parts, at last in the year
1466, peace was made, with covenants, that the King of Poland should have
Pomerella with other Castles and Towns, and that the Order should retain
Kingspurg.

And finally in the year 1547, this Order was totally extinguished, the Master
Upon the dissolution of this Order, the Duke of Prussia was created.
thereof being (as they said) forced to these conditions, namely that Albert
Marquess of Brandeburg, (being of the E'ectors Family) then Master of the
Order, should become vassal to the King of Poland, and should possess
Konigspurg with title of a Duke, to him and his brethren of the same venture,
and their Heirs Males for ever: (In which Dukedom were fifty four Castles
and eighty six Towns). Moreover that the said Duke should take new Arms, and
a Dukall habit, and when he came to do his homage at Crakaw in Poland, should
have his seat by the Kings side, but that upon Male Heirs failing, the
Dukedom should fall to the Kingdom of Poland, which was to provide for the
Daughter and Heir according to her degree, and to appoint no other Governor
of the Province, then a German having inheritance in Prussia. In the time of my
being at Dantzke, it was said, that Duke Albert was grown into a Frenzy, by a
poisoned cup given him, at his marriage with the Daughter of the Duke of Cleue:
and the common speech was, that the eldest son to the Elector of Brandeburg
was daily expected in the Dukes Court, to marry the Daughter and Heir to the
sickely Duke, to whom himself was next of kin by the Fathers side, and
Heir. And it was a common speech, that the said sickely Duke had lately lent
forty thousand Guldens to the King of Poland, and that the Elector of
Brandeburg had offered seven Tons of gold to the King of Poland, that his
Grandchild might succeed in the Dukedom of Prussia, but that it was flatly
refused by the Senate of Poland: so as it was diversely thought, according to
men's diverse judgments, what would become of the Dukedom after the said sickly
Dukes death, some judging that the King of Poland would keep the Dukedom
falling to him, others that the powerful Family of Brandeburg, would extort
the possession thereof, by force of money, or of arms.

I omit the military Orders of Knights in England, France, and Netherland, to
be mentioned in their due place.

Among the Germans I could not observe any ordinary degree of Knights,
conferred The ordinaery degree of Knighthood in Germany.
in honor upon such as deserve well in civil and warlike affairs, such as
the Kings of England give to their Subjects, with the title of Sir to
distinguish them from inferior Gentlemen: But in our age we have seen Master
Arundell an English Gentlemen, created Earl of the Empire for his acceptable
services to the Emperor. Christian Elector of Saxony deceased, did institute a
military Order of Knights, like to the Teutonike Order, save that it is no
Religious Order; and he called it, Die gulden geselschaft, that is, the Golden
Fellowship, by which bond he tied his nearest friends to him: And the badge of
the Order, was a Jewel, hanging in a chain of gold, having on each side of
the Jewel engraven a Heart peirced with a Sword and a Shaft, and upon one side
near the Heart, was the Image of Faith holding a Crucifix, with these words
graven about the Heart; Virtutis amore, that is, for love of Virtue, upon the
other side near the Heart was the Image of Constancy holding an Anchor, with
these words graven about the Heart, Qui persevere at adfinem, saluus erit, that
is: He that perseueres to the end shall be saved. Lastly, about the circle of
the Jewel, these great letters were engraven: F. S. V: that is, Fide, sed
vide, namely in English, Trust, but beware.

The Provinces of the reformed Religion, have no Bishops, but the revenues of
Bishops.
the Bishoprics are either conucrted to godly uses, or possessed by the
Princes, under the title of Administrators: And in like manner the revenues of
Monasteries for the most part are employed to maintain Preachers, and to other
godly uses; but in some places they still permit Monks and Nuns, (I mean
persons living single, but not tied with Papisticall vows), for the education
of their children, and the nourishing of the poor. In each City, and each
Church of the City, many Ministers or Preachers serve, who have no tithes, but
only live upon Pensions, commonly small, and not much unequal: For Ministers
commonly have one or two hundredth Guldens, and the Superintendants one or two
thousand Guldens by the year, besides wood for fire, and Corn, and some like
necessaries for food. These Superintendants are instead of Bishops, to ouersee
the Clergy, but are not distinguished in habit or title of dignity from the
other Ministers: yet to them as chief in virtue and learning as well the
Ministers as all other degrees yield due reverence, and in all Ecclesiastical
couses they have great authority: But otherwise Germany has many rich and
potent Bishops, of whom general mention is made in the Chapter of Proverbs,
and particularly in this Chapter, much has been said of the three spiritual
Electors.

The Husbandmen in Germany are not so base as the French and Italians, or the
Husbandmen.
slaves of other Kingdoms, but much more miserable and poor then the English
Husbandmen: yet those of Prussia, a fat and fertile Country, come necrest to
the English in riches and good fare. The other being hired by Gentlemen to
plough their grounds, give their services at low rates, and pay so great rent
to their Lords, as they have scarcely means to cover nakedness with poor
clothes, and to feed themselves with ill smelling coleworts and like meat, In
Morauia incorporated to Bohemia, and lying between it and Polonia, the
husbandmen are mere slaves. And at my being there I heard that the Barron of
Promnetz having been lately in Italy, did make free a slave of his, who was
there a Potecary, and gave him a present. Also I understood by discourse, that
the Marquess of Anspach in Germany, has many mere slaves for his husbandmen.
But all other in Germany are free, howsoever without doubt they be greatly
oppressed not only by the Gentry, but also by the Churchmen, so as we find in
late histories, that the Bawren (or clownes) in the year 1502 made a
rebellion, perhaps with the mind after the example of the Sweitzers to get
liberty by the sword, but yet pretending only revenge upon Bishops and
Churchmen, prouerbially saying that they would not suffer them to draw breath.
And it is probable that the neighborhood of the Sweitzers, who rooted out their
Noblemen, and got liberty by the sword, makes the Gentlemen of Germany less
cruel toward the poor clownes. For either upon that cause, or for the
fertility of the Country, no doubt the clownes in Sueuia and places near
Sweitzerland, live much better then in any other parts; as likewise in places
near Denmark and Poland, admitting slaves generally, the poor people are
more oppressed then any where else through Germany.

In Bohemia the highest degree is that of Barons, and the Gentlemen have the
same The degrees in Bohemia.
privileges with them; all other in towns and fields are mere slaves,
excepting Cities immediately subject to the Emperor as King of Bohemia, where
many are either emancipated for money, or find more clemency under the yoke of a
German Prince. For in lands belonging to the Barons and Gentlemen, the King
has no tribute, but all is subject to the Lord, with absolute power of life
and death; as likewise the King has his lands, and some thirty Cities in like
sort subject to him. And howsoever the Gentlemen do not commonly exercise this
power against the people, left the Germans should repute them tyrants, yet with
wonder I did hear at Prage; that a Baron had lately hanged one of his slaves,
for stealing of a fish. It is free for a Gentleman to hang any of his slaves
for going into strange Countries without being made free, if he can apprehend
him. Many times they give them leave to go into foreign parts, to learn
manuary arts, but they call them home at pleasure, and when they come back,
make them work for the Lords behoof. They take their Daughters for maid
servants, and Sons for household servants at pleasure. And these poor slaves
can leave their children nothing by last Will and Testarnent, but all their
goods, in life and at death, belong to the Lords; and they will find them, be
they never so secretly hidden. In the Province of Morauia, incorporated to
Bohemia. I have formerly said that the Gentlemen have like privileges, and
absolute power over their subjects, being all born slaves. And in Germany that
the Marquis of Anspach has like born slaves. And I shall in due place show,
that in Denmark and Poland, the people are mere slaves, so as the Gentlemen
and Lords reckon not their estates by yearly rents, but by the number of their
Bawren (or clownes) who are all slaves. In Bohemia the goods of condemned
persons fall to the Lord of the fee. Among the Barons, the Baron of Rosenburg
was chief, who for life was chosen Viceroy, and dwelt upon the confines of
Austria, being said to have the yearly rents of eighty thousand Dollers; but in
respect he had no Son to succeed him, he was less esteemed, especially
himself being decrepite, and his brother also old and without probable hope of
issue. The second family of the Barons, was that of the Popels, having many
branches, and plenty of heirs. One of them was at that time in great grace
with the Emperor Rodulphus; And the whole family for the issue was much esteemed
of the people and States of the Kingdom. In Bohemia (as in Poland) Gentlemen
cannot be judged, but at four meetings in the year, and then are tried by
Gentlemen; so as the accusers being wearied with delays, the offenders are
commonly freed, but men of inferior condition, are daily judged and suddenly
tried. The Bohemians give greater titles to Gentlemen by writing and in
saluting, then the Germans, where notwithstanding (as appears in the due
place) there is great and indecent flattery by words among all degrees. I did
not observe or read that the Bohemians, have any military or civil order or
degree of Knights, as the English have. The Hussites having changed nothing in
religion, save only the communicating of the Lords Supper in both kinds, with
some other small matters, yet I did not hear that they have any Bishops, and I
am sure that the Bishopric of Prage had then been long void. They and all of
the reformed Religion in Bohemia, send their Ministers to Wittenberg an
University in Saxony for receiving of Orders with imposition of hands, from the
Lutheran Superintendant and the Ministers of that place.

CHAP. IIII. Of the particular Commonwealths, as well of the Princes of
Germany, as of the Free Cities, such of both, as have absolute power of life
and death.
IT remains to add something of private Princes Courts, The Princes of the
Empire and free Cities.
and the Government of the free Cities. And since I have formerly said, that
these Princes and Cities, having absolute power of life and death, are many in
number, and that according to the number of the Princes, the places also where
taxes and impositions are exacted, are no less frequent, as well for subjects
as strangers passing by, both for persons and for wares. And that they who
deceive the Prince in any such kind, never escape unpunished. Now to avoid
tediousness, I will only mention the chief Princes and Cities, by which,
conjecture may be made of the rest; and this I will do briefly, without any
repetition of things formerly set down. Touching the Electors, I have formerly
related the principal laws of the golden Bulla. The Duke of Saxony is one of
these Electors, many ways powerful, and he deriues his pedigree The Duke of
Saxony Elector.
from Witikind, a famous Duke of the Germans, in the time of the Emperor
Charles the Great, who forced him to lay aside the name of King, permitting him
the title of a Duke, and to become Christian in the year 805.

Witikynd the second.
Deitgrenius Frederike. Frederick invested Marquis of Misen by the Emperor
Henry the first, he died in the year 925. Bruno
Dittimare. Christian invested Marquis of Lusatia by the Emperor Otho the
first. Theodorike died in the year 1034. Henry Marquis of Misen and Lusatia,
died in the year 1106. Timo. Conrade the Great died in the year 1150. Otho
the Rich built Friburg, where he had found Mines of Silver, and died in the
year 1189. Theodorike was poisoned by the Citizens of Leipzig, in the year
1220. Henry by right of inheritance became Langraue of Thuring, and died 6287.
In right line from Henry, discends Frederick, who chosen Emperor, yielded
the Empire to his Competitor the Emperor Charles the fourth, taking money for
giving up his right, and he died in the year 1349. In right line is Frederick
the Warlike, who overcame the Bohemians rebelling against the Emperor,
received the Scholars of Prage to study at Leipzig, restrained the title of
Dukes of Saxony to Families, which after the Emperors of Saxony had been
confusedly usurped, and lastly appropriated the title of Elector to his Family.
He died in the year 1423. Frederick the Gentle died in the year 1464.
Ernestus the Elector died in the year 1486. The Elector Frederike the Wise,
who put the Empire from himself, and chose Charles the fifth. He did found the
University at Wittenberg, and died 1525. John Elector exhibited the eformed
Confession at Augsburg, and died 1533. John Frederike for the Reformed Religion
deposed from the Electorship by the Emperor Charles the fifth. He married
Sibill, daughter to the Duke of Iuliar, and died 1554 John Frederike proscribed
by the Empire, and prosecuted by Augustus Elector of Saxony in the Emperors
name, was taken prisoner by him at the taking and razing of Gotha. John
Casimire borne of his fathers second wife Elizabeth, daughter to Frederike
Elector Palatine. He was borne 1564, and married Anna, daughter to Augustus
Elector of Saxony. John Ernest, then unmarried, borne in the year 1566. These
Dukes of Saxony then living, were called the Dukes of Coburg. John William
served the King of France in those Civil wars, and died 1573. Will. Frederik
borne of another daughter to Frederike Elector Palatine 1562, he buried the
daughter to the Duke of Wirtenberg, and married the daughter of Philip Lodowick
Prince Palatine 1591. He was Tutor to the sons of Christian Elector,
preferred to the Duke of Coburg, because his father was proscribed, and never
restored. John borne 1570 then unmarried. This Duke of Saxony was called the
D. of Wyneberg.
The last Elector of this branch.

Albert the Stout, Duke of Saxony, died in the year 1500. George of Leipzig,
called the Popish, was Duke of Saxony, and died in the year 1539. Henry Duke
of Saxony, made Governor of Friesland by his father, was there in danger to
be put to death, had not his father come to deliver him he died in the year
1541. The first Elector of this branch. Mauritius made Elector by the Emperor
Charles the 5, was borne 1521, died 1553. Augustus Elector married Anne daughter
to the K. of Denmark, and died 1586 Eight Boys, and three Girls died.
Christian the Elector married the daughter to the Elector of Brandeburg and
died 1591. Three young daughters. Christian the second Elector, but then a
Pupil borne 1583, the five and twentieth of September, at three of the clock
in the morning. John George, borne 1585, the fifth of March, at ten of the
clock in the night. Augustus borne the seventh of September, 1589. These three
were Pupils under William Frederike D. of Wyneberg, whereof the elder was to be
Elector, the other two Dukes of Saxony. Elizabeth married to Casimire
Administrator of the Electorship of the Palatinate. Dorothy, married to the
Duke of Brunswick; and Anne to John Casimire Duke of Coburg.





This is the seventeenth Duke of Saxony, and the first Elector of Saxony in
his Family.








Witikynd the third, of whom are the Capeti Kings of France.
The Princes borne of these three Families, are Dukes of upper Saxony (for
there be also poor Dukes of lower Saxony, as one residing at Angria). While
I lived at Leipzig, Christian the Elector of Saxony died 1591, whose Uncle by
the Fathers side Mauritius, was the first Elector of that Family. For the
Emperor Charles the fifth making war against John Frederike then Duke and
Elector of Saxony, and against the Langraue of Hessen, as Rebels to the
Empire; but indeed with purpose to suppress these chief defenders of the
Reformed Religion, and to bring the free Empire of Germany under the Spanish
yoke, he cunningly warned Mauritius, as next heir, to sease the lands of John
Frederike, or otherwise they should fall to him that took possession of them.
Whereupon Mauritius, though he professed the Reformed Religion, which now had
great need of his help, yet invaded his kinsmans lands, under a fair pretext,
that he took them, least the Emperor should alienate them to strangers,
professing that he would restore them to his kinseman, when he should be
reconciled to the Emperor. But such is the power of ambition, as in the end he
did nothing less, but further received the title of Elector, taken from John
Frederike and his children, and conferred upon him and his heirs males, by the
Emperor. The report was, that Luther seeing Mauritius brought up in the Court
of the Elector John Frederike, foretold the Elector that he should one day
confess, he had nourished a Serpent in his bosom. True it is, that Mauritius
shortly after restored the cause of Religion, in like sort deceiving the
Emperors hope, by making a league with the King of France. But ever since, the
posterity of Mauritius has been jealous of the heirs to John Frederike, and
has gladly taken all occasions to suppress them. Whereupon Augustus
succeeding his brother Mauritius, was easily induced, by virtue of his Office,
as Arch-Marshall of the Empire, to prosecute with fire and sword John
Frederike, the eldest son of the said John Frederike, whom the Empire had
proscribed. At which time he besieged him in Gotha, a strong Fort, which he
took and razed to the ground, coining Dollers in memory of that Victory, with
this inscription; Gotha taken, and the proscribed enemies of the Empire therein
besieged, either taken or put to flight, in the year 1567, Augustus Elector of
Saxony coined these.

And it is not unlikely, that Christian, son to Augustus, especially for
fear of this Family, fortified Dresden with so great cost and art, howsoever
the common people thought it rather done, because he affected to be chosen
Emperor at the next vacation. Of this Family thus prosecuted and deposed from
the Electorship, are the two Dukes of Saxony, the one of Coburg, the other of
Wineberg, so called of the Cities wherein they dwell. And the Duke of Coburg
having been proscribed by the Empire, and never restored, the Duke of Wineberg,
though more removed Kinsman, yet was made Administrator of the Electorship,
with title of Elector, as Tutor to the son of Christian and his two brethren,
who were brought up by him in the Court at Dresden, under their mother the
Widow to Christian, being of the house of Brandeburg. So as, were not the
Germans nature honest and peaceable, had not the power of the Elector of
Brandeburg stood for the Pupils, it was then thought, that the wronged Family
had great means of revenge. This example makes me think, that it is far
more safe to make the next Kinsman on the mothers side Tutor, who can have no
profit, but rather loss by the death of the Pupil, then the next Kinsman by
the Fathers side, being his heir.

The Dukes of Coburg and of Wineberg, are Dukes of Saxony by right of blood,
and of possessions therein: but the Family of the Elector has nothing either
in upper or lower Saxony, but only Wittenberg, belonging to the Electorship,
which was conferred upon them by the Emperor Charles the fifth. The Elector
holds his Court at Dresden, in the Province of Misen. Touching Christian the
Elector, he was reputed to be much given to hunting, to be prone to anger, not
to be solicited by petition, but at some fit times; to affect solitariness,
and little to be seen of the people, hardly to admit strangers to his presence
at any time, much less when he sat at the table to eat, (contrary to the use
of the Princes of the house of Austria), to have skill in the Art of
Gold-Smithes, and to spare no charge in keeping brave Horses. And no doubt he
was so carried away with this last delight, as he would take in gift from his
very enemies, any beautiful thing belonging to the Stable. And while I was at
Wittenberg, a Scholar having spoken some words, that he loved Horses better
then Scholars, was sent to Dresden, and there whipped about the streets.
Beyond measure he was given to large drinking, (in plain terms to
drunkenness), and that of the most strong Wines, so as this intemperance was
thought the cause of his untimely death. And for these drinking games, he had
certain fair chambers over his Stable, something distant from his lodgings of
his Court, which were appropriated to festival solaces. As soon as he was
made Elector, he presently ordained the new Judges for the Saxon Law, vulgarly
called Schoppenstuel, and the Consistories. In the year 1586 he had a meeting
at Lubeck, with the King of Denmark, and the Elector of Brandeburg. In the
year 1589, at Naumberg he renewed the hereditarie league, between his
Family, and the neighbor Princes, namely, the Elector of Brandeburg, his
eldest son (...) Frederike, then called Administrator of Hall, the three
brothers a William, Lodwike, and George, Langraues of Hessen, Frederike William
Duke of Saxony, (for one man has often times two names in Baptism), John Duke
of Saxony, (for the title is common to younger brothers and houses of one
Family with the elder), John Casimire (Tutor to his Nephew the Elector
Palatine); John Ernest Duke of Saxony, Christian Prince of Anhalt, Wolfang and
Phillip Dukes of Grubenhagen. And to knit his friends love more firmly to him,
I have said that he did institute an Order of Knighthood, called the Golden
Fellowship. He had for his Counsel, his Officers of Court, and some Doctors of
the Civil Law, and among them, Crellius Docter of the Civil Law, and the
Master of his Game or hunting (whose name I have forgotten), were in special
grace with him; for the Princes of Germany admit no Physicians nor Divines to
their Counsel, as having care of the body and soul, not of the worldly
estate. Neither does any young Princes keep their Fathers Counselors, but such
as served them in their fathers life time. Mysen, Voitland, and part of
Thuring, Provinces subject to the Elector, have fertile fields, frequent
Cities, many Castles proper to the Elector, innumerable Villages, and near
Friburg rich Mines of Silver, (as I have showed in the first volume or part,
where I treat of my journey through these parts). But howsoever these
Provinces excel in these things; yet because they are of no great circuit, the
Elector is not so powerful in the number of vassals, as in yearly revenues.
So as at a public meeting, he had no more then some two thousand vassalls,
when the Elector of Brandeburg had eight thousand, who notwithstanding is far
inferior to him in treasure and warlike power. He then fortified the City of
Dresden, as a Fort, and so strongly, as it was thought inpregnable by force,
and all the Citizens were bound to have Corn and all necessaries for the food
of their families, for six months always laid up in store. And in time of
that secure peace, yet the walls were furnished with Artillery, as if an Army
had line before the City. And in times of Divine service, the streets were
chained, and guards of soldiers were set in the Market place, and other parts
of the City, so as nothing could be added in time of the greatest war. The
Elector had in the City three hundredth Garrison soldiers, whereof those that
were Citizens had three Guldens, and the old soldiers six Guldens by the
month. The Captain had the pay for eight and the Lieutenant for two horses,
each horse at twelve Guldens by the month. The Ensign had sixteen Guldens by
the month, four Corporals or Campe-Masters had each ten Guldens, the
Scout-Master ten Guldens, and the Quartermaster eight Guldens. He gave
honorable stipends to four great Captains, who lived at home, but were bound
to serve him when he should call them. His Court was no less magnificall,
wherein he had three Dukes for his Pensioners, namely Christian Prince of
Anhalt, John D. of Winbrooke (both younger brothers), and the Duke of Desh,
whose Dukedom lies upon the confines of Hungary. And to each of these he gave
the pay of twenty Horse, each Horse at twelve Guldens the month. He had also
in his Court three Earls, Bastian Stick a Bohemian, Phillip Count of Hollock,
and one of the Counts of Mansfeild, and to each of them he gave the like pay
for twelve Horses. He had also in his Court five Barrons, namely, two Cousens
Barrons of Zantzke in Bohemia, the Barron of Ausse, the Barron of Shinck, and
the Barron of Done, and to the four first he gave like pay for ten, and to the
last for twelve Horses. He had in his Court twenty young Gentlemen, who carried
his Lance and Helmet, vulgarly called Spissyongen (Youths of the Spear), to
whom he gave yearly coats of Velvet, and all necessaries, and to each of them
he gave a chain of gold to wear. He had twelve Gentlemen of his chamber, and
to each of them he gave a chain of gold, his diet in Court, and like pay for
ten horses. He had sixteen youths of his Chamber, and to six of the eldest
(yet not bearing Arms) he gave each like pay for two Horses, and the other ten
he maintained with all necessaries. He had fifty Pensioners to wait at his
table, vulgarly called Drnckses, and these did ride before him, and to each of
them he gave his diet in the Court, and like pay for three horses. He had
twelve Sexhsruss, and to each of them he gave like pay for six horses He had
fifty Audlepursen, so called of a short piece they carried (in English we call
them Calbiners), and to each of them he gave the pay of one Horse, apparel
twice in the year, and two hundred Goldens yearly stipend. These (as all
other degrees) had their Captains and Liefetenants, and each third night by
turns, they did watch at the door of the Electors Chamber, having no diet in
Court, but only the night of their watch, both living otherwise, and lying in
the City. He had fifty Einspauners with a Captain and Liefetenant, who did
ride as Scouts far before the Elector, and looked to the safety of the ways,
each of which had pay for one Horse. He had sixteen Trumpeters, whereof three
did ride always with the Elector, and two Drums beating a Drum of brass,
vulgarly called, Kettell Drummern, and each riding, had sixteen Guldens by the
month, out of which they kept each Man his Horse, and each staying at home,
had ten Guldens monthly stipend, and all of them at solemn Feasts were
apparrelled by the Elector. He had of his Guard one hundred, (vulgarly called
Trabantoes), whereof the Gentlemen had eight, the rest six guldens monthly;
and the Gentlemen kept watch at the door of the Electors Chamber, carrying
Holbeards, and the rest kept watch at the gates of the Court, armed with
Muskets, and yearly they were apparrelled. He had three Chaplains, whereof
one was always to be at the side of the Elector. He had sixteen Singingmen,
whereof ten being Men, had each of them 400 Dollers stipend, and six being
boys, had some 100 dollers for maintenance. He had 18 Musicians of diverse
Nations, whereof each had some 140 dollers yearly stipend. He had two Tumblers
or Vaulters, one an English man, the other an Italian, with the like, or
somewhat greater stipend. He had eight French and two Dutch Lacqueis, to run
by his stirrup, or the side of his Coach, whereof each had some 100 Dollers
stipend, and apparel, besides extraordinary gifts.

The Dukes Stable may not be omitted, being more magnificall, then any I did
ever see in the World, (whereof I have at large spoken in the first Part,
writing of my journey through Dresden): for therein I did see one hundred
thirty six foreign Horses of the brauest races, (besides two hundred Horses
kept in other Stables for drawing of Coaches and like uses); and in this chief
Stable a boy and a man were kept to attend each horse, the men having for diet
thirty grosh weekly, the boys twenty four grosh, (that is, a Doller), and
the men for yearly wages had also sixteen dollers, besides apparel twice in
the year, and boots both to Men and Boys. It cannot be expressed, at least
this is not the fit place to write, how sumptuously and curiously all things
were prepared for the Horses and their Keepets. A Gentleman of special account
was ouerseet of this Stable, and had a great stipend for his care thereof. He
had eight Leibknechten, (that is, Servants for the body), who did lead the
Horses for the Electors saddle, whereof each had the monthly pay for two
Horses, and three hundred Guldens yearly stipend. He had four Riders, whereof
each had two hundred Dollers yearly stipend, and apparel. One chief and two
inferior Horse-leeches and Smiths, four Armourers (to pollish the Arms for
Tilting), three Sadlers, two Cutlers (to pollish the Swords), two
Feathermakers, and two Porters of the Stable, had each of them one hundred
Guldens yearly stipend, and apparel twice in the year.

Besides, the Elector Christian had a Kingly Armoury, or Arsonall for Artillery
and Munitions of war, which they said had furniture for an Army of eighty
thousand Men, ouerseene by a Captain or Master of the Ordinance, his
Liefetenant, and three Captains of the watch, who had no small stipends;
besides fifty Gunners, who had each of them six guldens by the month, with
yearly apparel: But when I was at Dresden, this Armory was much unfurnished
by aides newly sent into France to King Henry the fourth, at the instance of
his Ambassador the Earl of Tarine. These aides, though sent with the consent
of the foresaid Princes confederate, yet were levied as at the charge of the
King of France, and as voluntary men, because the Princes are bound upon pain
to leese their fees, and by the covenants of the peace given to the confession
of Augsburg, not to undertake any waire without the Emperors knowledge, which
bonds are often broken, the Princes of Germany administering all as absolute
Princes, only with consent of their confederates: But I pass over this, and
return to the matter in hand.

The foresaid so many and so great stipends, were most readily paid without
delay out of the Exchequer, called the Silver Chamber, monthly or yearly, as
they did grow due. And all the Pensioners aforesaid, did keep the horses in
the city, for which they had pay; to which if you add the 136 horses of the
chief stable, and the 200 kept by the D. in other stables, you shall find, that
Dresden was never without a 1000 horses of service, for any sudden event. And
the number was not less of the horses which the Elector kept in his Castles
not far from the City; so as he had ever (as it were in a moment) ready 2000
horses for all occasions. This Christian Elector of Saxony, was said to impose
most heavy exactions upon his subjects (no less then the Italian Princes, who
place all their confidence in their treasure, none at al in the love of their
subjects, or then the Netherlanders, who for fear to become slaves to the
Spaniard, bear intolerable exactions) The Country people about Dresden cried,
that they were no less oppressed then the Jews in Egypt, being daily forced
to labor at their own charge in fortifying the City. And many complained,
that the Red Dear, wild Boares, and like beasts destroyed their fields (for I
said that the Duke was much delighted in hunting, which is also forbidden to
all, even the best Gentlemen) no man daring so much as to drive the beasts out
of their pasture and corn he that sets a Dog on them, being subject to great
penalty, and he that killes one of them, being guilty of death. But nothing did
more cause the Duke to be maligned, then that he had left the positions of
Luther in religion, and carefully endeavored to establish those of Calvin, as
shall be showed in due place. His subjects were wont to pay for several goods,
as a sheep, a cow, and the like, a yearly tribute; but of late it had been
decreed by the 3 States, that after the value of goods, each man for 60 grosh
should pay two fennings yearly, I mean as well moveable goods (namely, wares
and ready money), as houses lands, and all immovable goods, and that not
according to the yearly value, but yearly according to the value at which
they were (or might be) bought or sold. Neither could any man dissemble his
wealth, since that deceit will appear at least upon the last Will and
Testament, and once found uses to be punished with repairing the loss, and a
great fine. This tribut was at first granted only for 6 years, but those ended,
the term was renewed, and so it continues for ever. And this tribute alone
was said to yield yearly 600000 guldens: but the chief revenue of the Elector
was by the imposition upon Beer, which (as I have formerly said) that people
drinks in great excess. And they said, that this tribute also at first was
imposed only for certain years. But the Elector meaning nothing less then to
ease them of this burden, of late there had bin a paper set by some merry lad
upon the Court gates, containing these words in the Dutch tongue: Ich
woundschihm lang leben; vnd kein gutten tag darneben: vnd darnoch den hellisch
fewr: der hatt auffgehebt dab bearstewer: Vndergeschreiben. Das wort Gottes vnd
das berestewer, wheren in ewigkeit. That is:

I wish long life may him befall,
And not one good day therewithal:
And Hell-fier after his life here,
Who first did raise this Tax of Bear.
Postscript. The Word of God, and the Tax of Bear last for ever and ever.

The Brewers pay tribute according to the value of the brewing, not according
to the gain they make, namely, some eighth part for one kind of Bear, some
fifth part for another kind in most places. At Wittenberg I observed, that for
one brewing of some 48 bushels of Malt, worth some 48 guldens, the Dukes
Treasurer received 8 guldens. This Treasurer does four times yearly view the
brewing vessels, and number the Students of Wittenberg, to prevent any
defrauding of Tribute. For howsoever in all these parts they drink largely,
yet at Wittenberg, in respect of the great number of Students, and at Leipzig,
for the same cause, and in respect of a great Fair, this tribute grows to an
higher rate, then in other cities; yet the City Torge, though less in circuit
then these, only exceeds these and all other, in yielding this tribute, because
the bear thereof is so famously good, as it is in great quantity transported
to other Cities of these Provinces, where the better sort most commonly drink
it and no other; so as that City alone yields one year with another
seventeen thousand gold Guldens for tribute of Bear. The same City makes
yearly seven thousand woollen clothes, each cloth thirty two else long, and
worth some fourteen Dollers; yet for each cloth they pay only one silver
Grosh, whereby it appears, that the tribute of cloth and like commodities, is
lightly esteemed, as of less importance, then the transcendent traffic of
Bear. Torge likewise yearly paies to the Elector 500 Dollers for the fishing
of a Lake near the City, which once in 3 years was said to yield 5000 Dollars
to the City: One sole Province, yet much inhabited, and very fertile, namely
Misen, was said one year with another to yield 1800000 Dollers for all
tributes, and half part thereof only for Bear. The Mines of Silver are of
great importance, which by the Law belong to the Electors in their Provinces,
not to the Emperor. And this Elector has many of these Mines-namely, those of
Friburg, those of Scheneberg, those of Anneberg, and those of the valey of
Ioachim, of al which I have written at large in the Geographicall description.
And no doubt this Elector is potent in treasure, so as how soever he be
inferior in dignity to the Elector Palatine, yet he is most powerful of all
the Electors.

Among the walled Cities subject to him (not to speak of the Towns, Castles,
and pleasant Villages), Leipzig is next to Dresden, to which it only yields
for the fortifications, and the Electors Court. Leipzig gives the Law to the
upper Territory, as Wittenburg does to the lower, and both are adorned by
being Universities: but at Leipzig the Scabines sit, Judges of great Authority
for the Law of Saxony, being in number seven, namely, three Senators of the
City, and four Doctors of the Civil Law. But Wittenberg has not the right of
the Sword to execute malefactors, which the Elector Augustus (they say)
translated to Leipzig, because the Judges obstinately denied him power to
pardon malefactors, or to moderate the Law. So as when any man is capitally
accused at Wittenberg, the cause is first referred to the Scabines at Leipzig,
who finding him guilty, give power to the Senators of Wittenberg, to pronounce
sentence, and do execution. Wittenberg is no fair City, but a famous
University, and at this time had a great many of Students, and it is not
subject to the Duke as inheritance from his progenitors, but as he is Elector,
for to the Electorship it properly belongs. Besides the great tributes it
pales for Bear, it also yields yearly to the Duke 1500 gold Guldens, for the
Bridge built over the Elue. Here, as in all other places, Lime and Brick are
sold in the Dukes name, and to his use. As well Leipzig as Wittenberg, in
difficult cases, ask counsel for the Civil Law, of their own and (if need
be) of foreign Universities, where the Doctors of the Civil Law, in the name
of the Faculty, write down their judgment in the case propounded. These
Doctors are also Advocates, whereof there were twenty two at this time at
Leipzig, and because this profession is much esteemed, the Germans willingly
apply themselves to the study thereof.

The Count Palatine of the Rheine, by old institution is chief among the
temporal The Count Palatine of the Rheine, Elector, and the Duke of Bauaria.
Electors, and is of the same Family, of which the Dukes of Bauaria descend.
The Pedigree of them both, is derived from the Emperor Charles the Great. Otho
the elder brother Palatine of Wirtelbach, upon the proscription of the Duke of
Bauaria, had that Dukedom conferred on him in fee by the Emperor in the year
1180. From his younger brother descend the Counts of Salmes now living. But
from the said Otho the elder brother, are descended, both the Palatines
Electors, and the Dukes of Bauaria now living.

Lodwicke Duke of Bauaria, who died in the year 1231, received the Palatinate
of the Rheine in fee from the Emperor Frederick the second. Otho the fourth,
succeeded him in the Dukedom of Bauaria, and the Palatinate of the Rheine, and
was the first Elector of this Family, who died in the year 1253. His son
Lodwicke the severe, Elector Pallatine and Duke of Bauaria, made Rodolphus of
Habsburg Emperor, who was the first Emperor of the House of Austria. He
married this Emperors Daughter, and died in the year 1294, leaving two
sons, who divided the inheritance, as follows.

From this Rodulphus, descend the Counts Palatines and Electors. Rodulphus the
elder Brother was Count Palatine of the Rheine, and Elector, who died 1319.
Rupert Palatine of the Rheine Elector, founded the University in Heidelberg,
in the year 1346. Rupert Elector and Emperor, died in the year 1410. Lodwick
Count Palatine and Elector. The Elector Frederike the second, discending from
him, freed Vienna from the siege of the Turks, and died 1556. Otho Henrich his
Nephew died 1559 without heirs males, and so the Electorship fell to the Duke
of Zweybruck.

Stephen Duke of Zweybruck. Frederike Palatine. John the first. John the
second. Frederike the third succeeded Otho Henrich in the Electorship, and died
1576. Lodwick the fourth Elector Palatine married the daughter of the Langraue
of Hessen, and died 1583. Frederike the fourth Elector then Pupil to John
Casimire his Uncle. The first house of the Palatines and Electors, in two
branches.
Christian his sole Sister.
John Casunire was Tutor to his Nephew, and Elector in his nonage, and married
Elizabeth sister to Christian Duke of Saxony, and died 1592. Dorethea his sole
Daughter.
Elizabeth married to John Frederike Duke of Saxony, called of Coburg. Susan
Dorothy married to John William, Duke of Saxony, called of Wineberg. Anna
Maria married to Phillip the 2, Langraue of Hessen. Kunigunde Iacobe married to
the Count of Nassawe.
Richard D. of Hunneseruck living when I wrote this. The 2 brach of the first
house.



Lodwick the black. Alexander. Lodwick. Wolfgang D. of Sweybruck married the
Daughter to the Langraue of Hessen, and died in the French wars 1569. Phillip
Lodwick married the daughter to the Duke of Iulice. Of three Daughters, one
married to Frederike William Duke of Saxony. Wolfgang borne 1578. Augustus
borne 1582. John Frederike borne 1587.
John married to another Daughter of the Duke of Iulce. Two Sons and two
Daughters. The second House of the Countes Palatines in four branches then
living, the last branches being multiplied from Phillip Lodwick being then
children.

Frederike married the Daughter of the Duke of Lignic. Two Twins borne 1591.
Otho Henrich married the Daughter to the Duke of Wirterberg. He had both sons
and daughters.
Eight Sisters, partly dead, partly living then.

Rupert. Of Rupert is George, borne of the Daughter to Gustanus King of Swetia,
who then was living. He had 3 sons and diverse daughters. A fifth branch of
the second house of the Countes Palatines.








Thus of Rodulphus the eldest son to Lodwick the Severe, descend two houses
in many branches of the Countes Palatines, whereof the chief and first has
the Electorship. And of Lodwick the Emperor the second son to Lodwick the
Severe descend the Dukes of Bauaria, as follows. Lodwick the younger Brother
was D. of Bauaria, and was made Emperor, who died 1347. The Dukes of Bauaria.
Lodwick the Emperor had two sons. Stephen Duke of Bauaria, who died 1392.
Frederike Duke of Bauaria died 1404. George the rich founded the University of
Ingolstat, and built the College of Saint George, and died 1503. Elizabeth his
Daughter was married to Rupert Count Palatine, and to Rupert George by his last
Will gave the Dukedom of Bauaria, but the Emperor Maximiuan would not
confirm this gift, as injurious to the next heir in this pedigree, whence
rose the war of Bauaria.

John of Monach Duke of Bauaria died 1397. Albert the third refused to be
chosen King of Bohemia, and died 1460. Albert the fourth brought the Channons
of 2 Monasteries to Monach, and that of his own authority, for which he
hardly escaped the proscription of the Empire; and to him the Emperor adjudged
the inheritance of George against the Palatine, who had married the daughter of
George, and was by his last Will made his heir. He died 1508. Albert the 5,
built 3 Colleges for the Jesuits. He married Anna, daughter to the Emperor
Ferdinand, and died in the year 1579. William borne 1548, married Rinata,
Daughter to Francis Duke of Lorayne in the year 1568. Maximilian D. of
Bauaria. Phillip Bishop of Ratisbona. Ferdinand a Praepositus of Colen, and
Channon of Trier. One Sister, Maximiliana.
Ferdinand borne in the year 1550. Ernestus Bishop of Liege, after Archbishop
and Elector of Colon, borne in the year 1554. Maria Maximilian borne 1552.
Maria borne 1553, and married to Charles Archduke of Austria, 1572.
William made war against the Duke of Wirteberg, and died in the year 1577.
Sibill married to Lodwick the fourth, Elector Palatine, died in the year 1511.
Sabina married to Vlrich Duke of Wirteberg, died in the year 1564. Sidonia
married to Philibert Marquis of Baden.



William Count of Holland by right of his wife. Of him descended the Counts of
Holland.

From this Lodwick descend the Dukes of Bauaria

It was couenanted, and stands agreed between the House of the Electors
Pallatines, and the house of the Dukes of Bauaria, that upon want of heirs
males, one of them should succeed the other; and when the Daughter to the Duke
of Bauaria, in the time of the Emperor Maximilian, opposed her self to this
contract, she was forced to yield to it by the Emperor.

I return to the Electors Palatines. The foresaid Frederick the fourth,
Pallatine and Elector, being under age, had Duke John Casimire his fathers
brother for his Tutor, The Elector Palatine of the Rheine.
who at his brothers death besieged the City of Colen, in the name of the
Bishop, whom they had driven out for being married. This Casimire, in his
brothers lifetime had a noble inheritance beyond the Rheine, to him and his
heirs, and then hearing of his brothers death, hasted to Heidleberg, where he
brought the people to obedience, who would not have him Administrator, because
he professed the Reformed Religion after Caluins doctrine, not after that of
Luther. And he presently sent back the Emperors Ambassadors, who were come
thither about that controversy, refusing to yield his right in the Tutorage of
his Nephew, which he defended in the Imperial Chamber at Spire. After he
brought up his Nephew wisely and religiously, appointing him his diet apart
with his Teachers and the Steward of his Court, to whose table one Professor
of the University was daily invited, who had charge to propound a question to
the Prince, out of the Histories, and controversies of Religion. And the Prince
did not presently make answer, except it were in a common subject, but asked
time to consider of it, and consulting apart with his Teachers, after some
half houer returned to give his answer. Thus by daily practice the chief
accidents of Histories, and controversies of Religion were made familiar to
him. The City Heidelberg, sometimes held in Fee from the Bishop of Wormz, was
in time beutified with buildings and an University, and became the seat of the
Electors. The said Elector Frederike the fourth, being a pupil, was after the
foresaid manner brought up in the Reformed religion, according to the doctrine
of Calvin: but in the mean time Richard the Duke of Hunnesruck his next
heir, if he should die without issue male, did obstinately follow the
reformed doctrine of Luther, and so did the rest of his kinsmen, the Dukes of
Zweybruck (their town being so called of the two Bridges) excepting the second
brother of them who consented in Religion with the Elector. This Elector
Frederick the fourth, married the daughter to the Prince of Orange, by his wife
of the French family de Chastillion. His Court was not great, nor any way
comparable to that of the Elector of Sexony. For he had scarce thirty
Gentlemen to attend him, and to them he gave no more then some twenty five
Guldens for stipend, which they spent upon their servants that attended them
and kept their horses. And he had no more then eight Yeomen for the Guard of
his body. Wine was sparingly drawn, and all expenses made with great
frugalitie. But the fame of this Electors wisdom and affability, made him
much esteemed of strangers, and while he conuersed with his Citizens often
coming to the public place for exercise of the Piece and Crosse-bow, and
being easy of access, yet carried himself like a grave and noble Prince, he
became dear to his subjects. Of whom he exacted moderate tribute for their
lands, houses, money, and goods, and some two small fennings for each Moss or
measure of wine. In five places upon the Rheine he exacted impositions or
taxes, which one year with another yielded some twelve or sixteen thousand
French Crowns, and they said, that he received yearly some fifty or sixty
thousand Crowns by the silver Mines of Anneberg, besides extraordinary
subsidies, which his subjects use to grant him upon occasion of war, or like
necessities of the Commonwealth. And I remember, when the Citizens of Strasburg
his neighbors made war with the brother of the Duke of Loraine, about their
Bishopric, so as the Palatine was forced to leuy soldiers for defense of his
people from the rapine of both Armies, that he imposed an extraordinary
subsidy upon his subjects, of a quarter of a Doller for each hundred Dollers
any man possessed, in moveable or immovable goods.

The Margraue (or Marquis) of Brandeburg is by the first institution the last
of the The Margraue of Brandeburg Elector.
Electors, but more powerful then any of them in the number of Vassals; and
his territories are much larger then those of the Elector of Saxony, but his
revenues are nothing so great. He held his Court at Berlin, some twelve German
miles distant from Wittenberg in Saxony. His pedigree is derived from Peter
Columna (a Roman Patritian, of the ancient blood of the Camills), who banished
by Pope Gregory the seventh, had lands given him in Sueuia by the Emperor
Henry the fourth, and built the castle of Zagaroll, and about the year 1120
had a son called Burchard.

Burchard Count of Zoller (his Castle so called.)
Frederick, the first race of the Burgraues of Nurnberg being extinct, was
invested 1273 of that dignity by the Emperor Rodulphus, whose sister was
mother to Frederick. Frederick the second Burgraue of Nurnberg, died in the
year 1330. Frederick, Burgraue of Nurnberg, had the Marquisate of Brandeburg
conferred on him by the Emperor Sigismund, and also the Electorship in the
year 1427, and he sold the Castle and Burgraueship of Nurnberg to the City of
Nurnberg. He died in the year 1440. John, Marquis of Brandeburg, at his
fathers commandment, yielded the Electorship to his second brother, and died
in the year 1464. Frederick Marquisse and Elector going into Palestine, did
yield the Electorship to his brother Albert, and died in the year 1470.
Albert, Marquisse and Elector, called the Achilles of Germany, overcame the
Citizens of Nurnberg in eight battles, and in the ninth being overcome,
promised them peace. He first made league with the Elector of Saxony and the
Langraue of Hessen, and died suddenly in a Bath in the year 1486. By his first
Wife, Daughter to the Marquisse of Baden, he had John Marquisse and Elector,
commonly called the Cicero of Germany, he died 1499. And had two sisters by his
mother. Ioachim the first, Elector, founded the University at Franckfort upon
Viadrus, in the year 1506, he married Elizabeth, daughter to the King of
Denmark, and died 1535. Ioachim the second, Elector, for killing a Turk, had a
Military Girdle of Charles the fifth, to whose part he was firm, and obtained
life for the captive Elector of Saxony, he died 1571. By Magdalen, daugh. to
Geo. the Bearded, D. of Saxony. Johannes Georgius the Elector then living,
borne in the year 1525. By his first wife Sophia (as some say) daughter to the
Count of Barba, he had Ioachim Frederick borne 1546, heir to the Electorship,
at this time Administrator of the Archbishopk. of Halla. He married one of the
House of Brandeburg in the year 1570, and (if I be not deceived) had at this
time a second wife, the daughter of the Duke of Wirteberg. John Sigismond borne
1572. Anna Catherina borne 1575. George borne 1577. Augustus borne 1580, Chanon
of Strasburg. Albert Frederike borne 1581. Ioachim a Twin borne 1582. Ernest a
Twin borne 1582. Christian Wilhelm borne 1588.

By Sabina daughter to George Marquis of Brandeburg married 1547, and dying
1574. He had three daughters, Ermund married to John Frederick D. of Pomern.
Anna Maria married to the eldest brother D. of Pomern, and Sophia married to
Christian Elector of Saxony 1582. By Elionora daughter to the Prince of Anhalt
married 1577, at the fifty three year of his age, and fourteenth of her age,
he had three sons, Christian, and Ioachim Ernest, and a third whose name I
know not; and in the year 1592 when he was 67 years old, he had a daughter,
besides two other daughters formerly begotten.
Barbara married to the D. of Bregan in Stlesia. Elizabetha Magdalena married to
Otho D. of Luneburg. Heduigis married to Julius, Duke of Brunswick. Sophia
married to the Barron of Rosenburg Viceroy in Bohemia, 1564.

John leagued with the Protestants, yet served the Emperor at his brothers
persuasion, but after joined with Mauritius Elector of Saxony against the
Emperor, he died 1570. Five sisters, Anne married to the Duke of Meckelburg.
Elizabeth to the Duke of Brunswick. Margaret to the Duke of Pomern, Elizabeth
to George Marquis of Brandeburg. And Catherine to be.
Anna, married to the King of Denmark Frederick the first, died 1521. Vrsula
married to the Duke of Pomerania; another Vrsula to the Duke of Meckelburg.
Albert Archbishop and Elector of Mentz and Cardinal, made the war of Religion,
which Lodwick Elector Palatine appeased. He died 1545.
By his second wife Anne, Daughter to Frederick the second Elector of Saxony,
he had Frederick the fifth Marquisse of Brandeburg in Franconia and Voytland.
He married the daughter of Casimire King of Poland, and died in the year
1536. He had five sisters by his mother, three married, two Nuns. Casimire
married the daughter to the D. of Banaria, he died 1577. Albert, called the
Alcibiades of Germany, most warlike, was proscribed by the Empire, and died in
banishment, in the year 1557. Marie married to Frederick Elector Palatine;
died 1567.
George gave the Confession of Religion at Augsburg, Geo. Fred. recovered
Prustia from the K. of Poland, and took it in Fee 1578. He married Elizabeth of
Brandeburg 1558, and Sophia, daughter to the D. of Brunswick 1579. He had five
sisters.
William Bishop of Regenspurg, died 1563. Albert Mr. of the Teutonike Order,
being overcome by the King of Poland, was made D. of Prussia, the Order being
extinguished, and founded the University at Konigsberg, he died 1568. By the
daughter of the Duke of Brunswick, he had Albert Frederick borne 1553, said to
be frantic, so as George Frederick his uncles son governed the Dukedom of
Prussia, he was at this time living. By the daughter of the D. of Iulec he had
some daughters. How the Tentonike Order was extinguished, and of the succession
in Prussia is formerly spoken in this Chapter, and in the Geographicall
description of Germany.
By Dorothy Queen of Denmark he had Anna Sophia, married to the Duke of
Meckelburg, and she died 1591. Besides males and females dying young.
Five sisters all married.


The first Marquisse and first Elector of this Family.
Conrade dividing the Principality with his brother, governed at Nurnberg, and
four of his posterity were great Commanders of the Order of the Teutonike
Knights.
Eitel Frederick Count of Zoller.

Hitherto I have spoken of the Temporal Electors. The fecond among the
Spiritual Electors is the Archbishop of Mentz, which Seat, when I passed
through Germany, The Spiritual Electors.
was possessed by Wolfgang of the noble Family of Dalberg, and all his Kinsmen,
dwelling hear Heidelberg, were of the Reformed Religion after the doctrine of
Luther, and therefore less esteemed him, who notwithstanding was thought no
enemy to the Reformed Religion, but rather willing to permit it, did he not
fear the opposition of the Chapter. For Gebhard Truchsesse Archbishop of
Colen and Elector, had lately bin deposed, and another placed in that Seat,
because he married Agnes Countess of Mansfield, with whom at that time he
lived, being made a Cannon at Strasburg, (for that city having abolished the
Roman Religion, yet kept the places of Cannons without any bond of
superstition, and used to bestow them only upon Princes and Gentlemen of the
Reformed Religion), and in this city he then lived a quiet life, after he had
in vain tried by force of Arms to regaine that Archbishopric. The third
Spiritual Elector, but first by institution, is the Archbishop of Trier, a
City seated beyond the Rheine, upon the confines of France, which Seat, when
I passed through Germany, was possessed by John (if I mistake not his name) of
the Noble Family of Schonburg. And whereas the other Electors dwell in the
cities whereof they are named for the most part, his continual abode was at
the castle Erbrotsteine, seated near the Rheine, some half days journey from
Trier. All these Archbishops have not only Spiritual but also Temporal
power in all their Territories.

The Families of the Langraues of Hessen is derived from Lambert Count of
Hannow, The Langraues of Hessen.
who died in the year 1015. Of his first branch come the Margraues of Berg,
and also the Barrons of Grimberg. Of the second branch come the Langraues of
Hessen, whose Progenitor Lodwick, called the Gentle, being chosen Emperor,
refused that burden, and died in the year 1458. Phillip united to the
Protestant Princes in the league of Smalcald, and joining his forces with the
Elector of Saxony, against the Emperor Charles the fifth, was persuaded by his
friends, when the Electors Army was broken, to yield himself to the Emperor,
by whom he was kept prisoner for a time, contrary to promise. He founded the
University at Marpurg, and died in the year 1567.

The said Phillip married the Daughter to the Duke of Meckelburg, and by her
had the following issue. William borne 1532, held his court at Cassiles, having
half the inheritance. He delivered his father out of prison, and married
Sabina, daughter to the D. of Wirteberg, and died not long before I passed
through Germany. Mauritius a most Noble young Prince, Langraue of Cassiles upon
his Fathers late death. Anna Maria married to Lodwick Count of Nassawe, 1589.
Heduigis then a Virgin. Sophia then a Virgin.
Lodwick borne 1537 held his court at Marpurg, and had a fourth part of his
fathers inheritance. He first married Heduige daughter to the D. of Wirteberg,
and after Mary of Mansfield, both barren. And at this time he lived, but
without any child. Agnes married to Mauritius Elector of Saxony 1541, and after
to John Frederick D. of Saxony. George borne 1547, held his court at Dormstat,
and had a fourth part of his fathers inheritance, and married Magdelen, daughter
to Bernard Count of Lipp, and she was dead, but he the^ lived. Lodwick oldest,
his Father yet living. Phillip. John George. Two Sisters, Christian and
Elizabeth.
Anna married to the Duke of Zweybruck, died 1581. Barbara married to George
Earl of Mompelgard. Elizabeth married to Lodwick the fourth, Elector Palatine.
Christina married to Adolphus, of the roial blood of Denmark.
His Sister Elizabeth was married to John Duke of Saxony.
The foresaid William Langraue of Hessen, of his chief City called the
Langraue of Cassiles, had in division with his brethren half his Fathers
inheritance, the other half being divided between his two brothers. And since
that time I heard, that his brother Lodwick of Marpurg was dead without issue,
and that his fourth part of this inheritance was returned to Mauritius, eldest
son to William. Yet because Mauritius was addicted to the reformed Religion,
after the doctrine of Calvin, which he and his Courtiers with many subjects
professed, how soever he had not yet made any general alteration, whereas his
Uncle Lodwick persisted in the doctrine of Luther, I remember the common speech
in the land of Hessen, that Lodwick had threatened his Nephew Mauritius to
disinherit him, and give his lands to the children of his brother George of
Dormstatt, if he made any general alteration in Religion.

I have formerly said, that the dignity of the Empire decaying, many
Principalities were given in Fee, and the Lords thereof became absolute
Princes. At that time many great Cities were immediately subject to the Empire,
whereof many were at sundry times after engaged for money to the said Princes.
At last the power of the Empire being more fallen by many Civil wars raised
by the Popes, to confirm their usurped power over the Emperors, these Cities
with money bought their liberty, partly of the Emperors, partly of the said
Princes, from which time these Cities being called Imperial, and having
freedom with absolute power, became daily more and more beautified with
buildings, and strong by fortifications; yet some Cities still subject to
diverse Princes, yield not to them in beauty and strength, as Dresden and
Leipzig subject to the Elector of Saxony, Monach and Ingolstat subject to the
Duke of Bauaria; and Breslaw the chief City of Silesia, a Province joined to
the Kingdom of Bohemia.

The Emperor at his election swears, that he will maintain these Cities in
their freedom, and not suffer them to be drawn back to the subjection of the
Empire, or the said Princes. Also I have formerly spoken of the many and just
suspicions between the Emperor, the Princes, and these Free Cities, which it
were needless to repeat. Of old the great Cities of the Empire were ninety
six in number, but many of them have since been alienated to the Princes of
Netherland, or united by League to the Cantons of Sweitzerland, so at this day
there remain only sixty Free Cities of the Empire.

Of the Commonwealths of these Cities, it shall suffice in general to have
said, that the Government is very moderate and equal. The Patritians live
upon their revenues, as Gentlemen. The Plebeans intend Traffic and
Shop-keeping; and be they never so rich, never so wise, can never become
Patritians, but still keep their own rank, as all other Orders do. And the
Artisans so they keep the Laws, (which bind the highest as well as them) are
secure from the injuries of any greater man. In civil causes they judge not
after strict Law, but according to equity, and without delay: but more easily
to conjecture of all in general, It will not be amiss particularly to observe
the government of some few.

And because Nurnberg is one of the chief, I will begin with it. The
Margraues The City of Nurnberg.
of Brandeburg were of old Burgraues of Nurnberg till Frederick the fourth
about the year 1414, sold that his right, and the Castle of Nurnberg to the
Citizens thereof. Albert his son, called the Achilles of Germany, for some
duty denied to him, made war upon the City, drawing seventeen Princes to
take his part, as the other free Cities assisted Nurnberg. At this day the
Margraue of Anspath, being of that Family, calls himself Burgraue of Nurnberg,
but has only the bare title, without any command in the City: yet because his
lands lie on some sides under the very walls thereof, the Citizens repute him a
dangerous neighbor. The common report was, that this Margraue had lately sold
to the City a great wood, growing very near the walls thereof, and that
shortly after he was at variance with them, as if he had sold only the wood,
and not the soil, so as (if vulgar speech may be believed) they were forced
again to buy the ground: And yet he has not renounced his right of hunting
therein, which he challenges proper to himself. Give me leave to digress so
much from my purpose, as to say, that the neighborhood of this Margraue, is no
less suspected by the free City Wasenburg, not far distant, where upon a
mountain in his own ground, hanging over the City, he has built a strong
Castle. And because all the streets of that little City lie open to it, the
Citizens when first he began to build, complained to the Emperor of that
wrong, and obtained letters to command the Margraue to build no further, but he
not only disobeyed those letters, but built the same with more speed and
strength. Now I return to Nurnberg, the Commonwealth whereof is
Aristocraticall. The great Counsel has no set number, but commonly consists
of some three hundred persons, whereof many are Patricians, living honorably
upon their rents, as Gentlemen, others are Merchants, and some few Artisans, of
the best and richest workmen. The Senate referres to this Counsel, the
impositions of tributes, and the decrees of peace and war, which Subjects of
Counsel being rare, this Counsel is seldom called together, but the authority
of them is so great, as the seals of any two of them, set to any last
Testament, serves in steed of seven witnesses required by the Civil Law. Out
of this great Counsel, the new Senate is yearly chosen, and when the time of
Election is at hand, this great Counsel names a Consul and a Scabine, of the
Gentlemen called ancient, or out of the chief of the next Order; and in like
sort the old Senate of the year past, names three of the ancient Gentlemen.
These five are called the Electors of the new Senate, and as soon as they are
chosen, all Magistracy cease. Then these Electors being sworn, are shut up
into a Chamber, whence they come not forth, till they have chosen twenty six
Consuls and Scabines, of each thirteen. Then they choose the rest of the new
Senate, and as soon as they are chosen, they name among themselves those that
are called ancient, which are commonly the same men, except some be put in the
place of them that are dead, for it is a disgrace to be put from that dignity.
This Election is made in one day, and the Senate consists of forty persons,
whereof thirty four are Patricians or Gentlemen, and so the government is
especially in the hands of the Gentlemen, as a thing whereof they hold the
common people to be incapable. Of these Gentlemen are (...) the seven Men, and
the Senate of the ancient, as also the chosen
Captains and Treasurers.

To be a Doctor of the Civil Law, makes a Gentleman, or any other, to be
incapable of a Senators place. But when in dificult cases they need the advice
of Doctors, they send two Senators to consult with them, who relate their
judgment to the Senate. For this cause, and because all judgments are according
to equity, not after the strict Law, there be fowe Doctors in that City,
neither have they many Advocates; the Senate giving stipend onlyto four, who
plead all causes. Yet the City intertaines some Doctors, to advise them, at I
formerly said, and to assist them in judgment, exhibiting the cause in writing,
as also to be Ambassadors. To the said 34 Gentlemen, 8 Plebeans are added,
which make the said Senate, and these Plebeans have free voices, but are
removed from secret Counsels, and having liberty to be absent, seldom meet
with the Senate, except they be called. So as the common people have little or
no authority, and are kept under, in so much as meetings (excepting funerals
and like ceremonies) and walkings by night are forbidden, yet they have their
privileges inuiolably kept, and live in great liberty, under a most equal
government. Of these Gentlemen governing the City, they have (as I have
heard) twenty eight honorable Families, or there about. And of the said thirty
four Gentlemen of the Senate, eight are called the Ancient, who like old
soldiers are freed from service, the other twenty six diligently attending
the public affairs, with capital and Civil judgments, and one of them is
chosen, to intertaine passengers worthy of Honor, by presenting wine to them in
name of the Senate, and also to call the Senate together, to propound the
causes upon which they deliberate; to ask their Voices, and to do many like
duties. These twenty six Gentlemen are divided into thirteen Consuls, and
thirteen Scabines, and these Scabines judge capital causes (first examined by
the whole Senate) as the Consuls judge Civil causes. And they so divide the
year between them, as each of them for a month is Consul or Scabine. Out of
them are chosen seven men, who have the greatest authority, and determine all
secrets of State, and to them the Treasurers make account. And howsoever two of
one Family may be Senators, yet two of one Family cannot be of these seven men.
Three of these seven are chosen Captains, who have the keeping of the Armory,
and the keys of the Gates, and upon any tumult all fly to them, and yield
them obedience. Two of these Captains are Treasurers, where of the chief has
the first place in all Assemblies. To these Treasurers one of the Plebeans is
added, to ouersee the expense of the treasure, and two of the best sort of the
Plebeans are Clerks of the Exchequer, but only the two chief Treasurers
disburse and lay up all moneys. They have in all public Counsels two
Chauncellors, whereof one always attends the Counsel of seven men, and these
Chauncellors write the Decrees of Counsel, receive and read, write and send,
all letters, being as Secretaries, and they have six Clerks to write under
them. All the Senators have their several stipends out of the common Treasure.
Each of the seven men has yearly five hundred Guldens, besides gainefull
Offices, as the keeping of the Seals, and each Treasurer has eight hundred
Guldens, and each Chauncellor two hundred Guldens yearly. In Judgments they
do not much use the pleadings of Proctors or Advocates, but use to judge
summarily upon oath, or to appoint Arbiters to compound controversies.

But among the Courts of Judgments, one is of five men, from whom there is no
appeal, yet they refer the greatest causes to the Senate. The second Court
is of eight men, and has two Tribunals, where the causes of citizens are
determined, which exceed not the value of thirty two Crowns, and these two
Tribunals in greater causes are united, and have three or four Doctors
appointed by the Senate to advise them, for only the Scabines judge, and from
these Tribunals appeal is granted to the Senate, if the cause exceed the
value of five hundred Crowns. These choose a Judge to see their Decrees put in
execution, and to see capital offenders executed. They appoint a Judge for the
Villages and territories subject to the City, for whose assistance the Senate
chooses some out of the great Counsel. These weekly give the Law to the
Villages and Country people, and by the exercise of this Office, the Judges are
enabled for the Office of Scabines. Also they choose a Judge to have care of the
Faires and Markets, who sets the price of Bread, Flesh, and all things there
sold, and he has four Senators to assist him in weekly inquiring after the
works of Artificers, that they sell no imperfect works, nor use any fraud.
Of the Senators, three are chosen supreme Tutors for pupils and widows, who
divide inheritances, see that all Testaments be performed, and appoint new
Tutors, in case the old be dead, suspected, or absent. These supreme Tutors
provide, that the moneis of pupils be put forth to use, and that the profit
returns to the pupills. They receive the accounts of the Tutors, and provide
that the Pupils be religiously and honestly brought up. One Senator is set over
each Church, Monastery, and Alms house, to see the revenues well administered,
and to promote the causes thereunto belonging. Five Governors are set over the
Territory without the walls, among which, the Chancellor has yearly one
hundredth Crowns, each of the rest twenty five Crowns for stipend. In time of
war, they choose seven Senators, who take upon them the care to provide all
necessaries for the same. I understood there, that not long before, they had
numbered in the City twenty two thousand Artificers, servants, and people of
inferior rank, and that the last subsidy imposed in time of war, was one Gold
Gulden in the hundredth, of every man's mouable and immovable goods, and one gold
Gulden by the Pole, for all such as had neither inheritance nor Art to live
upon.

Augsburg is one of the Imperial Cities (vulgarly Ein Reichs statt) and in
the year Angsburg.
1364. the Senate consisted of two Patritian Consuls, and of ten Merchants, and
seven Artisans, with power of Tribunes, all yearly chosen. The Emperor Charles
the 4 gave the City new priuillges, and confirmed the old, because the Citizens
swore obedience to his Son. And the Emperor Sigismund confirmed and increased
the same. When the Emperor Charles the fifth held a Parliament in this City,
(as many Parliaments have been held there) the old honor was restored to the
Patritians, and the Plebean Tribunes were taken away, two Advocates being set
in their rooms. Two Gentlemen Consuls, at this day govern the City, with six
Judges for criminal causes, whereof three are Gentlemen, two Citizens, one
Plebean. These are chosen by the great Senate, consisting of those three
Orders: but in causes of Religion, the City is subject to the jurisdiction of
the Bishop of Tilling. This City has many noble and rich Merchants, whereof
many have privileges of Barrons, and some of Earls; and among them, the
chief Family is of the Fuggari, famously known, being at this time both boys
and men some thirty in number, and the chief of them was Mark of the Fug
gari, who had married the Daughter to the Earl of Schwartzenburg, and was much
delighted in the gathering of antiquities, with much courtesy using to show the
same to such passengers as took pleasure therein. Three Cozens of this Family
had great and large, but dispersedly scattered possessions, besides that they
were rich in treasure, for supply whereof, the Emperor Charles the fifth, and
his son Phillip King of Spain, often made use of them, engaging to them the
impositions and custom of Havens for ready money, and giving them great
privileges of traffic. In which kind the said King of Spain so obliged them
to him, as the heart being always where the treasure is, he made them no
less obsequious to him then subjects, so difficult a thing is it, for covetous
Merchants to preserve their liberty. Great iealousies were between this City
and the Duke of Bauaria, whose territory extends to the very walls of the
City. And I remember at my last passage through Augsburg, this Duke attempted
to stop the course of water from the City, whereupon the Citizens sent out
Soldiers to beat back the Dukes workmen, but the controversy was soon
after appeased, and came not to blows. They perpetually, even in time of
peace, keep some five hundred Soldiers in the City, who dwell in a street by
themselves, and the City being seated upon the mouth of the Alps, leading into
Italy, and the Citizens being diligent in traffic, it cannot be that it
should not abound in riches. Augsburg in the foresaid Parliament held there,
after Charles the fifth had overcome the Protestant Princes, was said to have
bought their peace of the Emperor with 3000 gold guldens. I know not for what
cause they are severe toward strangers, but I observed, that they have a Law
forbidding strangers to dwell in the City, allowing them only a short time of
abode, and during the same, curiously observing what business they have.

Strasburg is also a free City of the Empire, and (as the rest) governed by a
Senate Strasburg.
yearly chosen: for howsoever it is one of the Cities leagued with the Cantons
of Sweitzerland, yet it is still numbered among the free Imperial Cities: And
it is stately built, and rich in treasure, for so it must needs be, since the
ordinary tributes and taxes are so great, as I have heard the Citizens
profess, that they yearly pay one doller in a thousand, for the value of
their mouable and also immovable goods, (wherein the full value of Land, not
the yearly rent, is reckoned), and that if any fraud be detected, in the last
Testament, or otherwise, the heir or the party offending (if he live) is
deeply fined for the same. While I passed through the City, they had begun a
war with the Duke of Loraine, about the choice of their Bishop which war
they had vnprouidently denounced, before they had levied Soldiers, or made
provisions to make it, so as their territories were exposed to many
oppressions, before they could gather troops to defend them, and offend the
enemy: And it was vulgarly reported, that they could deliberate of nothing in
counsel so secretly, as it was not presently made known to the enemy.

The Imperial City Franckfort, is famous for the two yearly Marts, one at
Midlent, Franckfort
the other at the midst of September, at which times all neighbor Princes
keep Horsemen to guard the Merchants passing that way, to which Horsemen I
remember that each passenger gave 6 creitzers, either of duty or in courtesy,
for his person. Also this City is famous for another privilege contained in
the Laws of the golden Bulla, namely, that all Emperors must be chosen there,
and in case two Emperors be chosen, the same Law defines, that if one of them
shall besiege the City, and there expect his enemy half a month, and if in
that time he come not to break the siege, then it shall be free for the City
to receive the first, as having the victory: For of old custom the new chosen
Emperors keep their coronation Feast in this City, with great magnificence,
which was lastly kept (as they said) by Maximilian the second, at which time
among other solemnities, they roasted an Ox in the midst of the field for
the people, and when the Marshal of the Court had cut a piece as for the
Emperor, the rest of the Ox was in a moment rent in pieces by the common
people.

I must make at least some mention of the Cities lying upon the Sea of Germany
toward the North, whereof most are not only called free, because they are
Imperial Cities, but by the same name, though in diverse signification, are
called Hans steten, that is, Free Cities, in respect of the privileges of
traffic granted to them of old in the neighbor Countries.

Among these Lubecke is the chief of the neighbor Cities joined in league for
common defense, whither the Senators of all the other Cities come once in the
year, to Lubecke
consult of public affairs. The territory of the City reaches not above a
German mile, but after some few miles distance, there is a certain Town which
belongs to Lubecke and Hamburg, by common right, being engaged to them for
money by the Duke of Lower Saxony, of whom they after bought the rest of his
Inheritance. This Town for six years space was wont to be kept by those of
Lubecke, appointing the Governor, and receiving the rents; which time ended,
those of Hamburg were wont to have it in like sort for six years, and so by
turns they were wont to enjoy it. Lubecke of old had a Duke, till it was
subjected to the Empire by the Emperor Frederick the first, after whose death
it became subject to their Duke again, and after five years became subject to
the Danes, but by the help of Frederick the second it freed it self from the
Danes in the year 1226, and after by favor of the Emperors obtained freedom
and absolute power: Both Lubecke and Hamburg are said of old to have
acknowledged the Kings of Denmark, but at last expelling the Kings Proctors,
they became free, and submitted themselves to the defense of the Empire: For
which cause to this day they warily observe the actions of the Kings of
Denmark, and live in fear and suspicion of their attempts, and howsoever they
have freedom and absolute power, yet they are careful to have the favor of
the Kings of Denmark, because they have power to hinder their traffic in the
Baltike Sea: yet sometimes leagued with the neighbor cities (which in the
common cause of freedom are easily drawn to give mutual aid), they have
made wars against the Kings of Denmark with good success. Lubecke is
commended for just government, (not to speak of their hospitality, very fair
and uniform buildings, and the very pleasant seat of the Town). It is
governed by the civil Law, and by statutes made by the Senate; as also some
made by the consent of the confederate cities. No appeal to Universities or to
the Chamber of the Empire is admitted, except the cause be above the value of
five hundred dollers. They lately made sumptuary Laws, restraining the number
of guests and dishes in Feasts, with penalties according to the excess. The
Citizens yearly choose twenty new Senators, and this (...) chooses of their
number four Consuls, with a Judge skillful in the civil Laws. These
Magistrates define all civil and criminal causes, the whole Senate first
examining them, and judgments are given by common consent with the doors
shut: but when any capital judgment is to be executed, at the day appointed
to the Malefactor, and the very hour he is to die, the hangman pronounces the
sentence in the market place. The consuls take the highest place by turns, one
in the morning, the other in the afternoon, at which times they also by turns
hear Ambassadors, and receive complaints. Many Offices are divided among the
Senators, two gather the rents, others have care of the wines, (which are sold
in a public house to public use, no private man being allowed to make that
gain), others ouersee the buildings, that they be uniform and strongly built,
and free from danger of fire, and likewise the fortifications of the City.
Four Serieants attired in red gowns, attend the Senate, and summon men to
appear, (besides twelve inferior Serieants), and they neither carry Sword nor
any Mace before the Magistrates, but follow them in the streets like Servants.
They do not imprison any debtor or light offender, but only summon such to
appear before the Magistrate, and declare to them the fines imposed for not
appearing: but they apprehend capital offenders, and prevent their escape by
flight. It is not lawful for a creditor to put his debtor in prison, but after
a set time and with cautions, prescribed in the Law of Saxony, wherein
notwithstanding, they of Lubecke so favor strangers, as they only have right
in this kind with expedition, and have a proper tribunal (or seat of
judgment) for themselves only: yet herein they seem not favorable to
strangers, in that they permit them not to dwell in the City, otherwise they
do as the common use is, to keep all commodities in the hands of Citizens,
not to be sold to strangers, but by a Citizen, especially since without the
help of strangers they have their own ships to bring in and carry out all
commodities.

Hamburg is in like sort governed, but I cannot so much commend them for
hospitality, Hamburg.
being rude to all strangers, and malicious to Englishmen above others, for no
other cause then for that our Merchants leaving that City, seated themselves at
Stoade: so as it was not safe for any stranger, much less for an Englishman,
to walk abroad after dinner, when the common people are generally heated with
drink: And the very Justice was herein commonly taxed, not that they punished
whoredom (which no good man will disallow) but that they permitted whores in
great multitudes, and yet favored the knavery of the Sergeants, who combining
with the whores, intrapped men in their houses, so as not only the whores and
Sergeants made profit thereby, but the very Magistrates were justly suspected,
to approve this course for their own gain.

Brunswick an Imperial City, worthily to be numbered among the chief, and so
called as the Village of Bruno, is not far distant from Hamburg, and seated
in the center Brunswicke.
of Saxony, was of old (as they say) the Metropolitan City thereof. It consists
of five Cities gathered into one, whereof each has his several privileges,
and they are thus seated, Alstatt is the part on the West side, Newstatt on the
North side, Imsacke the part toward the East, Imhagen, and Altweg (built first
of all the rest) are the part toward the South. And howsoever all these have
each their several Senators and privileges, yet all of them jointly making the
city of Brunswick, live under one common Law and government, the Senators of
each by yearly courses governing the whole body of that commonwealth. For
howsoever tenn Consuls be yearly chosen, two of each City, yet to the two
Consuls of that City which by course is to govern for the year, the other
eight as inferior, and much more all the Senators of the five Cities, yield
for the time great reverence in the Senate and all meetings, and great
obedience in all things commanded. One Senate house is common to all the five
Cities, yet each of them has also a private Senate House. The form of the
public government is Democraticall (or popular.) They live in such fear of
the Duke of Brunswick, left he should take away their liberty, as they have not
only fortified the Town very strongly against assaults or sieges, but also
willingly employ their Citizens in foreign wars as hired soldiers,
insomuch as no man is made free who has not first served one or two years in
the wars.

The Dukes of Brunswick and of Luneburg, derive their pedigree from one root,
namely, The Dukes of Brunswick and of Luneburg.
from the old family of the Dukes of Bauaria: for Henry called the Lion, D. of
Bauaria, (who was Duke and Elector of Saxony also, commanding a most ample
Territory), being proscribed by the Emperor, and for a time living as a
banished man in England, the Dukedom of Bauaria was by the Emperor given in
Fee to the Palatines of the Rheine, and so passed to a new Family. This Henry
the Lion died in Brunswick about the year 1195. His eldest son Otho the
fourth being chosen Emperor, was overcome by his Competitor, and being again
raised to that dignity, was put from it by Frederike the second, and died
1218. Otho his brothers Son, was forced to yield the Dukedom of Saxony to
the Elector of Saxony Albert the second. And the Emperor Frederick the second
cast his Garrison out of Brunswick, with the help of the Citizens, and made
Brunswick a free Imperial City. But at last the Emperor upon the submission
of Otho forgave him, and created him Duke of Brunswick and Luneburg. This Otho
died in the year 1252, from whom this house was subdeuided into the following
Families. From Henry the Wonderful, descend the Lords of Ember and
Grobenbagen. From Albert the Fat, dying in the year 1318, descend the Dukes of
Brunswick and of Luneburg, as follows.

Magnus Torquatus heir of both Dukedomes, (whose garrison the citizens of
Luneburg cast out of the castle Calkberg) left three sons. Frederick chosen
Emperor against Wenceslaus, killed by treachetie in the year 1400. Bernard
after the killing of his brother yielded the D. of Brunswick to his Nephew
William, and retaining the D. of Luneburg, died 1434. From Bernard descend
Otho, who exhibited the Reformed Confession at Augtburg and died 1549. Otho
Lord of Harburg, had to his first wife the daughter to the Earl of
Schwartzenburg; and with the second Wife, Daughter to the Earl of Emden, he
then lived when I passed though Germany. Otho had by his first wife two sons,
Otho Henrich, borne 1555; and John Frederick borne 1557; and one daughter,
Elizabeth, borne 1553, and married to the King of Suecia. And by his second
wife, six sons. William borne 1564. Euno borne 1565. Christopher borne 1570.
Otho borne 1572. John borne 1573. Frederick borne 1578. And three daughters,
Anna Margarita borne 1567. Heduigis borne 1569. Catherina Sophia borne 1577.
The first house of the Dukes of Luneburg and Brunswick (for the titles are
common to al.)

Anne borne 1526.
And Ernest, who reformed Religion, and died 1546, buried at Cella. Henry
married the daughter of the D. of the lower Saxony, dwelling at Angria. Henry
had three sons, Julius Ernestus borne 1571. Francis Cannon of Strasburg, borne
1572. And Augustus borne 1579. And two daughters, Sibilla Elizabetha borne
1576. And Sidonia borne 1577. The second branch likewise Dukes of Luneburg and
Brunswick.

William in the year 1561, married Dorothy, Daughter to Christian King of
Denmark. William had seven sons, Ernest borne 1564. Christian borne 1561.
Augustus borne 1568. Frederick borne 1574. Magnus borne 1577, then Rector of
the University of Iena. George borne 1582. John borne 1583. And seven
daughters, Sophia married to George, Marquis of Brandeburg 1579. Elizabeth to
the Count of Hohelm 1585. Doroty borne 1570. Clara 1571. Margaret 1573. Marie
1575. And Sibilla 1584. The third branch with the same titles.


Francis of the reformed religion, left two daughters no heirs males; and died
1549.
Henry died before his brother Frederick. William the Victorious, at the death
of his Uncle Frederick possessed the Dukedom of Brunswick, which his Uncle
Bernard did yield to him. He died 1482. Dukes of Brunswick. From William the
Victorious descends Henry, who twice in vain besieged Brunswick aided by other
free Cities. He died 1514. Henry made captive by the Elector of Saxony 1545,
twice besieged Brunswick. He had two sisters and four brothers; Ericus,
Christopher Bishop of Verden, Francis, and George Archbishop of Breme. The
eldest married Mary, Daughter to the Duke of Wirtenberg, and died 1568. Julius,
his two elder Brethren being killed, left his Priesthood, reformed Religion
after Luthers doctrine, founded an University at Helmstat, and called it
Iulia; married Heduigis, daughter to Ioachim the second, Elector of Brandeburg,
and died in the year 1589. Henry Julius borne 1562 Administrator of two
Bishoprics of Halberstat and Mind, first married Dorothy Daughter to Augustus
Elector of Saxony, then Elizabeth daughter to Frederike King of Denmark, yet
living. By his first wife he had Dorothy Heduigis borne 1587 by the second
Frederike Vdalrike borne 1591.
Three brothers, Philip Sigismond Bishop of Verden, borne 1568. Ioachim Carolus
borne 1573. Julius Augustus borne 1578. Five sisters, Sophia married to Ernest
Duke of Pomeru. Mary to Francis D. of lower Saxony 1582. Elizabeth to the Count
of Schaumberg, Dorothy borne 1577. Heduigis 1580. The second house of the Duke
of Brunswicke, more powerful then all the former joined.

He had four sisters, Catherine married to John Marquisse of Brandeburg.
Margaret to the D. of Munsterberg. Clara first an Abbess, then married to
Phillip Lord of Grachenhage. And Mary an Abbess.

And Ericus, called the Popish. Ericus called also the Popish, married his
daughter to John Prince Dauria of Genoa in Italy. He had a base son, who died
without issue, and lies buried with his Father at Pauia in Italy.




The Duke of Brunswicke keeps his Court at a strong Castle, within the little
City Wolfeubeiten, less then a German mile distant from Brunswick, of which
City he bears The Duke of Brunswicke.
the title, in respect it of old belonged to his Progenitors (in which kind he
is also called Duke of Luneburg, to which he has right of succession, and
Purgraue of Nurnberg, which title has been long extinct), not that he has
any least power over the City, or so much as a house therein, whom the Citizens
rather wish many miles removed from them. I have said that Henry Julius Duke of
Brunswick has three brothers, and that the eldest of them was Bishop of
Verden, but when my self passed that way, I understood that of these three
younger brothers, the eldest was Bishop of Osenburg, the next Channon of
Strasburg, and that the youngest was a Student in the University of Helmstatt,
founded by his Father: And it is worth observation, that the Duke himself was
Administrator of two Bishoprics. I have showed that the City of Brunswicke
got their liberty by the Sword, in the time of Duke Otho, and with the aid of
the Emperor Frederick the second: And as they gained it by Arms, so they
maintain it, having been often besieged by the Dukes, and to this day bearing
up the same against the Dukes, with whom they cease not to expostulate, that
they usurp the title of their City. And not long before my passage that way,
when at the marriage of the Duke with the sister to the King of Denmark, the
Citizens of Brunswicke discharged some great Pieces of Artillery in honor of
the marriage, yet so great are the iealousies between the Duke and them, as
he took it in ill part, and shaking his head for anger, said it was done in
ostentation of their strength, and as the threatening of enemies rather then the
triumph of friends: And the Senators of Brunswicke, though invited to the
marriage, yet would not come thither. Neither do they willingly suffer the
Duke to come into their City. And not long before, when the Duke for pleasure
disguised himself as a Carman, and drove a Cart of wood into the City, to be
sold there, the chief Consul having notice thereof, commanded the gates to be
shut, and the streets to be chained, and when the Duke had long sat upon the
cart, with some annoiance by reason of rain, and found he could not go back,
and thought it dangerous to go into any private house, at last the Consul
bought his wood, and so drew the Duke to his house, where he entertained him
honorably, yet remembered him that he had put himself in needles danger,
knowing the ill affection of the common people toward him, and then sending
for the Dukes servantes to attend him led him out of the city with honor.

Luneburg a free City of the Empire, is strongly fortified, and statly built,
but has no less ielosy with the neighbor Dukes, bearing the title of the
City, yet they neither The City and the Dukes of Luneburg
dwell in the City, nor meddle with the government thereof, but abide at Cella,
and at Sethern, some twelve miles distant, and in other Cities of that
Province, according to the division of their inheritance between them. The
Citizens of Luneburg knowing that of old they bought their liberty of these
Dukes, and that to this day they pay them some tributes, justly fear lest the
Duke or his Brothers and Cosens, being many in number, should practice any thing
against their liberty, or at least being poor, should seek new occasions to
extort money from them. The Duke of old had a strong Castle, built upon a
Mountain hanging over the City, vulgarly called Kalckberg, that is the
Mountain of Chalk; but the Butchers of the City, at a Shroftide, making show
of mustering in Arms, took this Castle, for which service to the
Commonwealth, the Butchers to this day have the keeping thereof. But the
Citizens are so suspicious, lest it should be betrayed to the Duke for money, as
if any of them who keep it, do at any time go forth of it, into the City or
to any other place, they are no more permitted to enter the same.

Upon the furthest shore of the Baltike sea toward the North-east, the free
City Dantzke.
of Dantzke is seated. It is free in respect of privileges for traffic, and
for that it is governed by the Senators and the Laws of the City, yet not
numbered among the Imperial Cities, because it in some sort acknowledges the
King of Poland, and paies some couenanted tributes to his Minister residing in
the City. In the time of Stephen Bathory Prince of Transiluania and King of
Poland, this City was by him besieged, and forced to pay these tributes.
Whereupon the Citizens to pay them without their own prejudice, doubled all
Impositions upon strangers trading there. The Consul of the City there, (as in
all Germany) is vulgarly called Burgomaster, and he judges all civil and
criminal causes, but appeals are granted from him to the College of civil
Lawyers, and from them to the Senate of the City, and in some causes, from the
Senate to the King of Poland. This City consists of three Cities, vulgarly
called Reichstat, Furstat, and Altstatt (that is, the City of the Kingdom, the
fore City, and the old City), and each has his gates, and his Senate, and the
Consul may be chosen out of either Senate, so as for the time of his Office,
he reside in the chief City, called Reichstatt. Here be the furthest limits of
the Empire toward the North and the East.

And from hence toward the West Isles the shore of the Balticke Sea, and of the
German Ocean, upon which are seated Stetinum, Meckleburg, Lubecke, Hamburg, and
Breame, Imperial Cities, and free, as weli for privileges of traffic in
neighbor Kingdoms, as for absolute government at home: And in East-Freesland
(for West-Freesland belongs to Netherland) the furthest limits of the Empire
toward the West and North, end in the City of Emden.

This City has his Count, bearing title of the City, and of late he kept his
Court Emden.
therein: but the Citizens professing the reformed Doctrine of Calvin, and the
Count attempting to force them to the profession of Luthers Doctrine, not long
before I passed that way, the Citizens expelled the Count, and gave oath to the
Senators of the City, to obey them, to be ready in arms for the defense of the
City, and not to remove their dwellings from thence without leave of the
Senate. And the Citizens were thus confident, because the City lies upon the
confines of the Netherlanders, who maintained men of war in that Inland Sea,
and upon the River passing by the walls of the City, to stop any passage, and to
defend the ships of Merchants, forced in those flats to expect the return of
the tide. And generally it was thought that Emden would join in league with
the united Provinces of Netherland, but as yet it remained under the Empire,
not free by privilege, nor yet subject to the Count of Emden. This Count at
this time had two sons by the daughter of the King of Suelia, and howsoever
his younger brother by the love of his mother, had obtained the best part of
the inheritance, yet he had no children, nor was thought likely to have any, so
as no doubt was then made, but that the whole inheritance would after his death
return to the children of the elder brother. And these things shall suffice,
briefly written in general of the Commonwealth of Germany, and in particular,
of the absolute Dominions under the Empire.

CHAP. V. Of the Commonwealth of Sweitzerland, according to the diverse
subjects of the former Chapters.
THE Sweitzers derived of diverse peoples (and among others of the Schwalen and
Friselanders), howsoever they be Germans both in language and manners, yet
because the old Galls gave them a seat at the foot of the Alps, they were
accounted Galls (or French) till the time of Julius Caesar. In the
Commentaries of Caesar, we find their Commonwealth divided into four
Communities, whereof one, namely that of Zurech, had not long before ouerthrown
the Army of Lucius Cassius Consul of Rome. About this time the Sweitzers weary
of their barren seat, attempted to seek a new place of dwelling, had not
Caesar overcome them, and contained them at home. And from that time to the
days of Charles the Great, and so long as his race possessed the renewed
Empire of the West, they were still esteemed Galls: but when that imperial
dignity fell to the Germans, they became subjects to those Emperors, and were
numbered among the Germans, having the same manners, laws, and customs with
them, as at this day they have. The Emperors governed this Nation, by
Governors vulgarly called Reichs vogt, till at last the Commonwealth of the
Sweitzers was severed from that of the Germans, and made a free state, which in
the age before ours, has gotten great reputation: And here it is worthy to be
observed, that the ambition of Popes, and their devilish tyranny over the
Emperors, not only (after some eight hundred years from Christ) caused
almost all the Garboyles of States, whereof we have heard, or read, or which
with our own eyes we have seen, but in particular were the chief, yea, sole
causes, of rending this strong member from the body of the Empire. Sweitzerland
about that time, abounded with noble Families, and them the Governors
favored, to increase their own power, whereupon they oppressed the common
people, and provoked their extreme hatred, so as they were forced to combine
themselves in mutual league against this oppression: yet the common people had
never dared to oppose themselves to the Gentry, if the Empire had enioied
peace: But when the Bishops of Rome, often cast out their spiritual
thunderbolts (I mean excommunications) against the Emperors, and as well
absolved all subjects from the Oath of Allegiance, as heartried ambitious
Traitors to be competitors against the Emperors, yea, stirred up their Kinsman
and their very Children to make civil war with them: in this confused
Anarchy, a Patron was not wanting to the most wicked person, to defend him, so
he would follow his party. Hence it came, that when the Emperor Frederick the
second, in the year 1240, received the common people of Sweitzerland into his
protection against the Gentlemen, they likewise, as the Clients of Monasteries,
followed the Popes party, whereupon the people of Zurech, the Vrij and Suitij,
(of whom the whole Nation is called Sweitzers) being three Communities, first
in the year 1251, made a league for three years against the Gentlemen, lying
in wait to entrap them; and after by little and little, they made more firm
and perpetual leagues for defense of absolute liberty: and serving diverse
Emperors in the Parall tumults, from time to time obtained great privileges.
Then they drew other Communities and neighbor Cities to be partners of their
leagues. Finally, after they had rooted out the Families of Gentlemen, and had
by conspiracy castout the Governors of the Archdukes of Austria (to who in
the Lordship of Sweitzerland was fallen), they in process of time attained
this absolute State, which we see them enjoy at this day: For the foresaid
strife continuing between the Emperors and the Popes, and Lodwick of Bauaria
contending for the Empire with Frederick of the House of Austria, the
Sweitzers took part with Lodwicke, who expressly ratified the freedom or
liberty of then Commonwealth.

And that consists of three parts, the communities (vulgarly called Cantons)
the Four parts of the Commonwealth.
fellows or confederates, and the stipendary Cities, or gouernements, to which
Semler adds the forraigue leagues for a fourth part.

The communities are vulgarly called Orts, and by the Italians Cantons of the
Thirteen Cantons.
Sweitzers, (as we will hereafter call them), and they are thirteen in number.
Among these Cantons, the Vrij (coming from the Taurisci) the Suitij (coming
from the Cimbri) the Vnderualdij (of the race of banished Romans) about the
year 1308, made a mutual league for ten years, and having overcome in battle
Leopold Archduke of Austria, in the year 1315, made this league perpetual
Lucerna the fourth Canton, being much wronged, while it was under the Patronage
of the House of Austria, to avoid tyranny in that confusion of the Empire, did
in the year 1332, join it self in perpetual league. Zurech a free City of
the Empire, was in like sort received for the 5 Canto^. When these cantons made
war upon Glarona, to have the possession of a country most commodious for the
common good, all the people so hated the Governors appointed by the House of
Austria, and so desired freedom, as they yielded up themselves to the Cantons,
and so Glarona the foresaid year became the sixth Canton: Likewise when the
Canton Zurech made war upon Zug, a Town (possessed by gentlemen subject to
the House of Austria) whence they were much annoied, the Citizens being
forsaken by the Gentlemen, yielded themselves, and being received into the
league, became the seventh Canton. (...) a free city of the Empire, and under
the power of the Governors, having found the faithful love of the Cantons, in
the said confusion of the Empire, did in the year 1352, make a perpetual
league with the three first named Cantons, wherein notwithstanding Zurech and
Lucerna are contained, the three Cantons being bound to those two, for the
succor of Bern, and being bound to Bern, for the succor of the two Cantons,
and so Bern became the eight Canton. The Town Friburg, subject to the House of
Austria, being many ways oppressed in the said confusion of the Empire, made
league with Bern, and when the House of Austria, upon pretense to visit them,
did for that cause, spoil them of their goods, they in the year 1481, after
the end of the Burgundian war, became the ninth Canton. Solothara a free City
of the Empire, had made a perpetual league with Berne in the year 1351, and
after in the year 1481, was received for the tenth Canton. Bizila free City of
the Empire, had in the year 1327 made a perpetual league with the 3 first
Cantons, and after provoked by many injuries of the house of Austria, did in
the year 1501 make a perpetual league with all the Cantons, and so was
received for the Eleventh Canton. (...) an Imperial city, first sold or
engaged to the house of Austria, and again united to the Empire, when the Duke
of Austria was proscribed in the Council of Costnetz, because the Emperor
Frederick the third in the year 1454, exacted an oath of the citizens, as Duke
of Austria not as Emperor, they first made a league for certain years with
six Cantons, and after at the end of the Suenian war made a perpetual league
in the year 1501 with all the Cantons, and so becam the twelfth Canton.
Abbatiscella vulgarly called Apinzill, containing eight Villages, after it had
obtained freedom from the Abbot of Saint Gallus by Arms and money, had war
with the house of Austria about the year 1408, at which time it made a league
with the Cantons, and after provoked by the injuries of the said Abbot, in the
year 1452; it made a perpetual league with the seven first Cantons, and at
last in the year 1513 became the thirteenth Canton.

Among the fellows in league, first the Abbot of Saint Gallus in the year
1451, Fellows in league.
obtained to be made a cityzen of the four Cantons, zurech, Lucerna, Suitia,
and Glarona, which right all the Abbots renew, and promise that all their
possessions shall lie open to the said Cantons, and that in controversies they
will rest in the judgment of the cantons, and by another agreement each of
these Cantons appoint a captain to be Assessor to the Abbot in judgment, and
the cantons have half of all mulcts or fines imposed, and the subjects of the
Abbot are bound to serve them in war. And howsoever some of the cantons at
this day are of the reformed religion, yet they send a captain according to
the covenant, and defend all the rights of the Monastery. In the second place,
is the town of Saint Gallus, which having bought freedom from all rights of
the Abbot and of the Empire, made a perpectuall league with six Cantons,
Zurech, Bern, Lucerna, Suitia, Zug, and Glarona, which was confirmed in the
year 1454.

In the third place are the Rhaeti, called Grisons by the Itallians, divided
into three leagues. The first is called the upper league, consisting of nintene
communities, and was made with the seven old cantons in the year 1407. The
second, in respect of the Bishopric of Chur, is called the league of the house
of God, consisting of nineteen communities, (whereof two use the Language of
Germany, the rest the Language of the country, being corrupt Italian), which
the year following joined in league with the cantons. The third league called
the ten judgments, (or jurisdictions) and consisting of ten communities
joined in the league with the Cantons in the year 1498, and at the same time
the house of Austria preparing war against the Rhetians, they all jointly made
a perpetual league of fellowship with all the Cantons.

In the fourth place the seven tenths of the Valesians, and the Bishop of
Sedune Earl of Valesia, for the controversies of religion in our time, made a
perpetual league of fellowship with seven Cantons of the Roman Religion,
Lucerna, Vria, Suitia, Vnderualdia, Tugium, (vulgarly Zug), Friburg, and
Solodurum, vulgarly Solothurne).

The Town Roteuilla in the fifth place, made a perpetual league of fellowship
with all the Cantons, in the year 1519; but because it is seated in Germany,
out of the confines of mountainous Sweitzerland, caution was made that without
the consent of the Cantons, they shall make no war, nor give any aides, and
if war be made upon them, in case the enemy consent, they shall rest in the
judgment which the Cantons shall hold just and equal: And that they shall
make no league without the consent of the Cantons, and in time of civil war
shall follow the greatest part of them.

In the sixth place Mulhusium of old an Imperial City, was incorporated to the
City of Bazill in the year 1506, and after nine years, made a perpetual
league of fellowship with all the Cantons.

In the seventh place, the Town Bienna (or Bipennium) enjoying all privileges
under the Bishop of (...) in the year 1303, made a more firm league with Bern
in the year 1352.

In the eighth place is Geneua, which gave all rights, and kept all old
covenants with the Bishop thereof, till he sold the same to the Duke of Sauoy.
After that time, this City made diverse leagues with the Cantons for certain
years, and at last couenanted the right of Citizens with the Canton of Bern,
and being assailed for Religion, confirmed the same more strictly, in the year
1536, since which time some motions have been made, to unite Geneua with the
Cantons in public league, but hitherto it could not be effected.

In the ninth and last place is the Town Neocomum, with the County thereof,
which the Sweitzers took in the war against the King of France, Lewis the
twelfth, and because it belonged to the Duke of Longouille in France, his widow
in the year 1529, obtained to have it restored to her upon certain
conditions, yet still it has league of fellowship with the Cantons of Bern,
Lucern, Friburg, and Solothurn, and the Lords of the County have a particular
league with the Canton of Bern.

Touching the people governed by the Sweitzers in common, they be five
stipendiary Stipendiary Cities and Gouernements.
Cities, and nine gouernements. The Cities are so called, because they serve
the Sweitzers in war at their stipend, and having their own Magistrates, yet
are subject to the Cantons, and ruled by their statutes. These Cities of old
subject to the House of Austria, became subject to the Cantons, upon condition
that keeping their privileges, they should obey them in the same manner, as
formerly they did the house of Austria. The Sweitzers took Baden, Brimigart,
and Mallinga, when the Duke of Austria was proscribed, and after the Emperor
engaged those cities to the Canton of Zurech, which made other 7 cantons
partners of that ingageme^t, namely, Lucerna, Suitia, Vnderualdia, Vria,
Tugium, Glarona, and Berna. The Sweitzers took Rapersuilla in the year 1458,
being received into the city, and helped by those of their faction. And they
took the fifth city Frawenfield, in the year 1460, when the Duke of Austria
was excommuned, upon the Popes command well pleasing to them. Among the
Governments, that of Baden is subject to the foresaid eight Cantons. The second
of Turg is subject to all the same Cantons, excepting Bern, but the judgments
and Fines belong to the ten old Cantons. The third of the free Province, was
given to the Sweitzers in fee from the Emperor, when the said Duke of Austria
was proscribed, and it is subject to the same Cantons, excepting Bern, but the
Governor dwells not among them, only using to come to them for the judgment of
causes. The fourth is the country of the Sarunetes, sold by their Earl to the
said Cantons, excepting Bern, in the year 1483. The fist of the Rhegusei was
sold to the Canton Apenzill in the year 1460, and the Cantons drew it to
common subjection, when Apenzill was admitted into the number of the Cantons,
so as Apenzill also is partner in that Government.

In the last place are the four Governments beyond the Alps, seated in Italy,
namely the town Lucanum, the Locarnenses, the Medrisians, and the middle valley,
which the Duke of Milan gave to the Cantons for a reward, upon the casting out
of the French in the year 1513, and yet the King of France, Francis the first,
after upon the casting out of that Duke, confirmed this gift to the Cantons.
To these is added the town Bilitioni sold to the Cantons, Vria, Suitia, and
Vnderualdia, in the year 1422, the country whereof is divided into three
Governments, commanded by the said three Cantons, by courses or turns.

Touching foreign leagues. Among those made for certain years, Pope Sixtus
Foreign leagues for (...), namely the papal leagues.
in the year 1478 made league with the Sweitzers, and gave them large
spiritual indulgences. Likewise at the end of the Sweitzers league with the
king of France Lewis the twelfth, in the year 1509, Pope Julius the second in
the year 1510 made league with the Sweitzers, but the soldiers levied under
the pay of Pope Julius, perceiving that he dealt not directly and truly with
them, employing them to expel the king of France out of Milan, whom he had
hired under pretense to defend the Church against the Duke of Ferrara, they
could not contain themselves from returning sudenly into their country, and
being dismissed without pay, they ceased not with many threatenings to storm
against the Pope. Yet in the year 1511 the same Pope Julius being overcome by
the French, he called the Sweitzers again to his aid, who sent him an Army of
20000 foot, at which time the Sweitzers being offended with the French, cast
them out of Milan, whereupon Pope Julius gave to this commonwealth the title of
the Defender of the Church, and diverse. Banners charged with diverse Images, and
a Cap for sign of liberty, with a sword. Also Maximilianus Sfortia by their
aid being then put into the possession of the Dukedom of Milan, made league
with the Sweitzers, and gave them the foresaid Governments in Italy. Also Pope
Leo the tenth in the year 1515, joined himself to the league, made between
the Emperor Maximilian, and Sfortia Duke of Milan, and the Sweitzers, against
the King of France. Lastly, Pope Clement the eight, sitting in the chair of
Rome when I passed through Italy, had also league with the Sweitzers.

But I must come to the hereditary foreign leagues, which only, and no
other, can truly be called part of the Commonwealth.

Among the chief of them, is that of Milan: And not to speak of the ancient
leagues, which some of the Cantons had with the Insubres, old inhabitants of
Lombardy, Foreign hereditary leagues, as that of Milan.
Galeacius Duke of Milan in the year 1466, made a league with eight Cantons,
(wherein mention is made of the said leagues with the Insubres), and he granted
to the Vrij, that they should possess the Lepontian Valley, for which they
were to send unto the Duke yearly four Hawks and a Crosse-bow: Moreover he
granted to the eight Cantons, that in his Dukedom they should be free from
all impositions and taxes. Afterward these and other heads of that league,
were confirmed and renewed by the Duke his successors: And Ferdinand Gonzaga
in the name of the Emperor Charles the fifth, confirmed the same in the year
1551. And among other heads of that league, it is couenanted, that it shall be
free for the Sweitzers to buy corn, yet in time of dearth, they may carry none
out of the Dukedom, only some 200 bushels shall in that case be sold to them,
as friends. Also cautions are inserted about the buying and carrying of salt,
and that they shall freely pass to and fro without safe conduct, excepting
those times in which Sweitzerland shall be infected with the plague, and that
they shall be free from impositions in all places, excepting the city of Milan;
where they shall pay custom at the gates. Lastly, that the Sweitzers thus
privileged, shall not take any others to be partners in traffic with them,
to the prejudice of the Dukedom; and that all such shall be excluded from
these privileges, as have fled out of the Dukedom, whether they live in
Sweitzerland or else where: And this league was made to continue four years
after the death of the Emperor Charles the fifth, and this time expired,
howsoever the league was not for a time renewed, yet the Sweitzers enioied all
these privileges. This hereditary league descends to the Kings of Spain, who
succeed Charles the fifth in the said Duchy of Milan, and all his possessions
in Italy.

The Sweitzers have had sharp wars with the House of Burgundy, and long
continuing wars with the House of Austria, which at last were ended in league
and The Burgundian and Austrian league.
friendship. The first war of Burgundy began in the year 1474, the House of
Austria using the pride and ambition of the Dukes of Burgundy, to keep down
the Sweitzers, with whom themselves had often fought with no good success: For
the cause of the war sprang from certain Countries, to this end engaged by
Sigismund Duke of Austria, to Charles Duke of Burgundy, whence the desired and
expected ielousies grew between them, which Lewis the II King of France did
nourish, bearing a spleen to Duke Charles, and for that cause did furnish the
Sweitzers with money to make that war: And Sigismund Duke of Austria more to
encourage the Sweitzers, made league with them against the Duke of Burgundy.
Also the Emperor Frederick of the House of Austria, leading an Army against the
said Duke, did stir up the Sweitzers to assail him. But when they had with
good success pierced into Burgundy, the Emperor made peace with the said
Duke, wherein the Sweitzers were not contained, so as the Duke turned all his
Forces upon them; and not to speak of light skirmishes and fights, the maine
business was tried between them in three battles, wherein the Duke himself was
in person. First at the town Granson, where the Sweitzers had the victory, but
they having no horse, (which could not so soon be sent to them from their
confederates), and the horse of the Duke defending the foot in their flight,
few of the Burgundians were killed there. Secondly, they fought at Morat; where
they write that 26000 of the Burgundians were slain. And to this day huge
heaps of dead bones lie in that place, to witness that great overthrow. The
third battle was at Nancy, a City of Lorain, where Charles Duke of Burgundy
besieged Renatus Duke of Loraine, confederate with the Sweitzers, and then 8000
Sweitzers and 3000 of their confederates sent to help them, overcame the Duke
of Burgundy, and himself being killed (...), his death gave an end to that
war in the year 1477.

After the house of Austria had made many wars and leagues for years with the
Sweitzers, at last Sigismund Duke of Austria, before the Burgundian war, made
an hereditary league with them, Lewis the French King mediating the same, that
he might draw the Sweitzers to make war with Charles the proud Duke of
Burgundy. By this league it was agreed, that any controversies falling, they
should be put to Arbiters, both parts binding themselves to stand to their
judgment. That al old leagues always preserved, they should serve the Duke of
Austria in his wars, upon the same pay they have at home serving the State. On
the other side, that the possessors should hold all places, without calling
into question for them. That neither part should join in league the subjects of
the other, or make them free of their Cities. That neither part should burden
the other with customs or impositions. At this time in the year 1474, many
neighbor Princes, Cities, and Bishops, did join themselves in league for
years: but the foresaid league with the house of Austria, ceased in the time
of the Emperor Maximilian the first, who made League with the Princes and
cities of Germany, against the Sweitzers (called the great League of Sucura.)

That war ended, Maximilian in the year 1511, renewed the former League,
joining therein the house of Burgundy, and his grandchild Charles (after made
Emperor the fifth of that name), so uniting all the thirteen Cantons with
both those houses, and he promised in the name of Charles, that he should
yearly pay in the Town of Zurech two hundred gold crowns to each Canton, for
a testimony of love, and for the Abbot of Saint Gallus, and the Town, and
besides for Apenzill he should yearly The German Emperors renew the League of
Austria.
give each of them one hundred Crowns, and that he should confirm this
league. This was done in the year 1543, wherein Charles the Emperor renewed
the League of Burgundy, and his brother Ferdinand succeeding him in the Empire,
renewed the League of the House of Austria.

At this time whereof I write, the Ambassador of the King of Spain resided at
Phillip King of Spain renewes the Leagues of Burgundy and Milan.
Frihurg, and Philip King of Spain, son to Charles, had (as I understood by
Sweitzers of good credit) renewed the Leagues of Burgundy and Milan, with the
Cantons of the Roman religion, to last five years after his death; and this was
done in the Church of Milan, where the Ambassadors are said to have hung up
their Shields in memory thereof, and to have given a thousand gold crowns to
the beautifying of the Church, at which time the King of Spain divided twelve
thousand gold crowns between the Ambassadors, besides the charges, passing
three thousand crowns. But the Ambassadors of Solothurn, withdrew themselves
from this League, because the King of France was indebted to them, which debt
the King of Spain refused to pay. By this League they are mutually bound to
aid each other with one thousand two hundred foot: and the King of Spain
promised yearly Pensions in general to the Cantons, and in particular to
diverse chief men and Captains. For the Sweitzers use to make no League
without profit, since the Neighbor Princes grew of opinion, that they could
not make war, except their Armies were strengthened with a firm body of
Sweitzers. Not only Solothurn renounced the said League, but also the Cantons
of the reformed religion, partly not to do any thing against their League with
France, partly left they should take part with a King, whom they judged most
ambitions, and a great enemy to the Reformed Religion, howsoever he covered
that hatred; and partly lest they should advance the House of Austria, justly
suspected by them, whose victories might turn to their ruin. And at the same
time the Cantons and Fellows in League, being of the Reformed Religion after
the doctrine of Calvin, made a League for defense of religion among
themselves, and with Strasburg, a neighbor free city of Germany, being of the
Reformed Religion after the doctrine of Luther.

The Duke of Sauoy had his Ambassador residing at Lucerna, (where the Popes
Ambassadors also reside, of whose Leagues for years we formerly spoke.) The
old The League of Sauoy.
Allobroges, now called Sauoyans, had old Leagues with the Cantons of Bern,
Friburg, and Solothurn: but Charles Duke of Sauoy in the year 1512, made a
League for twenty five years with all the Cantons, by which, among other
things, it was couenanted, that the Duke should aid the Sweitzers with six
hundred or more horse at his own charge, so he were not distracted with
wars at home, and that the Sweitzers should aid the Duke with six thousand
foot for any war in his own Country, to whom the Duke should pay each man
six Frankes by the month. But he should not employ them to fight at sea, nor
lead them beyond the sea, but only to defend his own Country, and the
confines thereof. And it was couenanted, that during this League the Duke
should yearly pay at Bern two hundred gold crowns to each Canton. When this
League was expired, Duke Charles put out of his Dukedom by the French King
Francis the first, followed the Emperor Charles the fifth, and the renewing of
this League was intermitted. But the King of France restoring Philebert his
son to the Dukedom, this Duke in the year 1560 made a new and perpetual
League with six Cantons, namely, Lucerna, Suitia, Vria, Vnderualdia, Zug, and
Solothurne. And after, the rest of the Cantons upon like conditions, renewed
the old league with this Duke, only in this last league no mention is made of
mutual aides couenanted by the former league.

The French Ambassador resided at Solothurn, (who of old used to reside at
Bazil) The French league.
and the league of the French Kings with the Sweitzers, is of far greater
moment then any of the rest. The first of the French that made war with the
Sweitzers, was Lewis the French Kings son (after the eleventh King of that
name) who leading an Army to assist Pope Eugenius in dissoluing the Council at
Bazill, was persuaded by the Emperor Frederick to assail the Sweitzers, but
a small number of them possessing straight passages, did so annoy his Army, as
he soon retired. He made peaco with the Sweitzers in the year 1450, and
having tried their strength, made league with them for ten years. His son
Charles the eighth in the year 1483, renewed this league, and used the
Sweitzers in his wars with the Duke of Britany, and for the Kingdom of
Naples. Lewis the twelfth, after the league for years was expired, renounced
the payment of all public or private pensions, wherewith the Sweitzers were so
greatly offended, as after they refused to renew that league with him, and
joined in league with the Pope and the Duke of Milan against him, so as by
their aid he was in the year 1512, cast out of the Dukedom of Milan. The
French King Francis the first, fought with the Sweitzers, joined against him in
league with the Emperor Maximilian, Pope Leo the tenth, and Sfortia Duke of
Milan. For howsoever the Sweitzers suspected the proceeding of their
confederates, and purposed to return home, yet the Pretorian Sweitzers of the
Duke of Milan, assailing the French, the rest of the Sweitzers, though called
home, yet lest they should seem to forsake their companions, joined with the
Pretorian Sweitzers, and so by art and cunning drawn to fight, gave the French
a notable overthrow, at which time the Sweitzers had the greatest Army they
ever brought into the field, being 31000 foot: but the French King Francis, the
next day fighting again with the Sweitzers, overthrew them, yet so as the
retreit (as they write) was nothing like a flight: And so the King casting
Sfortia out of the Dukedom of Milan, recovered the same.

After this prosperous success, the French King sought nothing more then to be
reconciled and joined in league with the Sweitzers he had overcome, which he
did, the league consisting of 13 heads. 1. They couenanted for taking away all
injuries and controversies. 2. For freeing of captives. 3. How the Sweitzers
may plead any cause in judgment against the King. 4 That al should enjoy the
benefit thereof, being borne within the confines of Sweitzerland, and speaking
the Dutch tongue. 5. Privileges are confirmed to the Merchants of
Sweitzerland. 6 For charges in the siege of Dyiune and in Italy, the King
covenants to pay them a great sum of money by yearly portions. 7. It is agreed
that all controversies shall be determined by courses there set down, not by
war. 8. That neither part shall give passage to the enemies of the other. 9.
That Merchants and all subjects on both parts, shall freely pass, not offended
with reproaches, or oppressed with impositions. 10. That the King shall yearly
pay to each Canton 2000 Franks, and to the Abbot of S. Gallus and his subjects,
and to those of Toggenburg 600 Frankes, and to the City of S. Gallus 400, to
the Mulhusians 400, to the Gruerians 600, to the Valisians 2000, and to the
Grisons the pensions given by Lewis the 12: and moreover yearly 2000 Franks
(but howsoever the Rhetians or Grisons by this league serve the King in his
wars with the Sweitzers: yet Semler witnesses, that they serve severally
under their own Captains). In the 11 Article all immunities in the Dukedom
of Milan are confirmed to the Bilitianenses, the Inhabitants of the middle
Valley, the Luganenses, and the Locarnenses. 12. Choice is given to the
Sweitzers to retain the Castles they had, or to take money for them. Lastly, it
is agreed and couenanted, that the league shall be peripetuall, and not be
broken upon any fraudulent pretense. In this league the King excepts all his
confederates, and the Sweitzers except Pope Leo the 10, the Emperor Maximilian,
the Empire, and the House of Austria; and all old leagues: so as if the King
should make war upon any of these in their own countries, it may be free to the
Sweitzers to observe their leagues with them, but if any of them assail the
King in his own Kingdom, the Sweitzers shall not permit any of their subjects
to serve them, but shall call them home. This League was made at Friburg, in
the year 1516, the month of November, and upon the day of Saint Andrew.

And the King rested not, till after five years since this Peace was made, he
leagued himself more strictly at Lucerna with all the Cantons (that of Zurech
only excepted) and with all their fellows in league; of which league I will
briefly relate some heads added to the former: namely, that if any man should
make war upon the King in France, or in the Dukedom of Milan, the King at
his pleasure might leauy in Sweitzerland an Army of six thousand at the least,
or sixteen thousand foot at the most (except the Senate should grant a
greater number.) That the King might choose the Captains, and the Senate
without delay should permit them to march within ten days, and not recall
them till the war should be ended, if the King shall please so long to use
them. That by the same right, and under the same conditions, the King making
war upon any, may freely leauy soldiers, but with this caution, that the
Sweitzers troubled with war at home, should be free from these covenants. It
was further cautioned, that the King should not divide the Army of the
Sweitzers into diverse places or Forts, but should keep it vaited in one body.
That he should not use it for any fight at Sea. That they should receive pay
the same day they should march out of their country, and were they never so
soon sent back, yet three months pay, should be presently due unto them, and
that the first months pay should be given them within the confines of
Sweitzerland. That the King to aid the Sweitzers having any war, should send
them two hundred armed horse, and twelve great pieces of Ordinance with all
furniture (namely, six battering pieces, and six middle pieces) and besides
toward the charge of their war, should each three months pay a certain
sum of money at Lions, and if the Sweitzers shall choose rather to have money in
stead of the armed horse, the King should further pay them two thousand crowns
each three months. That if in time of war, the Sweitzers shall be forbidden
to buy Salt in other places, they may buy and bring Salt out of France. That
neither part shall make the subjects of the other free of their Cities, or
receive them into patronage. That the King, to declare his good will toward
the Sweitzers, shall besides the two thousand Franckes promised by the former
League to each Canton, pay yearly one thousand Franckes more to each of them
during this League; and moreover shall besides the former Pensions, give to
their Confederates yearly half as much more. In this League the King excepts
Pope Leo the tenth, the Emperor, the Kings of England, Scotland and Denmark,
with other Princes; and the Sweitzers except the Pope, the Emperor, the House
of Austria, the house of Medici, the D. of Sanoy, and some others. But if these
so excepted should make war upon either part, within their territories, that
aides should be sent mutually without any respect. This League was made to last
three years after the death of the French King Francis the first, and was
renewed by his son Henry the second at Solotburn, in the year 1549, and by
all the Cantons (excepting Zurech and Bern), and was after renewed by Charles
the ninth, and the succeeding Kings. But in the leagues made with the
successors of Francis the first, caution is inserted, that the Sweitzers shall
not serve the King in any war for the recovery of any part of the Dukedom of
Milan: but if the King shall recover it with any other Army, then they shall
aid him to defend his possession, as formerly.

And whereas the Cantons of Zurech and Bern refused to join in the Leagues
made with Francis the first, and Henry the second, these reasons thereof were
then alleged. First, because the Canton of Zurech was then alienated from the
French by the Cardinal of Sedon. Secondly, because Zwinglius a notable
Preacher of the Reformed Religion, did in many Sermons sharply inueigh against
mercinary warfare. Thirdly, because this League much displeased the military
men of Sweitzerland, in that the Senate had no liberty to look into the cause
of the war; in that the Soldiers and Captains were not to be chosen by the
Sweitzers, but by the King at his pleasure; in that the large profits of the
League redounded to few; in that the armed horse to be sent by the King, were
of no use to the Sweitzers wars, commonly made in mountainous places and
craggy passages. Lastly, because it seemed a point of great inconstancy, that
the Sweitzers, who lately when the French King Francis, and Charles the
deceased Emperors grandchild, were competitors for the Empire, had written to
the Electors, that they would yield no obedience to the French King, in case he
were chosen, should so suddenly change their minds, and make a more strict
league with the French: but the greater part was of a contrary judgment,
because Soldiers were not bound curiously to enquire after the causes of
war, for which only the King in his conscience was bound to give account.
And because their barren Country being also populous, was most fit for a
mercenary war, and that military experience was thereby to be retained and
gained; by which and like reasons, they persuaded the necessity of this league.

Thus have I (according to the description of Sembler) briefly showed, that the
Sweitzers Of the Sweitzers Commonwealth in general.
Commonwealth consists of three parts at home, (not to speak of the foreign
leagues), namely of the Cantons, of the Fellows in league; and of the
stipendiary cities and prefectures or governments. Each community is vulgarly
called Ort, and the Italians call them Cantons, whereof (I have said) that
there be thirteen in number, namely, Suitia, (vulgarly Schweis, whereof the
rest have the name of Sweitzers), Vria, Vnderualdia, Lucerna, Tigurum,
(vulgarly Zurech), Glarona, Tugium, (vulgarly Zug) Berna, Friburgum, Solodorum,
(vulgarly Solothurn), Basilea (vulgarly Bazill), Seaphusium, (vulgarly
Shafhusen), and Abbatiscella (vulgarly Apenzill). I have said that the Fellows
in league, are the Abbot and Town of Saint Gallus, the Rhetians or Grisons,
the Bishop of Sedun, the Valcsians, and the Towns Rotauile, Mulhasium, and
Bipenue: And the gouernements are Turgea, that of Baden, of the Rhegusci, of
the Sarunetes, of the free Province, the Lugani, the Locarnenses, the
Inhabitants of the middle Valley, and the Bilitionenses. That of Turgea is
subject to the seven old Cantons, yet Bern, Friburg, and Solothurn, have also
their rights in capital causes. That of Raden, the Sarunetes, the Rhegusci,
and the free Province, are subject likewise to the seven old Cantons, only
Bern has been admitted partner in that of Baden, and Apenzill in that of the
Rhegusci. The four Italian gouernements are equally subject to all the
cantons, excepting Apenzill: and the Bilitionenses are subject to the three old
Cantons. All these joined, have these Cities and Towns, Zurech, Bern, Lucern,
Zug, Bazill, Friburg, Solothurn, Schafhusen, the Town of S. Gallus, Chur of
the Grisons, Sedun of the Valesians, Roteuil, Mulhuse, and Bipenne, all the
rest dwell in Villages. Among the cantons, Bazill of the Rauraci, Schafhusen of
Germany, Glarona in part of the Grisons, Vria in part of the Lepontij, are
seated out of the old confines of Sweitzerland; and so are all the fellows in
league, excepting the Abbot, and Town of S. Gallus, and the Town Ripenne.
Among these, the old Nation of the Rhetians, now called Grisons, were of old
called Valesiani, Viberi, Seduni, and Veragri: And Roteuile is a city of
Germany, and Mulhuse of the Sequaui in France. Among the gouernements, the
Rhegusci and the Sarunetes, are of the old Rhetians, and the Luganenses, the
Locarnenses, the Mendrisij, and the Inhabitants of the middle Valley, and the
Bilitionij, are of the Lepontij, and Italian Nation, which tongue they speak.
Many doubt to number these confederates among commonwealths, since each of
them is no otherwise tied to the decrees of the other, then by free consent, as
all private societies are, whereas in a commonwealth the greater part binds
all: yet because they have one common council, and most of the Provinces are
ruled thereby, because war and peace is made by common consent, and they live
almost under the same laws and customs, and are united strictly in perpetual
league, Semler concludes, that this society comes nearest to the form of a
commonwealth: for whereas some hating the nation, object Anarchy to them, and
say they got freedom by killing the Gentlemen; and others interpreting it more
mildly, and confessing the oppression of the Gentlemen, yet judge the revenge
to have exceeded all measure, the truth thereof will appear by the History of
Semler and others, showing that great part of the Gentry was extinguished by
the House of Austria. Therefore it must be a mixed commonwealth, (if such it may
be called) being neither a Monarchy (of one just King) Aristocraty (of just
great men) nor Democrity (a popular state) much less any of the corrupt
commonwealths, called Tyranny, Oligarchy, and Anarchy, (that is, the tyranny of
a King, or of noble men, or a confused State), the equity of the government
showing that it much differs from them. The Vrij, Suitij, Vnderualdij, the
Glaronenses dwelling scattered, and Zug, (though it be a Town), govern all
with the consent of the people. Zurech, Bern, Lucern, Bazill, Friburg,
Solothurn, and Schafhusen, are governed by the chief men; but since the
Magistrates are chosen by the people, some of these Cities are more, some less
Aristocraticall, or popular. The Ambassadors sent to public meetings have
Aristocraticall form, but since they are chosen by the people with limited
power, it may seem popular: And it is not unequal that the people having
settled freedom with their danger, should be partners of their government: but
in the mean time the Sweitzers avoid as much as they can, the discommodities
of a popular State, while none but the best and most wise are sent to the
meetings, and howsoever their power is limited, yet when they return, they so
relate all things to the people, as they easily understand them, and give
consent thereunto.

But to make the strict union of these confederates more apparent, it will not
be amiss to peruse some of the heads of the league between the eight old
Cantons. Therein first is cautioned, of sending mutual aides, so as first in
public counsel the iustnes of the war may be examined. Then the aides are
not to be required of all, but of each particular Canton, according to their
mutual leagues. Zurech by old league has right to require aides of the first
six Cantons, and by a new league also of Bern. And Bern requires aid of the
three first Cantons, and they of Bern. Lucerna requires aid of five Cantons.
The three first Cantons require mutual aides of one another, and of all the
rest. Zug and Lucerna are bound to aid the five Cantons. Glarona requires aid
of the three old cantons, and Zurech. Thus while one Canton calls the next
joined to it in league, howsoever each one cannot require aid of all or each
one by right of league, yet in any common danger, all the Cantons bring their
forces, being called of some one or more Cantons in league with them: besides,
that they have wisely decreed, that in sudden dangers, all shall bring
succors, whether they be called or no. They which are called to give aid by
virtue of any league, serve at their own cost, without any pay. Between Bern
and the three old Cantons it is decreed, that if the aides be sent beyond
certain bounds, then they which called them shall give them pay, and in like
sort certain bounds of sending aides are limited between all the rest of the
Cantons, in their several leagues, with all conditions expressed. In any
siege, the Canton which causes it, is bound to find many necessaries, but if
the cause be public, all provisions are made at the public charge. The four
old cantons and Glarona, cannot make any new league, which is free to the rest,
always preserving the old league, which they also may increase or diminish by
common consent. It is decreed, that every five or ten years, this league shall
be renewed by word or writing, or (if need be) by oath. Zu rech, Bern, Vria,
Suitia, and Vnderualdia, in this league except the rights of the Roman Empire.
Lucerna and Zug the rights of the Dukes of Austria, Glarona the rights of their
lawful Magistrates, and each Canton the rights of old leagues.

When the said eight Cantons received the other five into their number, besides
the foresaid heads, it was decreed among other things in their league, that the
five last cantons howsoever wronged, should make no war without the consent
of the eight old Cantons, and in like sort that they should make no league
without their consent, neither in time of war should refuse good conditions
of peace. And lastly it was decreed, that without great cause, no war should
be made in places out of the mountains and difficult passages of that
Province, where they could not fight with advantage.

The thirteen Cantons have that privilege, that they deliberate and determine
the affairs of the commonwealth in public meetings, by voices, and govern by
equal right the governments gotten jointly by them, and have equal part in all
booties. The greatest Senate is when all the Ambassadors (that is, chosen
Burgesses of the cantons, and Fellows in league) are called together, which is
seldom done, but in the causes of making war or peace only the Ambassadors
of the thirteen Cantons being commonly called to counsel: Al Ambassadors have
equal right in giving voices, but two or more being sent from one Canton, have
but one voice. In causes concerning the gouernements belonging to seven or
eight or 12 Cantons, only the Ambassadors (or Burgesses, or States) of those
Cantons meet, to whom the government belongs, and so the Burgesses of all
other severally for things belonging to themselves: but where the cause
concerns the public State, the full Senate of all the Cantons is called to
the meeting. Since the late differences of Religion, new and particular
meetings have been instituted. The Cantons of the Roman Religion, Vria,
Suitia, Vnderualdia, Lucerna, and Zug, joined in a more strict league; do
often meet together, and when any man names the five Cantons simply, they
mean them, not the hue old cantons, howsoever naming the three, seven, or
eight Cantons, they are taken according to the time of their entering into
league. And sometimes the Cantons of Frihurg and Solothurn, being also of the
Roman Religion, come to the meetings of the said five Cantons: Greatest part of
the Citizens of Glarona and Apenzill, are of the reformed Religion, and the
four Cities chief of the Cantons, namely Zurech, Bern, Bazill, and
Schafhusen, have altogether cast off the Roman Religion, and have particular
meetings, but not often: yet when I passed through this Province, I understood
that Glarona was altogether of the reformed Religion, and that Apenzill was
numbered among the Cantons of the Roman Religion. The great Senate determines of
war, peace, and leagues, (each having freedom to refuse any league),
likewise of making Laws, of sending, receiving, and answering Ambassadors, of
governments, of distributing gainefull Offices, of difficult causes referred to
the Senate by Governors, and of appeals made from Governors to the Senate.
Ambassadors (or Burgesses in place of Judges are sent about the month of June
to hear the causes of the Italian governments, from whom they may appeal to
the Senate, and these appeals (as all other) are determined by the Senate in
the meetings at Baden; where also they deliberate of customs and impositions,
and the revenues, and if need be of punishing the Governors, or displacing
them, (in which case the Canton which sent that Governor, appoints another.)
The City Zurech chief of the Cantons, has the first place, not by antiquity,
but dignity, and of old custom has the highest authority to call the Senate
together, signifying to each canton by letters the cause and the time of each
meeting: yet if any canton think it for the public good, to have an
extraordinary meeting, they write to Zurech to appoint the same, or if the
cause admit no delay, they meet uncalled. Most commonly the general meetings
are at Lucern, Zurech, Bremogart, and Baden; but more commonly in these days
and almost continually they are at Baden, in respect of the commodity of the
houses and Innes, the pleasant situation and famous medicinal Baths; and
because it is seated in the center of Sweitzerland, and is subject to the 8 old
cantons. The cantons of the Roman religion, commonly have their particular
meetings at Lucerna, sometimes at Bockenried of the Vrij, or Brame of the
Suitij, and are called together by the canton of Lucern: and the cantons of the
reformed religion have their particular meetings commonly at Arowike under
Bern, sometimes at Bazil, and are called together by the canton of Zurech.
Foreign Ambassadors require of Zurech to have audience in the Senate: but the
peculiar meeings for French causes are called by the French Ambassador as often
as he will at Solothurn where he resideth, or at Lucern: and other Ambassadors
should not be denied extraordinary meetings, so they pay the expenses, as the
French Ambassador does. The full Senate yearly meets about September at Baden,
about which time I said that Burgesses in place of Judges are sent to hear the
causes of the Italian governments: And in this first meeting, the greatest
causes are not determined, either because the Ambassadors (or Burgesses, or
States), have not full power, or for other causes, but another meeting is there
appointed, and howsoever this Senate is only called for public causes, yet
those being ended, they use to hear private causes also. As Soon as the said
Burgesses or States at the appointed day come to the City, the Burgess of
Zurech sends the Vice-gouernor of Baden to salute them, and to acquaint them
with the time of meeting. Then they sit down in the Court, first the Burgesses
of Zurech in a place raised higher then the rest: 2. Those of Bern: Thirdly,
Those of Lucerna, as chief, though not in antiquity, yet in dignity; and after
the rest, according to the antiquity of their Cantons. The Burgess of Zurech
first makes an Oration, and propounds the causes upon which they are to
consult, adding what his Canton has commanded him in each particular, and then
the rest speak in order, according to the directions given them at home. The
under Governor of Baden, of what Canton soever he be, asks and numbers the
voices. The peculiar meetings of particular Cantons, and those for French
affairs, have no set times.

Each Canton has public Magistrates, vulgarly called Vmbgelten, who
administer the Impositions upon wine and corn, and gather them by their
deputies. They pay The Tributes.
tribute only for that wine which is sold in Tauerns, and for that corn which
is exported or used by Bakers, for otherwise the Citizens pay not for wine and
corn brought iuto their private houses, and spent therein. And I have observed
that they pay in some places the value of 24 measures tribute, for a vessel of
wine containing ninety six measures: The salt which is brought in, is only
sold by the Senate of each City or Canton: and I understood by discourse, that
the Citizens may not buy salt, or take it of gift out of the City.
Particularly at Schafhusen the Customs are great, especially for salt, in
respect that the water of the Rheine has a great fall from a rock, so as all
ships must be vnladed before they can pass by that City. In general, the
Sweitzers especially want wine, corn, and salt, as may appear by the
covenants of their foreign leagues, and otherwise the tributes are small,
which can be imposed upon such a free Nation.

Concerning their Laws, I have formerly said that the senerall Cantons are not
bound one to the decrees of the other, except they freely consent thereunto;
yet that The Laws.
they all have one Common Council, and almost all have the same common Laws
and customs, which they inuiolably keep. They long suffered the Governors of
the Empire to be over them in capital causes, though with prejudice to their
freedom, till at last in the Sueuian war, about the year 1499, the
judgment of capital causes was granted to them by the Emperor, among the
conditions of peace. Whereupon the ten oldest Cantons who made this war, have
equal right of capital judgments in the stipendiary Cities and governments,
with the Cantons to whom they are subject, though gotten before they entered
into the common league, howsoever they have no right in the Civil causes, nor
any other command over them. In the old leagues, besides the Articles
concerning union, many Laws for the public good are contained and
established. Such is that of the old league between the eight first Cantons,
wherein they set down cautions for peaceable determining of public
controversies between the Cantons, and thereby, two Cantons being at strife,
are to choose two honest men, who give their oaths, to make an equal
composition between them, and the rest of the Cantons are to add one Arbiter
to them; and in case one of the Cantons consents, the other refuses to stand
to their judgment, all the rest are to help the Canton consenting thereunto
And in the league of the five last Cantons, as in all other, they justly give
curious cantions for taking away all controversies, and especially labor to
effect, that they break not out into Civil war, in which case they should be
diversely distracted, according to their diverse combinations and leagues among
themselves. Therefore of old, when the Abbot of Saint Gallus attempted to
remove the trade of clothing, and the holy relics (the superstitious worship
whereof brought great profit) from Apenzill, to Rosake (where the Abbot had
absolute command) and this matter drew them to Arms, wherein the Abbot called
the four Cantons his confederates, and Apenzill the six Cantons with whom it
had league, to give them aid, according to their mutual leagues, the said
Cantons thus called to aid both parts, earnestly endeavored to make peace,
whereby they preserved the common-welth. For if they should not alwaiea
carefully so do in like occasions, many times the dissension of one or two
Cantons, might draw all the rest into a pernicious Civil war. In the
foresaid league between the eight oldest Cantons, and in the Stantian
Transaction in the year 1481 Laws were established. That he who killed any
confederate (vulgarly called Eidgenossen, that is inioiers of the oath) should
be beheaded, except he had sufficient witnessea that he did it to save his
life; and in case of flight, he being banished by one Canton, should also be
banished by all the rest, and that he should be judged guilty of the crime, who
should help him; and that sentence shoud be given upon him in the Canton where
the crime was committed. That there should be no general meetings of the
people without consent of the Magistrate. That none of the Cantons should
support any disobedient subject of another Canton, but should force them to
obedience. That a lay person shall not use the help of an Ecclesiastical
Judge, but in causes of matrimony and manifest usury, which are referred to
Ecclesiastical judgment. That pledges or gages be not taken at private men's
pleasures, but with consent of the Judge. That causes be judged in the Canton,
wherein the act was done, and sentence be given without fraud or deceit, and
that every man be content and rest satisfied in the Judgments, Laws and
customs of another Canton. That all booties in war be divided among the
Cantons, according to the number of Soldiers which each of them sent, but that
Towns, Tributes, and like things gained by war, shall be under the common
command of all the Cantons, of which commodities, the subjects of stipendary
Cities and fellows in league, shall have no part, though their Forces be
joined in the same war with the Forces of the Cantons, howsoever they are to
have part in the division of all other booties.

In like sort the league of Schafhusen with the Cantons of the Sweitzers,
determines how debts are to be recovered, and what law is to be used in such
suites, and that no leagues be made by one without the priuity and against the
will of the rest, and that the oldest leagues be ever most respected.

The Commonwealth is administered with great equity, yet with no less severity
of Justice, then the Germans use: And howsoever all the Country lies within
mountains and woods, yet the high way for passengers is no where more safe
from thieves, so as it is there prouerbially said, that you may carry gold in
the palms of your hands: For all crimes are severely punished without all
respect of persons. The scope and butt whereat all their leagues aim, is that
every man may peaceably enjoy his own, and that the best men among them, may
in public counsel examine the causes of war, that they be just and lawful,
to the end they may never rashly make war upon any: And because the common
people being burdened with debt, is more prone to seditions, curious orders
are set down in their leagues, for the manner of exacting debts, and taking
pledges, neither giving liberty of oppression to the creditors, nor permitting
fraud to the debtors.

Also because military men, and such as drink in excess, are prone to
brawling and blows, most heavy penalties are thereby insticted upon such as
are Authors of injuries, Duells.
and the leagues make not more frequent mention of any other thing, then of
reproaches, for which they prescribe such good remedies and real
satisfactions, not passing over the least injury of the poorest man, as among
the very Soldiers, yea, half drunken, there very seldom happens any murder:
Wherein I could wish that our inferior Magistrates would apply themselves, and
our Laws were accommodated to the Sweitzers government. For the English being
most impatient of reproaches, and the law giving ridiculous satisfactions for
injuries by word, and all wrongs, excepting maimes, it has been accounted a
disgraceful course to seek remedy that way, and most injuries have commonly
been revenged by the Sword in single combat: But in Sweitzerland all standers
by are bound to keep the peace, and compose the strife, and if they who
strive, being remembered of the Laws, do not obey, they use to punish them
most severely; and if any kill another, he is sure to be beheaded, except he
escape by flight, (in which case he shall be banished by his own and all other
Cantons) or except he can prove by witness that he killed him in defense of
himself.

And such is the fame of the Sweitzers sincere Justice, as many strangers their
neighbors, Judgments
desire to have their controversies ended after the manner of the Sweitzers,
and by them: When causes are to be pleaded before the Senate, most men plead
their own cause; some use Lawyers, brought by them from home, or sound there
by chance, and the causes are not determined after the civil, but after the
provincial law, or according to that which seems good and equal, and by the
statutes and customs of each Canton. They have no quirkes or obscurities to
protract judgment, and they think it better sometimes to err in a doubtful
cause, then to follow the Lawyers, judging according to Law, not equity, and so
making the suites perpetual. In the Gouernements, all controversies are
determined by the Governors and Judges of the place, yet so, as appeal is
granted from them to the common Senate. In private Cantons, causes are judged
by the Senators and Judges of each Canton, yet they have some public
Judgments, namely, when the Cantons have any controversy one with another, or
a private man with a Canton, for which cases they have many cautions in their
Leagues; and at this day they are determined after this manner. Each part
chooses two Judges of his own Citizens, who are absolved in that case from
their oath given to their own Canton, and then they are sworn, that they will
consider of the controversy, according to that which seems good and equal,
and that they will faithfully endeavor to compose it, at least so as it shall
be decided by Law, not by Arms. And in the old leagues certain places are
appointed, in which these Judgments are handled. The 7 Cantons commonly meet
for them in the Monastery of the Heremites within their own confines, and so
other leagues in other appointed places. The Judges and Burgesses of those
Cantons, with which those that have controversies have more strict league,
determine these causes, if the first arbiters cannot compose them, and both
parts are bound to rest in the judgment of the greater part; and if the Voices
be equal on each part, as many times it falls out, a new Judge or Arbiter is
chosen, who does not give a new Judgment of his own, but approves one of the
Judgments given by the equal Voices of the said Burgesses. And this Arbiter
is chosen by those Burgesses, and so he be a Citizen of any one Canton, it is
not required, that he should be of either of the Cantons, to whom the cause
belongs. Thus if Bern be plaintiff against the 3 Cantons, 16 men are chosen
by the Cantons, out of which Bern chooses one to be Arbiter: but if the Cantons
be plaintiffes against Bern, they choose an Arbiter out of the lesser Senate of
Bern. Likewise in controversies between Zurech, and Bern, the plaintiff
chooses an Arbiter out of the Senate of the other City. To conclude, in all
Judgments public and private, they use such integrity, as this simplicity of
their Judgments, disallowed by subtle politicians, happily succeeds in all
occasions, and so they retain their old virtue, is like ever so to succeed.
In most of the Cantons, namely, at Zurech, Basil, and Schafhusen, no Bastard
may bear public office, nor be a Senator, or Judge, which Law is common to
the Sweitzers with the Germans, first instituted to restrain fornication, and
to preserve the dignity of marriage. In some places, he must have been a
Citizen ten years, in other places twenty years, who is chosen to be of the
common Counsel; and at Zurech no stranger is ever chosen to be a Senator or
Judge; and by Common law, no Homicide, Adulterer or infamous person for any
crime, may be of the Senate.

In all the Cantons, they are no less careful to prevent domages by fire,
then to keep out their enemies; for which cause they hire watchmen to walk
the streets Lawer.
by night, and Belmen to tell the hours, and in some places, as the Town of
Saint Gallus, they have nightly thirty two Watchmen, and choose Citizens to
visit the chimnies and ouens, that they be free from danger of fire. In other
Cantons they have public Officers, who in any such chance, see that all things
be done in order, and that no tumult be raised upon such occasions, to which
end they appoint some to quench the fire, and draw others in arms to defend
the walls and the gates. And at Zurech able young men are yearly chosen, to
be ready for the quenching of any such casual fire.

In Lucerna the Law of Retribution (an arm for an arm, a leg for a leg) is in
many cases observed, where he that killes a Citizen, be the cause never so
just, as repelling force by force, shall die if he be taken, or be perpetually
banished, if he escape by flight, yet when he has satisfied the Kinsmen of him
be killed, he is permitted to return from banishment. And in all the Cantons
where they dwell in Villages, he that kills a man in his defense, shall be
banished, and his own Senate cannot permit his return, which can only be
obtained from the great and public Senate. And in the same Cantons, no lands
may be engaged to any stranger, neither may any stranger buy any possessions,
but only a house and a Garden for herbs.

And if any man often offend in Drunkenness, he is imprisoned, and may drink no
Wine for a year, till he have procured pardon of the public Senate (which me
thinks should easily be granted him, by Judges guilty of the same fault, except
they mean quarrels and like offenses, not simple drinking, which I think
probable, because generally the Sweitzers drink as stiffely, as those of the
upper part of Germany.

In the same Cantons, Matrimonial causes are referred to the Consistory of the
Bishop of Costnetz: but all adulteries are punished by the Senate at home,
commonly with the loss of goods, sometimes with a fine of ten pounds, that is
ten Dollers with them.

The public Edicts are yearly in these Cantons confirmed or abrogated by the
Voices of the common people. And in the Town of Friburg and the Territory, if
a debtor pay not his debt, the Creditor sends certain servants and horses to
the public Inn, the charge whereof is paid by the debtor, till he satisfy
his Creditor. Besides in any controversy, if sureties be thrice demanded of
any man, and he bring not in suerty (or caution), he is punished with
banishment, and the same punishment is inflicted on them, who violate the
command of keeping the peace, and who without just cause take part with either
of them that are at variance. In general, for the Gentry of the whole
Province, mention has been, and is after to be made, that the same is
extinguished, so as it were in vain to seek for any Knightly order among
these men, who howsoever they be military men, yet universally are Citizens,
or of common Plebean rank. They take to themselves coats of Arms devised by
themselves, and tricked after their own fancies, yet not with open Helmets, as
Gentlemen bear them, but with closed Helmets, after the manner used by the
Citizens in Germany. And their Laws of inheritance and the dowries of wives,
do come nearest to those of Germany, the Civil law, (if I be not deceived)
passing with them into Provincial laws and customs (by which they are
governed) upon the old and long continued use of them. In one particular
example I observed, that the younger brother, in the division of his fathers
inheritance, first chose his part, and had liberty to buy the parts of his
brethren if he would, and not otherwise. But I shall have occasion to speak of
the common laws more at large in the discourse of the several Commonwealths
among them.

The leagues which the Sweitzers have with foreign Princes, do manifestly
show that they profess Mercenary Arms, no less, yea much more, then the
Germans: For Their Warfare.
whereas the Germans are hired for present service in time of war, these men
besides that pay, must have ample pensions in time of peace, as their league
with France especially shows. In this they differ, that the Sweitzers only
send aides of foot, but the Germans are hired both horse and foot. And both
these Nations have one commendable property, that after their service one or
more years in the wars, peace being made, they return home nothing
corrupted with military licentiousness, and roundly fall to the Plough, or any
other their trade of life. By the same leagues it appears, that they will not
serve in any sea fights, nor in the defense or taking of forts, neither will
have their forces divided, as if they reputed the strong bodies of their bands
only fit to fight in a pitched field, and to defend the great Ordinance and
carriage. Neither use they to fortify their own Cities (excepting few which
of old were fortified, and after received into the number of the Cantons),
bragging with the Lacedaemonians, that valiant breasts are brazen walls. In the
time of Julius Caesar, we read, that this Nation being populous, and weary of
the barren soil wherein they dwelt, resolved to seek a new seat: but were
soon restrained and kept at home by the Arms of Caesar. From that time we
read of no great warlike exploit done by them, till they laid the first
foundation of their Commonwealth by mutual leagues. The first perpetual
league made between the three first Cantons, was in the year 1315 from which
time the rest of the Sweitzers, having long been subject to the house of
Austria, began by parts to rebel against that house, and to win their
liberty by the sword. But all their war was at home, long continued against
the said house, and at last breaking out against the Duke of Burgundy upon
their confines, till the year 1477, when in the third battle the Duke of
Burgundy was slain, and so that war ended. At which time only eight Cantons
were united in perpetual league, the other five Cantons being after united at
several times, from the year 1481 to the year 1513, when the 13 and last
Canton was united to the rest in perpetual league.

Touching their foreign wars, the first league they made for years, was in
the year 1478, and the second in the year 1510, with two Popes. The first
perpetual foreign league they made, was with the Duke of Milan, in the year
1466; wherein mention is made of former leagues with the Insubres; but we read
no effects of war produced by them. And the first perpetual league they had
with France was in the year 1483, when Charles the eight made war in Italy
for the kingdom of Naples, about which time the Sweitzers Arms began to be
known in foreign parts. Guicciardine the famous writer of those Italian
wars, among the Actions of the year 1500, says, that the Sweitzers hired by
Lodwick Sforza Duke of Milan, fought well on his side at the taking of Nouara;
but after, that their Captains were corrupted to betray him, by the Captains
of other Sweitzers serving the French king, whereupen they provoked the
multitude to Mutiny for pay; but the Duke appeasing them by loving words, by
present pay in good part, and promise of the rest upon the coming of money from
Milan daily expected; that the Captains of the Dukes Sweitzers conspired with
the Sweitzers of the French king, to make the French presently draw to Nouaria,
which done, the Duke prepared to fight, but the Captains of his Sweitzers
answered him, that without special authority from their Magistrates, they
would not fight against their Kinsmen and Countrymen on the French side, and
that so the Sweitzers serving the Duke, upon their Captains instigation,
mingled themselves with the Switzers on the French side, as if they had been
both of one Army, saying they would depart home. And that the Duke could with
no prayers nor promises move their barbarous treachery, to stand with him in
this distress, nor so much as to conduct him to a safe place, only granting
him to march in their bands on foot disguised like a Sweitzer, in which
disguise taken of force, he with some of his chief friends were taken by the
French, moving compassion of all men, toward him, and detestation of their
treachery. And this Author leaves it in doubt, whether they were found out in
this disguise by the French spies, or rather visely betrayed. Semler a famous
writer of the Sweitzers Nation, thinks that soldiers in general might be
excused, who being in a town unfortified, and having other just causes (as
disability to withstand the Enemy) should make peace and return home, but
granting this fact to be inexcusable; yet whether it were done by the
Captains, or by the common soldiers, or by both, and that on both sides, he
thinks it a great wrong to impute the same to the whole nation, especially
those Soldiers being levied secretly, and without leave of the Magistrates.

The foresaid Author Guicciardine in the Actions of the year 1511, writes of
the Sweitzers to this effect; The Sweitzers of old called Heluetians, inhabit
the high places of the Mountain Iura, men fierce by nature, clownes, and by
reason of the barren soil, rather Crasiers then Ploughmen. Of old they were
subject to the Princes of Austria, but casting off their yoke, have long been
free, living after their own Laws, and yielding no sign of obedience to the
Emperors or any other Princes, divided into thirteen Cantons, whereof each is
governed by their own Magistrates, Laws and customs. The name of this so
wild and uncivil Nation, has gotten honor by concord and the glory of
Arms. For being fierce by nature, and trained in warlike discipline, and
keeping their Orders (or ranks) they have not only with valor defended their
Country, but in foreign parts have exercised Arms with high praise, which no
doubt had been greater, if they had fought to enlarge their own Empire, and
not for wages to enlarge the Empire of others; and if nobly they had propounded
to themselves other ends then the gain of money, by the love whereof being made
abject, they have lost the occasion to become fearful to all Italy: for since
they never come out of their confines, but as mercenary men, they have had no
public fruit of their victory but by covetousness have become intolerable in
exactions where they overcome, and in demands with other men; yea, at home
froward and obstinat in traffic, and in following their Comands, under whose
pay they serve in war. Their chief men have pensions of Princes to favor them
in their public meetings, and so public Counsels being referred to private
profit, they are apt to be corrupted, and by degrees fall at discord among
themselves, with great lessning of the reputation they had gotten among
strangers. He adds, that the Sweitzers, at the Popes instigation, armed
against the French in Milan, as if it were only the act of Suitia and Friburg,
who pretended offense against the French, for a messenger of theirs killed by
them. And that the French King for sparing a small addition to their Pensions
neglected to reconcile himself to them, and so lost their friendship, which
after he would have redeemed with great treasure, hoping that either they
would not arm against him, or if they did, that having no horse nor artilery,
they could do him small hurt.

The same Guicciardine in the actions of the year 1513 witnesses, that the
Sweitzers had then gotten great reputation by the terror of their Arms, and
that it seemed then, that their States or Burgesses, and soldiers, began to
carry themselves no more as grasers or mercinary men, but as Senators and
subjects of a well ordered Commonwealth, and that they now swaied all
affairs, almost al Christian Princes having their Ambassadors with them, by
pensions and great rewards seeking to have league with them, and to be served
by them in their wars. But that hereupon they grew proud, and remembering that
by their Arms the French King Charles the eighth had got the Kingdom of
Naples, and Lewis the twelfth the Dukedom of Milan, with the City and State of
Genoa, and victory against the Venetians, they began to proceed insolently in
the affairs with Princes; that the French King Francis the first then wooed
them, and to have audience, gave them the Forts of Lugana and of Lugarna (with
such indignity did Princes then seek their friendship.) Yet that he could
not obtain his demands, but that they rather chose, upon ample conditions of
profit, to assist the Duke of Milan.

Also in the actions of the year 1516, when the Emperor joined with other
Princes in League against the King of France, he writes, that the Sweitzers,
according to their Leagues, served both on the Emperors, and the French Kings
side. And that the Emperor knowing the hatred that Nation bore to the House of
Austria, feared lest the Sweitzers on his own part, should serve him, as they
served the Duke of Milan at Nouaria, thinking it more probable, in that he
wanted money to content them, whereof the French King had plenty. And that he
feared this the more, because their general Captain had with much insolency
demanded pay for them. And that hereupon the Emperor retired with his Army,
the Sweitzers not following him, but staying at Lodi, which after they sacked,
and so returned home. Of the other side he writes, that only some few of the
Sweitzers were at first come to the French party, who professed to be ready to
defend Milan, but that they would in no wise fight against their Countrymen on
the other side. That the French complained of the slow coming of the rest, and
at first doubted lest they should not come, and when they came, feared no
less, lest they should conspire with their countrymen serving the Emperor, or
left upon pretense of their Magistrates command, they should suddenly leave
the^ and return home. That the French justly complained thus of their slow
coming, purposely used to be affected by them, and continued to doubt of their
faith, especially because they had always said, that they would not fight with
their country men, and to fear as before, lest the Cantons should recall their
men from serving the French, which fear after increased, when they saw two
thousand of them already returned home, and doubted that the rest would follow.

Also in the actions of the year 1526, he writes, that the French King made
request to have a great leauy of Sweitzers, hoping they would readily serve
him, the rather to blot out their ignominy in the battle of Pauia: but that
this Nation which not long before by their fierce nature had opportunity much
to increase their State, had now no more either desire of glory, or care of the
Commonwealth, but with incredible covetousness, made it their last end to
return home laded with money managing the war like Merchants, and using the
necessity of Princes to their profit, like mercenary corrupt men doing all
things to that end in their public meetings. And that the private Captains,
according to the necessity of Princes, stood upon high terms, making most
impudent and intolerable demands. That the French King requiring aides of
them, according to his league, they after their accustomed manner made long
consultations, and in the end answered, that they would send no aides, except
the King first paid them all pensions due in areare, being a great sum, and
not suddenly to be provided, which their delay was very hurtful to the King,
making his Army long time lie idle.

By the premises we may gather, that the Sweitzers Arms were first made known
to foreign parts about the year 1483; that they increased in reputation to the
year 1513, when they attained to the height of their glory, which fell in few
years, by the foresaid iealousies, and covetous practices. And no marvel; for
their leagues and leuies are made with huge expenses. Their Bands are great
consumers of victuals, and wasters of the Countries they pass. They make
frequent and great mutinies for pay. They have league with the Emperor, as
possessing the Arch-Dukedome of Austria; with the Kings of Spain as Archdukes
of Austria by title, as heirs to the Duke of Burgundy, and Conquerors of the
Dukedom of Milan, and with the Kings of France upon ample Pensions. Now all
the wars of those times having been managed by these Princes, and the
Sweitzers by league serving on all sides, since they will not fight against
their Countrymen, small trust can be placed in their auxiliary Bands. If any
man speak of the King of England, he did not in those times lead any army
into the continent, but associated with one of the Kings of Spain or France,
or with the Emperor, in which case the Sweitzers served upon the same
condition on both sides. And if any of their confederates should make war
with the King of England at home, they shall have no use of Sweitzers, who
condition in their leagues not to be sent beyond the Seaes, nor to be employed
in Nauall fights. If any man speak of the wars in Netherland, the Sweitzers
will be found no less unprofitable to their confederates, those wars consisting
in taking and defending strong places, and the Sweitzers couenanting in their
leagues, not to have their bodies divided, nor to serve in that kind. And in
truth since all the rage of late wars commonly lies in defending and
assailing Forts, and set battles are rarely fought, it may seem strange they
should thus divide themselves from the common dangers of the Armies in which
they serve. And all these things considered, I find not what use their
confederates can make of them, but only in civil wars against their own
subjects, with whom the Sweitzers have no league. For the rest, as we read of
some Indians, who light one candle to the Devil, left he should hurt them,
and another to God that he may do them good; so I think Princes still
intertaine their expensiue leagues, rather left their enemies should be
strengthened by their entire aides, then for any profit themselves can reap
thereby.

The Sweitzers have no horse, which are of no use in the Mountains and craggie
places of their Country: but when they make their own war out of their own
confines, their confederates are by league bound to supply them therewith; and
if the war be not their own, their confederates only expect auxiliary Bands
of foot from them. The Roman Boterus writes, that in his judgment the
Sweitzers can make six score thousand foot for the defense of their own
Country. No doubt that Nation is very populous: but the greatest Army we ever
read them to have carried out of Sweitzerland, was that of thirty one
thousand, when they joined with the Pope Leo the tenth, the Emperor
Maximilian, and Sfortia Duke of Milan, being confederates against the King of
France. Nature and necessity have framed them to the war; for a Mountanous
Region, and Woody (as of old it was, being still somewhat barren and labourious
to the Husbandman) breeds a rude people, patient of hardness, and of warlike
disposition, and as taller trees and larger cattle, so stronger bodies of men,
so as they seem to be borne soldiers. Necessity likewise forced them to
Arms, when the Gentlemen and Princes oppressed them, and they had no means of
liberty, but Arms, wherein long use has made them expert. And their very
laws and customs are fitted to the wars. All Citizens and Plebeans use and
are commanded continually to wear their swords. All their several exercises
have a reference to the war as shooting with muskets at Butts (which they
practice for wagers both in Cities and Villages), leaping, casting of stones,
wrestling, fencing, swimming, continual hunting, wherein they pursue Bears,
wild Boares, and Linces (a kind of Wolf), the shooting of the boys in bows,
the use of Drums in stead of music, even at feasts of marriages, where the
Bridegroom is thought most honored, who is met by his friends with most shot
and Pikes. All private men are bound to have their Arms sit for war, and there
with are commonly armed, though many times the worst furnished are supplied out
of the Armories of the Cities. Their kinds of Arms are muskets, calciuers,
ashen pikes 18 foot long halbards, long two-handed swords (which they carry on
their shoulders, and with them they defeated the Burgundians coming to hand
strokes with them), and another long sword gift to their side, with a dagger
very heavy, the haftes of silver or gilded, and armor of solid steel for
breast and back: but the poorer sort have only helmets of iron, and thick
leather pelts in stead of armor; and some in stead of armor, wear coats of
quilted taffety, wrought with aglet-holes. They who will appear brauer then
the rest, carry feathers, white, or of some other color, commonly near the
color of their own Banner. Each wear a right cornerd cross upon his Arms,
which is the military badge of the Sweitzers. All follow the Colors and Banners
of their own Canton, and use drums, trumpets and bagpipes, and a man can
hardly distinguish between the beating of the drums of the Sweitzers, and
Germans, save that the former march is more grave and slow, and not so
tumultuous as that of the Germans. The Vrij blow a horn of a wild Heart, which
they call the Bull. The Vnderualdij have the like, but those of Lucerna use a
horn of brass No man that can wear Arms, is excused from war at home, and
no doubt their foot are of great force to fight within their mountains, and
keep themselves from tyranny of strangers, howsoever they have not so much
strength, when with the snaile they come out of their house. Men chosen in
peace are trained for the wars, but in foreign expeditions one man chooses
another, that being acquainted and friends, they may stick closer together,
and when they are to march, the Law commands them to lay aside all private
quarrels, so as they may more truly be called brothers, then the Landtznechts
or foot of Germany, who calling themselves brothers, yet bring home more wounds
and scarres from their private quarrels, then from the Enemy. It is a capital
crime with the Sweitzers, to fall to the spoil, before the Enemy be fully
overcome. The public spoil, as Artillery, Castles, Countries, and tributes,
or any revenues, belong equally to all the Cantons, though some of them set
forth five times more men then others, yet extraordinary rewards are given to
the best deserving Cantons and private men. They justly give all protection to
those that bring victuals to the Camp. They have an old Law always to spare
holy places, and the sex of women, excepting such women as give weapons to
their Enemy, or by casting down stones, and like helps, do hurt unto their
Army. They boast that their fouresquared body of foot, is the best form of
battle to resist horsemen, and that thereby they having no horse, did overthrow
the French horse at Nouaria; and when for want of artillery, and by the great
number of the French, they were beaten by them at Marignano, yet that they
retired in a close body and good array to Milan, so as they could not be justly
said to fly.

It remains to speak something, but briefly of the government of the particular
Cantons, Particular Commonwealths.
because they have absolut power within themselves. Among them such as have no
towns, but dwell in villages, call the heads of their Counsels Ammans, and the
chief power is in the common people. Such are Urania, Suitia, Vnderueldia,
Tugium, Glarona, 13 Cantons in three fermes.
Ahatis ella. Again some have towns or Cities which command the Cantons, and
the same especially those that were built by Princes, or were subject to them
are governed Aristocratically by chief men (namely, a Senate chosen out of all the citisens) and call their chief Magistrate Scultet, (vulgarly Schuldte
Hessen) such are Bern, Lucerna, Friburg, Solothurn. Thirdly, other towns or
cities are divided into tribes or companies, and the Senators are chosen out of
these Tribes by the voices of the people, whereof the chief is called
Burgomeister. Such are Zurech, Basil, and Schafhusen,

Among those of the first form dwelling in Villages, I named Glarona,
Abatifcella, The six Towns and Villages of the first form.
(vulgarly Apenzill) and Tugium (vulgarly Zug), for howsoever they have Towns,
yet the territory or Canton is not commanded by the Towns, having only equal
right with all the Inhabitants of the Country. All Towns and Villages of this
form (whereof I named six) have a President of their Counsels, called Amman,
that is, Amptman, signifying a man of Office. The Vrij are divided into ten
parts, called Tenths by the vulgar name. The Suitij are divided into four
parts, called quarters. The Vnderualdij are parted with a wood of Oaks, and
thereby are divided into the upper and lower, and the whole canton has the
name of the lower, as dwelling under the wood, and Stantium is their chief
Village. Zug for the Town consists of two, and for the county, of three,
conuents or meetings. Glarona consists of fifteen Tagwans (signifying a days
tillage) Apenzill as well town as country, consists of twelve Roden, whereof
the six inward were of old under the Abbot, and the six outward were out of
his territory, either free, or subject to private Gentlemen. Out of each of
these conuents or parts, the Senators of the whole canton are chosen in equal
number, being in most of them threescore in number, besides those who having
had public honors, remain perpetual Senators. Zug has forty five Senators,
that is, nine of each convent, the town being taken for two conuents. Apenzill
has 144 Senators, namely twelve for each convent. In weighty affairs, for
which it seems not good to call the people together, the Counsels of Senators
in most places are doubled or trebled, each Senator choosing one or two
Assessors: But only citizens are capable of this dignity, and it is much more
difficult to obtain freedom of being a citizen with these cantons, then with
the cities. The highest power is in the general meeting of the people, to
which all are admitted of fourteen or sixteen years age, and they meet in
the midst of the territory, or in the chief Village of the canton, and there
is first chosen the Amman, in most places for two years, and out of all the
people, of what part or convent soever he be: but at Apenzill he must remove
his dwelling to the Town, where public counsels use to be held, and there
abide during his office. And at Zug he is chosen out of the conuents by order
and course, and for the time of his Office must dwell in the city. Next to the
Amman, they choose his Deputy called Statthalter, then the Treasurer called
Seckelmeister, that is, Master of the Purse, then the Scribes or Clerks, and
other Officers in order: And this is peculiar to these Cantons, in the seeking
of any public Office, that they who seek it, are themselves present at the
giving of voices, and themselves, their Parents and children, give voices in
their election, which are given by lifting up the hand from an high place, and
in case of doubt, are numbered by the Pole. The Senators are not chosen by the
whole Assembly, but each by the Inhabitants of his own convent or part:
Besides this public meeting, other meetings use to be appointed upon
extraordinary occasions, namely, when Ambassadors are to be sent, or any
decree is to be made of league, peace, or war: Besides the two counsels, of
all the people, and of chosen Senators, most of the cantons have a privy
counsel of few men: Thus the Suitij have a privy counsel of one Senator, and
one Amman chosen of each convent or part, and this counsel gouernes the public
rents and expenses. They have two courts of Judgment, one of nine men, in which
the Amman is President, and that determines the weighty causes of inheritance,
of defamation, and injuries. The other of seven men; in which the Ammans Deputy
is President, and that determines civil causes of debts and contracts. The
Vrij (or canton of Urania) have the same course, where the Court of fifteen
men, in which the Amman is President, determines civil controversies of
greatest moment, and the court of seven men, in which the Ammans Deputy is
President, judges of debts under the value of threescore pound. The
Vnderualdij have one court of judgment at Stantium, and another at Sarna, and
each has an Amman for President. The town or city of Zug, besides the public
counsels of the Canton, has his proper Senate and Magistrates or Judges. In
the canton of Glarona, the indiciall court of nine men, determines of
inheritance, defamation, and injuries: And that of five men judges debts, but
only in the two months of May and September, Judgments are exercised by the
Judges yearly chosen at the general meeting of the Canton. The Canton of
Apenzill has two Courts of Judgment, one of twenty four men (two of each
convent or part), wherein fines are imposed, and defamations and injuries are
judged. The other of twelve men called the sworn Court of Judgment, because
it judges of doubtful controversies, and such as are tried upon oath, and
this also observes the breaches of Statutes, and determine what causes are to
be propounded before the Senate, and this Office is perpetual. Of
Consistories, and Matrimonial, and Spiritual causes, handled in other,
Courts, I shall speak hereafter in the Chapter of Religion. Capital causes
almost in all these Cantons are judged by the Senate, or public Counsel, and
that commonly doubled, the Amman of the Canton, or his Deputy being President.
At Zug Assessors out of each Convent or part are associated to the Senate, and
they sit in a public place, where all men may behold the Judges, and hear
their sentences: For the Courts of Judgments in the prefectures or
gouernements, commonly a Deputy Governor, and Assessors, are chosen of the
Inhabitants, to join with the Governor, and they determine as well of civil
as criminal causes, and these Governors in some places are chosen for three
years. Some Villages have municipall rights under the Cantons, and there they
choose Magistrates out of their own Village, yet they yearly crave this
privilege at the public meeting, and it is granted them as a singular favor.
And some of these Villages have also their peculiar Banners and Ensigns; but
they bear them not where the great and common Banner of the Canton is
displaied.

In the second place are the Cantons (as formerly is showed) over which the
Towns Four Towns of the second Form.
command not divided into Tribes or Companies, namely, Bern, Lucern, Friburg
and Solothurn, in which it is forbidden by the Law that they should be divided
into Tribes. But the Artisans have their Colleges (or Halles) not for the
choosing of Magistrates, but for orders of the Art, and these they call
Geselscafften, that is, Societies or Fellowships, not Tribes or Companies,
which are vulgarly called Zunfften. In these Cantons the chief Magistrate is
vulgarly called Schuldthessen, that is set over debts, whom I may call Consul,
and they have two Counsels, the greater and the less. The greater at Bern has
the name of two hundred, though they be more in number, and the lesser is of
twenty six men. At Lucern the greater is of one hundred men, and each half
year eighteen govern the Commonwealth by courses. At Bern when they choose
the Senate, the four Ensigns of the City take to them sixteen out of all
the Citizens, and these twenty men with the Consul, choose the greater Senate.
First, they inquire after those two hundred that were of the Senate, and if any
of them has disgraced his dignity by any ill act, they put him out of his
place, and toward Easter they choose new Senators into the places of them, and
of such as are dead, and the Serieants make this election known to them that
are chosen. All the Magistrates are chosen, and then all the Citizens have
feasts in their several Colleges or Halles, and after dinner they pass the
time in games and diverse exercises. Then the Consul with the twenty men called
the Electors, do meet again, and choose the Senators of the lesser Counsel,
who the day following are approved by the greater Counsel. At Lucern twice
each year they make election of Senators into the greater or lesser Counsel,
if any places be void, namely, about each Solstice of the year. And the
Senators are chosen by those of the greater Counsel, who governed the last
half year. The Consuls are chosen by the common voices of both the Counsels,
and these Consuls are chosen for a year at Lucern, for two years at Bern,
(though for form yearly Voices be given, and so they may seem to be newly
chosen.)

At Bern the chief authority next to the Consuls, is given to the four
Ensigns vulgarly called Venner, which are chosen of the four Colleges or
Hals of the Smiths Shoomakers, Bakers, and Butchers, and the City is divided
into four parts, each part committed to one of the Ensigns, to visit their
Arms, and ouer-see all military duties, and they execute this place four
years, though for form they yearly resign their Banners up to the Senate;
and if in the mean time any one of them die, another is set in his place, to
fulfill the rest of the years, as deputy to his Predecessor and then exercise
the place four years more for himself.

In all the Cities of Sweitzerland, the Treasurers or Tribunes of the
Exchequer, are of great reputation, who exercise that Office not for any set
time, but so long as the Senate will, and themselves like. At Bern the Consuls,
the Ensigns, and the Treasurers, adding one Senator of the Counsel of 200 make
the Privy Counsel, to which all secrets are first brought. In these Cantons
(as I said) the Magistrates are chosen by public voices, and so are the
officers, but the places of less dignity, as Serieants and watchmen, are
bestowed by the lesser counsel. It is peculiar to those of Bern, that they
admit no man into the lesser counsel, who was not borne in the City, and of old
they admitted not the very sons of Senators into that Counsel, if they were
borne out of the City: but in these days for the public good, the Sons of
the absent are as if they were borne in the City: but into the greater counsel
they admit those that are borne out of the City, so they be the children of
Sweitzers or any confederates, for stangers are also excluded from being of the
Senate of 200. All bastards or infamo^us persons are excluded from being of any
Senate at all.

The Canton of Bern has three Courts of Judgment, the Judges of them being
chosen by the Ensigns and Treasurers, and confirmed by the lesser counsel.
The first is called the outward Court, in which the Consul is President, but
almost continually the chief Apparater or Sergeant supplies his place, and he
has twelve Assessors or Assistants, whereof one is the last chosen Ensign,
and another is chosen of the lesser Counsel, the rest being ten, are chosen
out of the greater counsel, or Senate, and to them be added one Clarke and two
Appariters. This Court judges of debts, of lesser injuries, as ill words and
light blows, and appeal is granted from it to the lesser Senate, from that to
the sixty men, (being Senators chosen out of both the Senates), and from them
to the great Counsel, and these Judges meet daily, Tuesday only excepted, on
which they have a market. The second Court of Judgment hears the appeals
made from those of the Canton which dwell in the territory of Sauoy, whereupon
it is called Das Weltsch gericht, that is, the strangers Justice, in which the
Treasurer of the French renenues is President, and he has ten Assessors, but
only Losanna, though of the same territory, is exempted from this Judgment,
whether once every two years, a Judge is sent, with certain Assessors, to
hear their appeals. A third court of Judgment called the Consistory, belongs
to the discourse of Religion.

The Canton of Lucerna has two Courts of Judgment, one called Das
Wuchengevicht, that is, the weekly Justice, which determines of debts and
contracts: The other of nine men, in which injuries and reproaches are punished.
In the Cantons of Bern and Lucern, capital crimes are not tried by any
special Judges, but both the Senates sit, and give sentence upon them.

At Bern after sentence is given in the Senate, the Consul sets in the public
tribunal, where the Clerk reads in writing the prisoners confession, and the
sentence of the Senate, which done, the Consul commands the hangman to do
execution, and the Prisoner to be delivered to his hands. And at Lucerna the
Senate judges all capital crimes, not only for the Canton, but also for the
Presectures or Gouernements, and all executions are done within the City,
whereas Bern appoints special Judges for capital crimes in the gouernements,
the Governor being President, but their sentence there given may be changed,
or mitigated by the Senate of Bern, which commands over larger gouernements,
then any other Canton.

At Friburg the greater Senate consists of two hundred Senators, which manageth
all public affairee, and things of greatest moment. The lesser Counsel or
Senate is of twenty four men, and judges of Citizens causes, and appeals
made by the subjects, and the Consul is President of both Senates, who is
chosen by all the people for 3 years, upon the day of S. John Baptist, as the
choises of Senators is yearly made upon the Sunday next before that feast. The
four Ensigns are next to the Consul, and are set over the 4 parts of the
city, and howsoever they are not Senators of the lesser Senate, yet they are
always present at their meetings, in the name of the people, and they perform
this office for three years, being chosen by both the Senates as most of the
Magistrates are likewise chosen by them. The Treasurer is next in dignity, who
ouersees the treasure and the buildings, and holds his office for three years,
but yields account twice every year to the Senate. They have four chief
Clerks or Secretaries, and the Office of the chief Apparater, exercised by
one man for three years, is honorable here, as at Bern, for commonly he
assists the Consul, and when the Senate meets, stands at the door, takes the
Senators voices, and has the care of captives. At Friburg they have a Court of
Justice, called the Cities Court, which judges the citizens causes, takes the
examination of captives, and puts the accused to the rack or torment, but
after, referres all to the Senate. They have another Court of Justice for the
country, wherein the causes of subjects dwelling out of the city are
determined. In both Courts are two of the lesser Senate, and eight Judges of
the greater Senate, chosen for three years, and they meet thrice every week,
and appeal is admitted from them to the lesser Senate. Also twelve Judges
chosen out of both the Senates, determine the appeals of the prefectures or
gouernements, meeting once every month for that purpose, and from them there
is no appeal. The Governors are chosen by both the Senates, and hold that
Office for five years, but give account yearly before the lesser Senate, and
they judge capital crimes in their gouernements; but the Senate has power to
change, mittigate, or approve their sentence, as they Judge meet.

In the third place it remains to speak of the third form of government in
the Three Cities of the third form.
three Cities distributed into tribes or companies, namely Zurech, Bazill, and
Schafbusen, wherein the state is divided into two Orders of the noble and
plebean. They have a peculiar society of those called noble (which is vulgarly
called Eingeselschafft, and at Zurech, Etn Constaffell): but Bazill for the
great number of them, had two societies, which had the chief authority, the
Consul being chosen of one, and the tribune (next in dignity) chosen of the
other, till the nobility was removed from government, or rather freely gave it
over: For these Gentlemen first joined with the House of Austria, and were
after banished with them, till the year 1501, a perpetual league was made
with the House of Austria, and the Gentlemen returned from banishment, but
hating the common people, left the City to dwell in their Castles, whereupon
their authority was much diminished; and that which remained they utterly lost
in the year 1529, when they left the City, and opposed themselves to the
reformation of religion decreed by the Senate: yet the said two societies in
name, and their public houses of the societies, and the private houses in
their possession, remain to them at this day, but none of the Gentlemen are
chosen into the Senate, being excluded by the common consent of the Citizens
from the government of the Commonwealth, which they willingly for sook, so as
the gentlemen have really no peculiar society, only some few of them dwelling
continually in the City, are numbered in the four chief Tribes or companies
of the Citizens, and in them are chosen into the Senate, as Citizens, and these
four companies are called the companies of the Lords or Gentlemen. At Zurech
they have a peculiar society of Gentlemen, which has this privilege, that
half as many more are chosen into the Senate out of it, as out of any other
tribe. And in this very society of Gentlemen, there is difference among
themselves, for the old Families have a peculiar society, and a private stoaue
wherein they only meet, and many Citizens are joined to the whole society,
who neither exercise any art nor trade of Merchandise; and because Porters and
the baser sort must be numbered in some tribe or company, all these for
occasions of war, are, numbered in this society of the Gentlemen, called
Constaffel, and under the same they serve in the wars, yea, and give their
voices in the choice of the Master of the society, who is one of the Senate.
Also at Schafhusen, the Gentlemen have a peculiar society: but in all these
Cities, the people is divided into tribes or companies (vulgarly called Zunft,
whereas the Gentlemen's society is called Geselschafft or Constaffell).

At Basii there be 15 Tribes, (whereof 4 are called the tribes of the Lords or
Gentlemen) namely of the Merchants, of the Goldsmiths, of the Vintners, of the
Apoticaries and Silkemen (the most populous of all other), and the other eleven
are Plebean Tribes of all kinds of Artisans. Zurech has twelve Tribes (for the
Weauers of woollen cloth being few, are numbered among the Dyers.) Schafhusen
has but eleven Tribes, wherein sometimes Artisans of diverse Arts are joined in
one Tribe: but each Art has his peculiar Hall, and these are called the
divided Tribes, and they meet in their peculiar Halles, when they consult of
any thing concerning their private Art: but they meet in the common Hall of
the Tribe for causes touching the Commonwealth, as the choice of Senators, or
Masters of each Tribe.

In the said Cities are two Counsels, the greater when many meet in the name
of the people to consult of weighty causes belonging to the Commonwealth, and
the lesser, which daily sits in judgment. At Zurech the greater Counsel or
Senate is of 200 men, and the lesser of 50. At Basil the greater is of 244, the
lesser of 64. At Schafhusen the greater is of 86, the lesser of 26 Senators. To
these ad two Consuls, the Heads or Presidents of public Counsels in each of
these Cities. And this is common to al these Cities, that each Tribe has two
Masters, chosen for half or a whole year, which time ended, others succeed in
that place, yet commonly he that was Master the last half year is chosen
again, except there be some impediment. The lesser Senate is divided into new
and old, and that is called the old, whereof the Senators have served half a
year, and these are not always called to the meetings, for some business
only belongs to the new Senate. At Zurech the two Senates are changed each
half year, and the old Senate at the half years end chooses the new. But at
Basil and Schafhusen, they remain in Office a whole year. And the Masters of
the Tribes are chosen by their own Tribes, and confirmed by the greater
Senate, but they are confirmed by the old Senate at Basil. The voices are
openly taken at Zurech, but secretly at Schafhusen (for certain men are set
over the elections, in whose ears they give their Voices softly whispering.)
The lesser Counsel or Senate meets commonly thrice or four times each week.
The Consul is President of both Senates, and is chosen by the greater Senate
for half a year, and in some places for a year. The Tribunes are joined with
the Consuls for Heads and Presidents of the Senates; and at Basil nine other
are joined to them, who make the Counsel of thirteen, to whom the more
weighty affairs are referred, to consider of them before they be propounded to
the whole Senate. Zurech has a peculiar Counsel, which may be called the
Exchequer Court, consisting of eight men, chosen four out of each Senate, and
to them all Exchequer accounts are referred. Two Clerks or Secretaries are
present at public Counsels, with assistants joined to them if need require;
and the Office of these Secretaries, especially of the chief, is honorable
and gainefull, and not easily conferred on any but a Patritian, because they
must have full knowledge of the Laws, Customs, Privileges, and all secrets
of the Commonwealth.

Zurech has two public Courts of Judgment or Justice, one of eight Judges
chosen out of the lesser Counsel or Senate, who determine Civil causes,
Debts, and the like, and from them there is no appeal: but themselves refer
the most difficult matters to the Senate. The other determines the causes of
the Revenue. Basil has two Courts of Justice in the great Town, and a third
in the lesser Town. The greater Court consists of ten Judges, who are partly
taken out of the Senate, partly out of the people, and they determine Civil
and Criminal causes: but the Burgomaster (or Mayor) is President for Civil
causes, and the Advocate of the Empire for Criminal, and three men called the
Capital Triumuiri of Senators degree, plead and prove inditements against
malefactors. But at Zurech and Schafhusen, the new Senate judges capital
causes, yet the Consul or Burgomaster is not then President as at other times:
but the Advocate of the Empire, whom the Senate by special privilege chooses
yearly out of their own body. And at Basil capital Judgments are given in a
public place: but at Zurech in a close private Court with the doors shut, and
at Schafhusen, the accusation and defense are made in open Court: but all are
excluded when the Senate gives judgment. The lesser Court of the great Town
at Basil, does only determine small controversies not exceeding the value of
ten pounds. The Court of Justice in the lesser Town of Basil, has his own
Burgomaster or Consul; and determines all causes except criminal. At
Schafbusen the Cities Court of Justice, determines of debts, contracts, and the
like: but if the sum of the controversy exceed the value of one hundred gold
Guldens, the Senate iudgoeth it. And this Cities Court has twenty Assessors,
namely one of each Tribe, and eight other chosen by the Senate. It has another
Court of Justice for the Mulcts or Fines, consisting of twelve men, and the
Advocate of the Empire is President thereof, and this Court imposes Fines, and
judges the criminal causes of less weight, as small injuries and vulgar
reproaches, for the Senate determines of the greater.

Touching the Magistrates and Officers of these Cities, the Consuls called
Burgomasters, are of chief dignity, then the Tribunes, then diverse Treasurers
and Officers about the Revenues and Tributes. The next degree is of those
Officers, who have the care of public buildings and works, then those who
have the care of victuals, as those who look to the weight and goodness of
bread, and those who ouersee the shambles, that no unsound meat be sold, and
that all things be sold at a moderate price, which they set down, and appoint
how flesh shall be sold by the pound. In like sort the overseers of the fish
market, and salted meats, and butter and cheese. Likewise the Officers who
protect Orphans and widows, who dispense public aims, governing those
houses, and who ouersee weights and measures, and the public Schools. Some of
the prefectures or gouernements belonging to the Cities, are governed by the
Senate of the City, so as the Governors remain Senators in the City, and
only at-set days go to the Villages for administration of Justice; but the
Senate only judges of capital causes: but to those Gouernements which be
larger and farther distant, they send Governors, who judge not only civil,
but most capital causes. In privileges, customs, and peculiar Courts of
Judgment, where the prefectures have power to choose Judges among themselves,
the Governors alter nothing therein, but only sit as Presidents in their
judgments, these their rights always preserved. Thus among other, the City of
Zurech has two pleasant saire Towns subject to it, which are ruled by the
Laws of Zurech, but have their own Magistrates, and serve Zurech in war,
but under their own colors. And this shall suffice touching the
Commonwealths general and particular of the Cantons.

Among the fellows in league, are the Abbot and Town of Saint Gallus. The Of
the fellows in league
Abbot is numbered among the Princes of the Empire, but his power is much
diminished in these days: yet he sets Governors over many places, and his
Ammans do Justice in his name. Also he has instituted an high Court of
Justice, to which appeals Of the Abbot and Town of S. Gallus.
are made from the lesser Courts, and besides he has Officers of all kinds,
after the manner of Princes. The Town (as likewise that of Mulhuse and
Roteuil) is numbered among the Cities of the Empire, and it (as the other two)
has the form of a Common wealth formerly described, saving that this Town of
Saint Gallus has some peculiar things. It has six Tribes, whereof one is of
Gentlemen. It has two Senates, the greater and the lesser, in which lesser
Senate are four and twenty Senators, namely three Consuls, nine Senators and
twelve Masters of the Tribes, (for each Tribe has three Masters chosen by the
Tribes, and confirmed by the lesser Counsel or Senate, and one of them yearly
by course gouernes each Tribe, being six in number, the other two are of the
Senate, and make twelve): And twice every year, is the choice made of the
Senate and Magistrates. The first of the three Consuls exercises that Office
for the present year, the second did exercise it the year besore, and the
third is Judge of capital crimes: And the Consul is yearly chosen by the
whole assembly of the people. The greater Senate consists of sixty six men.
This Town has also an inferior Consul, or (as I may say) a Deputy Consul.
The lesser Senate judges civil causes. The greater meets five times in the
year, and judges of appeals, and of taking new inhabitants, and the like,
and extraordinarily it is called oftener, as for judging capital causes, at
which time the Advocate of the Empire (who^ I said to be the third consul) is
President of the counsel. The whole people is called together thrice in the
year, first when the Consuls are chosen, 2. when oath is given to the new
Consul, thirdly when the Ordination of Tributes is read before the people: and
the Laws divided into three Parts, are read before the pepole at these three
meetings. The first Court of Justice, is of five men, which judges of debts,
of wages or hires, of victuals, of injuries, and fines, without appeal. The
court of Justice for the City, is of twelve men, changed twice each year; and
from it apeale is admitted, to the lesser Senate, so the cause be above the
value of five pounds; but if he that appeals lose the cause, he paies a fine
to the Judges. The common people of the town and country, lives by making
woollen cloth, whereupon strict Laws are made for the same, that the web
undressed be viewed by three skillfull men, and be marked according to the
goodness, and if it be faulty, be rent in the midst through the breadth, or be
burnt, where any great fault is found, and that publicly, besides a fine
imposed upon the weauer. After, sworn men measure and mark the cloth, besides
other officers, who curiously and particularly view each cloth. I said before
in the History of this town, that it made war upon the Abbot, when he sought
to remove from it to another town, more absolutely in his power, not only the
gainefull trade of clothworking, but also the holy relics, whereby in those
days great gain came to them.

Among the Rhetians or Grisons, each convent or meeting or community has his
Amman, and chief Magistrates, yearly chosen, and a general Governor of the
whole Of the Grisons.
leage, called Landtrichter, that is, Justice of the land, yearly chosen at the
public meeting. They have many conuents or meetings, but only three leagues.
The head of the second league, called the house of God, is the City of Chur,
which has a Cathedral Church, and the commonwealth thereof is not unlike
that of Zurech. The three leagues have but one commonwealth; for howsoever
most places have their own Magistrates, and Laws, or rather customs, and
Courts of Justice as well for Civil as criminal causes, yet the chief power
is in the common or public Senate of the three leagues, consisting of the
Burgesses of the several conuents, not unlike the general Senate of the
Sweitzers, and the meeting of all the people is seldom called. But they have
another Counsel or Senate of the chief men, namely the Provincial Judge of
the upper league, the Consul of Chur for the league of the house of God, and
the Amman of the third league of the ten Jurisdictions, with other chosen men
joined to them, but this Counsel has not full power, for the acts thereof are
referred to the communities of the leagues, and that stands in force which the
greater part of them does confirm, and the judgments of such causes as are
referred to the several communities, are registered in a written book. They
determine controversies and give Judgments, as the Sweitzers do. Among their
Statutes, it is decreed by common consent, that the Bishop of Chur, or any
Ecclesiastical person, shall not appoint any Civil Magistrates, but that they
shall be chosen by the voices of the people. The three leagues have their
prefectures or governments under them, and the governor of their Italian
prefectures (as of those under the Sweitzers) is vulgarly called Il Podesta,
from whom the subjects may appeal. The three leagues by course appoint these
Governors for two years, and the conuentes or communities by course in their
own league, name the said Governors for two years.

Touching the Valesians. The conuents of upper Valesia are seven, and of the
lower Of the Valesians.
are six. The Bishop of Sedune is the Prince of the Country or region, who is
named the Earl and Governor of the same, and he is chosen by the Cannons of
the Church at Sedune, and by the Burgesses sent from the seven conuents of
upper Valesia. The Captain of the Country is next to the Bishop, and is chosen
by the Bishop and the said Burgesses for two years, and confirmed by the
publke consent of the several conuents, and to him all Civil causes are
referred. Each convent has a chief Magistrate or Mayor, or Castellan, who
with the Senate of that counent judges Civil and capital causes, and under
him is the Amman, (whichis the highest officer in the Cautons dwelling in
villages). Appeals are admitted from all the several conuents to the public
Senate of Valesia, consisting of Burgesses chosen by the conuents, and this
Senate meets at Sedune twice every year, and the Bish op sits in that
Counsel, and the Baly takes the Voices. By this Senate the Commonwealth is
governed, the governors, and public Officers are chosen, and it is called the
highest Court, from which there is no appeal. The Lords of Chiurone, of old
were of great authority, and are the Marshalls of the Bishopric of Sedune,
Vicounts of Sedune, and Seneschalls (or Stewards) of Valesia. The Valesians
have a peculiar Statute to repress the violence of mighty men. The Common
wealth is governed by the Bishop and the seven Conuents of upper Valesia, whom
lower Valesia obeys, being distributed into six prefectures or governments,
and three other prefectures out of Valesia, taken or subdued in the Sauoian
war, are also subject to them.

The Town of Bipenne having league with the three Cantons, for civil causes
acknowledges Of the Town of Bipenne.
the Bishop of Basil, and for Ecclesiastical jurisdiction is under the Bishop
of Losanna, but has cast of the yoke of the Papacy, and obtained immunitie
from the Bishop of Losanna, when that Bishopric and City were taken and made
subject to the Canton of Bern. The Bishop of Basil appoints the Mayor, out of
the Senate of the Town, and the Mayor takes an oath from the Citizens, and
they likewise an oath from him, and he with the Senate judges criminal
causes, and is President for capital Judgments. The Bishop has half of all
fines above three pound, and certain tithes with some other revenues, but the
Customs Impositions and Tributes belong to the City. The Citizens serve the
Bishop of Basil in war, but no further from the Town, then they may return
home the same day: but if he will use them further, he must hire them with pay.
The same privileges were granted to this Town by the Bishop, in the year
1382, which he granted to the lesser Town of Basil. The public Senates, as
well the greater as the lesser, are yearly chosen by all the Citizens, and the
Master of the Citizens, or Burgomaster is next in authority to the Mayor, and
is chosen by both the Senats, and when they consult of the Commonwealth, the
Mayor and the Officers of the Bishop go out of the Counsel. The Consul,
Tribunes, Judges, and other Officers are chosen by both the Senates, only the
Ensign is chosen by all the people, and he with the Consul has the care of
Pupils. This Town has some subjects, and their Conuents without any Governor
exercise Judgments: but the greatest matters are referred to the Senate of the
Town.

The Stipendiary Towns or Cities of the Cantons, have two Counsels or Senates,
Of the stipendiary Cities.
and he that is President of the public Counsel is called Schuldthess (as set
over debts) and at Baden he is chosen by both the Senates. Also they have their
Officers, their Exchequers and Tributes belongiug to each City: but at Baden
the customs at the gate belong to the Town: but the impositions upon
Merchandise belong to the Cantons, to which the Town is subject. Lastly, they
have Jurisdiction in Civil criminal and capital causes. Among them the Town
of Frawenfeld redeemed it self from the servitude of the Monastery of Augia,
for no small part of the Citizens were Ecclesiastical slaves to that
Monastery. At this day it gives an oath to the Lord of Augia, the privileges
always preserved, and that Monastery is incorporated to the Bishopric of
Constantia (vulgarly called Costnetz.) The City Judges have also power to judge
and punish capitally.

Touching the prefectures or gouernementes under the Cantons, the Governors Of
the Gouernements
are sent by course from the Cantons for two years, who judge according to the
laws of the several people, and for those beyond the Alps, the Governor
has assistants of the Country chosen and joined with him to judge of capital
and more weighty causes, but in Civil causes he judges alone, though
sometimes he calls some of the wiser inhabitants to advise him therein. The
Governors about the Solstice of the year, yield account before the Senate of
Sweitzerland, which then judges the appeals made by the subjects. They serve
the Cantons in war, to which they are subict, and they follow the standard of
that cantons, which for the present year gives them a Governor, and in civil
war they are bound to follow the greater part of the Cantons to which they
are subject. The Governor of Baden is present in the public Senate of the
Sweitzers, he takes the voices, and they being equal, is the arbiter of the
difference: but he has only power in the territory of Baden not in the City,
and there he appoints capital Judges for life; for their manner is, that the
Judges once chosen by him, exercise that place so long as they live. And the
same Governor has the power to mitigate their Judgments. The next in
authority are the Clerk or Secretary and the under or Deputy Governor. Two
little Towns of the County or territory of Baden, have Governors from the
Bishop of Costnetz: but they serve the Sweitzers in their wars, and the
Governor of Baden is their Judge for capital causes. The prefecture or
government of Terg most large of all the rest, has 50 Parishes, whereof some
have their own immunities or privileges, the rest are subject to diverse
jurisdictions: but the Sovereign power is in the Governor sent and chosen by
the Cantons, excepting Cella, where the Citizens have their own government,
the Bishop of Costnetz having only the keeping of the Castle, and half the
mulcts or fines. The seven Cantons with consent of the Lords in the several
jurisdictions of all this prefecture of Torg, appoint one form of Justice. And
the Judges impose very great fines, which belong to the Cantons, and especially
upon crimes which have coherence with capital offenses, namely, foul
injuries, breaches of peace, violence offered by the high way, challengers of
public ways or passages, changers of Land-markes, or goods committed in trust
to their keeping, breakers of public faith, and those who scandale or reproach
any Magistrate. The prefectures of the Saranetes, and the Rhegusci, and those
of Italy, have each a Governor, vulgarly called Commissary, sent from the
Sweitzers, and because the people speak the Italian tongue, he has a
Sweitzer skillful in that tongue for his interpreter. The people has the power
to choose their own Magistrates and Officers, and to determine of things
concerning their Commonwealth, the Commissary not intermedling therewith.

CHAP. VI. Of the Netherlanders Commonwealth, according to the foresaid
subjects of the former Chapters.
LOwer Germany, called of old Belgia, and now commonly The Commonwealth of
Netherlan in general.
Netherland (which the French name Pais bas, that is, Low countries) is divided
into seventeen Provinces, as I have formerly showed in the Geographicall
description thereof, namely, seven Counties, of Flaunders, of Artois, of
Hannaw, of Holland, of Zealand, of Zutphane, and of Namurtz; four Dukedomes,
of Luzenburg, of Limburg, of Brabant, and of Gelderland, the Lordship or
Dominion of West Freisland, three Countries or Territories, or places of
Jurisdiction, of Grouing, of Vtrecht, and of Transisola, vulgarly Dlands over
Ysel. To which fifteen Provinces, that the number of seventeen may be
complete, some add the County of Walkenburg (which is part of the Dukedom of
Limburg), and others add the two dominions of Mecblin and Antwerp, (which are
contained under the Dukedom of Brebant.) And how soever it be not my purpose
to speak of any other Provinces, then those which they call united, and through
which only I passed, yet it is not amiss in a word or two to show, how these
Principalities at first having several Princes, by little and little grew into
one body, and in our days through civil war became divided into two parts,
the one of diverse Provinces united for defeuce of their liberty, the other of
the rest remaining under the obedience of their Prince.

The County of Flaunders has given the name of Flemmings to all the
inhabitants of these Prouincess before named, and the Earls thereof, when
other Provinces Flaunders.
were erected to Dukedomes, did obstinately retain their own degree, least
they should disgrace their antiquitic, with the newness of any Ducall or other
title. And it is manifest, that this Earl was the first Peer of France,
having the prerogative to carry the sword before the King of France at his
Coronation, and to gird the same to his side, being not bound to appear in
Judgment before his Compeeres, except some controversy were about the
property of his Earldom, or he should deny justice to his subjects: and
finally having the badges of Sovereign Majesty, to raise an Army, to make
War and Peace, to yield no tributes or subjection to the King of France, to
punish or pardon his subjects, to make Statutes, to grant privileges, to coin
money, and to write himself by the Grace of God Earl, which no other Prince of
France might do, but only the Duke of Britany, Baldwyn Earl of Flaunders in
the year 1202, became Emperor of Constantinople, and held that dignity sixty
years, after which time the Empire returned to the Greeks. Earl Lodwick died
in the year 1383, and Margaret his daughter and heir was married to Phillip
Duke of Burgundy, who by her right became Earl of Flaunders. Charles Duke of
Burgundy died in the year 1477, and Marie his daughter and heir was married
to the Emperor Maximillian, and so Flaunders became subject to the House of
Austria.

For Phillip, son to Maximillian, died before his father, and left two sons,
whereof Charles the eldest was Emperor the fifth of that name, and heir to
his Grandfather The House of Austria.
Maximillian. And Charles the Emperor taking the King of France, Francis the
first, prisoner, in the battle of Pauia, in the year 1525, forced him to
renounce all Sovereign power over Flaunders and Artois, and to yield the
Rightes of the House of Aniou to the Kingdom of Naples, and of the House of
Orleans to the Dukedom of Milan, and of Genoa. Charles died, and his younger
brother Ferdinand succeeded him in the Empire, being long before designed his
successor, by being chosen King of the Romans but he left al his States of
inheritance to his eldest son Phillip King of Spain. The rest of the Provinces
by like right of marriage became subject to Maximillian, and so fell to
Charles, and lastly to the King of Spain, excepting Virecht and the
Transisolan Dominion, which by the yielding of the Bishop (reserving his
spiritual rights) and of the States of those Provinces, were joined to the
rest, and so finally fell to Phillip King of Spain.

Histories witness, that some of these Provinces did owe homage to the Empire,
The united Provinces.
and the rest to the King of France, till they fell into the hands of the
powerful Dukes of Borgundy, who by diverse transactions took all rights from
the Kings of France, and because the Empire has been ever since in the House
of Austria, it cannot seem strange, the Kings of Spain being of the same
House, that these Provinces have been freed of the homage due to the Empire.
The Emperor Charles the fifth happily governed these Provinces with great
judgment, handling the people gently, who had always been held under a gentle
yoke by their Princes, inioying great privileges inuiolably kept to them,
never used to absolute government, but having often taken Arms, when their
Princes imposed exactions upon them, or broke any of their privileges, and so
bringing their Princes to just and equal terms. But his son Phillip K. of
Spain, and many other Kingdoms, straying from his Fathers example in the
government of Netherland, and obstinately despising his counsel, which at his
death as it were by his last Testament he gave him to handle this people
gently, and not enduring their voluntary and free subjection, has caused the
greater, or at least the richer part of these Provinces to fall from him and
his heirs. For upon the first dissension about Religion, Pope Pius the fourth
induced Phillip King of Spain to publish a Decree in Netherland, for the
establishing of the infamous Inquisition (first invented in Spain of late to
punish the Jews and Saracens, who being Christians yet retained their own
rites), and also for the execution of the Decrees made in the Council of
Trent; which done, more then 400 Gentlemen made petition to the King to abolish
this decree, and joining the intercession of the Emperor, sent this petition to
the King by the hands of diverse Lords and Gentlemen, whereof the Prince of
Egmond was one, who had done the King very great service in the battle of
Saint Quintens. These petitioners were despised by the Spaniards, and called
Geuses (that is beggars or poor slaves), and the King sent them back
unregarded, and sent the Duke of Alua to go. uern Netherland, who cruelly raged
against the Professors of the reformed religion, and beheaded the Prince of
Egmond and the Earl of Horn, both Knights of the golden fleece, and on all
sides proceeded butcherly. In the mean time the Prince of Orange, (who
formerly had in vain persuaded the Prince of Egmond to fly) foreseing this
tyranny, with other banished Geutlemen, was gone out of Netherland, and fled to
the Prince of Condy in France. At last the Duke of Alua, having brought all in
subjection, reformed the policy, and imposed an exaction of the tenth penny,
was recalled into Spain, whither he returned with much treasure he had
extorted, and Don Iuvan of Austria succeeded in that Government, in whose time
the fatal Civil war began in Flaunders, and shortly after mutinous troops
called Male contents joined together, The Civil war.
neither acknowledging the King nor the States of the Provinces, and while Don
Iunan pursued them, he died in the Camp in the year 1578. Then Alexander
Farnese Duke of Parma, was made Governor of Netherland, and the King persisting
in his purpose to bring that people to absolute subjection, and the Professors
of the reformed religion being grievously persecuted, and all the people being
murinously affected for the new and tirannicall exaction of the tenth penny
without consent of the general States, the troubles still continuing in
Flaunders, at last some few Provinces, having The united, States.
the Prince of Orange for their General in the war, strictly combined
themselves in league for mutual defense. So Flaunders and the firm land was
left under the Spanish yoke, but the confederate Provinces firmly resolving to
cast off all subjection to the King of Spain, instituted a new form of common
wealth; For the Prince of Orange wisely and variantly procuring the public
good, was in the year 1584 traitorously slain with a baller by a desperate
Rogue, whereupon the cities of Flaunders lay The Prince of Orange killed.
open to the Duke of Parma.

But the foresaid united Provinces cast themselves into the protection of the
Queen of England; and if my, memory fail not, they are thus named, Holland,
Zealand, Vtreiht, England protects them.
Groaning, west Friesland, besides many towns for Gelderland, some fortes and
strong cities of Brabant, and Ostend in Flaunders, a town for neerenes fit to
annoy the Enemy. And the foresaid fortes and strong cities, for the most part
lying upon the coast of the sea within land, and upon the mouth of the Rheine
where it falls into the sea, gave free traffic by sea to the united Provinces,
and forbad the same to the cities within land, and besides yielded this
commodity; that as the Spanish soldiers from their forts send frey booters to
spoil the united countries of Gelderland, Groaning and Friesland, so the
soldiers of the states might fro^thence make incursio^s upon the countries
subject to the King of Spain, whereby the country people were forced to pay
large yearly co^tributions, to be free from this spoil. The few inhabitants of
these small Provinces, whom men will judge but a breakefast to the Spanish
Army, notwithstanding have not only been able to this day to keep out these
powerful forces from entering their territories; but may justly brag, that they
have won many strong forts and towns from the Spaniard, and carried their
Army into Flaunders, where in a field fought at Newport, they obtained a
glorious victory against the Spaniardes. And so much in small progress of time
have their just and moderate Counsels increased their commonwealth, governed
with great equity and equality, as at last forsaken (as it were) by the King of
France, and for the time having little help from England, they alone did not
only long defend themselves from the powerful revenge of the Spaniard, but
stoutly bearing out the war to a wished peace, are now no more to be pitied,
but in common judgment rather to be envied and feared by their neighbors.

Mention has been made of the Prince of Orange, and hereafter mention is to be
The House of Nassaw.
made of his son Count Maurice, therefore it will not be amiss to say
something of this noble family. The united Provinces consisting of citizens and
the common people, there being few Gentlemen in Friesland, and few or none in
Holland and Zeland, and such kind of Plebean men unfit to lead Armies, they
as well for the commonwealths sake, first took the Prince of Orange for their
head, as after for thankfulness to him much esteemed the Family of Nassaw, and
besides others of that Family governing in Friesland and other parts, made
choice of the said Princes son Count Maurice to be General of their Army, but
with limited power from the States, and he has a double (as I think) voice in
their public meetings, in which notwithstanding he seldom or never used to
be present. His father the Prince of Orange had all his inheritance in Brabant
and Flaunders, excepting the Principality of Orange, seated in France near the
City of Marseits, und when he suspected the counsels of the King of Spain
(into whose net Count Egmond, confident in his innocence and great service done
to the King, and the Count of Horn, unadvisedly fell), he first withdrew
himself into France, and after into Holland, where (as I said) he joined with
the States of the United Provinces, and was much respected and loved of them
all, inioying from them honorable means of maintenance, well deserved in that
his name and assistance much profited the common cause. He had many wives;
first, he married the Countess of Buren, sole daughter and heir to her
father, and she bare him a son, who in the beginning of these troubles, was a
Student in the University of Louan, whence the Governor called him, and sent
him into Spain, and she bore him likewise a daughter, which was married to
Count Hollock, a German well respected by the States for his warlike reputation
and good services done to them, and he with his wife lived in Holland, when I
passed through these parts. His second wife was the sister to the Elector of
Saxony, by whom he had the foresaid Count Maurice, who yet being young,
succeeded his father in the general conduct of the States Army, and about this
time whereof I write, had taken two strong Cities in Brabant, the inheritance
of the Prince of Orange, namely, Bredaw and Getrudenberg; and because they were
part of the Earldom of Buren, some difference was then about them, between
the said Count Maurice and his said sister by the fathers side, wherein it was
generally said, that the States favored the Count. Also the Prince had by this
wife a daughter, after married to the Governor of Friesland. His third wife
was sister to the Duke of Mompensier in France, which had been a Nun, and by
her he had six daughters. Lewis married to the Palatine of the Rhein, Marie
then living at Hage, the third living then in France, the fourth with the Count
of Schwarthenburg, and Francis also then living at Hage, and a sixth then
brought up in the County of Nassaw. His fourth wife was a French Lady of the
Family Chastillon, famous in that worthy Admiral of France killed in the
Parisian Massacre. And this wife after the Prince was slain lived then at
Hage, with her only son by him, who being borne at Delph in Holland, was
therefore, and for many respects much regarded by the Hollanders, and yet being
a child, was honored with military commands, and a large stipend for his
maintenance, and shortly after had the title of Colonel of Holland, with no
small addition to his means.

Being now to speak of the Magistrates, Laws and degrees of Orders in this
Commonwealth, it will not be amisie, first for conjecture of the general
estate of Netherland, to write some few things out of Marchantius a Flemming,
and other approved Authors, particularly of the County of Flanders, for the
pre-eminence it always had over the rest of the Provinces. The chief strength
of the Commonwealth of The Commonwealth of Flanders
Flanders, is in the Counsel or Parliament of the three general States,
namely, of the Clergy, the Nobility, and the four members, (in steed of the
people making the third estate in other Kingdoms), and without the consent of
these, the Earls were never wont to exact money, or make war. And howsoever
the King of Spain has weakened the authority of this Counsel, yet when
Subsidies are imposed, the very form of old proceeding comforts the people, as
a shadow of their old liberty. The Earl by writing is to appoint the time and
place of this Assembly, or in the Earls name the Counsel of Flanders used to
call together the Burgesses or Deputies thereof.

In these three States the Clergy is of chief dignity, as well for their
degree, as for the greatness of their revenues, and many Territories under
their command, and among these were only five Bishops, till Pope Pius the
fourth in the year 1560, estalished three new seats of Bishops at Gant,
Bruges, and Ypre.

The first degree of Nobility, is that of Barons, having their name of Banners,
which they are bound to follow, whereof there be very many in Flanders, and of
them some in later times have been raised to the titles of Earls and Princes.

In the second rank, are the Lords of Towns and Villages, whence Gentlemen
have their sirnames, and they cannot be numbered without tediousness: But
almost all of them have possession given them from some of the Feudatory Courts
of the Earls of Flanders, and differ in many customs, but in this all agree,
that he who has this fee, cannot alienate it, without the consent of the
Prince and the next heir, or upon oath given in Court, that he does it for
poverty and want. The inheritance of Fees descends to the eldest sons, a
third part reserved for the younger brothers, so they give over to the elder
their part in the other goods that are not in Fee. And it is an high fault, if
these Lords impose any tribute upon their subjects, except it be with the
consent of the Earl of Flaunders. There be some of these that are called
vassals, whereof some are clients of an higher, some of a lower degree. And the
Earl of Flanders has about seventeen feudatory Courts, and the number is
very great of Clients in Fee, depending immediately upon one or other of the
said Courts, whereby the Earl has many pecuniary profits and other services,
upon fines and alienations of inheritance.

In the third rank of Gentlemen are they, who hold inheritance in Fee,
whereof some are tied to the Jurisdiction and Counsel of the Earl, as the
Chancellor (so called of correcting or cancelling writings ill drawn with
blotting outlines), which dignity is tied to the Prepositure of Bruges Church,
and before the Counsel of Flaunders was erected, this Office was of greater
authority then now it is. Others of this kind are Burgraues or Castellanes or
high Sheriffs, who are set Judges over Towns and Castles, with prerogative to
have a proportion of the mulcts or fines, which dignity belongs to certain
Families, and may be alienated to others by sale, or for dowry in marriage,
and all have not the like but diverse jurisdiction and pre-eminence. The
Burgraue of (...) has the Lordship or command of the Town (which no other
Burgraue has), the ruling of the weights in the Market, the customs at the
Gate, capital Judgment, the fines that are under three pounds of Paris, and a
part with the Earl of the greater fines, and the power to appoint the Baily,
Scabins and Burgomafter, and a third part of the goods of bastards dying
without children. Also the Burgraue of Ypre takes an oath to himself of the
Officers of that Town as well as to the Earl, and he has the fines, and
power to appoint Magistrates. Others of this third rank of Gentlemen have
warlike Offices by inheritance, as the Constable (so called of Conine and
stapel, as the stay and upholding of the King), who has the highest command in
the wars; and the Admiral (so called of a Greek word), who has the chief
command in Nauall affairs. Then two Marshals (so called as skillful in
horsmanship, for the old Dutch called an Horse-mar, and now a mare is by them
called meri, and schalc signifies cunning.) Also the Steward of the house. And
the military titles still remain hereditary to diverse families, but the
exercise of the Office is taken from them. Other Gentlemen of this third rank,
are by inheritance Officers to ouersee the Revenues, and to take accounts; such
are the Treasurers and receivers for the Princes Rents, for perpetual Tributes
of land, and these honors still remain to certain Families, though these
Rents are now brought in ready money into the Exchequer. Other Gentlemen of
this third rank, have Offices in Court, as the Master of the household,
Chamberlain, Cup Bearer, which offices are proper by inheritance to certain
Families: but the Master of the game, as well for hunting as hawking, and the
Water-Graues, (ouerseeing Lakes and Rivers for Swannes, fishing, and other like
things), are offices given at the Princes pleasure, and not proper to any
Family.

The fourth rank of Gentlemen is of those, who are adorned with the Knightly
girdle, and they are called gilded Knights, of their golden spurs and other
ornaments, which honor the Princes give for great services, creating them,
with laying a drawn sword on their left shoulder, and with certain solemnity
of words, and those who have this title, be they never so mean, are made
Gentlemen with their posterity; and if they be Gentlemen, yet it adds
dignities to them. And because I have made this mention of Knights, give me
leave to add a word of the Knightly order of the Golden Fleece, instituted by
the Duke of Burgundy, Phillip the Good, in the year 1429, upon the very day of
his marriage with Elizabeth of Portugal, in imitation of Gedions Fleece, and of
the Golden Fleece fetched by the Argonauts of Greece. He received into this
Order, Gentlemen unblameable for life and valor in Arms, whereof the Prince
and his successors are the Head or chief President, and he gave each of them
a Scarlet gown of woollen cloth (which his son Charles changed into a red
Velvet Gown), and a gold chain, with his fathers Emblem, of a steel striking
fire out of a flint, upon which chain hangs the Golden Fleece, and upon the
death of any Knight this badge is sent back, to be bestowed upon some other
Gentleman of merit. At first the number of these Knights with the Prince their
head was twenty five: but within five years they were increased to thirty
five. And the Emperor Charles the fifth in the year 1516, made the number
fifty one. At the first institution, this order had four Officers, a
Chancellor, a Treasurer, a King at Arms, and a Secretary; and in the Court of
this Order, the unlawful flying of any Knight out of the field, and all other
crimes, and the dissentions among them, are judged without appeal. The feast
of the Order has been kept in diverse places, according to the Princes
pleasure, but the Arms of the Knights are set up in the Chancell of the chief
Church at Bruges, where the feast thereof was kept at the first institution. In
general, Flaunders has a great number of Lords and Gentlemen (as likewise the
Dukedom of Luxenburg, and adjoining Provinces), and they exercise themselves
in feeding of Cattle and tillage, but judging ignoble all trade of Merchants,
and profession of manual arts. They have no immunities (as in Artois, Henault,
and all France), but bear the same burden of tributes with the people, to
keep them from sedition, while the Gentlemen, hated by them, bear the same
burden as they do.

Having spoken of the two States of the Clergy and Gentlemen, it remains to
add something of the third State, namely, the four members, which have the
place of the common people in other Kingdoms; and they are Ghant, Bruges,
Ypre, and Terra Franca, that is, the Free land, which four Territories have
the chief, or rather all authority in Flaunders. Each of these members is
exempted from all confiscation of goods by old privilege, confirmed by the
Emperor Charles the fifth, in the year 1549. Other Cities, howsoever they
have their Magistrates, Laws and Revenues to themselves, yet in the common
Counsel or Parliament for imposing tributes, or leauying of soldiers, they
follow the four members, and all Flaunders is bound to their Decree in this
general meeting of the States, the Clergy, Gentlemen, Lords and Burgesses of
other Cities consulting with the four members: but they challenging all
authority to decree, and solely representing the whole body of Flaunders in
the general meetings of all Netherland. John Duke of Burgundy removed from
Lile to Ghant the Senate, called the Counsel of Flaunders, and giving the Law
to all Flaunders. Bruges, a most pleasant City is the second member, having
this privilege above all other Cities, that he who is free of the same by
birth, gift, buying, or marriage, is freed from all confiscation of any goods
wheresoever found, no crime or case excepted; whereas the privileges of other
Cities always except violence offered to the persons of the Prince, his Wife,
and Children. Also Bruges has a stately Mint-house, with privilege to coin
money. Ypre is the third member, which City I pass over, for fear to be
tedious. The fourth member is Terra Franca, added to the rest (being but three
at the first institution), by Phillip the Good, in the year 1437, with intent
to bridle the power of Bruges, which City then much repined at the same, and
never ceased to raise tumults, till Marie, wife to the Emperor Maximilian
abolished this fourth member, which Charles the fifth their Grandchild shortly
after restored to that dignity.

Among the Magistrates some of them do properly belong to the Princes
affairs, namely, the Legal Chamber, consisting of the Princes Counselors,
and being (as it were) the head of other Courts, the meeting and number whereof
is at the Princes pleasure, but commonly the meeting is at Ghant, and they
consult of weighty affairs, (which since have been referred to the Princes
Privy Counsel, or to the counsel of Flaunders, seated at Ghant). And to the
same are referred all controversies touching fees, and appeals from feodnary
Courts, which are judged without appeall, in the presence of the Earl or his
Baily, there being a chair, cushion, and Sword of estate. Also the chamber
Hastredeninga, that is, the supreme court of accounts, consisting of hereditary
treasurers, yearly meeting at Lile for three days, who judge without appeal
all things touching Receivers, with personal and real actions belonging to
the Princes patrimony, and give oaths to new Treasurers and Feo daries. The
third court of accounts, established at Lile, consists of a President, four
Masters, five helpers, and two clerks. It examines the accounts of revenues by
rents of lands, woods, customs at gates, confiscations, Fines, goods left to
the Prince, as by shipwracks and Bastards dying without children, by homages,
Pensions, and like profits, and all hereditary treasurers, and the two general
Receivers, give account in this court. Phillip the bold gave this court great
authority, but John his son, removed the counselors thereof to the office of
Justice in Ghant, and left the court at Lile to register the Princes edicts,
and Privileges granted by him. Fourthly the court called the Counsel of
Flaunders, which I said was removed from Lile to Ghant, and seems chief in
dignity; first instituted, partly by little and little to draw Flaunders from the
jurisdiction of Paris, in imitation of Brabant, Hennault, and Holland; for
which howsoever the Princes did homage to the Emperor, yet they belonged not to
the jurisdiction of the Empire, homage and jurisdiction by nature and in
themselves being much different. But the chief cause of the institution, was
the long absence of Phillip the bold in France, during the infirmity of the
French King, in whose time this court formerly kept in diverse places at the
Princes pleasure, was settled at Ghant, and to this court are referred all
things belonging to the Princes right and authority, and the controversies of
Coiners, of the Church, of the Province and of Cities among themselves and with
others, and appeals from Magistrates, and ratifying the Princes pardons for
crimes. The Counsel consists of a President (of a Knightly degree by virtue of
his office) eight Counselors (having yearly stipends) four Commissaries
(having part of the profit by informations) and for Assessors, the Procurator
and the Advocate of the Prince, the Treasurer of the revenues, a Secretary and
a Notary. Besides these courts and this said Counsel, Marchantius mentions a
court of Justice highest and without appeal over all Netherland, instituted by
Charles last Duke of Burgandy in the year 1473 at Mechlin, (as being in the
Center of Netherland) and it judges after that is equal and good, in
imitation of the Parliament of Paris; so as suitors needed not to follow the
Earls Court. And the Prince was chief head of this Counsel, or in his
absence the Chancellor, he being not present, the Bishop of Tornay, with two
Presidents, ten Lay and nine Clergy Counselors, six Masters of Requests (who
were commanded to ride on horseback to the Senate, clad in Purple.) But Mary
the daughter of the said Charles, fearing the French and Civil war, commanded
the ceasing of judgment in this Court, which Phillip her son restored, and in
the year 1493 reestablished that court at Mechlin, but less and more weak,
as it still remains.

And this shall suffice of the Magistrates belonging to the Princes affairs.
Others belong to the subjects in several Countries and Cities. Such are the
Scabines and the Bailies. Scabines are so called of a German word Schaffen
(that is to dispatch, or of an Hebrew word (as the Germans say.) These defend
the rights and privileges of the people, determine controversies by the
Statutes and municipall customs, or for want of them, by the written Law, and
are present when any are tortured, and judge capital causes, the pardoning
whereof is rather permitted to the Prince, then much used by him. And these
Magistrates are diversely named in diverse places, as Voegte (Tutor) Portmeister,
(Officer of the Port or Haven), Lanthouder, (that is, Keeper of the Land,)
Kourcher (that is, chosen Lord), and Burgermaster (that is, Master of the
Citizens). Under them are the Treasurers or Receivers in each City, and as well
they as the Scabines, are chosen by the Commissaries of the Prince. Next are
the Baylies, so called of a French word, as Tutors and Keepers; and they are
diversely called in diverse places, namely Schuldheten, as Judges of debts: and
they differ from the Scabines, in that the Scabines Judge, the Bailies execute
their Judgments and the Princes Edicts; they have stipend, these are paid out
of the Fines; they are changed after one or two years, these continue long in
Office; lastly, they respect the rights of the people, these of the Prince. In
the Villages they have Officers called (...), who (...) the Edicts of the
Magistrate, and warn Debtors to make payment, and upon longer delay then is
permitted by the Municipall Laws, sell their goods at the outery. They have a
supreme Judge of capital causes, whom they call Sovereign Baily, instituted
in the year 1374, to apprehend murderers and banished men, and to put them to
death, or otherwise punish them, with the assistance of two Gentlemen having
fees, or being Feodatory Clients to the Prince And to this Officer authority
was lately given and confirmed by the Emperor Charles the fifth, to release
banishment, and for the eues and man slayers by chance, or upon their own
defense, and like offenders, upon satisfaction made to the next Kinsman of the
man-killer, and to him that was robbed: not only to give them safe conduct to
pass for forty days, but also to pardon their crimes, so as the Mulcts or
Fines be gathered for the Prince, not to his behoof; and the Counsel of
Flanders approve the confessions of the offender to be true. But in case the
Magistrate of the place where the offender dwelt, require him to be there
tried, it cannot be withstood. And this Office is of such dignity, as Knights
for long time have executed the same. Many Tributes were of old granted to the
Prince, as perpetual Tributes of the Fields, of Corn, Oats, Cheese, and
Larde; which things for food, have long time been redeemed with money, the
price being yearly set diversely by the Counsel of accounts seated at Lile.
And no doubt through troubles and civil wars, from the beginning to this
day, all like burdens are greatly increased both in number and measure, which
may more easily be coniectured, by that which shall be said of this subject, in
the discourse of the united Provinces.

Flanders is most ruled by municipall Laws and customs of Towns and Cities,
and for want of them by the Civil Laws. The Laws of Flanders forbid any man
to give in Legacies by his last Will and Testament, more then the thirds of his
goods, (wherein are comprehended Lands in Fee); or that any stranger should
bear the office of Magistracy: yet strangers may there inherit their Kinsmens
goods, contrary to the custom of France, England, and Scotland, where the
Kings have the goods of all strangers dying intestate, and having there no
children. In Flanders no man is deprived of his mothers inheritance for
bastardy, no not the children of a noble woman being a concubine, except some
municipall Statute made by the Princes, do in some places prejudice them. The
Citizens of Curtrae about the year 1557, and those of Ghant some six years
after, have excluded those who are borne in adultery or incest from their
mothers inheritance: but the provincial Counsel of Flanders in the year
1532, gave sentence, that a Bastard should succeed in the sea of his mother,
with privilege of age and sex, even where the Parents leave Children lawfully
begotten.

I return to the foresaid Provinces, which I said to be united in mutual
league for Of the commonwealth of the united Provinces, protected by the Queen
of England.
their defense against the Spaniards. The said Provinces, at the first breaking
out of the civil war, when Antwerp was besieged, humbly and instantly
besought Elizabeth Queen of England, to undertake their patronage and defense,
and to encourage and give her more power, offered her the Soueraignety of those
Provinces; but the most wise Queen with grave counsel, and for weighty
reasons, refused to take them for Subjects. Perhaps (among other reasons of
greater weight) fearing lest undertaking that war as Queen of the Provinces,
most part of the burden thereof should fall upon her English subjects,
thinking it probable, that the Netherlanders, being a people which had often
taken Arms against their Prince, of all other things least bearing new taxes
and impositions, (which they professed, next the persecution for Religion, to
be the chief cause of this war), would always be apt to stir up sedition
when her Majesty as their Prince should impose but half the tributes and
customs, which themselves by general consent, and for love of liberty have
imposed and born with incredible patience, during this war. And howsoever her
Majesty desired their liberty should be preserved, yet the peace between
England and Spain, howsoever shaken by many injuries on both sides, provoking
desire of revenge, notwithstanding was not yet fully broken. And it seems
probable to me (not knowing those counsels but by conjecture), that her Majesty
being a woman, the King of Spain being powerful, and some of her Subjects
being alienated from her for the reformation of Religion, thought it more
wisdom to suffer war for her just defense, then her self openly to begin
the same: yet would she not altogether neglect the afflicted people of those
Provinces, but resolved with the States thereof, that they should make Count
Maurice son to the Prince of Orange, General of their Army, governing their
own affairs, and her Majesty should profess the defense of that afflicted
people, with whom England always had strict league of trade and amity, till
means might be used for restoring them to the King of Spaines favor.
Whereupon at the instant suite of the States, the tenth of August in the year
1585, her Majesty granted them an aid of five thousand Foot, and a thousand
Horse, to whom her Majesty was to give pay during the war, yet so as the
Provinces were bound to make restitution of all her expenses, when the war
should be composed; and for pledge of performance, should give into her
Majesty's hands the Town of Vlishing in Zealand, with the adioining Castle of
Rammekins, to be kept with a Garrison of seven hundred English foot, and the
Town of Brill with some adioining Forts, to be kept with a Garrison of 450
English Foot, the said Provinces being bound (as I said) to make real
satisfaction to her Majesty at the end of the war, for all expenses, as well of
the said Forces, as of these Garrisons, which amounted yearly to the sum of
one hundred twenty six thousand pounds sterling. And her Majesty for the safety
of her neighbors bore this intolerable burden, till the year 1594, at which
time Sir Thomas Bodley Knight, her Majesty's Ambassador for those Provinces,
by a new transaction diminished those great expenses, the wealth of those
Provinces being then much increased, as well by the concourse of Merchants
leaving desolate Flanders to dwell in that flourishing State, as because they
had brought many Countries by right of war to yield them contributions,
namely, all the Sea Coast of Brabant, some part of Flanders, with the Countries
vulgarly called, Ommelands, Drent, Twent, Linghen, Limbrough, and Walkenbrough,
and had greatly increased their tributes, as well in Holland, Zeland, Freesland,
and Vtrecht, as in Guelderland, Zutphan, Dlandt over Ysell, and lastly, had
taken many strong Towns of no small moment, namely, Deuenter, Zutphan,
Nimmenghen, Stonwicke, Bredaw, Hulst, Steneberg, and Groninghen. The state of
those Provinces being (as I said) thus increased, and her Majesty being forced
for many years to keep a strong army at home, to subdue the Irish Rebels, her
Majesty's Ambassador at the foresaid time made a new transaction with the
States, for diminishing the charge of the English Forces serving them. And this
help so long given by her Majesty to the united Provinces, cannot seem of
small moment: For howsoever the Queen did not always keep the full number of
the said Forces, and sometimes called home, or cashiered part of them, yet she
did always maintain the greatest part, decreasing or increasing the same
according to the necessity of the present affairs, and employed the Forces
called home, only in voiages by Sea, profitable as well to the united
Provinces, as to England, and that for a short time of Summer service, after
sending them back to serve the States:

The States who govern these Provinces (if they have made no change in
particulars, which at pleasure they both can and use to do), are grave men,
Counselors or The States or chief Governors.
Burgesses, vulgarly called States, chosen by the people of each City and
Town, not for a limited time, but during pleasure, and with full power; who
residing in the chief City of the Province, have care all jointly of the
provincial affairs, and each particularly of his Cities or Towns affairs:
And this Counsel must needs be distracted with diverse opinions, arising from
the diverse affairs of each Province, City and Town, and the several
commandments they receive at home. These provincial States, choose among
themselves one, two, or three Burgesses for each Province, (according to the
condition and capacity of those that are chosen: for how many soever they be,
they have but one voice for their Province at general meetings), and these
they send to reside at Hage in Holland, with like authority as they have, there
to govern the public affairs of all the united Provinces, and they are
called the general States. And as the provincial States may be diminished in
number or increased, according to the occasions of the public business, or of
any particular meeting, and may be called home by the Citizens who choose them;
so the general States chosen by them to reside at Hage, enjoy their places
upon like condition. And out of these general States certain chosen men are
made Counselors, to order the affairs of war, and to assist and direct the
General of the Army therein. Others are set over the affairs of the
Admiralty, others over the Chauncery of Brabant, and others over diverse
particular Offices, (I call them Counselors of the Chauncery of Brabant, who
manage the affairs of Brabant belonging to Holland). This must always be
understood, that the Burgesses or States of Holland, in respect of the dignity
of that Province, many ways increased and enriched above the rest, have
somewhat more authority and respect, then any other; but the wheel of the
public State is turned by the Senate of the general States residing at Hage,
yet so, as they do not take upon them to determine difficult matters, without
some diffidence, till they have the consent of their particular Cities and
Provinces, except they be made confident by the concurring of eminent men, who
can draw or lead the people to approve of their doings, or in such cases as by
long practice they fully know not unpleasing to the people. So wary are they,
notwithstanding the Provincial States from their Communities, and the general
States at Hage from them, have most ample power and absolute commission, in
express words, to do any thing they judge profitable for the Commonwealth.
And it is a remarkable thing, to observe their Art, when in difficult cases
they desire to protract time, or delude Agents, how the general States
answer, that they must first consult with the provincial States, and they
again answer, that they must first know the pleasure of their Communities,
before they can determine, and each of them has nothing more in his mouth,
then the consent of his superiors, (for so they call them). Whereas if
business were so to be dispatched, no doubt great difficulty would arise in
all particular actions. In the Senate of the general States, besides the
States themselves, Count Maurice has (as I think) a double voice, yet I never
observed him to be present at their assemblies. The Ambassador of England has
likewise his voice, and Count Solms (as I heard) because he married the widow
of Count Egmond, and for his good deserts in the service of the united
Provinces, has for himself and his heirs the like privilege. Thus the
Commonwealth in general is Aristocraticall, (that is, of the best Men), save
that the people chooses the great Senate, which rules all.

Touching the Commonwealths of particular Cities. Amsterdam is the chief City
of Holland, where the great Senate consists of thirty six chief Citizens,
whereof Commonwealths of particular Cities.
one dying, another is chosen into his place; and this Senate yearly chooses
four Consuls, who judge civil causes; and have power to appoint ten Judges of
criminal causes (vulgarly called Skout), though they be not of that Senate.
The other Cities are in like sort governed, but according to the greatness of
the City or Town, they have greater or lesser number of Senators.

The Tributes, Taxes, and Customs, of all kinds imposed by mutual consent,
(so great is the love of liberty or freedom) are very burdensome, and they
willingly bear them, though for much less exactions imposed by the King of
Spain (as they hold) contrary to right, and without consent of his Subjects,
they had the boldness to make war against a Prince of such great power. Yet
in respect of the unequal proportioning of all contributions, they are somewhat
at ods among themselves, and many times jar, so as it seemed no difficult
thing to break their concord, had not the common Enemy and the eminent danger
of Spanish revenge, together with the sweetness of freedom once tasted,
forced them to constant unity. This I dare say, that when they humbly offered
themselves vassals to the Queen of England, in the first infancy of their
Commonwealth, if her Majesty, or any other Prince whosoever, undertaking their
protection, had burdened them with half the exactions they now bear, it is
more then probable, that they would thereby have been so exasperated, as they
would have been more ready to have returned under the obedience of the King of
Spain, whose anger they had highly provoked, then to endure the yoke of such a
Protector: For each Tun of Beer (which they largely swallow), they pay into
the Exchequer six Flemmish shillings (each shilling being six stiuers), I
mean of Beer sold abroad, for they pay only four shillings for such Beer,
as men brew for the use of their private families, which frugality few or none
use, except perhaps some brew small Beer for their Families, and indeed I
doubt they would find small frugality in brewing other Beer for themselves, if
the Cellar lay open to their servants. And howsoever the Tons be of diverse
prices, according to the goodness of the Beer, namely of two, three, four,
five, or six Guldens, the Tun (though at Leyden only the Brewers may not
sell Beer of diverse prices, for fear of fraud in mixing them), yet there is
no difference of the Tribute. They have excellent fat pastures, whereof each
Aker is worth forty pound, or more to be purchased, and they pay tribute for
every head of cattle feeding therein, as two stiuers weekly for each Cow for
the Paile, the great number whereof may be coniectured, by the plenty of cheese
exported out of Holland, and the infinite quantity of cheese and butter they
spend at home, being the most common food of all the people: For Oxen, Horses,
Sheep, and other Beasts sold in market, the twelfth part at least of the price
is paid for tribute, and be they never so often by the year sold to and fro,
the new Masters still pay as much. They pay five stiuers for every bushel of
their own wheat, which they use to grind in public Mils: And since they give
tribute of half in half for food and most necessary things, commonly paying
as much for tribute as the price of the thing sold, the imposition must needs
be thought greater, laid upon foreign commodities, serving for pleasure,
pride, and luxury: besides that, these tributes are ordinary, and no doubt upon
any necessity of the Commonwealth, would be increased. French wines at
Middleburg the Staple thereof, and Rhenish wines at Dort the Staple thereof,
are sold by privilege without any imposition, but in all other places men pay
as much for the Impost, as for the wine: Only in the Camp all things for food
are sold without any imposition laid upon them: And some, but very few eminent
men, have the privilege to pay no imposition for like things of food. Each
Student in the Vniuertie, has eighty measures of wine (vulgarly called Stoup)
allowed him free from imposition, and for six barrels of Beer, only pays one
Gulden and a quarter, that is, two shillings six pence English, being
altogether free from all other tributes, which privilege the Citizens enjoy in
the name of the Students dieting with them, and no doubt the Rector and
professors of the University have greater immunity in these kinds.

One thing is hardly to be understood how these Provinces thus oppressed with
tributes, and making war against a most powerful King, yet at this time in
the heat of the war, (which uses to waste most flourishing Kingdoms, and
make Provinces desolate), had far greater riches, then any most peaceable
Country of their neighbors, or then ever themselves formerly attained in
their greatest peace and prosperity: Whether it be for that (according to the
Poet) Ingenium mala sape monent, Adversity often whets the wit, so as by war
they are grown more witty and industrious. Or for that Flanders, and Antwerp
the famous City, in former times so drew all traffic and rich Merchants to
them, as all the neighbor Provinces were thereby impouerished, all which trade
by the war, fell to Holland, most strong in shipping; or for that, the united
Provinces have such commodity by the Sea, and waters running to all Towns, and
by the strength of their cities, as in the heat of war they are free from the
enemies incursions, or any impediment of their traffic, and seem rather to
carry the war to their confines, then to have it in their bosoms. In which
point, it is not unpleasant to remember, how the Hollanders mock the Spaniards,
as if, not acquainted with the Northern Sea, and the ebbing and flowing thereof,
they thought they might at pleasure come into any haven, and lead their army
into any of those Provinces, and that when the Spaniards first entered Holland
with their Army, and they cutting the banckes of the sea drowned their Country,
the Spaniards were therewith astonished, and gave gold chains, money, and the
most precious things they had to the Country people, on condition they would
bring them out of those watery places to firm land. If any man require truer
and greater reasons of these Provinces growing rich by war, let him make
curious search thereof, for it is besides my purpose. No doubt, the frequent
Arms of the sea within land, passing by their Cities, the innumerable waters
(though for the most part standing, or little moving), which by made ditches
carry boats and barks to all their Cities, (being there more frequent then in
any other part of the World), and to all their Villages, and compass almost
all their pastures, yield no small commodity to their Commonwealth. For they
having little of their own to export, and wanting Corn, Wood, or Coals, and
many necessaries for their use, yet by this only benefit, and their singular
industry, not only most abundantly enjoy all commodities of all Nations for
their own use, but by transporting them from place to place with their own
ships (whereof they have an unspeakable number), make very great gain, being
delighted in Navigations by nature (as borne and bred in the midst of Seas and
waters), and having by war, heating their Flegmaticke humors, attained to
such skill therein, as for traffic they sail to the most remote coasts of
the world, and in process of time being grown so bold seamen, as they will
scarcely yield in this Art, to the English for many former years excelling
therein. So as their tributes imposed on Merchants commodities, must needs be
of exceeding great moment.

And not to weary my self with the curious search thereof, I will only add
for conjecture of the general, one particular related to me by credible men.
That in time when Italy suffered dearth, and was supplied with corn from these
parts, the tributes of one City Amsterdam, in one week, exceeded the sum of
ten thousand pounds sterling, whence the revenues of all tributes in all the
Havens and Cities, may be coniectured to be excessiuely great. So as adding
the impositions upon domestical things, and the great contributions paid by
the enemies subjects upon the confines in time of war (to purchase the safety
of their persons and goods, with freedom to till their grounds from the rapine
of freybooting soldiers), a man may well say, that the united Provinces are no
less able, then they have been daring, to do great things.

This Commonwealth is governed by particular laws and customs of diverse The
Laws.
places, and by the public edicts upon diverse new occasions made by the States
of the Provinces, and these wanting, by the Civil law. The particular Cities
are governed after the manner above named. And particularly at Leyden, my self
have observed the inhabitants of Villages, called by writings set upon posts in
the public streets, to have their controversies judged by the Magistrates of
the city, not at any set time of the year, but according to the occasions of
other affairs, at the Judges pleasure. High injuries and maimes of any member,
are punished by the law, which passes over lighter injuries, not giving such
ample satisfactions to the wronged even by word, as the constitutions of the
Sweitzers give; so as with them no less then in England, quarrels and
brawlings are frequent, and often break out into man-slaughters, wherein those
who will revenge themselves by force, first agree between themselves, whether
they will strike or stab; and then drawing out long knives, which they
ordinarily wear, they wound one another by course, according to their
agreement, either by slashes or stabs (which they call schneiden and stecken.)
They commonly allow money to be put out to use, and to the end poor men upon
pawnes may borrow small sums for a short time, they admit an Italian or
Lumbard (vulgarly so called) in each City, who taking a pawn, lends a gulden
for a brass coin called a doigt by the week. But this Lumbard in the French
Church there, is not admitted to receive the Communion. The pawn uses to be
worth a third part more then the money lent, and one year and a day being past
after the money is due, the usurer has the pawn to himself: but before that
time, the debtor at his pleasure may at any time have his pawn, first paying
the borrowed money, with the use to the day of payment. And the common report
then was, that the States would take this as a public Office into their own
hands, to help the poor not able to pay, by selling the pawnes to the owners
best profit.

Touching inheritance: Upon the Mothers death, the children may compel their
Father to divide his goods with them, least perhaps he should consume or waste
the same. And the wife that brought a dowry, be her husband grown never so
rich by his trade, may when she dies give, not only her dowry, but half her
husbands goods gotten in marriage, to her own Kinsmen after his death, if she
have no children by him; and if she brought no dowry, yet she has the same
right to dispose of half her husbands goods gotten in marriage, and (as is
supposed) by their mutual labor. A son may not be disinherited but upon
causes approved by the Law, for the Father is bound to give a third part of his
estate among his children, and only has power to dispose of the rest or any
part thereof in Legacies at his pleasure.

The wives of Holland buy and sell all things at home, and use to sail to
Hamburg The Wines.
and into England for exercise of traffic. I heard from credible men, that
the Citizens of Enchusen, within thirty years then past, used to marry a wife,
and put her away at the years end, if they liked her not; which barbarous
custom, Ciuility and Religion has since abolished and at Delph I did see two
examples, of men who having buried their wives, did after marry their wives
Sisters. It is no rare thing for blows to happen between man and wife, and I
credibly heard that they have slight punishments for that fault, and my self
did hear the Crier summon a man to answer the beating of his wife before the
Magistrate.

The multitude of women is far greater then of men, which I not only formerly
heard from others, but my self observed to be true, by the daily meetings of
both sexes, where a man may see sixty or more women sliding upon the ice, and
otherwise recreating themselves, with five or six or much fewer men. But the
reason thereof is not easily yielded, since we cannot say that the men are
much consumed by the Civil wars; their Army consisting altogether of
strangers, and few or no Hollanders, except some willingly served, for
otherwise they cannot be pressed by authority, but only for the defense of the
City or Town wherein they dwell: excpt these reasons thereof may be approved,
that the watery Provinces breed flegmaticke humors, which together with the
men's excessive drinking, may disable them to beget Males; or that the Women (as
I have heard some Hollanders confess) not easily finding a Husband, in respect
of this disparity of the Sexes in number, commonly live unmarried till they be
thirty years old, and as commonly take Husbands of twenty years age, which
must needs make the Women more powerful in generation. And the Women not only
take young Men to their Husbands, but those also which are most simple and
tractable: so as by the foresaid privilege of Wives to dispose goods by their
last will, and by the contracts in respect of their Dowry, (which to the same
end use to be warily drawn,) they keep their Husbands in a kind of awe, and
almost alone, without their Husbands intermedling, not only keep their shops
at home, but exercise traffic abroad. My self have heard a Wise make
answer to one asking for her Husband, that he was not at home, but had newly
asked her leave to go abroad. Nothing is more frequent, then for little
girls to insult over their brothers much bigger then they, reproving their
doings, and calling them great lubbers, whereof when I talked with some
Scholars my companions, as a fashion seeming strange to me, they were so
far from wondering thereat, as they told me, it was a common thing for Wives
to drive their Husbands and their friends out of the doors with scolding, as
if they consumed the goods wherein they had a property with their Husbands. I
should be too credulous, if I should think all Families to be sick of this
disease; and I must confess, that in few other Nations all Families are
altogether free from like accidents: but I may boldly say, that the Women of
these parts, are above all other truly taxed with this unnatural dominering
over their Husbands.

The Nobility or Gentry has long been rooted out by the people (as Iunlus
witnesses, The Gentlemen.
and experience shows) after the example of the Sweitzers, especially in
Holland and Zealand (for in Friesland they have many, and within land as
frequent Families of Gentlemen as other-where.) I could not hear of more then
some three Families of Gentlemen in Holland and Zeland (for the Lords of Nassaw
are strangers), and these Gentlemen lived after the Plebeian manner of the other
inhabitants, so as it were in vain to seek for any Order of Knighthood among
them. Neither are these Gentlemen (as those of Germany), curious to marry among
themselves; for those who come to greatest honor in this Commonwealth, are
either Advocates of the Law, or sons of Merchants. My self did once in the
high way meet a Gentleman's Wagon, to whom our Waggoner gave the way; and the
custom in Holland being, that the Wagons setting forth, give the way to all
they meet, till they have gone half the way, and after in like sort the way
is given to them, and our Wagon having then passed more then half the way,
the Plebeian Hollanders my companions were much offended with our Waggoner,
that contrary to the custom he had done that honor to the Gentlemen. The
vulgar sort so despise Gentlemen, or any superior, if he affect greatness,
as upon like occasions they prouerbially use to say, If he be rich, let him
dine twice; as if they despised rich men, of whom they stood not in need,
being content with their own, after the manner of the Italians, save that the
Italians do it out of pride, these out of clownishnesse, and affecting of
equality.

Touching capital Judgments: Where the offenses are heinous, and such as
former Capital Judgments,
ages have not known, the Judges inflict exquisite punishments and torments
upon the Malefactors. In such sort with strange torments the wicked person was
put to death, who killed the Prince of Orange with a Pistol. Thieves and
Pirates are put to death by hanging, and of all other offenders, they never
pardon Pirates upon any intercession, as destroyers of traffic, upon which
their Commonwealth and private estates depend. The manslayer is beheaded, and
buried in the same coffin with the man he killed; and if perhaps he cannot be
apprehended, but escape into some foreign parts, he may perhaps, but very
rarely, obtain pardon, if he can first be reconciled with the friends of the
man slain by him: but in case he be apprehended, they cannot, or at least use
not, to scandal Justice by pardons. But wilful murderers, according to the
circumstances of the person killed, or of the more or less wicked manner of
the act, are put to death with more or less torment, and hang in iron chains
till the bodies rot, for terror to others. Coiners of money have their bones
broken upon the wheel, a death more usual in Germany for heinous crimes: but
in all torments they commonly mitigate the severity of the Law, more then the
Germans do; for I have seen some executed in this manner, who were first
hanged, and so had no feeling of the pain. He that burns private (and much
more public) houses, and he that purposes or threatens to burn them,
though he never do the act, is himself burned by fire, with a mark upon his
head if the act were done; upon his breast if it were only purposed; or upon
his mouth, if it were only threatened. An offender escaped by flight, howsoever
he live long in foreign parts, yet if he ever return, be the distance of
time never so great, he escapes not unpunished. My self have seen a
manslayer, who having lived six years in foreign parts, and then for love
of his Country returning home, was then beheaded, as if the crime had been
newly committed. No man will apprehend any malefactor, nor hinder his flight,
but rather think it a point of humanity to help him, only the hangman and
base fellows appointed for that office, lay hold upon capital offenders, so
as very many escape by flight. Neither can any so base or poor man be found,
excepting the hangman and his said companions, who for any reward will be
hired to do the Office of an executioner, both these actions being infamous
here, as in Germany. Among the apprehenders, the chief are called Prouosts,
and they of old had power to hang vagabonds, till abusing it to revenge and
rapine, it was taken from them. Upon the rumor of any crime committed, these
men with their servants armed, are sent out into the country, to apprehend the
malefactors.

It was credibly told me, that the Emperor Charles the fifth, having suddenly
commanded a man to be hanged, who after, by an others confession of the fact,
was found guiltle, upon this error made a decrec, that no hangman should ever
live at the Hage, or nearer the court then Harlam, to the end, he being not at
hand, the Magistrate might less offend in deliberate or protracted judgments.
For as in upper Germany, so in Netherland, there is little or no distance of
time, between the offense committed, and the execution of judgment; whereas in
England, these judgments are excercised at London once in six weeks, and for
the Country, at two or four set times in the year. No man is put to death
without confession of the fact, neither do they as in Germany, force
confession by torture, but they condemn upon one witness, where probable
conjectures concur to prove the malefactor guilty.

I think (saving the judgment of the better experienced in these affairs)
that the Of their (...) in general.
military discipline of the States Army is very commendable: For since those
commonwealthes are most happy, where rewards and punishments are most justly
given, surely the States neither detain nor delay the paiments due to the
soldiers, nor leave unpunished their insolences, nor yet their wanton
injuries, either toward the subjects, or the Enemy yielding upon conditions.
In the camp all things for food are free from all impositions, so as a man may
there live more plentifully or more frugally then in any of their Cities. And
besides the soldiers pay duly given them, all sick and wounded persons are sent
to their Hospitals, vulgarly called Gaslhausen (that is, houses for Guests)
where all things for health, food, and clenlines of the body, are phisically,
plentifully, and neately ministered to them; of which kind of houses fairly
and stately built, they have one in each City. Also when they are recovered of
their sicknesses and wounds, they are presently sent back to the Camp or
their winter Garrisons. They who are maimed in the wars, and made thereby
unfit for service, have from them a Pension for life, or the value of the
Pension in ready money. On the other side they so punish the breakers of
martial discipline, as when bands of Soldiers are conducted to any service or
Garrison through the midst of their Cities or Villages, not one of them is so
hardy as to leave his rank, to do the least wrong to any passenger, or to
take so much as a chicken or crust of bread from the Subjects by force. And
while my self was in those parts, I remember that upon the giving up of a
Castle into the States hands, after Proclamation made, that no Soldier should
do the least injury to any of those who had yielded the same, a soldier
wantonly taking one of their hats away, or changing his hat with one of them,
was presently hanged up for this small insolency.

For war by land, they have no great power, (I speak particularly of the
united Their Foot and Horse.
Provinces, not of Netherland in general, which we read to have of old raised
an army of eighty thousand men). For since the subjects cannot be pressed to
the war, but when their own City or Town is besieged, and in that case
their Magistrate going before them, and leading them to the walls; and since the
number of them is very small, who willingly follow that profession, hereupon
almost all their army consisted of strangers, and long experience has
concluded mercenary Soldiers to be unfit for great Conquests. So as wise men
think for this reason, that the Common wealth of the States, is more fit, by
due observing of their leagues and amity with confederates and neighbors, to
defend their own, then ambitiously to extend their Empire by inuading others.
They have heavy Friesland Horses, more fit to endure the Enemy charging, then
to pursue him flying, (I speak not of Flanders and the other Provinces
yielding good light Horses); but all the ways and passages being fenced in
with ditches of water, they have at home less use of Horse, which makes them
commonly sell these Horses in foreign parts, using only Mares to draw their
Wagons and for other services of peace, which Mares are very beautiful and
good.

The Inhabitants of these Provinces, by nature, education, and art, are most
fit for Of their (...) power.
Navigations; and as in the exercise of all Arts, they are no less witty then
industrious, so particularly they have great skill in casting great Ordinance,
in making gunpowder, cables, ankers, and in building ships, of all which things
and whatsoever is necessary to naualll war, they have great abundance, the
matter being bought in foreign parts, but wrought by their own men at home:
So as they are most powerful at Sea, neither has any King a Navy superior or
equal to theirs, excepting only the King of England. And for conjecture of
their general power at Sea, I will be bold to add what I have credibly heard:
That one City of Amsterdam at this time had some hundred ships for the war,
(or men of war), and some four hundred ships of Merchants well armed for
defense, besides (as they said) some ten thousand Barks, or without all doubt
an incredible number.

Therefore if perhaps the united Provinces forgetting their old league with
England, and our late merit in defending their liberty, shall at any time
resolve to have war with England, (which for the good of both Nations God
forbid), then are such bloody fights at Sea like to happen as former Ages never
knew. Yet the course of those times whereof I write, gave small probability of
any such event like to happen, for many reasons combining our minds together.
First the happy amity that has been time out of mind between our Nations.
Next the bond of love on our part, toward those we have preserved from
bondage, and the like bond of their thankfulness toward us, which howsoever
ambition may neglect or despise, yet never any Nation was more obliged to
another in that kind, and so long as the memory thereof can live, it must needs
quench all malice between us. Besides, that they being not able to raise an
Army of their own men by Land, as well for want of men, as because it must
consist altogether of voluntaries, no man being bound to serve in the war,
except his Town be besieged, and his own Magistrate lead him to the walls;
they have hitherto happily used, and may ever so use, our men for soldiers,
(wherein Britany abounds above all other Nations, neither do they by much so
esteem the auxiliary bands of any other Nation as of ours). Lastly, in that
they wanting many necessaries of their own, and yet abounding in all things by
traffic, cannot long subsist without the freedom thereof; and nothing is so
powerful to diminish their wealth, and to raise civil discords among them, as
the barring of this freedom, which then seemed more easy or less difficult
to the King of England, then to any other neighbor Prince, or (I will boldly
say) to all other neighbor Princes joined together against them, (they having
strength of their own to maintain that freedom by Sea, and being able with
the only support of Britany, to defend themselves by land against all other
Enemies). For they had only three passages to Sea, one by Vlishing in Zeland,
another by Brill, upon the South-west Coast of Holland, and a third narrow
passage by the Island Fly, to the Tassell, on the North-east side of Holland,
whereof the two first were guarded by the said two strong Cities, with the
Forts belonging to them, all kept by Garrisons of English Soldiers, and the
stopping or restraining of the third, seemed less difficult to the Navy of
Britany, then to the power of any other Enemy. At this time when I passed
through these parts (of which time I write) the united Provinces much
complained of the English for taking their goods at Sea, and hindering their
free traffic: wherein they should have considered, that they caused the war
with Spain, which we bore only to second them. And if our Merchants were
forced to leave the traffic of Spain, where they had great freedom and
amity only for their sakes, how could they think it just and equal, that
they should freely supply Spain with food and necessaries for war? so as
the very commodities of England could not then be vented into Spain, but only
by Flemmish (and some few Scottish) ships and Mariners, except they desired to
make the war Eternal, by which they only grew rich, in which case our
project was more just, who for a time made war, that we might after live in
peace And whereas they then complained that not only prohibited wares carried
to prohibited places, but also other their commodities carried to friends, were
spoiled by our men of war, (which perhaps through the insolency of Captains
and Soldiers, might sometimes happen); no doubt these injuries were rare, and
never borne with by the Queen or inferior Magistrates; and they could not be
ignorant how hardly the insolency of Soldiers can be restrained by land, and
much more by sea. For all good Englishmen I may profess; that they abstaining
from prohibited traffic, no good Englishmen wished good success or impunity
to any English ships exercising piracy, especially against so near
confederates. These complaints I well remember to have been at that time
frequent in those parts, I know not how since appeased or continuing. And
because the Q. of England had disbursed much treasure for their safety, which
they were bound to repay at the end of the war, and threatened to deduct these
spoils out of the same, many then feared, lest this difference might in
process of time breed discord between England and those Provinces. Also
because the Towns and Forts given to the Queen as pledges for money
disbursed, were then kept with weak Garrisons, ouer-topped in number by the
very Citizens, it was then thought, that the States might take them by force,
if our Governors had not watchful eye upon their dessignes, and changes of
counsel. In general, good men on both sides are to wish the continuance of
Peace between England and these Provinces, by which both Commonwealths have
long had, and may still have unspeakable benefit, and that the rather, because
we never yet had war but perpetual amity together, neither can any war prove
more bloody or mischievous to either part, then that between our selves. To
conclude, happy be the makers, cursed the breakers of our peace.

FINIS.

