AN EXACT DISCOVERY OF ROMISH DOCTRINE IN THE CASE OF CONSPIRACY AND
Rebellion, by pregnant observations: Collected (not without direction from our
Superiors) out of the express dogmaticall principles of Popish Priests and
Doctors.

ISAY 29. 9. But stay your selves, and wonder; they are blind, and make you
blind. AT LONDON Imprinted by Felix Kyngston, for C. B. and E. W. and are to
be sold in Paul's Churchyard at the sign of the Swan. 1605.

TO THE SEDVCED BRETHREN WHOSOEVER, GRACE and peace from God the Father, and
from our Lord Jesus Christ.
Marvel not (beloved brethren) that I salute you in the name of brotherhood,
whom I acknowledge seduced: It pleased our Savior to call some Luke 15.
Sheep, when as yet they were wandering: and his Apostle names them Gal. 3. 1.
Brethren, whom he esteemed bewitched. With whom give me rather leave to
marvel in your behalf, Gal. 1. 6.
Why are you so easily removed from the Gospel of Christ? and in the earnest
desire of your blessed conversion, to expostulate in the same tenor: Gal. 3. 1.
Who has bewitched you, that you should not obey the truth, in whom Jesus
Christ was described (that is, lively preached) among you? It is not then any
Who, who may either prejudice a truth, or privilege an error: because, if
truth; then Do as they say, although (...) be a Pharisie: If any other
doctrine, not received from Christ, then Gal. 1. 8.
Hold him ^^cursed, although the Minister be an Gal. 1. 8.
Angel. And seeing (brethren) it has pleased almighty God (who brings
light out of darkness, and life out of death) from this late sinful attempt, as
namelesse for vglines, as matchless for example, to draw this inspiration of
grace, that you, through the detestation of their practices are now brought to
a suspicion of their enchantments: I thought it therefore my bounden duty to
discover unto you positions and practices of your Priests, whereby, as with
tongues and hands, they conspire together in like mischief: nothing doubting,
but when you shall perceive the damnablenes of their doctrine, you will
Christianlie avoid the danger of their charm. Now then let us (beloved)
jointly examine these spirits; and not, till in the end of this tract, take our
mutual farewell.

A PLAIN DISCOVERY OF THE REBELLIOVS DOCTRINE OF THE Romish Church.
PRegnant Observations, directly proouing Romish schools to be Seminaries of
Rebellions in all Protestants government: and Popish priests, as also their
adherents, to be worthily executed for seditious and traitorous persons, proved
by many Reasons, collected from their own public positions and practices.

The first Reason.
Their general Assumption, whereupon all their rebellious positions are
f^unded, is this, that All Protestants are Heretics; and Excommunicate. Now
then we may argue, first:

They who by their slanderous doctrine make all Protestants (in their common
censure Heretics) so odious, as unworthy of any Civil, or natural
society, must necessarily be judged Seditious, and intolerable amongst the
Protestants: But the Romish Seminaries and Jesuits do brand all Protestants
with detestable crimes; thereby to deny them all civil or natural respects.
Ergo.

The Minor has two parts: Crimes slanderouslie objected. All humane society
detracted: both proved.


The first part proved.
FIrst a Stranger says, that Protestants articulum omnino nullum tenent
Symboli Apostolici. Andraeas Iurgiwicius, lib. tit. Euangel. quinti Professores.
Protestants believe not one Article of the Apostles Greede. Our Countriman more
strangely: Wright in his late book of Articles.
Protestants have no faith, no religion, no Christ; but are mere Infidels. The
Master of the Seminary at Rhemes writes and in^ituleth his book: En Caluini
Turcismum, and plane Mahometismum, etc. Reinaldus in libro, qui inscribitur,
Caluino^turcismus.
Caluinish-Turcisme, and plain Mahometisme. Which book Deane Gifford does no
less impudently than impotently m^^ntaine, saying, that Caluini
pseudo-Euangelium Alcorane esse in nullo melius; in multis tetrius and
flagitiosius. D. Giffordus Decan. D. Petri, praef. in lib. D. Reinaldi.
Caluins doctrine is worse than the Alcoran of the Turks. The Jesuit
Possiuinus with the same spirit of blasphemy does c^mpile a book, Institui
Protestantium Atheismos explicare, etc. Possiuinus Ies* libello de Atheismis
Protest.
wherein he calls Protestants doctrines, concerning Christ, to be mere
Atheismes. And all to this end, that all humane society with Protestants may
be utterly dissolved.

The second part proved: as first the society in Neighbors.
Theft.
Haereticis licitum est auserri quae habent, melius tamen est, quod autoritate
Iudicis fiat. Decretum P^pale apud Great. cause. 15. q. glossa.
Neighbors, if Heretics, may lawfully be spoiled of their goods (by force)
though it be better to be taken from them by authority.

2. Jn Parishioners.
Sacrilege.
Where the question is concerning paying of Tithes* it is resolved: Non est
dubium, quin populus Catholicus iure possit haeretic^s Pastores deci^^s
defraud^re. Alanus Cardinalis and Pa^sonus.
Parishioners may lawfully defraude Protestant Ministers of their tithes.

3. Jn Debtors, and whosoever have any matter of trust committed unto them.
Perfidie.
Is apud quem Haereticus aliquid deposuerit, non tenebitur post manifestam
haeresin, rem depositam illi reddere. Simancha Episc. Pacens. Instit. Cath.
tit. 46. sect. 73.
Such are not bound to restore that which they have received, or to satisfy
their Creditors, who are Heretics. Non tenentur reddere rem verbis
contractam. Tolletus Ies. Instruct. Sacerd. de Excom.
They are not bound hereunto. Si iurani me soluturum alicui pecuniam, qui
excommunicatur, non teneor exsoluere; quia qualiter cunque possumus, debemus
vexare malos, vt cessent a malo. Apud Gratian. cause. 15. q. 6. glossa.
This is an ancient Decree.

4. Jn Servants.
Peri^rie.
Cust^des arcium et ^aeteri vassalli eadem Constitutione liberati sunt a
vinculo sacramenti, quo dominis fidelitatem promiserant. Simancha Episc. quo
supra, sect. 74.
Also Keepers of Forts, and all other vassals and slaves are freed from the oath
of subjection to their Lords.

5. Jn VViues.
A kind of disloyalty.
Quinetiam Vxor Catholica viro Haeretico debitum reddere non tenetur. Simancha
Pacens. Episc. Instit. Greg. 13o. dicatis, and eiusdem iussu Romae impressis.
Wives are not bound to render due benevolence unto their husbands, if
heretics.

6. Jn Parents.
Unkindness.
Pater, qui filium habet haereticum, qui conuerti non velit, si Pater liber and
sui iuris esset ad disponendum de bonis suis vt vellet, tenetur exhaereditare
filium talem. Huc adiunge. Parents mortaliter peccant tradendo filias
matrimonio Haereticis. Card. Alanus.
The father must disinherit his son, if he will be a Protestant.

7. Jn Children.
Disobedience to Parents.
Sacerdos in Angliam reuersus, and rogatus de Parentibus, qui sunt haeretici,
respondere possit and veraciter negare, eos sibi esse Parents; intelligendo
quales habere debet: quia Patres solent re^puere filios propter Religionem, and
filij Parents. Alanus, and Parsonus.
A Priest returning into England, if his father be a Protestant, he may deny
him to be his father: meaning that he is not such an one, as he ought to
acknowledge his father.

Nam propter haeresin Patris filij sunt sui iuris. Simancha quo supra, tit. 46.
sect. 74.
For by the heresy of the father the child is freed from obedience.

8. Jn all Kindred.
The professed bloody Massacre against the Protestants, without distinction of
Sex or Kindred.
Haeretici filij vel Consanguinei non dicuntur: sed, iuxta legem, Sit manus tua
super res, vt fundas sanguinem ipsorum. Apud Great. gloss. in Decret. lib. 5. ex
decreto Greg. 9. cause. 23. q. 8. cap. legi.
Heretics may not be termed either Children or Kindred; but according to the
old law, Thy hand must be against them to spill their blood.

9. Jn Natives.
Si Ciuitas tota, vel mayor pars sit haeretica, potest ille negare hanc suam
esse patriam: intelligendo, quod haereticam non habeat loco patria. Card. Alan.
and Parsonus.
If any find his native City to be most part infected with heresy, he may
deny it to be his Country.

Finally, by Iuxta Constitutiones Gregorij 9. Haereticus priuatur omni dominio,
naturali, civilly, politico. Simancha Inst. tit. 46. sect 74.
Pope Gregory his Constitutions: By heresy a man is deprived of all his
jurisdiction, whether natural, civil or politic. So that the tenor of the
oath of the Leaguers in France is this: Si vnquam ad haereticorum parts
deflexero, si amicitiam, si foedus, si matrimonium cum ^is faxo, si opem
fidemue d^, si A^e, si Vale dixero, illa die fulmine ferito. Lodouicus
d'Orleance, part. 29.
If ever I make marriage, use traffic, yield aid, hold friendship, give
credence unto heretics, or once salute them, then let God confound me. Shall
we call this Religion which dissolueth the duty of Servants, Subjects, De^t^s,
and strangleth the vital spirits of humane society; and by not
acknowledgement of natural duties of Wedlock, natural Parents; natural
Children, natural Country, does bowell up nature, as it were, and deprive men
of humanity it self? O Babylon (...) this in all particulars were needless;
one kind may satisfy.

Practice.
The Papists in France did libell against Henricum 3. haereticum, homicidam,
etc. Lib. de Abdicat. Henr. 3.
Henry the 3. as heretical; a manslayer: so likewise against this Henry the 4.
calling him a Henricum 4. Culinarem canem, pogonatum Iulianum, bipedum
nequissimum, Apostatam, foetidum Satanae stercus. Ludouicus d'Orleance.
Kitchin-dogge, long-bearded Julian, most heathenish Apostate, and the very
excrement of Satan. No less was the ranckor of our Cardinal Poole against his
Sovereign. Si Caesarem intellexerim cum omni sua class aduersus Turcam cursum
d^rigere, ac si iam Hellesp^nti fa^ces tenentem conspicerem, nunquam
acquiescerem donec conuenirem, and in haec verba apud eum prorumperem: Caesar,
quo paras? Quid cogitas? Si amor reip. Christianae te ma^et vt regem Turcarum
antiquum Christiani nominis hostem aggrediare, annon vnde maius periculum Reip.
Christianae imminet, and vbi nouus hostis viget, multo quam Turca infestior, eo
potius cursum conuertere oportet? viz. in Angliam, cuius semen Adulterinum vix
a Turcic internasci possit? Card. Poole ad Henr. 8. pro unit. Eccles. defens.
lib. 3. page 384.
Desirous to divert the Emperors forces from the Paganes, and to enforce them
upon Henry the 8. as upon an enemy more pernicious than the Turk.

The second Reason.
Whosoever do profess any Civil power sovereign over Kings, whether
directly, or indirectly, are to be accounted seditious: But all popish priests
do profess a double prerogative over all Kings: Democraticall, and
Monarchical; namely both of people, and Pope: both which are proved by the
positions.

First of the People.
Parsons: Parsons in his Dol^^an. page 13. and page 199. ^
The Commonwealth has authority to choose a King: and to limit him laws at
their pleasure.The French Jesuit shows a reason: Maiesta^ regni est in
populo, potius quam in persona Regis. les. libro de Iusta abdicat. page 36.
For majesty (says he is rather seated in the kingdom, than in the King. Like
to Stapleton his gloss: Non populus in Principum gratiam factus; sed Principes
in populi Commoda creati. Didymus page 261. Stapleton.
People are not ordained for the Prince: but the Prince for the people. But more
finely Reinalds; Rex humana Creatura est, quia ab hominibus constituta.
Reinaldus de Iusta Auto^^t. page 8.
A King is but a creature of man's creation.

Secondly the Pope.
To avouch his preeminence, these men go beyond the Moon: as first Bozius,
Pontificem esse caput totius Ecclesiae, and habere potestatem etiam circa omnia
temporalis, probamus ex Theologis, and Canonistis. Bozius de Eccl. Monarch.
Tempor. Epist. dedicat. ad Clementem 8. Pontif.
The Pope the head of the Church, has power in all temporal causes and states.
A new Article of faith.
Habet, sed tamen indirecte in ordine ad bonum spirituale. Bella^m. libr. 5. de
Pontif. Romans cap. 6. and 7.
This is true (says Bellarmine) understood indirectly, as it may avail for the
spiritual good. In brief, Stepleton in his English Counterblast against
Master Horn.
This supremacy of the Pope (says Stapleton) is a doctrine to be holden of all
Christians upon pain of damnation, and separation from the Church of God. We
demand how far th^se pretended powers may extend; and hereupon we argue.

The third Reason.
Whosoever upon any pretended supremacy, whether of Pope, or people, d^e deny
the necessary right of Election, or of succession of Protestant Princes; are
to be holden amongst all Protestants, seditious: but all popish priests do
utterly abolish the title of succession in all Protestant Princes, by pretended
prerogative of Pope and people. Ergo. The Minor proved by their positions.

In Election.
1. The Romish Cardinal: Nulla est Imperatoris, aut Regis Electio, si, cum
eligitur, excommunicatus sit. Tolletus Ies. and Card. lib. 1. instruct. cap.
13. Aduert. autem.
There is no election, whether of King, or Emperor, of any force, if he that is
elect (such they esteem all Protestants) be excommunicate.

In Succession.
They suggest a foreign Invasion.
Reinalds. (...) ad regna Christianorum mai^^ est in religione, (...) in
success^^^e: maius in vltione haeresis (loquitur de Protesta^tibus) quam in
Cognatione sanguinis. Debent igitur Christiani omnem tali spem praescindere, ne
ad eam ce^sitatem aspiret. Reignaldus Anglus in suo Rosaeus page 649. and page
670.
The right of Kings Christian must depend rather upon their religion, than upon
order of succession: and therefore all Christians are bound to cut off all
hope, least that any such (speaking of Protestants) may aspire to the Throne.
Qui contra facit, deum homini postponere, carnem spiritui anteponere dicendus
est. Stapletonus in suo Didym. page 122.
Otherwise (says Stapleton) what do people else but even prefer man before
God? A professed invasion.
Hereupon does Simancha conclude, that Regnum Haeretici defuncti ad filium
Catholicum pertinet; quod si filius and consanguinei eius haeretici fuerint,
Regnum Catholicum possit Regem Orthodoxum eligere: si vero Regnum haereticum
fuerit, Electio Regis Catholici ad summum Pontificem pertinet: sed and Regnum
illud possit a Catholicis occupari. Simancha Instit. Cath. tit. 46. sect. 75.
the kingdom, of an Heretic departed, does lineally descend upon his son:
but if the son in the race royal be heretical, the Catholic Commonweal
may choose a Catholic Prince: but if also the kingdom be heretical, then the
choice of the King belongs to the Pope: and so the kingdom may be taken by
Catholics. And least peradventure any should consent to the lawful
succession: Father Parsons does pronounce sentence; Parsons in his Do^^an. page
^16.
Whosoever shall consent to the succession of a Protestant, is a most grievous
and damnable sinner. Thus far of the position. Now behold their

Practice.
1. In France. Reinalds does forewarne the French. Vultis in Regno Galliae
Christianissim^ Regem Proclamare Nauarraeum Caluinistam? Eadem opera hominibus
imperare iubetis canem; Templum Dei vi^entis prostituitis Satanae, and in
Vineam domini immittitis truculentum aprum, qui eum vastet and depascatur.
Reignaldus in suo Rosaeus page 466.
Will ye proclaim Navarre a Caluinist, King of the most Christian kingdom of
France? What is this else, than to advance a dog to be sovereign over men?
Illinc clament, viue Rex, quem ne salutare possint, nec in d^mum suam recipere?
Ibidem page 476.
Shall Catholics pray God save that King, whom they may not admit into their
houses? Dicit sortassis Nauarraeus, ego saniorem Religionem induco, sed hoc ad
rem nullo modo pertinet, tenetur enim Religionem Romanam defendere. Creswellus
in suo Philopater.
For suppose (says Father Creswell) that he profess to bring in a more sound
religion; what is this to the purpose? he is bound to defend the Romish faith.
From France we will return home, where Father Parsons busieth himself to
disable the title of succession of our most dread Sovereign King James,
Parsons in his book called a Conference concerning the next succession of the
Crown of England.
with intent to advance the Infanta of Spain thereunto. Thus much of
Successors: now of possessors.

The fourth Reason.
When the King is established in his Throne by common consent of the kingdom;
whosoever shall manacle the hands of his subjects, detracting all obedience,
may justly by order of law be challenged and condemned for a disordered and
rebellious person. But all popish priests do dissolve the oath of obedience to
all Protestant governors. Ergo. The Minor proved by

Their Positions.
First, one of their Bishops resolves, that Quam primum Reges Christiani facti
sunt haeretici, protenus eius subiecti ab eorum dominio liberantur. Simancha
Episc. Inst. tit. 23. sect. 11.
As soon as a Christian King becomes heretical, forthwith people are freed
from subjection.

Secondly, their Cardinal: Durante excommunicatione qui obnoxij erant vinculo
fidelitatis vel iuramenti, tali vinculo liberabuntur. Tolletus Card. Instruct.
Sacerd. libr. 1. cap. 13.
As long as the Prince continues excommunicate, the subject is freed from the
oath of subjection. By whom are they freed? Non videtur negandum posse Romans
Pontificem se and alios soluere a (...) religione and lege, modo iusta causa
subsit. Azotius Iesuita Inst. mor. cap. 15.. sexto quaeritur.
By the Pope (says the Jesuit) who upon just cause has power to absolve from
oaths both himself and all others. Sometime the Prince is personally
excommunicate: what then? Postquam per Pontificem (nominatim) excommunicatur,
extunc Vasalli ab eius fidelitate denunciantur absoluti: and terra eius
exponitur Catholicis occupanda, qui eam, exterminatis Haereticis, absque vllae
contradictione possideant. Massouius Iuris^ons. de maiestate. Milit. Eccl. par.
2. libr. 4. de Imperijs page 676.
Then (says their Lawyer) subjects are freed from their allegiance: and all his
heretical assistants to be rooted out, and their land to be exposed to be
possessed of (Strangers) Catholics. But how if he be not excommunicate by
name? Yea, what though not excommunicate? Cum est crimen notorium nulla est
opus declaratione sententiae excommunicationis. Panormitan. cap. cum in homine
extra de iudicijs.
If (says another) his heresy be publicly known, there needs no
pronunciation of the sentence of excommunication. Crimen haeresis, si sit
notorium, vt nulla possit tergiuersatione celari; etiam ante iudi^is
sententiam; incurritur (ex part) poena praedicta: nim^rum eatenus, vt subditi
licite poss^^t tali domino negare obsequium. Valent. Ies. tom. 3. in Thom.
disp. 1. q. 12. punct. 2. page 463.. Nunc.
So that (says the Jesuit) subjects may lawfully deny him obedience. How so?
In hoc articul^ sunt Felinus and Caietanus, and communt^r sententia apud
discipulos D. Thomae; and probant, quia in hac causa adest semper voluntas
interpretati^^ Pontificis, qui obtinet vim sententiae atque euidentia facti
habet vim sententiae. Bannes in 2. 2. q. 12. Act. 2. conclus. 2.
For the evidence of the crime (says their whole School) does infer a
sentence of condemnation, because (as the more common opinion defines) there
must we understand the Pope his will is to have him excommunicate, whom upon
the knowledge of his fault he would excommunicate. Say Father Creswell is this
true? Hoc vniuersa Theologorum and iurisconsultorum schola tenent, and est
certum, and de fide. Creswellus Ies. in suo Philopater, page 194.
It is certain, and of faith avouched by the universal voice of Schools.
Satisfy us yet in one question more: Suppose that the Protestant Prince have a
just quarrel: what then? In the copy of a letter sent by Cardinal Allen to
Sit William Stanley. page 10.
No war can be lawfully denounced or waged by the Queen; (being excommunicate
by name) though otherwise in it self it were most just: because her power is
unlawful. Thus far of the Positions.

Practice.
First Pope Gregory the 7. alias Hildebrand, begins his Pageant: Nos eos,
qui excommunicatis fidelitate and sacramento constrictisunt, Apostolica
autoritate tur amento absol^imus. Gregor. 7. Pontifex apud Great. cans. 15. qu.
6.
We by Apostolical authority do absolve al from their oaths, which they have
given to persons excommunicate. And another Gregory uses the like tenor: Nos
excommunicamus vniuersos haereticos, vt absolutos se nouerint omni fidelitatis
debito, qui ijs iur amento tenebantur astricti. Greg. 9. Pont. lib. 5. Decret.
tit. 7. cap. 5. glossa.
We absolve etc. in the same case. Lastly, Pius Quintus their successor in
place; but superior in malice: Volum^s and iubemus etc. and absoluimus
subditos vinculo iuramenti, quo Reginae Elizabethae constricti tenebantur. Pius
5. Pontifex in Bulla.
We command all subjects (says he, etc.) and absolve them from the faith they
have plight with Elizabeth their Queen.

We have already understood how they forbid obedience to Kings. Now will we
examine how they also enforce violence: and in this case we argue thus:

The fifth Reason.
Whosoever suggesteth a doctrine of forcible deposing of Princes from their
Thrones, are therein manifestly rebellious: But all Popish priests defend
violent deposing of Kings and Emperors. Ergo.

Their positions.
Costerus: Pe^es Romanos Pontifices semper fuit potestas ad tollend^ incommoda
Ecclesiae, and damna animarum; Reges Regnis, and Imperatores imperijs priuandi.
Costerus Ies. Apolog. pro part. 1. Enchirid. page 64.
This power (says he) of deposing Kings of their Crowns, and Emperors of
their dignities in behalf of the good of the Church, was always peculiar to
the Pope: Non enim minus autoritatis a Christo collatum est Vicario suo, ad
^uium tutelam and commodum, quam a villi^o datur Mercenario, qui pecora pascit.
Ibidem page 64.
Who has no less authority, as Christ's Vicar over Christians, than the
hireling has over his beasts: Depositio Imperatoris ex Iusta causa pertinet ad
summum Pontificem: quia Imperator est tanquam Minister summi Pontificis gladiu^
iurisdictionis temporalis ad nutum summi Pontificis exercens. Molina Ies.
Tract. 2. de Iustitia, disputat. 29. Ad secundum page 149.
So the Pope has authority over the Emperor (says Molina) because the
Emperor is but the Popes minister, and is to use his temporal sword only at
his beck. But what if Kings will not inthrall themselves to the Popes
authority? Non licet Christianis tolerare Regem haereticum, si conetur
pertrahere subditos ad suam haeresin. Bellarminus Ies. lib. 5. de Romans Pont.
cap. 6. 7. and 4.
It is not lawful for Christians (says the Cardinal) to tolerate any King,
who draws his subjects unto heresy: Sed debent subditi operam dare, vt in
eius locum alius quampri^um surrogetur. Sanderus Theol. professor. de visib.
monarch. libr. 2. cap. 4.. Ius autem page 70.
But subjects ought (says Saunders) to endeavor to set up another in his place.
Debent illum, tanquam Christi hostem, ex hominum christianorum dominatu
eijcere: quae est virorum doctiss. indubitata sententia, doctrinae Apostolicae
confermis. Creswellus Ies. in suo Philopater. page 194.
Yea they ought (says Creswell) to expel him out of his kingdom, as the
enemy of Christ. An undoubted doctrine among the learned, and agreeable to
Apostolical truth. Yea which is more: Etiamsi pontifex toleraret regem
Apostatam, tamen Resp. Christiana possit illu^ pellere e regno; quoniam
Pontifex sine ratione permittit illum impunitum. Domin. Bannes in Tho. 22. 22.
quaest. 12. art. 2.
Although the Pope (says Bannes) should tolerate an heretical King; yet may
the Commonwealth remove him. And yet behold a greater mystery of this
iniquity than all these: for suppose that the King deposed shall be willing to
be reconciled to the Church: Nec ius hoc recuperabunt, quamuis postea
reconcilientur Ecclesiae. Simancha Inst. Cath. tit. 33. sect. 11*
Yet notwithstanding (says Simancha) he may not recover his Crown. Let us now
see this family of Corah.

Practice.
We will omit their Henry's, Fredericks, Otho's, and like Emperors and Kings
of former times: call but to mind that which has been visible in our days,
the late Henry of France, concerning whom their own Prophet has published a
Treatise, the scope thereof is this: Henricum dignitate regia excidisse,
Gallosque secura conscientia in eum, vt publicae fidei violatorem, bellasse.
Liber de Iusta Abdicat. Hen. 3. page 370.
The French have with good conscience borne arms against King Henry the 3. and
deprived him of his Crown. Return home, there we see a Comet. The Rebel
O-neele is up in arms against his Queen: the College of Sal^man bring pitch
to quench this flame, and resolve thus: Eos omnes Catholicos peccare
mortaliter, qui Anglorum castra contra Hugonem O-neele sequuntur; nec posse eos
aternam salutem consequi, nec ab vllo Sacerdote a peccatis absolui, priusquam
resipiscant, and castra Anglorum deserant. Determinatio Salamanae.
Whatsoever Catholics shall not forsake the defense of the English, and follow
the O-neele, does sin mortally, and cannot obtain life everlasting, except he
desist. Shall we think that other priests can have more loyal spirits?
Impossible; as long as they receive their breath from that Master, who
commends the former positions against the foresaid King of France. Theologi
illi fecerunt quod consultorum, Confessarierum, Doctorum fuit. Xistus Quintus
Papa, vt habetur lib. de Iusta Abdicat. Hen. 3. page 370.
Those Divines (says Pope Xistus) have done the parts of good Lawyers,
Confessors, and Doctors. His predecessor Pope Pius against our late Sovereign:
Volumus and inbemus vt aduersus Elizabetham Angliae Reginam subdui arma
capessant. Bull^ Pij Quinti Pont. Max.
We command the subjects of England to take arms against Elizabeth their
Queen. Hitherto has been manifested only their violence against the
dignities of Princes: now hear of their violating of their sacred persons in
conspiring their deaths.

The sixth Reason.
Whosoever does intend, design, or practice the murder of Princes, must
necessarily be holden for desperate Traitors: But all Popish priests are
guilty in some of these kinds. Ergo.

The Minor proved by their Positions.
They profess all, that it is lawful to take arms against their Kings, as we
have proved: from whence we may argue against them, as he against a
seditious one; Cicero orat. pro Ligaria.
Quis sensus armorum? What other meaning can arms have, but only blood? But
not to dispute from our suppositions, but their positions, by these degrees.
First the French Defense says, that Tyrannum occidere honestum est, quod
cuiuis impune facere permittitur, quod ex communi consens^ dico. Libr. de iusta
Abdicat. Henr. 3. page 262. and 270.
Any man may lawfully murder a Tyrant: which I defend (says he) by common
consent. Now Facile constat eum, qui quamcunque tu^tur haeresin, apud
Christianos non minus proprie perfecteque tyrannum effici; quam qui apud
Philosophos, spreta ci^ium conseruatione, omnia in republica stupris, rapinis,
and hominum caedibus implet. Reinaldus in suo Ros. page 157.
It is evident (says our Reinolds) that every heretic Prince is most properly
and perfectly a Tyrant. Which is supposed by the Spanish Jesuit; speaking of
this point, Vita priuari possint, tum multo magis omnibus alijs bonis, atque
adeo etiam praelatione in alios. Greg. Valent. Tom. 3. disp. 1. q. 11. punct. 2.
That if (says he) they may be bereaved of their lives, then much more of
their livings and renownes. And, which is the height of fury: Imo grauiori
poena digni sunt Principes haeretici, quam priuati homines; (...) igitur and
merito Scythae regem suum Scylaen occiderunt, propter externos ritus, quia in
Bacchanalibus sacris initiatus erat. Simancha Inst. Cath. tit. 23. Sect. 12.
and 13.
Heretical Kings (says Simancha) deserve more grievous punishment than private
men: therefore the Scythians (as he well deserved) did put to death their King
Scylen, for violating their Bacchanals. Scythia a most barbarous nation is the
fittest glass that these priests can find to look their faces in. Well, show
us then your Scythian and Heathenish practices.

Practice.
Let us travel (but in your thoughts) into India, Arnoldus in Synodo
Parisiensi omnem tyrannidem Hispanorum apud Indos solis Iesuitis ascribit.
Gallobelgicus tom. 2. lib. 10.
where (as your Arnoldus in his public Oration in the University of Paris did
contest) the general clamor of the poor people was, that Jesuits were the
causes of all tyranny which was exercised amongst them. Pass homeward through
Germany; there we see Rodolphus C^mes contra Henricum 4. (fulmine Gregorij
Pontificis percussum) bellum gessit, etc. Abbas Vrspurgensis, Cranzius, and
alij in suis Chronicis.
Duke Rodolph persecuting the Emperor Henry his King by force of arms, through
instigation of the Pope. From thence we come to France; where Clemens the
Monk, as a bloody parricide, did murder Henry his King. Lastly, to arrive at
home, where after the Bull of Pius Quintus few years passed without such
desperate attempts against their Sovereign: that Bull bellowing thus, Iubemus
vt aduersus Reginam Angliae subditi arma capessant. Bulla Pij Quinti.
We will and command subjects to take arms against their Queen. Which breath
possessed all those late conspirators: Arden, Someruile, Parry, Cullen, Squire,
Lopez, with others, all by instigation of priests sought the death of our and
their Sovereign. And now at this present, behold, and be astonished. A furnace
provided to consume at once, not only the King, but also (because an absolute
state assembled) the whole kingdom. Durst these Inginers do any such thing
without direction from their priests? First, they conspire by oath under the
seal of the (here is a priest) Sacrament. Secondly, he that was to put fire to
it runs once and again to the Seminary at Doway, doubtless to consult
with that priestly Oracle. Thirdly, he will not bewray his accomplices, except he
may be warranted by a priest. And that this kind of act is their priestly
function, will appear in the subsequents.

The seventh Reason.
Seeing, Nihil interest faueas ne sceleri, an illud facias. Seneca.
It is in a manner all one to commit a villainy, and to commend it: We may
argue, that whosoever shall justify acts of treasons, and parricides, are not
vnguiltie of the same crimes: But all priests do justify such heinous
parricides. Ergo.

The Minor proved by their positions practical.
The famous Cardinal and public Reader in Rome says: Multi Pontifices
Principes multos autoritate su^ regia merito priuarunt, vt Leonem 3. Fredericum
1. Othonem 5. Childericum regem Franciae. Card. Bellarmin. lib. 5. de Romans
pont. cap. 6. and. 7.
Many Popes have justly deposed many Princes. Our Countrymen In the copy of his
letter to Sir William Stanley. pa. 35*
Cardinal Allen, Reinaldus in suo Rosaeus cap. 2.
Reinalds, In his Dolman. part. 1. page 62.
Parsons, inciting subjects to arms against their prince, do persuade by
examples merely rebellious: as resisting of King John, of Edward the 2. of
Richard the 2. of Henry the 6. as presidents to be followed. The Author of the
book of Gratias agimus Deo immortali, qui operis huius fructum (nimitum, per
parricidium Monachi) tam been anteuerterit. Lib. de iusta abdicat. Henr. 3.
Deposing Henry King of France, does sing a In his Dolman. part. 1. page 62.
Gaudeamus for his death. And again, Allen approves the perfidious rendering
up of In his letter to Sir William Stanley, Anno 1587.
Douentore; and incourageth the English malcontents to join their forces with
A book entitled, An admonition to the Nobility and people of England. The
inscription: Gul^helmus mise^atione diuina S. R. E. Tituli S. Martini in
montibus Cardinali^, C^nctis ^egnt Angli^e and H^ber^ae Pr^teribus.
the Spanish Invasion. So the College of the Jesuits at Salamane approved the
insurrection of See above Reason 6. li^* ^.
Tyrene. And do not the most of that Sect canonize in their conceits all such
popish ones, as have been executed for manifest treasons?

An example of a notable patron of high treason.
Xisti Quinti Pont. Maximi de Henrici tertij morte Oration habita in Consistorio
Patrum. 2. Septembris, Anno Dom. 1589.
Xistus Quintus makes a public Oration in his Consistory of Cardinals: the
subject matter he shows is this: Mortuus est Rex Francorum per manus Monachi.
Page 3.
The King of France is slain, by the hand of a Monk. And what of this? Rarum,
insigne, memorabile facinus.
This (says he) is a notable, rare, and memorable act. But why? Occidit
Monachus regem non pictum aut fictum in charta, aut pariete, sed regem
Francorum in medio exercitus.
Because he slew not (says he) a King painted in paper, or graven in stone, but
the King of France, in the midst of his host. Is it a wonder any should
wonder that a Monk could murder a mortal King? seeing popish history do
record, that Hadrianus Pontifex excommunicationem Henrico 2. denuncians, ipse a
deo maledictus, a musca suff^catus est. Nauclerus generat. 139.
Pope Hadrian being guilty of the like seditious practice against the Emperor
Henry the 2. was choked with a fly. Nay but if the Monk had killed a painted
image, that had been an act far more memorable, and less intolerable:
notwithstanding no fact is good, because great; but therefore great, because
good. Say then what is to be thought of the worthiness of the fact? Facinus non
sine Dei Opt. Max. particulari prouidentia and dispositione: (page 5.) non sine
expressa eius voluntate, (page 4.) and succursu perpetratum.
It was a fact done by y^ admirable providence, will, and succor of almighty
God. How? by Gods will counselling and approving it? Nota quam insignis est
Historia illa Sanctae Mulieris Judith, quae vt obsessam ciuitatem suam, and
populum Dei liberaret, coepit consilium, Deoque sine controuersia suggerente,
de interimendo Holopherne, hostilis exercitus principe, quod and perfecit, etc.
page 8.
Holy Judith is famous (says he) for the slaying of Holophernes, which she did
not without the suggestion of Gods spirit. Hic vero Religiosus aggressus est,
and confecit rem l^nge maiorem, non fine Dei concursu. Page 10.
But this religious man has done a far more marvelous work. O marvelous
Religion! yet so it is in this sin of parricide, where A Monk does murder
his King. The best word the Pope affoordeth the murdered, is, Rex infoelix,
and in peccato mortuus. Page 3. and page 9.
An unhappy King, and one perishing in his sin. The worst he ^oth bestow upon
the murderer, is, Vir Religiosus. Page 9. and 10.
Religious man. And thus in not condemning, but rather commending one traitor,
he has made up two. Lastly, this Henry (a note very material) was a Papist;
only he favored the Protestants, and especially Prince Navarre (because a
Protestant) excommunicate. By this Pope, this was his crime, upon which ensued,
This fact (to paraphrase truly of the Popes words) rare for the attempt;
notable for the wickedness; memorable for the shame of the Sect.

The eighth Reason.
Those Snakes that do naturally sting, as soon as they get warmth, may not be
harbored in the bosom of the Commonwealth: But all popish priests profess
rebellions, as soon as they can presume of their strength: Ergo, etc. The
Minor proved by*

Their Positions.
Bannes maintains this as a necessary parenthesis: Sit haec tertia
Conclusio: vbi euidens ^dest notitia criminis, ante declaratoriam pontificis
sententiam licet (si modo vires ei suppetunt) Regem de ponere. Dominicus Bannes
in Thom. 2^. 2^. q. 12. art. 2.
Subjects before sentence of excommunication (if they have sufficient force) may
then depose their King. This Father Creswell adds as a wary caution: Sit
haec Cautio adhibenda, vt* vires habeant ad hoc idoneas subditi: alioqui in
Religionis Catholicae praeiudicium cederet. Creswell. in ^uo Philopater, page
198. and 199.
Let subjects take heed (says he) that they have competent strength in such
case: otherwise it may prejudice the Catholic cause. And least any taking an
Antidote against their poison, should object the condition of the Church of
Christ primitive, and of the glorious Christians in those times, who intended
not killing of Kings the enemies of the Gospel; but to be willingly killed for
the profession of the holy faith: mark with what intemperate mortar these men
daube up the consciences of Christians, Quasi vero eadem instituendae ecclesiae
ratio atque institutae esse credenda fit; add quod id tum non lic^it, dum
impi^rum multitudo superior esses: sed neque illi Christum professi erant, vt
cogi in verbae eius mortis supplicio possent; sed tum demum, scilicet, id datum
est, cum impletum fuit id prophetae Esa. 44.
Reges erunt nutriti; tui: and in quae temporae venimus. Lib. de Iusta abdic.
Regis Henrici 3. page 278.
Then (says the French Defense) the Christians did only suffer, because the
Church was not yet perfect, and because their enemies were more in number.
Again, Illud non mo^eat quemquam, id landabile est; cum resistere nequeast.
Lib. de Iusta abd. page 371.
It is commendable to suffer when thou can not resist. Which is the last*
miserable refuge of their desperate cause. Whereunto notwithstanding their
grand Cardinal is glad to betake himself. Quod si Christiani ^lim non
deposuerunt Di^^letianum, Iulianum Valentem, id fuit quia deerant vires
temporales Christianis. Bellam. libr. 5. de Romans Pont. cap. 6. and 7. and 4.
I answer (says he) that Christians in ancient times did not bear arms and
seek to depose Emperors and Kings, enemies to the Catholic faith, because
they wanted power. Whereby the now Romish faith does seek to make wicked men
excuseable. Ex hac secunda Conclusione sequitur, excusand^s esse Anglos, quia
non se exi^^nt exsuperiorum potestate, nec bellum contra eos gerunt: quia non
suppetunt illis vires, ^b consequentia pericula. Dom. Bannes in 2^. 2^. Thom.
quaest. 12. Art. 2.
By this second conclusion (says Bannes) the English Catholics, who now do
not take arms against the Protestants, are excused, because they want
sufficient power. Hence we may perceive that, that as long as Protestants live
safe, they must acknowledge themselves beholden to the Popish faction, because
they have no power to hurt them: otherwise they may hear of the^ before they
can see them, peradventure in such manner, as to The letter of Tresham to the
Lord Mounteagle.
Receive a terrible blow, and yet not know who did them the hurt. Yea they must
perish: for Populus Christianus obsistere tenetur conscientiae vincul^
arctiss^^^, and extr^^^ animarum periculo; si praestare rem possit. Creswell.
in suo Philopater, page 201.
Christian people (says Creswell) are bound in conscience and hazard of their
souls, whenever they can make resistance. These are yet positions. Now

Their Practice.
In the year 1580. when Campion and Parsons came into England, they procured a
dispensation from the Pope, that all Papists in England, notwithstanding the
excommunication of the Queen, might profess a large obedience in all
temporal causes: but with this addition ( Rebus sic stantibus) The case thus
standing: that is (as the sequel did interpret) till you wax stronger: for
in the year 1588. when the Spanish Armado was a flote, when by doubling their
strength, they might presume of the better: then our Countriman Allen does
write an Admonition to the Nobility of England, making his book the Popes
Nuncio to expound his former parenthesis. In his book of Admonition.
Though the Pope (says he) has tolerated obedience unto the Queen in
temporal conditions: yet now our holy Father Xistus Quintus does discharge all
men of their faith and loyalty unto her. This is the Popes common guise; when
he doubts his faction shall be ouermatched, then to inioyne obedience: but it
is only in policy to gain his soldiers a breathing, as Clement the late
Pope dispensed with the Irish for their fidelity to the Queen, till that he
had some confidence of Tyrones success. For then in the 20. of January, the
year 1601. writ a letter for encouragement: Clemens Octa^us.
Fili dilecte nobilis vir salutem, etc. My dear son, all health, etc. After
he calls the rebellion, Sacru^ foedus, An holy league; promising in the way
of blessing an happy success: Deus pugnabit pro vobis, conteret inimicos suos
ante faciem vestram: God will fight for you, and tread your enemies under your
feet. But he (God be thanked) proved a false Prophet.

The ninth Reason.
Whosoever does perfidiously either deny or violate, with men of diverse
religion, an oath, the most sacred bond that Ierem. 4. 4.
God has allotted unto men, as the most secure Heb. 6. 16.
confirmation of all fidelity with men, and Heb. 6. 16.
end of all contention; must necessarily be esteemed of them as a person
perfidious and treacherous: but Popish priests are guilty of such perfidie:
Ergo, etc. The Minor will appear in these three: 1. In the manner of
disallowing: 2. Of deluaing: 3. Of dissoluing of a necessary oath.

From the manner of denying a requisite oath, we reason:
Whatsoever servant being demanded of his master, to say or swear, whether if
he saw his master assaulted by his professed enemies, he would defend or betray
him, would either dislike the article, or defer his answer, he should
evidently bewary a treacherous disposition: But all Popish priests in like
articles concerning loyal subjection to Protestant Kings, are in like manner
affected: Ergo, all their other kind of Matthew. 26.
Hail Master, is but to kiss and betray. The Minor proved

By their positions and practices.
When as it is demanded of Priests (a necessary article in civil states) what
if the Pope should authorize the Queens subjects to rebel, or other foreign
Princes to invade her realm; whether they would take part with the Queen, or
her enemies? First they dislike this interrogatorie. Allen calls it, Allen in
his book entitled, A true Defense, page 68. 70.
An unlawful, unnatural, intolerable search of men's consciences. This kind of
examination which Princes make for preservation of the lives of themselves and
subjects, Creswell terms, Examen iniustissimum and postulata sanguinaria.
Creswellus in suo Philopater page 350. and 351.
Unjust and bloody demands. And these questions Stapleton names No^ae and
capti^sae, in quibus i^est ina^ditum quoddam nequissimae impietatis, and
barbarae calliditatis exemplum. Stapleton in suo Didymus. page 205. 206.
Captious questions, wicked, and full of all impious subtlety. As though
Sampson were bound to put his head in Judge. 16.
Dalilahs lap. Nay but their answer shows that this interrogatorie was as
necessarily invented, as it is wicked impugned. For this being an inbred law of
Nata lex quam non didicimus, sed a natura exhausimus. Cicero pro Milone.
Nature, to study for a self preservation: these men call iniust and
unnatural: But how sensleslie, let the very Vt i^gulent homines, surgunt de
nocte Latrones: vt teipsum serves non expergisceris? Horatius.
Heathen judge: Thieves watch to murder, do thou not awake to save thy self?

Now secondly their delaying. When the question is urged: whether if the Pope,
or any by his appointment should invade the land; which part they would take,
then they shift footing, and some (as our Governors have observed) have
answered: I will then take counsel when the case shall happen: others, I will
answer then and not before: others, I am not yet resolved: lastly, I shall
then do as God shall put in my mind. As though these maskes were large enough
to shadow their faces: which their Creswell has already discovered, saying,
that Si p^ntificis iussu de religione restituenda bell^ decertar^tur, se
conscientia salua facere non posse, quin partibus Catholicis adhaereant.
Creswellus in suo Philopater page 352.
If by the Popes command the war should be undertaken, to the end of restoring
religion, then (to answer) that he is bound in conscience to hold with the
Romish. This man speaks without parables: make then but a pretense of
religion, and farewell all subjection.

The second point is, their deluding of an oath by a new trick of
equivocation, as they (improperly) term it. Others call it reservation: but
most fitly we may name it Collusion.

Their Position in the Mayor.
Cum Iudex n^n iuridice petit iuramentum vel contra iustitiam, licet vti
aequiuocatione secundum mentem suam, contra a mentem Iudicis, vt puta,
quaerenti, fecisti ne illud? Respondeat, non feci; intelligendo inter se, non
hoc tempore, aut, vt narrem tibi, aut aliquid simile. Tollet. Card. lib. 4.
Inst. Sacerd. cap. 21. and 22.
When any Judge (says one) shall demand an oath unjustly, then may the
examinate swear by an aequiuocation: as for example, being thus demanded;
whether did thou that fact or no? he (though he did it) may answer; I did it
not, understanding secretly in his mind; at this time, or I did it not,
meaning to tell it to you: or some such like evasion. If you desire to know the
author, it is Cardinal Tollet: if his authority, De hoc illustri Cardinali
Gregorius 13. Pontifex sic scribit: Dilecte fili, etc. Tanta est tua doctrina,
quae longo and intimo vsu nobis cognita est, vt tua scripta, sicut caeterorum
aliorum, iudicio atque examini subijci aequum non sit. Vasques Ies. Epist.
Dedicatoria ante Com. in Luc.
Vasques the Jesuit shows, he has a special privilege from Pope Gregory
13. writing thus unto him: We so approve of your singular learning, that we
hold it unmeet that your books should be subjected to the censure of others.

Now their Assumption in this case of our English justice concerning
examination of Priests: Officiarij Reginae Angliae non iuridice iuramentae
exigunt, quia Regina haeretica non est Regina. Greg. Martin. in libr.
Resolutionis Casuum.
The Officers of the Queen of England (says Martin) cannot challenge answers
and oaths iudiciously, because an heretical Queen is no Queen. Upon this
sand is builded that which they conclude, namely, Allen, Parsons, Gregory
Martin, that Si Sacerdos interrogetur in portu, vel alibi, de antiquo suo
nomine ab aliquibus, qui ^um habent suspectum, possit respondere illud non esse
suum nomen, atque eodem modo si interrogetur de patria, pareatibus, am^cis,
etc. Resolutio quorundam casuum Nationis Anglicanae.
If a Priest shall upon suspicion chance to be asked either in any Haven, or
elsewhere, concerning his ancient name, his country, kindred, or friends: he may
deny all. And again, Cum Sacerdos sistitur ad Tribunal, vbi adsu^t
magistratus Regni, accepto iuramento, possit illud praestare iuramentum,
aequiuocando, quia qui quaerunt non iuridice interrogant, cum sint Tyranni and
velint punire bona opera. Ibidem.
When a Priest is conuented before a Judge, after the oath taken, concerning
such questions, he may answer by the foresaid aequiuocation; because those
that ask this oath, are not to be accounted Judges, but Tyrants: which point
of aequiuocation (says Parsons in his brief Apolog. fol. 193.
Parsons) is not only to be allowed by all Divines, but judged necessary also
in some cases for avoiding lying and other inconveniences. This man we see (as
if he would drive out Satan by Satan) teaches by lying how a man may avoid a
lie. Yet this is the general doctrine of their See Aquinas.
School, more than heathenish: for among Pagans this was a decree of
conscience: Fraus non dissoluit, sed distringit periurium. Cicero.
Craft in an oath does not lessen, but strengthen perjury.

Now the practice.
The practice of this device of aequiuocation in Priests has been found to
have been common of late, by experience of Magistrates. It may be thought to
have crept out of their S. Francis sleeves. For Sanctus Franciscus regatus qua
perrexisset quidam homicida, qui iuxta ^um transierat; manus per manicas
immittens, respondit non transiisse illac; intelligens, non transiisse per
illius manicas. Nauar. Tom. 3. cap. 12.
He (as Nauar writes) being asked which way the murderer did fly, which run
by him; putting his hands in his sleeves, answered, he went not that way,
meaning through his sleeves.

The third abuse of oaths is in dissoluing them.
That th^ugh they take an oath of allegiance in cases temporal, yet their
common interpretation is still with respect of their more supreme head, Before
in Reason 4. lit. ^
During the will of the Pope, who (say they) has power to free both himself
and others from the bond of an oath, which is their old Gloss, saying, Debuit
intelligi; nisi Papa remittat ei iuramentum: nam in iuramento excipitur
au^oritas maioris. Glossa ad decret. lib. 2. tit. 24. cap. 10.
That the case is so to be interpreted, namely; Except the Pope shall release
him from his oath: because in every oath the authority of a Superior must be
excepted.

Practice.
Their practice we have shown in the former reasons: we may here add a more
ancient example. Ca^onicus quidam i^^ehitur in Gregorium 12. P^ntificem, quod
tempore magni schismatis antequam port^^en crearetur, iu^^uerat publico and
solenni ritu sese abdicaturum Pont ficia potestate; postea vero Ponti^ex
electus noluit pontificatum d^ponere. Azorius Ies. Inst. Mor. lib. 5. cap. 15.
A Canonist (says a Jesuit) did inueigh against Pope Gregory the 12. who in
the time of a great schism, did openly and solemnly swear, that if he were
made Pope, he would give it over again: but being elected, he performed
nothing less. The Canonist doubtless wanted not a Canon to condemn this
perjury, though the Jesuit upon presumption of [ iusta causa] does defend it.
Who also in the same volume holds their general position, saying, Aliorum
quoque iuramenta possunt P^ntificis autoritate relaxari. Ibidem lib. 11. cap. 9.
Other men's oaths may be dissolved by the Pope: so that when the Pope shall
send but his Bull of freeing of our English, the bond of their oath will prove
as strong as the knot of a bulrush.

The tenth Reason.
Whosoever is so possessed with these former seditious positions, that ex
Officio (that is) as he is a Romish priest, he must profess them: such an one
is to be judged a most desperate traitor: But al Romish priests, as priests,
professes me, and othersome all of those seditious positions. Ergo, etc.

The Minor 1. Proved, 2. Confirmed.


Proved by an argument of Relation: That seeing the authors of this rebellious
doctrine, are the principal Rabbis of that sect, and publicly authorized
with the ordinary privilege of that Church: it may not be imagined, but the
scholars are infected with the leven of their professors and Doctors above
named: to wit,

1 Tollet a late Cardinal, whose writings have this special privilege by
Pope Gregory the 13. That (says Vasques the Jesuit) they may without censure
or examination of any, be published to the world. Now the book, wherein these
positions, or rather poisons are contained, is entitled, De instructione
Sacerdotum: That is, The book of Instructions for Priests.

2 Cardinal Bellarmine public Reader in Rome, in his book entitled, Of the
Pope of Rome, dedicated to Beatissimo, Sanctissimoque Patri Xisto Quinto
Pontifici Max. Robertus Bellarminus. In principio voluminis primi. Epist.
Dedicat. de Pontifice Romano.
Xistus Quintus Pope of Rome, and authorized by the same Pope of Rome, to no
other end, but (as he confesses) Ad eos iu^enes instituendos, quos a
Transalpinis Regienibus autoritas tua reuocauit. Ibidem.
To instruct those scholars, whom his Holiness did send for from beyond the
Alps: that is, All Scottish, Polish, Flemmish, Danish, and English
extrauagants.

3 Cardinal Allen, created of the same Pope Xistus Quintus, Anno Dom. 1588. to
the like end: for in the same year, when the Spanish Invasion was intended
against England, he published his book, entitled, An Admonition to the
Nobility of England, as a trumpet of rebellion, to take arms against their
Sovereign.

4 Molina, Divinity Reader in the University of Ebor^ensis.
Ebor.

5 Gregory of Valentia, Divinity Reader in the University of Ingolstadensis.
Ingol.

6 Doctor Stapleton, Divinity Reader in Louan..

7 Dominicus Bannes, Divinity Reader in the University of Salmanticensis.
Salma. another much infected with the same leaven, and yet privileged in
Spain with these commendations: Legi and expendi diligenter iussu and imperio
Senatus F. Dominici Bannesii Cathedrarij Sacro-sanctae Theologiae in
Salmaticensi Academia in 2^ 2^ D. Thomae Commentarios, and nihil reperi lima
dignum, sed admiratione: vt appareat fore opus Theologis vtilissimum and
fructuosissimum. Idque ego ratum mea fide iubeo. Frater Daques Regis Hispaniae
Confessarius in Commentarios Francisci Bannesij.
A work admirable, and profitable for all Divines. Dignified also of the
College of the Friars, called Minors, in these terms: Ne tam glorioso operi
sanctae obedientiae meritum deesse contingat, hoc ipsum ei praecipimus in
virtute Spiritus sanctisub formali praecepto, in nomine Patris, Filij, and
Spiritus sancti, Amen: non obstantibus in contrarium quibuscunque. Fratrum
Minorum de D. Bannefij Commentarijs Encomium.
A glorious work, which least it want his deserved obedience, this we
challenge in the power of the holy Ghost, under our formal command (without
all exceptions) in the name of the Father, Son, and holy Ghost, Amen.

We have also alleged The Resolution of the Jesuits College of the
University of Salamancha in Spain, Anno 1602. as likewise Creswels
Philopater, printed at Rome, Licentia Superiorum: By the license of the
Superiors; signifying the Jesuits there. What shall I need to mention
Reinolds (in his Rosaeus) a Doctor of Divinity, and chiefest man in the
English Seminary at Rhemes? Father Parsons (in his Dolman) a principal Rector
in the Seminary at Rome? Seeing all these be Seminaries, you may try the
young plants by their fruits. If any desire further experience in this kind,
he may consult with Carolus Malinaeus, and Pontus Tyardaeus, both Parisiens,
and but even now, before I can read them, to be read of all men.

The Confirmation.
It will not be denied of any Priest, but that in these Popish Seminaries he
has vowed obedience to his general Fathers in those Schools: And it is as
notorious, that all Generals are absolutely in^bralled to their chief general
the Pope: all of them, as hands and feet, to walk and work, as that their
head shall devise. Which (as we have heard in Gregory the 7. Gregory the 9.
Pius Quintus, and others) have absolved subjects from all obedience, and
charged them to take arms against their Emperors, Kings and Queens
excommunicate, etc. Shall we now imagine, the old foxes being such, that their
cubbes can degenerate? If ever any of that kind gave hope unto us, it was the
Secular Priests: who for a fit did write many things very truly against
Jesuitical rebellious practices: but after, perceiving the Recusants to
withdraw their benevolence, as rather devoted to the Jesuits; and that the
Pope also took part against them, they searing their consciences, wholly
submitted themselves unto the Archpriest, whose command, upon occasion, is
countermanded by the faction Jesuitical. So that now we may as well expect
grapes from thorns, or a white Ethiopian, as loyal subjection from this
Religion.

Thus have I proved (dear brethren) the dogmaticall doctrines of these men,
not particularly improuing, or confuting them; for this (as I understand) was
not your desire, and therefore might not challenge of me such discharge:
especially seeing that they be in themselves so naturally unnatural, that it
may be concluded hereof, The very commemoration o^ them is a just confutation.
Haec recitasse refutasse est. So that (according to the example of our blessed
Savior) only relating the fact [ Do, etc.] without examination of the guilt,
we may pronounce [ Woe be unto you Scribes and Pharisees, for you do etc.
Woe, etc.] a condemnation against them: in as much as all such sins have a
brand of impiety in their forehead, whereby any may discern them, as the
Apostle teaches: Gal. 5. 20.
The works of the flesh are manifest, which are these; Adultery, hatred,
contentions, seditions, murders, and such like; which whosoever does, cannot
inherit the kingdom of God. Being so condemnable in themselves in every
reasonable man's judgment, that it may be said of them, 1. Tim. 5. 23.
Some men's sins go before them to judgment. Notwithstanding if, as among
these Romish professors, malefactors of all kinds use to take sanctuary: so
these mischiefs shall dare to challenge the name of sanctity or Religion:
know (dearly beloved) that (as S. Hierom says) this Simul^ta sanctitas duplex
iniquit^s.
Dissembling of sanctity does double the iniquity: and that I am as ready to
consute all forged pretenses, as they can be to suggest them. Only at this time
be you exhorted (my brethren) to take this antidote and preservative against
all such poysonable positions and practices; it is compounded but of two
simples, simplicity of Apostolic precept, and practice of primitive examples.
The blessed Apostle and true Peter, far differing from this personate, does
thus admonish all Christians: 1. Pet. 4. 15.
But let none of you suffer as a murderer, an evil doer, or as a busy body,
in other men's matters: but if any suffer as a Christian, let him not be
ashamed, but glorify God in this behalf. So then Christians suffering for
murders, may happily become martyrers, but never be martyrs. Secondly, the
Primitive example is plainly recorded by Tertullian in his Apology, in behalf
of zealous Christians, who being in his days persecuted of Tyrants for the
profession of the holy Faith, yet avouched always their faithful allegiance
after this tenor: Tert. Apolog. Nos precamur, pro omnibus Imperatoribus vitam
prolixa^, imperium securum, domum tutam, exercitus ^ortes, populum probum,
orbem quieta^.
Our humble prayers to God, in the behalf of all Emperors, are, that he would
vouchsafe them long life, secure reign, safe guard, powerful armies,
faithful Counselors, godly people, and a peaceable world. And to remove all
ielousies of Princes, though Apostates from Christ, holy Nazianzen is bold in
defense of Christian loyalty to stand at defiance (as it were) against all
calumnious accusations, saying: Nazianz. Orat 2. in Iulianum. In quos vestru^m;
populum exastuantem contra vos, insurgere solicita^^mus? quibus vitae periculum
attulimus?
Against whom of you did we at any time make any insurrection among your people,
though of themselves prone to rebellion? Or whose death did we ever conspire?
Now in conclusion, do but consider the last (I pray God ever the last)
treason, and see whether it may not challenge the name of Mark. 5. 9.
Legion, seeing there is found in it so many murderous spirits, intending and
attempting in one blow so many execrable murders: that none can say of this
most infamous evil, as the Prophet spoke of that most excellent good: Psalm.
48. 8.
As we have heard, so have we seen: but contrariwise; That which we have
seen, the like was never heard. God of his great mercy fashion us to true
thankfulness, and them to repentance, to disclaim the Guelphish faction, and
always out of the confusion of their sins work the conversion of their
souls: establishing us all that call upon the name of Christ Jesus with his
sanctifying spirit, to the glory of his saving grace. Whereunto

Yours T. M.


