IN MORTEM SERENISsimae Reginae Elizabethae. Naenia consolans.

Hoc solo officio potui me ostendere gratum.



LONDINI Pro Edwardo Aggas, via longa sub quercu viridi. 1603.

IN SERENISSIMAE Reginae Elizabethae mortem Naenia consolans.
QVa^ tremefeciss^^ gentem mors slebilis Anglam,
Ni diuina nouam dextra tulisset opem?
Reginam eripuit, sed regem tradidit, orba
Quae sine matre dolet, ne sine patre foret.
Reginam eripuit, qualem non viderat ante,
Nec visura aetas vlla futura parem.
Spem rex ipse suis laetam virtutibus affert,
Quod toto regni tempore talis erit,
Qualem praemonuit moriens regina futurum,
Cum regno haeredem diceret ipsa suo.
Tu vero, rex magn^ diu, and foeliciter orna
Hanc Spartam, cui spes turgida vela facit.
Iam mihi non ploranda mea est regina, quod ipsam
Sustulerint patria tristia fata meae,
Sed cantanda, quod hac vita foeliciter acta
In summi sedeat patris aperta sinu.
Cuius dum memoro, quae sunt memoranda, videbunt
Quantum amiserimus saecula longa bonum.
Regia cum primas iniens infantula cunas
Desereret matris carnea tecta suae,
Quanti illam faceret, quo prosequeretur amore
Et quam prae reliquis foemina clara foret,
Pluribus indicijs, primum comitantibus ortum,
Ostendit domini prouida cura dei.
Vna Euangelium terram produxit in Anglam
Vna papatum iussit abire for as:
Qui licet ex omni non esset part resectus,
Namque superstitio multa relicta fuit.
Infanti tamen, and reginae aliquando futurae,
Excindendi eius sic patefecititer.
Quae quo nobilior: quae quo prudentior esset,
Sciret and imperij slectere lora sui,
Quam varia infantem fortuna exercuit, and quam
Post adolescentis prodita signa spei?
Quae diuini in eam, vel tessera mayor amoris,
Maiusue indicium magnam aliquando fore,
Quam comites primis tales adiungere cunis
Esset, vt, and prudens et pietatis amans.
Quae simulaccreuit plaenis maturior annis,
Corporis eximij gratia quanta fuit?
Qualem se, et quanta cum maiestate ferebat
Quo contemplantes vssit amore sui?
Sed, quod eam magis, atque magis decorauit, in ipso
Thesaurus very pectore quantus erat?
Quae, quantaeque animi dotes, quas discere posset
Ingenij princeps, indicijque capax?
Has omnes plene addidicit: diuinitus ipsam
Ad regni, vt scires fraena regenda datam.
Quod tunc emicuit, cum sceptrum nacta paternum
Promeret ingenij ditia dona sui.
Quanta quies, primas cum moliretur habenas,
Magna Euangelium grande professa fide?
Quamuis Romano iam plena satellite terra
Reginam tumido cerneret ore peti:
Quamuis serua sacerdoti vicinia, quamuis
Regum externorum funderet ira minas
Illa tamen subnixa deo pulsoque timore
Cuncta tuebatur, quae docuere deum.
Angliaque externo iam principe libera, cuius
Ante iugum metuit, laeta recepit eam.
Iam solio stabilita suo, quam grandia gessit,
Grandia, quae nullo sunt peritura die.
Quam constans, eademque fuit, quam tramite cert^
Direxit regni tempora longa sui
Quod sanxit, seruauit idem, tenuitque fidelis,
Ciuica seu spectes munia, sieve sacra.
Non dextram variare manum, variare sinistram
Docta, sedin recto fixa manner gradu.
Hoc regimen sanctum, sartum, tectumque tenenti
Sic fauit magni gratia sacradei,
Vt facile aequaret, si non superaret eosdem,
Anglia, quos reges viderat eius auos,
Perpetuo victrix si arceret finibus hostem,
Sieve rebellantes frangeret illa suos:
Sieve iugum gaudens vicinis demere, eisdem
Subsidio tutis vellet adesse suo.
Quin etiam insidijs ad coedem saepe petita,
Quas Iesuitarum turba tetendit ei,
Sensit adesse sibi, and clipeum obtendisse salutis
Illum, quem coluit* fida ministra, deum.
Qui gladijs adimens aciem, virusque venenis
Quaque tonare solet glande sclopeta, sonum.
Pergere eam voluit nec formidare periclum,
Sefore tutorem, praesidiumque pijs.
Sed neque quas tenuit magnas reticebimusartes
Veros ornatus nobilis ingenij
Docta fuit supra sexum, linguasque sciebat
Equibus hauriri cuncta scienda queunt
Hinc Academiacis data priuilegia: multas
Hinc sub ea multi constituere scholas.
Vt doctrina frequens illi se debeat, vnde
Altrices habuit lacte fouenda domos.
Vnde cibis solidis Academia pascat adultam
Munifica magnae principis aucta manu.
Sed neque sic exculta silenti in pectore clausa
Doctrinae occuluit, grandia dona suae:
Verum illis dubias regni sic rexit habenas,
Vt nulla in toto clarior orb micet.
Vnde modum imperij, fortunatosque labores
Admirata suis extera regna locis.
Vndique legatos ad eam misere petentes
Optatae loetum foedus amicitiae.
Queis ita respondet prudenter, and omnia lingua
Quam quisque e patrio protulit ore, sua.
Quod vir credibile in sexu, mirumque fuisset
Si non cuncta eius mira, supraque fidem.
Vt stupe facti omnes, demiratique referrent
Vix been principibus credita verba suis.
Quin etiam fama splendoreque nominis acti
Insignes magna nobilitate viri
Visuri de qua audierant tam multa, frequentes
Venere huc la ti, ac la ti abiere domum.
Namque excepit eos vere regaliter, omni
In re illis omni ex part satisfaciens:
Sed neque desuerat muliebris sexus adillam
Visendam cupidus quamlibet ire viam
Qu^ntus bonor terrae? quae sexus gloria? nostros
Externas gentes sic petijsse lares
Reginae vt vocem audirent, formamque viderent,
Et manibus pulchris osculagrata darent.
Publica sic obijt foelicis munia regni,
Tota quibus mundi gloria tessis erit.
Sed neque priuatim quidquam auscultansue, legensue
Quod tanta indignum principe, passa fuit
Verum pracipuis authoribus vsa, scienter,
Qui lingua ediderant, quae peperere sua,
Quicquiderat purum, secreuit, quicquid ineptum
Respuit; haud dignans ore, vel aure sua.
Si quid sanguineum aut crudele occurreret, illud
Perlegere vnquamoculis noluit ipsa suis:
Sed qui legit ei, priuatim indixit, vt illud
Proferret verum candidiore stylo.
Quin etiam si quando reos capitalia iura
Supplicio afficerent, tardius ibat co.
Sic innata retraxit eam clementia, iusto
Vt meritae poenae parceret obsequio.
Praeterea si cui priuata negotia mandans
Sentiret solida praestita cuncta fide,
Quam comis, quam mitis ei, quam prodiga laudis
Alliciens omni pectora fida modo?
Cuius erat fidei indicium, and constantis amoris
Quod non vlla aegram foemina desereret.
Sed vigilans illam assidue noctesque dicsque
Curaret, prae qua propria spreta salus.
Quin etiam par cura viris, studiosius omnes
Certantes obeunt triste ministerium,
Sic natura potens, sic vere regia virtus
Perpetui magnes verus amoris erat.
Denique quicquiderat, quod sacra modestia suasit,
Si cecinit, velsi ter pede pressit humum.
Maiestatis idem magnae, decuitque regentem,
Sic cum laud illi vita peracta prior.
Cum morti vicina fuit, constantia mansit,
In vita imbibitam in morte sequnta fidem,
Vt licet vlterius cuperent superesse videntes,
Gauderent viuae mortis honor pio.
Sic memor illa sui, coelestis sic memor aulae,
Praesensit vitae fila secanda suae.
Vt cum desereret mortales spiritus auras,
Atria coelorum sancta subiret ouans.
Nec moritura suos neglexit, vt improba matter,
Sed successorem iure creauit eum,
Qui desiderium morientis tolleret, atque
Molliret sortis tristia damna suae
Qui de morte sua natum lenire dolorem
Posset, and in suaues vertere moesta iocos.
Terminus hic vitae, regnantique vltimus actus,
Pro plausu planetum dignus habere grauem,
Nam quis non gemeret iactura principis huius?
Quae justice lachrymis tempora sufficerent?
Amisisse illam, quam, non homo, sed deus ipse
Nutricem verbo legerat esse suo?
Quae patriae dilecta parens: quae buccina very,
Quae pacis praeses, dissidijque lues.
Primitiae sexus muliebris, faoemina princeps,
De qua cum dices omnia, nulla satis.
Causa equidem, fateor, moeroris iusta: sed illam
Eneruat minuens altera causa duplex.
Quod prouecta aetas, quod septuagesimus annus,
Maturam ad mortem strauerat ante viam.
Quae si nupta prius, si inslato prodiga victu
Fracta, nequiuisset tam superesse diu.
Quod regno foelici, aduersae nescia sortis,
Chara domi, externis inclyta, cassa pari,
Permutasse locum videatur, in altera regna
Ad dominum tali morte vocata Deum.
Quam sic defunctam, sic omni ex part beatam,
Sic positam in summi condition boni,
Si lugere voles, lugere videberis illam?
Non: sed priuati propria damna status.
Atqui nescit amans vere deponere luctum
In memori quoties mente recursat amor.
Qui iusta nitens, and natus origin gaudet
Largo moerentes imbre rigare genas.
Quem tamen haec lenire potest, quae proxima causa
Et deponendae propria moestitiae.
Ipsa sui luctus finem praescripsit, in ipsa
Morte suis regem cum daret esse virum:
Assu^tum imperto, cognato sanguine fratrem,
Qui very quo non tempore fautor erat?
Pacis amans, doctrinae omnis multiscius, vt quem
Agnosset moriens Elizabetha parem.
Vt, licet amissam doleamus, debeat esse
Moeroris nostri terminus ille tamen:
Quod tali per eam delecto rege fruamur,
Qui pro tristitia loetitia autore erit.
Tuque o Reginae successor, maxim regum
Quos vnquam vidit terra Britanna prius,
Ante oculos exemplar habes: quia regia virgo
Sic rexit nostriregia sceptra soli,
Vt vel eiesse parem, veleam superare, sit ingens
Vnde tibi grandi pondere crescit onus.
Illius, vt regnum, and vestigia fausta sequutus
Sceptra diu teneas regia, laud pari.
Vtque diu teneas, Iesuitae indicito bellum.
Qui ne parcendum regibus esse docet.
Sed regno and vita priuandos, si modo nolint
Regia Romano subdere colla pedi.
Regius est illi pro atramento cruor, illo
Laiolitarum scripta liquore rubent.
Parcet Iacobo crudelis in Elizabetham?
Foemina cui praedae, parserit ille viro?
Foemina deprenso quoties miserata pepereit?
Cui iam spes perijt mortua, rege viro.
Namque coercendam duplici Babylona flagello
Imperat, vnde tibi tripla coronadatur.
Tripla corona? quid hoc? nomen fatale, futurae
Romanae triplici tripla Britanna lues.
Regnat vt in coelis foelix nostra Elizabetha,
Sic regna in terris rex Iacobe tuis.
Vtque illa insidias Iesuitarumque furores
Eludens, sicca morte quieta iacet:
Sic tu post similes (quia non vitaueris illos)
Et longum in regno tempus, adito deum.
Ri: Mulcaster

THE Translation of certain latin verses written upon her Majesty's death,
called A Comforting Complaint.



This only way I could declare my thankful mind.

Printed at London for Edward Aggas dwelling in long lane at the sign of the
Oken tree. Anno Dom. 1603.

The Translation of certain latin verses written upon her Majesty's death;
called A comforting Complaint.
HOw sore had mournful death shaked the english soil,
If God had not afforded present help?
Who though he took our Queen, a King he gave
To play the fathers part in mothers loss.
He took away our Queen, whose match no age
Has ever seen before, or after shall.
The Kings most royal virtues feed our hope
That he will prove so good the time he reigns,
As when our dying Queen pronounced him heir
She did sorewarne her State that he would be.
Most noble King with happy course and long
Stand to thy stern, our hope is under sail.
My Queen, though dead, now calls me: not to tears
For countries heavy loss by fatal stroke,
But unto joy, for that her happy life here spent
She rests in heaven, in bosom of her God,
Of whom when I have said what I shall say,
The world shall see how great a good we lost.
No sooner was this royal infant borne,
And left her mothers womb to enter light,
But Gods foreseeing care, by many signs,
Accompaning her first cradle-time, bewraid
What rate he held her at, how he loved her,
And in her sex how rare she was to prove.
Then he first showed his word unto this land:
Then he commanded Pope to part the realm,
Who though as then he were not quite cut off,
His superstitious rights remaining still,
Yet he then showed the way how being Queen
She might in time make him avoid the land:
And that she might with greater fame and wit
Thereafter rule the reins of Royal state,
How tried he her with change and choice of chance
Not only in her first, but after years?
What greater sign of Gods great love to her,
What stronger proof that once she should be great,
Than to allot her youth such special things,
Whereby to prove a wise and godly Prince?
Now when she began to be of riper years;
Her personage appeared for beauty rare,
Her carriage full of majesty and state,
Whereby she wan the love of every look:
But that which wrought in her the greatest grace,
Was truth in store bestowed in her heart,
The great indowments of her Royal mind,
Which she did learn as fast as princely brain
With judgment fraught, could possibly conceive.
All this she learned so as it appeared
That God had bred her up to be a Queen,
Which gifts of princely mind then beamed abroad,
When having got her fathers crown on head,
She did show forth the treasures of her heart.
When she first took the Scepter in her hand,
Even then professing here the heavenly truth,
How quietly entered she, and with what peace?
All the Romish rout, which swarming here
With open throats, did thirst to see her fall:
Though all our neighbor lands, then priestly slaves,
Though foreign Kings and princes threw out threats,
Because they were bewitched with Romish rags,
Yet she with hope in God, and check to fear,
What truth did teach, that she did still desend:
And England of it self now free from fear
Of foreign princes yoke, was glad of her,
Who being staid in throne and princely seat,
How mighty things, how borne to live did she?
Still constant, still the same, still in one course
Directing all the time that she did reign.
What she enacted once, she held it fast,
As Well what touched the Church, as civil state:
No change of hands, from right unto the left
Was she acquainted with, but still forth right.
Her gracious God so sauoured this her reign,
Which she religiously maintained thus,
As if she did not quite surpass all those
Which heretofore had reigned in this land:
At least she matched the brauest of them all.
In all her great attempts victorious still.
If she with armed hand barred foreign foes:
If with the like she daunted stirs at home:
If with assisting aid she sought to free
Her neighbors, craving help from servile yoke,
The God of heaven did guide her still to gain.
Often times assailed by false and treacherous mean,
Wherewith the Jesuits sought to suck her blood,
She felt her God to save her with his sheeld,
Which taking edge from sword, and charge from dagge,
From poison strength to do her any harm,
Bad her go on, bad her abandon fear,
That he would be both guide and guard to his.
But were it not a mighty fault to hide
The royal gifts wherewith she was endowed?
Her knowledge and her skill, the only mean
Which does adornea noble royal wit?
Her learning did surmount her sex and kind.
She had obtained the chief and learned tongues,
Whereby she knew what things were to be known.
Upon these grounds and learning of her own,
She favored so all people that were learned,
As both the Universities felt by Royal grant
The benefits wherewith she privileged them:
As every shire so warranted from her,
Found many a school well founded for their youth
To bring them up at first, whom afterward
The Universities were to feed with stronger meats,
These qualities of hers so rare in woman kind
She did not hide, but showed them to the sun.
In all her time so governing her estate,
As all the world did wonder at her wit.
Which kind of government and blessed course
Great potentates abroad in foreign parts
Did so admire, as they forthwith did send
Their Embassies to her with true desire,
To crave and have her friendship and her love:
Whose answer was returned in sort so wise,
And in that tongue which they themselves did use:
(A thing for wonder rare, beyond belief,
To find in that weak sex so strong a gift,
But that her self past wonder, past belief)
As they were all amazed, and coming home
Reported to their Lords the thing they scant believed,
So strange a prince had God given to this world
Truth to maintain and falsehood for to mate.
Besides all these, great troops of noble men
Rapt with the fame and honor of her name,
Desiring to see whereof they heard so much,
With gladsome hearts repaired to this Realm:
And as they came with gladness for to see,
So they departed glad when they had seen.
Her entertainment was in such a sort,
For majesty of state and princely cheer,
As in all points she did content them all.
Nay, diverse noble Dames whom like desire,
Enflamed for to see the object of their ears,
Did undertake the way though nere so long
By sea, by land to see that they did seek:
What honor were these things to this our Isle?
What glory to all those of that her sex?
That foreign lands should send both Ladies and Lords
To hear our princes voice, to see her face,
To kiss her fair and tender royal hand.
This was her public course in case of state,
Whereof the world each where eye witness was.
Now as she was addicted still to hear,
Or privately to read some learned book,
She never brook't, nor could with patience bear
What she perceived unseeming for a Prince,
But as her choice was ever of the best
And chiefest that did write in any tongue,
So what she found to be sincere and pure,
That did she note and laid it up in store,
What was not such, as sorry she had red
That she exiled both from her eye and ear.
If ought came by the way while she did read,
Which smelt of blood or cruel tyrants hand,
Her self rejected straight, and willed him
That red with her, to read the same alone,
And after tell it her in milder phrase.
Nay farther, if the laws by force of right
Condemned any one for crime to die,
None was more loath to yield to such a death,
None more desired to respit time for life
Her nature was so mild, her heart so kind,
As pain or death deserved could hardly win,
Though law and justice both did bid her strike.
Besides when any of her private train
Did painfully perform his charge in truth,
How would she cherish him with courteous terms,
Alluring every heart to yield her love,
Of which her gentle course well fitting her.
This may be brought for proof, that being sick,
No Lady of her suit refused pains
By night, by day, to save their princes health,
But every one with danger of their own,
Did seek to save her life whom they so loved:
And as the women did, so did the men
With earnest care in duty to perform
That sorrowful service, with loss of prince to live.
By nature such she was, by virtue such
As none denied her love, where she did like.
To knit the last with least, whatsoever thing,
She undertook, to dance, to play, to sing,
Or what so else a modest Queen might do,
That she perfourm'd with majesty and grace,
That it became the place, that it beseem'd a Queen.
Now drawing near to death, she stayed on still,
The faith she held in life she kept in death,
That though they which were near her when she dyed,
Were for her death in pain and extreme grief,
And could have wished her longer time to live:
Yet they rejoiced to see her so depart
As in her death they saw a present life:
For at her death she did remember well
Both what concerned her soul, her heavenly state,
And how she must depart without delay,
As when her soul her mortal body left
With triumph she did mount straight into heaven.
Nor when she died, she did forget hers here,
As many mothers do forget their babes,
But left us such a King whose virtues might
Abridge the grief which lack of her might breed.
This was her end, this was her lives last act
With clap of hands for sorrow, but not for joy,
For who can but bewail the loss of such a prince?
What time can serve to stint the stream of wosull tears?
For who is it we have lost? a prince whom man did not,
But God alone did choose protector of his word,
The trumpet of his truth, a mother to us all,
Apillar to all peace, a death to all debate.
The honor of her sex, a Queen surmounting match,
Of whom when all is said, all is not enough.
I must confess we have just cause to grieve,
But yet two greater grounds rebate our grief
The first because her age, her seauentie years
Had made her ripe, and ready for to die.
If she had been before a married Qneene,
Or not hauevs'd a diet low and spare,
Her life had not endured in strength so long.
She died in happy reign, not feeling cross
Beloved at home, admired abroad, a matchless prince,
So that it seems she changed only place
By such a blessed death called up to heaven,
Where here on earth she raignd in fits of care.
Now who so shall bewail one dying so,
So thoroughly bles'd, in state so perfect good,
He shall not seem to mourn for her he mones,
But to lament for loss of private gain.
And yet an earnest love cannot but mourn,
When cause whence love did rise has his recourse
Which bred and borne on ground that bears it up,
Cannot be tired at all with shed of tears.
The second cause which ought to stay our grief,
And that may seem the proper cure to care
Is, that the Queen, when death approached her,
Did stint where all our grief for her should stay,
By pointing us a King, and that a man
Accustomed to rule: one of our English blood,
Which all his time has fostered up Gods truth,
A friend to peace, a prince of mighty skill,
To whom our Queen, our good Elizabeth
Did yield, as to a prince her peer each way,
So that although we grieve for loss of her,
Yet this one close should knit up all our grief,
For that by her own choice and right of blood,
We have a King to turn our grief to joy.
Now my liege Lord, successor to my Queen,
The greatest King that British soil has seen,
Thou see a mighty pattern in thine eye
A maiden prince which ruled so this state,
As to match her it is much, to pass her more.
Wherefore thy charge is doubled in our eyes,
Which are in hope that thou will follow her steps,
And rule as she did reign with equal praise,
Which thing that thou may do both long, and safe, and sound,
Thou must of force with lesuites be at war,
Whose doctrine is to spare no princes blood,
To rob them of their state, to rob them of their lives,
With fire and sword to force them for to yield:
If they, (though God himself forbid the same)
Yield not their royal necks to popish foot,
The blood of Kings is Jesuits ink to write,
That liquour is it must make their Rubricks red.
Will he spare James our King, which spared not our Queen?
Will he forbear a man, which preyed upon a maid?
She though she caught him often, yet spared him often,
Which hope in him is dead through such a King,
Who has from Gods own mouth commandment given,
With double pain the bloody Babylon to pine:
That is his will that gave King James a triple Crown:
A triple Crown? what is that? a fatal term, that is
The triple British Crown, the Romish bane.
As good Elizabeth reigns most happy now in heaven,
So happy may King James reign long with us in earth:
And as she did avoid the Jesuits treacherous trains,
Whereby she gat her grave in dry and quiet death,
So good King James go late to God and slip their snares,
For if thou stick'st to God, they will not stick to stick thee.
R. M.


