James, by the providence of God, Bishop of Bath and Wels. To all and singular
Archdeacons, Officials, Parsons, Vicars, Curates, Churchwardens, Sidemen,
and al other Ecclesiastical Officers, And to all Teachers whatsoever within
our said Diocese, greeeting. Where is his Majesty, for the seasoning of all
youth in their due Allegiance, has caused a Book to be Compiled and
Imprinted, containing the sum of the Oath of Allegiance, Entitled GOD and the
KING: Or a Dialogue, showing that our Sovereign Lord King JAMES being
immediate under GOD, within his Dominions, does rightfully claim what-soeuer
is required by the Oath of Allegiance. And to the end that the same may be
duly read and exercised within his said Kingdom, has by his Highness
Letters Patents, bearing date on the thirteenth day of March last past,
commanded all Archbishops, Bishops, Archdeacons, Officials, and all other
Ecclesiastical Officers and Ministers whatsoever: That by public Act, Edict,
Order, or such other ways and means as they shall think fit, They make
known his Majesty's royal pleasure to be: And further to take order that
every Teacher, as well men as women, teaching either in the English or Latin
tongues, within their several Diocese within the said Kingdom, either
publicly or privately, shall take care that every Scholar (according to their
capacity) shall and may be taught the said Book either in English or Latin.
And that all such Teachers whatsoever, as shall refuse so to do, shall by the
Bishop of the Diocese where the said Teacher teaches, be disabled and
prohibited from teaching of Scholars, until such time as they shall conform
themselves thereunto: And further shall incur his Highness displeasure,
besides such other punishment, as by the Laws of this Realm may be inflicted
upon them, for their said contempt of his Highness royal commandment.

And further by his Highness said Letters Patents, has commanded all and every
Archbishops, Bishops, Majors, Bayliffes, Shiriffes, Justices of Peace,
Officials, Parsons, Vicars, Curates, Constables, and all other the Magistrates,
Officers and Ministers, and all other his Subjects of his said Kingdom: That
they and every of them, at all times within their several Jurisdictions and
places, do further the universal reading and exercise of the said Book. And
that every Parson, Vicar, and Curate, respectively within their said Parishes,
do take care, and see that every Child (taught publicly or privately) be
taught the same either in the Latin or English tongue, as they may best sort
with the Capacity of such Children. And that they and every of them, be
ayding, helping and assisting, in the due performance and execution hereof,
with effect, as they tender his Majesty's royal pleasure and commandment
herein.

These are therefore in his Majesty's name, straightly to require all Masters
of Families, and every Teacher, or Teachers, men or women, private or public,
teaching either in the English or Latin tongues: That they take such a
special care, that all, and every their youth, Scholars, severally and
respectively, may forthwith within the space of ten days next after monition
given unto them, by such as shall be authorized for that purpose, have, read,
exercise, and learn, and be taught the said Book (order being already taken
that there shall be a sufficient number of the said Books in readiness, in
places convenient for the buyer.) And that the said Books be sold by such
persons, or their Deputies only, as his Majesty has thereunto authorized. And
that they, nor any of the said Deputies shall presume to take above the rate of
six pence the Book, neither in Latin nor English, the same being in Octauo,
within the said Diocese. And further that all Persons, Vicars, Curates,
Churchwardens and Sidemen, do at their ordinary day of appearance in any
Ecclesiastical Court within our said Diocese, quarterly present a true note
of all their Teachers, men or women within their several Parishes, with the
true number of Scholars as every such Teacher teaches, that their Scholars
may be furnished with Books accordingly, Together with the names of all such
as shall refuse to conform themselves thereunto. And also that all and every
the said Parsons, Vicars and Curates, Churchwardens and Sidemen, be truly
and faithfully ayding, helping and assisting, for the universal dispersing and
teaching of all youth whatsoever in the said Book, being under the age of xxi.
according to his Majesty's Royal pleasure, and late Proclamation, Dated at
Theobals, the viii. of November last. Commanding all his Highness loving
Subjects, to obey such directions, and order, as by my Lords grace of
Canterbury, my Lords grace of York, and other the Bishops of this Realm shall
be taken therein for the better accomplishment, and due execution hereof,
according to his Highness will and Commandment. James Bath: and Well:

Imprinted at London. 1616.


