THE DEATH OF ROBERT, EARL OF HVNTINGTON.

OTHERWISE CALLED Robin Hood of merry Sherwodde: with the lamentable Tragedy
of chaste MATILDA, his fair maid MARIAN, poisoned at Dunmowe by King JOHN.

Acted by the Right Honorable, the Earl of Notingham, Lord high Admiral of
England, his servants.

Imprinted at London, for William Leake, 1601.

THE DEATH OF ROBERT, EARL OF HVNTINGTON.
Enter Friar Tucke. SCENE. I,
Friar. HOlla, holla, holla^follow, follow, follow. Like noise within. Now
benedicite, what foul absurdity, folly and foolerie had like to followed
me! I and my mates, like addle pates, inuiting great States, to see our last
play, are hunting the hay, with ho, that way, the goodly Heart ran, with
follow little John, Much play the man; and I, like a sot, have wholly forgot
the course of our plot: but crosse-bowe lie down, come on Friars gown, hoode
cover my crown, and with a low beck, prevent a sharp check.

Blithe sit ye all, and wink at our rude cry,
Mind where we left, in Sheerewod merrily,
The king, his train, Robin, his yeomen tall
Gone to the wodde to see the fat dear fall*
We left maid Marian busy in the bower,
And pretty li^ny looking, every hour,
For their returning from the hunting game,
And therefore seek to set each thing in frame*
Warman all woeful for his sin we left.
Sir Doncaster, whose villainies and theft,
You never heard of, but too soon ye shall,
Hurt with the Prior; shame them both befall,
They two will make our mirth be short and small.
But least I bring ye sorrow ere the time,
Pardon I beg of your well judging eyne,
And take in part bad prologue, and rude play:
The hunters holloo, Tucke must needs away.
Therefore down weed, bow do the deed, to make the Stagge bleed, and if
my hand speed, hey for a cry, with a throat strained hie, and a loud yall, at
the beasts fall.

Exit. Holloo within* Enter King, Ely, Fitzwater, Salsbury, Chester, Prince
John, little John, Scathlocke. Kin. Where is our mother?

Pr. John. Mounted in a stand.
Six fallowe dear have dyed by her hand.

Fitz. Three Stags I slew.

Ely. Two Bucks by me fell down.

Chest. As many dyed by me.

Sals. But I had three.

Prin. Scathlocke, where is Much

Sca. When last I saw him, may it please your Grace,
He and the Frierfooted it apace.

Prin. Scathlocke, no Grace, your fellow and plain John.

Lit. Ioh. I warrant you, Much will be here anon.

Pr. Think^ thou little Io^n, that he must Iinny wed'^

Lit. Ioh. No doubt ^e must.

Prin. Then to adorn he^ h^ad, we shall have horns good slore.

King. God, for thy grace,
How could I miss the Stagge I had in chase!
Twice did I hit him in the very neck,
When back my arrows flewe, as they had smit
On some sure armor. Where is Robin Hood,
And y^ wighte Scarlet? Seek them little John,
Exit Ioh. I Will have that Stagge before I dine to day.

Enter Much. Much. O the friar, the friar, the friar.

King. Why, how now Much?
Cry ye mercy, master king. Marry this is the matter; Scarlet is following the
Stagge you hit, and has almost lodged him: now the Friar has the best bow, but
yours, in all the field: which and Scarlet had, he would have him straight.


Kin. Where is thy master?

Much. Nay, I cannot tell, nor the Friar neither.

Scath. I hear them holloo, far off in the wod.

King. Come Much, can lead us where as Scarlet is?

Muc. Never fear you; follow me,

Exeunt, hollooing. SCENE. II.
Enter sir Doncaster, Prior. Don. You were resolved to have him poisoned,
Or killed, or made away, you cared not how.
What devil makes you doubtful now to do it?

Pri. Why Doncaster? his kindness in our needs.

Don. Apla^ue upon his kindness, let him die.
I never temperd poison in my life, but I imployd it.
By th'masse and I loose this,
For ever look to loose my company.

Pri. But will you give it him?

Don. That cannot be.
The Queen. Earl Chester, and Earl Salsbury,
If they once see me, I am a dead man:
Or did they hear my name, I Will lay my life,
They all would hunt me, for my life.

Pri. What have thou done to them?

Don. Faith, some odd toys,
That made me fly the south: but pass we them:
Here is the poison: will you give it Robin?

Pri. Now by this gold I will.

Don. Or as I said, for ever I defy your company.

Pri. Well, he shall die, and in his iollity:
And in my head I have a policy
To make him die disgraced.

Don. O tell it Prior.

Pri. I will, but not as now: Call the Friar within.
We Will seek a place, the wods have many ears,
And some me thinks are calling for the Friar.

Exeunt. SCENE. III.
Enter, calling the Friar, as before. Ioh. The Friar, the Friar?

Scath. Why, where is this Friar?

Fri. Here sir. what is your desire?

Enter Robin Hoode. Rob. Why Friar, what a murren do thou mean?
The King calls for thee. For, a mighty stagge,
(That has a copper ring about his neck,
With letters on it, which he would have read)
Has Scarlet killed. I pray thee go thy way.

Fri. Master I will, no longer will I stay.
Exit.
Rob. Good uncle be more careful of your health,
And you sir Doncaster, your wounds are green.

Both. Through your great kindness, we are comforted.

Rob. And Warman, I advise you to more mirth.
Shun solitary walks, keep company,
Forget your fault: I have forgiven the fault.
Good Warman be more blithe, and at this time,
A little help my Marian and her maid:

Much shall come to you straight: a little now,
We must al strive to do the best we may.

Exit, winding. War. On you and her I Will wait, until my dying day.

Exeunt, and as they are going out, Doncaster pulls Warman. Don. Warman a word,
My good Lord Prior and I
Are full of grief, to see thy misery.

War. My misery, sir Doncaster? why? I thank God,
I never was in better state than now.

Pri. Why, what a servile slavish mind have thou?
Art thou a man, and can be such a beast,
Asse-like to bear the burden of thy wrong?

War. What wrong have I? Is It wrong to be relieved?

Don. Relieved say thou?
Why, shallow witted fool,
Do thou not see Robins ambitious pride?
And how he clymes by pitying, and aspires,
By humble looks, good deeds, and such fond toys,
To be a monarch, reigning over us,
As if we were the vassals to his will?

War. I am his vassal, and I will be still.

Pri. Warman, thou art a fool. I do confess,
Were these good deeds done in sincerity,
Pity of mind, thine or this knights distress,
Without vain brags, it were true charity:
But to relieve our fainting bodies wants,
And grieve our souls with quippes, and bitter braids,
Is good turns ouerturnd: no thanks we owe
To any, whatsoever helps us so.

War. Neither himself, nor any that he keeps,
Ever vpbraided me, since I came last.

Don. O God have mercy on thee, silly ass.
Does he not say to every guest that comes;
This same is Warman, that was once my steward?

War. And what of that?

Pri. Is It not as much to say;
Why, here he stands that once did me betray.

Don. Did he not bring a troop to grace himself,
Like Captives waiting on a conquerours chair,
And calling of them out, by one and one,
Presented them, like fairings, to the king?

Pri. O, I: there was a rare invention:
A plague upon the fool.
I hate him worse for that than all the rest.

War. Why should you hate him? why should you or you
Envy this noble Lord, thus as you do?

Don. Nay rather, why do thou not join in hate
With us, that lately liu'dst like us, in wealthy state?
Remember this, remember foolish man,
How thou have been the Shrieue of Notingham.

Pri. Cry to thy thoughts, let this thought never cease,
I have been Justice of my Sovereigns peace,
Lord of fair livings: men with cap and knee,
In liueries waited howerly on me.

Don. And when thou think, thou have been such and such,
Think then what it is to be a mate to Much,
To run when Robin bids, come at his call,
Be mistress Marians man.

Pri. Nay think withal

War. What shall I think? but think upon my need,
When men fed dogs, and me they would not feed:
When I despaird through want, and sought to die,
My pitious master, of his charity,
Forgave my fault, relieved and saved me:
This do I think upon, and you should think
(If you had hope of souls salvation)
First Prior, that he is of thy flesh and blood,
That thou art uncle unto Robin Hoode:
That by extortion thou did get his lands:
God, and I know how it came to thy hands:
Now thou pursu'dst him in his misery,
And how heaven plagued thy hearts extreamitie:
Think Doncaster, when, hired by this Prior,
Thou came to take my master with the Friar,
And were thy self taken, how he set thee free,
Gave thee an hundred pound to comfort thee,
And both bethink ye how but yesterday,
Wounded and naked in the field you lay,
How with his own hand he did raise your heads,
Powrd balm into your wounds, your bodies fed,
Watched when ye slept, wept when he saw your woe,

Don. Stay Warman, stay: I grant that he did so,
And you, turned honest, have forsworn the villain?

War. Even from my soul, I villainy defy.

Pri. A blessed hour: a fit time now to die:

Don. And you shall, Conscience.

Stab him, he falls. War. O forgive me, God,
And save my master from their bloody hands.

Pri. What, have thou made him sure?

Don Its dead sure: he is dead, if that be sure.

Pri. Then let us thrust the dagger in his hand,
And when the next comes, cry he killed himself.

Don. That must be now: yonder comes Robin Hood.
No life in him.

Pri. No, no, not any life.
Three mortal wounds have let in piercing air,
And at their gaps, his life is clean let out.

Rob. Who is it uncle that you so bemone?

Pri. Warman, good nephew, whom sir Doncaster and I
Found freshly bleeding, as he now does lie.
You were scarce gone, when he did stab himself.

To. O God, he in his own hand houlds his own hearts hurt,
I dreaded too much his distressed look:
Belike the wretch despaird, and slew himself.

Don. Nay, that's most sure, yet he had little reason,
Considering how well you used him.

Rob. Well, I am sorry; but must not be sad,
Because the King is coming to my bower.
Help me, I pray thee, to remove his body,
Least he should come and see him murdered.
Sometime anon he shall be buried.
Exit.
Pri. Good, all is good: this is as I desire.
Now for a face of pure hypocrisy:
Sweet murder, cloth thee in religious weeds,
Reign in my bosom, that with help of thee,
I may effect this Robins Tragedy.

Enter Robin, Doncaster. Do. Nay, nay, you must not take this thing so heavily.

Rob. A bodies loss, sir Doncaster, is much:
But a souls too, is more to be bemon'd.

Pri. Truly I wonder at your virtuous mind:
O God to one so kind, who'ud be unkind?
Let go this grief, now must you put on joy,
And for the many favors I have found,
So much exceeding all conceit of mine,
Unto your cheer, I Will add a precious drink,
Of color rich, and red, sent me from Rome*
There Is in it Moly, Syrian Balsamum,
Golds rich Elixer: O it is precious!

Rob. Where is it uncle?

Pri. As yesterday,
Sir Doncaster and I rid on our way,
Thieves did beset us, bound us as you saw:
And among other things, did take from me,
This rich confection: but regardlesly,
As common drink, they cast, into a bush,
The bottle, which this day sir Doncaster
Fetched, and has left it in the inner lodging:
I tell you cousin (I do love you well)
A pint of this ransomde the Sophies son,
When he was taken in Natolia.
I meant indeed to give it my liege Lord,
In hope to have his favor: but to you
I put my self, be my good friend,
And, in your own restoring, me restore.

Rob. Uncle I will, you need urge that no more.
But what is the virtues of this precious drink?

Pri. It keeps fresh youth, restores diseased sight,
Helps natures weakness, smothes the scars of wounds,
And cooles the intrals with a balmie breath,
When they by thirst or travel boil with heat.

Rob. Uncle I thank you, pray you let me have
A cup prepared, against the king comes in,
To cool his heat: my self will give it him.

Pri. And when he drinks, be bold to say he drinks
A richer draught than that dissolved pearl,
Which Cleopatra drank to Antonie.

Rob. I have much business; let it be your charge,
To make this rich draught ready for the King,
And I will quit it, pray ye do not fail.
Exit.
Pri. I warrant you, good Nephew.

Don. Better, and better still.
We thought before but to have poysond him,
And now shall Robin Hoode destroy the king.
Even when the King, y^ Queen, the Prince, the Lords
Joy in his virtues, this supposed vice
Will turn, to sharp hate, their exceeding love.

Pri. Ha, ha, ha, I cannot choose but laugh,
To see my cousin cosend in this sort.
Fail him quoth you? nay hang me if I do.
But Doncaster art sure the poisons are well mixed?

Don. Iut, tut, let me alone for poisoning:
I have already turned ore four, or five,
That angerd me. But tell me Prior,
Wherefore so deadly do thou hate thy cousin?

Pri. Shall I be plain? Because if he were dead,
I should be made the Earl of Huntington.

Don. A pretty cause: But thou a churchman art.

Pri. Cut man, if that would fall,
I Will have a dispensation, and turn temporal.
But tell me Doncaster, why do thou hate him?

Don. By the Mass, I cannot tell. O yes, now I have it*
I hate thy cousin, Earl of Huntington,
Because so many love him as there do,
And I my self am loved of so few.
Nay, I have other reasons for my hate;
He is a fool, and will be reconcilde,
To any foe he has: he is too mild,
Too honest for this world, fitter for heaven:
He will not kill these greedy cormorants,
Nor strippe base pesants of the wealth they have:
He does abuse a thieues name and an outlawes,
And is indeed no outlawe, nor no thief,
He is unworthy of such reverent names.
Besides, he keeps a paltry whinling girl,
And will not bed, forsooth, before he bride:
I Will stand too^t, he abuses maidenhead,
That will not take it, being offered:
Hinders the common wealth of able men.
Another thing I hate him for again:
He says his prayers, fasts eues, gives alms, does good:
For these and such like crimes, swears Doncaster,
To work the speedy death of Robin Hoode.

Pri, Well said in faith. Hark, hark, the king returns:
To do this deed, my heart like fuel burns.

Exeunt. SCENE. IIII.
Wind horns* Enter King, Queen, John, Fitzwater, Ely, Chester, Salsbury,
Lester, little John, Friar Tuck, Scarlet, Scathlocke, and Much* Friar Tuck
carrying a Stags head, dancing. King. Gramercy Friar for thy glee,
Thou greatly have contented me,
What with thy sporting and thy game,
I swear I highly pleased am.

Fri. It was my masters whole desire
That maiden, yeoman, swain and friar
Their arts and wits should all apply,
For pleasure of your Majesty.

Qu. Some Richard, look I pray you on the ring,
That was about the neck of the last stagge.

Chest. Was his name Scarlet, that shot off his neck?

John. Chester, it was this honest fellow Scarlet:
This is the fellow, and a yeoman bold,
As ever courst the swift Heart on the molde.

King. Friar, here is somewhat grau'd upon the Ring,
I pray thee read it. Mean while list to me;
This while, most compassing the Friar about the Ring.
Scarlet and Scathlock, you bold brethren,
Twelve pence a day I give each for his fee,
And hence forth see ye live like honest men.

Both. We will my Liege, else-let us dye the death.

Much. A boon, a boon, upon my knee,
Good king Richard, I beg of thee.
For indeed sir, the troth is, Much is my father, and he is one of your
tenants in Kings Mill at Wakefield all on a green: O there dwells a jolly
pinder, at Wakefield all on a green: Now I would have you, if you will do so
much for me, to set me forward in the way of marriage to Iinny: the mill
would not be cast away upon us.


King. Much, be thou ever master of that mill,
I give it thee for thine in heritance.

Much. Thanks precious Prince of courtesy.
I Will to Inny, and tell her of my lands in faith.
Exit
Ioh. Here Friar, here, here it begins,

Fri. read. When Harold hare-foote reigned king,
About my neck he put this ring.

King. In Harolds time, more than a hundred year,
Has this ring been about this new slain Dear!
I am sorry now it did: but let the same
Head, ring and all be sent to Notingham,
And in the Castle kept for monuments.

Fitz. My Liege, I heard an old tale long ago,
That Harold being Goodwins son of Kent,
When he had got fair Englands government,
Hunted for pleasure once within this wood,
And singled out a fair and stately Stagge,
Which foot to foot, the king in running caught:
And sure this was the Stagge.

King. It was no doubt.

Chest. But some my Lord affirm,
That Julius Caesar many years before,
Took such a Stag, and such a Poesy writ.

King. It should not be in Julius Caesar's time:
There was no English used in this Land,
Until the Saxons came, and this is writ
In Saxon characters.

Ioh. Well, 'twas a goodly beast.

Enter Robin Hoode. King. How now earl Robert?

Fri, A forfet, a forfet, my liege Lord.
My masters laws are on record,
The Court-roll here your Grace may see.

King. I pray thee Friar, read them me.

Fri. One shall suffice, and this is he.
No man that comes in this wod,
To feast, or dwell with Robin Hood,
Shall call him Earl, Lord, Knight, or Squire,
He no such titles does desire,
But Robin Hood, plain Robin Hoode,
That honest yeoman stout and good,
O^ pain of forfetting a mark,
That must be paid to me his Clarke.
My liege, my liege, this law you broke,
Almost in the last word you spoke.
That crime may not acquitted be,
Till Friar Tuck receive his fee.

(Casts him purse. King. There Is more than twenty marks, mad Friar.

Fri. If thus you pay y^ Clarke his hire,
Often may you forfet, I desire.
You are a perfect penitent,
And well you do your wrong repent:
For this your Highness liberal gift,
I here absolve you without shrift.

King. Gramercies Friar. Now Robin Hood,
Since Robin Hood it needs must be,
I was about to ask before,
If thou did see the great Stags fall.

Rob. I did my Lord, I saw it all.
But missing this same prating Friar,
And hearing you so much desire
To have the lozels company,
I went to seek Small honesty.

Fri. But you found much, when you found me.

Rob. I, Much my man: but not a jot
Of honesty in thee, God wot.

Qu. Robin, you do abuse the Friar.

Fri. Madam, I dare not call him liar,
He may be bold with me, he knows.
How now Prince John, how goes, how goes
This wod-mans life with you to day?
My fellow Wodnet you would be.

Ioh. I am thy fellow, thou do see:
And to be plain, as God me save,
So well I like thee, merry knave,
That I thy company must have:
Nay, and I will.

Fri. Nay, and you shall.

Rob. My Lord, you need not fear at all,
But you shall have his company,
He will be bold I warrant you.

King. Know you where ere a spring is nie?
Feign would I drink, I am right dry.

Rob. I have a drink within my bower,
Of pleasing taste, and sovereign power:
My reverend uncle gives it me,
To give unto your Majesty.

King. I would be loath indeed, being in heat,
To drink cold water. Let us to thy bower.

To. Run Friar before, and bid my uncle be in readiness.

Fr. Gone with a trice, on such good vnsinesse.

Exeu^t omnes. SCENE. V.
Enter Marian, with a white apron. Mar. What Much? What Iinny? Much? I say.

Much. What Is the matter mistress?

Mar. I pray thee see, the fueller
Suffer the cook to want no wodde.
Good Lord, where is this idle girl?
Why Iinny?
Within. I come forsooth.

Mar. I pray thee bring the flowers forth.

Much. I Will go send her mistres, and help the cooks, if they have any need.
Exit Much.
Mar. Dispatch good Much. What Iin I say?

Enter linny. Much. Hie ye, hie ye: she calls for life.

Mar. Indeed, indeed, you do me wrong,
To let me cry, and call so long.

Iin. Forsooth, I strawed the dining bowers.
And smoth'd the walks with herbs and flowers,
The yeomens tables I have spread,
Dressed salts, laid trenchers, set on bread:
Nay all is well, I warrant you.

Mar. You are not well I promise you,
Your foresleeues are not pind (fie, fie)
And all your hed-geere stands awry.
Give me the flowers: Go in for shame,
And quickly see you mend the same.

Exit linny. Marian strewing flowers. Enter sir Doncaster, Prior. Don. How
busy mistress Marian is?
She thinks this is her day of bliss.

Pri. But it shall be the wofull'st day
That ever chaunst her, if I may.

Mar. Why are you two thus in the air?
Your wounds are green,
Good cuz have care.

Pri. Thanks for your kindness, gentle maid.
My cousin Robert us has praid,
To help him in this business.

Enter Friar. Fri. Sir Doncaster, sir Doncaster?

Don. Holla.

Fri. I pray you, did you see the Prior?

Pri. Why, here I am. What would thou Friar.

Fri. The king is heated in the chase,
And posteth hitherward apace.
He told my master he was dry,
And he desires ye, presently
To send the drink whereof ye spoke. Horns blow.

Pri. Come, it is here; haste let us make

Exeunt Prior, and Friar. Enter King, John, Queen, Scarlet, Scathlocke, Ely,
Fitz. water, Salsbury, Chester. Marian kneeles down. Mar. Most gracious
Sovereign, welcome once again:
Welcome to you, and all your princely train.

King. Thanks lovely hostess: we are homely guests.
Where Is Robin Hood? He promised me some drink.

Mar. Your hand maid. Robin will not then be long.
The Friar indeed came running to his uncle,
Who with sir Doncaster were here with me,
And altogether went for such a drink.

Kin. Well, in a better time it could not come,
For I am very hot and passing dry.

Enter Robin Hoode, a cup, a towell, leading Doncaster: Tuck, and Much
pulling the Prior. Rob. Traitor, I Will draw thee out before the king.

Fri. Come murderous Prior.

Much. Come ye dogs face.

Ki Why how now Robin? where is y^ drink you bring?

Rob. Lay hold on these.
Far be it, I should bring your Majesty,
The drink these two prepared for your taste.

King. Why Robin Hoode, be brief and answer me:
I am amazed at thy troubled looks.

Rob. Long will not my ill looks amaze your Grace.
I shortly look never to look again.

Mar. Never to look? What will it still be night?
If thou look never, day can never be.
What ailes my Robin? Wherefore do thou faint?

Rob. Because I cannot stand: yet now I can.
Thans to my king, and thanks to Marian.

King. Robin be brief, and tell us what has chanst?

Rob. I must be brief, for I am sure of death,
Before a long tale can be half way told.

Fitz. Of death, my son: bright sun of all my joy?
Death cannot have the power of virtuous life.

Rob. Not of the virtues, but the life it can.

King. What do thou speak of death? how should thou die?

Rob. By poison, and the Priors treachery.

Qu. Why, take this sovereign powder at my hands,
Take it and live in spite of poisons power.

Don. I, set him forward Powders quoth ye! nah,
I am a fool then, if a little dust,
The shauing of a horn, a Bezars stone,
Or any Antidote have power to stay
The execution of my hearts resolve.
Tut, tut, you labor lovely Qneene, in vain,
And on a thanklesse groom your toil bestow.
Now has your foe revenged you of your foe:
Robin shall die, if all the world said no.

Mar. How the Wolf howles! Fly like a tender Rid
Into thy sheepeheards bosom. Shield me love.
Can thou not Robin? Where shall I be hid?
O God, these Ravens will seize upon thy Dove.

Rob. They cannot hurt thee, pray thee do not fear,
Base curres will couch, the Lion being near.

Qu. How works my powder?

Rob. Uery well, fair Q^eene.

King. Do thou feel any ease?

Rob. I shall, I trust, anon:
Sleep falls upon mine eyes.
O I must sleep, and they that love me, do not waken me.

Mar. Sleep in my lap, and I will sing to thee.

Ioh. He should not sleep.

Rob. I must, for I must die:
While I live therefore let me have some rest.

Fitz. I, let him rest, the poison vrges sleep.
When he awakes, there is no hope of life.

Don. Of life? now by the little time I have to live,
He cannot live one hour for your lives.

King. Uillaine what art thou?

Don. Why, I am a knight.

Chest. Thou were indeed.
If it so please your Grace.
I will describe my knowledge of this wretch.

Kin. Do Chester.

Chest. This Doncaster, for so the fellon hight,
Was, by the king your father, made a knight,
And well in arms he did himself behave.
Many a bitter storm, the wind of rage
Blasted this Realm with, in those woeful days,
When the unnatural fights continued,
Between your kingly father and his sons.
This cutthroat, knighted in that time of woe,
Seaz'd on a beauteous Nun, at Barkhamsted,
As we were marching toward Winchester,
After proud Lincoln was compeld to yield,
He took this virgin straying in the field:
For all the Nuns and every Covent fled
The dangers that attended on our troops.
For those sad times too often did testify,
Wars rage has no regard of piety.
She humbly praid him, for the love of heaven,
To guide her to her fathers, two miles thence.
He swore he would, and very well he might:
For to the camp he was a Forager.
Upon the way they came into a wood.
Wherein, in brief, he stripped this tender maid:
Whose lust, when she in vain had long withstood,
Being by strength and torments ouerlaid,
He did a sacrilegious deed of rape,
And left her bathed in her own tears and blood.
When she revived, she to her fathers got,
And got her father to make just complaint,
Unto your mother, being then in camp.

Qu. Is this the villain Chester, that defilde
Sir Eustace Stutuiles chaste and beauteous child?

Don. I Madam, this is he,
That made a wench dance naked in a wood:
And for she did deny what I desirde,
I scourged her for her pride, till her fair skin
With stripes was checkred like a vinters grate.
And what was this? A mighty matter sure.
I have a thousand more than she defilde,
And cut the squeaking throats of some of them:
I grieve I did not hirs,

Qu. Punish him Richard.
A fairer virgin never saw the sun.
A chaster maid was never sworn a Nun.

King. How escaped the villain punishment, that time?

Fitz. I rent his spurs off, and disgraded him.

Chest. And then he raild upon the Queen and me.
Being committed, he his keeper slew,
And to your father fled, who pardond him.

Rich. God give his soul a pardon for that sin.

Sals. O had I heard his name, or seen his face,
I had defended Robin from this chance.
Ah villain, shut those gloomy lights of thine.
Remembrest thou a little son of mine,
Whose nurse at Wilton first thou rauishedst,
And slew'st two maids that did attend on them?

Don. I grant, I dashed the brains out of a brat,
Thine if he were, I care not: had he bin
The first borne comfort of a royal king,
And should have yald when Doncaster cried peace,
I would have done by him as then I did.

King. Soon shall the world be rid of such a wretch,
Let him be hanged alive, in the high way, that joins to the power.

Don. Alive or dead, I reck not how I die.
You, them, and these, I desperately defy.

Ely. Repent, or never look to be absolu'd,
But die accursed as thou deseruest well.

Don. Then give me my desert; curse one by one.

Ely. First I accurse thee, and, if thou persist,
Unto damnation leave thee wretched man.

Don. What do I care for your damnation?
Am I not doomed to death? what more damnation
Can there ensue your loud and yelling cries?

Pri. Yes devil: hear thy fellow spirit speak,
Who would repent; O feign he would repent.
After this bodies bitter punishment,
There is an euer-during endless woe,
A quenchlesse fire, an vnconsuming pain,
Which desperate souls and bodies must endure.

Don. Can you preach this, yet set me on sir Prior,
To run into this endless, quenchlesse fire?

Pri. High heavens show mercy to my many ils.
Never had this been done, but like a fiend,
Thou temptedst me with ceaselesse devilish thoughts.
Therefore I curse, with bitterness of soul,
The hour wherein I saw thy balefull eyes.
My eyes I curse, for looking on those eyes.
My ears I curse, for harkning to thy tongue.
I curse thy tongue for tempting of mine ears.
Each part I curse, that we call thine or mine:
Thine for enticing mine, mine following thine.

Don. A holy prayer. what Collect have we next?

This time Robin stirs. Fitz. My Marian wants words, such is her woe:
But old Fitzwater for his girl and him
Begs nothing, but worlds plague for such a foe.
Which causeless harmd a virtuous noble man,
A pitier of his griefs, when he felt grief:
Therefore be think thee of thy hateful deed,
Thou faithless Prior, and thou this ruthlesse thief.

Pri. Will no man curse me, giving so much cause?
Then Doncaster, our selves our selves accurse,
And let no good betide to thee or me.

All the yeomen, Friar, Much, Iinny cry; All. Amen, amen: accursed may ye be,
For murdring Robin, flower of courtesy.

Robin sits up. Rob. O ring not such a peale for Robins death,
Let sweet forgiveness be my passing bell.
Art thou there Marian? then fly forth my breath:
To die with in thy arms contents me well.

Pri. Keep in, keep in a little while thy soul,
Till I have powered my soul forth at thy feet.

Rob. I slept not uncle, I your grief did hear,
Let him forgive your soul that bought it dear:
Your bodies deed, I in my death forgive,
And humbly beg the king that you may live.
Stand to your Clergy uncle, save your life,
And lead a better life than you have done.

Pri. O gentle Nephew, ah my brothers son,
Thou dying glory of old Huntington,
Wishest thou life to such a murdrous foe?
I will not live, since thou must life for go.
Oh happy Warman, blessed in thy end,
Now too too late thy truth I do commend.
O Nephew, Nephew, Doncaster and I
Murdered poor Warman, for he did deny
To join with us in this black tragedy.

Rob. Alas poor Warman. Friar, little John,
I told ye both where Warmans body lay:
And of his burial I Will dispose anon.

King. Is there no law, Lord Ely, to convict,
This Prior, that confesses murders thus?

Ely. He is a hallowed man, and must be tried,
And punished by the censure of the Church.

Pri. The Church therein does err: God does allow
No Canon to preserve a murderers life.
Richard, king Richard,, in thy Grandsires days,
A law was made, the Clergy sworn thereto,
That whatsoever Churchman did commit
Treason, or murder, or false felony,
Should like a seculer be punished.
Treason we did, for sure we did intend
King Richards poisoning, Sovereign of this land.
Murder we did in working Warmans end,
And my dear Nephews, by this fatal hand.
And theft we did, for we have robbed the king,
The State, the Nobles, Commons, and his men,
Of a true Peer, firm Pillar, liberal Lord.
Fitzwater we have robbed of a kind son,
And Marians loue-ioyes we have quite undone.

Don. Whoppe, what a coil is here with your confession?

Pri. I ask but judgment for my foul transgression.

King. Thy own mouth has condemned thee.
Hence with him.
Hang this man dead, then see him buried:
But let the other hang alive in chains.

Don. I thank you sir.

Exeunt yeomen, Friar, prisoners, Much. Ioh. My self will go, my Lord,
And see sharp Justice done upon these slaves.

Rob. O go not hence Prince John: a word or two
Before I die, I feign would say to you.

King. Robin, we see what we are sad to see,
Death like a champion treading down thy life:
Yet in thy end somewhat to comfort thee,
We freely give to thy betrothed wife,
Beauteous and chaste Matilda, all those lands,
Fallen by thy folly, to the Priors hands,
And by his fault now forfetted to me:
Earl Huntington, she shall thy Countess be,
And thy wight yeomen, they shall wend with me,
Against the faithless enemies of Christ.

Rob. Bring forth a Beer, and cover if with green;
A Beer is brought in. That on my deathbed I may here sit down.
Beer brought, he sits. At Robins burial let no black be seen,
Let no hand give for him a mourning gown:
For in his death, his king has given him life,
By this large gift, given to his maiden wife.
Chaist maid Marilda, Countess of account,
Chase, with thy bright eyes, all these clouds of woe,
From these fair cheeks, I pray thee sweet do so.
Think it is bootelesse folly, to complain,
For that which never can be had again.
Queen Elianor, you once were Matilds foe:
Prince John, you long sought her unlawful love:
Let dying Robin Hood entreat you both,
To change those passions Madame turn your hate,
To princely love; Prince John, convert your love
To virtuous passions, chaste and moderate.
O that your gracious right hands would infolde,
Matildas right hand, prisoned in my palm,
And swear to do what Robin Hood desires.

Qu. I swear I will, I will a mother be.
To fair Matildas life and chastit^e.

Ioh. When John solicites chaste Matildaes ears,
With lawless suits, as he has often done:
Or offers to the altars of her eyes,
Lascivious Poems, stuffed with vanities,
He craves to see but short and sower days,
His death be like to Robins he desires,
His perjured body prove a poisoned prey,
For cowled Monks, and barefoote begging Friars.

Rob. Enough, enough, Fitzwater, take your child:
My dying frost which no suns heat can thawe,
Closes the powers of all my outward parts,
My freezing blood runs back unto my heart,
Where it assists death, which it would resist:
Only my love a little hinders death.
For he beholds her eyes, and cannot smite:
Then go not yet Matilda, stay a while.
Friar, make speed, and lift my latest will.

Mat. O let me look, for ever in thy eyes,
And lay my warm breath to thy bloodlesse lips,
If my sight can restrain deaths tyrannies,
Or keep lives breath within thy bosom locked.

Rob. Away, away,
Forbear, my love: all this is but delay.

Fitz. Come maiden daughter, from my maiden son,
And give him leave to do what must be done.

Rob. First I bequeath my soul to all souls sauer,
And will my body to be buried,
At Wakefield, underneath the Abbey wall:
And in this order make my funeral;
When I am dead, stretch me upon this Beer,
My beads and Primer shall my pillowe be:
On this side lay my bow, my good shafts here,
Upon my breast the cross, and underneath,
My trusty sword, thus fastened in the sheath.
Let Warmans body at my feet be laid,
Poor Warman, that in my defense did die,
For holy dirges, sing me wodmens songs,
As ye to Wakefield walk, with voices shrill:
This for my self: my goods and plate I give
Among my yeomen: them I do bestow,
Upon my Sovereign, Richard. This is all.
My liege farewell, my love farewell, farewell.
Farewell fair Queen, Prince John and noble Lords.
Father Fitzwater heartily adieu,
Adieu my yeomen tall.
Matilda close mine eyes.
Friar farewell, farewell to all.

Mat. O must my hands with envious death conspire,
To shut the morning gates of my lives light?

Fitz. It is a duty, and thy loves desire,
I Will help thee girl to close up Robins sight.

King. Laments are bootelesse, tears cannot restore
Lost life: Matilda, therefore weep no more.
And since our mirth is turned into moan,
Our merry sport, to tragic funeral,
We will prepare our power for Austria,
After earl Roberts timelesse burial.
Fall to your w^d-songs therefore yeomen bol^,
And deck his hearse with flowers, that loved you dear,
Dispose his goods, as he has them disposed.
Fitzwater and Matilda, bide you here,
See you the body unto Wakefield borne,
A little we will bear ye company,
But all of us at London point to meet:
Thither Fitzwater, bring earl Robins men:
And Friar, see you come along with them.

Fri. Ah my liege Lord, the Friar faints,
And has no words to make complaints:
But since he must forsake this place,
He will awaite, and thanks your Grace.
Song. Weep, weep, ye wod-men wail,
Your hands with sorrow wring:
Your master Robin Hood lies dead,
Therefore sigh as you sing.
Here lies his Primer and his beads,
His bent bow and his arrows keen,
His good sword and his holy cross,
Now cast on flowers fresh and green:
And as they fall, shed tears and say,
Wella, wella day, wella, wella day:
Thus cast ye flowers and sing,
And on to Wakefield take your way.

Exeunt. Fri. Here does the Friar leave with grieuance:
Robin is dead, that graced his entrance:
And being dead he craves his audience,
With this short play, they would have patience.

Enter Chester. Chest. Nay Friar, at request of thy kind friend,
Let not thy Play so soon be at an end.
Though Robin Hoode be dead, his yeomen gone,
And that thou think there now remains not one,
To act an other Scene or two for thee:
Yet know full well, to please this company,
We mean to end Matildaes Tragedy.

Fri. Off then, I wish you, with your Kendall green:
Let not sad grief, in fresh array be seen.
Matildaes story is repleat with tears,
Wrongs, desolations, ru^ns, deadly fears.
In, and attire ye: though I tired be,
Yet will I tell my mistress Tragedy.
Apolloes master done I invoke:
To whom henceforth my deeds I dedicate:
That of his Godhead, above all Gods divine,
With his rich spirit he would lighten mine:
That I may sing true lays of trothlesse deeds,
Which to conceive, my heart through sorrow bleeds.
Cheer thee, sad soul, and in a lofty line,
Thunder out wrong, compast in clowdy tears.
Enter in black. Show to the eyes, fill the beholders ears,
With all the lively acts of lustful rage,
Restraind by modest tears, and chastities entreats,
And let king John that ill part personage,
By suits, devices, practices and threats:
And when he sees all serves to no end,
Of chaste Matilda let him make an end.

Cho. We are all fitted, Friar, shall we begin?

Fri. Well art thou suited: would my order would Permit me habit equal to my
heart.

Cho. If you remember, John did take an oath,
Never again to seek Matildaes love.

Fri. O what is he, that's sworn affections slave,
That will not violate all laws, all oaths?
And being mighty, what will he omit,
To compass his intents, though nere so ill?
You must suppose king Richard now is dead,
And John (resistlesse) is fair Englands Lord:
Who striving to forget Matildaes love,
Takes to his wife the beauteous Isabell,
Betrothed to Hugh de Briu, Earl of North March:
And picking quarrels under show of kin,
Wholly divorces his first Queen away:
But yet Matilda, still, still trobles him,
And being in the Court, so often he courts her,
That by her noble father, old Fitzwater,
She is removed from his lust-tempting eye.
But tides restraind, oreswell their bounds with rage:
Her absence adds more fuel to his fire.
In sleep he sees her, and his waking thoughts,
Study by day to compass his desire.

Cho. Friar, since now you speak of visions,
It was received by tradition,
From those that were right near unto king John,
Of three strange visions, that to him appeard:
And as I guess, I told you what they were.

Fri, With them I will begin: draw but that veil,
And there king John sits sleeping in his chair.

Draw the curten, the king sits sleeping, his sword by his side. Enter
Austria, before whom comes Ambition: and bringing him before the chair,
king John, in sleep, makes signs to avoid, and holds his own crown fast
with both his hands. Fri. Ambition, that had ever waited on king John,
Now brings him Austria, easy to be taken,
Being wholly tamed by Richards warlike hand,
And bids him add that Dukedom to his crown:
But he puts by Ambition, and contemnes
All other kingdoms, but the English crown,
Which he holds fast, as if he would not loose.

Enter Constance, leading young Arthur: both offer to take the crown; but with
his foot he ouerturneth them: to them comes Insurrection, led by the F. K.
and L. menacing him, and lead the child again to the chair: but he only
lays hand on his sword, and with his foot overthrows the child, whom
they take up as dead: and Insurrection flying, they mournefully bear in the
body. Fr. The Lady and the child that did ascend,
Striving in vain to take the crown from John,
Were Constance, and her son the Duke of Britain,
Heir to the elder brother of the king.
Yet he sleeps on, and with a little spurn,
The mother and the Prince does ouerturne,
Again when Insurrection them assists,
Stird by the French king, and the wronged Earl,
Whose troth-plight wife, king John had taken to wife,
He only claps his hand upon his sword*
Mocketh their threatenings, and in their attempts,
The harmless Prince receives recurelesse death*
Whom they too late with bootelesse tears lament.

Enter Queen, with two children borne after her: she ascends, and seeing no
motion, she fetches her children one by one; but seeing yet no motion, she
desce^deth wringing her hands, and departs. Enter Matilda, in mourning veil,
reading on a book, at whose coming he starteth, and sits upright: as she
passes by, he smiles, and foldes his arms, as if he did embrace her; being
gone, he starts suddenly, and speaks. King. Matilda, stay Matilda, do but
speak:
Whoes there? Entreat Matilda to come back.

Bon. Who would you have, my Lord?

Kin. Why, my Lord Bonuill: I would have Matilda:
That but even now, past by toward the door.

Bon. I saw her not my Lord.

King. Had thou a lovers eye,
A gnat, a moate, a shadow thou would spy:
Come follow me, she cannot be so far,
But I shall overtake her: come away.

Exeunt. Fri. The last appearance shadowed the fair Queen,
And her two children, at whose sight king John
Showed neither sign nor show of passion:
But when the sun came masked in a cloud,
And veiled beauty, ioynde with chastity,
Appeared in Matildaes lovely shape,
He starts, he claspes, he wakes, he calls, he seeks
The shadow of that substance he affects:
To her he sewes, but she his suit reiects:
To him she sewes, but he her suit neglectes:
He sues to be her love, she does despise:
She sues to live a maid, which he denies.
What follows of this wilful will, and shall,
This no and nay, this quenchlesse, bootlesse fire,
This cold affection, and this hot desire,
The act it self shall tell, and the poor Friar,
Your partial favors humbly does require.
Exit.
Sound trumpets, Enter king, Bonuile, Salsbury, Lore^s. King. Now I perceive,
this only was a dream:
Divine Matildaes Angel did appear,
Decked like a Uestall, ready for heavens quire,
And to this earthly truncke will not come near.
Well, let her go: I must in faith, I must,
And so I will: kings thoughts should be divine:
So are Matildaes, so henceforth shall mine.

Old Anb. So doing, peace shall wait upon your crown,
And blessing upon blessing shall befall.

Kin. Its true my Lord, I know full well there shall.

Sals. Your people will wax proud of such a king,
That of himself is king, Lord of his thoughts:
Which by assertion of Philosophers,
Is held to be the greatest Empery.

Kin. And they said wisely, noble Anbery.

Sals. Then will Fitzwater with his gallant troops,
Again keep triumphs in the English Court.
Then will Matilda

King. Matilda, what of her?

Sals. Like a bright star, adorn the lovely train
Of beauteous Ladies, which attend the Queen,
Whose only beauty equalleth them all.

Ki. Like an old fool, whose dim eyes wanting sight,
Compar'st the sun, to common candle light.

Sals. Pardon my liege: I do comfesse, her fair
Exceedes all these, as far as day does night.

King. Grossly allude^: night by moon, by stars.
By wandering fires, exhaled meteors,
By artificial lights, by eyes of beasts,
And little glow-wormes, glimpsing in the dark,
Has some where brightness, lightness, and sometime
Under each Horizon in all parts clear:
But they at no time, no where can be said
To be less dark, then dungeon darkness is.
Pitch colored, Eban faced, blacker than black,
While her fair eyes gives beauty to bright day.

Sal. To hear the Queen thus praised works my content.

Kin. The Queen? O, had I such a thought I would repent.

To himself. Sal. Further my Lord.

King. What shall we further wade?
I fear I shall be tired with this jade.

Sal. The commonwealth will flourish and increase.

K. Good Oxford of those things now hold your peace:
And take the pains to fetchin Isabell.
I have strange tidings sent me out of France,
Which she will take, I know, in as good part,
As I accept her praise: fetch her I say.
Exit Salsbury. What is the old fool gone? now go thy way.
What think thou of him Hubert? tell me man.

Hub. As of a good old gentleman my Lord,
That speaks but what he thinks, and thinks you think
As he does: and I warrant you
Will not canceale those praises from the Queen,
Which as he deemes you vttred in her praise.

Kin. I would have them believe it so indeed:
But I protest, is no part of my Creed.

Hu. I faith your Grace did Oxfords years great wrong,
To curtall his good work, that seemed so long:
He peradventure would have brought in more,
After his Preface, to rich plenties store.
Perchance he would have showed dame vanity,
That in your Court is suffered howerly:
And bad you punish ruffians with long hair,
New fashions, and such toys: a special care
Has that good man: he turns the statute book:
About his hall and chambers if you look,
The moral virtues in fair effigy,
Are lively painted: moral Philosophy
Has not a sencence, be it great or small,
But it is painted on his Honors wall.

Enter Queen, Oxford. Kin. Peace, peace, he comes, now lets be silent all.

Sals. I tell you I was proud of his good words.

Qu. God hold them Oxford: for its often seen,
A reconciled foe small good affords.

Sals. O forbear: trust me, I gage my Honor he does hold you dear.

King. How cheer you Isabell? The earl, your spouse
Has sent defiance to the king your husband,
And like a tried tall soldier, fled his holds
In Marchland; Where he knows, despite of him,
And all the men that he therein can raise,
King John could have sent dogs enowe to tear
Their ill armed bodies peece-meale, ere his bands
Should with base blood have staind their noble hands.
And whether is this worshipful good Earl
(This first love, old love, new love if you will)
Gone thinks your Ladishippe? Forsooth, good man,
To Normandy; and there he stirs up coals,
And urges strong aid for confederates,
Who, as he says, are treacherously disposed.

Qu. If he do so, the greater is his sin:
Poor man, I have no interest in him.

King. But he has had in you, as it should seem,
Else would he not make sonnets of your browe,
Your eye, your lip, your hand, your thigh,
A plague upon him: how came he so nigh?
Nay, now you have the cursed queanes counterfeit:
Through rage you shake, because you cannot rave.
But answer me; Why should the Bedlam slave
Entitle a whole Poem to your kiss,
Calling it chery, ruby, this and this?
I tell you, I am jealous of your love,
Which makes me break into this passion.
Here Is the kind noble Anbery de Vere,
Knows what I speak is true:
My Lord, my Lord, I do appeal to you:
Are these things to be borne?

Sal. No by the Roode,
These loue-rimes are the tokens of small good.

Hu. Why my good Lord, was never Poetry,
Offered unto a Ladies patronage?

Sals. Yes, but not taken.

Hu. Yes, and taken too.
Though muddy slaves, whose ballatizing rimes,
With words unpolished, show their brutish thoughts,
Naming their Maukins in each lustful line:
Let no celestial beauty look awry,
When well writ poemes, couching her rich praise,
Are offered to her unstained virtues eye.
For Poetries high sprighted sons will raise,
True beauty to all wished eternity:
Therefore my Lord, your age is much to blame,
To think a taken Poem Ladies shame.

Sa. You see the King, that's better read than you,
And far more wronged than I, takes it not well.

Ki. Yes but I do: I think not Isabell, Lord,
The worse for any writing of Brunes.

Sa. Will you ha the troth my Lord: I think so too:
And though I be an old man, by my sword,
My arm shall justify my constant word.

Qu. After a long storm in a troublous sea,
The Pilot is no gladder of a calm,
Than Isabell to see the vexed looks
Of her loved Lord, changed into sweet aspects.

Kin. I will not tell thee what a world of foes,
For thy love (dear love) rise against my life.
To himself. ( Matildaes love: few swords will fight for thee)
I will not number up the many woes
That shall be multiplied, strife upon strife
Will follow! But to shun ensuing ils,
I Will take shuch pledges as shall please me ask.
Of each proud Baron, dwelling in the Realm.
Bruise kinsman, and the deputy to March,
Has a high-minded Lady to his wife,
An able son for arms, and a less bo^y,
That is the comfort of his fathers life:
Madame, I know you love the Lady well,
And of her wealth you may be bold to build,
By sending you four hundred white milch ki^e,
And ten like colored bulls, to serve that heard:
So fair, that every cow did Io seem,
And every bull Europaes rauisher.
To friend my self with such a subjects truth,
Thus I command; You, and Earl Salsbury
Shall, with what speed conveniently ye may.
Hye ye to Gilford, there the Lady lies,
And her sons too, as I am told by spies:
All that she has, I know she calls yours,
All that she has, I gladly wo^ld call mine,
If she abuse ye: if she use ye well,
For ever be, what she retains, her own:
Only go by as Queens in progress do,
And send me word how she receives you.

Qu. Well, I avouch she will, before I go,
Far be it, John should prove Lord Bruses foe.
Come noble Oxford, I long to be at Gilford.

Sals. In such a business, Madam, so do I.

Exeunt. King. Go on, good stales, now Gilford is mine own.
Hubert, I charge you take an hundred horse,
And follow unto Gilford Castle gates,
The Queen, pretend, you come to tend upon,
Sent carefully from us: when you are in,
Boldly demand the Lady for her sons,
For pledges of her husbands faith and hers:
Whom when ye have, upon the Castle seize,
And keep it to our use until we come:
Mean while let me alone with Hugh your son,
To work a wonder, if no prodigy:
But, whatsoere, it shall attempted be.

Hub. Even that which to your Majesty
May seem contentfull, thereto I agree.

King. Go then to Gilford, and a victor be.
Exit Hub. Moubray, our mask? are you and Chester ready?

Mow. We will before your Grace, I warrant you.

King. How think of it, Mowbray?

Hu. As on a mask; but for our torch-bearers,
Hell cannot rake so mad a crewe as I.

King. Faith, who is chief?

Hu. Will Brand, my Lord.
But then your Grace must curb his cruelty:
The reign once got, he is apt for villainy.

Kin. I know the villain is both rough and grim:
But as a ty-dogge I will muzzle him.
I Will bring him up to fawn upon my friends,
And worry dead my foes. But to our mask.
I mean this night to revel at the feast,
Where fair Matilda graceth every guest:
And if my hidden courtesy she grace,
Old Bainards Castle good Fitzwaters place,
John will make rich, with royal Englands wealth:
But if she do uot: not those scattred bands,
Dropping from Austria, and the Holy land,
That boast so much of glorious victories,
Shall stop the inundations of those woes,
That like a deluge I will bring on them:
I know the crew is there, banish all fears:
If wronged, they shall be ours, if welcome, theirs.

Exeu^t Enter Fitzwater and his son Bruise, and call forth his daughter. Fitz.
Why how now votary? still at your book?
Ever in mourning weeds? For shame, for shame,
With better entertainment cheer our friends.
Now by the blessed cross you are much too blame,
To cross our mirth thus; you are much too blame Isay.
Good Lord, has never woe enough of well ada!
Indeed, indeed,
Some sorrow fits: but this is more than need.

Mat. Good father pardon me,
You saw I sat the supper and the banquet,
You know I cannot dance, discourse I shun:
By reason that my wit, but small before,
Comes far behind the ripe wits of our age.

Young B. You Will be too ripe for marriage,
If you delay, by day, and day, thus long,
There is the noble Wigmore, lord of the March,
That lies on Wye, Lug, and the Seuerne streams,
His son is like the suns syres Ganimede,
And for your love, has sent a Lord to plead:
His absence, I did purpose to excuse:
Enter Lester, Richmond. But Lester to the man for him that sues.

F. My cousin Bruise has been your Broker, Lester,
At least has broke the matter to my girl.

Lest. O for a barber at the time of need,
Or one of these that dresses periwigs,
To deck my gray head with a youthful hair:
But I must to it. Matilda, thus it is;
Say, can ye love me? I am Wigmors son.

Ma. My cousin said, he looked like Ganimede:
But you, but you.

Ley. But I, but I, you say,
Am rather like old Chremes in a play.
But that's a nice objection: I am he,
But by attorney ship made deputy.

Mat. He Is never like to speed well, all his life,
That by attorney sues to win a wife:
But grant you are, whom you seem nothing like,
Young Wigmore, the heir to this noble Lord:
He for his son has yet sent us nere a word.

Old. Br. If you grant love, when his son does woo,
Then in your ioynture heel send, say, and do.

Y. Br. And for a dooer, cousin take my word,
Look for a good egg, he was a good bird:
Cock a the game in faith, never fear.

Ma. I, but I fear the match will fall out ill,
Because he says his son is named Will.

Fitz. And why good daughter: Has some Palmister,
Some Augur, or some dreaming Calculator
(For such I know you often hearken to)
Been prating against the name? Go too, go too,
Do not believe them. Lester, fall to woo.

Ma. I must believe my father, and it is you,
That if I ought misdid, reproou'd me still,
And chiding said, you are wedded to your will,

Fitz. God for thy mercy, have ye caught me there?
Wigmore is William, woman. Lester, speak,
Thou art the simplest wooer in the world.

Lest. You have put me out, and she has took me down:
You with your talk, she with her ready tongue.
You told me I should find her mild and still,
And scarce a word come from her in an hour,
Then did I think, I should have all the talk,
Unhindred by your willingness to help,
Unanswerd till I had no more to say: And then

Y. B. What then? she with a courtly curtsie saying nay.

Ma. Your friends attorney might have gone his way,
With as great credit, as did that Orator,
Which handling an Oration, some three hours,
Ill for the matter, worse than bad for phrase:
Having said Dixi; looked, and found not one,
To praise or dispraise his Oration:
For, wearied with his talk, they all were gone.

F. Now by my troth, if any troth I have,
I amas merry at Matildaes mirth,
As I was glad to see her first days birth.
For till this hour, so help me holidam,
Since the too timely death of Huntington,
Not a blithe word had passage through her lips.

Ley. See what a pleasing humor wooers bring.

Cos. B. O but ye leave too soon.

Ley. Yet she auerers
I stand too long, shall I choose yours or hers?

Mat. Either forbear, I pray ye, for a while.
Welcome Lord Richmond.

Rich. What, does Matilda smile?
That still like sadness solitary sat:
Then off with widows weeds, and teach your feet,
(That have forgot for want of exercise,
And by the means your sorrow had no mean)
To tread a measure: for a gallant crew,
Of courtly maskers landed at the stairs,
Before whom vnintreated, I am come,
And have prevented, I believe, their page,
Who with his torch is entered.

Fitz. Richmond, thanks:
If you have ought to say about the maskers,
Beseech the Gentlemen to enter in:
For they are welcome guests to old Fitzwater.
Exit Messenger. Son, son, I pray you fetch the Ladies in:
We have been talking here about a match,
And left our noble friends in discontent.

Rich. Nay by my faith, we had much merriment;
Yet thought it long, you neither came, nor sent.

Matilda faints, and sits down. Fitz. How now Matilda? pray thee cheer thee
girl.

Mat. I thought it was a lightning before death:
Too sudden to be certain: good pleasure stay.
Enter Ladies. Will thou not wanton? churl then go thy way.

After mask. Ri. What? changed so soon: so soon fallen to your du^ps?
Cheerly: the mask comes in. O God, this veil and look
Fit not this sport.

Mat. I Will leave it.

Lest. Nay: for your love, Williams sake, fair maiden stay.
Dance: Maskers take each a Lady, John Matilda: but refusing, father; This is
no courtship daughter, be not nice,
You both abuse him and disparage us:
His fellows had the Ladies they did choose,
And well you know, here is no more maids than Maud:
Your self are all our store: I pray you rise,
Or by my faith, I say you do us wrong.

Mat. I will do what you will: lead, lead your dance.

Ki. You know me by my speech.

Mat. I my Liege, I: O! that temptatious tongue
Had no where to be placed but in your head.

Ki. Well, say I have her tongue, had I not need,
When you have both her eyes: nay all her shape:
Able to tempt even Jove himself to rape.

Ma. Good my Lord leave; or I will leave the place.

Dance again: and in the first course Maitlda flings from him: John follows.
Fitz. Dance out your Galliard: Gods dear holibread,
You Are too forgetful: dance, or by my troth,
You Will move my patience more than I will speak.
She unwilling, John roughly pulls her. Nay soft vnmannerd sir, you are too
rough:
Her joints are weak, your arms are strong and tough:
If ye come here for sport you welcome be,
If not, better your room than such bad company.
John threatens him by signs. Do threaten me? theu will I see thy face.

Kin. And so thou shall, look on me rebel Lord;
Thou that were late a factious ringleader,
And in the open field gave me fierce fight,
Art thou again gathering another head,
That with such rudeness thou do entertain
The gentle coming of thy Sovereign?

Fitz. My dread Lord, hear me, and forgive this fault:
What I have erst done, long since you forgave:
If I did lead the Barons in the field,
The Barons chose me, when they could not choose
But make some leader, you were so missed.
When better thoughts entered your royal breast,
We then obeyed you, as our Sovereign head.

King. You did even what you list, and so do still.
I am the king, but you must have your will:
The plain troth is, we are not come in sport,
Though for our coming, this was our best cloak:
For if we never come, till you do send,
We must not be your guests while bankets last,
Contentious brauls you howerly send to us:
But we may send and send, and you return,
This Lord is sick, that pained with the gout,
He rid from home. You think I find not out
Your close confederacies: yes I do, no doubt.

Lest. If there be here a close confederate,
Gods vengeance light upon him with my hate.

K. No, you are open Lester, that I know.

Chapter I by the Lord, my Lord, your open foe.

Lest. By thy Lords Lord, and mine, proud Rafe of Chester,
Thou dare not say so, were thou from the king.

MOW. Yes, but he dares and shall.

Rich. Mowbray, if you stand by,
He dares perchance, else will the dastard fly.

Chapter My own sword shall maintain my tongues true speech:
For it is not frequented to such lies,
As wrangling Lester, and proud Richmond use:
It cannot set out like a thundering drum,
Or roaring Canon, stuffed with naught but brags,
The multitudes of seas died red with blood,
And famous cities into cinders turned,
By their two armed arms.

King. I Chester.
And then they show us rags, torn off belike,
From poor decayed Ladies petticotes:
For neither bill, nor feathered shot, nor pike
Made half or any of those rents they have:
These patcht together, fastened unto staves,
They will not stick to swear, have been advanced
Against the Sophie Souldan, and the Turk,

Le. Do not maintain proud Chester, my lives Liege.
Your words I must put up: his if I bear
Yes you shall bear them, Bear, and yet not bite:
We have you muzzeld now: remember once
You brau'd us with your Bombard boasting words:
Come briefly, Lester, Richmo^d, both Fitzwaters, Bruise,
Deliver up your swords immediately:
And either yield your bodies to our hands,
Or give such pledges as we shall accept,
Unto our Steward Winchester, with speed.

Lest. I will not leave my arms, nor break my word
Except I be prouok't: your liege-man I am sworn:
That oath is pledge enough. If you mislike

Kin. Thou hear me say, I do.

Lest. And I reply, that pledge refused, I have no more for you.

Rich. And Richmond says as noble Lester says;
Already have we plighted fame and faith:
Which being scornde, returns to us again,
And by the kings own mouth, we are discharged,

Kin. Fitzwater, what say you?

Fitz. What pledge desires my Liege?

King. I ask your stubborn daughter.

Young Br. That were a gage to be engaged.

Fitz. Peace thou headstrong boy.
Pardon me sovereign: all my power is yours:
My goods you may command, my life you may:
My children too I know with both their lives,
Will readily adventure deaths worst wrongs,
To do such service as true subjects should:
But honorable fame, true chastity

Kin. Make no exceptions, yield her up to me,
Or look for ever for my enmity.

Fitz. Nay then Fitzwater tells your Majesty,
You do him wrong; and well will let you wit,
He will defend his honor to the death.

King. And Bruise, you are no otherwise disposed,
You will not give your sons to me for pledge.

Br. I have but one, being my lesserboy,
Who is at Gilford: for my other son,

Ki. He braues me with the rest.
Well it is night, and there is no sun to swear by,
But by Gods son: and by him I here protest,
A miserable storm this night to raise,
That shall not cease, while England gives rest,
To such vile traitors: Bruise I Will begin with you:
I will in faith, as true as God is true.

Exeunt king, cum suis. Lest. Then shall a storm be raised against a storm,
And tempest be with tempest beaten back.

Fitz. But this firm Island like the sea will ^osse,
And many goodly buildings go to wrack,
Many a widow weep her dying son,
And many a mother to her helpless babes
Cry out uncomfortably; children peace,
Your crying unto me is all in vain,
Dead is my husband, your poor father slain.

Young Br. We can not help it uncle.

Ri. No, you see entreats and humble suits have now no power:
But lust and wrath the kingdom does devour.

Br. Me he did menace first, and much I fear
He will to Gilford, and besiege my wife.

Fitz. O, hye to save her. Richmond ride with him.

Rich. Let us away Bruise, least we come to late,
And with us take some score of men well armde.

Exeunt Richmond, Fitz. Do: Lester, and my self will keep the city,
Til we are furnished with an able army.
Your Nephew, Bruise, shall take an hundred armed men,
And poast to Hartford Castle with your sister:
Since wrong will wake us, we will keep such watch,
As for his life, he shall not hurt us bring.

Exeunt om^es. Enter Queen, Bruses Lady, Hubert, Salsbury. Qu. Be comforted
good Madame, do not fear,
But give your son as pledge unto the king:
Your self at Court may keep him company.

Wif. I am betrayed, alas I am betrayed,
And little thought your Highness had been bent,
So much against me, for my many loves,
As to prepare an entrance for my foe.

Qu. As I shall live in heaven, I did not know
Of Huberts coming: but lament not this:
Your son you say is gone; what fear you then?

Wi. O madame, murder, mischief, wrongs of men
I fear, I fear: what is it I do not fear?
Since hope is so far of, despair so near.

Ox. Answer me good Hubert, I pray the Hubert do.
What think you of this matter, may I on your word
Persuade the woman that all things are well?

Hu. You may persuade her, if you can my Lord:
For I protest I know no other thing,
But that the king would have him for a pledge of the
Lord Bruses faith.

Sals. And reason too. Now by my Honor, Hubert, I protest it is good reason.
Bruise, I tell you plain,
Is no sound cloak, to keep John from the rain.
I will go to her.

Hu. Do good simple Earl.
If not by threats, nor my entreats she yield,
Thy brain is barren of invention,
Dried up with care: and never will she yield her son to thee, that having
power, wantst wit.

Br. Wife, I ouerheare thee Hubert.

Ox. So do I dame Bruise:
But stir no coals: the man is well beloved,
And merits more than so.

Bru. W. But I will answer.
Hubert, thou fatal keeper of poor babes,
That are appointed hostages for John,
Had I a son here, as I have not one
(For yesterday I sent him into Wales)
Think thou I would be so degenerate,
So far from kind, to give him unto thee?
I would not I protest: thou know my mind.

Ox. Lady, you fear more than you need to do,
Indeed you do, in very deed you do:
Hubert is wronged about the thing you mean,
About young Arthus: O, I thought it was so:
Indeed the honest, good, kind gentleman
Did all he might for safeguard of the child.

Qu. Believe me Madame Bruise, the man is wronged.

B. W. But he wrongs me, to keep my Castle thus,
Disarming my true servants, arming his.
Now more of outrage comes, what shall I do?

Enter the king, Mowbray, Winchester, Chester. King. O this is well. Hubert,
where is Bruses son?

Wi. Where thou shall never see him, John.

K. Lady, we shall have talk with you anon.
Where is he Hubert?

Hu. Hid, or fled my Lord: we can by no means get her to confess.

Sa. Welcome to Gilford, Oxfords liefest Lord.

K. You scarce give welcome, ere I bid you go:
For you my Lord, the Queen and Winchester,
Shall march to Harford. Sweet Isabell,
And if thou love me, play the Amazon.
Matilda that has long bewitched mine eye,
Is as I hear by spials, now in Harford Castle;
Besiege her there: for now her hauty father
Ruffians it up and down, and all the brood
Of viperous traitors whet their poisoned teeth,
That they may feed on us that foster them.
Go forward, and go with you victory:
Which to assure, my powers shall follow you.

Sals. Did I not tell you this: then trust me next:
Nay he is changed, and cares no more for her,
Than I do Madame.

King. Be gone I say, be gone:
Your speed, rich victory attends on:
But your delay
May give your foes the happy glorious day.

Qu. One boon my Liege, and part.

Kin. Be brief.

Qu. Show that poor Lady pity, I beseech.

Exeunt. Kin. I will indeed. Come Lady, let us in.
You have a son, go in and bring him me,
And for the Queens sake I will favor ye.

B. W. I have no son: come, come: come in and search,
And if you find him, wretched may I be.
Exit.
Ki. Chester and Hubert, see you keep good watch.
Not far of do I hear a warlike sound:
Bruise on my life: look to it while I go in
To seek this boy; for needs we must have him.
Come with us Mowbray.

Exeunt. Enter Bruise, Richmoud, Soldiers. Rich. The Castle gates are shut.
what ho? what ho?
You that are servants to the Lady Bruise,
Arise, make entrance for your Lord and friends.

Enter, or above, Hugh, Winchester. HU. We will make issue ere ye enter here.
Who have we there, Richmond and Bruise? Is It you?
What, up so soon, are ye so early here?
In you in faith the Prouerb's verified:
You Are early up, and yet are nere the near.

Rich. The worse our fortune, Bruise let us go hence,
We have no power to fight, nor make defense.

Chapter What Richmond, will you prove a Runaway?

Rich. From thee good Winchester: Now y^ Lord defen^.

Bruise. we will stay and fight.

Br. It Is to no end: we have but twenty men, and they be tired.
But ere we do retire, tell me Lord Hubert,
Where are my wife and son?

Hu. Your wife is here, your son we cannot find.

Br. Let son and wife, high heavens, your comfort find.

Exeunt. Enter King, Mowbray, Lady Bruise. Chest. Bruise has been here, my
Lord.

Ki. I, let him go: we have good pledges: though we see but one,
The other we are sure will come anon.

Mow. I do advise you, for your own discharge,
Deliver up your son unto the king.

King. Nay let her choose. Come hither Mowbray.

The king and Mowbray whisper. HU. The king is angry; Lady Bruise advise you.

L. Br. What? be advised by thee, to have my loving,
kind and pretty boy, given to an unkind killer of sweet boys?

Chapter Madame go too, take counsel of your friends,
I warrant you the king will use him well.

L. B. I, as he used his Nephewe, Arthur Chester:
God bless my child from being used so.

MOW. Sir Hubert, what are all the people voided,
The horses and the cattle turned forth?

Hu. Mowbray, they be.

Mow. Then will I do the kings commandment.

L. B. What will he do! good lord, what will he do!

Mowbray, I pray you what is it you will do.

MO. Why? fire the Castle.

L. B. The Castle Mowbray? tarry, tarry man,
Hold me not Chester, gentle Mowbray stay:
Good Hubert let me go.
To lead a many able men to fight.
And modest looking maid, I see you too:
And unfit sight, to view virginity
Guarded with other soldiers, than good prayers:
But you will say the king occasions it.
Say what you will, no king but would take cause?
Of just offense: yield you young Bruise: your mother is in hold.
Yield you young maid: your father is in hold.

Ma. Will the Queen keep me from the lustful king?
Then will I yield.

Qu. A plague upon this counterfaiting queen,

Mat. Gods blessed mercy, will you still be mad,
And wrong a noble virgin with vile speech?

Ox. Let me alone: Matilda, maiden fair,
Thou virgin spouse, true Huntingtons just heir,
Will thou come hither? and I do protest,
The Queen and I, to mitigate this war,
Will do what thou would have.

Ma. I come.

Br. You shall not go: sound drums to war.

Ox. Alack, alack for woe: well God for us, since it will needs be so,

Alarm, fight, stay. Ox. What stay you for?

Br. Matildaes cries do stay us.

Mat. Oxford, I come in hope of thy defense.

Br. First will I die, ere you shall yield your self,
To any coward Lord that serves the King.

Ox. Coward proud boy? thou find me no such beast,
And thou shall rue in earnest this rude jest.

Fight again, Matilda taken, led by the hair by two Soldiers. Ox. Rude
hands, how hale you virtuous honor forth?
You do not well: away: now by my faith,
Ye do not well I say.
Take her, fair Queen, use her as she deserves:
She Is fair, she is noble, chaste, and debonaire.
I must, according to due course of war,
See that our soldiers scatter not too fare,
Least what care won, our negligence mray loose.
Exit.
Qu. Is this the Helen, this the Paragon,
That makes the English Ilinnus flame so fast?

Mat. I am not she, you see I am not she:
I am not ravished yet, as Helen was,
I know not what will come of John's desire,
That rages like the sea, that burns like fire.

Qu. Plain John, proud Ione? I Will tear your painted. face: thus, thus I Will use
you.

Enter Oxford. Ma. Do, do. what you will.

Ox. How goes this geere? ha? foul fall so foul a deed,
Poor chaste child of Fitzwater do thou bleed.
By Gods blessed mother this is more than need:
And more I tell you true than I would bear,
Were not the danger of the camp so near.

Enter a messenger. Mess. My Lord, the foes have gathered head:
Lord Bruise the father, joins with the son.

Ox. Why here is the matter, we must spend our time,
To keep your nails from scratching innocence,
Which should have been bestowed for our defense.
What shall we now do! help me holy God,
The foe is come, and we are out of rank.

Skirmish: Queen taken, Matilda rescued. Enter old Bruise wounded, led by his
son and Lester. Br. Is the field ours:

Young B. I, thanks to noble Lester.

Br. Give God thanks, son, be careful to thy mother:
Commend me to Fitzwater, love thy brother,
If either arms, or prayers may him recover.

Falls down. Lest. How cheeres old Bruise?

Br. His soul to joy is fled:
His gri^fe is in my bosom buried.

Lest. His life was dearly bought. For my eyes saw
A shambles of dead men about his feet,
Sent by his sword unto eternal shade:
With honor bury him: cease tears good Bruise.

Br. Tears help not I confess: yet must I weep.
Soldiers, your help to bear him to my tent.

Exeunt, cum Bruise. Ma. Be comforted great Queen: forget my wrongs.
It was my fortune and no fault of yours.

Qu. Is she thus mild? or does she mock my chance?

Lest. Queen Elianor, are you a prisoner?
See what it is to be a soldier.
But what foul hand has harmed Matildaes fair?
Speak honorable maid: who tore thy hair?
Did Oxford or the Queen this violence?

Ma. Ungentle grooms first took and sore me thus:
From whom old Oxford, chastising their wrong,
Mest kindly brought me to this gentle Queen:
Who laid her soft hand on my bleeding cheeks,
Gave kisses to my lips, wept for my woe:
And was devising how to send me back,
Even when your last alarm frighted us:
And by her kindness, fell into your hands.

Lest. Which kindness we return. Madame, be free.
Soldiers, conduct the Queen whether she please.

Qu. Farewell Matilda: if I live, believe,
I will remember this. O how I grieve,
That I should wrong so innocent a maid.
Come Lady, old Fitzwater is not far:
Hele weep to see these scarres, full well I know.

Ma Would I were from this woeful world of war:
Sure I will escape, and to some Nunry go.

Exeunt. Enter king, Oxford, Hubert. K. Had you her then? had you her in your
power?

Ox. I marry had we; we had taken her.

K. O had she been in mine,
Not all earths power, from my power, should have freed her.

Ox. You are a king: and high are Princes thoughts:
It may be with your sight you could have chac't
An host of armed men: it may be so:
But we your subjects did the best we could:
Yet Bruise the father, backing Bruise the son,
Scattred our troops: brought rescue to Matilda,
And took your peerless Queen, their prisoner.

K. On all the race of Bruses, for this wrong,
I will have vengeance. Hubert, call in Brand.
Exit Hu. My Lord of Oxford, give us leave a while to be alone.

Ox. I will my liege: but be you comforted,
The Queen will be recouer'd, do not fear.
As well as ere she was;

K. Oxford, for bear I pray.

Ox. Yet for the wrong she did unto Matilda, I fear, I fear,
Exit.
K. The father and the son did rescue her:
The mother and the son shall rue the deed:
So it shall be: I am resolved thereon.
Matilda, my souls food, those have bereft:
And these of bodies food I will bereave.

Enter Hubert, Brand. K. Will Brand?

Brand. Your Majesty.

Make legs. K. Less of your curtsie. Hubert, stand aside.
Poast spedily to Windsor: take this ring:
Bid Blunt deliver Bruses wife and child,
Into your hands: and ask him for the key
Of the dark tower, ore the dungeon vault*
In that, see you shut up the dam and brat.
Pretend to Blunt that you have left them meat,
Will serve some sennight: and unto him say,
It is my will you bring the key away.
And here you sir, I charge you on your life,
You do not leave a bit of bread with them.

Brand. I warrant you, let me alone.

Ki. Come back again with all the speed you may.

Hugh. Some cruel task is pointed for that slave,
Which he will execute as cruelly.

Kin. No ruth, no pity shall have harbor here,
Till fair Matilda be within these arms,

Enter Oxford with the Queen. Oxf. Comfort my Lord, comfort my gracious Lord.
Your love is come again.

Ki. Ah Oxford, where?

Ox. Here my dread Sovereign.

Kin. Thou lie she is not there.

Ox. Under correction you wrong my age.
Say I beseech you, is not this the Queen?

Kin. I cry you mercy Oxford, it is indeed.
Where is Matilda?

Qu. Where virtue, chastity, and innocence remain, there is Matilda.

King. How comes she, pray, to be so chaste, so fair, so virtuous in your eye?

Qu. She freed me from my foes, and never urged
My great abuse, when she was prisoner.

Kin. What did you to her?

Qu. Raild upon her first,
Then tare her hair, and rent her tender cheeks.

K. O heaven! was not the day dark at that foul deed?
Could the sun see, without a red eclipse,
The purple tears fall from those tyrant wounds!
Out A^thiope, Gypsy, thick lipt Blackamoore:
Wolf, Tygresse, worse than either of them both.

Ox. Are you advised my Lord?

K. Out doting Earl.
Could thou endure to see such violence?

Ox. I tell you plain* my Lord, I brookt it not,
But staid the tempest.

K. Rend my loves cheeks? that matchless Effigy,
Of wonder-working, natures chiefest work.
Tear her rich hair? to which, gold wyres,
Suns rays, and best of best compares
(In their most pride) have no comparison.
Abuse her name? Matildaes sacred name?
O barbarous outrage, rudeness merciless.

Qu. I told you Oxford, you mistook the king.

Ox. I did indeed: my liege Lord give me leave,
To leave the Camp.

K. Away old fool: and take with thee that trull:
For if she stay,

Ox. Come Lady, come away.
Tempt not his rage^ ruin wrath always brings:
Lust being lord, there is no trust in kings.
Exit.
Enter Mowbray. Mou. To arms king John: Fitzwaters field is pitched,
About some mile hence, on a champain plain.
Chester has drawn our soldiers in array:
The wings already have begun the fight.

K. Thither we will with wings of vengeance fly,
And win Matilda, or loose victory.

Exeunt. Enter Lady Bruise, and Brand. La. Why did my keeper put us in thy
hands?
Wherein have we offended Blunt or thee?

Brand. You need not make these words:
You must remove your Iodging: this is all.
Be not afeard: come come, here is the door.

L. O God how dark it is!

Brand Go in go in: its higher up the stairs.

La. My trembling heart forbids me to go in.
O if thou have compassion, tell me true,
What my poor boy and I must trust unto?

Brand. I tell thee true, compassion is my foe:
Yet have I bad of thee compassion.
Take in thy child: as I have faith or troth,
Thou and thy boy shall be but prisoners:
And I must daily bring you meat and drink.

La. Well, thou have sworn: and God so give thee light,
As in this dark place thou remembrest us.
Poor heart, thou laughst, and h^st not wit to think,
Upon the many fears that me afflict.
I will not in^ help us, assist us Blunt.
We shall be murdered in a dungeon.

Brand. Cry without cause? I Will have ye in ^faith.

La. O let my boy and I but dine with Blunt,
And then I will with patience go in.

Br. Will ye, or nill ye, zounds, ye must go in,
And never dine.

La. What sai^st thou? never dine?

Bra. No not with Blunt, I mean. Go in I say*
Or by this hand, ye get no meat to day.

La. My child is hungry, When shall he have meat?

Bra. Why, and ye would go in, immediately.

La. I will go in: but very much I doubt,
Nor I, nor my poor bay shall ere come out.
Exit*
He seems to lock a door. Br. Nere while ye live, in faith: now are they
sure.
Cry till their h^arts ache, no man can them hear.
A mis^rable death is famishment:
But what care ^? the king commanded me.

Alarm within: excursions. Enter Fitzwater, Bruise. Fitz. Now does fair
fortune offer hope of speed:
But howsoere we speed: good cousin Bruise,
March with three hundred bows and pikes to Windsor,
Spreading a rumor that the day is ours:
As ours it shall be, with the help of heaven.
Blunt loves our part far better than the king's:
And will, I gage my life, upon the news,
Surrender up the Castle to our use.
By this means shall you help us to a hold,
How ere it chance, set free your Lady mother
That lives in prison there, with your young brother.

Br. Away good uncle, to the battle go:
But that a certain good insues I know,
For all the world, I would not leave you so.

Fitz. Away, away.
God send thee Win^sor: us this happy day.

Alarm still. Enter Hughbert. Hu. You cannot hide your self Matilda: no
disguise
Will serve the turn: now must you to the king:
And all these wars will with your presence cease.
Yield you to him, he soon will yield to peace.

Ma. They say thou took'st some pity of a child,
The king appointing thee to sear his eyes.
Men do report thee to be just of word,
And a dear lover of my Lord the king.
If thou did that, if thou be one of these:
Pity Matilda, prostrate at thy feet.

Hugh. I saved young A^thurs eyes, and pity thee:
My word is just, which I have given the king.
The king I love: and thee I know he loves.
Compare these: then how can I pleasure thee?

Ma. By letting me escape to Dunmow Abbey,
Where I will end my life a votary.

Hu. And the king die with doting on thy love.

Mat. No, no: this fire of lust would be soon laid,
If once he knew me sworn a holy maid.

Hu. Thy tears and love of virtue have the power
To make me, at an instant, true and false:
True to distressed beauty and rare chastity:
False to king John, that holds the sight of thee
Dearer than England, or earths Emperie.
Go happy soul, that in so ill an age,
Have such fair beauty for thy heritage:
Yet go not so alone. Do hear tall soldier?
Call a Soldier. I know thee honest* guide this gentle maid,
To Dunmow Abbey: she is one I know.
I will excuse thee and content thee well.
My signet take, that ye may pass vnsearch^.

Mat. Kind Hubert, many prayers, for this good deed,
Shall on my beads be daily numbered.

Enter Lester, Richmond, Fitzwater. Lest. O trebble heat of honor, toil and
rage!
How cheeres earl Richmond?
Fitzwater, speak old man.
We are now near together; answer me.

Fitz. Lester, the more our woe,
The likelier to be taken by the foe.

Rich. O let not such a thought abuse thy age:
We Will never yield us to the tyrants rage.

Fitz. But if my girl be yielded,

Lest. If she be.

Fitz. I, I: there is no man but shall have his time to die.

Lest. Now is our hour: which they shall dearly buy.

Enter king, Hugh, Chester, Mowbray. Rich. Lester, we will stand like three
Battalions:
What says our noble General theretoo?

Fitz. Why, I say do: while I can, I Will keep my place with you.

King. How now my bug-beare, will ye now submit?

Lest. To death, but not to thee*

Kin. Richmond, nor you?

Rich. Earl Richmond will not yield.

K. Me thinks Fitzwater, you should have more wit.

Fitz. If it be wit to live, I have no will:
And so in this, my will orerules my wit.

Ki. Alarm then, with weapons will
We scourge your desperate will, and teach ye to have wit.

Fight: drive back the king. a Withdraw. K. Of high heroicke spirits be they
all:
We will withdraw a little and confer:
For they are circled round, and cannot escape.

Rich. O that we three, who in the suns arise,
Were (like the three Triumuirates of Rome)
Guids of an host, able to vanquish Rome,
Are n^^ alone, enclosed with enemies!

Fitz. The glory of the world has no more stay:
But as it comes, it fleetes, and fades away.

Lest. Courage, and let us die; they come again:
Its Lord Hugh Burgh alone, Hughberr, what news?

Hu. This days fierce slaughter, John, our King, lame^ts:
And to you three, great leaders of an host,
That now have not a man at all to lead:
You worthy captains without companies

Lest. Fitzwarer, Richmond; by the blessed Sun,
Lord Hubert mocks us.

Hu. By the Moon I do not, and put the blessed to it*
It is as good an oath as you have sworn.
My heart grieves, that so great hearts, as yours be,
Should put your fortunes on a sort of slaves,
That bring base fear within them to ^he field:
But to the matter. Since your state is such,
That without mercy you are sure of death
(Which I am sure, and well his Highness knows,
You do not fear at all) yet he gives grant,
On just conditions you shall save your lives.

Fitz. On no condition will I save my life,
Except Matilda be returned again,
Unblemisht, vnabus'd; and then I yield.

Hugh. She now is where she never will return.

Fitz. Never? O God! is my Matilda dead?

Hugh. Dead to the world: dead to this woe she is.
She lives at Dunmow, and is vowed a Nun.

Fitz. Do not delude me Hubert, gentle son.

Hugh. By all the faith and honor of my kin:
By my unstained alleagiance to the king:
By my own wor^, that has reproouelesse bin,
She is at Dunmow.

Fitz. O, how came she there?

Hu. When all these fields were walks for rage and fear
(This, howling like a head of hungry wolves*
That, scudding as a heard of frighted dear)
When dust arising like a cole black fogge,
From friend divided friend, joined foe to foe:
Yet neither those, nor these could either know,
Til here and there through large wide mouthed wounds
Proud life, even in the glory of his heat,
Losing possession, belcht forth streams of blood:
Whose spouts in falling, made ten thousand drops,
And with that purple shower the dust alaid:
At such a time met I the trembling maid,
Seeming a dove, from all her fellows parted.
Seen, known, and taken: unseen and unknown,
To any other that did know v^ both,
At her entreats I sent her safely guided,
To Dunmow Abbey: and the guide returned,
Assures me she was gladfully received,
Pitied: and in his sight did take her oath.

Fitz Hubert, for this thy honorable deed,
I and my house will reverence thy name.

Hu. Yet, I beseech you, hide it from the king:
At least that I conuaid her to the place.

Enter King, Mowbray, Chester. Fitz. Hubert, I will.

Ki. What, stand they st^ll on terms?

Lest. On honorable terms, o^ terms of right.
Our lives without our liberty we scorn.

King. You shall have life and liberty, I swear.

Lest. Then Lester bows his knee to his liege Lord,
And humbly begs his Highness to beware
Of wronging innocence, as he has done.

Rich. The like Richmond desires; and yields his sword.

Kin. I do embrace ye both, and hold my self
Richer by a whole Realm, in having you.

Fitz. Much is my wrong: yet I submit with these,
Begging free leave, to live a private life.

King. Old brands of malice in thy bosom rest.
Thou shall have leave to leave me, never doubt.
Fitzwater, see thou ship thee straight for France,
And never set thy foore on English shore,
Till I repeal thee. Go* go hence in peace.

Lest. Why does your Highness wrong Fitzwater thus?

King. I right his wrong; he is weary of the land.

Rich. Not of the land, but of a public life.

Kin. Content ye Lords: in such quick times as these,
We must not keep a drone among our bees.

Fitz. I am as glad to go, as you to send:
Yet I beseech this favor of your Grace,
That I may see Matilda ere I part.

Ki. Matilda? See Matilda, if thou can
Before Sun set; stay not another day.
The Abbey walls, that shroud my happy child,
Appear within her hapless fathers sight.
Farewell my Sovereign. Lester, Richmond, Lords*
Farewell to all: grief gives no way to words.

King. Fitzwater stay! Lords, give us leave a while.
Hubert, go you before unto the Abbess,
And signify our coming; let her bring
(Exit Hubert.) Matilda to her father. Come old man;
Be not too froward, and we shall be friends.
About this girl our mortal ^arres began:
And if thou will, here all our quarrel ends.

Fitz. Reserve my honor, and my daughters fame,
And no poor subject that your Grace commands,
Shall willinger submit, obey, and serve.

K. Do then but this; Persuade thy beauteous child,
To leave the Nunry and return to Court:
And I protest from hence forth to for swear
All such conceits of lust as I have borne.

Fitz. I will, my Lord, do all that I may do:
But give me leave, in this, to doubt of you.

K. This small thing grant, and ask me any thing:
Or else die in exile, loathed of the King.

Fitz. You shall perceive I will do what I may.

Enter, on the wall, Abbess, Matilda. Hu. Matilda is afraid to leave the h,
ouse:
But lo, on yonder battlement she stands:
But in no case will come within your hands.

K. What? will my Lady Abbess wars with us:
Speak Lady: wherefore shut you up your gates?

Ab. Have we not reason, when an host of men,
Hunt and pursue religious chastity?
King John, bethink thee what thou take in hand,
On pain of interdiction of thy Land.
Murdrers and fellons may have sanctuary:
And shall not honorable maids distressed,
Religious virgins, holy Nuns professed,
Have that small privilege* Now out upon she, out?
Holy Saint Catherine shield my virginity:
I never stood in such extreamitie.

Hu. My Lord, the Abbess lies, I warrant you:
For I have heard, there is a Monk of Bury,
That once a weak comes thither to make merry.

Kin. Content thee Hubert, that same monk and she,
And the worst come, my instruments shall be.
Good Lady Abbess, fear no violence:
There Is not one here shall offer you offense.

Fitz. Daughter, all this while tears my speech have staid.
My Lord the King: Lords all draw near I pray:
And hear a poor man's parting from his child.
Matilda, still my unstained honors joy,
Fair Ornament of old Fitzwaters coat,
Borne to rich fortunes, did not this ill age
Bereave thee of thy birthrights heritage*
Thou see our Sovereign, Lord of both our lives,
A long besieger of thy chastity,
Has scattred all our forces, slain our friends,
Raced our Castles, left us nere a house
Wherein to hide us from his wrathful eye*
Yet God prouides; France is appointed me:
And thou find'st house-roome in this Nunry.
Here if the king should dote, as he has done,
Its sacrilege to tempt a holy Nun:
But I have hope he will not: yet my fear
So drownes my hope, as I am forced to stay,
And leave abruptly, what I more would say.

Mat. O go not yet, my grieved hearts comforter,
I am as valiant to resist desire,
As ever thou were worthy in the field.
John may attempt* but if Matilda yield,
O then.

Fitz. I then Matilda, thou do loose
The former glory of thy chaste resolves.
These seven years have thou bid a Martyrs pains,
Resisting in thy self lust-growing fire:
For being mortal, sure thou had desire.
And five sad winters have their full course run,
Since thou did bury noble Huntington.
In these years, many months, and many days,
Have been consumed, thy virtues to consume:
Gifts have been heralds* Pandars did presume
To tempt thy chaste ears, with their unchaste tongues.
All in effect, working to no effect.
For I was still the watchman of thy tower,
The keeper of foul worms, from my fair flower:
But now, no more, no more Fitzwater may
Defend his poor Lamb, from the Lions prey:
Thy order and thy holy prayers may.
To help thee, thou have privilege by law:
Therefore be resolute, and nobly die,
Abhor base lust, defend thy chastity.

K. Dispat^h Fitzwater, hinder not thy child:
Many preferments do on her awaite.

Fitz. I girl, I know thou shall be offered wealth
(Which is a shrewde inticement in sad want)
Great honors to lift up thy low estate,
And glorious titles to eternize thee.
Al these do but gild over ugly shame:
Such wealth, my child, foreruns releaselesse need:
Such honor ever proves dishonourate.
For titles, none comes near a virtuous name:
O keep it ever, as thou have done yet.
And though these dark times should forget thy praise,
An age will come, that shall eternize it.
Bid me farewell, and speak it in a word.

Ma. Farewell dear father.

Fitz. Oh farewell sweet child.
My Liege farewell: Lester, Richmond, Hughbert,
Chester, and Mowbray: friends and foes farewell.
Matilda, see thou keep thy spotless fame,
And live eternized; else die soon with shame.
Exit.
^a. Amen, amen father, adieu, adieu:
Grief dwells with me, sweet comfort follow you.

Ab. Come daughter come: this is a woeful sight,
When good endeauours are oppressed by might.

Exeunt from above, Abbess, Matilda. K. ^h Hubert, see thou not the sun go
down,
Clowdy and dark? Matilda, stay one word.
She shakes her head, and scornefully says nay.

Rich. How cheer'st thou Lester?

Lest. Mad man, at my state:
That cannot raise true honor ruinate.

Enter Messenger. King. I will not be disdeignd: I ^owe to see
Quick vengeance on this girl, for scorning me.

Mess. Young Bruise, my Lord, has gotten Windsor castle,
Slain Blunt your Constable, and those that kept it:
And finding in a tower his mother dead,
With his young brother starved and famished:
That every one may see the rufull sight,
In the thick wall he a wide window makes:
And as he found them, so he lets them be
A spectacle to every commer by,
That heaven and earth, your tyrant shame may see.
All people cursing, crying fie upon
The tyrant merciless, inhumane John.

Ki. Chester, and Mowbray, march away to Windsor:
Suppress that traitor Bruise. What if his dam,
In wilful fury, would receive no meat,
Nor suffer her young child any to eat,
Is it our fault* Haste ye with speed away,
And we will follow: go, be gone I pray.

Exit. Chapter Mow. Hu. O black and woeful deed! O pittous thing,
When slaves attend the fierce thoughts of a king.

Lest. My Lord, shall we go too?

Kin. Lester and Richmond, I: I pray ye do.

Lest. Get I my Bear and ragged staff once more
Raised in the field, for these wrongs some shall roar.

Exit Richmo^d, Lester. K. Fetch in the Monk of Bury, that I talked off,
Exit Hubert, for the Monk. And bid Will Brand, my instrument of death,
Come likewise in. Convert, to raging hate,
Monk, Hugh, Brand, enter. My long resisted love. Welcome good Monk.

Mon. Thanks to my Liege.

K. Thou have been long in suit,
To be installed Abbot of your house:
And in your favor many friends have stird.
Now is the hour that you shall be preferred,
Upon condition, and the matter small.
Short shrift to make, good honest Confessor,
I love a fair Nun, now in Dunmow Abbey,
The Abbess loves you, and you pleasure her.
Now if, between you two, this pretty Lady
Could be persuaded to affect a king,
Your suit is granted; and on Dunmowe Abbey,
I will bestow a hundred marks a year.

Mon. A holy Nun, a young Nun, and a Lady*
Dear ware my Lord; yet bid you well as may be:
Strike hands; a bargain, she shall be your own:
Or if she will not

Ki. Nay, if she do refuse,
I Will send a deaths-man with you, this is he:
If she be wilful, leave her to his hands:
And on her own head be her hasted end*

Mon. The matter shall be done.

K. Sir, what poisons have you ready?

Brand. Store, store.

K. Awaite on the monk then, and ere we take horse,
I Will give you such instructions as you need.
Hughbert, prepare to Windsor with our host.

Exit King, Monk. Hu. Your tyrannies have lost my love almost:
And yet I cannot choose but love eternally
This wanton king, repleat with cruelty*
O how are all his princely virtues staind,
With lust abhorred, and lascivious heat!
Which kindling first to fire, now in a flame,
Shows to the whole world clearly his foul shame.
To quench this flame, full many a tide of tears,
Like ouerflowing full seas, have been spent:
And many a dry land drunk with humane blood,
Yet nothing helps his passions violent:
Rather they add oil to his raging fire,
Heat to his heat, desire to his desire,
Somewhat I fear, is now a managing.
For that prodigious bloody stigmatique,
Is never called unto his kingly sight,
But like a Comet he portendeth still
Some innovation, or some monstrons act,
Cruel, unkindly, horrid, full of hate:
As that vile deed at Windsor, done of late*
Gentle Matilda somewhat I mistrust:
Yet thee I need not fear, such is his love;
Again, the place does give thee warrantise:
Yet I remember when his Highness said,
The lustful monk of Bury should him aid:
I so it is; if she have any ill,
Through y^ lewd shaueling will her shame be wrought.
If it so chance, Matildaes guiltless wrong
Will with the loss of many a life be bought.
But Hubert will be still his dread Lords friend,
Howeuer he deserves, his master serve:
Though he neglect, him will not I neglect:
Whoeuer fails him, I will John affect.
For though kings fault in many a foul offense,
Subjects must sue, not mend with violence.
Exit.
Enter Oxford, Queen. Ox. Now by my faith, you are too blame Madame:
Ever tormenting ever vexing you?
Cease off these fretting humors, pray ye do.
Gri^fe will not mend it, naught can pleasure you,
But patient suffering: nor by your Graces leave,
Have you such cause to make this hue and cry
After a husband; you have not in good sooth.
Yearly a child? this payment is not bad.
Content fair Queen, and do not think it strange,
That kings do sometimes seek delight in change:
For now and then, I tell you, poor men range.
Sit down a little, I will make you smile.
Though I be now like to the snowie Alps,
I was as hot as Aetna in my youth:
All fire in faith, true heart of oak, right steel,
A ruffian Lady: often for my sport,
I to a lodge of mine did make resort,
To view my dear I said; dear God can tell,
It was my keepers wife, whom I loved well.
My Countess (God be with her) was a shrowe,
As women be, your Majesty does know:
And some odd pickth anke put it in her head,
All was not well: but such a life I led,
And the poor keeper, and his smoothed faced wife,
That will I, nil I, there she might not bide*
But for the people I did well provide:
And by gods mother, for my Ladies spite,
I trickt her in her kind, I served her right.
Were she at London, I the country kept;
Come thither, I at London would solourne:
Came she to court, from court I straight way stepped:
Return, I to the court would back return.
So this way, that way, every way she went,
I still was retrograde, seld opposite*
Till at the last, by mildness and submission,
We met, kissed, joined, and here left all suspicion.

Qu. Now out upon you Vere, I would have thought,
The world had not containd a chaster man.

Ox. Now, by my fay, I will be sworn, I am.
In all I tell you, I confess no ill,
But that I curbd a froward woman's will:
Yet had my keepers wife been of my mind,
There had been cause some fault with us to find:
But I protest, her noes and nayes were such,
That for my life she ever kept go much.

Qu. You would take nay: but our king John says no:
No nay, no answer will suffice his turn:
He, for he cannot tempt true chastuie,
Filles all the Land with hostile trueltie.
Is it not shame, he that should punish sin,
Defend the righteous, help the innocent,
Carues with his sword, the purpose of his will,
Upon the guarders of the virtuous,
And hunts admired spotless maidenhead,
With all the darts of desolation,
Because she scorneth to be dissolute.
Me, that he leaves, I do not murmur at:
That he loves her, does no whit me perplex,
If she did love him, or my self did hate:
But this alone is it that me does vex.
He leaves me that loves him, and her pursues,
That loath him and loves me: how can I choose,
But sadly grieve, and mourn in my green youth?
When nor of her, nor me he takes ruthe.

Ox. Ha dove, good Queen, for gods good love, ha don.
This raging humor will no doubt be staid.
Uertuous Matilda is professed a Nun:
Within a mile, at Dunmow lives the maid:
God will not suffer any thing so vile:
He will not sure, that he should her defile.

Qu. Nor Church, nor chapel, Abbey, Nunry,
Are priuileg'd from his intemperance.
But leave we him, and let us, I e^treat,
Go visit fair Matilda: much I am
In debt unto the maid

Ox. You are indeed.
You wronged her, when with blows you made her bleed.
B^t if you please to visit her, fair dame,
Our coach is ready: we will soon be there.

Qu. Thanks Oxford; and with us I mean to bear
The beauteous garland, sent me out of Spain:
Which I will offer in the Abbey chapel:
As witness of Matildaes chastity:
Whom while I live, I ever vow to love,
In recompense of rash and causeless wrong.

Enter Brand solus, with cup, bottle of poison. Brand. Good, by this hand:
exceeding, passing good.
The dog no sooner drank it, but, yugh, yugh quoth he:
So grins me with his teeth: lies down, and dies.
Yughst quoth I? by gogs blood go thy ways:
Of all thy line and generation,
Was never dog so worshipped as thou art,
For ere thou di'dst, thou were an officer:
I ly not, by these nails, a squires place:
For the vile cur became a countess taster.
So dyed the dog. Now in our next account
The Countess comes, lets see a Countess and a Nun*
Why so? why so?
What would she have the whole world quite undone?
We Will meet her for that trick. What, not a king?
Hanging's too good for her; I am but a plain knave,
And yet should any of these no forsooths,
These pray awayes, these trip and goes, these tits.
Deny me: now by these:
A plague upon this bottle and this cup:
I cannot act mine oath: but to it again.
By these ten ends of flesh and blood, I swear:
First with this hand, wound thus about her hair,
And with this dagger lustilie lambackt:
I would in faith, I, by my villainy,
I would: but here, but here she comes,
Led by two doctors in sweet letchery:
If they speed, with my poison I go by;
If not, have at you maid: then step in I.

Enter Matilda, between the Monk and the Nun. Mon. And as I said, fair
maid, you have done well,
In your distress, to seek this holy place:
But tell me truly, how do you expel
The rage of lust-arising heat in you?

Ma* By prayer, by fasting, by considering
The shame of ill, and meede of doing well.

Ab. But daughter, daughter, tell me in my eat,
Have you no fleshly fightings now and then? whisper,

Brand. Fleshly quoth you? a maid of threescore years,
And fleshly fightings sticking in her teeth?
Well wench, thou art matched in faith.

Ab. You do confess the king has tempted you,
And thinking now and then on gifts and state,
A glowing heat has proudly puffed you up:
But thanks to God, his Grace has done you good.

Mo^. Who, the kings Grace?

Ma. No: Gods Grace, holy monk.

Mo. The kings Grace feign would do you good, fair maid.

Me. Ill good: he means my fame to violate.

Ab. Well* let that be.

Br. Good baud, good mother B.
How feign you would that that good deed should he!

Ab. I was about to say somewhat upon a thing. O thus it is.
We maids that all the day are occupied,
In labor and chaste hallowed exercise,
Are nothing so much tempted while day lasts,
As we are tried and proved in the night.
Tell me Matilda, had you since you came,
No dreams, no visions, nothing worth the note?

Ma. No, I thank God.

Ab. Truly you will* you will;
Except you take good heed and bless your self.
For if ^ lie but on my back a while,
I am past recovery, sure of a bad dream.
You see yon reverend Monk: now God he knows,
I love him dearer for his holiness:
And I believe the devil knows it too:
For the foul f^end comes to me many a night,
As like the monk, as if he were the man.
Many a hundred nights, the Nuns have seen:
Pray, cry, make crosses, do they what they can.
Once gotten in, then do I fall to work,
My holy water bucket being near hand,
I whisper secret spelles, and conjure him,
That the foul fiend has no more power to stand*
He down, as I can quickly get him laid,
I bless my self* and like a holy maid,
Turn on my right side: where I sleep all night,
Without more dreams, or troubling of the spright,

Brand. An Abbess by the cross of my good blade,
An excellent mother to bring up a maid,
For me I mean, and my good master,
John* Coughs. But never any for an honest man.
Now fie upon that word of honesty*
Passing my throat, 'thad almost choked me:
Sblood I Will for swear it for this trick.

Mon. We trifle time. Fair maid, its thus in brief;
This Abbey by your means may have relief*
An hundred marks a year: answer I pray,
What will you do herein?

Ma. Even all I may.

Ab. Its charitably spoken, my fair child:
A little thing of yours, a little help
Will serve the turn, learn but to bear, to bear
The burden of this world, and it will do.

Bra. Well go thy ways: Is this no baud think you?

Ma. Madam, the heavy burden of the world
Has long oppressed me.

Ab But not pressed you right!
Now shall you bear a burden far more light.

Ma. What burden bearing? whereto tends this talk?

Mon. To ^ou, to us* this Abbey and King John,

Me. O God forefend he should be thought upon.

Mon. Lady make short, the king must lie with you.

Ma. With me, with me?

First turns to the Monk, then to the Abbess. Ab. Sweet never look so
strange:
He shall come closely, no body shall see.

Ma. How can he come but one has eyes to see?

Mon. Your chamber windows shall be shadowed.

Mat. But no veil from my conscience shadows me.

Ab. And all the Nuns sent quietly to bed.

Ma. But they will rise, and, by my blushing red,
Quickly give guess of my lost maidenhead.

Bra. She goes in faith, by God she is their own.

Mo. Be not so nice, the sin is venial:
Considering you yield for charity,
And by your fall, the Nunnery shall rise.

Ab. Regard good counsel daughter, pray be wise.

Mon. Come, here is a stir: wilt do wench? will it do?

Ab. Say I, say I, forget the sound of no:
Or else say no and take it: will thou so?

Mat. Do you intend thus lewdely as you speak?

Br. I by gogs blood do they: and moppet, you were best
To take their proffers, least if they forsake you,
I play the devils part, step in and take you.

Mat. Some holy water, help me blessed Nuns.
Two damned spirits, in religious weeds,
Attempt to tempt my spotless chastity:
And a third devil gaping for my soul,
With horrid starings, ghastly frighteth me.

Ab. You may call while you will: but maid list what we say,
Or be assured this is your dying day.

Draws a Crucifix. Mat. In his name that did suffer for my sin,
And by this blessed sign, I conjure you:
Depart foul f^ends, return from whence ye came:
Avoid ye fiends, and cease to trouble me.

Brand. Zounds, she thinks us devils. Hear you coniurer?
Except you use that trick, to conjure down
The standing spirit of my Lord the King,
That your good mother there, the Abbess uses,
To conjure down the spirit of the Monk,
Not all your crosses have the power to bless
Your body from a sharp and speedy death.

Ma. Are ye not fiends, but mortal bodies then?

Feels them all. Brand. Maid, maid: catch lower, when you feel young men*
S^lood, I was never taken for the devil till now?

Ma. O where shall cha^^itie have true defense,
When Churchmen lay this siege to innocence?
Where shall a maid have certain sanctuary,
When Lady Lust rules all the Nunnery?
Now fie upon ye both, false seeming Saints,
In carnate devils, devilish hypocrites.
A cowled Monk, an aged veiled Nun,
Become base Pandars! and with lustful^ speech,
Assaie the chaste ears of true maidenhead!
Now fie upon this age, would I were dead.

Monk. Come leave her Lady; she shall have her wish.

Ab. Speed her I pray thee; should the baggage live,
She Will slander all the chaste Nuns in the Land.

Exeunt Monk, Abbess. Bra. Well, well, go get you two unto your coniuring:
Let me alone to lay her on gods ground.

Ma. Why do thou stay?

Bra. Why maid, because I must:
I have a message to you from the king.

Ma. And thou art welcome to his humble maid.
I thought thee to be grim and fierce at first:
But now thou have asweete aspect, mild looks.
Art thou not come to kill me from the king?

Brand. Yes.

Ma. And thou art welcome, even the welcom^st man,
That ever came unto a woeful maid.
Be brief goodfellow: I have in the world,
No goods to give, no will at all to make:
But Gods will and the kings on me be done.
A little money kept to give in alms,
I have about me? deaths-man take it all?
Thou art the last poor alms-man I shall see.
Come, come, dispatch: what weapon will death wear,
When he assailes me: Is it knife, or sword:
A strangling cord, or sudden flaming fire?

Bran. Neither, thou manly maid: look here, look here:
A cup of poison. Wherefore do thou smile?

Mat. O God, in this the king is merciful.
My dear loved Huntington by poison dyed.
Good fellow, tell the king I thank his Grace,
And do forgive his causeless cruel^ie.
I do forgive thee to; but do advise
Thou leave this bloody course, and seek to save
Thy soul immortal, closed in thy breast:
G^ues it her* Be brief I pray thee: now to King John's health
A full carouse* and god remember not
The curse he gave himself at Robins death,
Wishing by poison he might end his life,
If ever he solicited my love.
Farewell goodfellowe, now thy medicine works,
And with the labor, I am for^'t to rest.

Bra. Zounds she cares not, she makes death a jest.

Ma. The guil^lesse fear not death. Farewell good friend*
I pray thee be no trouble in my end.

He stands staring and quaking. Enter Oxford, Queen, Abbess, attendants. Ox
And say you Lady Abbess that there came
One from the King unto her: what was he?

Ab. Yonder he stands, I know not what he is.

Still he stands staring. Q. Jesus have mercy* Oxford, come not nigh him.

Ox. Not nigh him Madame? yes: keep you away.

Ab. Come in good Queen: I do not mean to stay.
Exit Ab. Nor I to stir, before I see the end.

Ox. Why starest thou thus? speak fellow, answer me,
Who art thou?

Bra. A bloody villain, and a murderer.
A hundred have I slain with mine ow^e hands.
It Was I that starved the Lady Bruise to death,
And her young son, at Windsor Castle late.
It Is I have slain Matilda, blessed maid,
And now will hurry to damnations mouth,
Forced by the gnawing worm of conscience.

Runs in. Ox. Hold him for gods sake: stay the desperate wretch.

Ma. O some good pitying man compassionate*
That wretched man, so woeful desperate:
Save him for gods sake: he has set me free,
From much worlds woe, much wrong, much misery.

Qu. I hear thy tongue, true perfect charity.
Chaste maid, fair maid look up and speak to me.

Ma. Whose here? my gr^^ious sovereign Isabell?
I will take strength and kneel.

Qu. Matilda sit, I Will kneel to thee, Forgive me, gentle girl,
My most ungentle wrongs.

Ma. Fair beau^ious Queen,
I give god thanks, I do not think on wrongs.

Ox. How now Fitzwaters child? how do thou girl?

Ma. Well, my good Lord of Oxford: pretty well:
A little travel more, and I shall rest:
For I am almost at my iorneyes end.
O that my head were raised a little up:
My drousie head, whose ^im decaying lights,
Assure me it is almost time to sleep.
Raise her head. I thank your Highness, I have now some ease.
Be witness, I beseeth your Majesty,
That I forgive the King, with all my heart:
With all the little of my living heart,
That gives me leave to say, I can forgive:
And I beseech high heaven he long may live
A happy King, a king beloou'd and feared*
Oxford, for gods sake, to my father write
The latest commendations of his child:
And say, Matilda kept his Honors charge,
Dying a spotless maiden vndefilde.
Bid him be glad, for I am gone to joy:
I that did turn his weal to bitter woe.
The king and he will quickly now grow friends,
And by their friendship much content will grow,
Sink earth to earth, fade flower, ordaind to fade:
But pass forth soul unto the shrine of peace,
Beg there atonement may be quickly made.
Fair Queen, kind Oxford, all good you attend:
Fly forth my soul, heavens king be there thy friend.

Ox. O pity, mourning sight, age pitiless:
Are these the messages king John does send!
Keep in, my tears, for shame, your conduits keep,
Sad woe beholding eyes: no, will ye not?
Why, then a Gods name weep.

Sit. Qu. I cannot weep for wrath: here, here, take in
The blessed body of this noble maid:
In milk white clothing let the same be laid,
Exeunt with the body. Upon an open biere, that all may see
King John's unkingly lust and cruel^ie.

Ox. I, be it so. Your self, if so you please,
Will I attend upon, and both us wait
On chaste Matildaes body: which with speed,
To Windsor Castle we will hence convey:
There is another spectacle of ruth,
Old Bruses famisht Lady and her son.

Qu. There is the king besieging of young Bruise,
His Lords are there* who when they see this sight,
I know will have small heart for John to fight.

Ox. But where is the murderer, ha? is not he staid?

Ser. Borne with a violent rage, he clim'd a tree,
And none of us could hinder his intent:
But getting to the top boughs, fast he tied
His garters to his neck, and a weak branch,
Which being unable to sustain his weight,
Down to the ground he fell, where bones and flesh
Lie pasht together, in a poole of blood.

Ox. Alas for woe: but this is just heavens doom
On those that live by blood: in blood they die.
May an example of it, honest friends,
Do well, take pains, beware of cruelty.
Come Madam, come, to Windsor let us go:
And there to Bruses grief, add greater woe.

Exeunt. Enter Bruise, upon the walls. Bru. Will not my bitter bannings and sad
plaints,
My just and execrable execrations,
My tears, my prayers, my pittie-mouing mones
Prevail, thou glorious bright Lamp of the day,
To cause thee keep an ^bit for their souls,
And dwell one month with the Antipodes?
Bright sun retire, gylde not this vault of death,
With thy illustrate rays: retire, retire,
And yield black night thy Empery a while:
A little while, till as my tears be spent,
My blood be likewise shed in raining drops,
By the tempestuous rage of tyrant John.
Learn of thy love, the morning: she has wept,
Shower upon shower, of silver deawie tears.
High trees, low plants, and pretty little flowers
Witness her woe: on them her grief appears:
And as she dre^pes on them, they do not let,
By drop and drop, their mother earth to wet.
See these hard stones, how fast small rouelets
Issue from them, though they seem issuelesse:
And wet eyed woe on every thing is viewde:
Save in thy face that smil'st at my distress.
O do not drink their tears thus greedily:
Yet let the mornings mourning garment dwell
Upon the sad earth. Will thou not, thou churl?
Then surfeit with thy exhalations speedily:
For all earths venomous infecting worms
Have belcht their several poisons on the fields,
Mixing their simples in thy compound draught.
Well Phoebus well, drink on I say, drink on:
But when thou do vngorge thee, grant me this,
Thou power those poisons on the head of John.

Drum. Enter Chester, Mowbray, Soldiers: Lester, Richmond at an other:
Soldiers. Bru. How now my Lords: were ye last night so pleased
With the beholding of that property,
Which John and other murderers have wrought,
Upon my starued mother and her son:
That you are come again? Shall I again
Set open shop, show my dead ware, dear bought,
Of a relentlesse merchant that does trade
On the red sea, swollen mighty with the blood
Of noble, virtuous, harmless innocents?
Whose cole black vessel is of Ebonie,
Their shrouds and tackle (wrought and wou'n by wrong)
Stretched with no other gale of wind, but grief:
Whose sighs with full blasts beats on her shrouds:
The Master murder is, the Pilot shame,
The Mariners rape, theft, and perjury:
The burden, tyrannous oppression,
Which howerly he in England does unlade:
Say, shall I open shop, and show my wares?

Lest. No, good Lord Bruise, we have enough of that.

Drum: Enter king, Hubert, Soldiers. Ki. To Windsor welcome, Hubert^ Soft: me
thinks
Bruise and our Lords are at a parley now?

Br. Chester and Mowbray, you are John's sworn friends*
Will you see more? Speak, answer me my Lords:
I am no nig guard, you shall have your fill.

Both. We have too much, and surfeit with the woe.

Br. Are you all full? Here comes a ravening kite,
That both at quick, at dead, at all will smite.
He shall, he must, I, and bir Lady, may
Command me to give over holy day,
And set wide open, what you would not see.

Ki. Why stand ye Lords, and see this traitor pearcht,
Upon our Castles battlements so proud?
Come down young Bruise, set open the castle gates:
Unto thy sovereign, let thy knee be bowed,
And mercy shall be given to thee and thine,

Br. O miserable thing:
Comes mercy from the mouth of John our king?
Why then belike hell will be pitiful.
I will not open the gates, the gate I will:
The gate where thy shame, and my sorrow fits.
See my dead mother, and her famisht son*
Open thy tyrants eyes: for to the world,
I will lay open thy fell cruelties.

K. We heard indeed, thy mother and her son.
In prison dyed, by wilful famishment.

Br. Sin doubled upon sin. Slaunderst thou the dead?
Unwilling willingness it shall appear,
By then I have produced, as I will do,
The just presumptions against your unjust act,

K. Assail the castle Lords: Alarm drums:
And drown this scrietchowls cries with your deep sounds.

Lest. I tell thee drummer, if thy drum thou smite,
By heaven, I Will send thy soul to hels dark night,
Hence with thy drum: gods passion, get thee hence:
Be gone I say, move not my patience.

Exit drum. K. Are you advised Lester, what you do?

Lest. I am advised: for my Sovereign know,
The^'s not a Lord here will lift up his arm,
Against the person of you noble youth,
Till you have heard the circumstantiall truth,
By good presumptions, touching this foul deed.
Therefore go on young Bruise, proceed, re^ell
The allegation that puts in this doubt,
Whether thy mother through her wilfulness,
Famisht her self and her sweet son, or no?

Br. Unlikely supposition: nature first denies,
That any mother, when her young ling cries,
If she have means, is so unnatural
To let it faint and starve, But we will prove
She had no means* except this monefull mean,
This torture of her self. Come forth, come forth,
Sir William Blunt, whom slander says I slew:
Come tell the king and Lords what you know true.

King. Thou have betrayed our Castle,

Blunt. No: God can tell it was surpised by politic report,
And affirmation that your Grace was slain.

Rich. Goo^, sir William Blunt:
Pass briefly to the Ladies famishment.

Bl. About some ten days since, there came one Brand,
Bringing a signet from my Lord the king,
And this commission signed with his hand,
Lords look, and read the thing. Commanding me (as the contents express)
That I should presently deliver up
The Lady Bruise and her young son to him.

Mow. What time a day was this?

Bl. It was, Lord Mowbray, somewhat past eleauen:
For we were even then sitting down to dine.

Lest. But did ye dine?

Bl. The Lady and her son did not:
Brand would not stay.

Bru. No Lester, no: for here is no such sign
Of any meats digesture.

Rich. But by the way. Tell us I pray you Blunt,
While she remained with you, was she distraught
With grief, or any other passions violent?

Blu. She now and then would weep, and often pray,
For reconcilement twixt the king and Lords.

Chest. How to her son did she affected stand?

Blu. Affection could not any more affect:
Nor might a mother show more mothers love:

Mowb. How to my Lord the king?

Bl. O my Lord God! I never knew a subject love king more:
She never would blin telling how his Grace
Saved her young son from soldiers, and from fire*
How fair he spoke, gave her her son to keep:
And then, poor Lady, she would kiss her boy,
Pray for the king so hearty earnestly,
That in pure zeal, she wept most bitterly*

K. I weep for her, and do by heaven protest,
I honored Bruses wife* How ere that slave
Rudely effected what I rashly wild:
Yet when he came again, and I bethought,
What bitter penance I had put them to,
For my conceived displeasure against old Bruise,
I had the villain post and bear them meat:
Which he excused, protesting pity moved him
To leave wine, bread, and other poudred meat,
More than they twain could in a fortnight eat.

Blu. Indeed, this can I witness with the king,
Which argues in that point his innocence:
Brand did bear in a months provision;
But locked it like a villain, far from them:
And locked them in a place where no man's ear
Might hear their lamentable woeful moves:
For all the issue both of vent and light,
Came from a loouer at the towers top,
Till now Lord Bruise made open this wide gappe.

Br. Had I not reason, think you, to make wide
The window that should let so much woe forth?
Where sits my mother martyrde by her self,
Hoping to save her child from martyrdom:
Where stands my brother martyrd by himself,
Because he would not taste his mothers blood.
For thus I gather this? my mothers teeth and chin
Are bloody with the savage cookery,
Which her soft heart, through pity of her son,
Respectlesse, made her practice on her self:
And her right hand, with offering it the child,
Is with her own pure blood staind and defilde,
My little brothers lips and chin, alone,
Are tainted with the blood: but his eauen teeth,
Like orient pearl, or snowe-white yuory,
Have not one touch of blood, one little spot:
Which is an argument the boy would not.
Once stir his lips, to taste that bloody food,
Our cruel gentle mother ministered:
But as it seemed (for see, his pretty
Palm is bloody too) he cast it on the ground:
For on this side these blessed relics lie,
By famines rage divided from this shrine,
Sad woeful mother in Jerusalem,
Who when thy son and thou did faint for food,
Buried his sweet flesh in thy hungry womb:
How merciless were thou, if we compare
Thy fact and this: For my poor Lady mother
Did kill her self, to save my dying brother.
And thou ungentle son of Miriam,
Why did thou beg life when thy mother lackt?
My little brother George did nobly act
A more courageous part; he would not eat,
Nor beg to live, it seemed he did not cry:
Few tears stand on his cheek, smooth is each eye:
But when he saw my mother bent to die,
He dyed with her: O childish valiancie!

Kin. Good Brufe have done: my heart can not contain
The grief it holds, my eyes must shoure down rai^^.

Lest. Which showers are even as good,
As rain in harvest, or a swelling floode
When neighboring meadows lack the mowers sith.

A march for burial, with drum and fife. Enter Oxford, Matilda borne with
Nuns, one carrying a white pendant. These words writ in gold; Amoris,
Castitatis, and Honoris honos. The Queen following the Biere, carrying a
Garland of flowers: set it in the midst of the Stage. Rich. List Lester, hearst
thou not a mournful march?

Lest. Yes Richmond, and it seems old de Vere.

Ox. Lords, by your leave, is not our soueraign here?

K. Yes good old Awbury.

Ox. Ah my gracious Lord,
That you so much your high state should neglect!
Ah god in heaven forgive this bloody deed.
Young Bruise, young Bruise, I weep,
Thy mothers and thy brothers wrong.
Yet to afflict thee more, more grief I bring*

Br. O Houourable Awbery de Vere,
Let sorrow in a sable suit appear:
Do not misshape her garments, like delight.
If it be grief, why cloth'st thou her in white?

Ox. I cannot tell thee yet. I must sit down.
Attend young Bruise, and listen to the Queen:
She Will not be tongue tied, we shall have a stir
Anon, I fear, would make a man half sick.

Qu. Are you here leatcher? O intemperate king,
Will thou not see me? come, come, show your face*
Your Graces graceless, kings, unkingly face.
What? mute, hands folded, eyes fixed on the earth?
Whose turn is next now to be murdered?
The famisht Bruses are on yonder side:
On this another, I will name anon:
One for whose head this garland I do bear,
And this fair milke-white spotless pendant to^.
Look up king John, see, yonder sits thy shame:
Yonder it lies: what, must I tell her name?
It is Matilda, poisoned by thee.

Ki. Matilda: O that foul swift foote^ slave,
That kills ere one have time to hid him save.
Fair gentle girl, ungently made away.

Br. My banished uncles daughter, art thou there?
Then I defy all hope, and swear

Lest. Stay Bruise, and listen well what oath to swear.
Lewys the Dolphin, pitying one estate,
Is by the Christian king his father, sent
With aid to help us, and is landed too.
Lords that will fly the den of cruelty,
And fight to free your selves from tyranny,
Bruise, keep that Castle, to the only use
Of our elected king, Lewys of France.

Oxf. Gods passion do not so: king John is here.
Lords, whisper not with Lester^ Lester, fie:
Stir not again regardlesse ^utinie:
Speak to them Hugh: I know thou loou'st the king.
Madame, go to them, nay do, for gods sake do:
Down with your stomach: for if he go down,
You must down too, and be no longer Queen:
Advise you, go entreat them speedily.
My sovereign wherefore sit you sighing there?
The Lords are all about to follow Lewys:
Up and entreat them, else they will away.

K, Good Oxford let them go. Why should they stay?

Ox. What? are you desperate? that must not be.
Hear me my Lords.

All stand in Counsel. Ki. This pendant let me see.
Amoris, Castitatis, and Honoris honos. She was indeed of London the honor
once,
When she was loved of virtuous Huntington:
Of chastity the honor, all her life:
To impure thoughts she never could be won.
And she of Honor was the honor too,
By birth, in life, she honor honored.
Bring in two tapers lighted, quick, dispatch.

Lest. Remember Bruise, thy charge. Come Lords away.
All, but Oxford and Hugh. Away, we will away.

Bring in two white Tapers. Ox. Hark Lester but one word, a little stay.
Help me good Hubert, help me gentle Queen.

Again confer. K. How dim these Tapers burn! they give no light.
Here were two beauteous Lamps, y^ could have taught
The Sun to shine by day, the Moon by night:
But they are dim too: clean extinguished.
Away with these, since those fair lights be dead.

Ox. And as I say, hark Bruise unto our talk.
Think you it is for love of England, Lewis comes?
Nay: France is not so kind: I would it were.
Advise your selves, hark, do thou hear me Bruise?

Br. Oxford, I do.

Ox. Can noble English hearts bear the French yoke?
No Lester* Richmond think on Lewys sire,
That le^t you, and your king, in Palestine.

Qu. And think beside, you know not Lewys nature,
Who may be as bad as John, or rather worse than he.

H^. And look my Lords upon his silent woe:
His soul is at the door of death I know.
See how he seeks to suck, if he could draw,
Poison from dead Matildaes ashie lips.
I Will be sworn his very heart strings nips.
A v^ng^ance on that slave, that cursed Brand,
I Will kill him if I live, with this right hand.

Ox. Thou can not Hubert, he has killed himself:
But to our matter. Lester, pray thee speak.
Young Bruise, for gods sake let us know thy mind.

Bru. I would be loath to be a strangers slave:
For Englands love, I would no French king have.

Lest. Well Oxford, if I be deceived in John again,
Its long of you, Lord Hubert, and the Queen.
Yield up the Castle Bruise, we will once more try
King John's proceedings. Oxford, tell him so.

Oxford goes to the king, does his duty, and talks with him. Br. I will come
down: but first farewell dear mother,
Kiss her. Farewell poor little George, my pretty brother.
Now will I shut my shambles in again.
Farewell, farewell.
In everlasting bliss your sweet souls dwell.

Ox. But you must mendy faith, in faith you must.

Lest. My Lord, once more your subjects do submit,
Besceching you to think how things have past,
And let some comfort shine on us your friends,
Through the bright splendor of your virtuous life.

K. I thank you all; and Lester I protest,
I will be better than I yet have been.

Br. Of Windsor Castle here the keys I yield.

K. Thanks Bruise: forgive me, and I pray thee see
Thy mother and thy brother buried,
Bruise offers to kiss Matilda * In Windsor Castle Church. Do, kiss her
cheek:
Weep thou on that, on this side I will weep.

Q. Chaste virgin, thus I crown thee with these flowers.

K. Let us go on to Dunmow with this maid:
Among the hallowed Nuns let her be laid:
Unto her tomb, a monthly pilgrimage
Does king John vow in penance for this wrong.
Go forward maids: on with Matildaes hearse,
And on her Toombe see you ingraue this verse;

Within this Marble monument, does lie
Matilda martyrde, for her chastity,
Exeunt. Epilogus.
Thus is Matildaes story shown in act,
And rough heawen out by an uncunning hand*
Being of the most material points compackt,
That with the certainst state of truth do stand.
FINIS.

