A brief Answer made unto two seditious Pamphlets, the one printed in French,
and the other in English. Containing a defense of Edmund Campion and his
accomplices, their most horrible and unnatural Treasons, against her Majesty
and the Realm. By A. M.

Honos alit Arts. Imprinted at London by John Charlewood, dwelling in
Barbican, at the sign of the half Eagle and Key. 1582.

TO THE RIGHT Honorable Sir Fraunces Walsingham, Knight, principal Secretary
to her Majesty, and one of her Highness most Honorable privy Council:
Antony Monday, wishes the happy continaunce of earthly Honor, as also to be
partaker of the endless joy in the life to come.
COMPARING THE passed course of time (Right Honorable) with the succeding
continuance: I find that neither state, Prince or people, which might with
most authority make boast, either for royalty of Government, or
tranquillity of years: but at one time or other they have felt the malign
stroke of Fortune, either by envy of princely rule, ambitious desire of
unstable preferme^t, or some tragical and wicked intent, issuing from the
root of all disloyalty, Treason. In vain it were to spend time in repetition
of circumstau^ces, to make proof either of the one or the other: our eyes are
filled with the registered reports hereof, and our ears made acquainted, with
a multitude of unhappy accidents, yea, the more my grief to think thereon,
our native Country has lately witnessed, a Stratagem according with former
infortunes. But although malice, in diverse of these ungracious acts, had
purposed and appointed a wished end of his bloody desire; yet notwithstanding
his extremest occasions, some one or other have been reserved, to give warning
of such mischeeuous and iminent dangers; where through, the Prince and People
have been happily delivered, and malice altogether utterly disappointed. In
recompense of which true and loyal service, the faithful perfourmers thereof,
have not only attained the worthy favor of their Sovereign, but also have
been enritched with the continual love and amity of the Subjects.

These things (right Honorable) ioyntlye considered together, with the late
occasions so happily prevented, to see time grown to such an iron and
reprobate nature, contrary to that it has been in the aforenamed days; I am
not only confounded in a number of dismaying thoughts, but also account my
self as altogether unhappy.

It is not vnkowen to your Honor, in what occasions passed, foretelling an
unlooked for cause of danger, to my gracious Sovereign and her Realm: how
not I alone, but I cheefely as one, gave forth such unreprovable notice of
ensuing harms, as bewrayed their secret traiterous intent, and also notably
convicted the adversary. For which service, beyond my desert, I have found the
plentiful measure, of my Princess favor and goodness, as also the noble
goodwill of her Honorable Counsel, of which high calling, as God and her
Majesty has created you one: so am I in duty to pray for your continual
welfare, whose Honorable freendship has exceeded my poor demerit. But when I
think on the undeserved ingratitude, wherewith mine own Countrymen unkindly
reward me; I am forced to say, as one sometime said, A man is no where wurse
esteemed, then in his own Country. If I had come as their adversaries did,
for the subversion of their peaceable estate, and bloody overthrow: then might
I well have contented my self, to be condemned with reproach, and thrust
forth into infamy. But coming as I did, to open the gap of trouble secretly
meant unto them; I find not so much as I have deserved, but yet a great deal
more then I am able to suffer. Every man will deskant on matters after his own
imagination, commend and condemn as pleases his humor, but that which is more,
diverse prating Boys (whereof I ca^ name some) will take upon the^ to defend
their cause, who have been found such heinous offenders; if some of them were
publicly chastened, it would charm the tongues of a number more, who because
they perceive them to be suffered; join with them in evil speeches together
for company.

My desire is therefore to your Honor, that some good order may be appointed
for such lewd and talkatiue companions, and that they who are innocent of such
wicked crimes, whereby (by them) they are maliciously slaundered, may not be
dealt withal after this manner; for the enemy does very well perceive it, and
smileth to see us so shamefullie handled, beside, the lies and fables by such
idle fellows imagined, makes them more bold in their Libelles, to exclaim
and defame even as pleases them.

To approve my words true, two seditious and Traitorous Pamphlets have
lately been printed and dispersed abroad, the one in French, the other in
English; containing such horrible and detestable slanders, both against
Honorable, worshipful, learned and godly persons, as themselves, who are the
Authors thereof, if they were not altogether given over as reprobate, might be
ashamed to publish abroad. And yet will they say, they use such modesty,
piety and gravity in all their actions, as no men are able to do the like;
how void they are of such virtuous gifts, I will not reason my self, but
appeal to your Honor, and a number godly and learned men, who I know have
seen their unchristian like behavior, not only in their daily deeds and
gesture, but also in their mallicious and slanderous Libelles. These two
aforenamed Books (right Honorable) coming to my hands, and the famous
untruths therein with advise considered; I prepared my self to write this
brief Answer, which, in duty and humility, I commend to your Honorable
view. How it shall please you to like thereof, I am not to enter into oppinion:
nevertheless, I have good hope, that according as I meant it, your Honor will
accept it, which was and is, to displease none, but to pleasure and profit all
men if I might, especially your Honor, to whom I wish more then here I can
unfold, both of earthly honor, and heavenly happiness.

Your Honors during life. Antony Monday.

To the Courteous and freendly Reader.
I Commend to thy freendly judgment (gentle reader) this little Book, made in
answer of two seditious and Traitorous Pamphlets, the one printed in French,
and the other in English: wherein, if in their writings thou find any thing,
that may seem offensive to thy civil and well ordered nature, let this be thy
persuasion, such as the Tree is, such is the fruit, and such as the matter is,
such are those kind of me^. Thou have already read in my former book, a brief
setting down of their wicked and unnatural tresons: but shortly thou shall
have such matter come forth, as shall paint them forth in their right
coullours, yet not all that I know, for my duty will not suffer me to show
it, nor thy modesty endure to read it. And by way of courtesy let me desire
of thee, that although at sundry times thou shall hear such lewd speeches of
me, as I were not worthy life, if I were so evil as to deserve them: yet that
thou will not enter into judgment against me, before thou be resolved what I
am, as also what they are that move the slanders, for I know that I am
otherwise reported of, then I have deserved, or they can prove. For it is the
whole felicitye of the aduersarye, seeing he can no way prevail in his
mischeeuous intents: to raise up slanders and infamous speeches, that way to
discredit those, whom other ways they are not able to injury. Behold their
dealings, and be warned by them, fear God, honor thy Princess, love those
that wish thy welfare, and in all causes commend thy self to the heavenly
protection.

From Barbican this 22. of March. 1582. Thine to command, Antony Monday.

An Answer made unto two seditious Pamphlets, the one printed in French, the
other in English, containing a defense of Edmund Campion, and his Accomplices.
NOt long after I had published my Book, called The Discovery of Campion,
there came unto my hands a seditious Pamphlet, printed in the French tongue,
entitled. The History of the death, which the reverend Father M. Edmund
Campion, Priest, of the Society of the name of Jesus, Not for their religion,
but for high treason.
and others have suffered in England, for the Catholic and Roomish religion
or faith, the 1. of December. 1581. adding underneath, Translated out of
English into French. When I had thoroughly perused this Book, nothing the
traitorous effects, and slanderous speeches therein contained, receiving the
judgment likewise of diverse learned and godly men: as well to correct the
manifest untruths, wherewith this Pamphlet is notably stuffed, as also that
the godly and virtuous may discern their apparent impudency and wicked
nature, I resolved my self, to shape a brief answer to such a shameless
Libel, my self being therein untruly and malliciously abused.

First our namelesse Historiographer, because he would aim his course after
some od manner of conueyaunce: takes occasion to begin his Book with the
taking of Campion, The manner of the af^resayde tray^erous Book.
his bringing to the Tower, what happened in his time of stay there, and
lastly his martyrdom (as he terms it) with two other holy and devout
Priests, and in this manner continuing his unadvised labor, he begins as
hereafter follows.

GEorge Eliot, sometime servant to Master Thomas Roper, and sithe^ce
belonging to a Gentlewoman, the Widow of Sir William Peter's, in whose service
he made show to be a sound and good Catholic: not long since committed a
murder, To build upon hear say, proves but a slender foundation.
as men say, for which offense, fearing the danger that was like to ensue, he
went and submitted him self to one of the chief Lords in the Court, and the
better to win his favor on his own behalf, promised to deliver into his
hands the Father Edmund Campion. This promise (says he) was received, and
unto the said George, and an Officer was delivered commission, to take and
apprehend the said Edmund Campion. Then went they on their way, and coming
into Barkeshire, to house of one Master Yates: George Eliot met with the Cook
of the house, with whom he was very well acquainted, because they had before
both served one Master. His Master was then in the Iayle at Reading, judge
then how Campion could be within with his M^^ster.
The Cook thinking no ill, began to tell him many things, and that Father
Campion was in the house with his Master: upon which report, George sent his
fellow to the Justice, who was a very great Caluinist, and he in mean while
was brought into the house by the said Cook, where, like an other Judas,
Traitor and disloyal, he first attended the Sacrifice of the Mass, which was
celebrated that day by the Father Edmund, as also a Sermon which he made: in
which time, behold a goodman came running, willing them to take heed of a
present treason. Scantly was all carried away, that had served for the Mass
and the Sermon, but the Justice was there arrived with very great force,
besetting the house round about, that none should escape away. After very
dilligent search through all the Cha^bers, and other more secret places; they
were determined to return, as not finding any thing, until they were
advertised, either by George, who had understood it of the Cook, or by some
other, of a certain corner, more dark and subtle, where they found the Father
Edmund, and two other Preests hidden: who the same day, with Gentlemen and
other persons, were sent up to London, a spectacle of great joy unto their
adversaries.

By that which follows, written by George Eliot him self: consider of the
truth of this report.
Thus much of our French Historians words, I thought good in this place to set
down: because the disproofe thereto annexed, may discover what truth all they
of his sect frequent in any of their actions. This aforenamed George Eliot came
home unto my lodging, where I showed him the slanders that were used of him in
the French Book: whereupon taking good advise, and noting the circumstances
that so highly touched him, upon his conscience he delivers this
unreprovable answer.

George Eliot his answer, to clear himself of the former untrue obections.
ABout three years since, it was my fortune to serve Master Thomas Roper of
Kent: with whom I had not stayed past eleven weeks, but Pain the Priest (of
whom mention is made in the Discovery of Campion, set forth by the Author of
this Book,) entised me from thence to serve my Lady Peter's, to whom the said
Pain served craftily as Steward of her house. With her I continued almost two
years, in which time (being my self bent somewhat to that religion)
frequenting the company of a number of Papists: Who frequenteth their company,
shall find all their dealings disloyal and traiterous.
I perceived their dealings, to be as they are indeed, full of wicked
treasons, and unnatural dispositions, too bad to be named. The conceyt
whereof, examining first my duty to God, ne^t my love to my Princess, and
last the care of my Country* by the grace and permission of God, offered me so
great disliking of their dealings, that so warily and conveniently as I might,
I weaned my affection from their abominable infection, nevertheless using
their companyes still, for that it gave me the better occasion, to see into the
depth of their horrible inventions. From my Lady Peter's in Noue^ber was twelve
month, by entreaty I came to Master Ropers again, with whom I continued
till Whitsontide last: when my conscience hardly digesting such a weighty
burden, as with their devises and practices it was very sore laden, I was
constrained to give over that slavish kind of life, and humbly committed my
reconciliation to the right Honorable and my good Lord, the Earl of Leicester,
to whom I made known the grievous estate of my life, which for the space of
four years I had endured amongst them. Now whereas it has pleased my
adversary to set down, that I committed a murder, and to avoid the danger
of Law, offered (to the aforesaid my good Lord) to deliver unto him Edmund
Campion, thereby to obtain my pardon: How untrue this is, his honor very well
knows, and so do a number more beside, for in truth, I neither as then knew
Campion, It is very unlike, that he which never saw Campion in all his life,
nor knew where he was, could make any promise to bring him forth.
had never seen him in all my life, nor knew where or in what place he was: it
is very unlike then I should make any such promise. But that he may learn an
other time, to order his matters with more truth and discretion: I will set
down both how I went, with what commission, and to what intent, and then let
him have judgment according to the credit of his work.

When I had revealed the traitorous speeches of Pain the Preeste, how and
after what manner, you may read in the Book before expressed: I was demanded
if I knew where he was at that time. I could not make any certain answer,
wherefore I was demanded again, if I would do my endeavor to search him
out, whereto, according to my bounden duty, I agreede right willingly. Then
was I appointed in company with David Ienkins, one of the Messengers of her
Majesty's Chamber: I saw the warrant my self, and neither was Campion, Pain,
or any one named therein, but all Priests, Jesuits and such seditious persons
and to us was delivered a warrant, to take and apprehend, not any one man, but
all Priests, Jesuits, and such like seditious persons, as in our journey we
should meet with all, neither was Campion, Pain, or any one man named in the
warrant: for that as the one was judged hard to be found, so was it uncertain
where to find him I knew well enough. Wherefore remembering when I served
Master Roper, that there was one Thomas Cooper a Cook, who served him
likewise, and also knew the aforesaid Pain: to him I thought good to go,
because I had understanding that he dwelt at Liuarde in Barkeshire with one
Master Yates, who was a very earnest Papist, and gave great entertainment to
all of that sect: thinking as it might so fall out, that we either might find
the said Pain there, or else understand where he was. And considering the
generality of our warrant, some other Priests might chance to be there, in
respect he was such an Host for all of that disposition. When we came to
Liuard, and had talked with this aforesaid Thomas Cooper, we were framing our
selves to depart thence, not having been within the house at all: but he
desiring us to stay Dinner, we alighted and went in with him, he not telling
me that Campion was there with his Master, for he was then in the Iayle at
Reading, or any other Preeste, though it has pleased our namelesse Author to
write so. When we were within the house, this Cooper brought us into the
Buttery, where he whispering me in the ear, demanded if my fellow were within
the Church or no, A holy kind of Church, whereof the Devil is Uicar.
as much to say, as whether he was a Papist or no? I answered he was not, yet
nevertheless (quoth I) he is a very honest man, and one that wishes well that
way. Then said the Cook, will you go up. Hereby I understood that he would
bring me to a Mass, whereto I consenting, leaving David Ienkins, in the
Butterie, he brought me up, where after one Satwell alias Foord had said
Mass, Campion prepared himself to say Mass. And there was the first time
that ever I saw Campion in all my life, not having heard by any that he was
there in the house, before I was brought up into the Chamber. As concerning how
he was taken, how he was brought up to London, and how all things passed in
that service: I have already set down in my book imprinted, which conferring
with his false report, you shall find it as much to differ, as truth does
from falsehood.

This have I thought good here to set down, in the reproof of him who has
published such a manifest untruth: and as concerning what I have reported to
be spoken by Pain, I am ready at all times to iustifye it with my death, that
they are his words according as he spoke them.

By me George Eliot.


THus may you see how apparent these untruths are, which he and his sect take
for their infallible ground work: comparing the one with the other, you shall
hardly find him to say truth in any place, The father of lies has made his
Children so prompt in his Art, that they cannot choose but make knowledge
thereof.
but even according to his own profession, being governed by lies and unjust
actions, wherein he is grown so prompte and headstrong, that he must needs
show it accordingly, else he should estraunge himself from the ordinary course
of their nature: but now again to our History.

He says, that after Campion was brought to the Tower, he was hardly
entertained both for lodging and victualles: I need not here to lay open
how, and after what manner all prisoners that come there are entertained: for
every one well does know, how bountifully, liberally and truly they are
served, being the Queens Majesty's Prisoners, which many a poor man would be
highly contented to fare in the order as they do. But in deed he keeps
order very well, to make as many lies as lines, his Book will be the better
esteemed of them that delight therein. Now as concerning the time of his
imprisonment, his Disputations and other matters, Whereat (he says) he
thanketh God he was present himself: such a one has taken those matters in
hand, that when they come forth, you shall see our Historian, made the
perfect Anotamye, of all untruth, malice and egregious slanders. After what
manner he has behaved himself to Master Nowell the Deane of Paul's, Master
Doctor Day, and Master Whitakers: Who (says he) has put forth a Book, in
answer to the Book made by the Father Campion, but any man may see (says he)
with what ignorance and impudency. Indeed ignorance has so peruersely
blinded them, that either they cannot or will not see, the learning, modesty
and gravity, handled in that skillful Book, for truth whereof, I appeal to
all the learned Divines in England, who very well know that I report no
otherwise then truth is my warrant. After he has showen some part of his
accustomed untruths, in opening part of the Disputations: he comes to
report, whereof they were endicted, As co^spiring the death of the Queens
Majesty, overthrow of the Realm of England, provoking foreign Princes to
join therein, and persuading the people of England unto manifest Rebellion:
These horrible treasons, which were manifestly proved to their faces: are but
fables and lies, says he.
all these being fables and no truth, says he, not able to be proved any
way, albeit they were garnished with sundry false witnesses, who were
corrupted and bribed only for that purpose. I take God to my witness, that
neither I received bribe, nor any manner of corrupting in the world, or any
premise of my preferment any way: but only what I said and did, long before
that time, when I was brought to my examination, without demand of any such
matter, promise, bribe or corruption, I declared that which was nothing but the
mere truth, as diverse at my first coming over can witness: that what I
told them, of treasons pretended and conspired against her Majesty and the
Realm, I reported at the Araignement, and have set down in my Book the very
same, which, as I know to be true, and many other not to be publicly named:
so will I stand in maintenance thereof to the death, and in the death, for
the sauegarde of my Princess, whom I pray God long to continue in honor, All
good Subjects will say as much as I do: but as for such as will not, God cut
them off, or turn their hearts.
and benefit of my Country, which I pray God to bless continually, from all
attempts of Traitors, from all motions of mischaunce that may any way annoy
it: and that as God has blessed it hither to, with the glorious beams of his
sacred Gospel, through her who is the mother and maynetainer of our joy by the
same: even so, that he will long lend us her to increase it, long bless the
Realm to enjoy it, and us all faithfully to love it, and her Majesty. And
whereas he says, they were all fables and no truth, not able to be proved
any way: notable testimony remains, how their treasons were manifestly
proved, both by their own confessions and writings, uncorrupted witnesses,
and evident proof of every thing that was objected against them, and not that
they were condemned for their religion, as this false reporter says: but for
high Treason, intended, practiced and conspired against her Majesty and the
Realm, the sum whereof is so odious, that any good mind loatheth to hear
it.

Again he says, That when the witnesses where produced and sworn, to wit,
Monday, Cradocke, Sled and Hill, all of very base condition, who were so well
seen in lies, that they seemed to be borne and nourished therein: Here he
describes him self, and all chose of his sect and condityon.
they had the foul overthwart, albeit with shamelesnes and vehemency, they
mainetayned their accusation, against these good and innocent men. As for our
baseness or simplenes, we will not stand to contend with him: though we know
we have all one father, and that we are all made of one metal. Again we
know, God has chosen the despised of the world, 1. Cor. 1.
to confou^d them that think themselves most mighty. But where he says, We
were so well seen in lies, that we seemed to be borne and nourished therein. I
can level at his meaning: How that both he and they, believing in lies,
obeying the Author of lies, and daily fed and nourished with lies, hate nothing
so much as the truth, so that when they are truly and faithfully reproved,
of their own wicked and naughty dealings: then they storm and keep a coil,
exclayme, defame, and use vnreuerent speeches, so that what touches them with
most truth, is stark false, and nothing but lies. If he had applied this
unto themselves, he had spoken but truth, for they had the foul overthwart
every way.
If this be not his meaning. I take it so, and can prove it so, for that both
impudentlie and shamelessly, they denied all manifest truethes, brought and
proved against them, and neither had we a foul overthwart, or any motion of a
disproofe: but in deed Master Campion oftentimes would offer to trippe me in
my tale, and would question with the other subtillie, according to his usual
wunt, and if this was a foul overthwart, when no reason was made or showen of
any such occasion: let the learned judge, who can discern truth from
falsehood, and traitors from true and loyal Subjects, but we must suffer him
to keep his ordinary course of untruth, least perhaps he should chance to
forget it.

Then he sets down ye Euide^ces given, which you may see in my other Book,
with more truth then he uses the matter: reporting that which Sled never
spoke nor thought, wherefore we let it pass among the number of untruths. And
then irreverently he comes to Master Seriant Anderson, It is their cheifest
glory, to revile and slander: but therein they aptly show themselves.
and Master Popham, the Queens Majesty's Attorneye general: wherein our
Historian aptly discovers him self, but as Envy braggeth and draws no
blood, so he thinking to iniure others, sheateth his venomous blade in his own
breast. And all this while (says he) the good religious Campion, showed him
self so prudent, and answered with such piety and modesty: that he not
only astonished the people there present, but also brought the Judges into
admiration of him, he was so present to him self, and defended with so great
equity, both his own and his companions cause, that it was esteemed they
should be declared guiltless. The true construction of the former words,
vttred so highly on the behalf of Campion.
In deed I will not deny, but this good irreligious Campion, handled every
cause with a smoothe and cullorable countenance, being very present and
quick to him self, in Sophistical conueyances, and far fet deep points of
Logique: and indeed he did it with such a modest show, as Judas, when with a
kiss he betrayed his Master. And I am persuaded, that the people there
present were astonished, to hear and perceive that so modest a countenance,
could harbor such a false and traiterous heart, to God, his Princess and
Country: yea, the Judges did admire, that a man as he was, professing learning
and love in outward appearaunce, should be so overcome by the Devil, as to
seek the spoil and ruin of his Princess and Country. Good cause had the
people to be astonished, that so wicked members as they, should be found among
them, who were true and faith full Subjects, and more cause had the Judges of
admiration, to see their own Countrymen, in a matter so horrible to appear
before them: little did any there think to hear them declared guiltless,
their treasons so apparent, and the proof so evident, but rather thought no
torment sufficient, to reward them who were so heinous offenders, and
therefore woorthilie, and according to desert, they were given up guilty.

And whereas he says: It was since reproched to one of the twelve, A notable
untruth, made on our secret Authors fyngers ends.
for the ill advise used in searching their cause, and that he should make
answer: he could do no otherwise, least he should not be thought a friend to
Caesar: We add this to the trothlesse number likewise, the men being all
known to be no one of them such, as would make any such answer, but as they
said then, they thanked God that they had lived to do their Princess such
service, as to cut off such rotten branches, from such a quiet common wealth:
so they say still, and will continue therein, let the adversary report what
he can.

And here he brings in: That the next day Collington was found not to be at
Rheimes in the specified time, This is so well known to be false, that it scant
deserves any answer at all.
for that Master Lankaster of Grayes Inn, witnessed him then to be there with
him: by which means (says he) he delivered this innocent man from death,
whereto he was already condemned. How false this is, it is sufficiently
known, for so soon as the question was moved, Master Lankaster being by,
made answer: and neither was Collington condemned, nor any of them there that
was as then condemned, for that all the matters were not heard, neither had the
Iewrie determined upon any thing: wherefore you may see how he keeps his
hand in ure, with his accustomed untruths.

Upon this (says he) one William Nicholson Priest standing by, A manifest
untruth, as the reproof thereof succeeding does euidentlye declare.
and knowing well that Foorde, one of the prisoners, was as wrongfullie accused
as this other: earnestly moved with a conscience of verity, would as well
defend the innocence of Foorde, as the other before had done of Collington:
but it would not fadge with him, for he was taken and sent to prison. Now shall
you perceive what truth can be gathered of this place, which if he were not so
confounded in shame, he would have showen some sign of more discretion, rather
then to set it so falsely down after this manner. When as Alexander Brian, was
manifestly found, to be present at the traiterous Sermon which John Heart made
at Rheimes, as an especial encouragement to them all there sitting in
audience, to great disobedience and hate of their Princess and Country: the
said Alexander offered denial thereof, which notwithstanding, Charles Sled
defended truly to his face. Whereupon this William Nicholson standing by among
the people, William Nicholson, his presumption to defend a Craitours cause at
the bar, whereby he brought him self into ye same p^edicament.
would take upon him to affirm, that Brian was not at ye said Sermon,
granting him self to be present there then: being evidently disprooued of
his bold attempt, the treason of Brian appearing so manifest, he was committed
to prison, according as rightly he had deserved. He neither offered word on
the behalf of Foord, either to defend his innocence, or appeach his guiltines:
but even as I have set you down, so it was, and no otherwise. As for the
determination of the Pope, to replenish his Seminaries with such abou^dance of
Scholars as he can conveniently attain unto. It is largely handled in my
other Book, to his shame and all such, as follow his humor in so traitorous
persuasions. Nevertheless, this Sophister would smooth the matter after an
other manner, I would the Pope would keep his mere love to him self: for we
might very well be without it.
as that: The Pope does it for mere love and pity to our Country, to
increase such as shall profit in his service, and to aid the Church (says
he) which is so afflicted. I would wish him to keep that love and pity to
him self, for any good Subject loatheth to hear a motion, which may offer
disobedience to their Prince and Country, and therefore loatheth him who
offers them such unchristianlike service.

And here I must not forget, to answer his deep judgment as concerning
Alexander Brian, and the Cross made of a piece of a Trencher, which he had in
his hand at the Arraignement, which this fellow says: A meet Ancient
bearer, for such an Idolatrous and superstitious thing.
To be a great Cross, and that Master Brian as Ancient bearer, bare it there
in the behalf of them all, until (says he) he was corrected for it, and
because he would not lay it away, a naughty man by force took it from him,
to whom Brian said. Thou have taken from me my Image, nevertheless, I will
fight under the Standarde thereof to the death.

Oh most impudent and shameless words, it is so well known to be be untrue
that is here rehearsed, as I need not to waste time in so vain a matter. For
when he was reproved for his shaven crown, and that stubbornlie and
obstinatlie he made answer: He had good hope to do it again. The Cross was
taken from him, with so sweet a rebuke for such an idolatrous spectacle, as if
he had had any grace in him, would have constrained him to be heartily sorry
for his folly.

Of him that accustometh him self in lies: it is very hard to hear any
truth.
And neither spoke he the words here falselie imputed to him, or any matter
to that intent: only these words which have been rehearsed, he spoke very
scornefullie, and without any show of wisdom or modesty. And because I will
not be over tedious to the friendly Readers, the untruths by him avouched at
their execution: I will breestlie touch in rehearsal of the other Book,
which is imprinted in English, as concerning the same matter, shortly
knitting up this slanderous Libell, to be as you may perceive by the
confutation thereof, the writer thereof to be shameless in his shame, one of
the right brood as they all are of, and his Book equal with him in any evil
condition: so that as the Tree is, such is his fruit, and as the wrighter is,
such are his works.

In the end, he knitteth up his Book, with a brief report, entitled: The
martyrdom of Euerard Haunce, an English Priest, in An. 1581. And now you
shall hear what most impiously he alleges on his behalf, which is as
follows.

Euerard Haunce, being a Minister of the Heretics, and a benefactour in
England, being in a very greenous agony of sickness, as it were, near to
the death: fell in a sound, wherein he remained so long, that his friends
altogether reputed him for dead. A very strange vision: Too strange to be
true.
During the time he was in this trance, he seemed in a vision to see the
infernal pit of hell, and the Souls which were there tormented both night
and day, with intolerable and grievous pains, yea, the Souls of his
friends and most familliars, which he very well knew in their life time. But
that which is most strange, Note this.
he saw there the places, assygned for some other of his friends, who were as
then living in the world, and in sound and good estate of their health. After
this vision, being come again to him self, he called for a Catholic
Priest, who being come unto him, how be it, his Kinsfolks were against it
greatly, as well for his Religion, as for loosing his benefice, which was
worth much: with great sorrow and repentance of his former life, he made his
confession to the Priest, and wholly renounced his benefice, embracing the
Catholic faith. It so chanced that he forsook his Country, admonishing
those very earnestly, whose places he had seen prepared for them in hell, to
amend their lives: which they refusing to do, dyed within short space after,
This is as true as all the rest is.
and went to hell to their places. Then went he to Rheimes in Champaigne, for
to study Divinity, where having stayed about two years, Learning enough in so
small a time to be a Priest.
and made Priest: he felt a great zeal in him self, to return into his
Country, where not long since he was taken and condemned to death: and being
executed, he was ripped up and quartered, A notable lie.
and as his heart was thrown into the fire, it leaped forth again, three
several times.

This is one of our Historians faithful reports, carrying as great credit as
all the other do: In my English Roman life. you shall read many of their
wunderfull miracles.
these are the miracles of their Church, whereof in my English Roman life, I
will rehearse diverse of like aucthority and allowaunce, which albeit they will
urge many to wonder and marvel, yet shall they be set down in no other
order, then as them selves have reported them, and my self have seen. As for
Euerard Haunce, what he was, how he lived, and how he dyed, is already so
largely set down in print, that it were but double labor to rip it up
again. Traitor he was to her Majesty and the Realm, and so like a Traitor
he ended his life, as all the rest of them shall I hope, except God turn their
hearts, as I pray heartily he may, that they may see their horrible abuses,
and be heartily for their heinous offenses.

An Answer unto an other seditious Pamphlet printed in English, and named: A
true report of the death and Martyrdom of Master Campion, Jesuit and Priest,
Master Sherwin, and Master Brian Preests, at Tiborne the.1. of December. 1581.
Observed and written by a Catholic Priest, who was present thereat.
TO rippe up all the circumstances contained in this Book: as the whole course
thereof, is Traiterous, false, and no truth at all in it, so would it seem
yrksome to any modest ear, to abide the rehearsal of such vnreuerent matter.
Yet nevertheless, I will breeflie touch some points thereof, whereby may be
coniectured what all the restis, a fardell of folly, aptly figuring both him
that writ it, they who are defended in it, and them all that are of that sect
and opinion. First he finds him self agreeued: That Master Campion should
be reported at the time of his death, Both the right honorable and
woorshipful, with ye great number of people that were there present, can
witness the fearfulness and timeriousnesse of Campion.
tymerous and fearful, as also that Sherwin is said to show more humility
and discretion, and therefore (says he) dyed a Protestant. I will appeal to
the right Honorable and Woorshipfull that were there present, and also to
Master Hearne and the other godly Preachers: who in offering him comfortable
doctrine, to strengthen him and establish his faith, according as they
heartily desired: perceived him to be very fearful, wavering, and as it
seemed, would have opened something, but that this affliction of his mind
would not suffer him. This is he, who was reputed: For the flower of
Oxensoorde, Our reporter makes Campion a wunder to the world, in rehearsing
those gifts which were never in him.
while he studied there, and since abroad in other foreign Countries, by
whom our Country has gotten great honor, the fruits of his learning,
virtue and rare gifts, were in him so admirable and wunderfull: both here at
home, and abroad in Italy, Germany, and Bohemia, an honor to our Country,
a Glass and mirror, a light and lantern, a pattern and example to youth,
age, learned, unlearned, religious, and the laytie, of all sorts, state and
condition, for modesty, gravity, eloquence, knowledge, virtue and piety. Is
it not meruaylous to hear the impudency of this shameless Reporter, how
according to our French Historian, he makes him self the Image of all
untruth? You shall hear Campion his own confession, to those of woorship in
this City, during the time he was in the Tower: and then let this large style
blazed of him, be received into judgment accordingly.

He confesses that he never passed farther in Divinity then Canisius dictates,
Campions own words, to those of woorship, while he was in the Tower.
whose writing is very well known to our learned Divines here in England:
according as he writ, he followed in study, so that if he writ false, then he
followed false, if he said true, then he was in the truth, which of these he
could not make answer which was most certain. This was deep learning and
high knowledge, for him to make so proud a Challenge as he did, and for this
Reporter to write so arrogantly as he does, inferring such modesty, gravity,
eloquence, knowledge, and virtue, on him who was nothing acquainted with such
singular gifts.

Besides this, Campion likewise confessed him self, Campions estate being
beyond the Seas, which if every one consider with judgment, they shall well
perceive his glorious reports to be but fables.
that when he was at Praga beyond the Seas, he had little or no helps at all
to imploye his study, which is some reason that he could not be so profounde,
so present, and so well lettered, as this gallant gloser fayneth him to be. For
at very sildome times he had any Books to guide him, and into such necessity
he was driven, teaching there two Gentlemen's sons in the Latin tongue, as
when he had paper, he had neither pens nor ink, and when he had ink, either
he wanted pens or paper, so that ever he was without some needful thing,
that should have helped him every way.

All these things considered, may move the simplest body to understand, he
could not be such a fellow as he was taken for of some. This being
understood and well perceived by many, both woorshipfull, learned and wise,
who had conference with him: caused them to esteem of him according, and to
make report of his learning, as they found it. This Reporter, behaueth him
self irreverently to my Lord bishop of London, mislyking his judgment on
Campions learning, and Master Whitakers Book.
Which has made this Reporter irreverently and without modesty to reprove my
Lord Bishop of London, who said of Campions learning as before is expressed:
which this fellow ridiculouslie applies to folly, neither giving him his
calling of Honor, nor showing him the reverence he ought to do, but according
to the nature of them all, plainly shows his venomous heart. And there
likewise he scorneth at Master Whitakers Book, mislyking my Lords judgment
thereof: promising an answer thereto, as also to publish the disputations in
the Tower, to the honor of Campion. I will not gainesay, but they may as well
shuffle forth a shameless report on their own part, concerning the said
disputations, as they have this traiterous Libell, but when it comes, I trust
it shall not pass without the judgment of those, who will answer them to any
thing. I will omit (says our Reporter) though it be much material, A notable
lie on the behalf of Campion.
Campion his usage in his time of imprisonment, his constancy and patience,
his five days fast from temporal and bodily sustenaunce, his two nights
abstinence from ordinary sleep and rest, and the time he bestowed in
meditation and prayer. This to be false and untrue, they that can tell have
avouched it, wishing all men to esteem it as an horrible and detestable
untruth. Comparing the manner of the execution, the English with the French: I
find them so different the one from the other, and both of them so far from
truth, as I accou^pt it a waste labor, to bestow time in setting the^ down.
For both of them make these Traitors, To be so mild, patient and virtuous, as
though never their like was seen: wherefore the brief and true manner thereof,
which I my self have published in my former book, shall answer all the errors
made by them. As for the course of railing he takes, against those of
woorship, learning and judgment: I will answer with the Evangelist. Blessed
are you, when men shall curse you, Math. 5.
speak all evil against you, and make lies of you for my sake: be you glad
and rejoice, because your reward is the greater in the kingdom of heaven, for
so have they dealt with the Prophets, that were before you. Now where he
says: What charity was it to put pinnes under the nails of Alexander Brian,
An other manifest untruth, applied on the behalf of Alexander Brian.
and for his corporal sustenaunce, he was driven to lycke the moisture of the
walls. It is as all the rest are, a most deuillishe and malicious report, and
that Sir Owen Hopton will affirm with many more, who says it to be as false,
as it is true that God lives in heaven.

But then let me ask him, The manner of the Papists charity, to Christ's
members.
what charity is it for them, so unmercifully to torment the members of
Christ's body as they do daily, some tormented three days, and three nights
together in the Strapado, some hanged up naked by the arms, and pricked to
death with sharp Canes, others dismembered greeuouslie, and a number persecuted
with exceeding tyranny. A spectacle of their charitable dealinges, In my book
which shall shortly come forth, you shall read the cruelty lately used to an
English man at Room, for the christian faith.
shall shortly come forth in my other Book, how cruelly they tormented an
English man to the death at Room, only for his faith and spotless
Christianity. Then you shall behold their love and charity, which forced
their own Doctors into a troubled and vexed conscience: beholding the
patience, triumphing and great joy this faithful persecuted Martyr made, both
at his death, and continuing the whole time of their horrible torments.

He concludes his Lybell, saying: God save the Queen, thinking thereby to
shaddowe his villainous and traiterous heart: No, no, we know that all that
say, Lord, Lord, shall not enter into the kingdom of heaven: no more are they
all good Subjects, that say, God save the Queen, but they do this for a
face, to cover the foul blemish ensuing by their treason. God save her
Majesty from all such as they are, her honorable Counsel and the whole
Realm, from that bloody Antichrist, and his wandering shauelinges.

An answer to his Caveat, concerning me, and my Discovery.
Afterward, he comes with a Caveat to the Reader, I would they all bare as
true hearts to her Majesty, as he does.
concerning me and my Book of the Discovery of Campion: where he is very
lavish of speech of such a man, as he nor the prowdest of his sect dare
avouch the words to his face, saying likewise, that he perused my Book,
which on my Faith he never saw till it came abroad. Then he begins to rip
up the course of my life, How I was an Apprentise, and served my time well
with deceyuing my Master: I refer my self to the judgment of all men,
reading this which my Master unrequested, has here set down on my behalf.

This is to let all men understand, that Anthony Monday, for the time he was my
Servant, did his duty in all respects, as much as I could desire, without
fraud, couin or deceyte: if otherwise I should report of him, I should but say
untruth.

By me John Allde.


Again he says: That wandering toward Italy, I became a Coosener: For my
discharge I will appeal to one of their own sect now, he that went with me
all the way, by name Thomas Nowel, who knows this to be a false and malicious
slander.

When I came to Room, (he says) I was charitablie relieved, but never
admitted into the Seminary: You shall hear the words of Lucas Kerbie,
Priest, one of the condemned prisoners in the Tower, taken before Sir Owen
Hopton, on Tuesday, being the.6. of March last. 1582.

AT what time we were excluded the Seminary, and sent for again before the
Pope, he demanded of us how many we were in number, which was presently given
him to understand, I was not called by the name of Anthony Monday, but by an
other name, which they set down in their Table.
in which number Thomas Nowell, and Anthony Monday, were named. He commanded
we should all be received into the Seminary again, and gave us our desire in
all things we requested, the Jesuits to be our Rectors, and to govern us.

Then was a Table made, called: The Table of the names of all the Scholars in
the English Seminary: Where every man's name was placed by the Alphabet, and
therein was the names of Thomas Nowell, and Anthony Monday, set down likewise,
although he professed an other name then.

Now let men judge, whether I was admitted or no, for before that time,
neither my fellow nor I might be received into the house, nor suffered to have
our Uiandes with the Scholars: but were in deed maintained by the Scholars,
when they saw me so wylling to return from thence again, which made them
promise us, that they would labor both to the Pope and Cardinal for us. This
made us the more wylling to take part with them in their expulsion from the
Seminary. Then were we allowed among the number of the Scholars. At their
receiving in again, our names were put in the Table for Scholars, observing
all orders that the Scholars did, both in going to the Schools, in walking
for our recreation, and all other things we did as the Scholars did. The
manner of their expulsion, the cause, and how things happened, you shall read
at large in my English Roman life.

In all the course of his Caueate, which he seems to publishe against my
Book of the Discovery: he offers no reproof to any thing that I have
written therein, albeit he would have Campion and his fellows, to be thought
such holy, wise, and discreet men: Me thinks he should first have examined
their horrible treasons, their traiterous practices from time to time, both
against her Majesty, her honorable Council, and the Realm, and then have
shaped his defense according.

For in covering their faults without any reason to the contrary, and in
making a man a Saint, not purging him from the wickedness planted in him by
the Devil: he shows a rash and partial opinion, concealing their
guiltiness to him self, and seeking to make them famous by a few commixed
terms, whose odious offenses, has made them most infamous.

Their venomous nature may be seen in a Book secretly imprinted, A very
traiterous Book, secretly imprinted, and made by a Catholic priest.
made by a Catholic Priest not long since: where, in two several places he
calls her Majesty a Devil, in an other place Macheuillian, and in an place
plainly Iezabell: these are good Subjects, that can cry, God save the
Queen, with their mouths, and wish her death in their hearts, yea, they
will swear they are no such fellows, when for more proof of them selves,
they set it down in print: but such as their head the Pope is, They that
handle pitch, will be defiled therewith.
such are they all, for they that once enter into oath to him, can hardly
after be good Subjects to their Prince. Yet if they had any spark of love to
their Princess and Countreye, in them: they might take example by Master
Shelley the graund Priour in Room among the English men, who flatly told
the Pope to his face: That it neither stood with his holiness, nor honor, to
will any Subject to be a Traitor to his Prince and Country, for (quoth he) be
she never so evil, we must acknowledge her for our Princess, and our selves
for her Subjects. For this, if he had not presently fled upon it, he had been
murdered, or some way dispatched, so great was the malice of his Country men
toward him. Well, I pray God to illuminate them with his grace, that they may
see their wickedness and blindness, and though they have strayed a long time
like lost Sheep, yet that they may at length come home again to the
sheepfolde, saying: We have sinned, O Father, against heaven, and against thee,
unworthy we be to be called thy children. God preserve her Majesty, her
honorable Council, send his Gospel a joyful and free passage, turn the
hearts of all Traitors, stop the mouths of all backbiters and slaunderers,
and make us all his faithful Servants. Amen.

FINIS.
Verses in the Libell, made in praise of the death of Master Campion, one of
the society of the holy name of Jesus; here changed to the reproof of him,
and the other Traitors.
WHy do I use my paper, ink and pen,
and call my wits in counsel what to say?
Such memories were made for worthy men,
And not for such as seek their Realms decay.
An Angels trumpe, exalts ye Subjects truth:
When shame rings forth ye Traitors fearful rueth.
Pardon my want, I offer naught but will,
To note down those, at whom the Skies do skowle:
Ca^pion, his treaso^s do exceed my skill,
The cause, his coming, and the deed too foul.
Yet give me leave in base and homely verse:
His lewd attempts in England to rehearse.
He came by vow, the cause, his Princess foil,
His armor, Treason, to his Countries woe:
His comfort, blood, slaughter and grievous spoil,
The Devil his Author had incenst him so.
His triumph, Englands ruin and decay:
The Pope his Captain, thirsting for it aye.
From ease to pain, from honor to disgrace,
From love to hate, to danger being well:
Thus did he fall, flying his native place,
and Country, where by duty he should dwell.
Our no Apostle coming to restore:
The bloody sway was sometime here before.
His natures flowers, were mixed with hu^ny gall,
His lewd behavior, enemy to skill:
A climing mind, rejecting wisdoms call,
A sugared tongue, to shrowde a vicious will.
A Saintlyke face, yet such a deuillish heart:
As sparde no travail for his countries smart.
With tongue and pen, the truth he did suppres,
Stopping the way that Christians did desire:
Which pleased God for his great wickedness,
To stay his race, wherein he did aspire.
Then his behavior witnessed the more:
What he was then, as also long before.
His fare was good, yet he a scornful cheer,
His prison fair, yet he a froward mind:
His council good, yet deafned was his ear,
Persuasions large, he obstinate and blind.
Oh stubborn man, oh mind and nature strange:
Whom wisdom, pity, grace, nor love could change.
After great pause, they brought him to dispute,
With Books as many as he could demand:
His cheifest cause, they quickly did confute,
His proof laid down, reproved out of hand.
So that the simplest present there could say:
That Campions cause did bear the shame away.
After his foyles so often to his face,
It was thought good, Justice his deeds should try:
Upon appearaunce of so foul a case,
Nature her self, wild doom deservedly.
Traitor he was, by proves sufficient found:
The Iewrie saw his Treasons so abound.
Her Majesty to be deprived of life,
A foreign power to enter in our Land:
Secret rebellion must at home be rife,
Seducing Preests, received that charge in hand
All this was cloaked with Religious show
But Justice tried, and found it was not so.
Then rightful doom bequeathed them to dye,
Whose treasons put her Majesty in fear:
Out on the fiend, whose malice wrought so sly
Has wun a number, part with him to bear
But thinks he, his envy can prevail?
No, little David did the Giaunt quail.
My gracious Princess, see your Subjects moan,
Such secret foes among them should be found:
Who serve your Grace in duty every one,
though treason seek to make their hearts vnsou^d.
The bloody woolf prays on ye harmles sheep:
So treason seeks in loyal hearts to creep.
England look up, thy Children do rebel,
Unreuerent acts have entered in their mind:
The subject seeks his rightful Prince to quell,
Yea, to his native Country proves unkind.
Campio^, who sometime you did sweetly sourse:
Prepares his venom to destroy his Nourse.
Eliot rejoice, that God prolonged thee,
To take the man, who meant us all such ill:
As for thy slanders, take them patiently,
Envy draws blood, and yet he can not kill.
Those who by words he seemde to put in fear:
Have washed their hands, in judgment sound and clear.
My self as witness, Sled and all the rest,
who had their treasons noted in our Book:
Account our selves of God most highly blessed,
who gave us grace to such attempts to look.
And having given our witness sound and plain:
We fear not malice, nor his spightful train.
The well advised Iewrie on this cause,
Who with discretion pondred every thing:
Beheld their treasons with such heedfull pause,
That they found out the depth of Enuies sting.
Whereby they saw, the stirrers of this strife:
Were far unworthy any longer life.
Yea, Elderton does deskant in his rhyme,
The high offenses of such graceless men:
Which causes him to yrke at every crime,
And against their treasons to provide his pen.
Yet not without wisdom and modesty:
To warn all other that live wickedlie.
Remember you that would oppress the cause,
Our Church is Christ's, his honor cannot die:
Though hell him self, reuest his griefly jaws,
And join in league, with treason and popery.
Though craft devise, and cruel rage oppress:
Christ will his chosen, still in safety bless.
You thought perhaps, presu^ptious Ca^pio^ could,
disseuer those, whom Christ has joined in one:
And that our gracious loving shepherd would,
Before the woolfe, forsake his flock alone.
No, he preserues his Sheep for greater good:
And drownes ye rauener in his envious blood.
We know that Campion living did entreat,
The Subject from his vowde humility:
Now therefore shame his dealings does repeat,
Throughout the world to his great infamy.
The skies themselves, with lowering angry face:
Adiudge his deeds, worthy of all disgrace.
All Europe woonders at this shameless man,
England is filled with rumor of his race:
London must needs, for it was present than,
when Justice did three Traitorous minds deface.
The streets, ye stones, ye steps they halde the^ by:
Pronounst these Traitors worthy for to die.
The Tower says, he Treason did defend,
The Bar bears witness of his guilty mind:
Tiborne does tell, he made a Traitors end,
On every gate example we may find.
In vain they work to laud him with such fame:
For heaven and earth bears witness of his shame.
The rightful sentence given of him here,
Will charge his conscience in the time to come:
Although they say he is excused there,
And shall not taste Gods judgment and his doom.
Saint Paul does say, in reverence of ye highest:
We all shall come before the seat of Christ.
There to make answer unto every thing,
And to receive reward accordingly:
If well, the City of our heavenly king,
Shall recompense our former misery.
Where we with Angels voice continually:
Shall laud the gain we have so happily.
Then blinded malice shall perceive and see,
His own devises Author of his rueth:
And how true Subjects have felicity.
In recompense of their assured truth.
The one condemnd for his disloyalty:
The other crowned for his fidelity.
Can Treason then prevent our happy peace?
Or blustering winds assail our sprouting Tree?
No, sovereign Faith sends down her due increase,
And shroudes her Plant in sweet tranquillity.
So that the foe presuming on his might:
Is forste to know: Faith can prevent him quite.
Let us not fear a mortal Tirant then,
Seeing Faith and Truth does eleuate our hearts:
God has reserved one to conquer ten,
Let us then learn to play true Christians parts.
The head of him that sought our Countries woe:
Does witness shame to all that seek it so.
His youth does bid us bannish filthy pride,
his fleeting hence, to serve our Prince in truth*
His lew^ profession does lay open wide,
To fall from God, how grievous is the rueth.
His home return, his Challenge, and deface:
Says: Subjects, keep true hearts in every place.
His Hardle draws his sect unto like end,
His speeches there, unfold their tretcherie:
His death does say: Who so his life does spend
In faith and truth, reapes joy eternally.
His first and last, and all agree in one:
There Is none to help us, but our God alone.
Blessed be God, who cut him off so soon,
Thanked be Christ, which blessed his servants so:
Happy are we, that have such comfort won,
curssed are they that thought to work us woe.
Bounden we be to give eternal praise:
To Jesus name, who did such refuge raise.
FINIS.
An other upon the same.
WHat iron heart, that would not melt in woe,
what steel or stoone, could keep him dry from tears:
To see a Subject fall from duty so:
And arm him self unto his Countries fears?
In their three deaths, ye standers by might see:
The end of hatred and disloyalty.
England may moan a Subject erred so,
Without respect of God and Natures law:
And we our selves may show some sign of woe,
That treason should our brother from us draw.
That Antichrist should gain our Ca^pio^s heart:
And make him Soldier to his countries smart.
The skowling skies did storm and puff apace,
they could not bear ye wrong yt malice wrought:
The Sun drew in his golden shining face,
ye moistened clouds shed brinish tears with thought.
The river Thames against his course would ru^:
To count the treaso^s, Ca^pion would have done.
Nature her self, with tears bedewd her face,
Duty in countenance, looked pale and wan:
She, for to think her work should her disgrace,
He, to be wanting in an English man.
Even Antichriste, the eldest child of hell:
Began to blush, and thought he did not well.
For lo, behold, when Campion made his end,
His hardened heart, refused sovereign grace:
His own reproach did so his mind offend,
That treason did appear upon his face.
An yrksome spectacle was presented then:
In sight of God, of Angels, Saints and men.
The heavens did clear, ye Sun like gold did shine,
The Clouds were dry, the fearful River ran:
Nature and Virtue, wipte their watered eyne,
To see that Justice, cut off such a man.
Men, Angels, Saints, and all that saw him die:
Gave thanks to God in heavenly melody.
They saw Peruersenes had withdrawn his mind,
And Treason quite supplanted Duties awe:
Presumptuous thoughts, did humble Patience blind,
There was no place for Graces, well they saw.
His falsehood, treasons and impiety*
With blame and shame, did end in infamy.
By whose example, every Subject may,
Be warned how they fall in such abuse:
And all their thoughts on loyalty to stay,
Least they likewise do taste like sharp refuse.
For Honor does exalt the Subject just:
When Horror throws ye Traitor in ye dust:
Rejoice, be glad, triumph, sing Himnes of joy,
Campion, Sherwin, Brian, have their due:
They are suppressed that sought our great annoy,
I hope their fellows shortly shall ensue.
For faithful minds do loathe yt they should live:
Who to their Country, do dishonor give.
FINIS.
A Dialogue between a Christian, and Consolation.
Christian speaks first. IS chaste Susanna in the Judges hands?
Is Daniell left unto the Lions jaws?
Do Subjects break both God and Natures ba^des?
And Envy seek to put down Peace her laws?
Does perfect awe, and true Religion fail?
Then may I fear that falsehood will prevail.

Consolation. No, Susans foes the Lord will cut in twain,
and stop the mouths of Danielles enemies:
Rejoice therefore, thou have a noble train,
Armde by the Lord in most triumphant wise.
Whose life and death, thy quarrel will begin:
To vanquish falsehood, Satan, hell and sin.
Behold of late, a Champion of their train,
Confuted, foiled, yea, and vanquished:
With those who did like tretcheries maintain,
In their devises, they soon perished.
Lament not then, for Justice holds ye sword:
Who to them all, will like desert afford.

Christian. Alas I mourn, and sit with sighing mind,
To see my native Country men rebel:
Against the only Phaenix of her kind,
Who does in grace and goodness all excel.
And could proud Ca^pion think to work her woe:
O Lord co^fou^d them all, yt seek it so.
What were his gifts, if we recount each one?
A pregnaunt wit, I grant to tretcherie:
A bad Divine, seeking promotion,
A lusty man, detesting chastity.
A graceless impe, sprung up of basest kind:
A simple man, to bear a lofty mind.
His pithie wisdom, style and eloquence,
Comparde with those of fame and dignity:
Does open plain his friends insipience,
His confutation proves it woorthilie.
All the reports, whereby his fame began:
Were never found to harbor in the man.
Then boast no farther of his dreadlesse mind,
Which rack nor roape, could alter as you say:
Recount his treasons, cruel and unkind,
And then his praise will soon be laid away.
Your praise, his po^pe, nor al you have in store:
Can make the man, the woorthier ere ye more.

Consolation. It Is true in deed, their folly is in sight,
unto their shame that take like thing in hand:
We needs must win, our Lord himself does fight
The Cananites shall be expulst the Land.
Yea, all the deeds of such ungodly men:
Shall Be confounded, nere to rise again.
Campion his quarters on the gates do show,
His treason, doctrine, and his life too ill:
His head set up, does daily call for more,
Of those that lean unto like wicked will.
Well may they flaunt, and flourish for a space:
But truth in end, their dealinges will disgrace.
Not hell it self, our injury can frame,
But we shall prosper as the sprouting Baye*
God can of stones raise seed to Abraham,
He is our hope, and he will help us aye.

Christian. Fiat voluntas Dei, then say I,
I trust in God, whether I live or die.

FINIS.
The Complaint of a Christion, remembering the unnatural treasons of Edmund
Campion, and his Confederates.
O God from sacred throne behold,
our secret sorrows here:
Regard with grace, our helpless grace,
amend our mournful cheer.
Thy Creatures whom thou have appoint,
to live in Princess awe:
Forsake their duty, love and fear,
and spurn at duties law.
Alas, I rue to think upon,
their factes so lately scand:
How they did seek their Princess death,
and spoil of native Land.
Thy Treasons Campion is bewaylde,
of many far and near:
To think what unkind actions, thou
would have performed here.
Bohemia Land may well rejoice,
Rodulphus Court be glad:
That thou to recompense thy pain,
such due desert have had.
Germania may leave off to mourn,
yea, Spain to muse and Italy:
And France may rent that false report,
of thy surmised Tragedy.
They that would make these men to seem,
as not her Highness foes:
O Lord it is a world to see,
the feigned fraud of those.
For when as Campion had presumde,
to challenge a dispute:
His crafty cloak was soon pulde off,
Learning did him confute.
Albeit his cauilles, skornes and coil,
he bare with shameless face:
Yet truth pulde off his crafty veil,
and showed his wretched case.
So that although they did withstand,
each cause of right and reason:
Yet Justice soon found out the depth,
of their most wicked treason.
Justice perceived, how under cloak,
of their Religion:
They comprehended traiterous guile,
and false sedition.
Justice perceived how they sought,
within their native Soil:
To move rebellion and debate,
to work our secret spoil.
Justice perceived how the Pope,
with foreign Princes might:
Would use our England as him pleased,
and put our Queen from right.
How that these men were sent before,
by his persuasion:
To make all ready against the time,
of his invasion.
So that destruction suddenly,
should come upon us all:
Those only saved, had holy Graynes,
or could the watch word call.
All this did Justice plain discern,
with many matters more:
Where through they had the just desert,
that they deserved therefore.
God save Elizabeth our Queen,
God send her happy reign:
And after earthly Honors here,
the heavenly joys to gain.
And all that seek her secret harm,
or to annoy her Grace:
God turn their hearts, or that they may,
enjoy but little space.
Anthony Monday.

FINIS.
Honos alit Arts.

