THE ADMIRABLE DELIVERANCE of 266. Christians by John Reynard Englishman from
the captivity of the Turks, who had been Gally slaves many years in
Alexandria.

The number of the several Nations that were captives follow in the next page.

LONDON Printed by Thomas Dawson, and are to be sold at the little shop at the
Exchange 1608.

Englishmen 03 266 Scotts, 12 Irishmen. 10 Frenchmen, 18 Spaniardes. 26
Venetians. 14 Genowayes. 19 Portugalls. 35 Hollanders. 21 High Allmaynes. 08
Polanders. 23 Danes. 01 Greeks. 39 Muscouites. 18 Hungarians. 19

JOHN REYNARDS Deliverance from the captivity of the Turks, and his setting
free of 266. Christians that were Gally Slaves.
OF such honor (amongst all nations) has the trade of Marchandizing been ever
accounted that Commerce (ever in the hottest flames of War against one
another,) could find no better, or fayrer means to unite them in amity, and
to join the^ (as it were in wedlock) then by Commerce and Negotiation. This is
that chain which binds Kingdoms in Leagues, begetts love between princes
far removed asunder, and teaches nations, different in quality, in color,
in religion,) to deal faithfully together as brethren. Traffic (to speak of
our own country) has increased and strengthened our Navy, which is a second
wall (besides that girdle of the Sea that encompasseth her body) to defend our
Island. It is the breeder, and only bringer up of good Mariners, skillful
Pilots and cunning Nauigators, who to a state are as necessary in peace as
husbandmen for the tillage, and in war, as serviceable as so many Captains
for the field. Traffic is the carier abroad of our own homespun
commodities, and a bringer in of the fruits of foreign kingdoms, by which
means the Merchant and Citizen grow up to wealth, and the tradeseman that
lives by the hardness of his hand, is still kept and mainteyned in good doings.
There is no coast be it never so dangerous, left unsought no language (be it
never so barbarous or hard to learn) left vnstudied, no people (never so
wild) left vnue^tured upon, nor any treasure of the earth or curious work of
man left vnpurchased, only for this end, to do honor to our country, and to
heap riches to our selves, both which benefits do only spring out of our
Trading to foreign shores.

For this cause therefore (A peace being concluded beweene the two greaf and
opulent kingdoms of England and Spain) an english Ship (called the Three
half Moons) being manned with eight and thirty Mariners and bravely armed
with munition, was rigd, victualled, and ready furnished to take her voyage to
Spain. The Gods of the Sea (the winds) knowing her intent, prepared
themselves, to go along with her, and making the waves ready it becomed this
Ship to hoist up sails and come on, So that wc a merry gale she took her
leave at Portsmouth, bending her course toward Civil, the greatest City in
Spain. Gallantly did she for many days bear up her head, and daunced even
on the top of the billows: her masts stood up stiftly and went away like so
many trees moved by enchantme^t, whilst the big bellied sails made have to fly
after (blustering and puffing either in scorn or in anger) yet could never
ouer-take them: or rather as lovers roming after young damsels at barlibreake,
they took delight to see them make away before, and of purpose suffered them
to use that advantage. But (alack!) how soon does the happiness of this
world alter? In this bravery had she not carried her self long, but entering
into the Sraights, Neptune grew angry with her, or else envying her glory, sent
eight galleys of the Turks to beset her round. Now or never was both the
courage and the cunning of the Mariner to be showed, for either he must by the
wings of his sails fly away and so save himself, or manfully stand to it, and
preserve all from danger or gloriously to suffer all to perish. Of flight was
there no hope, for the winds and waves (that before were their friends and
tempted them to set forth) grew now treacherous and conspired their destruction.
Nothing therefore tebut the miraculous power of heaven, and their own
resolutions is on their side: every man hereupon calls up his spirits, and as
the suddaynes of the deadly storm would allow them, did comfort one another.
It was a goodly sight to behold how to the very face of danger they did defy
danger, and how in the midst of an overthrow which had round beset them, they
wisely and stoutly labored to work out a safety, nothing could be heard but
noise and confusion, and yet even in that wild disorder was there to be seen
an excellent method of policy. Their roming up and down showed as if they had
bin all frantic, yet like so many dancers, that sometimes are here and anon
antickly leap thither, fetching tournings and windings with strange and busy
action, they closed up every work with a sweet and musical preparation.

For after the close fights were made ready above and that the deuilish mouths
of their ordinance were opening to spit hell fire out of the belly of the
Ship: up comes the Master (whose name was Grove) armed with sword and target,
wauing his bright blade about his head in defiance of his barbarous and bloody
enemies: his very looks were able to fright death from his company, and so well
did his courage become him, that it served better then all their warlike
music to hearten up the rest: close by his side (as vowed partners in all
fortune good or badde whatsoever) stood the Owner, the Masters mate,
Boteswayne, Purser and the rest of the Mariners. All of them armed, all of them
full of valor, al of them full of braues: they showed on the top of the
hatches, like so many well guarded battleme^ts on the walls of a besieged city,
every man encoraging his next neighbor, to fight valiantly because they were
Englishmen and to die honorably (because they were Christians) rather then
stoop to the basecaptiuitie of those, that were Christ's professed and open
enemies.

As the Englishmen were thus busy to defend themselves on the one side, so
were the Turks active in their Galleys on the other side, their Semytaries
glistred in the Sun, their steeele targetts received the fire of his beams
upon them, and beat it back to dazzle the eyes of them whom they assailed:
Showers of musketts with bullets chargd stood ready to be powered down, some
were preparing to toss balls of wild fire, as if the Sea had bin their tennys
court, others with bulls pizzells in their hands walked up and down between
the Rowers, sometimes encoraging sometimes threatening, sometimes striking the
miserable gally slaves, because they should be nimble at ye oar who for fear
of blows more then of present death, tugd with their arms, till the Sinews
of them were ready to crack with swelling, and till their eie-balls in stead
of bullets did almost fly out of their heads.

At length the drums, trumpets, and fifes struck up their deadly consort on
either side: presently does ye demi canon and culuering strive to drowned that
noise whilst the Sea, roares of purpose, to drown the noise of both. In this
conflict, of three elements, (Air water and fire) John Raynard (the Gonner) so
lively. and so stoutly be haued hinselfe, in discharging his ordnance of their
great bellies, that at length fire seemed to have the maistry, for so thickly
did his bulletts fly abroad, and were wrapped up in such clouds of lightning, yt
the sea showed as if it had bin al in flames, whilst the Galleys of the Turks
as well as the English Ship, could hardly but by the groans and showtes of men
been fownd out where about in the Sea they houered. Many Turks and many gally
slaves did in this battle loose their lives, and end their Captivity: but
those who suruiued doubling their spirits at the horror of the danger with
which they were environed fell upon the English Ship in such storms of
haileshot, which still like hammers on an Anuill) lay beating on the ribs of
it, that at length, the Sea offered in many places to break into her, and to
get the conquest, of which glory the Turks being envious, came flying with the
force of all those wodden wings that bore them up, and of purpose to board her.
But at this stirring feast, Neptune was made drunk wc the blood both of
Christians and Turks mingled to gether. Here came the gallyes and the Ship to
grapling, look how a company of howndes, hang upon a goodly Stagge, when
with their noise they ring out his death, So hang these Galleys, upon the
body of her: nothing of her could be seen for Smoke and fire, she was
half choked with the flames and half stifled in the waters. Yet as you shall
often see a Bull, when his strength seems to be all spent, and that he is
ready to faint and fall on his knees, castes up on a sudden his surly head,
and bravely renewes a fresh and more feirce encounter: So did this ship break
from the Gallyes, like a lusty Bear from so many dogs or rather like an
inuineible Lion from so many bears. The Turks leapd out of their vessels,
and like ratts nimbly climed up to the taclings of the ship, But the English
Mariners, so laid about them with swords, brown bills, haluebeards, and morris
pikes, that in so tragical an act it was half a comedy to behold what
tumbling tricks the Turks made into the sea backwards. Some of them catching
hold of the upper deckes, had their hands strick off, and so for ever lost
their feeling, other clasping their arms about a cable, to fling their bodies
into the ship, lost their heads, and so knew not which way to go though it lay
before them. In this terrible insurrection in Neptunes kingdom it was hard to
tell for a great while who should be the winners, albeit how soever they sped,
both were certain to be loosers, for the Turks would not give over, and the
English scorned to yield, the Owner, Master and Boteswayne cried out bravely
and with loud lusty spirits let us all resolve to die, but not a man be so
base as to yield to a -Turk: especially did the Boteswayne show the noble
courage of a Mariner, both in directing without fear, and in bestowing blows
in scorn of danger, which hard alms whilst he was dealing amongst the
Miscreants, a shot was sent from a gally as a messenger of his death, and there
by a spoiler (though not a conqueror) of his valor, for it brake (with the
vielent stroke it gave) his whistle in sunder, and left him an the hatches with
these last words in his mouth, Fight it out as you are Christians, and win
honor by death.

His fall did not abate but whetted their stomachs to a sharper reueng, only
the masters mate, showed himself not worthy of that name, or to be mate to
so noble a master as he was, for cowardly he cried, yield, yield, pulling in
his arm from striking in the hottest of the skirmish.

What city is not over come by ye tyrany of Time, or the oppression of
assaults? what shoares though never so high can beat back the sea, when he
swelles up infury? what castles of flynt or marble are not shaken with the
continual thunder of the Canon? So was this poor English ship: whilst her
ribs held out, and were unbroken, her Mariners held out and had their hearts
sound. But when they felt her shrink under them that should bear them up in
all storms and that such numbers of Turks did so oppress them with thronging
in, and with beating them down, when they had scarce feet able to stand,
then even then did they not yield, but yet then were they taken.

Glad was the Turk that (though in this storm it rayned down blood so fast)
he was wet no farther: he looked upon his ill gotten commodity with a dull and
heavy eye, for the foot of his account showed him that his gains of this
voyage would not answer the treble part of his losses: Enraged at which,
emptying the wetherbeaten and the mangled ship both of men, and of such things
as were worth the carriage, the one he took home with him to enrich the number
of his spoils, the other were condemned to the Galleys.

Near to the city of Alexandria, (being a haven town) and under the Turks
dominion) is a Road, defended by strong walls, where the galleys are drawn up
on shore every year in the winter season, and are there trimmed and laid up
against the Spring. In this Road stands a prison where all those that serve
in those galleys of Alexandria, are kept as captives, so long as the seas be
rough and not passable for their Turkish vessels: hither were these Chrstians
brought the first villainy and indignity that was done unto them, was the
shauing off of all the hair both of head and beard, thereby to rob them of
those ornaments which all Christians make much of, because they best become
them.

It is well known to all nations in Christendom (by the woeful experience of
those wretches that have felt it) what misery men endure in this thraldom
under the Turk. Their lodging is the cold earth, their diet, course bread and
(sometimes) stinking water, for if they should taste of the clear Spring,
their drink were as good as the Turks, who never taste wine: their apparel,
thin and course canuas, their stockings and shoes, heavy bolts and cold
Irons, the exercise to put life into them, or to catch them a heat, is at the
pleasure of a proud and dogged Turk for the least fault, nay for none at all,
but only to feed his humor, to receive a hundred bastinadoes on the rim of
the belly with a bulls dried peezle, at one time, and within a day after two
hundred stripes on the back.

In this most lamentable estate did these Christians continue, but it was not
long ere the Master and Owner by the good means of freindes were redeemed from
this slavery: the rest lying by it, soon were starued to death, others with
cold, and blows breathed out their last.

But John Reynard, (the gonner) being enabled by the providence and will of God
to endure this affliction with a stronger heart then others could out lived
most of his fellows, only to be (as it after fell out) a preservation of his
own life, with many other Christians. For having some skill in the trade of a
barber, he did by that means shift now and then for victuals and mended his
hard diet, whereupon growing (after a long imprisonment) into favor with the
Keeper of the Christians that were gally slaves, he so behaved himself, that
at length he got liberty to go in and out to the Road at his pleasure,
paying a certain stipend to the Keeper, and wearing a lock about his leg:
and this liberty did six more likewise purchase upon like sufferance, who by
reason of long imprisonment, were never suspected to start aside, or that they
had in their bosoms ever any thought to workethe Turks any mischeife, with
whom they had stayed so long, that in a manner they were as brothers familiar
together.

But the wrath of winter driving all the Galleys into harbor, by which means
they lay there vnrigd and disfurnished of al their properties which set them
forth: the Masters, Captains, and officers of the Galleys, retiring likewise
either to their private affairs, or to some other employment of the State:
behold there remained (at this season and part of the year) in this prison of
the Road, 266. Christian prisoners, who were of fifteen several nations, and
all of them taken and made slaves to the Turk.

Amongst which there were (at this time) but only three Englishmen, and of
the^ was this John Reynard one: who having worn out the misery of 13. or 14.
years servitude under so barbarous a tyrant, began (as he full often had
done before) to call to mind the happiness and freedom of his own country,
which comparing to his present state, he wept to remember the one, and gat up
his manly courage and cast in his thoughts how to shake off the other.

Not far from the Road, somewhat near to one side of the City, was a
victualing house which one Peter Vnticaro had hired, paying also a certain fee
for his liberty to the keeper of the Road, this Peter Vnticaro being a
Spaniard borne, and a christian, had been prisoner under the Turks by the
space of 30. years, yet never (though many times the forelock of occasion was
thrust into his hands did he practice any means for his enlargement, but lived
so quietly and so conte^tedly in outward appeara^ce as if he had forgotten that
he was borne amongst christians, or yt he ever desired to be buried amongst
them. Notwithstanding which, did John Reynard open his intent to this Spaniard,
who consented to put it in act, and within few days after a third person (of
their fellow prisoners) was drawn into the conspiracy: which there so often as
they could without suspicion held conference to gether, laid several plots
for their escape and at the end of seven weeks or there abouts, their councels
had fully begot the means of their present delivery. Five more therefore are
made acquainted with the business to all whom liberty being sweet,
(especially out of so base and in famous a slavery,) these eight resolved (in
three nights following) to free not only themselves but all the rest of the
Christians that were in prison. In yt prison do these eight meet (at a time
convenient) and there did Reynard and Vntecaro deliver to all the rest what was
intended: every man was glad of the news, every man vowed to assist them, and
in the action to win freedom or to end their lives. Upon this confident trust
put each upon other, Reynard and Peter secretly furnished them with files, which
they had as secretly provided for the purpose, charging every person to bestir
himself nimbly, and to have his heels at liberty from shackles by such an
hour of ye following evening.

The night approaching, Reynard and Vnticaro with the other six, being at the
spaniards house, spent their time merrily, to blind the eyes of suspicion, till
darkness had taken hold of the world, at which time Peter Vnticaro was sent to
the Master of the Road in name of one of the Masters of the City, with whom
the keeper of the Road was acquainted and at whose request he would gladly
come: who desired him to meet the other at peter's house presently, promising
to bring him back again to the Road.

The keeper upon delivery of this message, agreed to go with Vnticaro,
commanding the warders not to bar the gate, because his return should be
speedy.

In the mean season had the other seven who stayed in Peter's house, furnished
themselves with such weapons as the time and place did afford them, amongst
whom John Reynard had gotten an old rusty sword blade, without either hilt or
pummel, which not with standing by bending the hand-end of the sword in stead
of a pummell, to serve his turn, the other had spitts and glaues etc.

The keeper of the Road being with Vnticaro entered into the house, the lights
were of purpose put out and no noise of any living creature to be heard: At
which the keeper of the Road being astonished, and suspecting some villainy,
stepped back, but John Reynard having hid himself in a corner next to the door,
stepped forth unto him and stopped his passage, who perceiving it to be John
Reynard, and that he was armde (as he might well fear) for mischeife, said thus
O Reynard what have I deserved at thy hands, that thou seek my death. Marry
this have thou deserved (quoth Reynard) and struck him on the head, that he
cleft his skull, thou have bin a sucker of much Christian blood, and therefore
die like a villain, no sooner was his hands lifted up to give his fatal
blow, but the rest (being at his elbow) came forward, and quickly dispatched
him, cutting of his head and so mangled him that he could not be known.

This prologue to the Tragedy going off so well, heaven was by this time hung
al over with black to ad a grace to that which was to be acted: no time
therefore do they loose, but steal softly and yet resolutely to the Road,
where entering they found sire warders only, who asked who is there: All
friends replied yt-other and were let in, But instead of welcomes blows were
given and the six warders in a short time left dead on the floor.

Upon this, (taking their enemies weapons to defend themselves,) were the gates
presently barred up strongly and the mouth of a Canon planted full upon it,
ready charged and one appointed with a linstocke to give fire if any assalt
were made upon them. Then entered they into the Iaylors lodge where they found
the keys both of the Fortres and of the prison, by his bedside, and in his
chamber were they armed, with better weapons. In this lodge of the keepers,
found they likewise a chest, which Vnticaro and one or two more opening, found
well lined with Ducats: the Spaniard and some others neglecting the business in
hand, stuffed their bosoms and pockets with this gold, but Reynard dissuaded
them from that covetousness which was likely to be the overthrow of them
all, wishing them to provide for their liberty which should return to the
honor of God and of their countries, rather then to sell their lives yea
perhaps their souls for the treasure of Infidelles. But the Spaniard and his
companions liked the color of the Ducats better then John Reynards doctrine,
and therefore they hastened away to the prison, whose doors being opened, It
appeared that they with their files had plied their work as well within, as the
other had with their weapons abroad for every man's legs were delivered from
his Irons: whereupon having first put certain warders (that were to look to
the prison) to silence for ever speaking more, they all fell roundly to labor,
some to ramming up the gates, some to launch out a certain Gally which was the
best in all the Road, and was called the Captain of Alexandria, some carried
mastes, others fetched Sails, others laid in oars, all of them were busy,
all of them sweat hard, yet none of them were weary.

In killing those Turks that were warders about the prison, eight other Turks
hearing a noise, and suspecting mischeife, got up to the top of the prison,
between whom and the prisoners, (who could not come near them but by
ladders) was a hot skirmish. Some were wounded on both sides, some slain
outright. John Reynard was thrice shot through his apparel but not hurt:
Peter Vnticaro and the rest that shared in the Ducats being not able to carry
their bodies in this danger, by reason of the gold about them, which wearied
them with the weight were there first mortally wounded, and afterwere stricken
down dead.

Amongst the Turks was one thrust through, who falling from the top of the
prison wall, made so horrible a noise that the Turks who dwelt within hearing
(for here and there stood a house or two scattring) came to take him up ere he
was full dead, and by him understood, how the Gally slaves were reckoning with
the Turks about their ransom without paying any thing but cracked crowns
toward it: hereupon they raised both that part of Alexandria which lay on the
west side of the Road, and a Castle which was at the end of the City next
to the Road, also another fortress which lay on the other side of the Road.

The Allarum thus on every side being given, danger and death did round about
beset the poor Christians: there was but one only passage to escape forth,
and that lay between the very jaws of destruction: yet not withstanding no
man's heart failed him, the nearer death came toward this company of
wretches, the less seemed they to care for his threatenings, for the Road is
still replenished with lusty Soldiers, with stout laborers and with tough
Mariners, all whose hands are full of helping one another in this great work
of life and death, some to victual the gally that must save them, others to
hang up the tacklinges, others to line it with shot for defense against
enemies, but the most part were busy in keeping the Turks from the wall of
the Road. In the end all things being in a readiness, every man leaped into the
Gally joyfully, hoisted up sails lustily, and lanched into the Seas merrily,
submitting their lives, and fortunes to the mercy of him, that commands both
sea and land.

The vessel flotes on the waves like a goodly pageant, she flies away by the
help of oars as if she had borrowed so many wings, and in a moment is she
gotten safe out of the Road, but having escaped one danger, she encounters a
greater, for now on both sides of her, do the two Castles send out their
vengeance: the Canons roar, and shoot to sink them, the waves watch that
advantage and gape to devour them: forty and five bullets, (dreadful as
thunder) fell about these Christians ears, yet not one of them bruised their
heads: they came out of the Road safely, and went from the danger of the
Castles securely, for joy whereof, they gave a lusty shout, that ecchoed and
rebounded back again between the clouds and the shore.

On they went, and though the winds began to grow angry, and to threaten
storms, yet with cheerful hearts did they choose rather to perish in the eye
of heaven, and by the hand of God, then to be fetched back again and bear
the yoke of Infidelles. For casting their eyes back, they might behold the
Turks, (for by this time the sun was a good way on his forenoones journey)
coming down to the Seaside in swarms like locusts to devour a country: all
of them laying their hands to launch out Galleys, and follow the Christians.
But such a spirit of rage, madness, disorder, and fear, fell upon them,
that what one set forward, three hindered. And as in a City fired in the
night time, men are so astonished, that they scarce can find the common ways
by which they may save themselves, no more could the Turks in this wild and
giddy tumult, know how to further themselves. After much labor therefore, and
nothing prospering, after much crying out upon Mahomet, and more cursing the
Christians, they quieted there spleenes, and looked about them how to make good
what was in this battle and battery of the Christians defaced, whilst in the
mean time, ye poor Captives, were both out of their sight, and out of their
Jurisdiction.

For away went they rowndly, one company still and anon leaping to the oar,
as another felt themselves weary. All their prayers being powered out, that the
hand of heaven would so guide them, that they might land upon some Christian
shore. A long time did they thus wander in those incertaine paths of the Sea,
the winds sometime blowing gently on their faces and sometimes angerly: In so
much that at length, victuals began to fail them, And then Famine (a more
cursed enemy then him from whom they escaped, yea then death it self) opened
her unwholesome jaws, and with her stinking breath blasted their cheeks, by
which means in 28. days, (wherein they were tossed up and down from billow
to billow) their dyed for want of bread eight persons, to the astonishment of
all the rest, that looked still for their turn, and to be flung over board
after their fellows.

But with a more merciful eye (when he beheld how patiently they endured his
trialls) did God look down upon them. And on the 29. day after they set from
Alexandria, they fell upon the Island of Candy, and so put in at Gallipolie,
where the Abbot and Monks of the place gave them good entertainment, warmed
them, and gave them food, not suffering them to depart till they had refreshed
their bodies and had gathered strength to proceed on their Journey. The sword
with which John Reynard, had slain the Turkish Iaylor, did they hang up for a
monument, in remembrance that by so weak an instrument so many Christians were
delivered from so barbarous a thraldom

From hence they sailed along the coast till they arrived at Tarento, where
they sold their Gally, divided the money amongst themselves, every man having a
part of it to relieve them: for so hardly were they pursued by the Turkish
Gallyes, that often times they came to that place at night, from whence the
Christians went away but the morning before. So that it behooved them to use all
the dilligent speed they could, and not to tarry long in one country, From
Tarento therefore do they travail by land to Naples, and there did they
separate themselves and break company, every man shaping his best course to
get to his own home.

John Reynard took his Journey to Rome, where he found good and freindly
entertainment at the hands of an English man, by whose means the Pope gave
him a liberal reward, and sent him with Commendatorie letters to the King of
Spain, who for that worthy exployt upon the Turks gave him in fee 20. pence
by the day. But the love of his own country calling him from thence he
forsook Spain, and his preferment there, and returned to England.

The Copy of the Certificat for John Reynard and his company, made by the
Pryor and the Brethren of Gallipoly, where they first landed.
WE the Prior and Fathers of the Covent of the Amerciates of the city of
Gallipoly, of the order of Preachers, do testify that upon the ninteenth of
January, there came into the said city a certain Gally from Alexandria,
taken from the Turks with two hundred fifty and eight Christians, whereof was
principal Master John Reynard an English man a Gunner, and one of the
chiefest that did accomplish that great work, whereby so many christians have
recovered their liberty. In token and remembrance whereof, upon our carnest
request to the same John Reynard, he has left here an old sword wherewith he
slew the keeper of the prison: which sword we do as a monument and memorial
of so worthy a deed hang up in the chief place of our Covent house. And for
because all things aforesaid are such as we will testify to be true, as they
are orderly passed, and have therefore good credit that so much as is above
expressed is true, and for the more faith thereof, we the Prior and Fathers
aforesaid have ratified and subscribed these Presents. Given in Gallipoly.

I Friar Vincent Barba Prior of the same place, confirm the premises as they
are above written. I Friar Albert Damaro of Gallipoly Subprior, confirm as
much. I Friar Anthony Celleler of Galli, confirm as aforesaid. I Friar
Bartilmew of Gallipoly, confirm as abouesaid. I Friar Francis of Gallipoly,
confirm as much.


The Bishop of Rome his Letters in the behalf of John Reynard.
BE it known unto all men to whom this writing shall come, that the bringer
hereof John Reynard Englishman a Gunner, after he had served Captive in the
Turks Galleys by the space of fourteen years, at length through God his help
taking good opportunity the third of January, slew the keeper of the prison,
whom he first struck on the face, together with four and twenty other Turks,
by the assistance of his fellow prisoners, and with two hundred sixty six
Christians, (of whose liberty he was the author) launched from Alexandria, and
from thence arrived first at Gallipoly in Candie, and afterward at Tarento in
Apulia: the written testimony and credit of which things as also of others, the
same John Reynard has in public tables from Naples.

Some few days since he came to Rome. and is now determined to take his
journey to the Spanish Court, hoping there to obtain some relief toward his
living, wherefore the poor distressed man humbly beseeches, and we in his
behalf, do in the bowels of Christ desire you, that taking compassion of his
former captivity and present penury, you do not only freely suffer him to
pass throughout all your cities and towns, but also succor him with your
charitable alms, the reward whereof you shall hereafter most assuredly
receive, which we hope you will afford to him, whom with tender affection of
pity we commend unto you. At Rome.

Thomas Grolos Englishman Bishop of Astraphen. Richard Silleun Prior Angliae.
Andreas Ludouicus, Register to our Sovereign Lord the Pope,which for the
greater credit of the premises, have set my seal to these presents.

At Rome the day and year above written. Mauricus Clenotus, the Governor and
keeper of the English hospital in the City.

The King of Spain his Letters to the Lieuetenant, for the placing of John
Reynard in the office of a Gunner, etc.
TO the illustrious Prince, Vespasian Gonsaga Colona, our Lieuetenant and
Captain General of our Realm of Valentia. Having consideration that John
Reynard Englishman, has served us, and was one of the most principal which
took away from the Turks a certain Gallie, which they have brought to
Tarento, wherein were two hundred, fifty, and eight Christian captives:

We license him to practice, and give him the office of a Gunner, and have
ordained that he go to our said Realm, there to serve in the said office
in the Galleys, which by our commandment is lately made. And we do
command, that you cause to be paid to him eight Ducats pay a Month, for the
time that he shall serve in the said Galleys as a Gunner, or till we can
otherwise provide for him, the said eight Ducats monthly of the money which
is already of our provision present and to come, and to have regard of those
which come with him. From Escuriall.

I the King. Iuan del Gado.
And under that a confirmation of the Counsel.

