A TREATISE of the Nature of God.

By T. Morton.

Psalm. 18. 11.

He has made darkness his secret place.



LONDON Printed by Tho. Creed for Robert Dexter, dwelling in Paul's
Churchyard, at the sign of the Brazen Serpent. 1599.

TO THE READER.
HEreis (good Reader) a little Treatise of a great Argument, in the which (if
ever in any) that may be seen, which does daily come to pass, that the Book
it self does nothing less then perform that which the title does promise and
pretend: as we see and find often that the countenances of men do make a fair
show of many singular virtues and excellent parts, which in trial are not to
be found in any part either of their souls or bodies. How then (may any and
will some man say) do you of purpose go about to deceive us with glosing
titles, which have under them no substance of matter? or were you your selves
deceived in taking in hand that which you were not able to accomplish? Surely
whatso^uer we were, he having the truth plainly told him, and the fault
revealed, need not now be deceived unless he will himself, and then volenti
no^ fit iniuria: but for our parts we did enterprise this conference, not in
hope of sou^ding the depth of this bottomless mystery, but only purposing
to content our selves with that knowledge of it which is revealed in the word
of God. The which no doubt is most needful, and also comfortable to all
Christians: for what either is or shall be our happiness but the true knowledge
and continual contemplation of God? To the which purpose, if this Treatise do
any whit further thee, we are glad: otherwise take our good will in good part.
And so we commend the (good Reader) as we desire to be commended by thee, to
the gracious assistance of Gods holy spirit, to be by him instructed and
preserved in all truth.

THE EPISTLE Dedicatorie.
SIr, my duty remembered unto you, desiring of God your welfare as heartely and
more earnestly, then I either do, or ever did mine own. I had once purposed
not to make any dedication of this little pamphlet, that so none should need to
be troubled with it, save only they (if there were any such) that would trouble
themselves with it. But the persuasions of some friends wishing that this little
body going abroad, might have some head to direct it, have prevailed so far,
that I began to think of some friend with whom I might make so bold as to use
his name (at least understood the which may serve for once, unless we have
imitated that unskillful painter, who must needs set this epigramme over every
thing yt he painted: This is such a thing) the forefront of this treatise, to
give to these few sheets of paper, the name and title of a perfest book, the
which they do so earnestly affect. Whereupon while I did bethink my self of
the reasons and respects which usually men follow in dedicating books, among
the rest (for there are diverse besides) yet above the rest (for they are the
chief) these three came to mind, the first is necessarium, the second vtile,
and the third honestum. Necessity makes men (writing of matters not only
greatly controuerted, but even flatly contradicted, yea perhaps spightfully
oppugned) as is almost every truth by one or other) shrowde themselves under
the authority and countenance of some great personage, that so they may have
shelter against the storms and tempests, which their malicious enemies raise
against their persons, and the truth which they do profess. But this seemed
not needful for this treatise, which being rather a Philosophical then a
Theological discourse, of the nature of God in general, wherein, not only all
Christians, but also the Jews, yea the very Turks and all other infidels do
agree, may safely travel into any country without a safe conduct, or arrive on
any coast without a conuoy. The second motive is vtile, a Planet that now
adays reigns by his powerful influence in the very wills of men, (the which
God himself cannot compel) and is the Cynosura or North star, by whose aspect
most men lay their plots and courses. And surely men are not to be blamed, if
by this officious kind of saluting and acknowledging the virtues of worthy
men (it being done without flattery) they labor to procure unto them deserved
fame and renown, and to purchase to themselves some lawful favor, as a
recompense of their good affection. This may be done, yet it is more lawful
then commendable, for it is better to give then to to take, and (in the opinion
of some men) to want then to crave. The third respect, is the most honest and
praise worthy, for it has an eye not to present safety, or to future
profit, but to benefits past and gone, and in a manner worn out of mind, the
voluntary acknowledging whereof, especially before so many witnesses, shows
a good nature, and a most ingenuous mind. Here I did set down my staff, as
minding out of this company to make my choice, yet was I not as yet come to my
iourneyes end: for as we all have many benefactours, to whom we are much
indebted, so it may be doubted, which of them may by best right challenge this
duty to himself. Our best benefactour is he, from whom only comes every
good and perfect gift, who has enriched us both with temporal and with
spiritual blessings, and therefore does most woorthely deserve to be honored
above all others, with the first and best of all the things we have.

And without question, the zeal and good affection of those men, who (even in
this our age) in thankfulness to God the giver of all knowledge and wisdom,
have made him and no other, the Patron of their books and labors, yea though
they were not directly written of his nature, deserves highly to be praised:
yet me thinks as it is not lawful to give to man, the honors which are due
and proper to God, so it sounds somewhat harsh (though in truth it be not
evil, and to be condemned as simply unlawful) to give those honors to God,
which are commonly bestowed on men: and therefore even the godliest men have
thought it most meet to dedicate their books to men like to themselves, and
themselves both body and soul to God. So then we must descend to humane
benefactours, of all which we must acknowledge the public Patrons and fathers
of our country, to be as most beneficial to us (howsoever the envy which
men bear to the good one of another, makes common benefits not to be
esteemed) so most worthy, to whom in the first place all honor, love and
duty, should be performed both by this, and by all other means whatsoever.
Yet we are not to stay here, for tho public persons be to be preferred, yet
private duties must not be neglected: the which thing the very heathen did see
by the light of nature, and therefore as soon as they had ended their public
services and sacrifices to the public Gods of their countries and cities,
they did without fail look homewards and carefully (though superstitioussly and
foolishly) honor with due rites and ceremonies their deos penates, their
household Gods. Neither did they herein think their public gods to be injured
or dishonored: for being (though fondly) persuaded that they received much
good even from their private Gods, hereupon they inferred as a most undoubted
truth, which no man endued with common sense would deny, that whosoever was
sufficient to bestow benefits on men, the same was sufficient to receive
honor and thanks at the hands of men. And in very truth, he that would make a
separation and divorce betwixt the bestowing of benefits, and the receiving of
thanks, he should go about to take heat from the fire, light from the sun,
and all sense of humanity out of the hearts, and from the societies of men.
But howsoever this duty of thankfulness ought most religiously to be
performed, yet we see that none is more profanely neglected: especially
toward those, to whom in respest of near conjunction of nature, we owe
double love and duty: but they what good soever they do to us, serve
thanklesse Masters, whereas we know that Idolatrous and unjust Laban could
say to Jacob, Though thou be my near kinsman, yet it is no reason, that thou
should serve for naught, and be defrauded of the wages due unto thee. And now
at length to come to our purpose, I do most willingly confess (as I would more
willingly have done long ere this, if it had pleased you to accept that homage,
which I think you could be content still to spare) that if ever any man might
of an other, then may you of me expect and require all thankfulness of mind,
all thanksgiving in word, and all actual testification of it by this or by any
other means, whatsoever is or may at any time lie in me to perform. Your
title is as good as is his (who having with great expense purchased the
feesimple of a fair and fruitful Orchard, and enjoying it in quiet
possession for many years together, no man making any claim to it, or to any
part or parcel of it, or once offering to set either foot or face into it: yea
planting it with the best trees that could be had, and not suffering them to
grow wild, and to bring forth sower fruit, but pruning and lopping them
(yet almost so as it is said of David, 1. King. 1. 6.) and grafting them with
the best sciences that could be had either at home or in foreign countries) to
take and taste an apple of some tree in this his own Orchard. If you should
say, the which I am persuaded you did never think, that this were a dear
apple, and a sorry recompense for so great cost and care: Indeed I must
confess, that you might have bought ten thousand such books with less
charges, yet we see this to be the course of the world, that when as men have
most extremely both charged and toyled themselves in planting Orchards and
setting Gardens, yet if they do but taste of the fruit of the one, and smell
of a flower of the other, they think that they have enough for their money, and
are better apaid, then if they had had given the^ a thousand cart-loads of any
other (though far better) either fruit or flowers. For all things are not to
be esteemed by profit, or to be numbered by Arithmeticall, but rather to be
waighed by Geometrical proportion, which is the better: and truly I have
always thought, and so it may be, that many others think, that you do make
more account of a public good, (the which happily even these small treatises
may procure more or less) then of a great deal of your private profit: As I
have often heard you say, that you thought it meet that the first borne should
be dedicated to the study of Divinity and the service of God according to
the equity of Moses law made to that effect, the which ought still to remain
in some sort, though it do not necessarely bind.

And therefore instead of a better testimony of a thanking, yet more thankful
mind, I am bold to send unto you, together with a little treatise of
repentance, for the which you wrote in your last letter, another of the same
pitch and stature, being his younger brother, to accompany him. It is
needless I know, to use many or any words, in commending them to you,
Nepotesauis, quam filij patribus chariores esse solent: Admit them I pray you
into your family, as did old Jacob, Ephraim and Manasses, the sons of
Joseph, and let your name be named upon them. Yea, if you please, lay your
hands upon them, in perusing the^ as your leisure will permit. Yet do not
imitate him in crossing his hands, and in preferring the latter before the
former, (for he was by the extraordinary spirit of prophecy, privileged to
cross his hands, and with all the law of God, yea which is more, because they
are more the laws of God, the laws of nature, and of nations) for the former
is fitter for your purpose, and will be more profitable for you, so much as
the true practice of Christianity, set down in some sort in that treatise of
repentance, is to be preferred before naked speculation, to the which kind I
must needs confess that this latter treatise does more properly belong. I do
heartely wish and earnestly desire of God, that as you have been the means of
existing to them, so they may return unto you in way of thankfulness, some
spiritual good, the one for practice, which is the better part, and the other
for knowledge, which is not to be neglested. Neither do I doubt, but that God
will in some measure hear my prayer, with whom nothing is more righteous and
pleasing, then that every one should reap the fruits of his labors,
especially of their godly endeavors which do directly tend to the good of his
Church: you have sown the seed, and therefore may well take the crop into your
barn, you have both planted and grafted the tree, and why then should another
pluck away the fruit? It would (perhaps) have been more profitable, if
according to the common course of the world, I had by this duty worshipped the
sun, not occidentem (for who regards the sun any longer th^n they see the
light and feel the heat of it) but Orientem, whose benefits are not in the
past but in the future tense. And yet as it has pleased God hitherto to make
you the only means (in a manner) of profit unto me (I speak of private
benefactours) even from my cradle and first infancy to this present hour, yea
so that you do not yet fail or faint, (as you might well have done since you
began, without any blame) but that your last and late benefits and bounty do
exceed the former: so if I were so minded as to use mai^^er vtile for my Pilot,
and the directer of my ship and course, I know no cause why I might not hope to
have as good a Chapman of you, as of another. So then, both honestum and vtile
have given their voices to this choice, to the which if necessity could be
brought to give his assent, then it were done vnanimi consensu, without any
gain saying: and surely in my mind he is not hard to be entreated. Pompey
surnamed the great, for his great conquests and triumphs, (although he might
more truly be so called for the greatness of his mind and virtues) being sent
by the Senate into one of their Provinces, would needs take ship and sea in a
great tempest, saying: It is needful that I should go, because it is needful
that I should discharge my duty, but not that I should live: and so we are to
account it more needful to avoid the foul crime of ingratitude, then to have
either our writings, or persons safely protected. I may not though I would,
trouble you any further: it remains only that I desire God to return seven
fold into your bosom, as I doubt not but that he will do, either in this or
in a better life) all that good which you have done unto me: and so leaving you
in the most sure protection of God, in whom I am persuaded that you trust, I
take my leave till further occasion be offered, either of writing or of
coming unto you.

The Lord be with you. London this 7. of February. 99.
A TREATISE OF THE NATVRE OF GOD.
CHAP. I. That there is a God.
Sect. 1.
Gent. ELL overtaken Sir.


Schol. You are welcome Gentleman.


Gent. No great Gentleman sir, but one that wishes well to all that mean
well: I pray you, how far do you travel this way?


Sch. As far as York.


Gent. I should be glad, if I might have your company thither.


Sch. And I, if my company might stand you in any steed: but howsoever it be,
you may command it: and by vouchsafing me the benefit of your company, makes
me much beholden to you.


Gent. Not so sir: but without question, the company of men of your profession,
is both pleasant and profitable, and much to be desired for the attaining of
knowledge and wisdom.


Sc. I pray you sir, who^ do you take me to be?


Gent. Surely, it should seem by your apparel, that you are a Scholar, or
some Minister.


Sch. Indeed, if you call a learner a Scholar, I do confess my self to be of
that profession: but if (as I suppose) you mean by a Scholar, not a learner,
but a teacher, or Doctor, one able to instruct, and direct others, you take
your marks amiss: for (as we s^y in the Schools) Cucullus nonfacit monac
huum.


Gent. I mean by a Scholar, not one that learnes his ABC, or his Accidens,
but a Student, one that has been brought up in learning in some University:
able with a little labor, and in a short time, to do much good to us that are
ignorant. In this sense I am persuaded, that you are, and may be both called
and accounted a Scholar.


Sch. It pleases you sir, of your gentleness, to think and speak of me,
far better then I do deserve: but if it were, as you do ween, and wish, yet
I know no cause, but that I both may and ought, look for profit and increase
of knowledge, as well at your hands as you at mine.


Genesis Why that cannot be: you give your selves continually to reading, and all
other means of attaining knowledge: whereas we follow other matters, and spend
our days about worldly profits or pleasures, as our callings, places and
degrees do require.


Sch. The more is the pity if it be so: you (for the most part) have leisure
enough to seek knowledge: yea you are of ability to provide for your selves,
all things belonging unto study, the which Scholars do often want, to their
great grief and hindera^ce. And surely (in my mind) it were far more
commendable and honorable, for men of wealth, place, and account, to pursue and
huntafter knowledge and wisdom, by the which they might benefit much their
country, both Church, and Commonwealth, then to spend their time and goods, in
vain and unprofitable pleasures.


Gent. You say true sir, in the opinion of the wisest: but for this time, we
will rather take it as we find it, the^ dispute how it oght to be: if you look
for any great learning at my hands, you are deceived, and will in the end be
disappoynted. Yet I pray you, let us pass the time and way in some good
conference, and give me leave to ask your opinion and he^p in some points of
divinity, whereof I either am altogether ignorant, or else do greatly doubt,
and would gladly be resolved. It would without question be a great ease, and
make that we should neither fee^e the wearisomenesse of our tedious travel,
nor yet complain or cry out of the length of these Northumberland miles: yea I
do not doubt, but it will be profitable to us both: for I shall be instructed,
and you by calling to remembrance your former reading, shall imprint it more
deeply into your mind, and have it more ready against an other time.


Sch. Indeed conference is always good, and especially in travel: yea, and
for the matter of our conference, you have chosen the better part, in that you
had rather bestow the time in some points of divinity, whereby we may be
edified in religion, and in the knowledge of God, then spend it in other
matters, which are either vain and needless, or at the least, not comparable
unto it, either in use or excellency. Yet I must needs tell you plainly, that
you are too careful of your own ease, in that you would lay the whole burden
of answering all questions, and resolving all doubts upon my shoulders, and
shift it wholly from your se^f. You know, that it is the custom, and as it
were, a law among travelers, not to put any one continually to the trouble of
seeking and leading the way, but to do it by course. And therefore I may not
agree to this motion which you have made, unless it please you to accept these
two conditions: first, that you give me the like liberty, in propou^ding to
you those doubts which trouble me, and be content to show me the like favor,
in helping me out of the briers wherein I shall stick. Secondly, that in hard
and intricate questions, that answer be accepted for the time which may be
had: for it is a plain case, that any one man may move more questions in an
hour, then all the learned men in the world can answer and resolve, all the
days of their lives.


Gent. Your conditions are very reasonable, and although my answering of your
doubts will be, as the proverb is, Sus mineruam, (in the which respect, and not
in any partial favor of my self, as you do charge me, I referred the matter
wholly to your disposition) yet for so much as you give others beside
Scholars, leave to have knowledge, I will do my best to satisfy your desire,
and rather show my ignorance and folly, then seem injurious and unthankful.


Sch. You may speak your pleasure: but by all liklihood you are a Scholar,
according to your own acception, howsoever it pleases you to make your self
for the time, one in my sense: and it may be you are so by your calling and
kind of life, howsoever your outward state seems better then usually
Scholars attain unto: yea, I am persuaded, by this great desire to increase
in knowledge, which appears in you, that you have already attained to a
great measure of it, and know what belongs unto it, as we see that usually the
richest are most covetous.


Sect. 2.
Gent. Well, well: let us leave these things, and come to the purpose: yet for
all this have, one thing I must needs desire of you, and it is this. That you
would not be offended, nor yet think scorn to answer and resolve me, eue^
in those questions, which are most certain, manifest, and without all
question, as if I should desire to be resolved of this point, that there is a
God, that made and rules, and governs al things. Not that I doubt of this,
or any other maine point of Christian religion, but that I may know and hold
that more firmly, which I do already both believe, and also know in part.


Sch. We cannot, if we speak properly, call this a point of Christian
religion, for all the heathenish religions that ever were, or that are at this
day in the world, agree in this, as in the foundation and ground whereon they
rest, that there is a God, for otherwise there could be no religion. Yet you
say very true, that our knowledge both in this, and in all other points
concerning God, is imperfect: and therefore we may lawfully, yea we must
necessarily labor for an increase of it, and for that Pleerophoria, that is, a
full knowledge and certain persuasion, mentioned in Scripture. Yea, if you
please, we will begin with this point, for that (if it must needs be handled,
as it is seldom, it being seldom called into question) it ought to have the
first place assigned unto it.


Gent. Indeed it is strange, that this blockish Atheism should be in any
that has a reasonable soul: yet he that does consider the lives of many, led
without any knowledge, fear, love, care, or any regard whatsoever had unto
God, may see that verified, which is spoken Psalm. 14. 1. The fool has said in
his heart there is no God. yea I have heard of such as would openly profess
themselves to be of that iudg^ment, and as far as they might without danger,
defend it by argument against any whosoever. The which shameless impiety,
although I do from my heart detest, and shall (I trust) while I live, yet (to
tell you plainly) there have often such doubts risen and ^unne in my mind, as
I should be ashamed, and therefore would be loath to utter.


Sch. Nay, it is a shame to conceal and cherish, not to declare and abandon
them: but what I pray you, has at any time made you doubt of God?


Gent. Surely, to deal plainly with you, me thought there was no order of
gon^rnement, but rather extreme confusion in the world, that things came to
pass not by any providence or power of God, but partly by the force and
efficacy of natural causes, working according to the ordinary and set course
of nature, and partly by the inclinations, devises, consultations and purposes
of men, proceeding from the free motion of their own minds and wills: that
foolish and superstitious people did ascribe many things, as war, dearth,
famine, plague, sickness, poverty, and many other casualtie^, to some
extraordinary work of God, which the wise did plainly see to come by the
ordinary connection and consequence of natural causes: that as touching those
few who did wholly depend and rely themselves upon God, and did daily and
hourly call upon him for such things as they stood in need of, it happened
to them no better: yea, for the most part, far worse then to the wicked:
that for all their faith and prayers, they must either betake themselves to the
ordinary course of the world, or else utterly perish and miscarrie: that many
who most outragiously blaspheme, yea openly both deny and defy God, (as we
read of a certain Pope, who said that he would have and eat of a meat that
he fancied, in despite of God, and so he did) prosper and fare as well, yea
much better, then they that serve him most devoutly: that there were not to be
seen in the world, any arguments of Gods power and presence, nor any thing
which might make a wise man wonder: whereas in all reason, it should seem more
possible to hide the sun, being above our horizon, so that it should not
either by heat, beams, light, or any other means, show it self to be
present, then that God should be in the world, and yet no way apparent.

As for the Scripture out of the which we use so plainly to teach, prove, and
demonstrate the being of God, as out of his only evidences, that there was no
certanitie could be had of any thing contained in it: that every Kingdom,
Country, and City, yea almost every private man, did gather out of it a
diverse and different ^orme of religion and serving GOD: that many things in it
might be proved to be false and fabulous, as of the flames of Purgatory, the
fire of Hell, and the light of heaven, prepared and appointed for the souls of
men departing from their bodies, according as they had lived in this world,
either well or else wickedly: that all these doctrines, and infinite others of
the same kind, were but counterfeit, and both devised and used to keep people
in some awe and order: yea (which seemed woorst of all) that the Scripture was
contradicted not only by others, but also by it self in many points and
places, whereas in truth, there is not any discord or harsh iarring, but a most
sweet and full consort and harmony. So that for these reasons and diverse
other, that I will not trouble you with, me thought I might say of God, as
Elias says of Baal, that in all likelihood he was either a sleep, or in bat
tell, or about some weighty affairs, or (as he thought and mentindeed) no
where existing, yet these doubts were but as flying clouds in my mind, which
the glory, majesty, and truth of God, shining both in his word and work, as
clearly as the sun does at noone day, did soon dissolve, yet not so, that
you should think it lost labor to speak somewhat to that effect,


Sch. I may for fashions sake, but I am persuaded, that it is in a manner
needless, and that you are not now to learn, how that God, having revealed
himself sufficiently by diverse evident means, does now in a manner hide and
absent himself from the world, yea even from his church and chosen people, and
that upon good ground, in respect both of the elect, and of the reprobate.
First for the elect, we know that in the first ages of the world, God did
reveal himself unto them by many means, which now he has laid aside, as
first in sensible apparitions, visions, voices, and dreams, yea sometimes in
as plain and familiar manner, as men use to talk and converse with their
friends, face to face, without any colors, shows or vizards. Secondly, God did
usually bestow upon his servants many temporal blessings, and power forth
upon the wicked, grievous plagues and punishments. This was done in respect of
the infancy and weak estate of the Church and the godly, who being as yet
endued but with a small measure of knowledge and faith, (the time being not
come, wherein the mystery of eternal salvation in Christ, was to be unfolded)
would soon have fallen into distrust and forgetfulness of God, if that he had
been strange with them: and therefore it pleased him in mercy to visit them
often in this sencible manner of bodily apparitions, and of temporal
blessings, that so he might (as it were) keep his acquaintance with the^, the
which otherwise would soon, by reason of that small measure of spiritual graces
which they had, have been forgotten and come to naught. But now in this time
of the Gospel, wherein spiritual graces are plentifully given, and eternal
glory so certainly promised to the faithful, yea even poynted at with the
finger, as being hard at hand, and almost in sight, should God still dandle
them in in his lap with temporal blessings, as with lakings to toy and play
with? and still appear in visible manner, as if the Gospel could not be,
either for doubtfulnesse believed, or for obscurity understood? We see that
when as children are grown up to any stature and strength, they are not only
ashamed, once to think of sucking the dug again, but also are by painful
toil and labor continually exercised, for the increase both of strength in
their bodies, and of patience in their minds, howsoever it be grievous unto
them, and make them doubt of the love of their parents, by whom they are tied
to so unwelcome a task.

In like manner it pleased God to deal with his children, not only in
withdrawing from the^ these temporal toies, (yet not leaving them
comfortless, who have both plenty of spiritual graces in present fruition
and the instant hope of eternal glory, wherewith to solace themselves) but
also in exercising their faith, hope, patience, and love, by continual trials
and temptations, crosses and afflictions, as if he had clean forgotten the^,
and cast them off for ever. Whereas indeed he does it only for the trial and
commendation of their faith; which by this means is found to be firm and
sound, even as gold is tried by the fire. For if whensouer we are pinched with
any grief, misery, or want, God were straightway at our elbowes, with comfort
and with such things as we desire, either for necessity or pleasure, what
great matter were it to depend upon him, and to love him. The most blockish
sot in the world, would trust that which he sees with his eyes: and there is
no brute beast in the world of so savage a nature, but would bear good
affection to him, that did daily ply him with good and pleasant things, one in
the neck of another, neither is it possible for a man to hope for that which
he already has.

But when as by faith and hope, we take such hold of God and the promises of
eternal life, that no temptations can make us let our hold go: when as in the
most bitter afflictions we feel the sweet taste and relish of the love of
God, when as we do steadfastly behold that which is far out of sight, then
is our faith found to be not baggage dross, but pure and precious gold, fit
for the service of the king of heaven. Thus Christ speaks unto Thomas, Ioh 2.
20. 29. Thou have seen, felt, and thereupon do believe, that I am risen
from the dead, but blessed are they that do notsee, or feel, and yet believe:
that is, their faith is more strong and excellent, and therefore their
salvation and blessedness more certain. Likewise in respect of the wicked, it
is needful, that God should by deferring those plagues, that their blasphemies
and other outrageous sins, do deserve, suffer the^ to go on in hardening their
hearts, and in filling up the measure of their sin. For if they saw God
present in the world in temporal plagues, giving to every sin the dese^ued
punishment, as he did in old times, and so standing over them with the whip
and sword of vengeance, they would then have some conscience of sin, and by
fear, be restrained from that outrage whereunto now they rush headlong: yea,
the nearer that the universal judgment wherein every one shall rec^iue
according to his works, is at hand, the more does God surcease from temporal
rewards and punishments, pu^posing by ^ternall retribution, to pay every one
home and to the full. And therefore we cannot impute the confusion and
abundance of sin which ou^^floweth the world, to the want of goue^nment in God,
but to the just judgment, who suffers the wicked to ^un on in their seu^rall
courses of wickedness, to their final dest^uction: yet not so, but that he
does plainly show his power and providence in restraining these floods of
wickedness, that they shall not so ouerslow the earth, but that always there
is a place left to serve and praise him in, even as we see, that he keeps by
violence the sea within the appointed limits, which by nature should and if it
were not restrained, very quickly would cover the face of the whole earth. As
for the multitude of false religions, and the great diversity of opinions
among those that prosesse the truth, what is that to the purpose? The pathway
of truth is one and the same, by-wares are infinite: the ignorance, errors, and
heresies of men, cannot prejudice the substance and foundation of it) safe and
sound in the Church, Lastly, for the contradictions and untruths wherewith the
holy Scripture is charged, if the spirit of God had used in penning the
Scripture, we^ke men, who might err in some circumstance of the story, or
some matter of no moment, as he does daily use the ministry of men, who no
doubt, together with the truth of religion. have errors and ignorance: should
that make the doctrine and substance of religion it self, to be suspected or
rejected? But we know that there is nothing false in the Scripture if be
rightly understood, and that all the parts of it have a most perfect agreement
and consonancie with the other, the Law with the Gospel, the ceremonies of
Moses, with the substance in Christ: the Prophets with the Apostles, and each
one with other. But I marvel why you join the fire of Purgatory, whereat now
the whole world does laugh; as at a most ridiculous toy, with hell and heaven,
whereby in Scripture is meant the misery of the wicked, and the happiness of
the godly in the life to come: both which we cannot doubt, but that God that
has spoken it, will accomplish and make manifest unto us.


Sect. 4.
Gent. I Was always (I thank God) of that mind, and yet you have resolved me
of diverse points whereof before I doubted. Now that you have taken away these
doubts and scruples, and weeded out these bitter roots of unbelief, which
make many depart away from the living God, it is meet that you should sow
some new seeds of faith in the mind, by setting down some manifest proofs,
demonstrations, and evidences of God, by the which he may be certainly known,
yea in a manner seen and felt.


Sch. That is no hard matter to do, for so much as there is nothing in the
world, which does not afford us an evident testimony of God, who even in the
least things, much more in those which are by nature excellent, is most
wonderful and most apparent. But to avoid confusion as welin my speech, as in
your memory, we will reduce the infinite testimonies of God to these five heads:
the first are the creatures: the second is the light of nature: the third is
the word of God: the fourth is his spirit: and the last are his miracles or
extraordinary works. All these together, will be unto us a cloud of
witnesses, even an infinite number compassing us round about, and so by their
huge multitude in a manner darkening the sun, or rather so inlightning our
minds, that there cannot any dark clouds of doubting or distrust remain.
First then to begin with the creatures in the which God did first manifest
himself, who can either deny or doubt, but that the heavens declare the
glory of God, and the firmament shows his handie work: and that if God made
not them, yet they made their maker whosoever he were, to be most justly and
woorthily called and accounted God, in that they most plainly witness his
surpassing power, wisdom, and majesty.

If the creatures themselves, as namely the sun, moon, and stars (yea many
earthly creatures, which in respect of these are base and contemptible, yet
have been taken and worshipped for gods) are in themselves so glorious, that
they have extorted from many nations, the names, titles, and worship of God,
it cannot be but that they should even lead us by the hand, to acknowledge the
glory and God head of him, who was their deviser and maker, and does still
continue their preserver.

Now if we descend into this lower world, wherein we dwell, and there
begin with our selves, called by the Philosophers not without cause, little
worlds, we shall find both without in our bodies, in the most cunning and
curious form and frame of them, and within in our minds and souls, in their
manifold faculties and effects, so plain and pregnant arguments of so great
wisdom and power, that we shall cease to marvel, how Alexander the great,
and Nabuchadnezar the proud, came to that pass, to suppose themselves to be
not men but Gods, and shall begin to marvel why all the men in the world are
not of their opinion, until we be think our selves, that men see plainly
both in themselves and in others, that they did not make themselves, but were
made by an other. Yet may not man boast or brag, that this prerogative of
bringing in evidence for the deity of his maker, is peculiar to himself: he
must be feign to admit into the participation of this praise, all the other
creatures in the world: not only those which excel himself in greatness,
strength, swistnes, sharpnes of sense, and in many other respects, but even the
basest and silliest worm that scrawleth upon the ground: yea (which may make
him lay down his peacocke tail, and be quite out of conceit with himself)
he must in this respect give place even to senseless things, as to herbs,
trees, and stones: the virtues and operations whereof (hidden in the causes, to
the sharpest wits of the most subtle Philosophers, yet manifest in the
effects, to the bluntest senses of the most simple idiots) if they be as duly
considered as they are daily seen, will in a manner turn men into stones: so
amazing them, that they will be constrained to renounce all natural reasons,
and to acknowledge that it is the finger of GOD.

And so for conclusion of this point, not only they that go down into the
deep secrets of natural Philosophy, but even such also as do only swim
and floate aloft in the superficial consideration of the frame of the whole
world, and of the particular creatures therein contained, do manifestly
behold, and must of necessity acknowledge the wonderful power and wisdom
of God.

And no marvel, when as the very heathen who are purblinde, if not
stone-blinde in respect of God, have in this clear Crystal glass of the
creatures easily descried, and plainly discerned the portrature and image of
God. Against whose testimony, which now in the second place is to be
produced) although there might exception be taken, in respect of the
particulars, for that in matters of religion, heathen men are of no credit or
account, both deceiving others, and being deceived themselves, by following
lies and illusions, yet in respect of the vniue^salitie of it, it has some
weight, and may well be admitted.

I am sure you have often heard and read, that Vox populi (much more then Vox
mundi) est vox Dei: many may be deceived, but that is taken for truth,
wherein all generally do agree: for such things are not devised by this or that
man, but engraven in the mind of man by nature her self, and therefore are to
be accounted true and certain, especially by Atheists, who make Nature their
God.

Yea besides the ordinary means of the light of nature, by the which all men
naturally and generally attain the undoubted persuasion of this truth, it
has pleased God in all ages and places to maintain it, and put it out of all
doubt by extraordinary works, of the which all profane stories afford
plentiful examples.

But we have a clearer light to direct us in this, and in all other cases of
controversy, then is the dim light of nature, to wit, the word of God
contained in the books of holy scripture, so full of divine wisdom, that we
cannot once imagine it to have been hatched by the brain of man, angel, or
other creature whatsoever.

To let all other arguments pass, which the scripture does afford us for this
purpose, let us but consider in it how God has dealt with his Church from time
to time, always preserving it in some one corner or other, yet never suffering
it to be generally received throughout the world, yet bringing it into every
part of it at one time or other, even as he suffers his sun to shine upon
all the parts of the earth, not at once, but successively and by peece-meale,
one part being enlightened after another: how God has trained up his Church
from one estate to another, from the first infancy to the childhood, and so on
forward to man's estate, instructing it in his will, and as it were instilling
his precepts into it by little and little, and line after line: as the
^apacitie of it would admit, (not regarding the time of their ignorance) first
by temporal blessings, then by eternal promises: first by sencible
appatitions, then by inward assurance, more certain then sense: first by
ceremonies, then by the substance of his worship: first by tipes, then by the
truth: first by the shadow, then by the body it self: first by prophecies,
then by accomplishments: and lastly, first by the image and counterfeit, and
then by the very personal presence of Christ himself, bringing unto us in his
Gospel, that consummatum est, that yea and amen, even all in all, and all at
once. For who knows not, that in the doctrine of the Gospel, we have
unfolded unto us such endless treasures of divine wisdom, that (even by the
judgment of those who are not affected with any love toward it, and therefore
cannot be suspected of partiallitie) all the religions of the heathen are in
comparison of it most childish, ridiculous, and trifling toies. The fourth
means by the which God is revealed and made known to man, is proper to the
faithful, to wit, the inward and secret operation of his spirit, renewing
their minds and hearts to know and love the truth.

This light far passes all the other, for that it not only shines in the
eyes, as the other do, but also opens them, that they may see and behold the
truth, which thing, the other are not able to effect.

For although we cannot imagine any more plain and evident proofs of the
deity, then the three aforesaid means: namely the creation and preservation
of the world, the general assent and voice of all the Nations under heaven in all ages, especially of the jews, who do generally abhor this opinion of
Atheism: and lastly, the doctrine of the Gospel, wherein the whole will and
counsel of God is fully and finally revealed, by some or all whereof, many are
brought to acknowledge God, and to have although not a full sight, yet a
glimmering of him: yet notwithstanding all these means, we see that many
remain in the palpable blindness of Atheism, neither knowing in mind, nor
acknowledging by word, any other God, then the ordinary and set course of
nature, because as yet their eyes are fast shut and sealed up: so that they
cannot see the light, although it be most clear. But the spirit of God is that
ointment, Ioh. 2. 20. which opens our eyes, and makes us clear sighted: so
that now it fares with us, as with that man, Ioh. 9. 1. that having been
borne blind (had no doubt) often heard men speak of the Sun, and the light
thereof, and did believe it to be so, yet not without some doubting, and not
at all knowing what to make of it, or whereunto to resemble it. But as soon as
his eyes being opened, he did plainly behold the Sun, with the light and
beams thereof, he did no more doubt of the Sun, then he did of himself, and
of his own being: so men before they be enlightened by Gods spirit, they see
little or nothing of the glory of God, which after regeneration, is as clear
unto them as the Sun at midday, even as we read, 2. Kin. 6. 17. that Eliseus
his servant could not see the huge army of horsemen and chariots, which was
hard at hand, till such time, as God, at the prayer of the Prophet opened his
eyes. The fifth and last means, by the which God is made known, are his
extraordinary and miraculous works, by the which he has revealed himself, not
only to some few of his servants, who have bin the instruments by whom they
have bin wrought, but also in the eyes of the world, beholding them. And
without question, when these are added to the former, they bring with them, to
the true believers, even a huge heap of faith, and assurance, howsoever to
carnal unbelievers, they are often vain and of no effect. For if unto that
knowledge of God which we have by the creatures and the light of nature, by his
word and spirit, God should add such immediate revelations, familiar
conferences, visible apparitions, and sencible visions, such signs and wonders
as he wroght in old times in and by his servants, we could not but by these
means be much more undoubtedly persuaded of the power, presence, and
providence of God, then now we are, howsoever the wicked did still continue in
their unbelief, yea though one should rise from the dead and preach unto them.
To speak any more of this matter to you, were no otherwise then if I should
light a candle to show you who are sound and clear sighted, the sun shining
here before us. You see that the creatures and light of nature to the heathen,
the scripture and word of God to the Church, the sanctifying and illuminating
spirit of God to the faithful, the gifts of prophecy, revelation, and other
miraculous actions (the which are not now needful in the Church, as they were
before the coming of Christ, and in the first publishing of the Gospel) to
all that either have the^ themselves, or behold them in others, are infallible
demonstrations of the Godhead, and such against the which no exception can be
made: yet not withanding all this, it is a wonder (but that it is so common) to
consider how Atheism does daily prevail among men, yea far more then it did
amongst either the superstitious papists, or the idolatrous heathen, of whom
there were very few, which had not their religion and Gods in great reverence,
and most high estimation, whereas now a days, few do make any account of
religion or of the worship of God, but as of a formal and ordinary matter of
course, which for order and fashions sake, is to be performed. And accordingly,
it pleases God to deal with them in his just judgment, for the hardening of
their hearts, that for so much as they have so wilfully rejected so many means
of knowledge, he does wholely abstain from any further revealing of himself by
any extraordinary means, but suffers every one to go on and to prosper in
their own devises and wicked ways, that so their impunitie may confirm them
in their ignorance and contempt of God: the which is more to be wondered at, and
to be lamented, many of them that have had some knowledge and sense of religion
revealed unto them, and have made conscience of it in their lives, yet seeing
no great matters or effects to come of it, but the ordinary course and fashion
of the world, they faint in faith by little and little, till at length they
become if not open, yet secret contemners of God and all religion. And so is
fulfilled the prophecy of Christ, Math. 24. 12. 24. That in the last ages of
the world, iniquity shall so abound, that it shall cool the lukewarm love of
many, in so much, that if it were possible, the very elect should fall away
from the faith, and be deceived: but I doubt not but that you are far from
that fearful estate. Genesis That which you have said, as touching the existence
of God, dothfully satisfy me and may content any reasonable man: yet because I
do sometimes meet with men that are even rooted and confirmed in Atheism, and
will not stick to deny that there is a God, I pray you furnish me with some
few arguments, wherewith to convince and to confound them.


Sch. Indeed there are many, which are to be accounted Atheists, for that they
deny the doctrine of Gods providence, and the truth of his word and promises,
made to his Church of eternal glory (the proof and declaration whereof must
be referred to their proper places) wherein we did both agree: but sure I
think, you meet with few or none, that are either so brutish in mind, or so
shameless in face, as to deny that there is a God, neither to my remembrance
have I ever either heard or read of any such. The Epicurean Philosophers among
the heathen, were counted Atheists, as they might well be, for they exempted God
from the care of humane things, and from the the government of the world, but
they neither denied nor doubted but that there was a God. And so I think of
our epicures and Atheists in these days, that howsoever they might as well
deny God to exist, as to contemn and reject his word, threatenings, and
promises, as mere fables, and to be altogether void of any care or regard of
him, yet if they were examined, I think they would confess, that they think
there is a God, tho they have neither knowledge nor care of him.


Genesis You may in favor and gentleness make the best of their Atheism, tho to
say the truth, the best be bad inogh) but I can assure you of my own
experience, that there are such, that deny not only the providence, but even
the very nature and existence of God.


Sc. They are not me^, but beasts in the likeness of men, altogether unworthy
of any favor, neither (if I met with any such) should I either bear o^ show
them any, but rather extreme, and yet not sufficient hatred: for howsoever I
use to be (I know not how) too easy and indifferent in judging and condemning
those that hold even gross heresies, as thinking, that either there may be
some truth and grace with great errors, or at the least that they may be
reclaimed from them: yet when I think of such monsters as you speak of, I
feel my heart to rise against them so, that I could more willingly tear them
in pieces with my teeth, then teach the^ with my tongue. Yea to tell you
plainly, I think that such having lived in the Church, and in the light of the
Gospel and word of God, are not to be disputed with, or persuaded by reasons,
but rather as men given up to a reprobate sense, and branded with the most
fearful mark of the wrath and vengeance of God, to be lest to his just
judgment. For if an Heretic be to be avoided and left after a few
admonitions, as being wilful and obstinate, what then should be done to these,
that have rejected a thousand admonitions given them, not only by the
testimony of the whole world in all ages, but also by the creatures, word, and
extraordinary works of God. And therefore I pray you, let us not trouble our
selves any further with the^, but rather go on to some matter, the consideration
whereof, may be profitable unto us: for as you know, Contra principia negante^,
non est disputandu^.


Gent. I confess that they are in a most fearful case, and deserve to be
abhorred both of god and man, yet when as I am by some necessary occasion in
company with the^, and hear the^ protest themselves to be, not wilful in
gainsaying, but willing to learn the truth, I wish they might be reclaimed, or
at ye least, that their mouths were so stopped, that they did no harm to
others: and therefore I pray you show me, how I should deal with them?


Sch. It is impossible to show or prove the existence of God, by any other
arguments then have bin brought, for that God has revealed himself by those
only, and by no other means: to wit, by his word and spirit to his Church,
and by his works to the world. Now the first kind of these arguments is to be
used against the temptations and doubts arising in the minds of believing
Christians, but not against the horrible blasphemies of these shameless
Atheists, and therefore you must insist in the works of God, the which being
sensible, cannot be denied by them. By these you may show the existence of God,
both by the ordinary works of the creation and preservation of the world (the
which in truth, are most miraculous) as also by the miraculous and
extraordinary works and judgments of God. For the first, you must ask him if
he see not in the creatures, to wit, in their greatness and number, proportion
and beauty, force and efficacy, cerraine signs and arguments, of some great
wit, cunning, wisdom, goodness and power: would he confess this think you?


Gent. Surely if he denied it, I would leave him as being not a man endued
with reason, but a brute beast, or rather a senseless stock.


Sch. Well then, if these things appear in the creatures, they must be
confessed to be in some subject or person, and that either in the creatures
themselves, or in some other, but that is all one, for whatsoever thing is
endued with so great wisdom and power as is necessarely required to the making
and preserving of the world, that without question, is to be^ magnified and
worshipped as God, and to be accounted God. This demonstration of the Godhead
is plain, as plain need be, to any that will consider it, and yet the
extraordinary works of God do more affect men, although in themselves they be
nothing so miraculous: even as we see, that men do more gaze on and admire a
stately house, which they never saw before, and think that there is more
cunning workmanship and bravery in it, then in the frame of the whole world,
which is continually in their eyes. And therefore, you must lay before the eyes
of your Atheists, the strange and miraculous things, which have bin done in all
ages of the world (more or less) contrary to the course of nature: and if he
reject all stories, both divine and profane, yet God does never leave himself
without some of of these extraordinary witnesses. Not that he does now send his
Angels visibly to good me^ with blessings, for they believing his word, need no
extraordinary proofs, but for that he suffers Satan to show himself to the
wicked and unbelievers, not only in strange illusions, but also by searful
plagues and punishments, the which I warrant you he will confess to come, not
by the ordinary course of his goddess nature, but from some supernatural
power, whereof we have of late had evident examples, to the astonishment of all
men. And if your Atheist will not believe his own eyes, beholding the strange
judgments of God in others, but will rather give his own senses the lie, then
acknowledge the truth of the Godhead, let him but by some injurious deed, or
co^tumelious word, provoke some witch of Endor, that has the temporary power
over some spirit, upon condition, that he shall have eternal power over her,
and it is like enough he being void of all faith and sense of God, and so out
of his protection) that he shall feel to his cost, and confess to his shame,
that there is a power over and beside the ordinary course of nature.


Gent. Indeed these Atheists that deny God, do also deny that there is either
devil or Angel, and I think will confess them all as soon as any one.


Sch. And they that will not be taught by God, must, will they, nill they,
learn of the devil, who in my mind, is the fittest schoole-maister for such
scholars.


CHAP. 2. What God is, or of the essence of God.
Sect. 1.
Gent. YOu have so fully resolved me, and settled my mind in this point, that ^
trust never hereafter to be troubled with the objections which Athists make
against the divine essence: especially, if that I might by any means, have the
nature of God declared and described as it is indeed. For this is the cause,
why men are so easily brought to doubt of the being and existence of God,
because they cannot conceive or comprehend the manner or form of his essence,
nor have any true notion of it settled and fixed in their minds: whereby it
comes to pass, that the imagination of man, casting god in a thousand
moules, and turning him into as many diverse forms, as Proteus is fained to
have, never resting contented with any, as never finding any garment that will
sit close on his back, or any form agreeing to the infiniteness and
subtilitie of his essence, rejects all, and with all, even the divine nature
it self: supposing it not at all to exist, which they cannot suppose how it
does exist. And therefore, if I may entreat you to take the like pains in
showing the manner and form of Gods essence, which you have done in proouing
the truth and certainty of his existence, you shall make me much beholden and
indebted to you.


Sch. Indeed it is impossible, as for you to keep that, which you never had,
so for me, either to declare that to you in words, which I my self did never
conceive in mind, or to comprehend that within the compass of my narrow and
shallow brain, which is in nature infinite and incomprehensible: for so we are
to think of God, that his nature and essence being every way infinite, cannot
possibly be comprehended by any finite creature: no not by the heavenly Angels
themselves, whose nature being subtle and spiritual, does easily pierce into
the depth of knowledge: how much less then by men, who in comparison of
Angels, are but dolts and dul-pates, groueling here on earth in the mudde and
mire of error and gross ignorance: unable by any art or industry, to find
out the true nature, form and virtue of the meanest creatures, no not of the
least Fly or Gnat, how much less then of the mighty Iehoua, whose seat is
in the heaven, and whose footestoole is the earth. But what need I allege the
impossibility of comprehending fully in our finit minds and memories, the
infinite essence of God, it being impossible for us, to commence or begin this
action, by receiving into our imaginations or fancies, any true conceit of him.
Things subject to sense, are conceited in the mind, by a resemblance or
similitude of them, which the sense does draw from the things themselves. But
as for things not subject to sense (of the which nature, all men confess God
to be) how shall they convey and send to the imagination, their picture and
resemblance? surely they cannot do it themselves, but must substitute in their
rooms, that sensible thing, which is likest unto them, to represent their
person, as if a man that is far absent, should will the Painter to draw his
picture and counterfeit, by beholding the visage of his son or brother, being
not much unlike unto him. But what creature shall ^it in Gods chair of estate,
and represent his person to our imaginations and minds?

Whereunto shall we compare or liken Whereunto shall we compare or liken God?
or how can we not think it to be unlawful, and flatly forbidden by the law of
God, to resemble him to any thing, either in, or within heaven? or to frame any
Image or similitude of him, either by outward action in deed, or by inward
imaginatio^n in our minds? Thus God persuades the people of Israel from
making any Image, wherein to worship him, because they had not seen him in any
form, and therefore could not tell after what fashion the Image should be
made: Deuteronomy. 4. 15.

Besides, it may be doubted, whether it be lawful or not, to attempt the
searching and finding out of the nature and essence of God, which we have not
in the scriptures revealed unto us. We know that God in revealing himself to
men, has reserved some things secret to himself, the which it is his glory to
conceal, Prou. 25. 2. and therefore his dishonor to have them known. Deuter.
29. 29. Let the hidden things be with the Lord our GOD, and the revealed things
to us, and to our children for ever. But what can be hidden or secret in GOD,
if his very form and essence be revealed?

And therefore we ought to be rather sober and modest, then hot and hasty
in pursuing the knowledge of the divine essence.

It is sufficient for us, that we may enter into the Temple and Church of God,
and there behold his mercy and goodness, yea his power and justice toward the
wicked: what need we be so presumptuous, as with the me^e of Bethsemes, to look
into the a^ke of the Lord, 1. Sam. 6. 19. or to enter into the holy of holiest?
or how dare we set either foot or face into that place, which the Lord has
enclosed with glory, and made several for his own abode, and there to behold,
or rather to outface the Majesty of God, sitting in his Cherubin chair of
estate, the which the Angels themselves neither can not yet dare behold, and
therefore with their wings cover their faces, least that they seeing it, should
be confounded, as overwhelmed with the greatness of his glory? And therefore
for this m^tter, I must desire you to hold me excused, if I do not take upon me
to declare unto you the essence of God, the knowledge whereof I am sure it is
impossible to attain, and I doubt whether it be lawful to attempt.


Gent. You put me into a strange maze and quandary, in that you would ma^e me
believe, that I had committed some heinous offense in desiring to comprehend the
infinite, and know the secret essence of God. But by your patience a little: is
it now become a fault to seek the knowledge of God, in the knowledge and
contemplation of whom not only the scripture and (as I have heard) all divines
with one assent, but even Plato an heathen Philosopher, although somewhat
smelling of the truth of religion, do make our whole happiness to consist? the
infiniteness of the nature of God does hinder the full comprehension, but not
the true knowledge of it self to be in the mind of man: the sight of the eye,
no not the whole eye, is able to contain the body of the Sun, and yet by it,
we do plainly behold, and truly know the Sun, Moon, and Stars, yea the
whole heaven. What though it be not lawful, evher to make any Image, or to
imagine any similitude of God? yet we may consider of the nature of God, by
co^paring it to the nature of the creature, though there be never so great
inequality betwixt them. Yea the infiniteness of Gods nature, is most plainly
seen, when it is compared to a finite and mean creature, as we know that
the cheerful lightsomnesse, and fairness of white, is best perceived, when
a dark and sad back is laid by it: that the hugeness of an Eliphant is most
admired, when we think of he smalnesse of a fly: and a crooked building is
best known by the straight line. The whole body and compass of the sun and
moon may be beheld in a little dishfull of wate^, and why not God in his
creatures, especially in those which he has made according to his own image,
and that as I am persuaded, for this very end and purpose? But although the
nature of god might be by some means in some measure conceived and known, yet
you doubt of the lawfulness of the attempt: but your doubting is without
cause, or rather as I am persuaded, without truth, and in show only. The
propitiatory is now removed, and the Arc uncovered, so that we may be bold
to look into it: the veil of the Temple is rent a sunder, yea quite broken
down, and therefore we need not any longer stand aloof, but may with
confidence enter into the holy place, and approach unto the throne of grace. It
is not with God as it is with mortal and sinful men, who of set purpose, and
in good policy do (in many cases) withdraw themselves from the sight and
view of others, least that by bewraying their infirmities, they should bring
their persons into contempt: but God is not ashamed of himself, neither afraid
of being known, seen and censured. Men, the further they are off from us, the
greater they seem, and the less they are known, the more they are esteemed:
the more familia^ly that they are acquainted, the more likely to be contemned:
but it is not so with God, who the more he is known, the more he is admired,
the nearer he approaches to us, the more he amazeth and astonieth with his
^urpassing glory and majesty: so that he may not unfitly be compared to the
cloud, which the Prophet Elias, or rather God himself raised out of the sea,
1. King. 18. 14. which a far off seemed no bigger then the palm of a man's
hand, but when it came near, it covered the whole face of heaven. I confess
indeed, that the essence of God cannot be fully comprehended by any creature,
and that if God should shine upon us with the bright beams of his glory, we
could not but be confounded, as we see our eyes to be dazeled, and our sight
dimmed by gazing on the bright shining sun. For this, the word of God is
plain, Exodus 33. 20. where God says to Moses, My face, that is, my full
glory and majesty, no man can see and live, but as for my hinder parts, that
is, some part or shadow of my glory, that I will show unto thee. Yet the does
not prove, that this great and greedy, yea insatiable desire, which this holy
man of God had, of seeing and knowing still more and more of God, yea after
that God had many ways revealed himself more fully to Moses, then ever he
had done, or did since to any man living, should be condemned as rash and
pre^umptuous, which rather is to be commended and imitated of us, by having a
most earnest care and desire to know so much of Gods essence as may be known,
yea much more, and even the whole nature of God, if so it stood with his good
pleasure. For this is the only happiness which we aspire unto, and hope for
in the life to tome, that whereas now we see God but darkly in part, and as it
were his image in a glass, the^, we shall see him face to face, 1. Cor. 13.
that is, in far more ample manner then now we do, although not so fully and
amply as he is indeed, unto the which absolute perfection of the knowledge of
Gods essence, I do easily grant you, that neither the Saints nor the Angels
in heaven can possibly attain. And therefore, seeing that my request is no
other, then both I may well and lawfully make, and you easily perform, I pray
you do not shift me off with this excuse, which I am persuaded you made,
thinking as it is indeed, that you Scholars ^an by your logic and
schoole-tricks, perswadevs simple people to think what you list, and make us
believe that, as the proverb is. The moon is made of green cheese: but rather
at my request take in hand the explication of this point, which of all other is
most needful to be known, and most worthy to be sought out with all care
and diligence, as being that whereunto all our knowledge, yea our whole life
is to be referred.


Sch. I am glad sir, that I have by this means ferreted you out of this deep
dissimulation, wheerin you have hitherto so closely lurked: although indeed I
did think so much, when I first heard you speak, and did suspect you to be
the man, who^ now I find you to be. I am persuaded, that you who are so
cunning in craving, could if you list be as bountiful in giving: but seeing
the bargain is made, it is now no going back: neither will I look back unto
the speech which you have made of the lawfulness of attempting, and the
possibility of attaining the knowledge of Gods nature in some sort: It was
true, and therefore cannot be confuted, yet was full and sufficient, and
therefore need not be enlarged. You do well to confess that the infinite
essence of god cannot be fully comprehended, no not by the Angels in heaven,
and yet that it may in some sort be known even by men here on earth. For even
as when a traveler desirous to see strange countries and fashions, arriueth
in some coast town of any foreign kingdom, he may even there gather some
conjectures, and get some knowledge of the condition, state and power of that
Prince: but when he comes to the chief and mother-citie of the land, where
the kings Court is kept, and where there is greatest concourse of people,
abundance of wealth, and store of all things, serving either for the necessity
and use of war, or the pl^^sure of peace, then he says thus unto himself:
Surely now I see and know the very state and power of this Prince, as well as
I do that man, whose face I do fully and steadfastly behold: and yet all this
while, he neither is, nor can be admitted to see the very person of the
Prince. Even so it fares with us in respect of nod: for here on earth, as it
were in Dan or Bersheba, or some other border-town of the land of Promise, the
happy kingdom of Chanaan, we have a glimmering of the king. But when we
come to the heavenly Jerusalem, the City of the great king, there we see a
thousand times mote then we did before, and yet all that we see, is but the
riches, power, and glory of the king: as for his person and very essence,
that is kept secret, and shut up in his privy chamber, or closet, into the
which none may or can enter, for none but god knows God, 1. Tim. 6. 16. the
king of kings, who only has immortality and dwells in light, that none can
have access unto, whom never man saw, neither can see: yet although the nature
of god be unsearchable, and as a bottomless gulf, into the midst whereof
whosoever plungeth himself, in hope of sounding the depth of it, will without
question be soon swallowed up by it, and confounded in all his imaginations yea
though he were endued with the wit of all the men and Angels in the world: yet
I confess, that as you say, we may safely wade and swim in the shallowe
brinke of this great Ocean: having the one hand on the shore or bank, as a
sure anchor to hold us fast, that we be not carried too far into it, by the
violent blastes of presumption and curiosity: and the other in the water,
wherewith to move our minds up and down, in a sober and modest contemplation
of it.


Sect. 2.
LEt us therefore let loose into this deep and bottomless sea of the nature
of God, not in any fond hope of attaining the perfect knowledge of it, yet
trusting in God, that we shall not loose our labor, and fish all night without
catching any thing, (as on the other side, it were madness to think of
catching all the fish in the sea) but rather return to land with our vessels
not empty, although not so full lade, that they be ready to sink, by reason
of the heaviness of their burden. The knowledge (therefore) of the the
natures of things, is attained two ways, to wit, by sense, and by imagination:
sense apprehends the qualities of things sensible, by the which the mind is
led to thenature and substance of the thing. But as for those things which are
not sensible, we must suppose and imagine the^ to be thus and thus, and so
coin in our minds, a form and fantastical idea of them, resembling them to
something, which we have sometime apprehended by sense, and especially to that
which is likest, and comes nearest unto them.

Soh. That to the searching out, and the knowing of the nature of any
insencible thing, these three things belong and must concur. First, the
observation of the effects or actions proceeding from it, the which being
sensible, will give us some light to know the nature of the thing it self,
from the which they did proceed, as we see the nature of the father to appear
in the son, of the root in the fruit, and of the fountain in the streams
issuing from it. Secondly, when as by this and whatsoever other means we have,
we have gotten some knowledge of the nature of it, and to what kind of things
it i^ to be referred, we must then as it were, coming nearer to the purpose,
and bringing forth into act the conceit of the mind, resemble it to that
thing, the which of all other things in the world comes nearest, and is
likest unto it. Yet we have not attained to that which we desire, for we have
not the thing it self, but only a pattern or example, a likeness or
resemblance of it: and therefore in the third and last place, we must add to
this example or pattern, that which is wanting: squaring it in all respects to
the idea and conceit which we first had of the nature of the thing. For
example, a man hearing much speech of ye Angels, would gladly know, what, and of
what nature and essence they are: to the effecting whereof, he is desirous to
see, hear or feel one of them, hoping by thi^ means to know what they are,
as he uses to be by his senses taught the nature of other things. But in the
trial he finds, there can no good be done by this means, the Angel^ being
spiritual and insensible creatures, and that therefore he must go some other
way to work, and search out their nature, by the eyes not of his body, but of
his mind, and guess at their natures, by that which he has heard and read of
their effects, functions and actions. As touching the which, he finds in
scripture that they are Gods servants, continually attending his pleasure, and
praising him, and readily performing whatsoever he commands. Whereupon he
infers, surely the Angels live, for they move: and they are not brute
beasts, but reasonable creatures: yea, not simple idiots, but of great
understanding and wisdom, without the which they could never dispatch those
affairs aright, about the which God imployeth them: and further, that they are
not weaklings, but of great strength, for otherwise one of them could not have
destroyed in one night, an hundredth fourscore and five thousand of the
Assyrians, as we read 2. Ki. 19. 35. and lastly, that they are not base or
contemtible, but most glorious creatures, fit to stand and serve in the
presence of God. Thus he conceiving and imagining them, to be most mighty,
wise, and glorious creatures, to what thing in the world can he resemble them
more fitly, then to the most excellent men in the world, endued with the
greatest measure of power, glory, authority, knowledge and wisdom?

Now we are come as near them as we can in any one thing, for there is
nothing more like to an Angel, then is an excellent man, whereof it comes,
that the name of an Angel, is often given to men: yet we have not attained our
purpose, for there is yet great difference and odds betwixt them, therefore to
make them even, we must take from this excellent man, this gross body of clay
and earth, and give unto him a pure and spiritual body, void of all mixture of
elements and moisture, the which debaseth and keeps him down beneathe the
Angels, who being not clogged and pressed down with such heavy lumppes of
clay, nor having their clear understandings dimmed with soggie mystes of
moisture, excel him far in nimblenesse, quickness of wit, and in all other
respects. But what need we suppose this Angelical man, whom we have truly
existing? for we know that in heaven the bodies of the Saints shall be pure
and spiritual, free from all heavy lumpishnesse: yet the faithful being
glorified, shall not become Angels, but still be men, for neither in subtilitie
of body, nor yet in excellency of inward gifts, shall they be made equal to
the Angels.

Thus we have with much ado, make the humane and the Angelical nature meet
together, and used the one as a Glass, to represent and make known the other
unto us.

Now then to apply all this to our purpose, for the finding out of Gods nature,
we must do these three things: first, we must get an idea, or conceit of it
into our minds, by searching what manner of thing God is, and so to what kind
his nature does belong, and is to be referred: in the second place, we must
get a pattern, example, or resemblance of it in some thing really existing:
and lastly, we must by adding and detracting, make them even or equal. For the
first, seeing that the nature of God cannot be known, either by any
essential causes or by sensible qualities, we must imagine it by the effects,
actions and works, whether they be ordinary, or extraordinary: Romans 1. 20.
The invisible things of God, that is, his eternal power and Godhead, are seen
by the creation of the world, being considered in his works. For so it has
pleased God (to the end he might make himself known to man, and man happy by
knowing him) after a sort to take unto this his invisible and insensible
nature, this visible and sensible shape, and to cover himself with the
creatures, as with a garment, that so he might discover and reveal his hidden
nature to man, as we know, that both he himself, as also his Angels, have
showed themselves to men, by putting on the nature and shape of man. Not that
we imagine, as some have done, that God is the soul or life of the world, and
the world the body of God: for God is not in the creatures, either as their
matter, or as their form, but only is to them the efficient: but because the
creatures make Gods invisible nature to be known, therefore we call them, the
shape or form of God. For by this means it is brought to pass, that although
God Iehoua, as he existeth in himself, and as he did exist before the
creation, be invisible, yet God the Creator of heaven and earth, is as visible,
as are the Stars by night, or the Sun at midday in the heaven, and as
palpable, as is the gross earth whereon we tread: as it is, Act. 17. 27. God
has made the world, that in it men might seek him, yea grope after him and
feel him. Thus both the creatures, and also the extraordinary works of God,
done both within and also without the Church, and recorded both in holy
Scripture, as also in other true Records and. Histories, teach us what God is:
yea thus they preach to the whole world, as touching God their maker and
Author, that he is a living and working, yea a mighty and wise nature,
excellent, yea infinite in all goodness: to wit, in knowledge and wisdom, in
truth and justice, in love and mercy, in power and strength, in glory and
majesty. Thus having conceived in our minds an idea or imagination of Gods
nature, we are in the next place, to bring it forth into the world, by getting
an example or resemblance of it, in some thing not unlike unto it. But against
this pattern or resemblance it will be objected (the which you touched
before) that both it is impossible to find any thing in the world, that is
like to God, or fit to be a resemblance, and also, that if there could any such
thing be found, yet it were Idolatry, to resemble God to any creature.
Whereunto we answer, first to the former part of the objection, that although
the unlikeness to God, be far greater in the creatures, then the likeness,
yet that there is no creature, which is not more or less in one respect or
other, like unto him: for whatsoever is good, commendable, or excellent in any
creature (as all the creatures are good, yea every one of them endued with a
proper and peculiar goodness) that comes from God, who is the fountain of
all goodness, and makes the creature to be like to God. So then if the
meanest and basest creatures have some likeness to God, without doubt the
excellent creatures cannot but have a great likeness and resemblance unto him:
the which we know, that GOD himself in the Scripture does grant unto them,
calling man his own similitude, God made man in the likeness of GOD. Genes.
5. 1. Yea, although there were no manner of likeness or resemblance betwixt
GOD and the creatures, but rather all contrariety and flat repugnancie, yet
they might profitably be used for the illustration of his nature, as we know
that all contraries do argue and illustrate each other. The which way of
teaching, although it be not the readiest to attain the truth: for that
doctrine and knowledge are positive not privative, consisting not in the
negation of that which is not, or is not true, but in the affirmation of that,
which does truly and really exist, yet it is always an help, and sometimes
the only means.

To the other part of the objection, we answer, confessing that it were
flat Idolatry, and utterly unlawful, to make or suppose God to be simply like
or equal to any creature, for that were to pull him down from his Throne of
majesty, and to place him among the creatures: yet affirming it to be very
lawful, to resemble him to any creature, the difference which is betwixt them,
being observed and mentioned. Thus Act. 17. 29. the Apostle Paul resembles the
divine nature to the humane, proouing against the Idolatrons Athenians, that
God is not like to those stocks and stones, wherein the heathen did worship him,
because he is like unto man, who is of a contrary nature to senseless things.
We men (says he) being the kind of God, it cannot be, that God being like unto
us, that he should be like to silver, gold, or to any senseless thing: where
tho he make these two natures of God and man like to each other, yet he makes
them not equal, but puts the difference, in that he makes man to come and
flow from God, as a little arm or creek of the sea, from the great Ocean.
Yea thus God has throughout the whole Scripture revealed himself unto us in
the form and shape of a man, ascribing to himself the parts of his body, as
his eyes and ears, his hands and feet, yea all the faculties, affections and
passions of his mind and will, and that both severally, sometimes one and
sometimes an other, and also al together, assuming to himself, the whole shape
and form of a man, as namely, Ezech. 1. 26. upon the similitude of the Throne,
there was as it were a similitude of a man upon it: whereof is said, Verse. 26.
This was the appearance of the similitude of the glory of the Lord: and when I
saw it, I fell upon my face: so Dan. 7. 9. I beheld till the thrones were set,
and the ancient of days did sit, whose garment was white as snow, and the
hair of his head like the pure woll. Likewise, Es. 6. 1. the Prophet says: I
saw the Lord sitting upon a high throne. By the which sitting upon a Throne,
although signifying royal glory and majesty, God does not exalt or advance,
but rather debase himself, and that for our sakes, that we by this means
might get some conceit and knowledge of him into our minds: yet if we should
continue and rest in these forms, without adding the difference unto them, we
should not help, but hurt and hinder our selves, and get not the knowledge,
but the ignorance of God.


Sect. 3.
NOw let us go on, and see what creature in all the world is to be accounted
likest unto God, and fittest to resemble his nature unto us, as we gathered it
to be by the consideration of his works. The question is not hard to be
answered: for this being taken for granted, that God having made al things, is
far more excellent then any or all of them, it will follow, that that creature,
which of all other, is most excellent, is the likest, and comes nearest to
the nature of God, and does more fitly resemble him, then any of the other: as
we know that among men, not any of the rascal sort, but some great Noble man
or Prince of the blood, is most fit, in the absence or nonage of the king, to
hold his place, and represent his person. For although every creature be good
in his own kind, as (we read in Genes. 1. 31.) yet look how many diverse
kinds of creatures there are, so many diverse degrees of goodness there are,
the highest whereof are to be accounted excellent, as we see all the stars
to be bright and glorious, yet the sun, moon, and some other, to be the most
excellent in light and glory; as they were in the beginning, called by God
himself by the name of great lights. Thus no man will deny but a common
peeble stone, is better then a raw lump of clay, or a handful of earth: that
a tree is more glorious then a stone, that a living beast excels a tree,
that a reasonable man is better the^ a brute beast, an Angel then a man, and
an Archangell then one of lower degree: and so will any man consesse that God,
whose infinite knowledge and wisdom, appears in the creation of the world,
is not to be placed among the senseless and brutish creatures, but to be
referred to the kind of reasonable things. And so indeed throughout the whole
scripture, we see that God is content to take a place among his reasonable
creatures, to be accounted to be of their nature and kind, as has been showed
out of Act. 17. 26. to call them, to wit, both men and Angels, his image and
simililtude, and in that respect, his offspring, sons and children, yea to
appear and show himself, in the form and shape, sometimes of the one, and
sometimes of ye other. But to come as near the mark, we aim at, as we can,
although both the humane and the angelical nature, be notable images,
similitudes, and resemblances of God, yet as the Angels are far more
excellent then men, so they are (in themselves) far more fit tipes and
examples of the divine nature, then men are, for that they have many properties
of the divine nature which man wants. For man is mortal and corruptible, but
both the Angels and God are immortal and incorruptible: he consists of a
medley of contrary qualities, continually iarting and fighting together, until
at length one destroy another: but their nature and substance is uniform, not
wasting it self, or wearing away, but steadfast permanent, and the same for
ever: he is visible, yea gross and palpable, but they are invisible,
insensible, subtle, pure and spiritual: he has little strength with much
weakness, they have great power and might without impotencie or infirmity:
he has knowledge with ignorance: truth with error: wisdom, with folly: will
with perverseness and obstinacy: affection with passion and perturbation,
love with lust: abundance with many wants, contentment with complaint: day with
night: joy with sorrow: glory with shame: and happiness with misery: but
they are perfectly wise, virtuous, mighty, glorious and happy.

Yea, by this excellency above man, the Angelical nature is proved (against
those who will not believe the word of God, unless their own senses say amen)
to exist as a mean betwixt man and god, although far nearer the lower, then
the upper extreme. For if there were no nature existing betwixt God and man,
the distance and downfall would be greater then is meet, in respect of that
dependence and cohaerence, which should be betwixt the creature and the
creator, closely combined together without any such wide and abrupt gappe, in
order and due proportion. The which wide gap betwixt God and man, the angelical
nature does fill up, participating somewhat of each nature, as it were hanging
and houering in the middle region betwixt heaven and earth, having had a
beginning with man, and n^w being immortal with God: void of all mixture as
is God, and yet consisting of matter and form, as does man: subsisting in some
matter, subject and substance as does man, yet being incorporeal as is God:
able in a moment to be any where, as God always is every where, yet local,
and circumscribed by place as is a man: being of wonderful capacity and
knowledge, as is God, yet ignorant of some things, (as namely of the essence of
God) as is man: and in one word, being every way finit as is man, yet perfect
in all respects as is God. Thus we have by the degrees of the creatures, as it
were by the stairs and steps of Jacobs ladder, climbed up to heaven, and
leaving men with the rest of the earthly creatures, groueling here in the dust
below, by the wings of Angels soared aloft to the divine nature, or rather (to
speak more properly) toward it. Neither is it possible for us to go any
higher, or to find more of God in any thing, then we have already found in
the angelical nature. Whereupon our Savior Christ doubts not to put on Gods
back, this glorious robe of the angelical naure, having amongst all the forms
and shapes in the world, none more excellent wherewith to inuest him, and
therefore he says, Ioh 4. 24. God is a spirit, as he is elsewhere in scripture
called an Angel, and an Archangell. But this saying is warely to be taken, and
wisely understood, least that in stead of true doctrine, we gather out of it a
blasphemous heresy. For in truth, God is no more a spirit, or an angel, (the
which two words, are in divinity to be accounted of the same signification and
compass) then he is a soul or a body: what then may you say, is the
signification of these words? Surely, they are not positive, but privative:
they show not what God is, but what he is not, namely, that he is not a
formal, visible, and sensible body. For so they contain in them, a
refutation of that gross opinion of the carnal and hypocritical Jews, who
thought that an outward and bodily worship, void of the spiritual sincerity
of the heart, would well enough fit and please God: as if a man having to deal
with those heathenish idolators, that think brute beasts or senseless
stocks to be Gods, should say unto them, you are foully deceived in this
point, for God is not a dead stock, or a brute beast, but rather to be
resembled to a living man. So then, the meaning of Christ's words is this, God
although in truth he be not a spirit or an angel, yet because that nature
comes nearer him, and does more resemble him then any other, therefore he
may fitly for your capacity be so called.

Sect. 4.
YOu remember I doubt not, that it was said, that there are three things
required to the searching out of Gods nature: first, a conceit of it in the
mind, gathered by the effects of it: secondly a real example or pattern,
wherein that conceit does exist, and may be seen: and thirdly, the difference
betwixt the conceit and the example the one being in abstracto, the other in
concreto: the one existing only in the imagination of the mind, the other in
some creature and real subject. The two first we have already gotten, the
one out of the creatures, which have taught us the nature of God in general,
the other we have found in the angels, who are a lively resemblance of the said
divine nature: the third remains, to wit, the difference betwixt the pattern
and the thing it self. For although we have already ascended, and come to the
highest step of Jacobs ladder, for that it is impossible to find any more of
the divine essence in any creature, then we have already seen in the
angelical nature, yet we are not at our iourneyes end, nor yet half way:
for although there be as great difference betwixt Angels and men, as there is
distance betwixt the heaven and the earth, yet there is ten times, yea ten
thousand times greater odds betwixt the Angels and God, and the space is
infinitely greater from the heaven of the Angels and saints, to the heaven of
heavens, where God dwells. And therefore we are now in the last place, to
seek out the difference, which exalts the nature of God thus far, or
rather thus infinitely above the Angels: this is the very true essential form
of God, the which if it could be once named, the matter were at an end, the
case clear, and much labor might be saved, which must be spent, or rather most
profitably and happily bestowed, in gessing, coniecturing, and imagining that,
by many properties, attributes, actions, and effects, which by this means
might be fully known all at once. But it is not the will of God, neither were
it profitable for us, that so inestimable a jewel should be so easily gotten:
who would esteem the most precious pearls, if so be that they lay in the
streets for the vptaking? and if the nature of God were once fully known, how
could it afterward be so earnestly sought and desired as is m^ete? Yet we
are not to think that this impossibility of finding out the true form of
God, comes of God, as making dainty and dangerous of the knowledge of his
nature, to make us eager and earnest in desiring to know it, although i^ be
true that has been said, that it is better to have our appetite whetted and
sharpened, by the hardness and impossibility of attaining it, then our
stomachs cloyed with the full fruition of it: neither are we to think that God
does envy and grudge us so great a good, and so sweet a pleasure, or that in
policy he keeps himself close, not daring to show himself for fear of
being censured or contemned by us: But this comes of the shallowness of our
brains, and the the weakness of out capacity, the which making it impossible
for us to conceive it, makes it impossible for God to reveal it.

Gent. I was in good hope to have heard at the next word, the very true
essential form of God declared, and indeed that had been worth the hearing:
but now I perceive you will reserve that for another time, or rather give it
over for ever: wherein you deal wisely in my mind, for what folly were it for
a man to beat his brains in pursuing that, which it were more then madness
once to hope to attain. But I pray you, how will you do, to make your proud
Lucifer a God.


Sch. We will do as we may sir: and if all should fail, I hope that you will
help at a dead lift, according to your promise: but to proceed. Seeing that
the true form of gods nature cannot be had, we must take in stead of it, some
essential property flowing from the form, the which will make those things
which are attributed to God, differ from the same things as they are in the
Angels. For example, knowledge, wisdom, might and majesty, have place both
in God, and also in the Angels, yet they are not alike in both: for in the
Angels they are, although great and perfect, yet finit, but in god they are
absolute and infinite. So then, if we add this difference of infiniteness to
the Angelical nature, there will come forth a divine nature, which may not
unfitly be described an angelical nature every way infinite: and so God be
defined an infinite Angel, as an Angel may be said to be a spiritual man. For
as surpassing excellency does distinguish the Angelical nature from the
humane (for although they be both of one kind, to wit, reasonable, endued
with wit, knowledge, wisdom, and will, yet they differ, in that the
Angelical nature has all these in far greater measur^ then has the humane)
in like manner infiniteness does distinguish the divine nature from the
angelical, for they both being reasonable or understanding natures, endued
with wit and will, and with all things belonging there unto, differ in this
respect, that the one is excellent in understanding, knowledge, wisdom, will,
power, purity, and glory, but the other is infinite in all these respects: the
one has all these things in an excellent measure, the other has them without
measure: the one has much, the other has all. And thus by gathering the
nature of God out of his works and word, by finding out a pattern of it in
the Angelical nature, and lastly, by adding unto this angelical nature that
wherein it comes short of God, we have in some sort made up the divine
nature, or rather endeavored to do that, which it is impossible to perform:
for in this case, the least glimse of the truth is to be esteemed knowledge.


Sect. 5.
Gent. I Thank you for this pains which you have taken, in unfolding this
deep and dark point of religion, the ground of all the rest: Indeed I
confess, that as he that goes up to the top of the highest mountain in
the world, may far better see and consider the whole course and order of the
stars and heavens, then he that lies in the low valley, having his sight
hindered by trees, hills, clouds, and other impediments: so he that has his
cogitations fixed on the celestial Angels, the highest and excellentest of all
creatures, may in them behold the divine nature more clearly, then he that
looks only upon man, and other earthly creatures, in whom, although there
be some resemblance of God, yet the grossness, corruption, and mortality of
their bodies, being between our sight and the image of God in them, does
hinder us from the clear and plain beholding of it. Yet for so much as few
can clime up to the top of this high hill, for that few off us that are
unlearned, are so well acquainted with the angelical nature, as to have any
certain idea or notion of it settled in our minds, I doubt that his
demonstration of the divine nature by the angelical, which indeed, and to
those that are learned, is the most fit and direct that can be imagined, will
to us (who for the most part either doubt whether there be any such thing as
an Angel in the world, or if we believe the scripture, telling us that there
are such spiritual creatures, yet we know no further of them, the^ as we have
seen them painted on signs with a pair of wings) will seem obscurum per
obscurum, if not per obscurius: for that it will be as hard for the^ to suppose
what an Angel is, as what God is. And therefore me thinks I could wish, that
the divine nature could be declared and shadowed out unto us, by some other
nature better known and more familiar unto us. Sch. It were dangerous, as that
which might be an occasion of idolatry unto us, to take so great liberty in
imagining the nature of God, as to resemble him to any visible thing: neither
were it agreeable to the nature of God, who is invisible: and we know, that of
all bodily creatures, there is none by nature invisible, save only the air.
And surely if we must needs in respect of the vulgar capacity, or rather
dullness and want of understanding have some familiar and easy example and
resemblance of the divine nature, in my mind there is no elementarie creature
so fit for this purpose, as is this, which we have light on. For first, as no
man doubts but that this element of ye air does truly and substantially
exist, although it cannot possibly be seen, no more are we to doubt, but that
God does most certainly exist, al though he cannot possibly be visibly seen.
Thus does Christ Ioh. 3. 8. by the inuisibilitie of the wind, teach Nicodemus
the secrecy of the spirit of God.

The wind blows whither it lists, thou hear the sound of it, but know
not whence it comes, nor whither it goes: even so is every one that is borne
of the spirit, or so secret is the operation of Gods spirit in reneuing men.
And without question, it is the safer and the better course, whenever we
think of God, and therefore must of necessity coin in our minds some idea or
form of him, to resemble him to this invisible body, then to any beast or
man, to the sun, moon, stars, or any other visible creature. Again, this
element does, (the which neither Angel, man, beast, nor any other creature
can) very notably represent unto us the vbiquitie of God? for it is every
where, in every open place and secret corner, in the town, in the fields, and
in the widest deserts: in the bowels of the earth, and in the bottom of the
sea: within and without us, yea inseparably closing and compassing us about. So
that if we do but stretch this element up to the heavens, supposing them to be
made of this matter, (as sure the matter of the^ is not much unlike, neither
can we more probably compare it to any thing, then to a pure and firm kind of
air) and so in imagination above the highest heavens (although in truth, there
be there neither air, body, nor place) we shall truly and plainly conceive of
the vbiquitie of god. A point of doctrine very needneedfull to be plainly
declared and truly learned, for that most men do greatly and in truth very
grossly err in it, by tying god to one certain place, and shutting him up in
heaven, as it were a Be in a Box, for that the Scripture does often assign
unto him that place: not meaning that he in essence is there, more the^ in this
inferior world, but that there his glory and majesty do mote clearly shine*
From this foul error, another far worse does spring, for by this means
they exclude both God and his providence out of the world, and cast off all
fear ^offending him, whom they think to be fa^^ ^^sent, and by the walls,
doors, and windows of their closets and chambers, kept from seeing or knowing
their doings: whereas on the other side, if they were persuaded of his
vbiquitie and presence in all places, that he does immediately compass them
about, as does the air, and sits as closely to them, as their shirts do to
their backs: yea that he has place even in their minds and hearts, as
certainly as they do continually draw the air into their brains, and bodies,
it could not be but that they should continually stand in awe of him.

So then, (to let pass without any enlarging,) diverse other respects, in the
which this Element does not unfitly represent unto us some properties and
attributes of the divine nature, as that it is most mighty, making the very
earth to shake, and rocking it too and fro like a little child in a cradle,
that it is most subtle, pearcing into every place, and passing through the
least crack and narrowest crannie or chinke: that it is the beginning of
things, if we think as some Philosophers have done, that it is the first
matter whereof being thickened and compacted together, the water and other
things were made: that it is the preserver of our life, for that without it we
cannot continue any space, but do presently perish: so that we may truly say of
it, as the Apostle says of the divine nature, Act. 17. 28. In it we live, we
move, and have our being. But to let these things pass thus briefly* if we
suppose a thousand worlds one above another, all of them replenished, with thi^
primarie, pure, simple, subtle, pearching, invisible, yea insensible, (for of
it self, not affected or distempered by any accidental quality, it is
neither seen, heard, tasted, smelt, nor felt) this mighty, large, and
universal creature, we shall have a pretty pattern and resemblance of the
infiniteness, vbiquitie, inuisibilitie, pure simplicity, and pearcing
subtlety of the divine nature: for as I have often told you, we do not make
any comparison between this or any other creature, and God the Creator, but
only a resemblance, which may be, where there is no show of equality. As in
this instance the air is to our sense and capacity, and in respect of other
creatures, subtle, simple, pearching, insensible, mighty, large, and
universal: but in comparison of the divine nature, it is more gross,
confused, blunt, palpable, weak, narrow, and wanting, then can be said. And
therefore in resembling God in word or in imagination, either to Angels, or to
the air, we must remember to add the difference, for otherwise we commit
gross and heinous idolatry. For there is no creature in the world, which
howsoever it be perfect in the own nature, yet if it be used as a resemblance
of God, will not be found wanting in many respects. Man is indeed the image of
God, yet he is too little and weak, to fill his chair of estate, yea indeed
too gross for that purpose, how soever it has pleased Gnd sometimes to
reveal himself to Moses, Daniell, Esaias, Exechiell, and other of his Prophets,
in the likeness of a man, for some respect and signification. The Angels are
not little, weak, and gross as man is, yet before we can make them a fit type
of God, me must stretch them far beyond their own compass, even throughout
the whole world. The air is large and universal, but it wants life, sense,
and an internal beginning of motion: howsoever it move as nimbly as if it had
a thousand lives: annd therefore to make it a fit resemblance of God, we must
inspire it with life, or rather (if we think that life is not properly
attributed to God) with reason and understanding, the which without question
does most properly and essentially belong to God. And so we may for the weak
capacity of the unlearned, describe God, supposing him to be a reasonable
element of air, as before to the understanding of the learned, we made him to
be an infinite Angel. Thus to make up and finish this pattern and picture of
God, we are constrained to imitate Apelles that famous Painter, who going about
and enterprising by the curiosity of his art and cunning, to counterfaite, yea
to surpass the perfection of natural beauty, would not insist in any one
particular, but out of diverse persons, made choice of that, which in each one
of them seemed most excellent: taking from one the complexion and color of
the eye and hair, from an other the form and straightness of the nose: from
the third the breadth and largeness of the forehead, and so forth, in all the
other parts of the visage, until at length, with much ado, he got together
into one face or countenance an exquisit and absolute, idea of beauty. In like
manner we are not to think that any one creature is able to afford sufficient
matter, whereof to make this infinite Image, that does fill both heaven and
earth, or that the shop of any creature (how excellent so ever) has sufficient
variety of colors, wherewith to set it forth, as the dignity of it does
require: it is well, if that all the perfections of all the creatures in the
world, brought together into one picture, do make but a reasonable resemblance
of him.


Gent. Indeed, I must needs confess, that you have now fitted me a penney
worth, and served me in my kind: and as I cannot truly call my self either
learned or altogithe unlearned (for I went long to the Grammar school and I
was a year or two at the University, before I went to the Innes of Court) but
rather a mungrell betwixt both, so now I may choose, of whether side and sect I
wll be: and so worship, either the air with the common people, or with the
learned your asspiring Lucifer, climbing up to the throne of god. Yet by your
patience, as touching your ayerie god, although I confess that element to be
fitter then any other of these elementarie bodies, yet me thinks, ye the
element of the fire would have served your turn better: considering that it is
both far larger, as being higher, as also far more subtle and simple, more
piercing and forceable, then is the misty and fogayre, as all men know and
confess. Neither can you take exception against the visibilitie of it, as you
make it very dangerous, and a great occasion of Idolatry, to resemble God to
any visible thing: for although our fire here below, being composed of all the
other elements, be visible and sensible, yet the element of fire as it is in
the proper place and sphere, we see to be invisible.


Sch. The same reason that would not suffer you to rest contented in the
similitude of the Angels, because as you say truly, their nature is greatly
doubted of among the ignorant people, and in a manner unknown to the wisest,
and therefore, it being dark and obscure in it self, is not fit to give light
to any other thing: so I say of your fiery element, that although the
Philosophers prove by good reasons, that howsoever it wete never seen, yet
there is some such thing truly existing: for that otherwise there cannot be
that perfect quaternitie and correspondency of primarie qualities, which is
needful in the mixture of these inferior bodies: yet for as much as it is not
so certain, but that some who thought themselves to be Philosophers, have
doubted of it, and much more the common people, who do not weigh reasons, nor
admit any other evidences for the proof of the true and lawful tytles of
assertions, save only their own senses, I thought, that I should fit your
humor, and fulfill your request: which was, to have a plain and popular
demonstration of the nature of God, not so well by this unknown and insensible
element of fire, as with that other of the air, with the which, as with a
daily companion and friend, that will not be kept out a doors, nor yet out from
our hearts, we are so familiarly and so entirely acquainted.


Sect. 6.
THere I confess, you have answered me to the full, and given me as good as I
brought: yet seeing I have begun to pick a quarrel with these discourses and
definitions of the divine nature, so little learning as I have, I doubt not but
that I could find a fault in them, that you should not wipe away so easily as
you have done this, but I dare not be so bold with you.

Sch. I will be so far from thinking it boldness, that I shall think my self
much beholden to you for so doing: yea it is a thing which both I may and do
challenge of you, and you are bound by promise to perform: for I did not take
upon me to deliver the whole truth of this doctrine as it were to speak
undoubted oracles, but rather in hope that by our mutual helping one another,
where either of us should chaunc^ to go astray from the truth, to ^ifte out
some part of the truth of this unsearchable mystery by our familiar reasoning
too and fro of matters: and therefore, I can be well content, to be
admonished, where I go astray.


Gent. Then to tell you plainly, me thinks that although these definitions
which you bring, may have in them some substance of truth, and also some
plausible show of popular facility, which I will not deny, yet they have no
Art in the world in them, and for that cause are not only not curious, but
even confused and obscure, and want that euidencie, which you seemed in framing
them wholly to affect.

I have heard and read many discourses of this matter, yet never knew I any
take such a course, as to define one thing by another, and to inmble up into
one definition, things of diverse natures, as you do in defining god, to be an
infinite Angel, or a reasonable air: for thus you make a mo^ster of him, as it
were an Hermaphrodite, half of one nature, and half of another, half
reasonable, and half unreasonable. You deal with me as men do with natural
fools, when they cannot make them conceive that three and four make seven,
but by a mathematical demonstration, setting seven leaven horse loanes one
upon another: so you heap up diverse particulars in stead of one general. It
had been a better course, if according to the old and ordinary manner of
handling and defining, in the first place you had sought out the general kind
or nature: (which you in the Schooler call the Genus in definition) to the
which the divine nature does belong, and is to be reserred, and the^ to have
added either the proper form, or (if that could not be found, as I think that
in this case it cannot) some formal proopertie, pointing as it were with the
finger at the unknown form. As in this example, you have found out of Act.
17. 29. the Genus or kind of God, to wit, that he is of the same kind and
nature that man is, in respect not of his body, but of his soul: and indeed
so he is, God is of a reasonable nature, for ^ee has knowledge, wisdom, and
will, (...) which cannot have place but in a reaso^able nature.

Now thisis but the genus of the definition, for both men and Angels are
reasonable natures, and therefore you must add the difference, which
distinguishes God from al other reasonable natures: but how can you make this
infiniteness to contain in it, all the attributes of Gods nature I see not as
yet: and so you define God infinite reason, or the infinite reasoble nature. But
I pray you proceed in declaring it, and pardon my boldness in telling you my
foolish opinion thus plainly.


Sch. It is not so easy for a man to do right himself, as it is to find
fault with an other, as it may be you will confess anon, when we change
places, and you become the speaker, and I the censurer. I know that definitions
should consist of one general notion, not of diverse particular instances, yea
I could have done thus much my self, for it is nothing: but upon yourmotion
and request I took that other course, which if it be rude and void of art,
blame your self, who were the procurer of it: yea I did mean to bring at
length, the proper and true definition, void of all metaphorical similitudes,
as namely that God is as you say, infinite reason, or r^ther an infinite
understanding, the which is t^^ fittest definition of him, that I can now think
of. Yet surely for my own part, I do not so much trust my own wit in
conceiving aright of the nature of God, but that I should be glad in learning
it, to have the help of a type or particular example to direct me. But in one
thing, you do me manifest wrong, in that you say, that I make a monster of the
divine nature, compounding it of the Angelical, humane, and elementarie
natures. I dare warrant you, that the difference which was brought, to wit,
infiniteness, being put to the definitions, or to the aforesaid natures, will
so purge them, that there shall not be one dram of the dross of any created
nature left in them. Yea, try it when you will, and you shall find it to be
the right Philosophers stone, which turns all mettalles into gold, and that
one dram of it being put, not only to an Angel, or to a whole element, but
even to the least fly in the world, or the least mote in the Sun, is of
force to make it true and very god.

For first it makes it to be the primary and authentical nature, or (if this
word import generation to the ear of a curious grammatist) the first essence
derived from none other, for then it was contained in that other, and then it
was finite, for the thing containing, is the limit and bounds of that which is
contained.

Secondly, this infiniteness makes it to be but one, because there cannot be
two infinits: for where there are two, there is division of ye one from the
other: and where there is division, there is the end of the one, and the
beginning of an other, and so no infinite. Thirdly, infinitnes makes the
subject to be immateriall, and incorporeall, for no matter or body can be
infinite, for a body is of necessity contained and circumscribed by a place,
but if it be contained, then it is not infinite: whereof it follows, that the
infinite thing being without matter, is also without passion, for sola materia
patitur: and so it be comes also immutable, for there can be no change
without passion. Fourthly, infiniteness makes a thing to be immooueable, for
whatsoever moves, has terminos, a quo and ad que^, that is, it moves
hither and thither, but in infini^o non sunt termini. And lastly, the infinite
thing is simple, void of all manner of composition: for in composition there
is division and quality, and so by consequent, there are limits. And thus we
are to think of the divine nature, that although it be of the kind of
reasonable natures as some creatures are, yet in that it only is infinite, it
is sufficiently distinguished from them all: and is made first primarie or
authentical, without cause or beginning, but existing absolutely in himself,
and of himself. Yea as he is himself without cause, or beginning, so he is
to all the other things, the cause and beginning: he is the root and
fountain, from the which all natures and beings, do spring and proceed:
coming from him, yet not diminishing him, having all their essence, but no
part of his essence from him. For this also is a proper effect of the infinite,
to be the original of all things, the which if they came from any finite
thing, they should at length draw it dry, and so the nature or being of all
the things in the world should perish, or being preserved by mutual
transinutation, yet they want an omnipotent agent to begin them. For (by the
confession of all men) the first creation of the world, requires a power not
limited, but infinite, for that it is impossible to any finite power, to create:
that is, to make something of nothing: and if the power be infinite, the subject
wherein it is, must be of the same nature. Again, God is one and but one,
because he is God, to wit, that infint nature, which is sufficient of it self,
to occupy, and fill ten thousand wordls: neither can abide to be iustled by a
pewfellow, but must sit and reign alone: this point of doctrine the whole
world, even the Jews and Turks do hold, abhorring all sound or show of any
plurality of Gods.

Again, God is immateriall and incorporeall, not existing as we do in earthly
and corruptible bodies, or as the Angels do in some more pure, solid and
firm subjects, which may in some sense be called bodies, or in the most
subtle and pure matter that can be imagined, but as a pure actual and
substantial form, subsisting of it self. And therefore we are (interpreting
every doubtful thing, in the best sense) to think that Tertullian giving a
body not only to the Angels, but even to God himself, meant him to be not a
fantastical imagination, or an accidental quality of some other thing, but
a true, real, substantial, and essential nature, subsisting as truly and
really as does a body which we see and feel. Otherwise, by giving God a body,
we take from him his infiniteness, and so his divine nature, making him local,
mutable and mooueable. The which are in no case to be admitted: for God is not
contained in any place, but contains in himself all places, bodies and
natures whatsoever, 1, King. 8. 27. How shall God dwell in this house, when as
the heaven of heavens cannot contain and comprehend him? Neither is he subject
to mutation, passion or alteration, as he should of necessity be, if he were
material, but is the same this day, and yesterday, now and for ever.

Lastly, we are not to admit motion in the divine nature, for that in motion,
there is a possibility of good, or some degree of perfection, which is not yet
in act, nor attained unto, and so there would be imperfection in God: but the
divine nature is not in any moving possibility tending to any other state, but
is ever in complete act and in absolute perfection, and rests and remains
in it self without motion, far more firm, and steadfast, then is any Rock in
the sea, or the earth or whatsoever can be imagined most immooueable: moving
all things, yet he himself resting, for all things tend to him, but he to
nothing. Lastly, the divine nature is most simple and uniform, all alike
throughout all: void of all mixture, composition, combination, division or
dissimilitude.

It is not compounded of matter and form, for it is a form needing no matter,
wherewith to be vpheld, or wherein to exist, but vpholdeth it self, and
subsisteth in it self: In it there is not cause and effect, for it is an
efficient without an effect, and of that which is no effect, even of it self:
It is a totum, a whole without parts, for it is every where the same, and like
it self, or rather it self, and therefore cannot be diuersely divided, or
distinguished into parts: and if our finite cogitations must needs make him
have parts, and conceive him by peecemeale and parts, because we cannot take
the whole, then must we needs make every part to be the whole: and lastly,
it is a substance without accidents, for nothing can either accidere or
accedere to that which already is all and infinite, neither does it, as other
substances do, extenuate it self into accidental qualities, but whatsoever it
sends forth from it self (or rather to it self, for from it self it
cannot go) that is it self, not any way extenuated, but remaining in the same
plight, which it had before.


CHAP. III. Of the faculties of man's soul attributed to God.
Sect. 1.
Gent. HItherto you had my company, and I was glad of yours, but since you
entered into the handling of this infinitnes, which you make the difference of
the divine nature, distinguishing it from other reasonable natures, you have
flowen so clean out of my sight, that I have no hope of ourtaking you. For if
you thus exempt Gods nature from all logical relation of substance and
accident, of subject and adiunct, of essence and attributes, by the which
distinction, it is (as you know) usually declared and laid open, you will take
away all means, either of teaching, or of learning and conceiving it.


Sch. You mistake my meaning, which was not to exempt God from all logical
relation, and the grounds and rules of reason, without the which, I confess,
that neither the divine, nor any other nature, can be either declared or
learned, or in truth exist in it self. For reason and logic, which is the
act and operation of reason, stretch themselves over all things that exist,
howsoever they exist whether finitely or infinitely, although (in us) it cannot
fully comprehend, that which is infinite, yea and a little further too, even to
those things, which do not exist. As for the divine nature, it is as has been
said, an essential and infinite reason, or understanding, even the fonndation
and fountain of all reason: and therefore, we cannot think that it should
abolish or destroy reason, for so it should destroy it self: but rather are to
acknowledge that it does establish it, and agree unto it. Indeed the grounds
and principles of natural Philosophy, as they have been laid down by heathen
Philosophers (who having little or no knowledge of God, had the more leisure to
look into natural things) do fight with the grounds of divinity, and by not
admitting any actual infinite, do destroy the nature of god, as in other
points we know, that the best Philosopher that ever was, was but a sorry divine,
yet we may not in any wise think, that reason and divinity do jar or
cross each one the other, the which indeed are both one in effect: and
therefore neither I, nor any other (unless he be void both of natural and
also of artificial logic) can doubt or deny that God has substance, essence,
nature, form, yea his proper attributes and effects: and the distinction of
essence and attributes, which all Divines make in handling the nature of god,
is good and true. They deny indeed, that there are any accidents in God, and
say that whatsoever is in God, is the essence of God, but then they mean by
accidents, separable and mutable qualities, and by essence, essential and
inseparable properties.

So there are no accidents in God, as in a man or an Angel are knowledge,
wisdom, purity, holiness, strength, and happiness, which are no part of
their nature or essence, nor yet essential properties, for they may be removed
and separated from their subjects, as we know that many both men and angels are
ignorant, foolish, wicked, vile, weak and miserable: but nothing that is in
god, or does belong unto him, can be augmented, diminished, or any way altered,
for as he is once at any time, so is he always at all times. Yet it cannot be
denied, but that god has his essential properties or attributes, and that
they are and may be truly and really distinguished from his substance, essence,
or form, and some things (I confess) are attributed to God, in respect of our
weakness, which are not proper, but rather contrary unto the nature of God,
as namely, the parts and senses of man's body, as hands, eyes, feet, going,
seeing, and likewise the passions and perturbations of men, as anger, fury,
hatred, revenge, repenting, forgetfulness, and diverse other: all which are as
far discrepant from the nature of god, as darkness is from light: and
therefore they are to be understood as improper, and metaphorical speeches,
borrowed from our nature, to represent and make known unto us, the diverse
actions of God. Again, God is the Creator, Preserver and Redeemer of the
world: these attributes and many others of the same kind, are truly given to
him, yet they are not to be accounted his essential attributes, because they
are not coeternall with God: therefore not inseparable, although creation
import omnipotency, and so an essential attribute. Besides, there are diverse
other things attributed to God, but the true and essential attributes of God,
are those which arise and spring from his essence and form, as naturally,
necessarely, directly, continually, and immediately as the beams, light and
heat issue from the sun, yea as do the streams from a fountain, and the
twigges and branches, from the root and body of the tree: as namely,
vbiquitie, eternity, unity, simplicity, and omnipo^e^cie, these are y^
essential attributes of god, arising necessarely from his essential form: to
wit, from an infinite understanding and reason, (the which we are constrained to
make the substitute and vicegerent of the essential form of God) the which
must of necessity (as has been said and showed) be eternal, illocall, one,
simple and omnipotent, yea omniscient and infinite in many other respects: yet
these attributes are not the essence and form of God, for they are diverse one
from each other, as vbiquitie is not unity, nor unity eternity, but the
essence of God is not diverse.


Gent. The difference which you make betwixt the essence and essential
properties of God, as I take it, is this: that the essence is as it were the
foundation, fountain, substance, head, beginning, and root, and the
attributes, the top, streams, existence, inferior members, end, fruit and in
brief, they come from the essence of God: is not this your meaning?


Sch. You say true, and I thank you for explaining it more fully then I could
have done: but what of that?


Gent. Then I pray you let me ask you this question, why may you not make some
or all of the atttributes, the essence and form of God, as well as the infinite
understanding of God, or at the least, why do you not make the understanding
of God one of his attributes, as I am sure that usually Divines do, who put
the knowledge and wisdom of God in the forefront of his attributes? I might
trouble you with other objections, for by this distinction of Gods essence from
his attributes, you seem to make prius and posterius, one thing before an
other in God: and also to take away the uniformity and equality of Gods
essence, for that the beginning, root, and head, is more essential, then the
progress, fruits and members: but I know you would say, that I do but
cavil and trifle with you: for that it is no absurdity to say, that in God
one thing is before another, in order, though not in time, as the understanding
is to the will: and to the other you may say, that ye head is no more essential
to a man then is the foot, nor the root, then a little twig, and therefore I
pray you, resolve me for that other matter, and let these pass.


Sch. You might have let that pass too, for any great hardness that is in it:
as will plainly appear, if you consider the same distinction in men, or rather
in Angels, for they have essential attributes proportionable (though not
comparable) to these in God: for they have successiue vbiquitie (for they can
be any where in a small space of time: and for the eternity, or rather
sempiternitie of god, they have immortality: for his simplicity, they have
great subtlety: and for his omnipotency, great power and might: yet the
beginning and foundation of their essence is in none of these, but in their
reason or understanding, the which only gives the denominatio^ of a person to
the subject in the which it is, whether it be in the creatures or in god. Yea,
it does more properly make the subject excellent, then does any other respect:
as namely, a man endued with understanding, has more of the image and
similitude of God, and is in that respect more excellent then is the whole
earth, being but a dead and senseless lump of clay, as it is said Eccles. 9.
4. That a quick dog is better the^ a dead Lion, and as we know, that the least
bird that flies in the air, is more admired, and counted more excellent, then
the hugest mountain in the world that stands stone-sti^. So that living
things excel those which want life, as reasonable men excel brute beasts, as
wise men excel fools, as much as light does darkness, Eccles. 2. 13. as
Angels surpass men, as far as the heaven does the earth, in purity and
subtilitie, so does the infiniteness of Gods understanding, (not of his
quantity, time or power) extol God above all things, and in the first place
makes him God. As for the method which diverse Divines use, in putting the
knowledge and wisdom of God among his attributes, in that they put them in
the forefront of them, as you say truly, it is plain that they make them the
beginning and foundation of the rest: yea, I could show you some of the latest
of them, which make the knowledge and wisdom of God to be his life: and by
life we know that all things are said to exist. And therefore, howsoever it
be impossible for us to sound the depth of the divine essence, and to show
fully and plainly, wherein the form of it does consist, yet for so much as we
need not doubt, but that of all that is in scripture attributed to God, and
said to be in him, his infinite understanding has the first place, both in
excellency, and also in order of nature, we may be bold to make it the root,
fountain, and foundation of his essence, and the rest of his attributes the
branches, streams, and progress of it. For in the first place God is a
substance, nature or essence, truly subsisting: then he is to be accounted,
not a dead and unreasonable, but a reasonable and understanding nature:
thirdly, not a finit, but an infinite understanding, whereof it follows, that
he is eternal, illocall, simple, one and omnipotent.


Gent. Now I do perceive your meaning, neither will I gainesay it, or deny but
that God is to be thought to be an understanding nature or essence, and that
infinite, having the aforesaid attributes belonging unto it: But whether shall
the understanding or the infiniteness of God have the first place assigned unto
it?


Sch. These two can no more be severed, then can the fire and heat, neither is
the one before the other in time, nature, or being, both existing together
eternally: yet in the order of logical relations and respects, as god is an
essence before he is an understanding essence, so is he an understanding or
reasonable nature, before he is infinite. Neither are we to think, that the
essence of God consists simply in infiniteness, but in an understanding, or
(if any other thing can be named, which comes nearer to the essence of God)
in some other thing, that is infinite: for the essence of God is not privative
only, but most truly and properly positive.


Sect. 2.
Gent. YOu have satisfied me fully, and I thank you heartily for your pains,
in explaining unto me that point of religion, which of all other I have
always desired to hauesom insight into: nether do I know what now to desire of
you, unless it please you to go on in the particular explication of these
attributes of the divine nature, and to begin with the understanding which
you make not an attribute, bur rather the very essence of God, or at the least,
that which comes nearer unto it, then any other thing does that we know.


Sch. Indeed the first place in the treatise of Gods nature, is woorthily
assigned to his knowledge, or rather to his essential understanding, the which
must either be made Gods essence, or else we must confess that we know not
what itis, or wherein it does consist: but to declare the true nature and
manner of it, is as far above my reach, as the heaven is above my head. Yet
some little knowledge of it, the scripture does afford us, to this effect,
that the knowledge, reason, or understanding of god, is his infinite essence,
knowing all things actually always.


Gent. Do you make the knowledge and the understanding of God, to be all one,
or is there some difference betwixt them?


Sch. I do mean but one thing by them both, to wit, that part (for so I may
speak tho improperly) of Gods essence, which in order has the first place: and
I thought it best to use diverse words, to signify one thing for plainness, and
the greater evidence of the matter: for the one, to wit, knowledge, is the more
usual term, and yet the other seems to be the more proper and significant.
For as in a man or Angel, knowledge is one thing, even a separable or
accidental quality, which is often wanting, as we see in many men, who are
(in a manner) altogether destitute of knowledge: and the mind, understanding,
or reasonable soul, another thing, to wit, the very essential form: so in
God we may say that the same thing is both his understanding, as it subsisteth
in it self, and also his knowledge, as it has relation to other things,
namely to the creatures: and so knoledge as it is in the creature a separable
or accidental quality, so in God (in whom there is no mutation) it is an
essential attribute arising from his understanding, which is his essence. For
if the world had never been made, nor to have been made, we could not in
proper speech have said that God had the knoweledge of it, for so he should
have known that which was not: but that cannot be: for things which never
exist, are never known in particular, howsoever they might and should have
been known in abstract and general notions. So that the knowledge of God
properly taken, and precisely distinguished from his understanding, is his
understanding actuated or brought into act, yet not so large as is his
understanding, which is infinite, whereas gods knowledge of the world or of the
creatures, neither is nor can be infinite, for that God neither has already
created infinite particulars, neither yet in truth can do it, because so
there should be two infinits, one created or made, and the other the maker of
it: for howsoever to our weak vnderstanstandings, not only all the
particulars which have happened or shall happen in the world, but even a asmall
part or portion of them, seem infinite, yet to God, they altogether are finite
and numerable.


Gent. You seem to make the knowledge of God to be his understanding, not as it
is subsisteth in it self, but as it is actuated and has relation to the
things that are known.

But by this means you incur two great inconveniences: first in making it
finite, the which you confess, although in my mind it is not to be admitted,
for all Divines make the knowledge of God infinite: and secondly, in making it
to be accidental, and not of absolute necessit^ in God. This will plainly
follow, if the knowledge of God be limited to the things in the world which
are known: for although it was necessary that the world should be created, God
having so decreed, yet this necessity is not absolute, because God might have
existed, though he had never made the world, and then he should have wanted
this knowledge of things, because the things themselves were wanting.

This supposall is not altogether vain^ and friuilous, for God as he did exist
without the world, before the creation of it, so we cannot doubt, but that he
might have done so still and for ever: otherwise we should fall into that
gross absurdity of some Philosophers: who to make the world eternal, make it
essential to God, and to follow him as necessarely, inseparably, and as we
say, as hard at heels, as the shadow does the body, the which I doubt not, but
you condemn as most absurd.

We are rather (in my mind) and so others also think and write) to acknowledge
not one^y the understanding, but even the knowledge of God to be infinite, in
that it stretches it self not only to the creatures, but even to God
himself: whereof it will follow, that it is both infinite, (for whatsoever
knows and comprehends that which is infinite, is it self infinite) and also
essential to God, because it is not only eternal, as is the knowledge of the
creatures in God (although it be not of absolute necessity) but also
absolutely necessary, because it cannot be supposed, that God could exist
without the knowledge of himself. Yet I will not wholly reject or deny this
destinction which you make of the understanding of God from his knowledge: for
although of all Gods attributes, his knowledge does most properly and
immediately flow from his understanding, yet me thinks that there is a
difference to be put betwixt God and his knowledge, as well as betwixt God and
his power: yet for so much as through ignorance of Gods true form, we are not
able to declare the nature of his essential understanding, (the which we are
constrained to put in the place of his form) hereof it comes, that we are
not able to distinguish this essential understanding of god from his actual
knowledge. And therefore leaving the knowledge of gods form; essence, and (as
we make it) of his essential understanding to himself, who only either does
or can know it, let us I pray you, proceed in considering this his actual
knowledge.


Sch. I like well of that you have said, and do think you for showing me
wherein I err: yet this I may say for my self, that unless you had in a manner
compelled me to imagine or coin this or some such distinction, I should not
have mentioned it: but to proceed. It was said of God, that he knows all
things actuallly, always. For the first, it is plain and not greatly doubted
of by any, that all the actions of the creatures, and whatsoever does any way
happen unto them, is as manifest unto God, as is the sun at noone: he does
see with eyes, which need no light, for darkness and light are all one to him:
the heart of man is deep and deceitful above all things, yet he sounds the
depth of it, seeing and perceiving his most secret thoughts, as plainly as if
they were things done in the sight of the whole world: the which thing,
although it seem most impossible, and be incredible to many, yet we know
^ssuredly (...) ^r^^h of it, both by the word of God, and also by manifold
experience: and no marvel, seeing that he has framed and fashioned them, he
has made the eye and care, and therefore must of necessity both see and hear.
Neither does the infiniteness (as it seems to us) of the particulars which
happen in the world, hinder this universal knowledge of God: for they all are
to him, not only not infinite, but a few in comparison of those which he might
and should know if they were to be known, that is, if they did exist. It has
be ene admired in some great men, that they have bin of such capacity and
readiness of wit, as to be able at one instant to mind diverse matters, and to
endite to two or three Secretaries as fast as they could write: for why? as we,
our outward senses and inward faculties, are not many, but one particular, so
they cannot well stretch themselves at once to many diverse objects, for then
Pluribus intent us minor ad singula sensus.

But it is not so with God, who although in truth he be but one particular
nature and essence, not many or diverse, yet he is more large and universal,
then the whole, yea then a thousand worlds. And so if we consider the
proportion of his infiniteness to all things existing, we shall find, that it
is far easier for God to know and mind at once, all the particulars which
either have been, are, or are to be, then for one of us to think on any one
particular thing or matter. As if (that we may use the similitude of the
divine essence which was brought before) we should suppose a man or an Angel
to be of so large a brain and understanding as is the whole element of the
air, the which we know to be every where, if it be not kept out by some more
solid body, and that every part of it were of sufficient virtue to conceive
and know: we then should not mauell, if at one instant he did know and
consider of all the things in the world, and that without any confusion of wit:
how much more then shall we graune this universal knowledge to God, who is far
more universal the^ the air, he being not only about things, but even in the
midst also of the most hard and solid stone, and not excluded by it, or by
any body out of any place: yea he being wholly every where with every man,
yea with every pi^e of grass on the earth, and with every corn of sand on the
sea: and how then can we marvel, that he should be able to know all things
at once? In the second place we are to consider, that God knows himself, and
also the whole course of all things actually, that is, he does not attain to
the knowledge of it by doubtful reasoning, discourse and consequence of one
thing from another, but sees it existing as certainly as if it were actually
existing and present with him. Otherwise, if God did attain to the knowledge
of things, by way of uncertain discourse, it would follow, that his knowledge
is sometimes potentiall and imperfect, not having as yet attained to the thing
it aymeth, but being only in the way toward it: whereas we are to think,
and hold for a most certain truth, that the whole course, order, beginning,
progress and end of the world, is and h^th been always from everlasting,
seen and known by him, and that without successiue discourse, and by one
perfect and comp^e^e act of knowledge: the which we say in the third place, to
be eternal in God, not that he needed so long a time for premeditation, how to
devise and dispose things, so as they should all agree together in tending to
one and the same end for the which he decreed them: for in this respect, ye
whole frame and c^u^se of the world, may be said to be exte^porall, and as we
use to say, nasci sub stilo: that is, to be penned and made without any
premeditation: ^or to him, the least time is as good as a thousand years for
devise: yet we are to think, that the frame of the world was not devised when
it was made, nor a little before, but that the idea and pattern of it, has
plainly and fully existed in God from all eternity, as the spitit of God
witnesses almost every where in the scripture, speaking of the eternal love
and purpose of God toward his elect.


Gent. You say, that god knowe^h all things actually always, and I think you
say true: yet I am sure you know the old exception and objection, which has
been always made against this doctrine, not only by heathen Philosophers, but
also by Christian Divines, who grant this to be true in all those actions
which God works, either immediately by himself, or by the means of those
creatures which are not endued with liberty of will: in all which they grant
that there may be an appointed order and course, which shall certainly come to
pass, because the things thus disposed are not at their own disposition, so as
they might break the order set by God, but are wholly governed by God, who
never changes his purpose or determination in any thing which he has
apponted: but as for the will of man, the which they say, is in it self most
free, yea as free as the will of God himself, because otherwise it is not will,
that they say must be exe^pted from the foreknowledge, (at least from the
necessary foreknowledge) and fore appointment of god, for that it is wholly at
the own disposition, and not controlable by any other, howsoever it may be
hindered by a superior power from bringing it self into perfect act, yea or
from existing also: yet as long as it does exist in his place and subject, that
it cannot be barred of free choice in any thing that is propounded unto it. And
that for this cause it will not stand, and therefore cannot be placed in any set
and constant order, it being so slipperie, uncertain, yea as it were
altog^ther lawless, unruly and exorbitant: what think you of this point?


Sch. Surely I have always thought it to be very hard and intricate, and that
it was no marvel to see many so troubled and grauelled in it, that they could
not possibly see how the will of man could be yoaked by any necessity of God^
decree, and yet left in the natural freedom. But that which is impossible
with man, is possible with God, who has taught us in his word, as touching the
foreknowledge of things contingent, as are the issues and elections of man's
free will, that not only the senseless, but even the reasonable creatures
with all their actions are ordered by him: and that for that end and purpose,
not only the persons, words, and deeds, but even the most secret thoughts of
their minds and inclinations of their wills, are both seen and also foreseen
of God, who does accordingly direct and dispose of them, as seems best unto
him: yet the freedom of the will remains (as indeed it cannot be taken away
unless the will it self, yea the creature it self, wherein the will rests,
be abolished) not having any kind of violence offered unto it, but moving it
self of it self, which way it pleases: even as we see a man sitting on his
horse, does not carry the horse, hither and thither, but is carried by the
horse, who goes on by his own free will, yet guided and ruled by the rider, and
directed to that place which he has appointed. As we plainly see in Adam,
transgressing Gods commandment given as touching the forbidden fruit: the
action was voluntarye and contingent in respect of Adam, who might have
abstained if he had would, for GOD did no way compel him or impell his will
to eat the forbidden fruit, but did both by promises and by threatenings
dissuade him from it. Yet there is no question to be made of it, but that GOD
had as certainly foreseen and foreappointed it, as if he had resolved to
compel Adam by outward violence, or by inward compultion of his mind and
will, to eat it. And so we are to think of all other the like cases, that God
does plainly foresee, that this or that without fail will be the issue and
effect, though the causes be ambiguous, co^tingent, and as like in our eyes to
bring forth the contrary effect: for he sees easily, what motives are in the
mind to move the will, and what force each of them has to sway it hither or
thither.


Gent. Yet you have not so fully resolved this doubt, as I do desire. For even
Cicero himself, or whosoever other is most pere^ptoric in exempting man's will
from Gods providence, will confess, that contingent things may be foreseen
in the causes (though not in the effects themselves) when they do plainly
prevail, and ouersway the one side the other: yet they affirm, that the will
of man, setting it self of purpose to the full use of the natural freedom
and nimblenesse, may dispose it self to a me^e contingencie, which cannot
possibly be foreseen, because it will choose and work, not by the means or
inducement of any motive whatsoever, which would bewray the intent and issue,
but freely of it self, and to no other intent, but to show the absolute
soueraig^tie of it own power.


Sch. I have already told you, what I have gathered out of Gods word, as
touching this point of his foresight of contingent things. I for my part, do
rest herein, and so I wish that you would do without any curious inquisition
into their needless questions, whereof it is best to let them dispute, while
they list, and to determine when they can: In the mean time we will proceed,
and speak somewhat of the wisdom of God, the which is, besides his
knowledge, usually attributed unto him.


Sect. 3.
Gent. INdeed, I have often heard, that in men knowledge and wisdom may be not
only distinguished, but even quite separated the one from the other, as it is
usually said of you scholars, that the greatest Clerks are not the wisest
men: yet I thought that in God, knowledge and wisdom were all one, and not to
be distinguished.


Sch. I have heard as much my self, but I never thought him of whom I heard
it, eythe more learned, or the more wise for saying so if he spoke as he
thought: and yet I know that they are diverse, and different things, as are
speculation and practice. But (to come to the matter) in God they are not two
diverse things, but one and the same thing diuersely considered: for knowledge
is a general notion and speculation, which when it comes to be put in
practice in the making, ordering and disposing of the creatures, is called
wisdom, to the which the counsels and decrees of God (whereof hereafter) are
to be referred: and so knowledge is of simple, but wisdom of compound things,
joining together in perfect order and agreement those things, the natures
whereof, were before fully known. Gent. You fall again into the same error you
did before, in limiting and restraining the knowledge of God to the creatures,
which does infinitely stretch it self abroad even to God himself, and so
shows it selse to be infinite: so now also you tie his wisdom, which in my
mind, you may more rightly extend, so as it may belong also to God himself.
For howsoever as he existeth eternally himself alone, he needs not to be
ordered by any wisdom, neither can properly be said to be ordered by his
own wisdom: for that order has place, not in one simple nature existing in
it self, both immutably and also immoueably, without any possibility of
variance, discord, or confusion, but rather in diverse things, whose natures
being different, are by wisdom conjoined together in good agreement: yet in
that it pleases God of his goodness so to debase himself, as to have any
dealings with hi^ creatures, in this respect eue^ God himself and his actions
are to be ordered disposed and guided: that as the creatures are made to agree
among themselves, so they may agree with God also their Creator, to their own
happiness and his glory.


Sch. You are too curious to be pleased, and too cunning to be taught: I speak
of things after the common and usual manner, according to the which, the object
of Gods wisdom, are his creatures, and not himself: yet I confess that this
distinction which you bring, is true and not to be rejected. But as touching
this wisdom of God, shining every where in the world, it is highly extolled in
the scripture, as being most wonderful and pleasant to behold. And no doubt,
but that it is a great happiness, that a man has this grace given him of God,
and his eyes opened to consider and acknowledge it in any measure. For if the
Queen of Saba were so ravished with the report, and much more with the sight
of Salomons wisdom, appearing in his fit and sound answers, sayings,
sentences, and proverbs, containing in the^ great depth of knowledge, and also
in the practice of his life (whereby he turned his speculatiue knowledge into
practical wisdom) in the orderly constitution of his house and kingdom, and
the right contriuing of al matters belonging thereunto, that she thought her
travel in coming to hear, see and behold it, well bestowed, and the servants
of Solomon, most happy men, for that they making their daily attendance in his
Court and presence, had singular opportunity of knowing and considering it:
how much more happy a thing are we to esteem it to have the wisdom of God
revealed unto us: from the which, as from the sun shining in the firmament,
this dim candle of Salomons wisdom received light. If Salomons house and
kingdom were so well appointed and so wisely ordered, that it wrought in the
beholders admiration, yea astonishment and unspeakable pleasure, how much more
excellent shall we think the orders of Gods house to be, whether we consider
the world in general, which is the outward court, into the which, all both
holy and profane are admitted: but much more, if we consider the Temple it
self, to wit, his Church, wherein he is served and worshipped, and wherein he
does reveal his glory in Christ and his Gospel, after a special manner: but
most of all, if we consider his glory in the holy of holiest, to wit, in ye
heavens, and in the heaven of heavens, where the Apostle heard, and we may
imagine, things not to be uttered. First then, when as we come into the outward
Court of his Palace, and consider either the whole frame of the world, or the
particular creatures therein contained: how every thing is so curiously
contrived in it self, so correspondent to the rest, we shall see how truly wise
Solomon does acknowledge the incomparable wisdom of God, in the creation of
the world. Prou. 3. Iy. 20. The Lord through wisdom, has laid the
foundations of the earth, and has established the heavens through
understanding: by his knowledge the depthes are broken up, and the Clouds drop
down the deawe. If we should enter into particulars where should we begin,
or how should we ever make an end? what profession is there in the world,
which would not think it great madness, not to mention that about the which
it is conuetsant, as a most pregnant witness of the infinite wisdom of God?
how does the Astronomer with endlesseadmiratio^ and astonishment, gaze upon the
stars, and is never satisfied with beholding their brightness, counting
their number, demonstrating their greatness, observing their virtues and
influence not to speak of those, as not worthy to be mentioned, who with the
heathen worship the Sun, Moon and Stars, by ascribing all operations and
effects unto the^: neither yet to roue abroad in these large fields, which
yield as many arguments of Gods wisdom, as the earth does piles of grass,
but to keep at home in our own houses: how infinitely, and yet how worthily do
Physicians extol the frame of man's body, how every part is so wisely and
warely devised to avoid all harms and inconveniences, which might happen:
neither do our bodies, alone that, but even the lowest flower, that grows out
of the earth, (the which if it can be but rudely counterfeited in wood, stone
or color, workmen think their cunning, and Princes their Palaces highly
advanced) yea the silliest worm that creeps on the ground and the least fly
that floteth in the air,, declare the same. For the which purpose the study
of natural Philosophy is to be accounted, as pleasant so also very
profitable, and worthy tobe followed by Christians, as their gifts and callings
do permit: for without question, they that go down into the depth of it, see
the wonderful wisdom of God. But if we enter into the inner Court of Gods
Palace, to wit, into his Church, and there consider his dealings with it from
time to time, the small beginnings, the slow progress, the mean knowledge
which it had in the first ages, as it were in the infancy of it, and how in
these latter ages, it has so mightily prevailed and so stretched it self so
far abroad into the world, still fleeting and moving as does the Sun in the
outward Court) from the Eastern to the Western countries and kingdoms: But
if we step a little further into it, and there consisider the deep mysteries
of knowledge, and wisdom, contained in the bowels of the scripture, the
unsearchable obscurity of aenigmaticall Oracles mocking the sharpness of all
humane wit, the agreement of ceremonies with the body, of the types, with the
things signified, of punishments with sins: but especially, if we consider
in the three fold state of man himself, first the stately building of this
Palace, begun in Adam, then the miserable ruin of it in his fall and lastly,
the glorious repairing of it'm Christ the second Adam^, it cannot be but that
we shall burst forth with the Apostle into admiration of it, and say O the
depth of the knowledge and wisdom of God, how unsearchable are his judgments,
and his ways past finding out? and agree to the truth of that, Ephesians. 3. 10.
that the wisdom of god, showed in the church is so great, that the Angels in
heaven do and may well admire it: and as it is Col. 1. 3. that in Christ and in
the matter and mystery of the Gospel, the very treasures of Gods wisdom are
both hid and revealed. Lastly, if we should draw a little nearer, and with
confidence enter into the glorious presence of God in heaven, where there are
no clouds or mystes, to keep from us the clear sunshine of his wisdom, all
his counsels, decrees, devises and dealings, being unfolded, and fully
accomplished, we should the^ say as the Queen of Saba said of Salomons
wisdom, and the unspeakable pleasure conceived by the beholding it, that the
report which goes on earth and in the church of the wisdom of God, yea the
conceit which we have in our minds of it, how great soever it be, is as
nothing to the thing it self. But I will not be so presumptuous, as to take in
hand this argument, or to attempt to set forth the wisdom of God, as it
shines in the world, and in the Church, and much more fully, (although as yet
not so plainly to us) in heaven: It were an argument fitter for the tongues or
pens of Angels then of men, and whereof we may say, that if all should be
written, that might be brought to that purpose, the whole world would scarce
suffice to hold the books which would be written.


Sect. 4.
Gent. What follows to be considered in the nature of God?


Sch. Surely even that, that follows the understanding in the nature of man,
from the which we borrow al these attributes, as types and similitudes of the
nature of God, and so we do after a sort put our own coat on Gods back, or
rather put our whole nature both the body and especially the soul upon his
divine nature, as he himself did in the incarnation of Christ, that so we may
see and know that, which otherwise and of it self, is invisible, and not to be
known, and therefore as in the humane, so also in the divine nature, we must
to the understanding, join the faculty of will, the which cannot possibly be
severed from an understanding, for that there is no understanding, which if it
be not actual, or in complete act of it own nature and eternally, as is the
understanding of God, yet it is potentially actual, that is, it tends to
action, whereof this faculty of will is the fountain and beginning.


Gent. Nay surely, you need go no further in declaring what is the will, or any
other thing in the essence of God, if it be so as you say, that these
attributes are not truly in God, but only resemblances and shadows of his
nature. Belike we have all this while bin conserring about moonshine in water,
and striving about shadows, altog^ther void of the substance of truth. I did
verily think, that the understanding, knowledge and wisdom, whereof you have
spoken, had been truly and really in god, and not only shadows of his
unknown nature. I may well use the similitude of the Prophet, and compare my
self to a man, who being hungry and thirsty, dreameth that he eats and
drinks according to his own appetite, but awaking on a sudden, he finds
himself dry and empty: so I did all this while imagine that you did feed,
and in truth even fill my hungry and thirsty soul with the knowledge of
God, the which I do far more earnestly and greedely desire the^ ever I did
meat or drink, and behold, on a sudden you awaken me out of this pleasant
dream, and tell me that all is nothing but mere imaginations.


Sch. You take me at the worst, and far worse then you should do: I have
not fed you with wind or vain dreams, as you infer of my words, but the
truth is this. The nature of God is so unsearchable, and so faare above the
reach of any created wit, that when we have come as near it as we can, and
have to our thinking, gotten some hold of it, yet the very remembrance of
ourowne weakness in comparison of the infiniteness of it makes to us to
distrust and suspect our selves as being deceived with a false conceit of that
which cannot possibly be truly conceived and comprehended: here of it comes,
that although we be verily persuaded that understanding, knowledge and wisdom
are in God, not only truly and really, but also most properly as in the
natural subject or rather substantially without any subject, but being to
themselves an upholding subject, yet we doubting the worst, and thinking that
the divine nature, is something more, and more excellent then an infinite
understanding, although in truth there cannot be any nature more excellent
then an understanding, or a reasonable nature, nor any thing more then that
which is infinite: and also thinking that for so much as these things to wit,
understanding, knowledge and wisdom have place in the nature of man, whom we
see and feel to be a most weak and silly creature, that therefore they cannot
be truly in the nature of God, hereof it comes, that we rather call them the
attributes or resemblances of his nature, then his very essence or nature it
self, the which in truth they are.


Gent. That is an other matter, but then we must not foster in our selves this
vain fear and doubting to affirmi him to be that which we learn and know
out of his word, that he is indeed, but rather boldly without any wavering or
doubting, affirm him to be that he is, knowing most certainly that we are not
deceived: and if we be deceived, that then God himself has deceived us, with
whom it is better to err, then to hold the truth in our own conceits. But I
cannot but laugh to my self, when I think of one thing that you said, that
we doubted, least that understanding, knowledge and wisdom, were not truly
in God, because they are truly in the nature of man, whereas you should have
inferred the clean contrary: to wit, that we know assuredly, that God is an
understanding or reasonable nature, because man who is reasonable, is the image
of similitude of God, yea, and made for this end, to show and represent to us
the nature of god: but how I pray you, can a reasonable nature be an image or
similitude of that which is not reasonable? Now proceed I pray you, and show
me, how and what you make will to be in God?


Sch. Will is very fitly and truly, yea essentially given to God: for as in the
soul of man, will is not an accidental quality, which may be spared without
the diminishing or abolishing of the subject, as may knowledge or wisdom, but
an essential faculty issuing properly and immediately out of the
understanding, and cleaning inseparably unto it (for that it is impossible that
the conceits received into the mind, should rest ydly there, and not tebound
back again into action, even as the beams of the sun lighting upon a
solid body, cannot but reflect, and so make heat): so we are to think, that
the essential understanding of God does naturally, necessarely and eternally,
bring forth the essential will of God, the which may be defined, the
essential act of his understanding, the fountain and beginning of all his
actions which are simply good.


Sect. 5.
Gent. HOw do you make the will of God to be the beginning of all the actions
of God?


Sch. Even as it is in all other things which have will, the which is of this
nature, that in what subject soever it be, it will there dominere, and have the
sole and supreme authority of doing all things: and therefore may truly be
called Primus motor, the first mouer and beginning of all actions, for every
thing that has will, does that only (or at the least tends to the doing of
it, which it wills. As for the understanding, although it be in order and
nature before yt will, yet it is not said to be the beginning of actio^,
because it only moves, persuades, and directs, but does not enforce or
compel: for as we usually say, counsel is no command: whereof it comes,
that although in God there be no such disagreement, yet in ye creatures it does
of^e^ come to pass. that the will rejects the counsel and direction which
the mind gives, and works without or against reason, according to the own
inclination. But the will is followed and obeyed by the actions in all things
possible, even as the commandments of a sovereign Monarche within the
compass of his kingdom, are put in execution by loyal subjects, without any
resistance. And indeed will may very fitly be it compared to an absolute and
mighty Monarche, for that it cannot either be controled, commanded, or
compelled by any superior power without it self, or yet resisted by any
inferior within his own dominions: it being impossible even to God himself,
to enforce or constrain the will of the least of his creatures. He may indeed
abolish and destroy all the wills and all the creatures in the world, or enforce
the^ by outward violence to whatsoever pleases him: yea he may (as he does in
regeneration) by changing and inlightning ye mind, make that the will shall
incline it self to that which it did before abhor: yet he cannot compel any
thing to be willing, it being of it self unwilling. Whereof it comes, that
this sovereign monarche harh place in those creaturs only, which are entire
and absolute in themselves, not depending upon any other without it
self-whatsoeuer, for ability of motion and action. And therefore trees, which
have not in themselves sufficient power of natural heat, whereby to move
themselves at their own pleasure, but do depend upon the sun, by whose heat
they are helped, cannot be said to have will. But as for those things which do
perfectly live and move, as do all things which have life and soul, for they
do as freely move or rest, and perform any natural action, as any man or
gell.


Gent. I like well, that youmake the will of god the first beginning of al his
actios: but to make this common unto the creaturs, as if they were so absolute,
that they did not, nor neded to depend on god, me thinks it is harsh, and
sounds somewhat to the disgrace of God, to whom (me thinks) you should not
deny this royal prerogative, that his will should be the first moouer and
beginning, not only of his own actions, but also of all the actions of all
the creatures, rather then to make every living creature, as it were a
privileged place, exempted from his jurisdiction.


Sch. We are rather to account it to be a great praise and glory to God,
that as he himself is most perfect, so he is able to make other things also,
not only imperfect (as some of the creatures, to wit, those which want sense,
may be called, although they also be perfect in their kinds) but also perfect
and absolute in themselves, able to move themselves (within the compass of
their natural power) when and as it pleases themselves, without any outward
help whatsoever. Let us suppose (for we may read of such a matter) that some
cunning Mathematican made a dove of wood, or some such matter, which could fly
out, and return to him home again: should he think it a disgrace unto him,
that this dove needed not his help, or that he should carry it abroad, when
as it could fly of it self: and not rather think it a matter of incomparable
praise, that he could make such an absolute and admirable piece of work? yes
surely, for the perfection and absoluteness of the work, does not detract,
but adds to the praise of the workman: as no doubt but that it is a great
glory to God, that all the creatures in the world move, preserve, and
increase themselves, by the sole means of that virtue and strength which he
put into them in the beginning, without any other supply or strength, although
without question, they do many ways both need and feel his helping hand. Yet
has not the creature hence any matter of boasting against god, for that all
that absoluteness and perfection, which it has, came not of it self, but from
God: who as he gave it, so he is able to take it way, and as he made all the
creatures of nothing, so also to consume them all to nothing, if it were his
will. Besides, if we did make the will of God the beginning and fountain, not
only of his own actions, but also of the actions of the creatures, we should
admit many inconveniences and absurdities: for then all the enormities,
monstrous confusions and sins, which are in the world, should be ascribed
and referred to God, as to the fountain from the which they sprang. Yea, we
should fall into their heresy, or rather extreme madness, who imagine the
whole world, and all the creatures contained in it, to be the body of god, and
god to be the soul of every living thing, the^ the which nothing can be
imagined more gross and impious. So then in this comparison of the will of God
with the will of the creature, we see in the first place, that as God, so also
the perfect, that is, all living and moving creatures, have their proper wills,
not only distinct and diverse from the will of God, but also free and absolute
in themselves, and exempted from being constrained or enforced by the
authority or power of God, yea it may be said truly, if it can be so taken
and understood, that the will of the creature is no less free in the own
kind, then is the will of God, for nothing can be added to that which is in
the highest degree. Whereof it comes, that this freedom of will is alike in
all things, in the brute beast as in the reasonable man, in men as in angels,
in the creature as in the creator, yea (si paruis componero magna liceret) in
the least fly or weakest worm, as in the mighty God of heaven and earth. Not
that any creature has so effectual a will as God has for there is no
comparison between the power of God, and of all the creatures in the world
joined together in one: as a poor man is not of so great ability as is a
great Lord, yet his freedom may be as great, The creature can do nothing,
but it may will any thing against the will of god: the mightiest creature is
not free to do what it list yet the weakest is free to do whatit list, as can
be imagined, even as the prisoner that lies bound in chains in the corner of
a straight prison, is as free in will, as the king that sits on his throne.
Freedom therefore is so inseparable and essential a property of the will,
that it cannot possibly by any means or power whatsosoeuer, be taken away
either from the brutish, the reasonable, or the divine will. Will may be taken
from the creature, and the creature out of the nature of things; yet cannot
freedom be taken from the will, for it will follow it, either existing or at
the least desisting with it. Lastly herein agree the wills of ye creature with
the will of God, rhat all of the^, whither created or uncreated, tend and
incline to good, not all to that which is in truth good, yet al to y^ which is
in appearance good. For as it is the nature of every thing to preserve, and to
delight it self, so for that purpose it escheweth whatsoever seems evil, and
inclines it self toward y^ which it judges good and pleasant. And as every
nature is diverse from all other, so every one has a particular good to the
attaining whereof itmoueth it self, and also the subject which it has in
subjection, and in the fruition whereof, it rests and pleases it self, as
in happiness and the chief good. Thus the nature of God has a proper kind
of good belonging to it, the which is simply and chiefly good: to wit, his own
glory, whereunto the will of God in all the actions of God does aim and
incline: for in it, rising out of it self before the creation, and since
gotten, or rather continued by means of the creatures, it does rest and please
it self for ever.


Sect. 5.
THus far the will of God agrees with the will of the creature: now
follows the difference, the which cannot but be great. First they differ in
that respect, which has already been named, to wit, that the will of God is
always effectual and actual, always bringing it self into act without
fail, or any difficulty, and therefore is never in vain, whereas the
creature does often incline and move it self inwardly toward some object,
but cannot go forward in accomplishing and bringing forth into act that
inward motion: being hindered either by the impotencie of the subject wherein it
is, or by some greater power, but nothing can resist the will of God, or make
his purpose frustate. This is the first difference, and yet to speak properly,
and to say the truth, this is not a difference of the wills, but of the persons
and their power: For the will being hindered from putting it self into
execution, may be as strong, yea usually is more strong then when it has
outward power joined unto it. Secondly, the will of God is immutable and the
same for ever, that which he wills once, he wills always, but the will of
the creature is more variable then is the wind never constant, but continually
altering it self from one object to another, yea often to that which is clean
contrary to the other: and that not only in particular objects, but even in
regard of the general kinds of good, ^eiecting the true good for a false
appearance, and with all true happiness, for a vain and transitory shadow of
pleasure. Neither is it any marvel, that the will of the creature is so
variable, when as it is so easily deceived, and led out of the way by error
and ignorance, or else ouerruled by headstrong affections, from both which the
nature of God being free, admits no manner of alteration in will. The
reasons which may seem to infer alteration of will in God, are drawn out of
those places of scripture in the which it is said, that God has not performed,
that which he has spoken and purposed: as when he being moved either with
the sins and unthankfulness of the wicked, or by the prayers and repentance
of the godly, does confess himself to repent of that good which he has done
to the one, or of those afflictions which he had threatened to the other. But
the truth is, that God never repents himself either of the one or of the
other but takes to himself the person and manner of men, who not foreseeing
what will follow, do often repent themselves, and are sorry both for benefits
bestowed on unthankful and unworthy persons, and also for too great severity
and rash anger upon those whom they love.

Gent. You have made one objection against the immutabilitie of the will of
God, and have also fully satisfied it: I pray you do as much to one that I will
make.


Sch. I know not whither I can or no, but I will do my endeavor.


Gent. You need not fear it, for I know you have often both moved and
answered it ere now: it is this. If the will of god cannot be altered in any
thing that he has determined, and that he has determined all things
whatsoever, what need we use any means for the attaining of any good, or what
will it avail to labor to eschew evil, when the determinate will and purpose
of God, cannot be by prayer, or by any other means avoided, but must of
necessity stand and take place.


Sch. The answer is as you say, easy and ordinary, for God wills and
works (ordinarily) nothing but by the ordinary means effectual for that
purpose, the which he has commanded us to use: and therefore we are to think
and hope that our endeavors are the means which he has appointed for our
good. If our endeavors take not effect, we are to acknowledge those wants and
harms to be sent from God, the which (otherwise) we could not have denied to
have happened through our own default: and therefore we are to be careful in
using all good means effectual for any good purpose, and especially of prayer,
which you bring for an instaunce: for to imagine that God has so tied himself
to a stoicall fate and necessary course of things that he can not, though he
would, grant our desires, is most fond and foolish, contrary to the whole
course of scripture, and in truth, the utter subversion of all godliness. You
might in like manner object, that it must needs be granted, that God does
sometimes change his will, seeing that he wills contrary things, which cannot
come to pass: for example, God would have all men to be saved, and come to the
knowledge of his truth. This is true, for it is the word, yea the very words
of god, 1. Tim. 3. 4. Again, it is his will that some should perish, for it is
certain that some do perish, and that neither without nor against the will of
God, but by his will and purpose, as the scripture does plainly teach us every
where. Likewise it was the will of God, that Adam should not either taste or
touch the forbidden fruit, for he forebad him: and yet we cannot doubt, but
that God had foreappoynted, that Adam should fall by eating the forbidden
fruit, and so in infinite other instances: for answer of all which, we are to
distinguish the commandments of God given to us from his will, which he
keeps, to himself: he commands things impossible, to show us what we ought
to do and to endeavor, as is the fulfilling of the law, and the converting of
all men, as far as we can, to the obedience of the Gospel: both which are
good, and to be endeavored by us, and therefore commanded by him, but both of
them impossible, and therefore not to be thought to be willed by him. Again,
God commands sometimes to this end, to give occasion of sin, for the which
end he forebad Adam to eat of the fruit of the tree of good and evil, and so
the Apostle says, that the law was given to make sin abound: yea God sometimes
comma^deth that he would not have done, to make trial of our faith, as he
commanded Abraham to sacrifice his son Isaac. But these commandments are not
to be accounted the will of God: yea if he command any thing contrary to his
written word, this argues no change or contrariety in his will, but only,
that God is not nor will be bound to any law. Lastly, the will of God differs
from the will of the creature, in that it only inclines it self naturally and
necessarely to that only that is good: whereas the wills of the creatures
although they do incline to good only as we see in the elect angels, yet it is
not of nature and necessity, but of grace, and so of contingencie. For
naturally their will is free as well to evil as to good, neither is it possible,
that the will of any creature should be otherwise, howsoever by grace and the
assistance of God it continue, in affecting only that which is good. But the
will of God does necessarely move to good only, because whatsoever God
wills, it is therefore good, because he wills it, his will being the square
and rule of good, so that whatsoever agrees to it, that is good as
contrariwise, if it dissent from it, it is to be accounted evil. Hence it
comes that God when he wills and commands any thing contrary to the
moral law, as when he did bid Abraham kill his son, the Prophet Hose to
company with a harlot, and the Hebrews to spoil the Egyptians, or in that he
decrees that their shall be sin in the world, yet in so doing, he wills
nothing but that which is good, for by willing it, he makes it good. Yet in
proper speech, these actions of men, although commanded by God, are not to be
accounted the proper object of the will of God, the which we must needs think
to have a larger scope and object, yea a more excellent object then are a few
particular actions of me^. For the proper object of gods will, is that
whereunto it does totally, eternally, and naturally incline and tend as we
know the object of man's will, to be apparent good and pleasure, this being
the scope whereat our nature does wholly aim, to preserve it self in a good
and pleasant estate. In like manner the good whereat Gods will does wholly
aim, is his own glory, the maintaining, advancing and enlarging of it is
that which he does desire above all things, to this end and purpose are all his
counselles, creatures and actions to be referred, and in this being obtained,
as in his chief good, pleasure and happiness he does delight and rest
contented.


CHAP. IIII. Of the attributes of God called his affections.
Sect. 1:
Gent. WHat is therebesides in the faculties of the soul attributed to God,
fit to express and resemble his nature unto us, or what other faculties of ye
soul have we in common with God? for so you will needs have understanding,
knowledge, wisdom and will, to be not typically attributed, but truly and
essentially belonging to God.


Sch. I am so persuaded, and I hope you are so too by this: there is not any
thing in our souls, that is so truly in God, as are the understanding and
will, which make the substance of them: but there remain yet many things to be
considered in the nature of god, the types whereof we fetch from our selves,
as namely from our affections, the which are diverse motions of the will,
arising of the diversity of particular objects, making an impression into the
will according to their several natures, and stirring it up to desire.

Secondly, our moral virtues arising of the duc moderation of the said
affections: and lastly, diverse moral duties, coming from these virtues as
from their roots are attributed to God.


Gent. Have all these things place in the nature of God?


Sch. Some of them are truly in God, the rest are only attributed to him, as
types and similitudes borrowed from our humane nature, fit to declare the
manner of Gods working, and the diversity of his actions, by the which we must
ascend to his nature, as near as we can.


Gent. What affections are attributed to God?


Sch. Love, hatred, lenity, anger, pleasance, joy, sorrow and pity: all
which, the scripture does usually give unto him.


Gent. What moral virtues or duties?


Sch. Justice, bounty, magnificence, care of credit and honor, truth,
fidelity, thank^fulnesse, friendship, indulgence, patience and such other,
even whatsoever is good, and commendable in the nature, manners, behavior,
life and actions of men.


Gent. I pray you think it not yrke some to make a particular declaration of
them: for I do not see, how these things and especially the affections that you
speak of, will either be truly found in God, or can fitly be attributed to
him.


Sch. If you mean by affections, sudden and vehement perturbations, such as we
see usually in men rising and ceasing as occasions and objects are offered,
then there are no affections in God, for there is is nothing in him at any time,
that is not always in him, and that has not been in him from all eternity.
But if (as we may) we mean by affections, constant continual yea eternal
acts, motions, and inclinations (for even these two latter terms (although
improper) must for want of better be used) of his will, not stirred up on a
sudden like a tempest, by this or that particular object, but settled and
permament, arising of the diverse natures of things and agreeable thereunto, in
this sense we may truly' say, that there are affections in GOD, for he does
truly love and embrace good and likewise hate and abhor whatsoever is evil.


Gent. You make a strange distinction of affections, some sudden and
momentanie, others permanent and eternal: thus you make them no affections but
habitual dispositions, and moral virtues.


Sch. You need not meruell so much at this distinction, for it has place even
in humane affections, as we know that hatred is an habitual and inueterate
anger, and love also may be settled and fixed for ever: but it must of
necessity be admitted in GOD, for that his will being eternal and immutable,
sends forth affections of the same nature, as the little twigges and
branches of a Tree are of the same nature with the great boughs and body of
it, and the streams with the fountain from whence they flow: yea, in truth
they are so settled and constant in God, that we cannot distinguish them from
his will, moving it self without any alteration, too or fro the object, as
the nature of it is good or evil.

In men they are like to the flames of fire, blown up by the impression of the
objects, as by a great blast of wind, and make such strange alterations in
them that you would scarce say, they were the same men which they seemed
before. But no object of what nature or force so ever it be can make the least
alteration or impression into the will of GOD, whose nature is immutable, yea
impassible. For he is not material as are the creatures, yea even the Angels
themselves who must needs be granted to consist of, and in some matter, which
may suffer and be altered, whereof it comes that not only men, but even the
spiritual Angels, are subject to affection, passion and perturbation: but God
is a pure and mere form, and therefore altogether actual, he is immateriall,
and therefore impassible.


Gent. Belike you make all affections to be acts, motions and inclinations of
the will, but with this difference, that in God they are eternal, general,
constant and quiet (and indeed, acts of the will, but neither motions nor
inclinations) but in man, momentanie, variable, evident, raging and particular,
stirred up not by the general consideration of the diverse natures of things
as they are in God, (whose affections in that respect must needs be constant,
because the general natures and notions of things, are eternal, and
immutable) but with this or that particular object, and therefore variable and
uncertain.


Gent. I perceive your meaning, save only that I do not see, why Gods will
should be said to be moved with general objects only, and not also with
particular persons and accions: for we know, that he is diuersely affected
toward particular men and hates evil not only in abstracto and in the
universal idea of it, but also in particular men, in whom soever he finds it.


Sch. Affections and will in God are not blind, nor yet pe^uerse and
rebellious to reason, as they are in men, but wholely agreeing unto it, and
therefore they follow the general grounds of it ever in particular objects,
whereas in men they follow the impression of the particular object without, yea
contrary to the grounds of reason.


Sect. 2.
Genesis Well, I pray you show me the particular points of doctrine in the love
of God: for as I remember, you put that first of the affections which you say
are attributed to God.


Sch. Love is most fitly and truly attributed to God, who for that he excels
in this affection, is defined by it as if it were his very essential form, for
so we read, 1. John. 4. 16. God is love.

But that we may know the particulars of this love of God, it is needful
that we first search out, and consider the nature of love in general, the
which may thus after a sort be described. Love is an inclination of the will
to a pleasan^ object for the fruition of the pleasure of it: the which breeds
a desire of doing good unto it, if it be capable of it.

This description is to be explained by alleging the several objects of
love, or of those things which men do usually love, in all which it will
appear that the cause why they are loved and sought unto, is some sweetness
or pleasure, which may be sucked out of them, and that nothing is loved, which
does not bring with it some delight and pleasure: thus John reasons, 1. Ioh.
4. 20. How can he that loves not his brother whom he has seen, that is, with
whom he has conuersed, and so might have taken delight and pleasure by him,
love God whom he has not seen? and we read Genesis 25. 28. that Isaac loved
Esau because his venison tasted sweet in his mouth, and Leah says, Genesis 29
32. Now my husband will love me, having borne him a son. By these and infinite
other examples it appears, that all men incline to that wherein they find
and feel some pleasure and sweetness, and this inclination is called the love
of that thing. Yet this is not all in love, and therefore we must add the
second part of the description, which says, that the pleasure in true love
procures a desire in him that loves, and enjoys the pleasure, to return
pleasure, delight and any good whatsoever can be done unto it, to the thing
loved. For without this mutual relation of pleasure, it is not to be called
love but rather lust: as the inclination which men have to those meats,
drinks, and such other things, the which they love, is not true love but rather
lust, and those things are properly said to be loved, to the which we may
return that pleasure and delight, which we received from and by them, and
procure their good, as well as they procured our pleasure. For example, the
inclination which a man has to an harlot, and to the pleasure that may be
had by her, is not true love, but only lust, because herein a man has
respect only to himself, and to his own pleasure, not caring what become of
her, when his lust is satisfied. But the affection which a man bears to his
wife, is of an other kind, and is true love, because he does not rest in that
pleasure which he enjoys by her means, bu^ adds thereunto an earnest
desire and endeavor, by all means possible to procure her good, being far
more desirous to please and profit her, then to please himself by her:
otherwise it is not true love, but self love, for true love has a hand to
give, as ready yea more ready then one for to take.

And therefore meats and drinks, and such other pleasant things, although
they do greatly delight us, yet they cannot be said to be loved, because
they perish with the use, and though they did ^emaine, they are not capable of
any pleasure or good to be done in way of requital, which is the chief part
of love. But men are truly said to love their friends, wives and children
because as they do many ways receive pleasure, comfort, joy, delight and
profit by them, so their whole desire is, to return all that good back again
into their bosoms with double interest.


Gent. You say that it is not true love, but lust to take pleasure in any
thing, without returning, and as it were repaying the said pleasure to him from
whom it was taken, and, as it were, borrowed.

Indeed this is good honest dealing, and to be commended, but if I be not
deceived, I can show you a more true and excellent love, then this which you
have propounded, to wit that which Christ prefers far before this your
love, the which may be called a kind of traffiquing and exchanging of one good
turn, or benefit for an other. But the love which he commends unto us, is
not procured, and as it were bought or hired by precedent pleasure, but comes
from a mere desire of doing good unto them which have not only not deserved
it at our hands, by loving us, but contrarely, have by hating and harming us,
provoked us to requite and repay them with the like hard measure: Math. 6. 43.
You have heard that it has been said, love thy neighbor, and hate thine
enemy: but I say unto you love your enemies: for if you love your friends
only, what great matter is that? do not the Publicans so? And as this love is
far more excellent then yours, so it does far better agree to your purpose
and serve for the explication of the love of God: for if we should make the
ground of his love toward us to be the fruition of some pleasure in us, or by
our means, we should make a fair piece of work of it, or rather mar all the
ground of our salvation, which relyeth it self upon the mere love of God, not
procured by any desert, or any occasion whatsoever on our own behalf.


Sch. If you think that our Savior Christ means, that we should bear as
great love to strangers and to our enemies, as to our friends, you are far
deceived: for so he should destroy nature it self, which has with her own
fingerwritten in our hearts this description of love, which I have brought: to
wit, that our love should be greater toward them, at whose hands we have
received pleasure and comfort, then to them who are strangers or enemies unto
us. But his meaning is, that to our enemies we should not be full of anger
and revenge, but patient, gentle, yea loving and helpful, laboring by good to
overcome their ill: and that by doing good to strangers, from whom, or from
any in their name, we are never like to receive any retribution, we should
show the faith and love which we bear unto God, in obedience of whose
commandment we do that, which of it self is hurtful unto us. But that a man
should love a malicious enemy as earnestly as a loving and faithful friend, a
strange and unknown woman as well as his own wife, other men's children as
well as his own, it is not only not commendable, but even monstrous, and
contrary both to the light of nature, and to the law of God. For so we should
be unjust and injurious to our own friends, to whom our love and the duties of
it do belong, in bestowing it upon others, and in suffering them to to reap
the croppe where they did not sow any seed. yea then Christians should
endeavor to procure to themselves, the good will of their brethren, not by
duties of love, but by injuries, then the which what can be said or supposed
more absurd. Now as touching the love of God toward us, the which you affirm
to come of the free motion of his will, not proucked, caused, or occasioned by
any good or pleasure, which he gets by us, I confess that GOD electeth to
salvation without any motive of goodness foreseen in us, even of hi^ mere
will and good pleasure: and that it were mere madness to imagine, that there
is any thing in us or in any creature, by the which we might either pleasure or
profit God: yet I answer you, first that we are to distinguish betwixt the
election, and the love of God, for God chooses and predestinanateth to love of
his own mere will, but he loves not, but for some cause. For as his love is
in the general notion inclined to good, and not to evil, so he loves nothing
but that which is good, yea and he loves it because it is good, and for the
goodness sake. If you say what is our goodness to God, that he should love us
for it, what does it profit or pleasure him: indeed he stands in no need of
it: yet he takes pleasure in it, the Lord delights in the righteousness of
his Saints, their sins are as eyesores, and unpleasant sights unto him. For why
God delights in himself, and every thing in that which is like it self: he
takes pleasure to behold his own Image in us even as the greatest joy and
pleasure that a man can have in any worldly thing, is to behold his own favor
and fashions, his own countenance and conditions, in his son. And therefore
the more that a man in holiness resembles god, the more he is beloved of him,
as being so much, liker to him, as it is said of David, that he was a man
according to the heart of God.


Gent. This doctrine sounds very harsh to me, and so I think it would do to
others, if they should hear it, as that which gives a great blow to Gods
free election: I am sure you have read, that Christ loved us being his enemies.
Romans 5. and that you do not doubt, but that God loved the Apostle Paul, even
in his infidelity, and when he in great fury did persecute the Church.


Sch. It may be, that it would seem strange to them that have not considered
of it: but the doctrine is, as I think, good and sound, that God neither
hates any but for sin, neither loves any but as they are holy. Yet our
foreseen holiness is not the cause why God does elect us to salvation: for first
he electeth us to love and to life, and then afterward by sanctifying us, he
makes us capable of his love and of eternal life. The proper object of Gods
love, is the holiness of the reasonable creature, unto the which, as being
agreeable to his own nature, God does incline himself by doing good unto it,
as he receives a kind of contentation in it, and from it. As for the estate
of the elect before they be called and sanctified, we know that whom God
loves once, he loves always: and Paul even in the heat of his fury against
Christ, was beloved of God, as one whom he had chosen and predestinate to
bear at the appointed time his own Image of holiness, and so the foresight
of holiness in him may be said to be the the cause of Gods love, though not of
his election, For God may choose to love whom he list, but he cannot love, but
according to his own nature, neither any thing, but that which is in some sort
agreeable to his nature: for he cannot love or like, but must of necessity
hate and abhor evil, as well in concreto, as in abstracto: in parricular
subjects, as well as in general notions: that so he may be always like
himself.


Sect. 3.
Gent. I Will not contend with you about it at this time, because I will not
hinder you from other matters: now that you have laid the foundation of the
description of Gods love, I pray you go on with the rest of the building.


Sch. We will: and first, we may out of that, that has been said to this
purpose, define the love of God to be, the motion, or rather the act of his
will, enclining it self by doing good, to good prevailing in the reasonable
creature. In this description we are to observe these three things: first,
that the love of God belongs only to the reasonable creature: secondly, that
the motive or inducement stirring up in God this love, is goodness prevailing
in the creature: and lastly, that the manner, or rather a proper and necessary
effect of this love or inclination of God to the creature, is by doing good
unto it.

The first point being plain enough of it self, needs no further
explanation: for although all the creatures in their several kinds and
degrees, have in them a special goodness, in respect whereof, God may be
said to love, and favor them, as we read. Genesis 1. 31. that God having finished
all the creatures, looked upon them: and seeing them all to be good, blessed
them: and still to extend his gracious providence over them al, preserving and
upholding them, not only by the ordinary force of their natures, but even by
extraordinary means unknown to us, as he is said to feed the young rau^ns,
when they call upon him (although this may be ascribed to natural means) yet
in proper speech he is said to love the reasonable creatures only, whom he
has picked out of the whole bunch, whereon to set his heart, wherein to
delight and take pleasure.

This choice of his love, it has pleased God to make for two causes: first in
respect of the excellent goodness, as it were the surpassing beauty of the
reasonable creature, the which being framed according to the likeness of God,
makes a kind of sympathy and natural agreement betwixt God and it: whereof
it comes, that God takes exceeding delight and pleasure in the soul of man,
the faculties of it being orderly disposed and endued with that beauty of
holiness, which God created in it, and therefore may justly require of it) as
in a most pleasant garden and paradise, shining with all variety of the most
fair flowers and colors. The other respect, which appropriateth the love of
God to the reasonable creature, is, for that as it only has in it matter of
exceeding pleasure and delight to God, so it only is capable of the rebound,
recourse, and reciprocation of the said pleasure from God, in the which as has
been said the chief part of love does consist. For howsoever God may do, and
does many ways good to the other creatures, in that he feeds and preserves
them in their several kinds, yet they not knowing GOD, cannot acknowledge
those good things, which they receive from him, to come from him, and to
proceed of that favor which he bears unto them: whereas the soul of the
reasonable creature, being as it were filled with the sweet blessings of God,
takes greater pleasure in the giver then in the gift, and rejoices yea
glories more herein, that God the great King of heaven and earth, vouchsafes
to set his heart upon it, and to take pleasure in doing it good, then in any
other thing whatsoever. This sense of the goodness of GOD, as it is to them
the most sweet happiness that can be imagined, so it stirs up in them a
mutual love toward God, whom although they cannot by any means either profit
or pleasure, yet they endeavor with all care to glorify him by their holy
obedience, and so to testify that unfeigned love which they bear unto him. But
the unreasonable creatures wanting this sense of the love and goodness of GOD,
and so the reciprocation of love which should be in them, wherein the force of
love consists, are for this cause not to be admitted into the participation
of the love of God.

Besides, the love of God as it is eternal, so it has this virtue, that on
what subject soever it seazeth, it makes it eternal, preserving it from
perishing: but this cannot be done in the other creatures, the which must be
dissolved and come to naught: only the reasonable soul, being possessed and
as it were filled with the love of GOD, i^ by preserved for ever. For these
causes it has pleased GOD of his goodness to make choice of the reasonable
nature of man, whereunto to join himself in the bond of perfect love: and in
this respect to compare himself to a carnal lover, enamoured of the beauty of
some fair young woman, delighting himself exceedingly in the fruition of her,
and desiring nothing more then to please and pleasure her, yea by all means
possible to procure her good: as we may see in the song of songs, in the
Prophet Ez^chiel, and in diverse other places of scripture. In the second place
we are to consider, that not any measure of goodness in the reasonable
creature, will serve to procure the love of God, for then God should love the
wicked, in whom we know that there are diverse relics of his image, yea even
the devil himself and all his wicked spirits, whose nature and natural
faculties are good, and not corrupted with sin in respect of their substance,
but God does not love and embrace these with this affection of love: for what
fellowship or agreement, much less entire love, can God have with Beliall, or
light with darkness? Nay rather we know, that God does most justly hate and
abhor them, for that their persons are not in regard of these relics of
goodness to be accounted good, because it does not prevail in them, but is
overcome and captiuated, or rather abolished by the contrary corruption of
sin, the which having the possession and command of them, ought of right to
have the title and name of them. But God loves the godly and their persons,
yea though they be in part defiled with sin, because not sin and evil,
but holiness and good prevails and bears sway in them, sin being
captiuated and kept under. So that in man good and evil do in a manner contend
for God, the one laboring to procure his love, and the other his hatred, in the
which conflict the stronger and the predominant quality prevails, and
pulls to the person in the which it is, the affection of God, either of love,
or else of hatred.


Gent. I had thought that one, and that the least corruption or sin in a man,
had been of sufficient force to make the whole person hateful and abominable
in the sight of God, as a little leven sowreth the whole lump, according to
that of the Apostle James, he that breaks any one point of the law, is
guilty of transgressing the whole, notwithstanding there be in him many good
parts of holiness: even as we see in civil judgments, that one single crime
condemns a man, yea though in other respects his life be never so just and
unreprovable.


Sch. That is true you say, according to the exact rule of Gods justice, the
which requires the full perfection of holiness without any exception, and
rejects the whole, if never so little of it be wanting: but the love of God
takes another course, for it looks on men with an amiable and favorable
countenance, and (what marvel is it that the love of God does that which the
love of men is enjoined to perform) covers the multitude of sins. Lastly,
the love of God never comes empty, but as God is the fountain and full
treasure of all pleasure, so he brings with him whither soever he comes,
all good, pleasure and happiness, by the which his love and affection toward
any person is known and felt. Yea hereof it follows, that as any nature or
person is endued with a less or greater measure of this goodness which is so
pleasing to the will, and so agreeable to the nature of God, so it procures to
it self a less or greater measure of the love of God, and so consequently of
that pleasant and happy good which does continually accompany it: yea that as
God himself is the best and most excellent nature of all other, without any
comparison, so he lou^th himself far more then he does any other thing
whatsoever, and procures to himself more pleasure and happiness, the^ he does
to any creature. Yea it is his will, that according to this rule, this
affection of love in the godly be squared, to wit, that they love those most,
in whom they see a greater measure of goodness and godliness, and be more
inclined toward them, to do any manner of good unto them, then to any other,
as it is Psalm. 16. 3. All my delight is in the saints on earth, even to those
that are excellent. And so Gal. 6. 10.


Sect. 4.
BY this doctrine of the love of God, we may easily gather, what hatred the
contrary affection is, to wit, a motion or act of Gods will, declining and
abhorring the person wherein evil does prevail. And first, for the cause or
ground of Gods hatred, we must hold, that God does not hate or abhor any
creature, upon the mere motion of his own will, for his will neither does nor
can move either toward or from any creature, but upon good and just cause
taken even from his own nature. We know that God of himself loves all his
creatures, even because they are his own workmanship, and therefore good and
worthy to be both liked and loved, as immediately after the creation, he
beheld them, and seeing them to be good and excellent, every one in his proper
kind, he powered down his favorable blessing upon them, even as the deawe and
rain falls upon the herbs and flowers of the field, whereby they wax
fair and flou^ish. Neither did God either play the dissembler, in pretending
love to all his creatures, whereas he hated many of them, or yet is he a
changling, to turn his love into hatred, but as once he did, so always he
does both love and bless the creature which he sees to be good. Yet if the
creature at any time become evil, and be not as it was made by him, but as it
has been marred by it self, not bearing any longer his excellent and
glorious image, but some other monstrous shape, then it cannot be loved any
longer, but must incontinently be hated of God. Yet God is the same that he
was, and not a whit altered, but the creature has changed his place and
condition, and is removed, and as it were transplanted out of Gods pleasant
paradise, in the which it did flourish amidst the four rivers of the blessings
of God, into a wide and wild desert, where it being schorched with the burning
beams of gods curse, withers for want of water, and being clean dried
up, is become most deformed.

Gent. I could well agree, that love should have place in God, both in his
nature and in his actions, for as he is the chief, and the very fountain of
all goodness, so it seems very meet, that he should extend his goodness to
all his creatures, by doing good unto them all according to their several
kinds: but for this affection of hatred, I do not see how it can so well agree
to the nature of God, it being by nature evil, and contrary to the lou^ of
God, for the which he is so renowm^d. And therefore me thi^kes it were better
for you, to pass over in (...) this head of doctrine, and as it were to (...)
it cut as a foul blemish, which in my (...) disgraceth this fair picture of
Gods nature, which you have so carefully drawn.


Sch. If you grant the one, you cannot deny the other, for as God is good, so
he must maintain and uphold his goodness against evil, by hating and
abhorring it, yea by confounding all the maintainers and vpholders of it. For
it is as necessary and natural to God, to abhor evil general, and to hate
it in the particula^ subjects, as it is to him to inclin to good, and to love
it in his creatures.


Gent. You will have much ado to persuade me, that God hates any, although I
confess you make a show of argument to prove it: but before we argue the
matter, I would know whom, and how God hates.


Sch. Indeed the state of the question would be agreed upon before
disputation, and it may easily be known if you call to mind that which has
been said of the love of God: for first the reasonable creature only is the
subject, as of the love, so also of the hatred of God, for of all the creatures
in the world, the reasonable only can be and is evil. The reason hereof is,
because all other things as they were created good, so they continue in that
state of goodness (and in respect of it, are in some sort loved of God)
although not in that degree of perfection and excellency, God having (for the
sin of man) withdrawn from them some part of it: But man has clean forsaken
that state and standing wherein he was placed by God, and lost that goodness
for the which he was so beloved of God. Yea not only so, but also he has
made an exchange of the said goodness, for the contrary naughtiness, of
knowledge and obedience, for ignorance, error, rebellion and contempt, yea of
the whole image of God, for the ugly shape of Satan, and so is justly become
odious to God, to whom before he was dearly beloved.


Gent. Belike man was created in a worse estate then the rest of the
creatures, for they were sure to continue in the state of the love of God, and
in happiness) from the which we see that man is most miserably fallen, and
that into ye hatred of god, as you would have it.

I confess, y^ (as now ye case stands with him) man is in a far worse
esta^e, then any unreasonable creature. And that it were far better to be a
brute beast, or a senseless stone, then a man out of the favor of God: for
who had not rather (without any comparison) with the^ want the sweet sense of
the love of God (as all the reasonable creatures do, which either have no sense
at all, or at the least no sense of God) then to feel the hea^ie burden of
the wrath of God, and would not choose, not to be happy with them, rather then
to be miserable with man. Yet if we compare their first estates together, we
shall find that man's estate was far more excellent then theirs, in that he
was created in the fruition of all pleasure and happiness, of the which their
nature is not capable. And what though he were created in the possibility of
being miserable, from the which the other creatures are exempted? Who would
refuse the offer of riches, honor, favor and love, made by his Prince upon
this condition, that if he were found to be traitorous, rebellious and
disloyal, he should not only be deprived of all the aforesaid benefits, but
also be most shamefully and miserably to^tured and tormented to death?


Gent. That is it I looked for, you have mad^ a very good reason against your
self: for protest unto you, I have always carried this mind, that I had
rather live in a mean and low estate, from the which one cannot fall, then in
the highest top of flattering Fortunes wheel, in the which there is no
liklihood that I should continue. And this I may be bold to say, being so well
backed with the authority of wise Solomon himself, saying: That a dinner of
herbs with quietness, is better then a stal-fat ox with fear and trouble.


Sch. I am of your mind for that, that he is unwise, that will adventure where
he is like to miscarrie, or that will accept an offer of all the pleasure and
happiness that can be imagined, with a forfaiture of extreme pains and
misery, if he break such and such con^itions, which he knows himself
unlike to keep. But I pray you, were the conditions of man's felicity so many
to be remembered, or so hard to be performed, that in respect of the great
danger of falling into eternal misery (which was the forfaiture if he
failed) you would refuse the fruition of Gods presence, (and in it of eternal
happiness) and choose to be a dead and senseless stone, which has neither the
possession of pleasure, nor the possibility of pain, rather then an happy man
in so tickle an estate? who is so weak or intemperate, that would not for a
small commodity adventure the suffering of a thousand deaths and pains, upon
the abstaining from any one kind of fruit, he having plenty besides, both
for necessity, and also for pleasure?


Gent. Indeed I must needs confess that the condition of man's happiness in
the beginning was so easy to be kept, that his conditional estate of
happiness may be accounted as good and sure, as if it had been absolute
without any condition: and therefore I will yield unto you, that the
impossibility of happiness in the unreasonable creatures, was a far worse
estate then the possibilite of misery in man, the which (but that we see and
fee^e it to be already come to pass) might well have been account^d
impossible. Bu^ now to bring you back again to the matter in hand, from the
which I have made you by my doubting, or rather by obiecting those doubts
which came into my mind, somewhat to digress: I do easily grant that no
senseless thing can be the subject of Gods hatred, for that they wanting the
power of moving or changing themselves, do persist (for they could not leave
it) in their natural estate of goodness and of the love of God: yet me
thinks that the brute beasts (the which, as I noted before, you grant to
have freewill in their kinds) are as deep in naughtiness and perverseness of
nature, and so in the hatred of God, as man himself. For I cannot think that
they were created so violent, ravenous and bloodthirstie as we see and feel
them, being more like hellish feends, then earthly creatures. Yea, we read
Genesis 9. 5. that God will require the blood of man at the hands of the beasts
which shed it, as we know that in many cases beasts were by the Judicial
law of Moses condemned and put to death.


Sch. Sometimes you object in good earnest, as I easily perceive by you, but
now I see you sport and dally: for I am sure you do not think that brute
beasts do sin against God, whom they cannot know. I do not think but that
ravenous beasts were created with the same weapons, both for offense and
defense, the which now they use in pursuing their pray, and also in the same
complexions and conditions which now they have: but man in his innocence was
protected from them, not by the tamenesse of their natures, but by a majesty
inherent in his person, the which was of sufficient force to amaze and control
the vnruliest of them. But we will leave the brute beasts to their prays, and
come to me^, who^ this doctrine of gods hatred does concern in respect of the
sinfulness of their natures, into the which they have transformed themselves
from that image of Gods holiness, wherein they were created. Yet not any
measure of evil is sufficient to procure this personal hatred, for then God
should hate the godly, in whom there are relics of evil, as there are in the
wicked of good, but only reigning and prevailing evil. It is true indeed,
that God hates the least sin that can be committed or imagined, yea almost
the show of it, and even the garment spotted with the flesh, yet he hates not
the person in regard of it, it being suppressed and kept under, for godliness
is stronger in them that are sanctified (though imperfectly) and having overcome
sin, has won the full interest of God and his love. The other thing which
you desired to know before you would come to the question it self, was the
manner of Gods hatred, the which is two fold, inward, and outward. The sirst
is the true manner of it: the other is the sencible declaration of the inward,
and is indeed the effect of it, as amongst men, outward harm is asigne and
also an effect of inward hatred. Now for this inward manner of fau^r in God, we
are not to imagine any boiling affections of anger, or any inue^erate ill will
toward any creature, but must know it to be the general and eternal
antipathie and contrariety of his nature, which is absolute purity, goodness
and holiness, to the pollution and naughtiness of sin prevailing in man:
for as God does approve, love and embrace his own nature, as the absolute
perfection of goodness, yea and the very image or likeness of the said
goodness, either created or restored in man, so he cannot but mislike and
abhor whatsoever is contrary unto it. Then follows the outward manner,
which is the effect and declaration of the inward hatred by bringing or doing
evil to the person thus polluted with sin, from whom God having once turned
away his face and favor, it cannot be, but that all manner of evils, as it
were whole legions of devils should invade him, as finding him not only out of
Gods protection, as a traitor and rebel, but also by gods just judgment
appointed to many kinds of most fearful judgments.


Gent. Now I pray you let me ask you a question: are we according to Gods
example, to hate wicked persons, or rather (if it be unmeet to make our selves
presidents for god to follow) is it not most true, ye he does not hate ye
wicked, but does rather as he wills us to do, love their persons, and hate
only the sins of men. For although our duties do not belong to God, yet by
that which he commands, we may gather what his nature is, for that all his
commandments are just, pure and agreeable to his nature. Yea to urge this
reason a little further, we have the express commandment of Christ, Math.
5. 44. 45, To love and to do good to our enemies, even as God does both to the
just and to the unjust.


Sch. We are not yet come to speak of humane affections, yet this I say, that
by this question you do plainly show, what makes this doctrine of Gods hatred
seem so strange and be so harsh in your ears, namely because hatred amongst
men is so corrupt a thing, bringing with it so many evils and mischiefs. But
we must not measure God by man, nor the one kind of hatred by the other: for
God hates first by detesting sin, and then by punishing the rebellion of him
that has committed it.


Gent. Belike you make this hatred only the execution of justice done by God,
as by a righteous judge upon malefactors, or as by a sovereign king upon open
rebels, and so a supposed hatred, for that he that inflicteth punishment,
seems to hate, as it is 1. Cor. 4. 21. Shall I come to you with a rod, or in
love? and if it be so, me thinks it were better to call it justice then
hatred, the one word signifying a most corrupt, the other a most commendable
thing.


Sch. The outward and actual manner of Gods hatred, which is by doing evil to
the sinful person, being in nothing disagreeing from the rule of justice, may
not unfitly be so called, yet we need not fear to ascribe hatred and
detestation both of sin in general, and also of the particular persons
polluted with it, unto God, he having so often in scripture taken them unto
himself. Otherwise if we take hatred as it is usually in and among men, then
man is freed from all hatred of God, both by the goodness of Gods nature, the
which can neither will nor do evil to his creatures, but only so far forth
as is needful for the satisfying of his justice, and manifesting of his
glory, and also by the baseness of his own nature and estate, for what is
man (a worm rather then a man) that god should hate: the least spark of whose
anger is of force to consume to nothing a thousand worlds?


Sect. 5
LIke unto the aforesaid affections, are pleasance and anger, the which also
are often in scripture atributed to god, yet in truth thee they have no place
in his nature, but only are as resemblances borrowed from man to declare the
actions of God. The former does better agree, and may more fitly be attributed
to God then the other, for it is an essential thing in God, to like or mislike
as things are good or evil. But as it is usually taken for a sudden and
temporary contentment or rest of Gods will, having been before stirred up and
moved to anger, in this sense, God cannot be properly said to be either
pleased or appeased, for he was never displeased, it being impossible that any
thing proceeding from any creature (or indeed from himself) should work any
change or alteration in him. Likewise for anger, though it be in infinite places
of scripture a^tributed to God, yet that he cannot by any means be provoked
unto it. Only hereby is meant, first, for the nature of God, that as he likes
and approoueth the obedience and purity of the godly, so he misliketh the
impuritie of the wicked as greatly, as men do those things whereat they are
inflamed to anger, which is a certain sign of coffeehouse. And secondly,
for the outward and sensible actions of God, that he uses as great severity
(yet not passing ye limits of justice) as me^ do being angry, who usually are
rather too rigorous, and pass the bounds of moderation in this behalf: yea
if we suppose (the which we need not, it being so common a thing) the most
outrageous blasphemies and horrible villainies which can be imagined, to be
committed by men, yet God is not thereby provoked to anger, or any whit
changed otherwise then he was before. He does indeed abhor sin, and punish
sinners as they do deserve, but not in choler, or any violent passion, but by
the essential and eternal motion, or rather immovable act of his will, so
affected to these objects, as they do either agree or disagree from his divine
nature: and therefore this affection in God may more fitly be termed hatred, it
being so constant and inueterate: to wit, eternal, not a sudden and momentanie
anger. Thus God says, Exodus 23. 10. Let me alone and I will be angry at this
people and consume them: that is, I will consume them as if I were angry: but
if this affection of anger had been truly stirred up in God, he would have said
I am angry, not, I will be angry. Likewise for joy and sorrow these affections
also are attributed to God in scripture: yet no man is so simple, as to think
that they do belong to God in truth: for nothing can happen to him either
profitable or unprofitable, nothing either pleasant or unpleasant: or rather
nothing, but that which is not pleasant unto him, because nothing can be done
against his will. But as for pity and compassion, which is a sorrow and
grievous sense of the misery of an other, that the scripture does so earnestly
ascribe to God, and God in scripture so carefully challenge to himself, as
that wherein his chief glory does consist, that it may seem very hard and not
to be admitted, that such great matters should be turned into shadows and
resemblances. For so we read, Exodus 33. 19. That when as God would at the
earnest suit of Moses set forth himself and his nature in his greatest glory,
he desineth himself by thi^ one attribute, saying, I will make all my good to
go before thee, and I will proclaim the name of the Lord before thee, to wit, I
will have mercy on whom I will have mercy, and I will show compassion, to
whom I will show compassion. And without question, if any humane affection may
be truly said to be in God, it is this of pity, the which of all other is
most excellent and commendable, proper to gentle, noble and royal minds, as
nothing is so base and savage, as is unmercifulness and cruelty.

But the truth is, that there are no manner of passions in God, his nature
being impassible: only by the pity of God in scripture is meant, that God as
he is infinitely and only good, yea the fountain of all goodness, so he is
most prone and ready to impart and extend the same to all his creatures,
especially unto those which being miserable, do stand in greatest need of his
help and comfort.

This may be plainly seen in those judicial laws, which he gave to his
people by Moses, wherein it may worthily be noted how careful the Lord is for
the helping and releeuing of all those which are any way distressed, as namely
the poor, the widow, the orphane, and the stranger, that men should not
only take heed of iniurying them any way, (for says he, Exodus 22. 27
although thou be cruel in oppressing thy poor brother, yet I am pitiful
and cannot abide it, but will punish thee for it) but also be careful to
relieve them with the crop and vintage of the seventh year, and by leaving
them some gleanings in the yearly harvest, by setting them free out of bondage
at the seventh year. Yea this compassion of the Lord extends it self even
to the brute beast, and therefore he commanded, that they should not be
ouerwrought, but be suffered to rest the 7 day, that the seventh years crop
should be left for them in part, that the young Kid should not be sod in the
mothers milk, nor the damme taken in the neast with the young birds: and so in
many other particulars, we cannot but see in reading these laws, what great
care and compassion God had over all his creatures, which were in misery, or
any way distressed.

CHAP. V. Of the attributes of God, called his virtues.
Sect. 1.
Gent. YOu will not, me thinks, admit into the nature of God any sudden and
momentanie motions, and therefore no affections: but what say you to constant
habits of good, as justice, goodness, and such other excellent virtues? will
you exclude these also out of the nature of God, or admit them only in name
and in show as you do the affections?


Sch. These things, and whatsoever else, is not only indifferent as are the
affections, but even simply good, have place in the nature of god, not only
truly, but also primarely, as in their root and first fountain, from the
which, they are derived to the creatures.


Gent. I pray you declare them in particular.


Sch. It is more meet if not needful, to break off our conference for this
time: I dare say, I have wearied you with speaking so long of one matter.


Gent. Of one matter? call you this one matter? nay it is all in all. Alas god
help us if one afternoones conference of God do make us weary: this being the
only lesson, in the learning whereof, all that hope to be in Gods kingdom,
must make account to spend, not hours, days, years or ages, but eternities,
that is, time which is endless, and will never be spent.


Sch. It is true that you say, yet you see our weakness to be such, that we
are soon wearied and cloyed with hearing still of one matter, although it
concern us never so much, especially if it be thus rudely and rawly handled.


Gent. Well, well, I can assure you, there is no such matter, and (but that I
hope to have your company to morrow and the next day also) I should wish (the
which I think few travelers do) to have the way lengthened, and that we had
many hours riding to our lodging, as now we have not above one. But if your
self be weary of speaking and of my unskillful questioning with you of this,
and that, you may be the shorter: and I will promise you not to trouble you
with any more questions, but to suffer you to speak and to hold your peace at
your own pleasure,


Sch. Your questioning has been no trouble but a great ease and profit to me.
I will (if there be no remedy) show you breefely the nature of someof this
kind of attributes, which may not unfitly be called the virtues of God. You
may by them gather the nature of the rest.


Gent. I pray you do so: I would be loath we should leave this days conference
imperfect: but make an end of it once in, and the^ I will say, that we have
made, a good days work of it.


Sch. I wish we had many Gentlemen of your mind, so desirous of knowledge,
especially of the knowledge of God: we may well wish it, but it were folly to
think it, and in vain to hope it: but to the matter.

You know that those good and commendable dispositions of the mind, which are
commonly called moral virtues, are of two sorts, whereof the one looks
inwardly toward our selves, the other outwardly toward others.

The first kind consists in the moderation of the desire and use of worldly
pleasures, as of meat, drink, ease, pastime, riches, honor, and whatsoever
else is pleasant in the life of man.

These virtues are not to be attributed to GOD, because his nature is not
capable of these pleasures. He indeed lives or rather existeth in the
perfection of pleasure, for he does continually and eternally delight and
rejoice in himself and in no other thing (in comparison, as no other thing is
to be compared to him in goodness) for although he take pleasure in the
goodness of his creatures, whereby they resemble him, as in their knowledge
wisdom, purity, bewty, and whatsoever else is good in them, yet all this is
nothing to that infinite goodness which is resident in himself, affoording
unto him matter of unspeakable pleasure, the whieth is not to be limited
within the bounds of any virtues, for it cannot have either defect, moderation
or excess, and al, for that it is infinite. And what marvel is it, if God be
exempted from these virtues, and the pleasures which are the objects of them,
when as the Angels, which are creatures, are not subject unto the^? for they
cannot be said to be either temperate in regard of meat and drink, or
continent in respect of bodily pleasures, for that their nature is not capable
of those pleasures, no more then are trees or senseless stones. Yet theit
nature is capable both of virtue and also of vice: for as by virtue some of
them stand in happiness, so by vice many of them fell into misery: to wit,
through ambition, as it is thought, for desiring to be higher, they became
lower then they were created. This vice (as also the virtue of it, which being
but the moderation of it, must needs be of the same kind with the vice) is
incident into all excellent natures: as we know that every nature does desire
to increase in that good, wherewith it is already endued: yea the more it has
of it, the more it does desire, because it feels so much the more the
sweetness of it, and so we see it to come to pass, that none are so desirous
of riches, as is the richest, of knowledge, as are the best learned: and of
excellency: as those that are already most excellent, even as the fire, the
purest of all the elements, does never rest, till it be above all the rest, and
in the highest place of dignity Yea as the virtue which is care of credit and
honor, and also the exceeding extreme, which is ambition, so also humility
(which may seem to be the lower extreme, but is in truth, the highest and
most excellent virtue) may be most plainly showed, and fully exercised in that
nature which is most excellent. For as none can have so great a fall, as he
that has the highest place, so none can show so great humility, as he that
is most excellent, because none can debase himself so far, as he that is
highest in excellency. Whereby it may be gathered, that although God cannot be
said to be ambitious in desiring greater honor then is due unto him for that
he has by right, all honor that can be either had or desired, yet we may
truly say that he may have both the greatest humility in laying aside the
greatest excellency, and also a due care of credit and of maintaining his just
honor against al unjust usurpers whatsoever.

Thus the scripture teaches us, that God is not only careful, but even
curious, as we may say, and as it self says, jealous of his honor, the
which he cannot abide that it should be any touched or impared, as he does
openly profess of himself, Es. 48. 11. My glory I will not give to any other.
Neither indeed will he suffer any to take it, or any portion of it, but does
straightway confound them all with all their devices, whosoever do any way
obscure it, much more such as have most impiously, yet more foolishly sought to
usurp or participate it.

Thus were the aspyring spiri^s thrown from heaven into the place and pit of
darkness to the which man also (treading in the same steps of sacrilegious
pride) was sent out of paradise to bear them company. Thus were the
vaineglorious builders of the Tower of Babel confounded in all their devises,
and thus the Lord slew 50000. of the presumptuous Bethsemites, who by looking
into the A^ke brought the name and presence of God into contempt. Thus he made
proud Nabuchadnesar, who thought that he might with the majesty of his
person and Palace outface the sun in heaven, yea God himself, whose glory
fills both heaven and earth, to become as a silly and miserable beast: and
thus he confounded Herod by a filthy disease that took to himself the
glorious title of God, which the flattering people ascribed unto him. Neither
need we marvel, that God is so careful in maintaining his honor and glory,
it being the last and chief end of the creation of all things, all which tend
to this one end, and even bend their whole forces to maintain and uphold the
glory of God as of the highest and greatest good, even as we see loyal
subjects to endeavor nothing so much as to maintain the majesty and honor of
their Prince: as we read, Romans 11. 36. Of him, by him and for him are all
things, to him be praise for ever. For if God should suffer any false or fained
God, any man or Angel to usurp any royal prerogative belonging to the
godhead, and so himself to be disgraced, and his majesty diminished, the
confusion of all things (as of the streams the fountain being troubled) must
of necessity follow. And yet god is not so desirous of advancing his name and
glory, but that he can on the other side debase himself, when he thinks
meet as being endued with humility in as great, or rather in greater measure.


Gent. me thinks, that humility does not well agree with the nature of God,
and that there is small use of humiliation in his doings.


Sch. As God does advance others being humble, so he does by his humility,
not debase, but honor and magnify himself: for as we see it to come to
pass in Princes and other great personages, that nothing does make them to be
loved, honored and extolled, so much as does their gentle and familiar
behavior with their subjects and inferiors: so God is exalted in his
humility, and made most glorious in it. Psalm. 113. The Lord is above all
Nations, and his glory above the heavens, who is like unto our God, that having
his habitation in the highest heaven, does debase himself to behold things on
earth? Yea not only to behold them a far off, but also to have a hand and a
part in them. Princes do not use to converse much with their subjects, but that
any of them should so far debase himself, as to take upon him the condition
of a subject, and to suffer his own subjects, to rule and insult over him, yea
to use him despightefully and contumeliously, that is a thing never heard of
neither supposed to be possible to be brought to pass, but that they would
rather loose both their kingdoms and their lives, then suffer such a disgrace
especially at the hands of their subjects. But God the King of Kings did leave
his Throne of majesty in heaven, and made one little Cave or hole of the earth
(all which before was but his footestoole) his chair of estate: yea he took
to himself the form of weak and frail man, not of a Lord or King, but of a
base servant, yea of a vile and loathsome sinner: he suffered himself to be
taunted and reviled, yea which is the greatest disgrace in the world) to be
spit on, as a most vile and filthy thing: who can imagine, must less allege
an example of so great humility? yet herein God is most glorious.

This one instance of his extreme humiliation, makes it needless to allege
his familiar conuersing with men here one earth, his familiar conferring with
Moses face to face, as one friend does with another: his answering them to all
their demands, as it were coming at their call, whereof we have many
examples in the scripture, as namely in Abraham, pleading so hard for Sodom
and in the story of David, 1. Sam. 29. 8, who there asks one question after
an other of God about his worldly affairs, as if he had been aduising with
some familiar friend: but that one example of his unspeakable humility showed
in his incarnation, and in suffering all the miseries of our life, and in the
end, that most shameful death, is so notable, that it can never be
sufficiently admired.


Sect. 2.
THese two only which have been declared, of all those virtues which concern
our selves, are attributed to god: but of those which tend and reach to others,
many may very fitly and truly be ascribed unto him, to show the manner of his
dealing with men, as namely justice in recompe^cing, indulgence in forbearing,
faithfulness in performing promises, and goodness in doing good to men. For
the first, namely justice, it does belong unto God, in respect of that
sovereign authority, which he has over all the creatures in the world, as
well Princes as subjects, as well men as Angels, he being by virtue of the
creation, wherein he made them all of naught, their most natural King, and
the only absolute Monarch of the world: all other Kings and Rulers whatsoever,
being but his substitutes and vicegerents, holding their Crowns and Kingdoms
of him, as uassalles of their liege Lord and master: and ruling by him, from
him, and in his name and steed, yea and by his laws. For howsoever God have
permitted the ordering of their subjects in great part to their will and
discretion, yet he has given and published to the whole world, his own
supreme and universal laws, to the observing whereof, all without any
exception are bound by his commandment and the violating whereof he does most
severely punish. But as no state or Commonwealth can stand by penal laws
only, which restrain vice by threatenings, and punish offenses committed by
due pains, because it is needful that there should also be rewards
appointed, whereby the virtuous endeauours of good subjects may be recompensed
and encouraged, in the right disposing and distributing whereof justice has
place as well as in inflicting the deserved punishment upon offenders: so is
the justice of God, whereby he administ^eth the Kingdom or Commonwealth of
the world, of two sorts, the one in Paena, the other in Praemio, the one in
due punishment, the other in meet rewards. For the first kind, the laws which
concern the punishing of sin are not many, for they are but one, given to all
mankind in the person of Adam, Genesis 2. 17. In the day that thou shall eat,
thou shall die: And Romans 6. 23. The wages of sin is death: The which is the
only punishment (yet diversely inflicted according to the diversity of sins)
appointed for all sins and offenses committed against God, as well for the
least, as for the greatest,

This death begins with our life, during y^ which God lays upon the
sinner, many euilles and miseries, all which are forerunners of that eternal
death and misery, which abides in the world to come. And that me^ should know
and acknowledge, that these temporal euilles come from God as punishments of
their sins, he does usually punish them in the same kind wherein they have
sinned, that so the likeness which the punishment has unto the sin, may
show it to be the son of that father, and the fruit of that tree, Genesis 2 17.
Because thou have eaten of the forbidden fruit, thou shall all the days of thy
life eat in toil, and in the sweat of thy brows. And Genesis 20. 8. The Lord
had shut up all the wombes in the house of Abimelec, because of Sarah Abraham's
wife. And Iud. 1. 7. And Adombezek said, seventy Kings having the thumbes of
their hands and of their feet cut off, gathered under my table, as I have done
so God has rewarded me. And 1. Cor. 1. 21. After that the world would not by
the wisdom of God know God, it pleased God (as a just punishment) by the
foolishness of preaching, to save the believers. All which actions of God, as
well in his temporal, as in eternal punishments we are not to doubt, but that
they are squared according to yt rules of justice, from the which it is
impossible that God would swerve.

Gent. It were impiety to think and blasphemy to speak the contrary: and
yet to tell you plainly, I have been more troubled with doubts about this point
of Gods justice, then in any other: and but for troubling and hindering you in
your course, I would declare them unto you, in hope to be more fully resolved
in this.


Sch. You shall not hinder but further me, I will willingly do my best to
satisfy you.


Gent. I have often thought upon occasion of heating this doctrine, that the
punishment due unto the least sin, is by the justice of god eternal death,
that some Atheists might say of Gods laws, as it was said of Dracos laws
given to the Athenians, yt they were written with blood, and would accuse God of
cruelty, for infflicting so great or rather so endless and infinite a punishmen
upon small sins, yea upon those which may be doubted whither they be sins or
no, as namely to let pass the inward thoughts and desires, (the which although
they be actual, yet they are in the lowest degree of act that can be)
original sin in infants, the which is either alienum, another man's, and
therefore not justly imputed to the^, or if you take it as it is inherent in
themselves, it is but an inclination to sin, not sin indeed and in act.
Besides how should we think that so grievous a punishment as is eternal
death, can without extreme rigor be inflicted upon many thousands of men,
that did never hear tell of god or of his word, either in the law or in the
gospel, as are those poor Indians, which have in this last age been
discovered, whom in all reason inevitable ignorance should excuse, howsoever
wilful ignorance be made damnable. These doubts and diverse other, wherewith I
will not trouble you, have often run in my mind, yet I doubt not but that
God is just in all actions, or rather I doubt whither God can be said to be
vuiust, whatsoever he does to his creatures, yea though he should inflict
extreme punishment upon the most righteous man in the world, for he has
absolute power over the^ all, as the potter has of his claye to dispose of it
as he list himself, and we know, that it is lawful for a man to do to his
own what he will.


Sch. I am not of your opinion, or rather that opinion which you name, that it
were not injustice in God, to punish a righteous man altogether voy de of sin:
for not to allege the promise and covenant of life, which god has made to
man being righteous, but to suppose that God had not bound himself by any
such promise, the absolute power of God over his creatures, will indeed be a
warrant unto him, not only to dispose of them according to his own pleasure,
but even to consume the^ al to naught, as in the beginning he made them all of
naught, but yet not to inflict extreme punishments where there is no sin: for
so God should do that which is contrary to his own nature, the which does
necessarely incline it self toward the goodness of the creature, by doing to
it not evil but good, and therefore he should do evil and that which is
unjust, or rather he should do that, which it is impossible for him to do. But
as touching your obiectio^s against the justice of God, I answer, that we
must not think sins committed against God to be so small, as they seem in
themselves and when they are committed against men: for the greatness of the
majesty of god make^h the least sin to be most heinous, even as we know
that the least indecent behavior toward a Prince, is thought worthy to be
punished with death: and not only outward and actual rebellio^s, but also the
very thoghts and purposes of the mind tending to treason, are accounted most
heinous crimes, yea so heinous, as for them not only the offendant himself,
but also all his posterity for ever are thought worthy to be deprived of all
those dignities and commodities, whatsoever they did enjoy by the liberality
of the Prince, or yet within his dominions. Yet we need not say, that God does
punish infants for Adams sin, for they have in themselves sufficient matter
of damnation, their whole nature being actually corrupted in respect of y^
image of God, for the which cause it is woorthely loathed and abhorred of God.
As for the infidels which have not the word of God, whereby to learn and know
God, you may remember how the Apostle Romans 1. in the latter part or half of the
chapter, does plainly prove that they do wilfully sin against the light of
nature shining in the creatures, yea that they do obstinately contemn god,
whom they might learn out of the creatutes, to be most maiesticall and
worthy, to whom all obedience, honor and thankfulness should be performed. And
lastly, I say that as none in this world can charge God with cruelty, so in
the world to come, the wicked themselves shall confess al their punishments to
be most just.


Gent. What say you the^, to the^ that accuse god of injustice, in respect of
his partial dealing with men, in that he rejects and condemns some to
eternal death, and yet electeth and spares others, who are every way as
sinful, and as unworthy of favor?


Sch. I am sure you will not call that Prince partial or unjust, that shows
favor and gives life to some malefactors, for a testimony of his goodness
and clemency, although he suffer others to be put to death for the same
offense: no more is God unjust in saving some from eternal death, the which
the rest are to suffer, and which all of us do most justly deserve. Yea if we
do consider the manner and the means, by the which God does save these his
elect from the death which they deserve, we shall be far enough off, from
imagining any partial dealing in him. For howsoever he did fully determine,
and most earnestly desire, to save some from eternal death, yet his justice
would not in any case suffer that to be done, unless and until the death and
punishment due unto their sins, were fully suffered by some other in their
behalf. Whereof it came, that (no creature being able to sustain it) God
himself was feign to do it, and so did debase himself to a shameful death,
the which what was it else but the confusion of all things, that God should lay
aside his glory and majesty, to suffer shame and ignon inie? and yet all this
he did because his infinite justice would admit no partial dealing. Yea so
great is the justice of God, that it cannot be perverted by that most tender
love which he bears to his elect, being now both redeemed by the death of
Christ, and also sanctified by his own spirit, but that he does still lay upon
them grecuous punishments for those sins, whereby they do displease and
dishonor him. 1. Pet. 4. 17. The time is come that judgment shall begin at
the house of God, and if it do begin with us, where shall the wicked appear,
that is, he will be far less partial and more severe with them. For sin is
as seed cast into the ground, which multiplyeth it self, and comes forth
with advantage to the sower, yea although he be otherwise a godly and just
man. Thus God dealt with David, a man according to his own heart, repaying him
the injuries done to Vriah, from whom he took both his wife, and also his
life, in full yea in ouerrunning measure, making his own son to take from him
his wives, crown, kingdom, children, and well nigh his life also. Yea this
advantage or overplus, which David received at the hands of Godbesides the
principal, is noted 2. Sam. 12. 12. Thou did sin secretly, but I will pay
the before all Israel, even in the face of the sun.


Gent. Do you call this justice, or is it not rather injustice, to make the
faithful bear in their own persons the punishment of their sins, which
Christ has already borne to the full.


Sch. It is without question that God brings even upon the godly, for those
sins whereby they dishonor him, most bitter and fearful evils, yea (as I
have heard that a godly man uses to say) that God never suffers any great
sin committed by any of them, to escape unpunished: and that not only for
their chastisement and amendment, which is the usual end of their
afflictions, but also even for this end, to make them testimonies and examples
of his severity, justice, and impartial dealing, for he does often punish
them in their posterity after their death, as he did Eli his negligence in not
correcting the misdemeanor of his sons, and the idolatry of Solomon, by
taking away ten of the twelve tribes from his successors. Yet there is a
difference betwixt their suffering, and the suffering of Christ, who did suffer
for this end, to satisfy Gods justice for the sins of the elect, the which
they cannot do either in whole or in part: for if they were put to satisfy
Gods justice but for the least of their sins, they should suffer not only
temporally, but also eternally, and so should perish: but Christ only
suffers for the satisfaction, and they for the declaration of Gods justice.


Sect. 3.
But we may not stay any longer in this part of his justice, we must now
briefly consider the other, to wit, the remuner atiue justice, by the which he
rewards the goodness of his reasonable creatures.

Gent. You need not be long in this point, for I think there is small use of
it: not but that God is most bountiful in rewarding those that do deserve, but
for that none (except the Angels) do or can deserve any reward at the hands of
god, for their obedience and good, being imperfect and polluted with sin, are
so far from deserving rewards, that they cannot possibly stand before the
seat of Gods justice and judgment, but are rejected as silthie menstruous
clou^es, as the scripture speaks.


Sch. You say true, that according to the strickt rigor of Gods law and
justice, our best works are so far from deserving reward, that they deserve
eternal death. But there is a time and use as for the rigor, so also ^or the
mitigation of Gods justice, in the which it pleases God of his mercy and
goodness to pass over and over see the imperfections and sinfulness of man's
obedience and works, and both to promise in word, and to perform in deed
competent rewards, as he sees most meet, and that not only to the godly, but
even to the wicked. For the first, the retribution of good to the godly, has
place both in this life and also in the life to come. Not that God does always
reward the godly with te^porall benefits, for that is not always good for them
for their eternal salvation, in respect whereof god sees it often to be
needful that they should live, yea and end their days also under the cross
in grievous afflictions: yet this temporal retribution is never wholly
wanting, but is found if not at one time, yet at another: if not in their life
time, and in their own persons, yet in their graves, and in their childers
children, even to the thousant generation: if not so fully as flesh and blood
desire, yet so that they may plainly acknowledge the goodness and rewarding
hand of God. Thus God promises at large, Deuteronomy. 29. that they which fear and
obey him, shall even be compassed about with all manner of blessings, that every
thing y^ belongs unto them, and that they take in hand, shall prosper and
have good success, as the Apostle witnesses, 1. Tim. 4. 1. That godliness is
profitable in all respects, having the promise both of this life, and of the
life to come: and Christ himself Math. 19. 29. He that forsakes any worldly
thing for my sake and the gospels, shall both inherit eternal life, and also
receive an hundred fold even in this life. Thus God did from one generation to
another, and thus he will do even unto the end of the world, both remember
and also recompense the godliness of his servants, Abraham, David and others:
and thus he made a covenant with Phinees, in regard of that hi^ zealous love of
his glory, to bless and honor both him and his posterity from age to age.
Thus God has done, and thus he will do in all ages: yet with this difference,
that the greater measure of spiritual graces the godly have, the less need
they have of temporal blessings to confirm and cherish their faith: and the
nearer they come to the fruitio^ of eternal glory the more they may and ought
to contemn worldly pleasures: whence it is that this temporal retribution is
not so plentiful, and so apparent in these ages of the gospel, which flow in
abundance of spiritual graces, as it was before when they were scant.

But that which is wanting and doubtful in this life, shall without doubt be
fully performed in the life to come, where the obedience and good works, the
afflictions and patience of the godly, shall be rewarded, not only with just
praise and commendation, (the which reward is deserved, and agreeable to the
nature of their works, and is mentioned 1. Cor. 3. 14. 15. If any man's work
stand, he shall have wages or recompense, but if it fail, he shall want that
recompense, and yet be saved) but also with eternal happiness: the which
although it pass by a thousand degrees, the desert, or rather although it
cannot in any part or respect be deserved by any obedience of the faithful in
this life, because all their obedience is imperfect, yet it pleases God in
mercy to call it a reward, yea to be content that they look for it in that
name, as we see that the Apostle does, 2. Tim. 4. 7. 8. I have fought a good
fight, and have kept the faith: from hence forth I am to expect that crown of
rightteousnesse, which the Lord that righteous judge shall give me. And so Romans
8. 8. although the afflictions of this life be not worthy to have such a
reward, as is the glory of the life to come, yet he makes the one to depend
on the other.


Gent. Me thought you said, that the rewarding justice of God is so great,
that it extends it self even to the reprobate, recompencing their good
deeds (if they may be called good) with blessings: but what fruit can be
looked for from the root of infidelity, but corrupt, the which if God should
reward, what should he do else, but bolster and maintain them in their sin?


Sch. God does reward with good, not the wicked deeds of ungodly and unjust
men, but the honest and upright actions of such as are ciuilly and morally
virtuous, yea and perhaps affected with some blind zeal of religion: the which
although they cannot merit before Gods judgment seat, being not only
imperfect and in part sinful, as are the actions of the godly, but also wholly
sinful, in that they come from an evil root, yet they have respects of good,
the which God rewards with temporal blessings, as he did Achabs outward
repentance and humilation, with immunitie from those temporal plagues, which
belonged to his sins. And thus did God reward Iehu Achabs successor, for
executing his anger and vengenace upon Achabs house, with the honor of the
kingdom to the fourth generation. Thus you have heard somewhat of Gods
justice, the which although it shall without doubt have the full sway at length
in punishing and confounding the wicked, yet for the time of this life, it is
suspended and kept from executing the full force upon them, that so there may
be place, use, and declaration for another virtue of God, called patience and
long suffering, the which who cannot but admire, that considers the horrible
outrages, blasphemies, cursings, and all manner of contemptuous and spiteful
impiety, which the ungodly do daily spew out against God and his holy truth,
and yet they go not only unpunished, but also prosper and flourish as if they
were blessed of God, who does by this patience only harden them to their
eternal destruction.


Sect. 4.
THere remains now to be considered in a word or two, the last knot of divine
virtues consisting in Gods natural inclination to do good unto his creatures:
they may be called by the general name of goodness, to the which his general
favor to all, his particular friendship with some few and his fidelity or
faithfulness both to the one and to the other, may be referred. For as he is
only good, that is, the first fountain and full treasure of all good things,
so he does not enuiously keep it wholly to himself, but does graciously impart
it to others, even to all living things, base and excellent, good and evil,
reasonable and unreasonable, one and other, all of them do either drink or
taste of this sweet cup of Gods goodness and blessings. He suffers his
rain to fall upon the just and upon the unjust, he feeds and fills all
things living with a plentiful hand, there is no end or measure of his
goodness. For why, he has a favor unto them, as a father has to his
children, and as a skillful workman to the works of his own hands, wherein
his nature and Image, or his skill and cunning do plainly appear.

Yea, so great is his goodness toward them, that he vouchsafes to enter
into bonds and covenants with them, binding himself to them by promises and
oaths, for the performance of that good unto them, which comes from him, not
as of necessity and by constraint, or yet by their desert, but only of mere
favor and his natural goodness. In the performance whereof he is so sure,
yea so careful as we see honest men to be in keeping their promises, that
the whole world shall sooner fail, then any jot of that which he has
promised. Whereof we may gather, how odious to God is the impiety of those men
or rather blasphemous monsters, that are not ashamed to call into question, if
not flatly to deny, the truth of that which God has from time to time
promised to his Church, as touching eternal happiness in the world to come:
yea, and that the faithful themselves, while they often doubt within
themselves of the truth and fidelity of GOD, in making good whatsoever he
has spoken, do no doubt greatly both displease and dishonor God.

But most of all in this kind, we are to admire the friendship and
familiarity which it pleases God to have with men, yea with sinful and
mortal men, to some of whom he vouchsafes not only this general favor,
whereof all the creatures in the world are partakers, and that eternal love
which brings with it eternal salvation, but also a more special favor,
admitting them into his secret counsel and acquaintance, as men do some
special and approved friends.

Thus we read that Enoch walked with GOD, that Moses did ordinarely talk and
confer with him face to face, as one friend does with an other: thus he did
(as it were in sport) familiarly wrestle with Jacob, and continually both
accompany and assist him: thus he was to David as a Counselor, to direct him
in all his affairs, and thus he took Paul up to heaven, and showed him
things not to be uttered. But of all other, most notable in this respect was
Abraham, called often in Scripture by the name or rather by the most honorable
and glorious title of Gods friend, as 2: Chro. 20. 7. Es. 41. 8. James 2. 23.
And in truth so might he well be called, for God did both make and keep
with him very solemnly, all the laws of true friendship. For first he made a
covenant of perpetualloue, with him and with his seed for ever, calling Abraham
Gods friend. and himself Abraham's God. Secondly, he did bestow upon him all
his blessings both temporal and spiritual, yea the greatest honor that could
be, namely to be as it were the foundation of his Church and chosen people,
and the first of the progenitors of Christ. And lastly, he did impart to him
his purposes and counsels in all things that did any way concern him, or might
make for his good.

Yea, we read that God was so careful in the performance of this duty (for
so it pleases God to bind himself in duties to men) of friendship, that
being about to destroy those wicked Cities of Sodom and Gomorra, he thought
it needful to impart the matter to his friend Abraham, yea to have his assent
for the doing of it. Thus it pleases God of his mercy and goodness to exalt
wretched men to this highest degree of honor, which indeed is so high, as that
the Angels in heaven do seldom attain unto it. So that in this respect, and
in many other heretofore mentioned, we may well burst forth with the Prophet.
Psalm. 8. 5. And say, what is man that thou that art the great God of heaven and
earth should remember him, or the son of man that thou should thus visit
him.

Sect. 5.
Gent. I Am thinking with my self, what faculty there is in the soul of man
not yet mentioned: for if there be any, I doubt not (considering the great
likeness betwixt the soul of man and the nature of God, in those faculties
common to them both, which you have already handled) but that it is either truly
belonging to God, or at the least, will give occasion to consider something in
his nature. You know that men conceive things by imagination and retain them
by memory, are these faculties in God? likewise, conscience in man is a
distinct faculty, or rather an act of the mind, and there are in him diverse
affections, as joy and grief, and diverse virtues not as yet mentioned, what
are we to think of these things?


Sch. I hope you do not look to hear at this time, whatsoever might be said
of the nature of God: you are not now so desirous, but if that were taken in
hand, you would be as weary of hearing, ere it were half done: if the chief
matters be declared, they will give sufficient light, whereby the rest may be
perceived, and so by those which have been handled, you may easily understand
the nature of the rest of those good affections, and virtuous dispositions,
which are in scripture attributed to God. So for the essential faculties of
the soul, you say very truly, that they are most like to the divine nature,
and even a plain and express Image of it: yet this difference must be noted,
that whatsoever thing is in them that argues weakness or suture
possibility, that has not truly place in the divine nature, which is a
perfect and complete act. As in these particulars which you have named,
imagination is but a possibility or means of knowledge, but the knowledge of
God has been said to be eternal and actual.

It is hard, I confess, and even impossible for us to see or imagine how all
the particulars in the world should exist actually in any understanding from
all eternity, but we must not measure the infiniteness of Gods understanding
by our shallow brains. But as touching the question which you move of
imagination and the means and manner of knowledge in God, how the ideae or
notions of things enter into his mind, or rather how they exist eternally in it
without any entering in or beginning, first it must be held, that although
they exist eternally in GOD, yet they are not essential to him, that is, so
natural and necessary as that without them he could nor exist, as is the
knowledge of himself and the idea of his own nature, yea all the rest of Gods
essential attributes, of all which if we should detract but one from God, we
should quite destroy and overthrow his whole nature and essence.

But the knowledge of the creatures is not of that kind, for God being in
himself absolute and all sufficient, might have (if it had so seemed good
unto him) existed without ever either making or knowing any creature, and
therefore the knowledge of them in God, must be thought to arise not from the
absolute necessity of his nature, but from the free liberty of his will,
moving (yet eternally) his understanding to this actual knowledge of the
creatures. Yea that as the knowledge oridea of his own nature is (according to
y^ order of nature, not any difference of time) first in the essential
understanding of God, and then in his will, so the knowledge or idea of the
creatures has his beginning not in the understanding but in the will of God.
This difference we have and see more plainly in our selves, for as we have
some general notions engraven in our minds by nature it self, and so in a
manner both bred and borne with us without any help of our wills, so the
knowledge of other things has the beginning in the will, disposing and
inclining the mind to this or that knowledge, as it seems best unto it.
Secondly as touching this (in a manner accidental) knowledge of God, it must
be held that God has it of himself and not by the means, or from the
creatures, as we have, that by sense and imagination get the resemblances of
things into our minds, the which way of knowledge if it were admitted to be
in God, it would follow, that his knowledge of the creature does not go before,
but follows after it and so is not the cause but rather an effect of it, and
not eternal but temporal, whereas we hold that the will and eternal
foreknowledge of God are the cause of all things.


Gent. I have heard it said, that the divine nature is as it were a Glass,
wherein al things that do at any time exist in the world, may be seen and
known, and that by the Saints and Angels in heaven, much more then by God
himself, who knows all things by his own essence, it being the similitude
of all things.


Sch. Some have thought as you say, but it is a mere fable to say that either
the Saints or the Angels do or can see the essence of God, much less all
things in it. It is true that God knows all things, and that by his essence,
if thereby we mean his essential understanding, and that by the similitude
which his essential understanding has to the creatures, if thereby we mean
the similitude which is betwixt the general idea or notion and the particular
instance. For as it is essential and natural to God to know himself, so it
is essential and natural to him to know the general differences of things,
without the knowledge whereof he could not know himself. As namely it is
essential to God to know what is reasonable, infinite, knowledge, wisdom,
good and eternal, for otherwise he could not know his own nature, which
consistesh in these differences. By the same means also he knows what is
unreasonable, finite, error, folly, evil and time, which are contrary to the
other, for one contrary cannot be known without the knowledge of the other.

This is the essential knowledge engraven in the very nature of GOD, and as
we say of our natural notions, both borne and bred with him, but it does not
extend it self any further or descend into particulars: for it is not
essential to GOD, to know Peter, Paul, or any other man, nor yet to know the
nature of man, nor yet to know this world wherein we live, for GOD might
have existed though none of these had ever been. But the knowledge of these
particulars, is by the free will of GOD deducted from those general notions,
which are essential to God: who has thought good to make by the creation a
particular instance, example, and as it were an experiment of his essential
and universal knowledge.


Gent. You seem to be of their opinion, that think that God knows no
particulars, because there is no medium, no means or way by the which the
similitudes of them should be carried from the things to the nature of God,
for that there must be a conuenience betwixt the things known and the mind:
which is not betwixt the creatures and the understanding of God.


Sch. I am far from that absurd error, and I hope from any such: I do not doubt
but that God knows every particular thing in the world severally and
distinctly from all other, yea, that he has in his eternal counsel
distinguished them, as namely men, of whom he has appointed some to glory and
others to confusion: yea, that he knows every particular thing far more
distinctly and truly then we do, that see and feel them: for he knows them
in their causes, and essential forms, the which only is the true knowledge,
whereas we do but guess at their natures by their qualities and effects.


Gent. Yet perhaps you do think that God knows the particulars of this
world which now existeth, more then he does a 1000. other worlds, which never
did nor shall exist indeed, although they exist in the universal notions of Gods
understanding, and so may be as well known to God as this particular world,
which is brought forth into act.


Sch. We cannot say, if we speak properly, that God knows any particulars,
but those which do sometime exist. He knows himself able to make such
particulars, if it were his will, but they are not particulars, until his will
do bring them into act: for as universal notions are in Gods vnderstanstanding
as in their first fountain, or rather in their proper place, so particulars
come from the will of God: And therefore we must needs think that God knows
those particulars which do or shall exist, or have existed otherwise then those
which do never exist, for he knows the one and not the other.


Gent. Let me trouble you once more, and no more, for this is a point that I
could never understand, to wit how God gets the knowledge of these things:
do you think that he knows those things which he has decreed to exist no
otherwise, when and while they do exist, then he does before, and after: or
that the existance of them makes some kind of impression, or alteration in
his mind, which was not before?


Sch. No surely, the existence of things does no way alter or affect God:
objects do work upon our senses and mind, but Gods understanding is merely
active not passive: yet we cannot doubt, but that as God makes us to perceive
things by sense, and the Angels by some other means, so he is able by means
to make himself capable of the qualities of particular objects, but of
himself and in his own nature, he is altogether incapable of them, or of any
knowledge by them.


Gent. You have no list to answer me directly to the question: I do not think
that God does suffer from the objects, but that is all one, I would know
whether that he does not know and see us, as we go here otherwise then he did,
when we were in the loins of our first father Adam, and whether that he do
not plainly see us two particularly and distinctly, whether he do it
intromittendo, as we do, or which is more agreeable to his nature being
impassible) extramittendo, that is not the question: but I cannot be persuaded
but that although he knows us fully and certainly before we exist, yet when
once we do exist in nature, he then does see and behold us after an other
manner.


Sch. You say true, I have no mind to wade far into this matter, for it is
very hard, yea impossible for us to know the manner of the actual knowledge of
God: and therefore I did pass it over in the proper place, neither would I have
mentioned it but that you urge me so hard: for I think it sufficient for us
to know that God knows all things, even the most secret thoughts of our
minds, although we be ignorant how he comes to that knowledge. But for your
question I have told you my opinion, that howsoever you seem to think that
God knows things not existing and sees the^ as it were with eyes, when they
do exist, yet it seems more consonant to the truth to say, y^ the creatures
whither existing or desisting, are all alike known to God, and I pray you rest
in this answer, for this time. Now as touching memory, as God has no use of
imagination, because he has nothing to learn, so he has no need of memory,
for that he cannot loose any thing by forgetfulness, all things being present
unto him both past and future. Likewise for conscience, which is the testimony
given by the mind in the presence of God of the innocence and integrity or
of the guiltiness of this or that reasonable creature, and so either of the
want or of the desert of blame, it may in some sort be attributed to God, and
that in respect both of himself as also of the creature: for first, God as he
is in all respects most pure and innocent, yea most holy and good, so before
himself and in his own presence, he both knows and acknowledges himself
so to be, and for that cause not only to be free fio^ all desert of blame, but
also to deserve most worthily al praise and glory. But more plainly this
faculty has use in respect of men, who do often charge God with evil,
injury, injustice, cruelty, and many other grecuous crimes, in the which plea
this faculty of conscience does clear and absolve God, from all those
blasphemous reproaches which wretched men spew out against him. Romans 3. 4. Let
God be true and every man a liar that thou may be justified in thy sayings,
and overcome when thou art judged. Thus much of the faculties of the mind,
which you thought omitted in the former discourse: as for the affections and
virtues, as joy grief, and diverse other, which in scripture ate often
attributed to God, their nature may be known by those which have been handled.


CHAP. VI. Of the external attributes of God.
THus I have declared unto you, those things which for the present I could call
to my remembrance as touching the nature of God, his existence, essence, and
attributes, either truly taken or typically borrowed from the faculties of a
reasonable soul. To the which if you add the external attributes which are
borrowed from the body or outward person of man, as is the eternity of GOD
from the age or continuance of man, his vbiquitie from the greatness or
stature of man, his omnipotency from the strength of man, with others of the
same kind, you have a perfect picture of the nature of God shadowed out,
though rudely and imperfectly, under the shape of man.

This last kind of attributes has been touched already in speaking of the
infiniteness of God, the general and essential difference of his nature, from
the which they do necessarely flow, and therefore we are here to make an
end of this conference: and so we may of our journey also, if you think good
to light and lead along this long causey: it will be a great ease both to our
selves and to our horses, and we may (now that we are in sight of the Town)
talk of our lodging, for it is meet that we have some care of our bodies,
that so we may be able afterward to serve God by meditation, conference, and
such other Christian exercises.

Gent. Nay by your favor sir, I must needs desire you to make an end of the
task, which upon agreement, though unwillingly you took in hand: It would be
a great grief (I will not say a shame) for a man that had toyled all the day
long many a long mile through thick and thin, to give over at the last cast,
in the sight of the place whither he goes: if you have perhaps touched
these attributes by the way upon some occasion, it follows not, that they
should be denied their proper and due place in this work, the which without
them would be maimed and imperfect.

I like well that we light and lead, for so we shall have the more time for
conference but for our lodging we will not trouble our selves as yet, but
rather take it as we find it, and therefore I pray you let me hear and know
somewhat of these also in particular, and first why you call them external
attributes.


Sch. I hope your meaning is not that we shall go reasoning into the town, for
so we should have moderatours inow to cut us off: but to shut up these things
breefely: They are called external, not as if there were any such difference
of external and internal in god as in man, consisting of an outward body and
an inward soul, for in God there is neither without nor within, but all alike:
but they are so called in GOD because they are so in truth in man from whose
nature the resemblance is taken. Yea further they may be so called, howsoever
they be as essential as the other: for that they do not come so immediately
from the root of Gods essence, which is an infinite understanding, neither so
properly belong to the nature of it, but are as it were, begotten by the
conjunction of the difference which is infiniteness to the essential
understanding of GOD: the which brings forth knowledge, wisdom, will and
the rest of the aforesaid attributes, more naturally and properly then it does
eternity and vbiquitie, the which are found only in this one understanding,
whereas the other are common to al understandings, both finite and infinite. And
therefore we may truly say that the infinite knowledge of God is more inward and
near the understanding which is the root of Gods essence, then is his infinite
continuance, although not more essential: even as we see that those parts of a
tree, which are nearer the root, may be said to be the inner parts, and the
small twigs the utter parts, although the one be no more essential to the tree
then the other. Now for the particulars: and to begin with the eternity of God
which is his everlasting age or continuance, represented to us, Dan. 7. 9. by
an old aged man, whose head and hair are as white as snow, or ye whitest
wolle, the which testifies that he is no babe of yesterdaies birth, but that
he has lived and continued in the world many years: even so it is with god,
or rather so it is not with god, for the oldest man that is had a time of birth
and beginning, tho long since, and shall have a time of end even hard at hand
but god is without father or mother, and has neither beginning of days nor
end of life, but is the same this day, yesterday and for ever. He is not by the
gray or white hayres of old age summoned to the court of death, for he is
always in his fresh and flourishing youth: his substance does not wear and
waste away, for it is not as are the bodies of men, as a Kingdom divided in it
self, which therefore cannot stand but is simple without mixture or
diversity, and therefore without iarring, yea all peril and peradventure of
ruin.

So then this eternity of God is to be defined, the everlasting existence of
his essence without either beginning or end. For if it had beginning, then it
did not always exist, for it could not exist before it had a beginning: And
if it did not always exist, then sometime there was nothing, but that cannot
be, for if there were time, there was distinction of motion which made that
time, but where there is nothing, there is no motion, for nothing cannot move.

Besides, if the time ever were, wherein there was no thing nor nature existing
(for if God were not existing there was nothing, for whatsoever did then exist
was god, because it did primarely exist) nothing should ever have existed: for
if the Philosopher could not see how the most mighty and omnipotent God could
make ye first matter of the world, for that he had nothing whereof to make it,
and just nothing says he, (though falsely) is made of nothing, what would he
say to this paradoxe, that nothing did of nothing make something, yea all
things, not only material bodies, but even the most pure and operative
forms? But we know that God is eternal, that is, he ever was, and never
was not, he was not made by nothing, for nothing makes nothing, nor by any
thing, for that which could make God, was before god and greater then God, and
therefore only God: but God made himself, not by giving or rather by taking a
beginning to himself, but by being himself, as he does still, and shall for
ever make himself. He was always, as he will be evermore, never beginning,
nor ever ending, but always being. He existeth not of nothing, but of
himself, not by another, but by himself, in no other but in himself, and for
no other but for himself, and so he is to himself all in all. Yea as God is
eternal, so every eternal is God, for no creature can be eternal, because
with the creature there comes in generation and motion, and with motion time,
and so eternity is abandoned: for time and eternity are contraries, as are
finite and infinite,. the measure and that which is unmeasurable. But (you may
say) how could God exist without the creature, for how could he exist without
working and doing something, he being a most actual and operative form, and
how could he work, if he had no matter to work on? how could God extend his
goodness, there being nothing to receive it, or how could he have glory and
honor, there being none to give it, for honor is in the giver, not in the
taker? or what disparagement would it have been to God, if he had made the
creature to exist from all eternity, more then it is that he will make it to
existe to all eternity, as we know that he has promised in holy scripture?
yes surely, God is not pind upon the sleeue of the creature, that he could not
exist and that in perfect happiness and glory, without the help or company
of any creature, the which howsoever it do set forth the glory of God after
another manner, then that whereby God was glorious in and to himself ftom all
eternity, yet it adds nothing to the perfection of Gods glory, which before
was absolute, although not in the same manner. Neither can we doubt but that
this eternity of the creature would be a great blot to the glory of God,
whereof his eternity is now a notable part, but should not be if that the
creature were eternal as well as God. And therefore it must be content to be
a degree beneath him, rather then to strive in vain to fetch the pedigree from
so ancient a stock: eternity must be left to God as a royal prerogative
proper to his house and crown, for the antiquity of a few thousand years
may serve to make ye creature noble. Now that objection which says, that God
could not exist without the creatures, because without the^ he could not work,
is easily answered: for before the creation, God did no way move or work: yet
he was not idle, for he did as he does still, give himself to the
contemplation of himself, even of his own infinite essence and glory.


Sect. 4.
NExt to the eternity of GOD, comes to be considered his vbiquitie which
concerns the stature and greatness of GOD, as the other did his age and
continuance. For as in time, so also in greatness God must be known and
acknowledged to be infinite, not enclosed or comprehended within any creature
or place either in heaven or in earth, but silling all creatures, and all
places both in heaven and earth, yea stretching and extending himself beyond
the compass of the world by infinite degrees, and that not only by his power
(his essence being in some set particular place) as we know that Princes
sitting and being contained in a little chair, stretch their power and
authority over whole countries and kingdoms far distant from them: but it
is not so with God, who as in power, so also in his substance and essence is
every where, in all things and in all places, for he is not by any thing either
kept or put and as it were iusled out and dispossessed of his place, but is in
all places even where the grossest bodies are, as well as where is neither
place nor body. We see how the air (to the which we have before compared the
vbiquitie of God) is desirous to enlarge his dominions, and therefore as soon
as ever it finds any place empty, it straightway takes possession: but if
there be any body in it to keep possession, it is kept out a doors, and can
have no title to it: and so in all other bodies we see that the weaker gives
place to the stronger, for it is impossible that two bodies should be together
in one place. But it is not so with God, for no creature is able to put him out
of any place: he does suffer the creatures to have their several places, but
not to usurp his place, the which is every place, as well where the creatures
are, as where nothing is. For their being in place does not hinder him from
being there, for he is there as well as they, and even where they are. He is
where the earth is, for he is in the earth, and both heaven and earth are in
him, and subsist in him as in their subject and foundation, upholding and
containing them. And therefore his title is better to that place which they
have, then is theirs, for he was there in peaceable possession of it, before
they were any where existing, and so he will be there when they are consumed
to ashes and gone.

Gent. I do easily believe that God is every where, and that his exceeding
greatness is more then sufficient to fill a thousand worlds: but I pray you
show me how God is present every where, whither he be partly in one place,
and partly in another, or rather as I have heard them say, wholly in every
place, as it is said of the soul, that it is tota in toto corpore, and tota in
qualibet part, wholly both in the whole body, and also in every part or
member of it.


Sch. That is indeed the usual saying and similitude, according to the which
god is to be thought to be wholly in every Church and house, yea in the least
thing that is, as well as in the greatest. It is sure, that the essence of God
is most simple and uniform without any distinction of parts, but the very
same every where: yet that common saying is hard to be understood, and
therefore may easily by the simple be perverted to their own destruction: who
hearing God to be wholly in every place, will readely suppose him to be
contained in that place, and so to be finite, yea to be divided into infinite
Gods, as the Heathen imagined every house and person to have his proper god
attending on him. And therefore we may more ^asely and truly imagine God to
be one whole undivided and uniform essence, containing and enclosing in it
self all bodies as does the air, yet not excluded out of any place where any
body is, as the air is out of all such places, and that God is not in this or
that place, Church, or house, but that all places, houses, churches, yea the
earth, air, and heaven it selfare in God, and that in quantity even as a pins
point is in respect of the whole compass of heaven, and that in him the whole
world moves and has his being. Yea, his essence extends it self
infinitely without the compass of the world, and above the highest heavens, and
so is to be thought to be totally or wholly in any one place, and that
equally, as much in one place as in another.


Gent. I pray you show me that, for I have always thought God to be after a
special manner there, where he professed himself to be, as namely to be
present with the Arc and the propitiatory seat, more then in the Idols of
the heathen, in the temple of Jerusalem, more then in any other: so likewise to
be in the godly more then in the wicked, in heaven, the which the scripture
does usually make the place of Gods dwelling and residencie, more then in hell,
or on the earth: and most of all, to be in the humanity of Christ, wherein
the Apostle says. Col. 2. 9. That the fullness of the Godhead does dwell
bode^y.


Sch. If you think the essence of God to be in any one place more then in
another, you are greatly deceived: it is every where alike, neither can it
possibly be otherwise, for it cannot be gathered or compacted together into
any other form, then is that infinite greatness, which fills all places,

God may indeed show his presence by outward actions, more in one place then
in another, and so say and profess himself to be there only, and no where
else, speaking according to the erroneous conceit of men, that think him to be
no where present in essence, but where he shows himself and his power by
some outward sign. Thus God was present in the Temple of Jerusalem, and more
specially in the holy of holiest, and in the propitiatory seat more then in
other places, not by his essence but by his mercy and goodness, the which he
did there reveal and show to the Jews more then to any other people. Thus God
is present in his spirit in the faithful, more then in the carnal man, not by
the essence, but by the effectual operation of it, reneuing in the^ his own
image of holiness and truth, the which thing he does not in the other. Thus
God is present in heaven more then in hell or here on earth not in essence,
but in glory and majesty, the which shines more in heaven, then any where
else. For even as a man having been kept all his life in a dark dungeon from
the light of the sun, and the sight of the creatures in the world, if he were
on a sudden brought up into the open air, and suffered to behold all these
glorious creatures, would not stick to say and affirm, this world to be the
very dwelling place and palace of God: so does heaven seem in respect of this
inferior world wherein we live. But the greatest doubt is of the humanity of
Christ, with the which (without doubt) the Godheade is present far otherwise,
yea far more excellently then ever it was with any creature, or in any place
either in heaven or earth: yea so, that if it were possible for the divine
essence to be in any one thing or place more the^ in another, it would without
question be more in the humanity of Christ, then ever it was any where. For
God did never before vouchsafe such unspeakable honor to any creature, as to
take it into his own person and to himself, yea to be himself. Yet for all
this, the essence of God is no more in the humanity of Christ, then in other
places and creatures, and yet it is joined, yea united to it, so as it never
was to any creature.


Gent. How is that strange conjunction of the humanity of Christ to the
divine essence?


Sch. For that I must crave pardon of you, it is not so soon done as desired:
it is well if I can get done the task which you exact of me, though I do not
meddle with other matters, especially with such as being very hard and
intricate, require several and large treatreatises: it is better that we hold
our selves to the matter in hand, and so seeing in part the truth of this
point, to proceed to the rest of the external attributes of god, as namely to
the omnipotency of God.


Sect. 3.
Gent. I did not think it to have been a matter requiring either long time,
or any great labor, and then I am sure you would not have stuck with me, but
I pray you hold on your course, seeing you will not be entreated to digress.


Sch. The omnipotency of God is resembled in man by the strength of his body,
or the power of his person, yet there is as great difference, as is betwixt the
age of man and the eternity of God, or the stature of man, and the
incomprehensible greatness of god. For as God is, so is his power, by the
which he is able and sufficient to do whatsoever pleases him, as it is
defined Psalm. 135. 6. The Lord is great above all Gods, and has done
whatsoever he would in heaven and in the earth, in the sea and in the deeps:
and what need there to be more power then will, or to what purpose is that
power, which is without the will. So that the object of Gods power, is the
whole world, in the which, and over the which, God has so ample and absolute
authority, that neither the greatness, strength, nor multitude of the creatur
is able to resist his will and power, who is able (if he were willing) to turn
all things vpside down, to make the heaven and the earth change places the one
with the other, so that the heaven should rest in the midst, and the earth
turn about in the circle.

Yea as he made both heaven and earth, and all things in them contained of
nothing, so he is able to turn them all to nothing, and that without any
labor or difficulty, even by the breath of his mouth, and the mere
inclination of his will.

But howsoever this power of God cannot be matched by any creature, yet it
does both match and ouermatch it self, restraining it self so, that it is not
able to do any thing against it self, for that which God by his power does at
any time, he cannot by his power make it to be not done or undone at the same
time, for so the power of God should be contrary to it self. And therefore
if God by his power make the sun to shine at any time, he cannot by his
power make that it shall not shine at the very same time.

If he make man free, he cannot make him bound, if he give him will, he cannot
compel him to be willing, for so he should not give, but take away will from
him: and so in all other instances, it is impossible to God to make
contradictories to be true, because he being perfect unity, cannot be
contrary to himself. And if God cannot make any repugnancie in the nature of
the creatures, much less can he do it in his own nature, and therefore he
cannot do any thing contrary unto it, as namely to justify a wicked man, or
to condemn the righteous, to love one that is sinful, or to hate him that is
endued with his own image of holiness, to diminish, destroy, or any way to
alter himself, who is unchangeable. These things God cannot do, being hindered
not by any creature but by himself, and therefore the impossibility of doing
them, is not to be accounted weakness or impotencie, but strength and power:
otherwise nothing is impossible to be done by God, that can possibly be
imagined by man. How then can we sufficiently wonder at the gross error and
sottish ignorance of those men, who in respect of the difficulty or rather
impossibility (as they think) of performing them, call into question the
truth of those promises which God has made to his Church of the resurection
of the body, although consumed to nothing, and of eternal glory. But as they
err, not knowing the scriptures nor the power of God, so we seeing these
things to be most easy to God, are to be confirmed in faith and in the
resolute persuasion of the truth of them.


Gent. I am I thank God fully persuaded, that God both can easily, and will
vndoubttedly restore us to life, though we were consumed to nothing, by burning
a thousand years in the hotest fire that can be made or imagined. Yet I pray
you tell me one thing, do you think it possible that the very same
indiuiduum, and as you say in the Schools, idem numero, having been consumed
to nothing, can be restored, as namely the same candle after that it is
consumed?


Sch. I perceive you meaning: it is certain that God both can and will raise
us to life again, not in any other, but in these very same persons, which now
we are: but what the Schoolmen mean by that quidditie of idem numero, and
many other of the same kind, as I never did, so I do not now mean to trouble my
self with them.


Sect. 4.
We will rather come to the rest of these external attributes, the which (as I
am of my self not unwilling) so you see that we must of necessity knit up in
very few words. First for the similitude of the divine essence, the which must
be granted to be a most simple and pure form, altogether void not only of
all mixsture of diverse matters or contrary qualities, as we know the
elements to be, but even of all manner of composition whatsoever, even of that
which is the simplest, to wit, of matter and form, whereof all creatures do
necessarely subsist, for that neither matter nor form can in them exist the one
without the other. But there can no kind of matter be admitted into the
divine essence, no not that whereof as being most pure, subtle and simple, the
heavens, or the Angels themselves (more subtle then the heavens, if more may
be) do consist. For so we should pull down all that we have built up, and
gainesay all that has hithertoo been affirmed of the nature of God. For we
cannot make him both eternal, and also compounded of matter and form, for in
composition there is motion, and in motion time, and time takes away
eternity, yea we must grant the matter whereof he is compounded, to have
been before him, the which must subsist in simple, before it be brought into
composition. Again if he be material, he is local, for all matter is in
place, and so he is not infinite, but finite and circumscribed. Yea thus we
shall take from him his omnipotency, which arises of the purity of his
simple form being mere actual, because it is inmateriall, whereas if it were
compounded of matter and form, it should be compounded of impotencie and of
power, of passion as well as of action, for it must participate the nature of
both the parents, taking from the one operative power, and from the other
passible impotencie, and so be not a pure act, but clogged and blunted with
the grossness of matter, and by it made unable to work, yea as like and
ready to suffer it self, as to work in others. And therefore in the building
of this palace for the great God of heaven, we must reject all corruptible
matter, yea all matter whatsoever, because al matter is corruptible, and so
make the divine nature to be a pure form, wholly active and in no respect or
part passive.

Ge. I have often heard men speak, and have red men's writings of these pure
abstract forms, of the which kind many do hold not only god, but eue^ the
angels, which are mere creatures to be: yet it could never sink into my head,
how a form should subsist of it self without some matter to uphold it: and as
I remember, you said before, that some ancient divines (I think you named
Tertullian) were of the same opinion, or rather dullness of conceit, and did
therefore allow bodies wherein to subsist, not only to the Angels, but even
to God himself.


Sch. It is hand for us, who consisting of gross bodies and brains, esteem
other natures by our own, to imagine how any form should subsist without some
material subject to uphold it. As touching the Angels, if you cannot think,
or will not believe them to be pure and abstract forms, altogether void of
material composition, you shall (for me) continue in your error or opinion:
but if you will not admit God to subsist in this manner, to wit, as a
substantial form upholding both it self, and also all things whatsoever do
any way exist, you will mar all. Neither ought the difficulty of supposing
it, breed in us any doubting of the truth of it, it having been often
already said, that the manner of Gods subsisting in his essential form, is
altogether unsearchable and incomprehensible. Let it be sufficient that we
have it proved by most necessary demonstrations, that God is a most pure,
substantial, immateriall and active form without any composition of matter
and form or distinction of parts, but every where alike and the very same. Yea
I do not see but that this praerogatiue of being a mere and pure form must be
reserved to God, and in no case communicated to any creature as the grossness
of matter must be left to the creature and in no wise ascribed to God. And so
matter, or material subsisting (the which brings with it motion and time,
passion, alteration, limitation and impotencie) shall be the badge or
cognizance, which the creature shall wear that so it may appear, that he is
not his own man, or maker, but that he serves and depends on an other, by
whom he was made and is maintained. And on the other side, mere simplicity and
pure formalitie (to the which eternity, rest, identitie, operation,
infiniteness and omnipotency are annexed) is to be accounted the royal
diadem, which aduanceth God in his Throne of glory above all creatures
whatsoever. With this simplicity of the divine essence we may join the unity
of it, for as it is simple without parts, so it is one without kinds, neither
can we imagine it to be more then one for many causes. For if we suppose two
infinits, we make no insinit, for each of the two is the limit of the other,
for it keeps the other from coming into it self (otherwise it becomes one
with it, and is no longer two but only one) and so from extending it self
into infinite. Besides, we know that the divine essence being the first
fountain from the which all things flow, and the last end to the which they
tend, must be the absolute perfection of rest altogether void of motion: for
otherwise things should move not to rest but to motion, and the termini a quo
and ad quem, should be not fixed, but moveable, and so uncertain: but if the
divine essence be many or more then one, there is not absolute perfection,
which is only in unity as motion is in number.

So that as it is in civil states, the which are never counted sure and settled
in the absolute perfection of government, till the whole authority be deuolued
from the people to many, from many to a few, from a few to one, because where
there are more then one in autho^itie, there is matter of continual discord and
disorder, but in unity there is perfect concord, for no man disagreeth with
himself: so much more we are to think that the sovereign Monarchy of the
world is not in motion or possibility tending to perfection, but already and
even for ever established in perfect unity: but we need not insist any longer
in proouing the unity of the godhead, which of it self is manifest, and
therefore we will now shut up this conference, with the last of these external
attributes, which is the immoueabilitie, if we may so speak, of God.


Sect. 5.
THis attribute gives us to understand, that god is not subject to motion,
which is the mutation of state or place, but is in all respects immutable and
immovable: he does not shift his dwelling place, wandering up and down like a
Pilgrim, this day in one country and to morrow in an oother, at one time in
heaven, and at an other time on earth, but continues where he is and where
he has been always, more firm and steadfast then the hugest mountain, or
the whole earth, like to a Rock in the sea, against the which though the waves
do beat, and so break themselves, yet they cannot either move it in or remove
it out of the place where it is: even so it is with the creatures in the world,
the which do continually toss and tumble themselves from one estate to an
other, but the Lord remains the same for ever.

For why, as we our selves must not sit down, but go on till we come to the
end of our journey, even so the creatures, when they are in their best estate,
are not there to rest in themselves, as if they had made themselves for
themselves, but they must move and go on toward God and his glory by
performing those duties, which do naturally belong unto them, and so
continually better their estate. But it is not so with God, whose perfection is
and ever was in complete act, not in hope and possibility, and therefore
having all the perfection, that he can have, he need not stir for the obtaining
of any more, or move for any man's pleasure: his last end and chief good is
in himself, and in no other thing whatsoever, and therefore he need not by
motion pursue that, which he enjoys already in rest, or seek that from an
other which he has in himself. Yea it is needful that God should be
immovable, he being the foundation, whereon all things whatsoever do any way
exist, do stand and rely: so that if it did move and were fickle and wavering,
there must necessarely ensue universal confusion and disorder in nature: in
the which respect (as was noted in the former attribute) God being both
terminus a quo, and terminus ad quem, all natural motion motion is made, must
needs be supposed to be immovable. for otherwise both disorder would ensue,
and also motion should be made to motion, as it were in an endless journey,
and with bootelesse labor.

Lastly how should we suppose God to move, whom we know to have no place
whither to move: for he himself is every where and therefore whither soever
he moves, he moves to himself, or rather he moves not at all, because he
is still where he was, even in himself. Now sir, I have as I could,
endeavored to satisfy your request, neither can you require any more of me,
save only thanks for your gentleness and courtesy in attending so patiently
these simple and rude discourses: your wisdom is such, that I am persuaded,
you did not expect any perfect declaration of the nature of God, especially at
my hands, and at this time: in the which respect I hope that you will take in
good part, that which has been said, how rudely and rawly soever.

Gent. If I should tell you how much I think my self beholden to you for this
days work, you would think that I did but flatter you: I know not when I
learned so much good divinity in one day, but I hope to have ere we part,
better occasion and cause too of thanking you.


Sch. There is no such cause sir, these are but ordinary matters.


Gent. Well I would give any good I might have had your company up to London: I
would think to be by your means a good divine ere I came thither.


Sch. So you are already, otherwise it were strange, that I should make you a
good divine in half a score of days, that could not make my self one in a
whole score of years: but to deal plainly with you, my purpose is to travel
as far as London, though I told you not so much at first: but I doubt that
my little weak nag will not hold out, and I am sure, that he cannot hold foot
with your strong gelding.


Gent. I am right glad of it, take no thought for your nagge, I will assure him
to London for the pains that you have already taken in instructing me: and
when we come to our iournies end, if I might entreat you to go with me to
my house, which is not far off, you should be as weleome as your seife could
wish, and command any thing I have.


Sch. You may soon have a bold guest of me, but we will talk of that six or
seven days hence. In the mean time for that I perceive ye you are a stranger
in this country, I will be so bold, as to bid you welcome to this Northern
Town.


Gent. I thank you heartely, but do you know of any good lodging in it?


Sch. No doubt sir, but that we may in many places here in New Castle be both
heartely welcome, and honestly used for our money: but you know that the
country is plain and rude, and therefore your entertainment will be but
course and homely in respect of that curious civility that is besouth: yet
their meaning is good and better then it seems.


Gent. You speak worse of your country, then there is cause, I like plain
dealing best, let us get on, and I pray you lead us to some honest house where
you are known or acquainted.


FINIS.

