THE DOVVNEFALL OF POPERY: Proposed by way of a new challenge to all English
Jesuits and Iesuited or Italianized papists: daring them all jointly, and every
one of them severally, to make answer thereunto if they can, or have any truth
on their side; knowing for a truth that otherwise all the world will cry with
open mouths, Fie upon them, and their patched hotchpotch religion.

Psalm. 116. verse. 10. Credidi, propter quod loquutus sum.

LONDON. Printed by A. Jslip, for Arthur Johnson: and are to be sold at the
sign of the White Horse, over against the great North door of Paul's. 1604.

TO THE MOST PVissant, Wise, Virtuous, Learned, Judicious, and Religious
Monarch, James, by Gods permission and holy ordinance, king of England,
Scotland, France, and Ireland, defendour of the ancient Christian Catholic
faith, and supreme governor within his said Realms, Kingdoms, Territotories,
and Dominions, next and immediately under God, over all persons and causes, as
well Ecclesiastical as Civil.
THe Truth is of such force (most gracious and dread Sovereign) that it has
enforced the professed enemies of truth (the cursed brood of English traitorous
Jesuits and Iesuited papists I mean) to testify the truth against themselves.
The secular Seminary priests (the Popes own dear vassals, who profess the
selfsame religion with the Jesuits, and yield the self same obedience to the
Pope,) tell us plainly in printed books puplished to the view of the whole
world (a thing very rare and greatly to be admired) of such brutish,
barbarous, cruel, villainous, traytorous, and most bloody dealing, practiced
not only by their dear brethren the Jesuits, but even by themselves also,
though not in one or the same degree; that my self doubtless could never have
given credit thereunto, if their own selves had not so written, and so
testified against themselves. They affirm constantly, in many printed books
published to the view of the whole world, that the Jesuits by treacherous
practices and most bloody complots, have long sought for the utter ruin and
conquest of noble England, and that their own hearts and hands had sometime
been imbrewed with the same. They affirm against the Jesuits: First, that
they are great liars. Secondly, that they are proud men, richly apparelled,
furnished with coaches, and attended on with a great train of seruingmen, as
if they were Barrons or Earls: Yea, it is constantly avouched, that the Jesuit
Gerard had two geldings in a gentleman's stable, at thirty pounds a gelding,
besides others else where, and horses of good use. It is also set down in
print, that a Jesuit had a girdle and hangers of thirty pound price. Thirdly,
that they trowle up and down from good cheer to good cheer, commanding
their chambers to be perfumed, and gentlewomen to pull off their boots.
Fourthly, that they are great statesmen, and that matters of state, titles of
princes, genealogies of kings, right of succession, disposing of scepters, with
other matters of like quality, are their chief studies. Fifthly, that they
threaten a conquest, and promise great preferment to all that will execute
their most traitorous designements. Sixthly, that they are cruel tyrants, and
firebrands of all sedition. Seventhly, that they are thieves and murderers, and
that the Jesuit Percie stole seven and twenty pound of the common money, by
the consent of the other his fellow Jesuits. Eighthly, that they have a mint of
counterfeit miracles, with which they labor to seduce the world: Yea, that
they endeavored with a false miracle, to persuade Sebastian the late king of
Portugal, to establish a settled law, That from thence forward none might be
capable of the crown of Portugal, except he were a Jesuit, or chosen by
their society, as at Rome the Pope is chosen by the College of Cardinals.
Nninthly, that the Jesuits are right Machiauels, and that whosoever will adhere
unto the^, must depend upon the devil of hell. Tenthly, that the Jesuits are
flat cousiners; and that their religion is nothing else, but an hotchpotch of
omnigitherum. And to knit up all in a word, that they are the wickedst men upon
earth.

They confess against themselves: first, that Sanders a secular priest, was
the architect of religion, both in England and in Ireland. Secondly, that the
same Sanders did too much extol the rebels, seeing they were executed by the
ancient laws of our country, for high treason. Thirdly, that the Jesuits
came into England by the instinct of the devil, and were the chiefest
instruments of all traitorous practices against our late Sovereign of most
happy memory. Fourthly, that popish Seminaries are erected for treason.
Fifthly, that the Jesuits and the secular priests expected a change, which now
they have indeed; but God be thanked, to their everlasting woe and grief.
Sixthly, that the Seminary priests are sworn to be traitors against their
dread Sovereign and native country. Seventhly, that all Iesuited papists must
depend upon the devil. Eighthly, that popery is inseparably annexed with
treason. Ninthly, that the hearts and hands of the secular priests, had
sometime been as deep in treasonable practices, as the cursed crew of
Jesuits. Tenthly, that the laws of the land are justly made, both against the
Jesuits and themselves; and that they are not put to death for religion, but
for treason. Eleuenthly, that long hidden treasons are miraculously revealed,
God so appointing it to be done. All these asseuerations to be true, (most
dread Sovereign) I am ready to justify out of their own printed books, even
upon the peril of my life: if any of them upon the like peril, will challenge
me to have charged them falsely in that behalf. This notwithstandlng, the
Jesuits, Seminaries, and other Iesuited papists, do still expect a
tolleration, to live as they list, within your Majesty's kingdoms and
dominions; that is in plain English, to be rank traitors as they have
been. For this end they never cease to buzze into men's heads and ears (so to
withdraw them from their due allegiance, and to become popish vassals) that the
next parliament, they shall not fail of their desire. Against this cursed
brood, I have published many books; but to this day, could I not receive
answer to any of them all. Neither can they allege for their excuse, that
they have not seen my books, or else they would have answered the same. For,
about a year ago the masked Jesuit E. O. did publish a treatise against two
learned writers of this age, Viz. Against M. D. Sutcliffe and M. Willet.
in which he takes notice to the books which I have published against them,
and their late vpstart Romish religion; which by piece meal, and by little and
little has crept into the Church, as I have proved at large in my former
volumes.

These are the express words of the masked Jesuit; In his Preface to the
reader.
To these former, I was once determined to have adioined a reformed brother of
theirs, one Thomas Bell, who has published certain books against the
Catholic Church, and vaunteth mightily, and with insolent words braueth all
Seminaries: but I altered my purpose, partly upon other considerations, but
especially, because the confutation of his worthy works is already
undertaken, and to be published, if it shall be thought necessary.

Thus does the Jesuit write. By whose words it is very apparent, clear, and
evident, that they have been many years buzzing about some answer, either to
all or some one of my books; but never yet durst adventure to frame any
answer to any one of the said books, and to publish it to the view of the
world. Their silence in not answering my said books, has reclaimed many a man
from their popish faction: and therefore would they gladly have the the world
to think, that they are in mind to answer my said books, but they seem to
mean nothing less in deed: and why? he tells us forsooth, That the
confutation which has been long undertaken, must be published, but with this
addition, (If it shall be thought necessary.) What a jest is this? the Jesuits
and Seminary priests, have consulted now for the space of eight years and
above, and have all that time devised how to frame some colorable answer at
the least, to all or some of the said books; and in the end of the year,
1602, have undertaken the confutation of my worthy works (as they scornefully
term them;) but for all that cannot yet tell, whether it be expedient to
publish the said confutation, or no. Are these men the great Statists of the
world? are these men the skillful Politicians that must manage all Europe? are
these our learned Divines? are these they indeed, upon whose doctrine and
guiding all Lay-papists do depend, and on their shoulders do hang their souls
and salvation? doubtless, they may preach this goodly sermon to wise men, but
only noddies and stark fools will believe them. In regard hereof (most dread
Sovereign) and because I greatly desire once during my life, to receive
answer to some part of my labors published against our English Iesuited
papists, that so we may valianly fight the combat, my self so having occasion
to reply upon their answer, which would be to me melle and fauo dulcius; I
have compiled and couched in a small room, a few distinct articles: for
answer whereunto, I once again challenge Robert Persons that traitorous
Jesuit; George Blackwell that seditious and late start-vp archpriest; and all
other English Jesuits, Seminary priests, and Iesuited papists, whosoever and
wheresoever, jointly and severally; daring them all jointly, and every one of
them severally, to answer either all my books, or some one of them, or these
few articles; or at least to confess plainly, that they cannot answer,
because I hold and defend the truth. These my late studies (most gracious
Sovereign) I have presumed to dedicate unto your Majesty, in congratulation
of your most happy reign over us; whom God of his great mercy has raised up
in our greatest necessity, to continue his holy Gospel among us, and to
abolish all idolatry and superstition out of his Church. It is not such a
present I confess, as beseems your most royal excellency; yet such a one,
as my small talent is able to afford: I most humbly beseech your Highness for
to accept it, as our Lord Jesus Christ did accept the two mytes of the poor
widow; and withal for to protect and patronize the same, against the
traitorous Jesuits and Iesuited papists within your Majesty's Realms; who
seek by might and maine (as I am credibly informed) not only to impair my
good fame and name with their malicious tongues, but also to take away my life
with their bloody hands. The Almighty bless your Majesty with long,
prosperous, and happy reign in this world, and with everlasting life in the
world to come, Amen. From my study this fourteenth of January. 1603.

Your Majesty's loyal subject, and faithful servant, Thomas Bell.

To all English Jesuits, Seminary priests, and Iesuited papists, in England,
Scotland, or wheresoever else.
I Have written many times at large in larger volumes, In my Motives, book 2.
chap. 1.
heartily and instantly desiring to have received some answer from you,
either from all jointly, or from some of you severally. In my first book,
published in the year 1593, I promised to yield, if any of you could convince
me; either to have alleged any writer corruptly, or to have quoted any place
guilefullie, or to have charged any author falsely: since that time I have
challenged you again and again to answer me, but Ne gry quidem will be had;
no answer can you make, or dare you make. In regard hereof, I have at this
present compiled a few articles couched in a small room, challenging you once
again, to frame the best answer you can unto the same: if you can sieceerelie
and truly confute these articles, or any one of my former books, I promise
herewith (and I protest before God to perform it) to subscribe unto your
doctrine. If you therefore shall refuse to answer me, because you cannot, (for
if you can, you will undoubtedly perform it) all wise men which have any care
of their salvation, will without all peradventure after notice hereof made
known unto them, cry, Fie upon you and your religion. Answer therefore o
papists, if ye can; if ye cannot so do, then repent for shame, and yield unto
the truth. Farewell.

THE FIRST ARTICLE, of the falsely so supposed soueraignetie of the Bishop of
Rome.
YOu Papists tell us, that your Pope, the Bishop of Rome, is above all powers
and potentates on earth, that he can depose kings and emperors from their
royal thrones, and translate their empires and regalities at his good will and
pleasure. But this doctrine is false, absurd, and nothing else but a mere
fable: and consequently, late Romish religion consists of mere falsehoods,
fables, and flat leasings.

The proposition, the Jesuit Bellarmine that late Romish Cardinal, Bellarm.
lib. 5. de Romans pont. ca. 7. col. 824.
sets down in these words: Si ergo princeps aliquis ex oue aut ariete fiat
lupus, id est, ex Christiano fiat haereticus, poterit pastor ecclesiae eum
arcere per excommunicationem, and simul iubere populo, ne eum sequantur, ac
proinde priuare eum dominio in subditos.

If therefore any prince, of a sheep or ram become a wolf, that is to say,
of a Christian be made an heretic; then the pastors of the Church (the Pope
forsooth) may drive him away by excommunication, and withal command the
people not to obey him, and therefore deprive him of his dominion over his
subjects. Thus we see, that when any prince is not, or cease to be a Papist,
for that (with this Jesuitical Cardinal and all others of his brood) is to be
an heretic; then the Pope forsooth may depose such a prince from his royal
scepter, and absolve his subjects from their allegiance to him. This is the
common doctrine of all Iesuited papists, as I have proved in my anatomy of
Popish tyranny.

The assumption is proved by the flat testimony of their famous Pope Gregory
the great, Gregor. lib. 2. epist. 61. cap. 100
in these words: Ego quidem iussioni subiectus, eandem legem per diuersas
terrarum parts transmittifeci; and quia lex ipsa omnipotenti deo minime
concordat, ecce, per suggestionis meae paginam, serenissimis dominis nunciaui;
vtrobique ergo quae debui exolui, qui and imperatori obedientiam praebui, and
pro deo quod sensi, minime tacui.

I being your subject, and at your command, have caused the same law to be
sent through diverse parts of the land; and because the law it self does not
accord to Gods will, behold, I have signified so much unto your majesty's by my
epistle; and so I have discharged my duty in both respects, as who have
rendered mine obedience to the emperor, and have not concealed what I thought
in Gods behalf.

These are the words of Gregorius, who was himself bishop of Rome anno 603.
and lived above six hundred years after Christ; for which time the Popes lived
in dutiful obedience under the emperors, as is evident by his express words
already alleged: For first, Pope Gregory freely and willingly acknowledges
the emperor to be his sovereign lord.

Secondly, he confesses himself to be the emperors subject.

Thirdly, he grants that he owes loyal obedience to the emperor, and for
that respect he thought himself bound in conscience to publish the emperors
law, though in some part it seemed to disagree with Gods will; and that
(forsooth) least he should be found guilty of disloyalty toward his prince.

Fourthly, this allegiance he acknowledged to the emperor Mauritius, who
lived more than six hundred years after Christ's sacred incarnation. During
which term of years, the bishops of Rome, now called Popes, lived in
subjection to the emperors of Rome, as other bishops do this day to their
lawful kings.

S. Ambrose freeth kings from all laws made by man, Ambros. de apologia David,
cap. 10. page 386.
these are his express words: Rex vtique erat, nullis ipse legibus tenebatur
humanis. Neque enim reges vllis ad poenam vocantur legibus, tuti imperij
potestate. Homini ergo non peccauit, cui non tenebatur obnoxious.

He was indeed a king, he was subject to no law of man: for kings being freed
by royal prerogatives of imperial power, are not punishable by the laws of
man. He therefore sinned not to man, to whom he was not subject. S. Hierome
teaches the same doctrine, Hieron. tom. 1. fol. 63. d.
if his words be well marked.

Enthimius has these words, Cum sim vex, Enthi. in Psalm. 50.
and te solum commissorum a me scelerum iudicem habeam, tibi soli peccasse
videor, hoc est, tibi soli iudici subijcior. Coeterorum enim omnium ego dominus
sum, and ob potentiam meam licere mihi videntur, quaecunque libuerint.

Seeing I am a king, and have thee only my judge over my sins, I seem to
sin only to thee; that is, I am subject only to thee, as to my judge. For I
am lord over all others, and in regard of my power and majesty, whatsoever
pleases me, seems to be lawful for me.

The Popish ordinary gloss sings the same song, Glossa ordin. in Ps. 50.
these are the express words: Rex omnibus superior, tantum a deo puniendus est.

The king is above all, and he can be punished of none but of God alone.

Nicolaus Lyranus, Lyranus in Ps. 50.
a man of great reckoning with the papists, teaches the same doctrine with the
rest. These are his express words; Tibi soli peccaui, scilicet tanquam iudici
and punire potenti. Peccauerat enim contra Vriam, and alios occasion huius
interfectos. Tamen quia erat rex, non habebat iudicem superiorem qui posset eum
punire, nisi deum.

To thee only have I sinned; that is to say, to thee only, as to my judge, and
to him that can punish me. For he had now sinned against Vrias and others, whom
he caused to be murdered by that occasion: yet because he was a king, he had
no superior judge that could punish or control him, save God alone.

Thomas Aquinas, Aquin. 1. 2. q. 96. ar. 5. ad. 3.
being as it were half a god with the Papists, teaches the selfsame
doctrine, with Lyra and the rest. But I hasten to the verdict of a Cardinal of
Rome.

Hugo Cardinalis has these express words; Hugo Card. in Ps. 50.
Tibi soli, quia non est super me alius quam tu, qui possit punire. Ego enim
sum rex, and non est aliquis praeter te super me.

To thee only, says Cardinal Hugo, See S. Cyprians opinion in the sixth
article following, in the first proposition and second reason; and note it
well, because it is of great importance.
because there is not any above me but thy self alone, that has power to
punish me: for I am a king, and so besides thee, there is none above me.

Thus gentle reader, it is clear and evident, as well by the flat testimony
of the ancient fathers, as also of most famous and renowned Popish writers;
that the Pope or Bishop of Rome is so far from having power to depose kings
and emperors, that he himself ought to be subject to them, and has no
authority at all to punish them. What can be more plainly spoken? what
testimonies can be more manifest? what doctrine can be clearer? for if none but
God be superior to the king, if none but God can judge the king, if none but
God can punish the king, (all which both ancient fathers and the Popes own
dear doctors affirm) then doubtless cannot the Pope depose the king; then
can he not absolve his subjects from their allegiance; then can he not
translate empires and kingdoms, and bestow the same at his own pleasure. The
good kings, Iosue, David, Solomon, Iosaphat, Ezechias, and Josias, knew right
well, that they had authority above all the priests, and therefore took upon
them, not only to command and control them, but also to depose and thrust
them from their places and functions, yea even the high priests themselves,
when their deserts did so require. Which thing is proved at large in my
golden balance of trial. Yet here for better satisfaction of the vulgar
people, I will propound a common objection, that much troubles many of them;
and that done, frame a plain and sincere solution to the same.

The Objection.
The empire was translated by the Popes authority, and the emperors after
their election are this day confirmed by the Pope: yea, many emperors have
acknowledged the Popes soueraignetie over them, in so much as they have fallen
down prostrate, and kissed his holy feet.

The Answer.
I answer, that many absurd things have been affirmed by Popish parasites,
for the advancement of the primacie, as Franciscus a Victoria, a famous Popish
school doctor, and Spanish friar, sometime professor of Theology in the
University of Salmantica, Victor. de potest, eccles. relect. 1. sect. 6. p. 39.
does testify in these words; Sed gloss atores iuris hoc dominium dederunt
papae, cum ipsi essent pauperes rebus and doctrina.

But the glossers of the Popes law (says this great doctor and zealous papist,
for the truth it self enforced him to utter the truth) gave this dominion (and
these lordly titles) unto the Pope, when themselves were blind bayards and
beggarly fellows.

Thus writes their own Popish Friar, affirming that ignorance and poverty
were the beginning of all lordly popery: and no marvel; for by reason of
their poverty they flattered and sought to please the Pope, and by reason of
their ignorance, they set abroach many things which they did not understand.

Johannes Gerson, a famous papist likewise, and sometime chancelour of Paris,
reports much like stuff, and more lordly titles, ascribed to the Pope by his
popish parasites. Gerson de potest. eccles. consid. 12 part. 3.
These are his express words; Sicut Christo collata estomnis potestas in coelo
and in terra, sic eam Christus, omnem Petro suisque successoribus dereliquit.
Sequitur; sicut non est potestas nisi a deo, sic nec aliqua temporalis vel
ecclesiastica, imperialis vel regalis, nisi a Papa; in cuius foemore scripsit
Christus, rex regum, dominus dominantium; de cuius potestate disputare, instar
sacrilegij est; cui neque quisquam dicere potest, cur ita facis.

As all power was given to Christ in heaven and on earth, so Christ left all
the same power to Peter, and to his successors (the Bishops of Rome.) As there
is no power but of God, so is there neither any temporal or ecclesiastical,
neither imperial nor regal, but of the Pope; in whose thigh Christ has
written, the king of kings and lord of lords; of whose power to dispute, is as
it were sacrilege; to whom no man may say, Why do thou so?

These are the words of this great learned doctor, who though he were a zealous
papist, yet could he not conceal these Antichristian blasphemies within his
breast. Nevertheless Pope Boniface, or (if ye will) Pope maliface, did not
only acknowledge them, but with great pleasure practiced the same, as
witnesses the said Gerson in these words; Hanc existimationem habuisse visus
est Bonifacius octauus in quadam decretali; putatur ab alijs, Gerson vbi supra.
depositio vnius regis franciae per papam Zachariam hic esse fundata; tanquam
papa sit, qui transfer possit reges and regna.

Pope Boniface the eight seems in a certain decretall to have had this
opinion of his own authority. Others think, that the deposition of (
Childericus) the French king by Pope Zachary, was grounded in this
(Antichristian and godless conceit;) as if forsooth the Pope were he, that
could depose princes, and translate their kingdoms.

By these authorities it is clear, that the late Bishops of Rome have taken
upon them, not only to depose kings, and to translate their kingdoms; but
withal have challenged more than humane and royal power, even that power
which is due and proper to God alone. So as we have not so much to consider
what has been done, as what ought of right to be done. I will therefore for
perspicuitie sake proceed by way of gradation, and set down the very steps of
the ladder, by which the late bishops of Rome, did climb up to their usurped
tyrannical primacie.

1 The first step, was the departure of the emperor Constantinus from Rome to
Constantinople, at what time (as the Popes parasites tell us) the emperor gave
large gifts to the Pope, even his whole power, dominion, and territories, both
in Rome, Italy, and all the West parts: for thus is it written by Gratian in
the Popes own decrees: Constantinus imperator coronam and omnem regiam
dignitatem, Did. 96. can. Constantinus.
in vrbe Romana, and in Italia, and in partibus occidentalibus Apostolico
concessit. Sequitur, decreuimus itaque and hoc, vt ipse and successores eius
diademate, viz. corona quam ex capite nostro illi concessimus ex auro purissime
and gemmis pretiosis, vti debeat pro honor B. Petri. Constantine the emperor
gave the Pope his crown and all royal dignity in the city of Rome, and in
Italy, and in all the West parts. It follows a little after in the next
Cannon. We therefore have made also this decree, that the Pope and his
successors shall for the honor of S. Peter, wear the crown of pure gold and
precious stones, which we have given him from off our own head. Thus says the
decree. But Laurentius Valla, Raphael Voluteranus, Paulus Catthalanus, Bellarm.
lib. 5. de romans pont. cap. 9.
Nicolaus Cusanus, and many other popish writers, repute the same as a fable.
Yea our Jesuit Bellarmine seems to doubt thereof, and of other like supposed
donations, and therefore has he invented a soueraign remedy for the same.
These are his express words: Extant Romae authentica instrumenta harum and
similium donationum. Sed etiamsi nihil horum extaret, abunde sufficeret
prescriptio 800. annorum. Nam etiam regna and imperia per latrocinium
acquisita, tandem longo tempore flunt legitima.

There be extant at Rome authentical instruments of these and the like gifts.
But if there were no such thing, yet would prescription of 800 years be
sufficient: for even kingdoms and empires gotten by robbery, through
continuance of time become lawful. Thus writes our Jesuit, who has left
nothing unsaid, that can be said for popery.

The second step, was the fall of the empire in the West. For after the
division of the empire, it begun daily to decline, and was utterly dissolved in
Augustulus, in the year 471. A. D. 471.
of whom was made this epigram; Augustus romanum imperium condidit, Ar. Pontac.
Burdeg. page 93.
Augustulus labefactauit. Augustus set up the empire, but Augustulus pulled it
down. For after Orestes his father was slain (who was never emperor but a
captain under Nepos) the said Augustulus gave up the diadem, and betook
himself to a private life. From this time the empire in the West was vacant
about 330 years. By means whereof, the Popes power did daily increase by
little and little, and from step to step.

The Vissigothes ruled in Spain, the Abienes in Guian and Gascoyn, the
Frenchmen in the residue of France, the Vandales in Affricke, the Saxones in
Britain, the Ostrogothes in Hungary, the Herules and Turdilings in Italy
and in the city of Rome: only the name of the empire, remained with Zenon in
the East. About the year 536. A. D. 536.
Totilas king of the Goths by force of arms and famine subdued well near all
Italy, and after long siege took the city of Rome, and spoiled it with sword
and fire, overthrowing the walls and towers even to the ground, and until
Carolus magnus the Abiens and Barbarians possessed all Italy.

The third step was the voluntary charter which Constantine the emperor of
Constantinople made to Pope Benedict the second; viz. that whomsoever the
clergy, people, and the Roman soldiers should choose to be Bishop, A. D. 684
all men should believe him to be the true vicar of Christ, without any
tarrying for any authority of the emperor of Constantinople, or the deputy
of Italy, as the custom and manner was ever before that day. Thus writes
Platina, Platina in vita Benedicti secu^di.
who was the Popes own dear vassale. This was a very gallant step: for as you
see here, the Popes for the space almost of seven hundred years, viz. until
this Bennet in the year 684. Vide Ar. Pontac. fol. 111. a.
acknowledged the emperors for their superiors and lords, without whose
letters pattents they could have no jurisdiction, nor be reputed the true
Bishops of Rome: but now the Bishops of Rome by privilege granted from this
emperor, wrested their necks from the emperors subjection. Let these words
of Platina be well remembered; because he being a famous papist, must needs be
of good credit against them. A. D. 607.
I let pass the petite step, when the emperor Phocas made Rome the head of all
churches, which for all that, is of some moment.

The fourth step, was the great amity between Zachary then Bishop of Rome,
and Pipine governor of France under Childerich the king: for Pipine purposing
to defeat his lord and sovereign of the kingdom, and to inuest himself
therein, sent his ambassadors to Zachary then Bishop of Rome, and his bounden
friend, to demand this question of him, viz. Whether he were more worthy to
be king, which was king only by name and natural succession; or else he, who
bare the whole burden of the kingdom alone, and yet lacked the dignity of a
king? The Pope understanding the parable right well, and respecting his own
future advancement likely to ensue thereupon, answered roundly (I will not say
clerkely, but like a right doctor of the Romish rout) that it was more
rightful forsooth, that he which took the charge of all things, should be
called king. A. D. 751.
Upon this judgment so clerkely yielded, Pipine forthwith presumed to depose
Childerich, and made himself king: that done, saintlesse (not sackles)
Zachary the Bishop of Rome (that antichrists forerunner might be known)
Geraes. 28. v. 12.
assoiled Pipine and the other Frenchmen of their oath of allegiance and
fealty made to Childerich, and confirmed Pipine the traitor in the kingdom of
France. This was indeed a step, not of Jacobs ladder, nor of Scala coeli, but
of Scala inferni, Scala Antichristi, and of the ladder of the master devil of
hell. Yet is not our Jesuit and Cardinal Bellarmine (the mouth of all papists,
Bellar. lib. 5. de Rom pont. cap. 8.
and of the Pope himself) ashamed to publish the same as a ground of the
popish religion. For these are his own words: Childericum deposuit Zacharias,
and in eius locum Pipinum Caroli magni patrem creari iussit. Cuius causa fuit,
quia propter socordiam Childerici, and religioni and regno in Gallia extrema
ruina imminere videbatur.

Pope Zachary deposed Childericke, and commanded to place and inuest Pipine,
father to Charles the great, in his throne: the cause whereof was this; because
forsooth through the slothful and negligent government of Childericus, the
kingdom and religion in France seemed to be in great danger. This is the
deep divinity of the Pope and his clergy, by which we may learn many
worthy lessons.

1 First, that the Pope may set up and pull down kings at his pleasure by
Jesuitical doctrine and late Romish religion.

2 Secondly, that the Pope and Jesuits are the grandmasters and architects of
seditions, rebellions, and most bloody treasons.

3 Thirdly, that it is very true which the secular priests have written,
concerning the traitorous proceedings of Jesuits and Iesuited papists.

4 Fourthly, that the Pope commanded to depose the Sovereign, and to
inthronize the subject in his place.

5 Fifthly, that all this was done, because forsooth the king did not rule after
the Popes fancy and pleasure. Hereupon I infer this necessary correlarie;
viz. that it behooves Christian kings to be vigilant, and in due time to
expel all traitorous papists out of their dominions. And if the Bishop of Rome
shall send any seditious popeling into their kingdoms and territories, with
his thunderbolts, bulls, and excommunications; then to deal with the
messengers, A. D. 1294.
as king Philip the fair dealt with pope Boniface his nuncioes in France; whom
he committed to prison, and caused the Popes bulls to be burnt in the fire. And
as Charles the sixth, when Bennet the 13. did interdict his realm, A. D. 1408.
sitting in the throne of justice in his high court of parliament the 21 of
May, in the year 1408. gave sentence, that the bull should be rent in pieces,
and that Gonsalue and Conseleux the bearer thereof should be set upon a
pillorie, and publickely traduced in the pulpit. The story is set down at
large by the French papists, in their book entitled the Jesuits catechism,
and the same is recorded in my anatomy of Popish tyranny.

The fifth step was the decay of the empire in the East about the year 756. A.
D. 756.
For when Aistulphus, or (as some write) Aristulphus king of the Lombards,
besieged the city of Rome for the space of three whole months, exacting an
huge tribute of the Romans; then Pope Stephanus the second, made suite to
Pipinus king of France to stand their good master, and to defend the city from
the fury of the Lombards. King Pipine willing to gratify his good friend the
Bishop of Rome, came with a mighty army against Aistulphus, and besieged him
in Pauie; and then and there constrained him to appeal to his mercy, and to
yield up the exerchate of Rauenna and Pentapolis into his hands. Manus manum
fricat.
This being effected, king Pipine (whom Pope Zachary of a traitor had made
king, as is already proved) gave up the government of Italy into the Popes
hands. And the king had reason so to do: for as we know, one good turn
requires another. So now the lieutenants of the emperors of Constantinople,
ended their whole power in Italy, who aforetime had their seats at Rauenna:
and now was he taken out of the way, who (as the Apostle tells us) did hinder
the coming of Antichrist: 2 Thessalonians. 2.
for Pope Stephen in way of gratitude confirmed the inheritance royal of the
kingdom of France to the said Pipine and to his posterity for ever. Here
began a new progeny of the kings of France: for Childericus was the last king
of the stock of Meroneus, who was the first king Christian of France. This
truth is apparent by the testimony of many renowned Chronographers, it cannot
be denied.

The sixth step, Bellar. tom. 3. col. 827.
was the translation of the Roman empire from the Greeks to the Frenchmen or
Germans, in the person of magnificall Charles, as the Jesuit Bellarmine
terms him. The truth is this, as popish Chronographers do record and
testify to the world; viz. That when the Romans had driven from among them,
Pope Leo the third, he appealed to Charles then king of France, who came to
Rome, and examined the matter: and in the end appeased the Romans, and
restored the Pope to his place and dignity again. For this good work and
kind favor of the king, the Pope, and people of Rome, having now a long time
in mind and affection, revolted from the emperor of Constantinople; and seeing
a fit opportunity offered to accomplish their long wished desires, did with
uniform consent and joyful acclamation proclaim Charles the great, the
emperor of Rome, giving him the imperial names of Caesar and Augustus, and
setting the royal diadem upon his head by the hands of Pope Leo. And for the
better credit of mine assertion, I will here recount the very words of
Sigebertus, a famous Chronographer and popish monk, A. D. 801.
who therefore must needs be of credit with the Pope and all his popelings.
Thus does he write: Romani qui ab imperatore Constantinopolitano iam diu animo
desciuerant, nunc accepta occasionis opportunitate, quia mulier excaecato
imperatore Constantino filio suo eis imperabat, vno omnium consensu Carolo regi
imperatorias lauds acclamant, eumque per manum Leonis papae coronant, Caesarem
and Augustum appellant; Pipinum vero filium eius regem Italiae ordinatum
collandant.

The Romans, who a long time had in mind and affection revolted from the
emperor of Constantinople, seeing now a fit occasion offered them, because a
woman did govern them, her son the emperor Constantine being made blind,
did all with one consent found out imperial and royal acclamations to king
Charles, calling him Caesar and Augustus, and crowning him by the hand of Leo
the Pope: yea they collaud his son Pipine made king of Italy.

Out of these words I wish the Reader, to observe these important points with
me.

1 First, that 800. years after Christ's sacred birth, the Bishops of Rome were
subject to the emperor, as their own dear monk Sigebert tells them; and
as you have heard already, Pope Gregory acknowledged his fealty to Mauritius
the emperor, in the year 603.

2 Secondly, that the Pope and people of Rome endeavored a long time, to shake
off the yoke of obedience to the emperor, and in the year 801 put the same in
execution.

3 Thirdly, that the translation of the empire implied flat treason, in the
Pope and all his Romish Popelings. For as Friar Sigebert tells us, they
surrendered up the right of their sovereign to an other man: and hence comes
it, that the Jesuitical Cardinal Bellarmine appealeth to the law of
perscription, affirming titles gotten by robbery to be lawful by that means.
And indeed by stealth and robbery, it may well beseem a Jesuit, to justify
popish late start up regalitie.

4 Fourthly, that the Bishop of Rome is not the true and lawful king of
Italy: for the papists do not agree in their assertions, touching this
counterfeit regalitie of their popes. Bl^ndus and Platina write, that Pippine
gave the exerchate of Rauenna and Pentapolis to Gregory; Regino refers the
donation to Steven; and Sigebert says here, that Pippine in the year 801 had
it in his own possession still. Yea, the same Sigebert says further, that in
the year 812 the emperor Charles imposed the imperial crown upon the head
of his son Lewis, and made Bernard son of Pippine the king of Italy. But
doubtless if Pippine were king of Italy in the year 801 and Bernard king
thereof in the year 812, I see not how the pope was then, A. D. 727.
or that is now, any king at all. And therefore we may credit Bellarmine at
leisure, when he tells us out of Ado, that king Pippine gave Reuenna and all
Pentapolis to Saint Peter and Saint Paul: but it is well, that S. Paul is
become coheire with Saint Peter. For by his means, other bishops must have as
great a share, as the Bishops of Rome: there the reader must not forget, what
friar Sigebert tells us of Charles the great, A. D. 805.
after that he was inthronized in the empire. These are his express words;
Carolus imperator etc. Charles the emperor, when the emperors of
Constantinople had indignation against him, for the name of emperor given him
by the Romans; suffered them with great patience and magnanimity: And because
he was afraid of their mighty power, with often ambassades he procured them
to be his dear friends: yet our Jesuit Bellarmine would have us to believe,
that the emperors of Constantinople did freely grant, that the Pope and the
Romans had full right to translate the empire; but their own dear friend (as
we see here,) affirms the contrary for a truth. Yea, both Bl^ndus and
Platina affirm very constantly, Vide Ar. Poniac. fol. 122.
that Charles did agree first with the empress Irene, and afterwith the
emperor Nicephorus, that he with their favors might rule over the West.

The seventh step, was the constitution of the electors of the future emperor.
Vide Phillip. Bergemens. p. 277.
For Gregory the fifth being a Germane borne, and a near kinsman to Otho the
emperor at that time, did by his favor and free grant, appoint seven
electors of the empire for ever. Antoninus 3. par. tit. 22. cap. 5.. 13.
viz. the archbishop of Mentz, the archbishop of Treuerse, the archbishop of
Colen, the marquis of Brandenburgh, the county Palatine, the duke of Saxony,
and the king of Bohemia. This goodly constitution was enacted by the Pope and
emperor, A. D. 994.
(being both of them not only Germans but also kinsmen) that the empire might
be established in their posterity, and their blood thereby advanced for ever.

The eight and highest step of this ladder, did reach up even to the highest
heaven, and to the very throne of our Lord Jesus. For the Pope having now
enlarged his sovereignty, by little and little, from step to step; was
neither abased nor afraid to challenge the authority and royal right, A. D.
1294.
of both swords throughout the christian world: for he made a flat decree for
the confirmation thereof, as is evident by the extrauagant of Boniface the
eight, ( vnam sanctam, de maioritate and obedienta) set down in the sixth book
of the decretals. Dest. 22. can. omnes.
And as Gratianus reports, Pope Nicholas taught the same doctrine: these are
the express words, Christus beato Petro aeternae vitae clauigero, terreni
simul and caelestis imperij iura commisit.

Christ committed to Saint Peter that bears the keys of eternal life, the
right both of earthly and heavenly empire. And the gloss, which the Popes
parasites have annexed to this decree, Gloss. F. caelestis.
has these very words; Argumentum quod Papa habet vtrunque gladium, and
spiritualem and temporalem. An argument, that the Pope has both the swords,
as well the spiritual as the temporal. And in the marginall note, it is there
set down, Papa habens vtrunque gladium transtulit imperium: the Pope having
both swords, translated the empire. And appendix Fuldensis unfolds this
cursed decree, in these most plain terms:

Hic Papa (Bonifacius 8.) constitutionem fecerat, Appendix Fuldensis.
in quae se dominum spiritualem and temporalem in vniuerso mundo asserebat.
Vnde requisiuit Philippum regem Franciae, vt a se regnum suum cognosceret, quod
rex facere contempsit.

This Pope (he speaks of Boniface the eight) made a constitution, in which he
affirmed himself, to be both spiritual and temporal lord in the whole world.
Whereupon he would have had Philip king of France, to have acknowledged his
kingdom from him: which thing the king scorned to do.

Since this ladder was thus framed, the Bishops of Rome have tyrannized above
measure in the world, and taking upon them that authority which pertains to
god alone, they have disposed of kings and kingdoms, translated royal
diademes, tyrannized over men's souls, and trodden all sacred sovereignty under
foot. For, that popish canons ascribe plain divine titles to the Pope, it can
not possibly be denied, because in the Popes own decretals, Gloss. lib. 1.
decret. tit. 7. cap. 3.
I find these express words; Sic (Papa) dicitur habere caeleste^ arbitrium,
and ideo etiam naturam rerum immutat, substantiam vnius rei applicando alij;
and de nihilo potest aliquid facere. So the Pope is said to have celestial
arbitrament, and therefore does he alter the nature of things, applying the
substantial parts of one thing to an other; and so can make of nothing
something. Thus the papists write of their Pope, and he is well pleased
therewith. And yet the truth is, that as man can in some cases at some time
make one thing of an other; so in all cases at all times, to make some thing of
nothing, is proper to God alone.

The Popes parasites write thus of his power in general; Gerso^. de potest.
eccl^s. consider. 12. part. 3.
Sicut non est potestas nisia deo, sic nec aliqua temporalis vel ecclesiastica,
imperialis vel regalis, nisi a Papa; in cuius foemore scripsit Christus, rex
regum, dominus dominantium. Like as there is no power but of God, so is there
neither any temporal nor ecclesiastical, neither imperial nor regal, but of
the Pope; in whose thigh Christ has written, the King of kings, and Lord of
lords. Lo here gentle reader, two things are proper to God alone; the one, to
be King of kings, and Lord of lords; the other, to be the author of all power:
both which you see here ascribed to the Pope.

The Pope himself from his own pen, Greg. 9. libr. 1. decr. tit. 33. cap. 6.
Gregory the ninth, delivers us this doctrine, Ad firmamentum coeli, hoc
est, universe alis ecclesiae, fecit deus duo magna luminaria, id est, duas
instituit dignitates, quae sunt pontificalis authoritas, and regalis potestas
sequitur; vt quanta est inter solemn and lunam, tanta inter pontifices and reges
differentia cognoscatur. To the firmament of heaven, that is, of the universal
church, God made two lights, pontifical authority, and power royal: that we
may know there is as much difference between Popes and kings, as there is
between the sun and the moon. The gloss sets down precisely, Gloss.
ibid.
how far a king is inferior to a Pope, that is, to any bishop of Rome, in
these words; Restat, vt pontificalis dignitas, quadragesies septies sit mayor
regali dignitate. It remains, that the dignity of the Pope, is forty times
seven times greater than the power of the king.

Now touching the kissing of the Popes feet, I answer that some Christian
kings and emperors upon a blind zeal not grounded in knowledge, humbling
themselves to the Bishop of Rome, and yielding up their sovereign rights to
him, opened the window to all antichristian tyranny. For in short time after,
(as is already proved) the Romish bishops became so lordly and insolent, that
they took upon them to depose the emperors, to translate their empires, and to
dispose at their pleasures of their royal scepters and regalities. Much more
might be said in this matter, but for that the Pope has made it sacrilege to
dispute of this, I will here only tell thee gentle reader, Sigebert. in anno,
1088.
what the Popes dear friar Sigebertus has written of his holiness. These are
his express words; Vt pace omnium honorum dixerim, haec sola nouitas, non
dicam haeresis, nondum in mundo emerserat, vt sacerdotes illius, qui
regnarefacit hypocrita^ propter peccata populi, doceant populum quod malis
regibus nullam debeant subiectionem, and licet ei sacramentum fidelitatis
fecerint, nullam tamen debeant fidelitatem, nec periuri dicantur, qui contra
regem senserint; imo qui regi pa^^erit, pro excommunicato habeatur; qui contra
regem fecerit, noxa iniustitiae and periuris absoluatur. To speak by the
favor of all good men, this sole novelty, I will not say heresy, was not yet
known in the world; that his priests who makes an hypocrite to reign for the
sins of the people, should teach the people, that they owe no subjection to
wicked kings; and that although they have taken the oath of fealty, yet do
they owe them no allegiance, neither are they perjured that think ill against
the king: yea, he that obeys the king, is this day reputed an excommunicate
person; and he that takes part against the king, is absolved from the crime of
injustice and perjury.

This is our very case (gentle reader) this day in England, so lively painted
out in best beseeming colors, as if the writer had been living even now
amongst us. So then, we have to observe here for our instruction, That the
Popes own monks and friars have thought as ill of the Popes dealings in
former times, as we think of his procedings in these latter days: As also,
That popish religon has always been condemned, Answer o papists if you can:
if not, repent for shame.
even of great learned papists that lived in the Popes Church. Whereof none
can be ignorant, that will seriously peruse my books of Motives and Survey.
And this shall suffice for the first article: to which (if their hearts do not
faint them, or their consciences condemn them) the papists will frame some
answer undoubtedly.

The second Article, touching the erroneous doctrine of the Popish mass.
The first member. Of the impossibility of their supposed real presence.
AQuinas, the Jesuit Bellarmine, the council of Trent, Melchior Canus,
Josephus Angles, and the rest of the Romish brood, hold constantly as an
article of their christian faith, Conc. tri. sess. 3. can. 1. Aquin. 3. p. q.
76. ar. 1. Joseph. Angles, in 4. 1. p. q. 4. de euchar. Bellar. de euch. libr.
1. cap. 2. col. 468. B.
That the true, organicall and natural body of Christ Jesus, which was borne
of the Virgin Marie, which was crucified and nailed on the cross, which rose
again the third day from death, and is circumscriptiuely and locally in
heaven; is also truly, really, and substantially, under the form of bread
and wine, in the sacrifice of the popish mass, But this is impossible, as
which implies flat contradiction; and consequently, late romish religion
consists of impossibilities, falshoodes, and contradictions. The doubt hereof
is only in the assumption; for proof whereof, I set down this supposall with
our Cardinal Bellarmine, viz. That we are not bound to believe any thing which
implies contradiction. Bellarm. de euchar. lib. 3. cap. 19. col. 748. A.
And because I will proceed sincerely, ye shall hear his own words: thus
does he write; Neque fides nostra ad id nos obligat, vt ea defendamus, quae
euidenter implicant contradictionem. Neither does our faith bind us so, that
we must defend those things which implie evident contradiction. But so it is,
that the popish imaginary being of Christ's body in a little round cake,
implies in it self evident contradiction, and cannot possibly be brought to
pass. For example, no power upon earth or in heaven can bring to pass that a
body being three cubits long and one cubit broad, remaining still so long and
so broad, shall be contained in another body of two cubits length, and half a
cubite breadth. The reason hereof is evident, because so to contain and be so
contained, implies flat contradiction. And this is the case now in
controversy, concerning Christ's supposed being in the round popish cake.
Aquin, 3. p. q. 76 ar. 4. contra.
For if Christ's natural and organicall body be there, as popish faith
avouches: then must the papists believe evident contradictions, contrary to
Jesuit Bellarmines resolution; yea, contrary to all power, all Logic, all
reason. All the papists in England are not able to solue this reason. I
challenge them all, and advise them to consult together, and to crave help of
their friends elsewhere, and then to let me have their speedy answer hereunto.

Cardinal Caietane affirms boldly, Apud Joseph. Angles, in 4. sect 1. p.
page 144.
that no text in the whole Gospel does prove effectually, and convince the
reader to understand these words properly (This is my body.) For which respect
friar Joseph advises gravely, to read their Cardinal ( caute) warily.

Aquinas affirms constantly, Aquinas, in 4. s. d. 10. q. 1. art. 1.
Corpus Christi non esse in pluribus locis simul, secundu^ proprias
dimensiones; that Christ's body is not in many places at once, according to the
proper dimensions thereof: whose assertion is my flat position. For Christ's
natural body cannot be without those dimensions which naturally pertain unto
it. Durandus holds the very same opinion.

S. Austine says plainly, Aug. epist. ad Dardan. in fine.
that Christ's true body can be but in one only place of heaven. Vbi totum
presentem esse non dubites tanquam deum, and in codem templo dei esse tanquam
inhabitantem deum, and in loco aliquo coeli propter very corporis modum. Thou
must not doubt (says S. Austen) that Christ is wholly present every where as
God, and in the same temple of God, as God inhabiting it, and in some one place
of heaven, for the manner of a true body. Lo, this grave father tells us,
that Christ as God is every where; but yet in respect of his true body, he is
only in heaven, and in some certain place of heaven. Only in heaven, because
the Scripture says, That he shall be there till the worlds end, in some
certain place of heaven, to declare the nature and verity of a true body
indeed. So then, if he were present as the papists would have him, his body
should lose the nature and verity of a true body indeed.

Again in another place S. Austen has these words; Aug. de consecr. did. 2.
can. prima quidem.
Donec seculum finiatur, sursum est dominus, sed tamen etiam hic nobiscum est
veritas domini; corpus enim in quo resurrexit, in vno loco esse oportet;
veritas autem eius vbique diffusa est. Our Lord is above until the worlds end,
but yet his truth is with us here; for the body of our Lord, wherein he rose
again, must needs be in one place; but this truth is diffused every where.

Again, Aug. cont. Faust. lib. 20. ca. 11. to. 6
the same S. Austen writing against Faustus the Manichee, has these express
words: Secundum presentiam corporalem, simul and in Sole, and in Luna, and in
cruce esse non posset. According to his corporal presence, it was not possible
for him to be both in the Sun, and in the Moon, and on the cross, at one
and the same time. O papists, answer if you can; if not, recant for shame.

The second Member. Of the Sacrifice of the Popish Mass.
THe Papists teach and believe as an article of Christian faith, Conc. trid.
sess. 6. can. 2. die 17. sep. Bellar. li. 1. ca. 12 Aq in. 3. p q. 82 art. 4.
That in their mass Christ's true and real body is truly and really
sacrificed to God the father, under the form of bread, as also his true and
real blood under the form of wine. Yet this implies horrible impiety and
brutish cruelty, as shall be proved: and consequently, popish Mass is to be
abhorred.

First, where the Apostle tells us, that Christ rising again from the dead,
henceforth dies no more, because death has no more dominion over him; the
papists tell us a contrary tale, that Christ dies every day, nay, a thousand
times a day, in the daily sacrifice of their mass: for with them all priests
(the Pope, Cardinals, and some others excepted) do ordinarily say mass every
day, and three masses upon every Christmas day. Which being so, and three
hundred Jesuits and seminary priests being this day in England and Scotland,
as the Jesuits tell us; an huge multitude of masses must be said daily in
these realms, and many times must Christ be put to death, so far forth as in
them lies, though they pretend to honor him thereby.

For, Note this reason.
as Cardinal Bellarmine grants freely, a sacrifice implies intrinsecally,
the consumption of the thing that is sacrificed. I will not avouch any untruth
upon any man (gentle reader) these are his own words: Sacrificium enim preter
oblationem, requirit mutationem, and consumptionem rei quae offertur. Beller.
de missa, lib. 1. cap. 2. col. 957.
For, says Bellarmine, a sacrifice besides the oblation requires an alteration
and a consumption of the thing which is offered.

Again, Vbi sup. col. 697.
Bellarmine in another place tells us, that the body and blood of Christ are
offered in the mass, vere and proprie, truly and properly, under the forms of
bread and wine.

Again, Vbi sup. col. 1015.
Bellarmine says in another place, that flesh and blood are not fit for meat,
nisi prius animal moriatur, unless the beast first die (and be slain.)

Again, Bellar. de missa. lib. 1. cap. vlt.
the same Bellarmine teaches the same doctrine, yet more plainly in another
place. Thus does he write: Sacrificium enim verum and reale, veram and realem
occisionem exigit, quando in occisione ponitur essentia sacrificij. For a true
and real sacrifice requires a true and real killing, seeing that the essence
of the sacrifice consists in the killing thereof. Hebr. 9. ver. 17, 25, 26,
27, 28.
And in very deed, this is that constant doctrine which S. Paul does inculcate
to the Hebrews.

So then, we see it clear and evident by popish faith and doctrine, that Jesus
Christ our sweet redeemer, must first be killed, then offered, lastly torn and
consumed by the teeth of the sacrificing mass priest; or else the popish mass
cannot be perfect, as their most perfect doctor tells us.

For confirmation of this popish doctrine, it is a constant position and
generally received axiom in the popish church, that by virtue of their
consecratorie words, Christ's body is put apart from his blood, and his blood
apart from his body; and so Christ is there slain by force of their
consecration, though he still live indeed, because the priests words have not
so much force as they imagine. You shall hear Bellarmines own words; Bellar.
de missa, lib. 1. cap. 12. col. 1015. a.
Nam inprimis ideo in coena seorsim consecratur corpus, and seorsim sanguis, vt
intelligamus presentiam corporis and sanguinis in coena, esse ad modum occisi
and mortui corporis. For first, therefore is the body consecrate apart in the
supper, and the blood asunder, that we may understand the presence of the body
and blood in the supper, to be there after the manner of a body slain and
dead. These are his words, and this which he thus delivers, is the constant
doctrine of the Popish Church. VVhereupon it follows of necessity, that if
any papist should have said mass, in triduo mortis Christi, during Christ's
death; then Christ's body by virtue there of should have been dead in one
place, and his blood in another place: for otherwise, Christ should have been
both quick and dead at once, which implies contradiction. Aquinas grants
this illation, these are his words: Ideo si in illo triduo mortis fuisset hoc
sacramentum celebratum, Aquin. 3. p. q. 76. ar. 1.
non fuisset ibi anima Christi. Therefore during Christ's death, if this
sacrament had been celebrated, the soul of Christ should not have been in it.

Secondly, if this popish kind of doctrine were true, these absurdities and
gross impieties must perforce follow hereupon, viz. that Christ the night
before he was crucified, was both sitting at the table, and borne in his own
hands, both living and dead, both visible and invisible, both long and short,
both broad and narrow, both light and heavy; that he was a sacrifice for our
sins, before he died for our sins; that his sacrifice was either imperfect
in the former oblation in his last supper, or else that it was needless in his
bitter immolation upon the altar of the cross. Hebr. 9. v. 27.
For as the Apostle tells us, Christ was not to offer himself often, as the
high priest did, but once to the destruction of sin, by the sacrifice of
himself. These are his words, as the papists (our English Rhemists I mean)
have put them down; and as it is appointed to men to die once, and after this
the judgment: so also Christ was offered once, to exhaust the sins of many.
Lo, Christ died but once; and that one oblation was sufficient to take away
all sins in the world. The word (exhaust) which the Rhemists use, does
significantly express so much. But the words of S. Paul in another place are
most manifest, and do plainly convince this truth: In the which will (says
S. Paul) we are made holy, Hebr. 10. v. 10.
even by the offering of the body of Jesus Christ once for all. Again thus:
But this man, ibid. v. 12.
after he has offered one sacrifice for sins, is set down for ever on the
right hand of God. ibid. v. 14.
Again in these words: For with one offering has he made perfect for ever
them that are sanctified. Lo, gentle reader, Christ, says Christ's apostle,
made but one oblation; Christ, say the papists, has made many, and still
makes more oblations. Christ, says Christ's Apostle, died but once on the
cross; Christ, say the papists, dies every day in the mass. Christ, says
Christ apostle, made perfect, finished, and consummated man's redemption, with
one only sacrifice. Christ, say the papists, does perfect and consummate his,
with the daily sacrifice of the mass. Now, whether Christ's apostle, or our
papists be of better credit, let the indifferent reader judge.

Thirdly, the cup is the new testament in my blood says Christ, Luke, 22. v.
20.
which is shed for you. But a testament is not of force without the death of
the testator, Hebr. 9. v. 17.
as S. Paul teaches us. And consequently either Christ's body was not really
offered in his supper, or at least it was a sacrifice of no force, value, or
efficacy at all; for that it was not yet ratified by the death of the
testator. Hereupon it follows of necessity, Luke 22. v. 20.
that when Christ says in S. Luke, This cup is the new testament in my blood:
Math. 26. v. 28.
and in S. Matthew, This is my blood of the new Testament: the sense is all
one, most plain, and clear, viz. that the cup is a sacrament of the blood of
Christ, and of the new Testament confirmed thereby; but indeed is no more
really the blood of Christ it self, than it is really the new testament it
self. For the express mention of remission of sins, is referred to the
blood of Christ shed upon the cross, and not to the sacrament of his blood;
seeing his blood was not shed in his supper, but in his bitter passion.

Fourthly, the Apostle says flatly, (...), there is not henceforth any
oblation for sin. Hebr. 10. 18.
But if Saint Paul say truly, that there is no oblation for sin, after
Christ's death on the cross; then doubtless the papists must needs say
falsely, that they have a daily propitiatory sacrifice in their popish mass.
Neither will it serve their turn to answer, that it is the selfsame
sacrifice of the cross, but offered in another manner; for if that were true,
then should their masse-sacrifice be of infinite value: which for all that, no
papist dares avouch. Nay, Bellarmine says in plain terms: Valor sacrificij
missae finitus est. Bellar. de missa, lib. 2. cap. 4. col. 1076.
The value or worth of the mass, is finit, not infinite. And yet, if the value
of the mass be not infinite, then doubtless, that sacrifice cannot be the
son of God, for he is of infinite power, of infinite majesty, of infinite
value. Yea, whosoever denies Christ's body and blood, subsisting in the person
of God by hypostaticall union, to be of infinite value, he is become a flat
Arrian, believing Christ to be pure man, and not God. And consequently, the
papists, howsoever they think or speak of their mass, yet in making it a
sacrifice, they must perforce be blasphemous against the son of God. Again,
Bellarmine confesses against himself unawares, and against an article of
popish faith, That their popish mass is not vere and proprie, Bellar. de
missa, lib. 2. cap 4. col. 1076.
truly and properly propitiarie: Quod Christus nunc immortalis, nec mereri, nec
satisfacere potest. Because, says Bellarmine, Christ now being immortal, can
neither merit nor satisfy. But I am well assured, that their holy late
council of Trent teaches otherwise. These are the words: Et quoniam in diuino
hoc sacrificio, quod in missa peragitur, Conc. trid. sess. 6. can. 2. die 17.
sep.
idem ille Christus continetur, and incruente immolatur, qui in ara crucis
semel seipsum cruente obtulit, docet sanctasynodus sacrificium istud vere
propitiatorium esse. And because in this divine sacrifice which is made in the
mass, that same Christ is contained, and offered vnbloudily, who on the altar
of the cross once offered himself bloudily, the holy council teaches it to
be a propitiatory sacrifice truly and indeed. Lo, how the papists say and
unsay: one while it is truly a propitiatory sacrifice; another while it cannot
truly be so called. Well, the Pope has allowed Bellarmines doctrine, and he
has also allowed the Council; and yet wise men can see how they flatly
disagree, and that in the highest point of their melody.

Fifthly, the Popes own decrees do seal up this truth against the Pope, these
are his words: Sicut ergo coelestis panis qui Christi caro est, De consecrat.
did. 2. can. hoc est
suo modo vocatur corpus Christi, cum reuera sit sacramentum corporis Christi,
illius viz. quod visibile, quod palpabile, mortale, in cruce positum est;
vocaturque ipso immolatio carnis quae sacerdotis manibus fit, Christi passio,
mors, crucifixio; non rei veritate, sed significante mysterio; sic sacrum fidei
quod baptismus intelligitur, fides est. As therefore the heavenly bread, which
is the flesh of Christ, is after it manner called the body of Christ, when
indeed it is the sacrament of Christ's body, of that body which is visible,
which is palpable, mortal, and nailed on the cross: and that oblation of
flesh which is made by the hands of the priest, is called Christ's passion,
death, crucifixion, not in the truth of the thing, but in a mystery, which
signifies the thing: so the sacrament of faith, by which baptism is
understood, is faith.

Thus says the text. Let us now hear their own gloss upon the same text,
these are the express words: Coeleste sacramentum quod vere representat
Christi carnem, dicitur corpus Christi, sed improprie, vnde dicitur suo modo,
sed non rei veritate, sed significate mysterio: vt sit sensus, vocatur Christi
corpus, id est, significatur. The heavenly sacrament which represents Christ's
flesh truly, is called the body of Christ, but improperly, wherefore it is
said, suo modo, after it manner, but not in the truth of the thing, but in the
mystery of the thing signified: that this may be the sense, it is called
Christ's body, that is to say, it signifies his body.

Out of these golden words, delivered as God would have it by the pens of
papists, to the confusion of all papists, I note first, that the holy and
blessed bread of the Eucharist or Lords supper, is called the body of Christ.
Secondly, that it is also called the passion and death of Christ. Thirdly, that
it is not Christ's body truly, properly, and in the truth of the thing.
Fourthly, that it is Christ's body, as the sacrament of baptism is faith.
Fifthly, that it is not Christ's body in truth, but in signification. Sixthly,
that it is only called Christ's body, because it is the sacrament of his body;
as baptism is called faith, being only the sacrament of faith. Seventhly, that
it is Christ's body, improprie, suo modo, significat^ mysterio; improperly,
after a sort, in the mystery of the thing, signified: which words must be well
remembered and marked. Lastly, that it is said negatiuely, non rei veritate: it
is not Christ's body, in truth, in deed, or in the verity of the thing. These
words are the very vpshot of the controversy, they can admit no solution. For
if Christ's body were in the sacrament really and substantially, with body,
flesh, blood, sinews, bones, and quantity, as the papists say and believe;
then doubtless he should be there in rei veritate, in the truth of the thing,
even in that true body which was borne of the blessed virgin, the true mother
of true God and true man. Answer papists, if ye can, or else come home, and
yield to the truth for shame.

The third Member. Of the barbarous and plain villainous proceeding against
Berengarius, for denial of the abouenamed popish sacrifice.
POpish decrees tell us a long tale of one Berengarius, sometime deacon of a
church in Gaunt, who held a doctrine surely grounded upon the holy scriptures,
but wholly opposite to the late popish faith; viz. That the bread and wine in
the holy Eucharist, De consecrat. did. 2. can. Ego Berengarius.
after Christ's words uttered, which they call consecration; are only the
sacrament, and not the true body and blood of our Lord Jesus Christ; and that
they cannot sensuallie or sensibly, (for so their own word sensualiter
signifies) be handled or broken with the hands of the priests, or torn with
the teeth of the faithful. For this opinion so settled upon Gods word, as all
the cursed Romish brood, are not able in truth to gainesay the same; Pope
Nicholas with his Romish synod, did so cruelly proceed against the silly
deacon, as he must needs either abjure and renounce the truth, or else betake
himself to be burnt with popish fire and faggot out of hand. In regard
whereof, the poor deacon overcome with humane frailty, yielded at least in
show of words, to their most wicked, cruel, and very barbarous, or rather
villainous suggestion. Then the Pope and Council set down the form of words,
which he should pronounce, the sum whereof I have already alleged: who as
list may read the words at large, in the place quoted in the margent. I omit
the words, because they are long and tedious: only I wish the reader to
observe seriously with me, (for this reason can never be answered till the
worlds end) that it is an article of popish faith, (oh horrible blasphemy)
That the true and real body of the son of God, which was borne of the vigin
Marie, and sits at the right hand of God the father omnipotent and all
sufficient, is torn in pieces with the teeth of the faithful, and broken
asunder with the hands of the priest, in their idolatrous mass. For these are
the words of the popish synod; Manibus sacerdotum frangi, and fidelium dentibus
atteri. Which words are so fully farced with blasphemy, and repugnant to the
truth, that neither Melchior Canus, nor the popish gloss, nor Bellarmine, can
tell how to shuffle up the same, but with shame enough, they pass it over as
they can. Bellarmine, who is as it were the Popes own mouth, writes in this
manner; Bellar. de con. lib. 2. cap. 8. d.
Respondeo, nunquam fuisse quaestionem, an Christi corpus vere vt est in se,
frangeretur manibus, and dentibus tereretur; certum enim est, and semper fuit,
Christi corpus incorruptibile nunc existens, non posse frangi and teri, nisi in
signo sieve sacramento: ita vt dicatur frangi ac teri, cum signum eius, id est,
species panis frangitur, and teritur. I answer (says the Jesuit) that
question was never made, if the body of Christ as it is in it self, were
truly broken with hands, and torn with teeth; for it is and and ever was
certain and sure, that Christ's body being now incorruptible, cannot be broken
and torn, save only in a sign or sacrament; so as it may be said to be broken
and torn, when the sign thereof, that is to say, the form of bread is broken
and torn.

Out of these words I note first, that by the Popes own doctrine, (for the
Jesuits doctrine is the doctrine of the Pope, seeing the Pope has approved
it,) Christ's body cannot be broken or torn, truly and indeed. I note
secondly, that the Pope and his Council decreed the contrary doctrine, and
that as an article of popish faith; when they compelled Berengarius, to
confess it with his mouth, and to believe it with his heart, and did also
publish the same, per vrbes Italiae, Germaniae, and Galliae, through the cities
of Italy, France, and Germany: for so says the decree, Ego Berengarius. I
note thirdly, that it is truly said, Christ's body is broken; because the
form of the bread is broken, as popish doctrine teaches us. For we see here,
that this is all that the papists can say for themselves: and upon this strong
foundation, and invincible bulwark, I infer this golden and evident
corollarie; viz. That if it be true to say, Christ's body is broken and torn,
because the sign of his body is broken and torn; then truly may we say,
and truly do we say, that Christ's body is in the Eucharist, because the
sign of his body is there, because the sacrament of his body is there,
because the representation of his body is there. And much more truly might
Christ himself say, This is my body, when he gave the sign and sacrament of
his body. I note fourthly, that it is the constant doctrine of the church of
England (which also many other reformed churches approve therein) that Christ's
body is received, broken, torn, and consumed with mouth and teeth,
figuratively, significantly, mystically, sacramentally. And consequently, if
the papists would be judged by this doctrine, which by the pen of the Jesuit
Bellarmine they here deliver, the controversy would soon be at an end. But I
must needs tell the reader, what the Popes own gloss teaches us: Gloss. de
Cons. did. 2. cap. ego Berengarius.
it is singular and worthy to be noted, these are the words: Nisi sane
intelligas verba Berengarij, in maiorem incides haeresim, quam ipse habuit; and
ideo omnia referas species ipsas, nam de corpore Christi parts non facimus.
Unless thou understand the words of Berengarius soundly, thou shall fall into
a greater heresy than he had; and therefore thou must refer all things to
the forms, for of Christ's body we make no parts. Mark these words, gentle
reader, for they are important: They teach us plainly, that it is a most
dangerous thing to rely upon popish decrees, even then when they pretend to
reform the church, and to condemn heresies.

S. Austen confirms the doctrine, which the Pope compelled Bellengarius to
abjure, August. in Joan. tract. ^9.
and that in many places of his works; one only assertion I will now set
down. These are his words: Illi manducabant panem dominum; ille, panem domini
contra dominum. They (the other Apostles) are the bread, that was the Lord, he
( Judas) ate (not our Lord, but) the bread of our Lord, against our Lord.

Note these words, gentle reader, and mark them seriously. S. Austen tells
us, that the bread which the other Apostles ate, was our Lord; yet that which
Judas received, was but the bread of the Lord. This assertion confounds the
papists. For, if our Lord and maker be present really, in flesh, blood, and
bone, under the accidents of bread; and that so long as the same accidents
remain vncorrupt, as the popish faith holds: then doubtless Judas should
have received his redeemer; the^ perforce Judas should also have received pane^
dominu^ the^ Judas could not by any possibility have barely received panem
domini, which yet S. Austen affirms most constantly. For first, if it were
true, that after popish supposed consecration, the substance of bread were
transubstantiated into Christ's natural body, as it truly consists of flesh,
blood, and bone: and again, if it were also true, that the selfsame body
remained under the form of bread, until it were corrupted, then let all the
papists in England, with the best advise of all their adherents and brother
papists elsewhere in Europe, tell me how Judas could receive ( panem domini) the
bread of our Lord, and not ( panem dominum) the bread which is the Lord, as S.
Austen plainly avouches, that is, how Judas could receive the form, with the
flesh, blood, and bones, of Christ's organicall and natural body hidden under
the same; and for all that, not receive Christ himself, and panem dominum, as
the other Apostles did. Let them I say tell me this, and I herewith promise to
subscribe, and never henceforth to write against them or any part of their
popish doctrine. If they will not this do, because they cannot (for if they
can do it, all the world must think they will do it, for their own credit
and the credit of their cause) then doubtless, if the fear of God be before
their eyes, they will acknowledge the truth, and with open mouth confess the
same. Cord enim creditur ad iustitiam, and ore confessio fit ad salutem. Romans
10. v. 10.


The fourth Member. Of the apparent contradictions in the Popish mass.
FIrst, the papists tell us, that Christ's body in their mass, is the
selfsame body that was nailed on the cross. And withal they tell us, that
it is a figure of the same body. That it is a flat contradiction, their own
dear Cardinal Bellarmine shall tell them: These are his words: Bellar. de
Eucharist. lib. 1. cap. 3. col. 474.
Figurae necessario, inferiores esse debent rebus figuratis. Figures of
necessity must be inferior to the things figured by them. And this doctrine
is most true indeed, as S. Paul discourses to the Hebrews. Hebr. 10.
Now would I know of the papists, if they can say ought for the life of their
mass, how Christ's body in the mass being the selfsame body numero, as they
teach and believe, can be inferior to Christ's body on the cross; how it can
be both inferior and superior to it self; how it can be both of greater and
lesser value than Christ's body on the cross, being ever the selfsame body on
the cross.

Secondly, the papists tell us, that Christ's natural body is contained in a
little round cake, or under the accidents and form of bread. Now would I know
of the same papists, how the bigger can be contained of the lesser, how a
bushel can be couched in a pecke, how a great ox can be closed up in a little
calves belly. For all these implie evident contradiction.

Thirdly, Bellar. de Eucharist. lib. 1. cap. 2. col. 472.
the papists tell us, that Christ's body is truly broken. For these are the
Jesuit Bellarmines words: Denique in concilio Romano sub Nicolao 2. compulsus
est Berengarius confiteri, Christi corpus sensualiter sacerdotum manibus tangi
and frangi. Finally, in a council at Rome under Pope Nicholas the second,
Berengarius was compelled to confess, that Christ's body is sensuallie touched
and broken with the priests hands.

Now would I know, how it can be true, that Christ's body is broken, and also
true, that it is not broken, speaking of the same body at the same time. Let
all papists answer, and tell me if they can, how it implies not
contradiction. For to say, that not the body but the accident of bread is
broken, is too too childish and frivolous. The reason is evident, because
Berengarius (o cruel impiety) was compelled to confess, that Christ's body
was sensually broken.

Fourthly, the papists tell us, that the pronouncing of these words by a priest
(This is my body) do make Christ's body present in their mass, and also in
other places: insomuch (mark well gentle reader what I say) that if a popish
priest come into a great market place, where there is great store of wheat
bread, though a thousand or more loaves in number, and there looking on the
bread, shall pronounce the said words, with intention to consecrate, then
forthwith every loaf is God almighty, and the people must adore the same.
Trial hereof was once made de facto in Italy, as my self being in Rome,
heard from the mouth of a Jesuit. For, as the Jesuit reported, a priest being
degraded and designed to die, as he passed in the street by a bakers house,
beheld a great quantity of wheat bread, and recited these words ( Hoc est
corpus meum) and told the people, that he had consecrated the said bread. This
is a great wonderment, and extreme popish sollie.
VVhereupon consultation was had out of hand among the learned, and sentence
given, that every loaf was God almighty: and the bread was carried away with
great solemnity, reverence, and such adoration as was due to the son of the
everliving God. Now would I know, when the priest has pronounced three of the
said words, viz. (hoc est corpus.) what is become of the bread before him. For
if they answer, that it is Christ's body: then will it follow to their shame,
that one of the words of their consecration is of no force; which to die for
it, the papists may not admit. If they say, that a part of Christ's body is
then wrought really, by virtue of the said words, then will it follow to their
greater shame, that Christ's body is really torn in pieces, by force of their
bloody and most cruel mass. If they say, that naught is indeed effected,
until the last syllable of the last word be pronounced; then will it follow to
their confusion, that of four words wherein consists their whole
consecration, three are of no virtue, force, or efficacy, but stand as ciphers
to fill up the place, and to make a show of that which is not.

Fiftlie, Durandus tells us, that only the form of bread is changed, and
that the matter of bread remains still in the Eucharist. Rupertus the popish
Abbot holds, that the bread is united hypostaticallie to the son of God.
Caietanus, Henricus, and Capreolus, are of another opinion: Iohanncs
Parisiensis held also that the bread was assumpted, but in a different manner
from the opinion of Rupertus. Another opinion, affirms the annihilation of
the bread: but the Jesuit Bellarmine holds with their Council of Trent, that
the bread is transubstantiated into the body of Christ.

Sixthly, the papists tell us, that when the priest is at mass, then all
spectators must adore that which he holds over his head, and constantly
believe it to be their maker and redeemer of the world: and if any hold
contrary opinion, or teach the contrary doctrine, that person must be burnt
with fire and faggot for his pains. But yet for all this the popish faith
tells us, that if either the priest want intention to consecrate, (which
often chances, or at least may chance, by reason of wandering imaginations)
or of purpose means not to consecrate, or of negligence omitteth, or
miscalleth any word of consecration; then by popish doctrine, faith, and
religion, the thing adored for God almighty, is but pure bakers bread; and
consequently, the adorers there of become idolaters, worshipping a piece of
bread for the everliving God.

Seventhly, the papists tell us, that many priests are appointed at once to
pronounce the words of consecration, in the Romish Church Lateran when they are
made priests. But they cannot tell us, how many gods, or how many times God is
made in one and the same piece or cake of bread, in and at that mass of the
newly made priests. For they are all appointed to consecrate, they do all
pronounce the words, they are all bounden to have intention, and they all have
the fit and requisite matter to work upon: but when the principal actor and
chief agent, to wit, the bishop, is at the last syllable; then some of the
rest be in the midst, some toward the end, some in one place, some in an
other, never one iumping with other in that instant, in which they should their
bread-god make. For of this dreadful mystery, there are three solemn
dissonant opinions. Joseph. Angl. in 4. s. page 180.
Pope Innocentius holds, that they all do consecrate: Durandus avouches,
that that priest only consecrateth, which with greatest speed first comes to
the end: but Cardinal Caietanus has a different consideration. Now would I
know, how these so different popish opinions, in a matter of so great
importance, can be reconciled and salued from contradiction. Answer papists if
you can, or else relent and yield to the truth for shame.

The third Article. Of popish dispensations.
ANtoninus sometime archbishop of Florence, coming as ambassador from the
Pope, tells us, if we may believe him, Antoninus, 3. par tit. 22. cap. 5.. 8.
that the Pope is Christ's vicar upon earth, and has equal power with God
almighty. These are his own express words; Cum aute^ vicarius Christi sit
Papa, nullus potest seipsum subtrahere ab obedientia eius de iure, sicut nullus
de iure potest se subtrahere abobedientia Dei. Et sicut recepit Christus a
patre ducatum and sceptrum ecclesiae gentium ex Israel egrediens, super omnem
principatum and potestatem, and super omne quodcunque est, vt ei genua cuncta
curuentur; sic ipse Petro and successoribus eius, plenissimam potestatem
commisit. For seeing the Pope is the vicar of Christ, none can lawfully
withdraw himself from his obedience, as none can lawfully withdraw himself
from Gods obedience. And as Christ received of his father, the dukedom and
scepter of the Church of the gentiles arising of Israel, over all principality
and power, and above every thing that has being, that to him every knee may
bend: even so Christ has committed most full power to Peter and his successors.

The famous popish friar, Aug. de Anch. in summa, page 152.
Augustinus de Ancona, in that book which he dedicated to Pope John the twelft
of that name, sings the same song, and affirms the Pope to have the same
power. These are his express words; ( Papa) tanquam vicarius Dei filij
caelestis imperatoris, iurisdictionem habet vniuersalem super omniaregna and
imperia. The Pope, as he that is the vicar of the son of God the heavenly
emperor, has universal jurisdiction over all kingdoms and empires.

Many other papists have the like testimonies, but they are needless, seeing
the Pope is a sufficient witness against himself, having often reduced their
assertions to actual execution. For the Pope has often by his wicked and
execrable dispensations taken upon him to dissolve that matrimony which is
firm and stable by Christ's own institution. The former part is proved by
their learned canonist Martinus Nauarrus, Nauar. in Euchar. cap. 22. par. 21.
in these express words: Diuiditur (matrimonium) ante consummationem, per
dispensationem papae iusta de causa factam. Matrimony is dissolved before
consummation, by the Popes dispensation upon just cause granted. Now to prove
that the Pope may this do, Navarre takes it for a good ground, that the Pope
has practiced the same. Thus does he write: Quorum opinio adeo obseruatur,
Nauar. vbi sup.
quod etiam ter vel quater ad petitiones consilio meo antequam in vrbem
venissem oblatas, Paulus 3. and Pius 4. per suas dispensationes, dissoluerant
quaedam matrimonia omnino clandestina nondum consummata, in remedium animarum
alioquin probabiliter periturarum. Whose opinion (he speaks of the
Canonists) is so observed, that three or four times before my coming to Rome,
upon petitions made by mine advise, Pope Paulus the third, and Pope Pius the
fourth, with their dispensations dissolved certain secret matrimonies not yet
consummate, for the safeguard of souls, which by likelihood would otherwise have
perished.

And another famous popish Canonist Couarruvias affirms, Couar. to. 1. cap.
7. par. 4. n. 13. col. 1
that Pope Paulus the fourth and Julius the third dispensed in like manner.
These are his words: Necme latet Paulum quartum summum ecclesiae pontificem,
anno 1558. hac vsum fuisse dispensatione quibusdam excausis, quas iustissimas
esse idem summus ecclesiae praesul existimauit. Idem Paulo ante Julius tertius
fecerat in eodem matrimonio, cum ecclesiae universally praesiderit. Neither am I
ignorant, that the Pope Paul the fourth put this dispensation in practice, for
certain causes which the same Pope thought to be most just. Julius the third,
when he was Pope, in the like case granted the like dispensation. Thus we see
the former part of mine assertion to be most sufficiently proved, viz. that
Pope takes upon him to dissolve lawful and perfect matrimony. Now for proof
of the latter, viz. that wedlock before consummation or copulation, is firm
and perfect, and cannot be dissolved by the power of man: Christ's own words
are a sufficient ground. Matthew. 19. v. 7.
Quod deus coniunxit, homo non separet. That which God has conjoined, let not
man put asunder. And in another place Christ has these words: Luke, 16. v. 18.
Omnis qui dimittit vxorem suam, and alteram ducit, moechatur. Every one that
puts away his wife, and marries another, commits adultery.

S. Paul upon the same argument delivers the like doctrine in these words:
1. Cor. 7. v. 10.
His autem qui matrimonio iuncti sunt, precipio non ego sed dominus, vxorem a
viro non discedere; quod si discesserit, manner innuptam, aut viro suo
reconciliari, and vir vxorem non dimittat. Those that are married command not
I, but the Lord, that the wife depart not from her husband: but if she shall
depart, then to abide unmarried, or to be reconciled to her husband.

Thus says S. Paul, and thus says Christ himself, that man and wife joined
by Christ, must abide during life together, or live unmarried, and not be
severed by the Popes dispensation.

And it will not help the Pope to say as the Jesuit Bellarmine does, and
others with him, That Christ only speaks de matrimonio consummato, and that
matrimonium ratum, with which the Pope dispenses, is not de iure diuino.

For first, if matrimonium ratum were not de iure diuino, the greatest popish
doctors would not deny the Popes dispensation therein.

Secondly, Christ speaks absolutely, and makes no mention of copulation or
popish consummation at all.

Thirdly, matrimony with papists is a divine sacrament, and consequently, it
both is perfect without carnal copulation, and also indispensable by the power
of man. Canus de locis, lib. 8. ca. p. 246.
For as their own famous doctor Melchior Canus says: Sanctus spiritus and
sacramenti gratia, per coitum non datur. The holy ghost and the grace of
sacrament is not given by copulation.

Fourthly, it follows hereupon, that matrimony is not fully perfect in the
popish church, because copulation follows a good while after.

Fifthly, because it is absurd to say, that it begins to be a sacrament by
carnal copulation, and was not a sacrament by the priests action.

Sixthly, it follows hereupon, that there was not perfect matrimony between
Adam and Eve, for their matrimony was in the state of innocence, and before
all carnal copulation.

Seventhly, because if matrimony be not de iure diuino, even before
copulation, there is no cause why both parties agreeing together, may not
release the bargain, and quite dissolve the contract. For as the law says,
Quisque potest suo iuri cedere. Every man may yield up his right: which thing,
all, as well Canonists as Divines, admit for good in sponsalibus.

Eighthly, it follows hereupon, Matthew. 1.
that the marriage between the blessed virgin and S. Joseph, was not perfect
matrimony: for there doubtless wanted carnal copulation; but the angel of
God feared not to call her Joseph's wife.

S. Ambrose has these words: Non enim defloratio virginitatis facit coniugium,
Ambros. de instit. virg. cap. 6.
sed pactio coniugalis. For not the deflouring of virginity makes wedlock,
but the conjugal covenant.

S. Austens judgment herein is most clear and evident. August. de consens.
euang. lib. 2. cap. 1. to 4.
These are his words: Cum igitur ipse narret, non ex concubitu Joseph, sed ex
Maria virgin natum Christum, vnde eum patrem eius appellat, nisi quia and
virum Mariae recte intelligimus sine commixtione carnis, ipsa copulatione
coniugij. When therefore he tells us, that Christ is not borne of Joseph's
copulation, but of the virgin Marie; upon what ground does he call him his
father, but only for that we do rightly conceive him to be Mary's husband
without the commixtion of flesh, by the very copulation of wedlock.

The same father writing to Valerius, discourses of this matter at large,
Augustine. de nup^ijs and concupisc. lib. 1. cap. 11. tom. 7.
and among many other notable sentences sets down these words: Quibus vero
placuit, ex consensu ab vsu carnalis concupiscentiae in perpetuum continer,
absit vt inter illos vinculum coniugale rumpatur. Secquitar neque enim
fallaciter ab angelo dictum est ad Joseph, noli timere, accipere Mariam
coniugem tuam. They that were content by mutual consent to abstain for ever
from the use of carnal copulation, God forbid, that between them should be
dissolved the bond of wedlock. For the Angel did not speak deceitfully to
Joseph, when he willed him not to fear to take Marie his wife unto him.

Thus we see it clear, that the pope takes upon him that power and authority
which is proper to God alone: for he practically avouches (as I have proved
by his own dear doctors) that his dispensations are of force to vnmarrie and
put asunder those persons whom God himself has joined together in holy
wedlock. And contrariwise (as I shall prove unto you) he practically has
taken upon him to join in wedlock those persons, to whom God himself has
forbidden marriage. I will omit known examples, and allege one only not
known to many; which as it is rare and notorious, so is it able to provoke all
that hear it, to exclaim against the execrable practice of the Pope.

Antoninus, Antonin. 3. p. tit. 1. cap. 11. prope fin.
a man of no small credit (for he was an archbishop of the popish stamp, and
by the Pope reported for a saint) has these very words: Reperitur tamen papa
Martinus quintus dispensasse cum quodam, qui contraxerat and consummauerat
matrimonium cum quadam cius germana. Nevertheless, it is known, that Pope
Martin the fifth did dispense with one who had contracted and consummate
matrimomonie with his own natural and full sister, Fatetur Durandus olim
papam dispensando errasse. lib. 4. sent. did. 7. q. 4. in fine.
of the same father and same mother, for so much the word ( Germana) does
import. Behold here, gentle reader, the excellency of holy popery: and if
thou desire more of such melody, thou may find it in my book of Motives.
But this here is a sufficient antepast for all our English Jesuits and Iesuited
popelings. None are so ignorant, but they know that only God can give license
to marry a man's own natural sister. Answer papists if ye can, or else yield
unto the truth for shame.

The fourth Article. Of original concupiscence in the regenerat.
SAint Paul throughout the whole seventh chapter to the Romans, Romans 7.
proves original concupiscence in the regenerate to be sin. But the papists
cannot abide to hear this doctrine, Psalm. 58. v. 6.
they stop their ears against the charmer, though he charm never so wisely.
And why, I pray you? because forsooth it overthrows their holy so supposed
iustifications, their inherent purities, their mutual satisfactions, their
condign merits, their pharisaicall supererogations. And yet Petrus Lombardus
their famous master of sentences (whose book to this day is publickely read in
their schools of divinity) utterly condemns their damnable doctrine in this
point. Lombard. lib. 3. sent. did. 19.
These are his express words: Secundum animas vero iam redemptisumus ex part,
non ex toto; a culpa, non a poena, nec omnino a eulpa, non enim ab ea sic
redempti sumus, vt non sit, sed vt non dominetur. But touching our souls, we
are redeemed in part, not wholly, from the sin, not from the pain, neither
wholly from the sin or fault. For we are not so redeemed from it, that it be
not (in us) but that it rule not (over us.) Thus writes the worshipful popish
master, Now must the papists perforce either recant their doctrine, or else cry
fire and faggot for their chief master.
our reverend father Lombard: out of whose words we may gather with facility
so much as will serve our turn against the papists. For first he says we are
redeemed in part, but not in the whole. Secondly, that we are not wholly
redeemed from sin. Thirdly, he tells us how we are redeemed from sin,
viz. that albeit sin still remain in us, yet has it not such dominion over
us, that it can enforce us to consent thereunto. Lo, this doctrine is not
mine, but the flat doctrine of the papists, which I learned of that great
papist, who for his learning was surnamed the master of sentences, and to this
day is publicly read in their divinity schools.

Touching S. Paul, Romans 7. v. 25.
he says first in this manner: I my self with the mind serve the law of God,
but with the flesh, the law of sin. Out of these words I note first, that the
Apostle speaks of the regenerate throughout this whole chapter, because he
names himself, who was Gods chosen and elect vessel. For which respect, and
the like expressed in the seventh chapter to the Romans, S. Austen changed his
opinion, and granted S. Paul to speak here of the regenerate. Aug. li. 1.
retract cap. 22. p. 23.
I note secondly, that the elect and regenerate do serve the law of sin. I
note thirdly, that the best livers are so far from meriting ex condigno,
grace and glory, that they deserve in rigor of justice, eternal death,
because death is the reward of sin. Which for that S. Austen could not well
digest at the first, he thought that S. Paul's words were to be understood of
the reprobate, and not of the elect and godly sort: but when he had pondered
the Apostles discourse and words more seriously, he changed his opinion. This
is confirmed in the selfsame chapter in these words: But I see another law in
my members, rebelling against the law of my mind, Romans 7. v. 23.
and subduing me unto the law of sin, which is in my members. By these words
it is evident, that albeit S. Paul were the child of God, yet could he not
merit any thing in Gods sight: but rather in rigor of justice provoke Gods
heavy displeasure against him: For where or what could be his merit, who was
prisoner to the law of sin? Romans 7. v. 19.
Again, the same is confirmed in these words: For I do not the good which I
would, but the evil which I would not, that do I. Thus says S. Paul. And
doubtless, since he did the evil which he would not, he sinned, though he
were regenerate: and in that he sinned, he was guilty of damnation, because
death is the stipend of sin. August. epist. 105. page 301.
For this cause gravely says S. Austen: Cum deus coronat merita nostra, nihil
aliud coronat, quam munera sua. When God crowns our merits, he crowns
nothing else but his own gifts. Again, the same is confirmed in these words,
For the law is spiritual, but I am carnal sold under sin. Romans 7, v. 14.
Thus says S. Paul of himself. And yet it is most true, that one under the
buthen of sin can merit nothing save hell fire and eternal pain. Again,
the same is confirmed in these words: If I do that I would not, Romans 7. v. 20.
then it is not I that does it, but sin that dwells in me. Lo S. Paul
grants that to be sin in himself, which yet himself consents not unto.
And that he speaks of original concupiscence, which remains in the
regenerate after baptism, it cannot be denied. And it will not serve the
turn, to say as Bellarmine does, viz. that original concupiscence remains
after baptism, but is no sin at all: and, that it is called sin only in
this respect, because it provoke a man to sin; as a man's writing is called
his hand, because it is written with his hand. For first, their own master
Petrus Lombardus grants it to be sin, even as S. Paul does. Secondly, it
causes man to serve the law of sin, which service can never be but sin.
Thirdly, S. Paul says, he does that ill which he would not, and that which he
does hate. All which must needs be meant of sin.

That concupiscence remaining after baptism, is truly called sin, the
papists themselves confess unawares in a maine point of doctrine and settled
ground of their religion. Mark well gentle reader what I shall deliver in this
behalf.

God chose all in Christ that shall be saved before the foundation of the
world: and likewise reprobated al both negatiuely and positiuely (that I may
use their schoole-tearmes:) but positiuely, for the foresight of original
sin. For the proof hereof, it will suffice to allege the words of our
papists at Rhemes, Rhemes test. in Romans 9. v. 14.
in their notes upon the new testament. Thus do they write: So likewise, God
seeing all mankind, and every one of the same, in a general condemnation and
mass of sin in and by Adam, delivers some and not othersome. These are
their own words: and that which they teach, is the common doctrine of the
Romish church. Rhem. Romans 9. v. 11.
Again, the same Rhemists in the chapter before quoted have these words: by the
same example of those twins, it is evident also, that neither nations nor
particular persons be elected eternally, or called temporally, or preferred to
Gods favor before others by their own merits: because God when he made choice
and first loved Jacob, and refused Esau, respected them both as ill, and the
one no less than the other guilty of damnation for original sin, which was
alike in them both. And therefore where justly he might have reprobated both,
he saved of mercy one. This is that strong foundation, whereon the papists
think predestination to be built: the which I willingly do admit, as which
will make good my positio^ even against themselves. For seeing as they grant.
That God beholding all in a general condemnation for original sin, Mark
well this Dilemma.
saves the elect of mercy, and justly decrees to condemn the reprobate for
original sin: it follows of necessity, that either some reprobate shall be
saved, which the papists neither dare nor may avouch, or else that concupiscence
remaining after baptism, is sin indeed, Juno per actualia, and propria sua
peccata quid ni?
which is the doctrine I defend. The consequution and illation is evident. For
if original sin be truly remitted in baptism, and be not truly sin in the
baptized, then can none be justly damned that are baptized: for how shall they
be justly condemned, for that which is remitted? it cannot be. And to grant
that all baptized persons shall be saved, is most absurd; neither can I think
any papist so senseless, as to affirm the same. For to name one for all:
their Pope Boniface the eight, who (as their own dear friar Caranza says)
entered into the popedom as a fox, Caranza in summa conciliorum. fol. 369.
reigned in it as a wolf, and died in the end as a dog; is not I trow a saint
in heaven; and yet must we think he was baptized, or else a terrible vae vobis
will fall upon our papists.

Now because the papists use to boast, that S. Austen is on their side, I will
prove at large, that he defends this my doctrine here delivered: and that I
purpose in God to do so plainly and evidently, as none can stand in doubt
thereof, that shall seriously ponder my discourse.

The first place of Saint Austen.
SIcut caecitas cordis, quam solus remouet illuminator Deus, and peccatum est
quo in deum non creditur; Aug. lib. 5. cont. Julian. cap. 3. tom. 7.
and poena peccati, qua cor superbum digna animaduersione punitur: and causa
peccati, cum mali aliquid caeci cordis errore committitur; ita concupiscentia
carnis, aduersus quam bonus concupiscit spiritus, and peccatum est, quia inest
illi inobedientia contra dominatum mentis: and poena peccati est, quia reddita
est meritis inobedientis; and causa peccatiest, defectione consentientis, vel
contagione nascentis. Like as the blindness of heart, which only God the
illuminatour does remove, is sin, through which man believes not in God;
and the punishment of sin, wherewith a proud heart is justly chastened; and
the cause of sin, when through the blindness of heart any evil is
committed; even so concupiscence of the flesh, against which the good spirit
coueteth, is sin, because there is in it disobedience against the government
of the mind: and also a punishment of sin, because it was rendered to the
merits of the disobedient: and it is also the cause of sin, by defection of
him that consents, or by contagion of the child that is borne.

In these words, Saint Austen expresses three things precisely; first, that
concupiscence in the regenerate, is the punishment of sin; secondly, that it
is the cause of sin; thirdly, that it is sin it self. Which three, S.
Austen does not only distinguish, but withal he yields three several
reasons for the same: and that he speaks of the regenerate, it is evident in
this; because he speaks of that concupiscence, against which the good spirit
strives. Most impudent therefore are the papists, when they avouch with open
mouth, that Saint Austen only calls it sin, because it is the cause of
sin. And the gentle reader may here also observe, that S. Austen compares
concupiscence of the flesh, with that blindness of heart which breeds
infidelity in man: which how great a sin it is, every one can tell.

The second place of Saint Austen.
NEque enim nulla est iniquitas, cum in vno homine vel superiora inferioribus
turpit^r seruiunt; Aug. contr. Julian. lib. 6. cap. 8. to. 7.
vel inferiora superioribus contumaciter reluctantur, etiam si vincere non
sinantur. For it is some iniquity, when in one man, either the superior parts
shamefully serve the inferior; or the inferior parts stubbornly strive
against the superior, although they be not suffered to prevail.

These words of Saint Austen are so plain, as the papists cannot possible
invent any evasion at all. For he says in plain and express terms; that
the rebellion which is between the flesh and the spirit, is sin; yea, that
it is even then sin, when it is resisted, and cannot prevail. At which time
and in which respect, the papists will have it to be merit, but no sin at
all. Behold a flat contradiction, it is sin, says Saint Austen: it is merit
and no sin, say the papists.

The third place of Saint Austen.
SI in parente baptizato potest and esse and peccatum non esse, August. de.
nuptijs and concupis. lib. 1. cap. 25. to. 7.
cur eadem ipsa in prole peccatum est? ad haec respondetur, dimitti
concupiscentiam carnis in baptismo, non vt non sit, sed vt in peccatum non
imputetur. Sequitur, non ergo aliquid remanet quod non remittatur, cum fit
sicut scriptum est, propitius dominus omnibus iniquitatibus nostris; sed donec
fiat and quod sequitur, Ps. 103. v. 3.
qui sanat omnes languores tuo, qui redimet de corruptione vitam tuam: manet in
corpore mortis huius carnalis concupiscentia. It remains sin by nature, and
so passes by regeneration, from the parents to the children.
If concupiscence can both be in the baptized parent, and withal be no sin,
why is the self same made sin in the child? to this, this is the answer:
that the concupiscence of the flesh is forgiven in baptism, not so that it
remain not, but so that it is not reputed for sin. Not any thing therefore
remains, which is not forgiven, seeing that is done which is written, God is
merciful to all our iniquities: but until that be done also which follows:
which heals all thine infirmities; which redeemeth thy life from corruption:
carnal concupiscence abides in the body of this death.

Saint Austen in these words shows plainly, that concupiscence remains
as well in the baptized parent, as in the unbaptized child; yet with this
difference, that it is sin in the parent, though not for sin imputed; but
in the child it both is sin, and is also so reputed. And the reader must not
forget, that Saint Austen says, Nothing remains which is not forgiven. He
does not say, Nothing is sin that remains; or thus, No sin remains: but
thus, Not any thing remains, which is not remitted. As if he had said, sin
indeed remains still in the baptized, but shall not be imputed to the
faithful. Mark well gentle reader, the phrase which Saint Austen here uses.
It is forgiven that still remains, says Saint Austen; or, not any thing
remains, which is not forgiven. Therefore he must needs mean, that
something remains which is sin, though pardoned and not reputed sin. For
nothing has need of forgiveness, but that which is sin indeed.

The fourth place of Saint Austen.
I Deo apostolus non ait facere bonum sibi non adiacere, August. de nupttijs
and concupis. libr. 1. cap. 29.
sed perficere. Multum enim boni facit, qui facit quod scriptum est; post
concupiscentias tuas non eas; sed non perficit, quia non implet quod scriptum
est; non concupisces. The apostle therefore says not, that he has not power
to do good, but that he cannot perfect that which is good. For he does great
good, who does that which is written; Follow not thy lusts: but he does not
perfect his well doing, because he does not fulfill that which is written, Thou
shall not lust.

Out of these words of Saint Austen, I note many memorable documents. First,
that Saint Austen speaks these words of the regenerate; for they only can
do this good, whereof the apostle speaks. Secondly, that though the
regenerate can do good, and strive against lust; yet can they not do that
good so perfectly, but it is always annexed to sin, and chayned with it, as
with an heavy yokefellow. Thirdly, that the tenth commandment (mark well my
words) prohibiteth not only actual lust done with consent, but also
original lust committed without consent; and consequently, that concupiscence
remaining in the regenerate, is sin properly and formallie. I prove it,
because Saint Paul could not perform this precept, as Saint Austen truly and
learnedly observed: who for all that touching actual sin, was most free and
innocent. For he fought mightily against his raging concupiscence, and did in
no wise yield thereunto. He was therefore guilty by reason of original
concupiscence, which abode in him against his will. Therefore most absurd is
the exposition of the Rhemists, Romans 7. v. 7.
who bear the reader in hand, that Saint Paul speaks not of the habitual
concupiscence, or sensual desire and inclination to evil, when he forbids
to lust. For if only the consent of our reason and mind, to obey and to follow
the lusts thereof, were sin indeed; then should Saint Austens exposition be
very childish and too too absurd, who tells us plainly in express terms,
That S. Paul could not fulfill that precept, although he did not yield his
consent unto it, neither did obey or follow the desires thereof. No, no, Saint
Paul had no such meaning; he named it sin, as it is indeed. He says, he had
not known lust to be sin, Romans 7. v. 7.
except the law had said, Thou shall not lust. But he could never be ignorant,
that concupiscence with consent was sin; seeing the very heathen men did
know, and confess the same. Again, that actual concupiscence which our
Rhemists speak of, Matt. 5. v. 22.
is forbidden in the sixth, seventh, and eight commandments; as Christ
himself expondeth them. And consequently, the tenth commandment forbids,
the very habitual and sensual desire, or inclination to sin, and the evil
fruits thereof; that is, wicked, vicious, and injurious thoughts, though we
resist and strive against them. This is the express doctrine of Saint Austen
in another place, August. de nupt. and concup. lib. 1. cap. 27.
which he delivers in these words; Agitenim aliquid concupiscentia carnis,
and quando non exhibetur ei vel cordis assensus, vbi regnet, vel membra velut
arma, quibus impleatur quod iubet: agit autem quid, nisi ipsa desideria mala
and turpia? Non enim si bona and licita essent, eis obedire prohiberet
apostolus. For concupiscence of the flesh works something, even when there is
not given unto it, either the consent of the heart, Romans 6. v. 12.
where it may reign; or the members as weapons, which may accomplish what it
appoints. And what does it, but the very wicked and filthy desires? For if
they were good and lawful, the apostle would not forbid to obey them.

Mark these words gentle reader; for they fortify that which is already
said, and give a deadly blow to the papists: two things are cleared by this
testimony of Saint Austen, the one, that concupiscence to which consent is not
given, brings forth ill desires: the other, that the said desires are
unlawful, and prohibited by the law of God. And so we have it evidently
proved, by many inuinsible reasons; that concupiscence habitued, to which the
regenerate yield no consent, but stoutly resist the same; is so far from
being meritorious, as the papist teach, that it is sin formally, and properly
so called. Neither will it serve their turn, to object that which is ever in
their mouths, that it is inuoluntarie, and can no way be avoided, and so no
sin at all. This objection I grant, carries a majesty with it; and it
seems to many men, to be insoluble. But God willing, I shall make it so
clear and evident, as every child may behold with facility, the weakness,
falsehood, and absurdity thereof.

Saint Austen proves at large in sundry places of his works, Aug. lib. 1.
retract. cap. 13. page 13.
that inuoluntarie motions of concupiscence are sin in deed, and truly so
called. In his first book of retractations, he has these words; Illud quod
in paruulis dicitur originale peccatum, cum adhuc non vtantur libero arbitrio
voluntatis, non absurd vocatur etiam voluntarium; quid ex primi hominis mala
voluntate contractum, factum est quodammodo haereditarium. Non itaque falsum
est quod dixi, vsque adeo peccatum voluntarium malum est, vt nullo modo sit
peccatum si non sit voluntarium. That which in infants is called original
sin, when as yet they use not free arbitrament of will, is not absurdly
called voluntary; because being contracted of the evil will of the first man,
it is become in a sort hereditarie. It is not therefore false which I said,
Aug. retract. lib. 1. cap. 15. page 16.
sin is an evil so voluntary, that it is no way sin, if it be not
voluntary.

Again, in an other place S. Austen has these words; Quod si quisquam dicit
etiam ipsam cupiditate^ nihil esse aliud quam voluntate^, sed vitiosam
peccatoque seruientem, non resistendum est, nec de verbis, cum res constat,
controuersia facienda est. Sic enim ostenditur sine voluntate nullu^ esse
peccatu^, sieve in opere, sieve in origin. But if any man say, that
concupiscence is nothing else, than a will that is vicious and serving sin,
there is no resistance to be made; neither must controversy be in words, when
the thing is clear and evident. For so we prove every sin to be voluntary,
either in the act, or else in the original.

Again, he has these words; August. vbi sup page 17.
Propterea non perturbat de paruulis question, quia ex illius origin rei
tenentur qui voluntate peccauit, quando libero and ad faciendu^, and ad non
faciendu^ motu animi non carebat, eique ab opere malo abstinendi su^ma potestas
erat. Therefore let no man be troubled with the question about infants, because
they are guilty by reason of his original, that sinned voluntarily; having
free motion of mind both to do and not to do, as also full power to abstain
from evil.

Thus we see most evidently, that the vnuoluntary motions of concupiscence, so
termed of the papists, are both sinful and voluntary: sinful in their
nature, and voluntary in the original. And the papists may as well deny
concupiscence to be sin in the infants unbaptized, as in them that are
baptized, upon this their falsely supposed ground. For it is as vnuoluntarie in
the one, as it is in the other; neither can it be any more avoided in the one,
than in the other. This is the gordian knot which the papists are never able to
loose, or untie.

Bellarmine himself is enforced to confess, Bellarm. tom. 3. col. 400. vide
Aug. de spiritu and liter. cap. vlt. tom. 3.
that Saint Austen acknowledges all the motions of concupiscence, even those
which be inuoluntarie, to be properly sin, and flatly condemned by the tenth
commandment. These are his express words; Haec dicta sunt ad mentem S.
Augustini, qui precepto, non concupisces, intelligit prohiberi aliquo modo
motus omnes concupiscentiae, etiam inuoluntarios; assensum vero his motibus,
prohibere docet illo alio precepto: post concupiscentias tuas non eas. These
things are spoken after Saint Austens mind, Eccles. 18. v. 30.
who by this precept, (Thou shall not lust) understands all the motions of
concupiscence, even the inuoluntarie, to be prohibited in some sort; and that
the consent to these motions, is forbidden by that other precept; Follow not
thy concupiscence. Thus writes the Jesuitical Cardinal: by whose doctrine it
is evident, that Saint Austen affirms the first motions of concupiscence:
which prevent reason cannot be avoided to be condemned by Saint Paul, as
sinful and against the law of God. Which doctrine of Saint Austen does so
sting and confound all papists, that Bellarmine knows not in the world what
he shall answer to the same. And therefore deceitfully he adds in his
exposition of Saint Austens words, the word ( quodammodo, after a sort;) which
word neither is in Saint Austen, nor yet agreeable to his meaning. For Saint
Austen says plainly, simply, and absolutely, without all ands, or ifs, or
other qualifications, that such motions are forbidden by this commandment, (
non concupisces.) And for the consummation of this doctrine, (which
overthrows the best part of popery,) I will here add to Saint Paul's
doctrine, and the exposition of Saint Austen; the flat testimony of Saint John
an other Apostle, who sings the same song with Saint Paul.

Saint John in his first epistle, 1. Joan. 3. v. 4.
has these words; (...). Every one that sins, transgresses the law. And
sin is the transgression of the law. These are S. John's words truly
translated out of the original Greek. But before we proceed any further in
the discourse hereof, Rhem^ test. in the notes in 1. Joan. 3. 4.
let us take a view of that doctrine, which our papists of Rhemes have sent us.
These are their words; Iniquity is not taken here for wickedness, as it is
commonly used both in Latin and in our language, as is plain by the Greek
word (...) signifying nothing else, but swaruing or declining from the straight
line of the law of God, or nature. So that the Apostle means, that every
sin is an obliquitie or defect from the rule of the law: but not contrary,
that every such swaruing from the law, should be properly a sin, as the
heretics do untruly gather, to prove that concupiscence remaining after
baptism is a very sin, though we never give our consent unto it. Thus they
write. Out of whose words, I gather two notable docume^ts; the one, that the
word (...) is a defect and swaruing from the law, but not properly a sin: the
other, that if (...) be proved to be sin properly, then will it also follow of
necessity by S. John's doctrine, that concupiscence in the regenerate is
properly sin. Let this doctrine be well marked, as which is no less apparent
then important. Now, it only remains for the victory, and truth of this
article, That I prove against our papists the Rhemists, that the Greek word
(...) does signify sin properly: behold the proof.

A very famous papist and great linguist, Arias Montan. in 1. Joan. 3.
Ben. Arias Montanus, says plainly in express teames, that (...) is
transgressio legis, the transgression of the law. Now, that the transgression
of Gods law is properly sin, none is so sottish, that he does not understand
it; none so impious, that he will deny it; none so peevish, that he will not
acknowledge it. But I prove the same.

S. Ambrose has these words: Quid est enim peccatum, nisi preuaricatio legis
divine, Ambros. de parad. cap. 8. tom. 4.
and coelestium inobedientia preceptorum? For what is sin, Vide Ambros. in 7.
cap. ad romans and in sine huius articuli.
but the transgression of Gods law, and disobedience to his heavenly precepts?
Lo, sin (says S. Ambrose) is nothing else but the transgression of Gods law,
that is to say, nothing else but (...), as S. John terms it, and as Arias
Montanus does interpret it.

S. Austen has these words: August. de consensu Euangel. cap. 4. tom. 4.
Peccatum est transgressio legis. Sin is a transgression of the law. Lo S.
Austen concludes with S. Ambrose, and they both agree with S. John.

The same S. Austen in another place defines sin in this manner. Aug. cont.
Faust. lib. 22. cap. 27. tom. 6. page 281.
Peccatum est dictum, vel factum, vel concupitum aliquid, contra legem aternam.
Sin is a word, deed, thought, or desire, against the eternal law (of God.)
And what the eternal law is, he shows in these words next following in the
same place: Lex aeterna est ratio diuina vel voluntas Dei, ordinem naturalem
conseruari iubens, Vide Bernard. de aduent. dom. sermon. 6. to. 1. p. 16.
perturbari vetans. The eternal law is the reason or will of God, which
commands the natural order to be observed, and forbids the same to be
perturbed.

Thus writes this ancient, grave, and learned father; by whose judgment it
is properly sin, whatsoever is against the will of God. So then, Gods will is
that law and rule, by which every sin must be measured and tried. And
consequently, whatsoever deflecteth, declineth, or swarueth from the will of
God, the same is most properly sin. The reason hereof is evident, because
not to be correspondent and agreeable to Gods will, is the very intrinsecall
reason, essence, and nature of sin. But so it is, that the (...), disorder,
and concupiscence in the regenerate, is repugnant and disagreeable to the will
of God: and consequently, it must be sin indeed.

S. Bid, ^ Beda in 1. Joan. 3
who for his learning and virtue was renowned throughout the whole Christian
world, and thereupon surnamed venerabilis, has these express words: Virtus
huius sententiae facilius in lingua Graecorum, qua edita est epistola,
comprehenditur. Si quidem apud eos iniquitas (...) vocatur, quod significat
quasi contra legem vel sine lege factum. Si quidem lex Graece (...) appellatur
sequitur; sed and latinum nomen eidem rationi congruit, quod iniquitas quasi
aequitati aduersa nuncupatur. Quia quicunque peccat, contarius nimirum
aequitati diuinae legis peccando existit. The force and efficacy of this
sentence is more easily perceived in the Greek tongue, in which the epistle
was written. For iniquity with them is called (...), which signifies, As done
against law, or without law. For the law is called in Greek (...). The Latin
word also agrees to the same reason, because it is called iniquity, as being
against equity: for every one that sins, is by reason of sin, contrary
to the equity of Gods law. See more to this effect in the eight article
following.

Dionysius Carthusianus, Dionys. Carthus. in 1. Joan. 3.
a famous papist, has these words: Lex autem diuina est aequitas ipsa; sicque
mortale peccatum est iniquitas, id est, non aequitas, vtpote violatio
aequitatis. The law of God is equity it self: and consequently, iniquity,
that is, not equity, to wit, the transgression of equity, is a mortal sin.

Nicolaus de Lyra, Lyr. in 1. Joan. 3.
another famous popish writer, has these words: Peccatum est transgressio
legis diuinae. Lex autem diuina est ipsa aequitas; and ideo in omni peccato
mortali est equitatis corruption, and per consequens, iniquitas. Sin is the
transgression of the law divine, and therefore in every mortal sin there is
corruption of equity: and consequently, there is also iniquity.

The Corollarie.
Now gentle reader, thou have heard the express words and plain testimonies,
as well of the ancient fathers, S. Ambrose, S. Austen, and S. Bid, as also of
the two famous popish writers, Carthusianus, and Lyranus, concerning this great
question and most important point of doctrine, in which the very life of
popery does consist.

I have proved first even by the testimony of S. Paul, and of S. Austen,
expounding his words, as also of the Jesuit Bellarmine granting the same, that
concupiscence remaining after baptism in the regenerate, is both called sin,
and is properly sin indeed.

Secondly, that the first motions of concupiscence which are connaturall to the
corrupt man, and can no way be avoided, are flatly forbidden by this
commandment, Thou shall not covet.

Thirdly, that though the said rebellious motions be inuoluntarie in the work;
yet are they voluntary in the original: which is sufficient says S. Austen.

Fourthly, that Cardinal Bellarmine not able truly to answer S. Austens
words, has in his explication added deceitfully, this word ( quodammodo) after
a sort: Which word cannot be found in S. Austen, neither is it agreeable to
his meaning. But such beggarly shifts and silly euasions are the props and
stays of late Romish religion.

Fifthly, that by S. John's doctrine every deflection from the eternal law, is
properly (...), and consequently, it is properly sin.

Sixthly, that S. Ambrose, S. Austen, and S. Bid, do all three affirm
constantly and with uniform assent, that sin is nothing else but (...), and a
transgression of the law of God.

Seventhly, that by the flat doctrine not only of Saint Bede, but also of two
famous popish writers (whose authority is ever most forcible against papists)
Dionysius Carthus. and Nicholaus Lyranus, iniquity is a mortal sin, because
it is against the eternal law, which is equity it self, and the will of God.

Eighthly, that our papists of Rhemes do confute themselves unawares, while they
tell us, that every sin is a declining and swaruing from Gods law: but withal
deny, that every such swaruing from Gods law, is properly sin. For, seeing
Gods law is nothing else but his will, as is already proved, the papists must
either confess, that to swerve and decline from Gods will is properly sin;
or else, that to decline and swerve from Gods will, is consonant and agreeable
to his will: which to hold, is not only most absurd, but withal implies flat
contradiction.

Against this discourse of original concupiscence in the regenerate, nothing
in truth can be alleged for the papists. Yet, Rhemists in 1. John 3.
to take away all wrangling, I will truly put down the vpshot of our Rhemists,
and frame my answer to the same. Thus do they write, Though in the 5. chapter,
verse 17. the Apostle turn the speech, affirming every iniquity to be sin;
yet there the Greek word is not the same as before, (...), but (...). By which
it is plain, that there he means by iniquity, man's actual and proper
transgression, which must needs be a sin. These are their words, to which I
answer in this wise.

First, that though the Greek word be different, yet is it equivalent, and so
the sense all one. This to be so, S. Austen will testify with me in these
words: Nemo dicat, aliud est peccatum, August. in epist. Joan. tract 4. tom. 9.
page 412.
atque aliud iniquitas. Nemo dicat, ego peccator homo sum, sed iniquus non sum.
Omnis qui facit peccatum, and iniquitatem facit. Let no man say, sin is one
thing, and iniquity another thing. Let no man say, I am a sinful man, but not
unrighteous. For every one that commits sin, commits also iniquity.
Thus writes S. Austen, and what he says, the same say Beda and Oecumenius.
Who as we see here, does plainly and expressly affirm, sin and iniquity
to be all one. So that whatsoever is sin, must also be iniquity; and
whatsoever is iniquity, the same likewise must be sin. Neither is it to the
purpose to iterate their usual song, because, as is already proved, Saint
Ambrose tells them in another place, that this sin is committed against the
will of man. Ambros in 7 cap. ad Roman. p. 205
These are his words: Numquid quia inuitum hominem dicit peccare, immunis debet
videri a crimine; quia hoc agit quod non vult, pressus vi potestatis? Non
vtique. Ipsius enim vitio and desidia haec caepta sunt. Quia enim mancipauit se
per assensum peccato, iure illius dominatur. Is therefore a man clear and free
from sin, because he says man sins against his will? because he does that
which he would not do, being pressed with the violence of power? No truly: for
these things began through his fault and negligence. For seeing he consented to
be a slave unto sin, sin by right has dominion over him. Lo, a man is
guilty of sin, yea even of that sin which he does against his will, and
cannot avoid the same, that is, of original concupiscence. And S. Ambrose
yields a reason hereof, because this impossibility came of man's default. And
this is the very case of infants, as is already said. Let the reader here
observe seriously with me, Inuoluntarie in the act, yet voluntary in the cause.
that S. Ambrose calls this inuoluntarie concupiscence, crimen, a crime or
mortal sin.

Secondly, that S. Bid affirms not only all to be sin which is iniquity;
but also reputeth the very corruption of innocence, which comes of
infirmity, to be sin in Gods sight. These are his express words: Omnes qui
peccant, praeuaricationis rei sunt; Beda vbi supr.
hoc est, non solum illi qui data sibi scriptae legis scita contemnunt, sed and
illi qui innocentiam legis naturalis quam in protoplasto omnes accepimus, sieve
infirmitate, sieve negligentia sieve etiam ignorantia corrumpunt. All that sin,
are guilty of preuarication or transgression of the law; that is, not only
they which contemn the precepts of the written law given them, but they also,
which either of infirmity, or of negligence, or of ignorance, corrupt the
innocence of the law of Nature, which we all receive in the Protoplast ( Adam.)

S. Ambrose in another place iumpeth with Bid in these words: Ambros. in 7 cap
ad Roman. p. 203
Non discreuit concupiscentiam hanc a peccato, sed miscuit, hoc significans,
quia cum nec suspicio quidem esset istud non licere apud deum, cognoui inquit,
esse peccatum. Sub sua persona, quasi generalem agit causam. Lexitaque
concupiscentiam prohibet, quae propterea quod oblectamento est, non putabatur
esse peccatum. He has not discerned this concupiscence from sin, but has
coupled it with sin, signifying thereby, that when there was not so much as
any suspicion, that this thing was not lawful before God, I knew, says he,
that it is sin. Under his own person, he pleads as it were the general
cause. The law therefore forbids concupiscence, which because it delights,
seems not to be sin. Thus writes S. Ambrose; whose words cannot possibly
be understood of any other concupiscence, than of that which is inuoluntarie
and original.

Thirdly, that their own vulgar Latin text, (which the late council of Trent
prefers before both the Hebrew and the Greek, and commands all papists to
use it as authentical, and none other) has the word ( iniquitas) in both
places; and does call as well (...) as (...). Ininiquitie: these are the
express words; omnis iniquitas peccatum est: All iniquity is sin. Lo,
their own translation (to which all papists are tied as a Bear to a stake)
does flatly confound them all, and says plainly and expressly, That every
iniquity is a sin. And yet the papists of Rhemes bluntishly and impudently
defend the contrary, crying out with open mouths, That some iniquity is not
sin. The truth is this, that they are driven to a non plus, and cannot tell
in the world what to say against this doctrine of concupiscence in the
regenerate. For both (...) and (...) is truly and fitly termed iniquitas or
iniquity. Which (but that I study to be brief) I could show by a thousand
testimonies, out of S. Austen, S. Ambrose, and S. Bid. Answer therefore o
papist if ye can, or if ye dare not, because ye cannot, then reclaim your
selves, and yield unto the truth for shame. I challenge you, and adjure you, if
your hearts fail you not, and if your own consciences condemn you not, to
send me an answer to this short challenge, which I have compiled very
briefly, so once to provoke you to the open combat, which I have now many
years expected at your hands, and could never yet find so much courage in any
of you all. Wherefore to seal up the verity of this article, as an undoubted
truth, I will here add for the complement, as amost delicat post-past, to
satisfy the longing appetites of the Jesuit Parsons, the arch priest
Blackwell, and all the traitorous crew of that Iesuited brotherhood; the flat
testimony of their saint Thomas Aquinas, whose doctrine they are bound to
defend, believe, and approve, and may not in any case refuse or deny the same:
Aquinas. 1. 2. q. 74. art. 3. 3.
these are his express words; Dicendu^ quod illud quod homo facit sine
deliberatione rationisnon perfect ipse facit; quia nihil operatur ibi id quod
est principale in homine, vnde non est perfect actus humanus, and per
consequens non potest esse perfect actus virtutis vel peccati, sed aliquid
imperfectum ingenere horum. Vnde talis motus sensualitatis rationem perueniens,
est peccatum veniale, quod est quiddam imperfectum in genere peccati. We must
answer, that that which man does without the deliberation of reason, he does
it not perfectly, because that which is the chiefest in man, works nothing
there: wherefore it is not perfectly man's act, and consequently it cannot be
perfectly the act of virtue or of sin, but some imperfect thing in this kind.
VVhereupon it comes, that such a motion of sensuality preventing reason, is
a venial sin, which is a certain imperfect thing in the nature of sin.

Thus writes Aquinas, out of whose words I note these important observations.
First, that this Aquinas is a popish canonized saint. Secondly, that for his
great learning he was surnamed, Doctor Angelicus, The Angelical Doctor.
Thirdly, that Pope Vrbanus the fourth, and Pope Innocentius the fifth, did so
admire and reverence the excellent learning of this famous schoole-doctor (who
was a learned clarke indeed) that they confirmed his doctrine for authentical,
and gave it the first place after the canonical Scripture. Fourthly, that this
great doctor, so highly renowned in the Romish church, that no papist may deny
or gainesay that which he has written, graunteeth freely, teaches plainly,
and avouches constantly, that the inordinate motion of sensuality which goes
before reason is properly a sin, though but a venial sin, as he terms
it. For it is one thing, to be a sin perfectly, another thing, to be a sin
properly. A venial and little sin is as well and as truly a sin, as a
mortal and great sin, as the papists term them. For he is as truly and
properly a thief that steals a lamb or a goose, as he that steals an ox
or a horse, though not a thief in so high degree. For mortal and venial
sins (as the papists term them) do only differ, Secundum magis and minus,
according to more and less. But in truth, every sin is mortal, as I have
already proved in my book of Motives. Add to this the sixth article, and note
it well
Answer o papists, if ye can; if not, repent for shame.

The fifth Article. Of the condign so supposed merit of works.
THe papists either of ignorance or of malice, do most vnchristianlie slander
the professors of Christ's Gospel, as though they were enemies to good works:
when in deed, they both think, preach, and write, more Christianly, more
religiously, and more sincerely, than the papists do, of and concerning godly
actions and good works. In regard hereof, before I come to the maine point of
that, which I purpose to oppugn in this article: I grant first of all, that
though good works neither do nor can go before justification; yet they ever
follow (as the fruits follow the tree) the persons that are freely justified by
Gods mercy in Christ Jesus, for his merits and condign deserts.

I grant secondly, that though good works go not before justification; yet
do they so necessarily go before salvation, that no man without them can
attain eternal life, when possibility is granted to do them.

I grant thirdly, that good works are the true effects of predestination; by
which the children of God make their salvation sure unto themselves, and
manifest unto the world. Yet this notwithstanding, I hold constantly, believe
steadfastly, and affirm Christianlie, that albeit good works are the effects
of predestination, and necessary fruits of faith and justification; yet
neither are they the cause of predestination, nor of justification, neither do
they or can they merit ex condigno, eternal life or glory. I say (merit ex
condigno) because I willingly grant with the ancient writers and holy
fathers, that good works in a godly sense may be said to merit; that is to
say, to impetrate favor and reward at Gods hands, for his mercy and promise
sake, who has promised not to leave unrewarded, Matt. 10. v. 42. lac. 1. 12.
so much as one cup of cold water given in his name: but they can never truly
be said to merit, for any worthiness or condign desert of the works that are
done. Against which last part, I contend with the papists at this present; and
namely, against the late decree of the late Romish Counsel of Trent, Council.
Trid. sess. 6. die 13. Ian. can. 32.
whose express words are these; Si quis dixerit hominis iustificati bona
opera ita esse dona Dei, vt non sint etiam bona ipsius iustificati merita, aut
ipsum iustificatum, bonis operibus quae ab eo per Dei gratiam and Jesus Christi
meritum, cuius membrum viuum est, fiunt, non vere mereri augmentum gratiae,
vitam aeternam, and ipsius vitae aeternae, si tamen in gratia decesserit,
consecutionem, atque etiam gloriae augmentum, anathema sit. If any shall say,
that the good works of the justified man are so the gifts of God, that they be
not also the good merits of him that is justified; or that the justified man,
by his good works which he does by the grace of God, and merit of Christ
Jesus, whose lively member he is, does not truly merit the increase of grace,
eternal life, and the consequution of the same eternal life, if he shall
depart hence in grace, and also the augment of glory, let him be accursed.

Here we see the flat doctrine of the Romish Church; which whosoever will not
believe steadfastly, must be damned everlastingly, and with fire and faggot be
sent packing speedily. Yet that this doctrine is most absurd in it self, most
blaphemous against the free mercy of God, and most injurious to the
inestimable merits of our Lord Jesus; I undertake by Gods assistance, to prove
by such clear and evident demonstrations, as shall be able to satisfy all
indifferent readers, and to put the papists to silence for ever in this behalf.

The first reason, drawn from the holy Scriptures.
THe first place of holy scripture, is contained in these words; (...). But the
gift of God is life everlasting, Romans 6. v. 23.
in Christ Jesus our Lord. This text of scripture does plainly convince, that
life eternal cannot be condignely achieved, by the works of man; for being
the free gift of God, it can no way be due to the merit of man's work. The
Rhemists to extenuate the cleerenesse of this text, and as it were to hide and
conceal the euidencie thereof, do translate, for the Gift of God, the Grace
of God, following their old vulgar Latin edition. Which translation though in
this place it mae be admitted, yet does it not sufficiently express the
efficacy of the original word (...), which signifies a gift freely bestowed;
for which respect, their own famous linguist Arias Montanus, who was the only
man chosen as most sufficient, for the translation of the old testament out of
the Hebrew, and of the new out of Greek, and employed by the king of Spain
for that only end, did not translate gratia, but donatio; not grace, but
donation (or free gift.) Now, let us see and view the judgment of the holy
fathers, upon this portion of holy writ. Saint Theodoret has these words; Hic
non dicit mercedem, Theod. in cap. 6. ad Roman.
sed gratiam: est enim Dei donum vita aeterna, and si quis enim summam and
absolutam iustitiam praestiterit, temporalibus laboribus aeterna in aequilibrio
non respondent. He says no there reward, but grace; for eternal life is the
gift of God: For although one could perform the highest and absolute justice,
yet eternal joys being weighed with temporal labors, are nothing answerable.

Saint Chrysostom has these words; Chrysostom, in cap. 6. ad Roman.
Non eundem seruat oppositorum ordinem. Non enim dicit, merces benefactorum
vestrorum vita aeterna, sed donum Dei vita aeterna; vt ostenderet, quod non
proprijs viribus liberati sint, neque debitum, aut merces, aut laborum sit
retributio, sed omnia illa ex diuino munere gratuito acceperint. He does not
observe the same order of opposites. For he says not, eternal life is the
reward of your good works; but, eternal life is the gift of God: that he
might show, that they are not delivered by their own strength or virtues; and
that it is not a debt, or a wages, or a retribution of labors, but that they
have received all those things freely of the gift of God.

Origin writes thus, Origin. in cap. 6. ad Romans
upon the same words; Deum vero non erat dignum militibus suis stipendia,
quasi debitum alique dare; sed donum and gratiam quae est vita aeterna, in
Christo Jesus domino nostro. But it was not a thing worthy beseeming God, to
give stipends to his soldiers, as a due debt or wage; but to bestow on them a
gift or free grace, which is eternal life in Christ Jesus our Lord.

Saint Ambrose has these words; Ambros. in cap. 6. ad Romans
Sicut enim sequentes peccatum acquirunt mortem, ita and sequentes gratium Dei,
id est, fidem Christi quae donat peccata, babebunt vitam aeternam. For as they
that follow sin, gain death: so they that follow the grace of Christ, that
is, the faith of Christ which forgiueth sins, shall have eternal life.

Theophilact has these words; Theoph. in cap. 6. Romans
Gratiam autem, non mercedem dixit a Deo futurum, perinde ac si inquiat; non
enim laborum accipitis premia, sed per gratiam fiunt haec omnia in Christo
Jesus, qui haec operatur and factitat. He said grace, not wages, was to come
from God; as if he should say, for ye receive not rewards of labors, but all
these things are done by grace in Christ Jesus, who works and does them.

Anselmus and Photius have the same words in effect, which I omit in regard of
brevity.

By these manifold testimonies of the holy fathers, the doctrine which I
defend, is clear and evident; viz. that eternal life is the free gift of God,
and is not merited or purchased by desert of man; that eternal life is not a
due debt, a deserved wages, or retribution of man's labors, but proceeds
wholly and solie of the free mercy and grace of God; that man's works waighed in
the balance, with the joys of heaven, are nothing at all answerable unto
them. To which fathers, I will add the verdict of Paulus Burgensis, Paulus
Burgen. addit. 2 in 6. ca. ad Romans
a very famous popish Spanish Bishop. These are his words: Noluit ergo
dicere, stipendium iustitiae vita aeterna: sed maluit dicere, gratia Dei vita
aeterna: quia eadem merita quibus redditur, non a nobis sunt, sed in nobis a
Deo facta sunt per gratiam. He would not therefore say, eternal life is the
stipend of justice: but he had rather say, eternal life is the grace of God:
because the same merits to which it is rendered, are not of our selves, but
wrought in our selves by God through grace.

The second text of holy scripture, is contained in these words: Romans 8. v. 18.
I count that the afflictions of this present time, are not worthy of the
future glory which shall be revealed toward us. Lo, all our (...), all our
passions, afflictions, and penalties, that we are able to endure in this life,
are so far from being meritorious of eternal life, that they are in no wise
comparable to the same.

Theoderetus does lively express this verietie, in these most golden words:
Theodor. in cap. 8. ad Romans
Superant certamina coronae, non comparantur cum laboribus remunerationes labor
enim paruus est, sed magnum lucrum speratur. Et propterea non mercedem, sed
gloriam vocauit ea quae expectantur. The conflicts of the crown do remain,
the labors are not comparable to the rewards: for the labor is small, but the
gain hoped for, is great. And therefore the things expected, are not called a
reward, but glory.

Anselmus has these words; Anselmus in 8. cap. ad Romans
Hoc est, si quis pateretur omnes paenarum acerbitates, quae in tempore
presentis vitae sufferri possunt; non essent omnes illae passiones dignum
meritum ad consequutionem futurae gloriae, quae ablato omni velamine
reuelabitur in nobis. If one should suffer all kinds of torment, which can be
endured in this life: yet would not all those afflictions, torments, or
passions, be a sufficient and condign merit, to atteine the future glory;
which, when every veil is taken out of the way, shall be revealed in us. Mark
well these words in this famous popish writer, because they are most
important: for, seeing he was a great papist, his proof must needs be good
against the papists. Again, his words are so clear and manifest, that no
evasion can have place. For, he says in plain and express terms; that all
which is possible to be done or endured in this world, can not be a worthy or
condign merit of eternal life. No answer in truth, can be made hereunto, it
iumpeth in deed; with the true sense and meaning of Saint Paul.

The third place of holy scripture, Tit. 3. 5.
is contained in these words: Not by the works of justice which we have done,
but according to his mercy he has saved us, by the lauer of regeneration and
renouation of the holy Ghost. These are the Apostles words, even as our
Rhemists have alleged them. By which words it is most clear and apparent,
that we are not only justified, but also saved of mere mercy and the free
gift of God. And consequently, that eternal life has no merit on the behalf
of man. For after salvation once accomplished, all merit is vain and
needless.

Anselmus has these golden words; Anselmus in tit. cap. 3.
Tunc saluos nos fecit, qui nostris meritis eramus perditione digni: non enim
ex operibus iustitiae quae fecimus nos, processit haec salus, quia nulla opera
iustitiae feceramus, vnde salutem meruissemus; sed ipse secundum misericordiam
suam saluos nos fecit, non secundum merita nostra nobis hanc salutem dedit.
Then did he save us, who by our own merits deserved perdition. For, this
salvation came not from the works of justice, which we have done, because we
had done no works of justice, by which we should merit salvation: but he
according to his mercy saved us, and not according to our merits gave he us
this salvation.

The famous papist Dionysius Carthusianus, Dionys. in tit. 3.
expounds Saint Paul even as Anselmus did. These are his words: Non ex
operibus iustitiae quae fecimus nos: id est, non propter merita nostra quae
nulla fuerunt, quia predictis peccatis eramus obnoxij sed secundam suam
misericordiam saluos nos fecit, a potestate diaboli and reatuaeterui tormenti,
merito suae conuersations and passionis. Not of the works of righteousness
which we have done; that is, not for our merits which were none at all,
because we were subject to the before named sins: but according to his mercy
has he saved us, from the power of the devil and guilt of eternal torment,
by the merit of his holy conversation and passion. Lo, our salvation comes
not of man's merits, but of the merits of the son of God. This shall suffice
for the first reason, which is drawn from the authortiie of holy writ.

The second reason, drawn from the authority of the holy fathers.
SAint Austen has many excellent testimonies in his works, which do
evidently approve and confirm this my doctrine, against the popish supposed
condign merit of works; but I will content my self, with one or two at this
present. Aug. ad Hieron. epist. 29.
Thus does he write; Virtus est charitas, quaid quod diligendu^ est diligitur:
haec in alijs mayor, in alijs minor, in alijs nulla est; plenissima vero, quae
iam non possit augeri, quandiu hic homo viuit, estin nemine: quandiu autem
augeri potest, profecto illud quod minus est qua^ debit, ex vitio est. Ex quo
vitio non est iustus in terra qui faciat bonum, and non peccet. Ex quo vitio,
non iustificabitur in conspectu Dei omnis viuens. Propter quod vitium, si
dixerimus quia peccatum non habemus, nos met ipsos seducimus, and veritas in
nobis non est. Propter quod etiam quantum libet p^ofecerimus, necessarium est
nobis dicere; dimitte nobis debita nostra, cum iam omnia in baptismo dicta,
facta, cogitata, dimissa sint. Charity is a virtue, with which we lout that
that ought to be loved. This in some is more, in others less, in others none
at all; but the perfect charity, which cannot be increased while a man here
lives, is found in none: so long as it can be increased, that doubtless which
is less then it should be, proceeds of sin; by reason of which sin,
there is not one just upon earth, that does good and sins not: by reason of
which vice, if we say we have no sin, we deceive our selves, and the truth is
not in us: by reason of which sin, how much soever we profit, yet must we say
of necessity. Forgive us our trespasses, even after that all our thoughts,
words, and works, are forgiven in baptism. Thus writes Saint Austen, that
mighty pillar of Christ's Church: out of whose most golden words, I note
sundry excellent documents to the great comfort of the faithful, and to the
everlasting confusion of all impenitent papists. For first Saint Austen says,
that no man can have charity in that perfect degree, which the law requires.
Secondly, that the want thereof, proceeds of that vice that is inherent in
us. Thirdly, that by reason of this vice, every man is a sinner. Fourthly,
that by reason thereof, none living can be justified in Gods sight. Fifthly,
that by reason thereof, whosoever says he has no sin, is a flat lier.
Sixthly, that how virtuously soever we live, yet must we desire God to forgive
us our sins, by reason of this inherent vice. Seauenthly, that we must thus
pray, even after all sins be forgiven us in our baptism.

Again, August. in epist. Joan. tract. 4. tom. 9.
the same Saint Austen in another place has these words; Iustitia modo nostra
ex fide, iustitia perfecta non est nisi in angelis, and vixin angelis si Deo
comparentur; tamen si qua perfecta iustitia anim arum and spirituum est, quos
Deus creauit, in angelis sanctis, justice, bonis, nullo lapsu auersis, nulla
superbia cadentibus, sed manentibus semper in contemplatione verbi Dei, and
nihil aliud dulce habentibus, nisi a quo creati sunt, in ipsis perfecta
iustitia est, in nobis autem ex fide coepit esse secundum spiritum. Our justice
is now of faith, there is no perfect justice but in the angels, and scarce in
the angels, if they be compared to God. Yet if there be any perfect justice of
souls and spispirits which God has created in the holy Angels, just, good, by
no lapse auerted, by no pride falling, but ever abiding in the contemplation of
the word of God, and thinking nothing sweet, but him only which created them:
in them justice is perfect, but in us (it is not perfect) it is only begun of
faith according to the spirit. Thus says Saint Austen, telling us very
plainly, that there is no perfect justice in man: but doubtless, where no
perfect justice is, there can be no condign merit of eternal life.

S. Ambrose is consonant to S. Austen, Ambros. lib. 10. epist. 84. tom. 3.
who writes in this manner: Caro contra spiritum, and contra carnem spiritus
concupiscit; nec inuenitur in vllo hominum tant a concordia, vt legi mentis lex
quae membris est insita, non repugnet. Propter quod ex omnium sanctorum persona
accipitur, quod Ioannes Apostolus ait; si dixerimus quoniam peccatum non
habemus, nos ipsos seducimus, and verit as in nobis non est. The flesh (says
S. Ambrose) coueteth against the spirit, and the spirit against the flesh:
neither can there be found in any man such concord or agreement, that the law
which is ingrafted in the members, fights not against the law of the mind.
And for that cause Saint John's words are taken as spoken in the person of all
Saints; If we say we have no sin, we deceive our selves, and there is no
truth in us.

Thus writes S. Ambrose; out of whose words I note first, that concupiscence
moves rebellion against the spirit, in the holiest man upon earth. Secondly,
that this rebellion is sin in every one: for S. John speaks of sin
indeed. Thirdly, that no man living is free from sin; and consequently, that
none living in this pilgrimage of mortality, can condignely merit eternal
life.

S. Chrysostom is consonant to S. Ambrose and S. Austen: these are his words;
Etsi millies moriamur, Chrysostom. de conpunct. cord. lib. 2. nom. 5. col. 592.
etsi omnes virtutes animi expleamus, nibil dignum gerimus adea, quae ipsi
percepimus a deo. Though we die a thousand times, and though we accomplish all
virtues of the mind; yet do we nothing worthy of those things which we
receive of God.

Theophilact says in this manner: Seruauit nos aeternum, Theophil. in 3. cap.
Tit.
non ex operibus quae fecimus, hoc est, neque secimus opera iustitiae, neque
per haec conseruati sumus, sed vniuersam salutem bonit as ipsius atque
elementia operata est. He has saved us eternally, not of the works which we
have done, that is, neither have we done the works of justice, neither are we
saved by them, but his goodness and his clemency has wrought our salvation
wholly.

Now, to knit up this reason with all consents in one, I will here set down
the flat and plain report of a famous Friar and popish bishop, in that book
which he dedicated to Pope Sixtus the fifth: Josephus Angles in 2. lib. s. page
103.
Post humillim am sanctorum pedum deosculationem. These are the words: Eodem
etiam modo considerantes omnes alij doctores sancti naturalem solum modo
bonorum operum valorem, and illum a valor and iusta vitae aeterae aestimatione
longissime distare perpendentes, prudenter dixerunt, opera nostra non esse
meritoria aut digna vita aeterna. Ex lege tamen, sieve conuentione, sieve
promissione facta nobiscum, opera bona hominis cum adiutorio gratiae dei fiunt
aeternae vitae digna, and illi aequalia; quae seclusa illa dei promissione,
quae passim in sacris literis reperitur, fuissent tanto premio prorsus indigna.
Lo, this Friar grants, that all the holy fathers are against the papists.
All other holy doctors also, considering after the same manner the natural
value only of good works, and perceiving that it is exceeding far distant
from the value and just estimation of eternal life, said wisely, That our
works are not meritorious nor worthy of eternal life. Yet for the covenant
and promise made unto us, the good works of man with the help of Gods grace,
are worthy of eternal life, and equal with it; which for all that, that
promise of God which is frequent in the Scripture, set aside, were altogether
unworthy of so great reward.

Thus says our popish bishop, our holy Friar, even to the Pope himself, after
the humble kissing of his most holy feet. Who though he bestirre himself more
than a little, to establish the condign merit of man's works, yet does he in
his own kind of dispute and reasoning; utterly confute and confound himself.
For first, he grants, that not only S. Chrysostom, but all the rest of the
holy fathers with him (mark well, gentle reader) affirm constantly and
uniformly with one voice and assent (a testimony almost incredible to proceed
from the mouth of a papist, so dear to the Pope) That good works neither are
meritorious nor worthy of eternal life. Secondly, he grants freely, that
the best works considered in their own nature and kind, are unworthy of
eternal life. Thirdly, he grants willingly, and tells the Pope roundly (
post deosculationem pedum, but after the kissing of his feet) that good works,
even as they proceed of grace and assistance of the holyghost, The papists
grant as much as we desire.
are for all that altogether unworthy of eternal life, if Gods promise and
free acceptance be set apart. Which three points doubtless, are all that we
desire to be granted, concerning the doctrine of good works. And
consequently, though the papists never cease to impeach, accuse, slander, and
condemn us in this behalf: yet do we defend nothing herein (as is evident to
the indifferent reader) but even that which their own best doctors in their
printed books do teach us; yea, in those very books which are dedicate to
the Pope himself, and that with the solemn and religious deosculation of his
holy feet. The conceits which bishop Friar Joseph alleges, to make good his
imagined condign merit of works, are very childish and too too frivolous. For
first, where he says, that the fathers speak of good works, only in respect
of their natural value, as he terms it; I answer, that that silly gloss
is only invented by him and his fellows, to save the life of their beggarly
doctrine, if it would be. For no such thing can be found in any one of all
their books. Nay, our Friar bishop confuteth himself unawares (of such force
is the truth) when he grants, that good works done in grace are utterly
unworthy of heaven, if Gods promise be set apart. Where I wish the reader to
observe seriously the word ( prorsus, utterly) which is indeed his own, and
most emphaticall against himself.

Their highly renowned Abbot and cononized saint Bernardus shall tell them the
truth, and give the vpshot of the game: Bernard. sermon. 1. in annune. B. M. V.
page 160. tom. 1.
these are his express words: Iam vero de aeterna vita scimus, qu^non sunt
condignae passiones huius temporis ad futuram gloriam, nec si vnus omnes
sustineat. Neque enim talia sunt hominum merita, vt propter ea vita aeterna
debeatur ex iure, aut deus iniuriam aliquam faceret, nisi eam donaret. Now
touching eternal life, we know that the sufferings of this time are not
worthy of the glory to come; no, not if one man could sustain all. For the
merits of men are not such, that for them eternal life is due by right, or
that God should do some injury, if he gave it not.

The same Bernard in another place has these express Bernard. in eam. sermon.
67. p. 1003 tom. 1.
words: Deest gratiae, quicquid meritis deput. 13. Nolo meritum, quod gratiam
excludat. Horreo quicquid de meo est, vt sim meus; nist quod illud magis forsit
an meum est, quod me meum facit. Gratiae reddit memihi iustificatum gratis, and
sie liberatum a seruitute peccats. It derogateth from grace, whatsoever thou
ascribest to merit. I will have no merit that excludes grace. I abhor
whatsoever is of mine own, that I may be mine own, unless perchance that is
more mine own which makes me mine own. Grace justifies me to my self
freely, and so delivers me from the bondage of sin.

The same Bernard in another place has these express words: Bernard. in cant.
set. 68. p. 1006.
Sic non est, quod iam quaeras quibus meritis speremus bona, presertim cum
audias apud prophetam; non propter vos, sed propterme ego faciam, dicit
dominus. Sufficit admeritum, scire quod non sufficiant merita. Sed vt ad
meritum satis est, demeritis non presumere; sic carere meritis, satis ad
iudicium est. So there is no cause, that thou should now ask by what merits
we hope for glory, especially, since thou hear the prophet say, I will do
it, says the Lord, not for your sake, but for mine own. It is sufficient to
merit, to know that our merits are not sufficient. But as it is enough to
merit, not to presume of merits, so to want merits, is enough to judgment.

Out of the most excellent testimonies of this famous papist, I note many
worthy lessons for the benefit of the reader. First, that nothing which man
can do or suffer in this life, is worthy of the ioies of heaven. Secondly,
that heaven is not due to any man for his own deserts. Thirdly, that God
should do no man wrong, no, not the best liver on earth, if he should debar
him from the joys of heaven. Fourthly, that whatsoever is ascribed to man's
merit, the same is derogatorie to Gods grace. Fifthly, that Bernard renounceth
all merit, which excludes grace, that is to say, all merit of man's works
whatsoever: for so himself expounds himself. Sixthly, that he abhors
whatsoever is his own, and so he denies any thing within himself to be
meritorious, or worthy of eternal life. Seventhly, that the most sufficient
merit in man, is this, viz. to know and confess, that our merits are no merits
indeed. Eighthly, that to want merits, is enough for man's condemnation. Which
last observation does fitly expound that which I uttered in the beginning of
this article, to wit, that the word (merit) in that sense in which the fathers
use it, is not to be rejected, though in these our days it commonly be abused.
For to want merits in their sense (as Bernard here declares evidently) is to
have no good works: which good works I affirm willingly, both with the old
and late writers of best account, to be so necessary to attain eternal life,
as the usual, ordinary, and undoubted means, by which God decreed from
eternity freely for his own name sake, to bring his chosen and elect to
salvation; that without the same, none have been, are, or shall be saved world
without end; if, as I said in the beginning, time be granted to do them.

The third reason, drawn from the doctrine of best approved Papists, and
their renowned schoole-doctors.
THomas Aquinas ( whose doctrine no papist may gainesay or refuse) has these
express words: Aquinas, 12. q. 114. art. 1. in corp.
Manifestum est autem, quod inter deum and hominem est maxima inaequalitas, in
infinitum enim distant; totum quod est hominis bonum, est a deo; vnde non
potest hominis a deo esse iustitia secundum absolutam aequalitatem, sed
secundum proportienem quandam; in quantum scilicet vterque operatur secundum
modum suum. Modus autem and mensura humanae virtutis homini est a Deo, and ideo
meritu^ hominis apud deum esse non potest, nisi secundum presuppositionem
diuinae ordinationis; ita scilicet, vt id homo consequatur a Deo persuam
operationem quasi mercedem, ad quod Deus ei virtute operandi destinauit. It is
manifest, that between God and man there is exceeding great inequality, as
which do differ in infinite; all the good that man has, is of God. Wherefore
man's justice received of God, cannot be according to absolute equality, but
after a certain proportion, to wit, in as much as either works according to
his condition. Now, man has the measure and condition of his virtue from God;
and therefore man's merit cannot be with God, save only according to the
supposall of Gods holy ordinance; so forsooth, that man may attain that at
Gods hand by his working, as a reward, to which God has designed to him the
faculty and power of working.

Thus writes their grand master papist Aquilias, who utterly overthrows all
popish merit, as it is this day defended and believed in the Church of Rome.
For first Aquinas tells us (mark well, for this is a weighty point) that
where there is not perfect equality, there can be no merit properly. Secondly,
he grants freely, that there is infinite inequality between God and man, as
every child knows to be true. Thirdly, he freely confesses, that man's
justice is not absolute, but imperfect. Fourthly, he grants willingly, that
man does merit nothing in Gods sight, save only by way of his free
acceptance. Fifthly, he confesses in like manner, that eternal life is not
properly hire, but as it were hire, quasi mercedem; and that, by reason of the
same free acceptance.

Durandus, Durand. in 2. s. did. 27. q. 2. in med.
a very famous popish Schoole-doctor, has these express words: Tale meritum
de coniligno inuenitur inter homines, sed non est hominis ad deum. Quod patet,
qu^ quod redditur potius ex libe alitate dantis, quam ex debito operis, non
cadit sub merito de condigno stricte and proprie accepto. Sequitur; quod si
quis dicat, quod quamuis deus non constituatur nobis deb tor ex aliquo nostro
opere, constituitur tamen debtor ex sua promissione, quam exprimit scripturu;
non valet propter duo. Primu^ est, quod promissio diuina in scripturis sanctis
non sonat in aliquam oblig ationem, sed insinuat meram dispositionem liber
alitatis diuinae. Secundu^ est, quod quod redditur, non redditur ex debito
operis, sed ex promissione precedente; non quod redditur ex merito operis de
condign, sed solum vel principaliter ex promisso. Et it a non est illud
debitum, de quo loquimur. Et sic patet, quod meritum de condigno stricte and
proprie sumptum, viz. pro action voluntaria, propter quam oper anti debetur
merces ex iustitia, sic quod si non reddatur, ille ad quem pertinet reddere,
unjust facit, and est simpliciter and proprie iniustus, non est hominis ad
deum. Et ideo propter tale meritum, cum sit homini simpliciter impossible, non
est necesse in nobis ponere gratiam, vel charitatem habitualem. Such condign
merit is found among men, but is not between God and man. Which hereby is
clear, because that which is rendered rather of the liberality of the giver,
than of debt due to the work, falls not under condign merit, properly so
called. If any say, that though God become not our debtor by reason of our
work, yet is he made our debtor by reason of his promise, which the Scripture
expresses: that answer is of no force for two respects. First, because Gods
promise in the Scriptures does not sound to any bond, but insinuates the mere
disposition of Gods liberality. Secondly, because that which is given, is not
given for the debt arising of the work, but of promise that went before; not
that it is rendered for the condign merit of the work, but only or
principally for his promise sake. And so there is not that debt of which we
speak. So then it is clear, that condign merit, properly so called, viz. for
a voluntary action, for which reward is due of justice to the worker, so that
if it be not rendered, he to whom it appertains to give it, does unjustly,
and is simply and properly unjust, is not between God and man. And therefore
for such a merit, seeing it is simply impossible to man, there is no need to
put in us grace or charity habitual. Thus says M. Durand; out of whose words
I note first, that condign merit cannot be between God and man. Secondly,
that eternal life is given of Gods free liberality, not of any duty due to
the works that we do. Thirdly, that God rewards us principally for his
promise sake, and not for any thing we either have done or can do. Fourthly,
that condign merit is so far above man's capacity, that no man can by any
possibility have it. And consequently, that late popish doctrine is impossible.

Gregorius Ariminensis, Apud Joseph. Angl. in 2. s. did. 27. ar. 2. p. 105.
Marsilius, Thomas Waldensis, Paulus Burgensis, and Eckius, five most zealous
papists, do all with one assent affirm very constantly, that man's works are
not meritorious of eternal life, how holy soever the man be.

Dominicus Soto a zealous monk and famous popish writer, Soto, de not. and
great. lib. 3. cap. 6. page 138.
tells the papists roundly, and teaches them gravely, that no pure man is
able to make condign satisfaction for his sins; and so a fortiori, against
his will and meaning, that no man can by condign merit attain eternal life.
These are his express words; Perfecta satisfactio est illa, cuius valor and
pretiu^ totu^ emanat a debitore, nulla vel p^^ueniente, vel interueniente
gratia creditoris; taliter vt sit redditio aequiuale^tis alias indebiti
voluntaria. Perfect satisfaction is that, whose value and price proceeds
wholly from the debtour, without either preventing or interuenting grace of
the creditour; so as the voluntary reddition be of that which is equivalent,
and not otherwise due. This is true doctrine which our friar Soto delivers to
the world: he teaches us four things. First, that the satisfaction must
proceed wholly from the debtour. Secondly, that there must be no preventing nor
interuenting grace of the creditour. Thirdly, that there must be equivalent
restitutio^. Fourthly, that that equivalent reddition must be a work, which is
otherwise not due. These four conditions (which our popish M. Soto and
Dominican friar requires in every satisfaction) when any papist can find in
any one of their merits or satisfactions, I will be their bondsman, neither
shall the popes holiness be excepted. But to come to this bondage upon this
covenant, I am in no fear at all: For the ethnicke philosopher Aristotle,
Aristo. in 8. ethic. cap. 7.
perceived by the natural discourse of right reason, That no man can ever make
co^digne compensation to God and his natural parents. For which respect,
Aquinas, 12. q. 114. ar. 1. 3. m.
Aquinas affirms constantly, that God is not simply and truly said to be
debtor to us, but to himself and to his own promise, which he freely without
all our deserts made unto us. And their great schoole-doctour Josephus Angles,
after he has disputed this question of condign merit too and fro, pro and
contra, does in the end though unawares, Josephus Angles, in 2. sent. page 107.
plainly confess the self same doctrine, that I now intend to prove. He
tells us forsooth, that the price of every thing may be equal to the value
and worth of the same thing, two ways; first, of the nature of the thing;
secondly, of the pact, covenant and promise of him that does promise the same
thing: for says he, if one penny be the full value answereable to the labor;
yet if a greater reward be promised, which far exceeds the worth and value
of the work wrought, then that reward is also due by covenant. He adds the
reason thereof; viz. because the law of nature teaches to keep promises which
far exceed the value of the thing. And hereupon this great learned doctor
concludes roundly, that though our good works come far short of eternal
life, if we respect the worthiness thereof: yet do they condignely merit the
joys of heaven, if we respect the free promise of Christ Jesus. And this
condignitie of works, our friar bishop, or bishopfrier, (as you will) calls
aequalitas ex promissione tantum, equality of promise only. Now, I pray thee
gentle reader, what childish wit is not able to penetrat the very bowels of
this deep divinity? and yet is it the maine point and only foundation, to
which all papists do and must appeal, in this weighty and most important
question. For example sake, if thou would wish me to lend thee my cloak, to
defend thee from a shower of rain, and promise to give me an hundred pounds
for the loan; then doubtless were it true to say, that after such loan an
hundredth pounds were due unto me: yet withal would it be most true also, that
such loan of my cloak were not the condign merit of that hundredth pounds;
but that it proceeded principally of the free gift and promise made unto me,
far above my merit and desert: neither could my act be any way rightly
termed, the condign merit of that reward. And yet it is evident, that thus
stands the state of the question, between the condign merit of man's works,
and the excellency of the joys of heaven. For I willingly grant, that
eternal life is due to the works of Gods elect, and that it is as well the
crown of justice, as of mercy: but withal I constantly affirm, 2. Tim. 4.
v. 8.
that God bestows it on his elect freely for his own name sake, Iac. 1. v.
12.
and not for any merit, Romans 8. v. 18.
worthiness, or condignitie of their works.

For this cause, Romans 6. v. 23.
their own dear friar Ioannes de Combis, Ps. 103. v. 4.
teaches this golden lesson: Ps. 145. v. 9.
Meritum condigni dicit aequalitatem meriti ad remunerationem: Iac. 2. v. 83.
dico autem aequalitatem, non arithmeticam, sed geometrieam: Joan. de Combis
lib. 5. theolog. verit. cap. 11.
id est, non quantitatis, sed proportionis. Et hoc patet, quia Deus semper
remunerat supra meritum, sicut punit citra condignum. Condign merit does
connotat the equality of merit, to the thing that is merited; I say equality,
not arithmeticall, but geometrical, that is, not of quantity, but of
proportion: And this is evident, because God ever rewards above our merits,
as he punishes less than we deserve. Out of these words we see two things
cleared: the one, that we deserve greater punishment for our sins, than God
inflicteth upon us for the same: the other, that for our well doing we receive
greater reward, than our works do or can deserve. And consequently, that we
do not condignely merit eternal life.

For this cause says their famous popish doctor, Nicolaus de Lyra, in this
manner: Salus enim aeterna, Lyra in 3. ca^^it.
excedit totaliter facultatem naturae humanae. Propter quod non potest eam
attingere, nisi ex largitate diuinae misericordiae. For eternal life does
far surmount and wholly exceed the faculty and power of man's nature.
Wherefore man can no way attain unto it, Carthus. in 6. cap. ad Romans
but only by the liberality of Gods mercy.

For this cause says another popish doctor, Dionysius Carthusianuns, in this
manner: Ex gratia seu per gratiam Dei, datur justice pro praemio vita aeterna.
Non hoc dicitur merita excludendo, sed vt insinuctur, quod principaliter
ascribendum sit gratia Dei, qui etiam premiat vltra condignum. Eternal life is
given for reward to the just, of grace or through the grace of God. This is not
said to exclude merits, but to insinuate, that reward must principally be
ascribed to the grace of God, who rewards us above our deserts. Lo, this
great papist laboreth with maine and might, to stablish popish condign merit
of works: who affirming more boldly than wisely, that the elect do merit
eternal life; tells us with one breath, that the reward is above our merits
and deserts. And so unwittingly and unwillingly he confuteth himself, and
refelleth that doctrine, which he gladly would confirm.

To conclude, our Jesuit and renowned Cardinal, friar Bellarmine, who after
mature deliberation and grave consultation had with all the best learned
Jesuits in the world, and with the Pope himself (whose faith judicial cannot
fail, say they) says all that possibly can be said for the life of popery,
does with great gravity and prudent sagacitie in the name of all papists,
deliver this doctrine unto us; Bellarm. de justify. tom. 3. col. 1296. and
col. 1298.
Quod vero attinet ad rem ipsam, Durandi sententia, si nihil aliud vellet, nisi
merita nostra non esse ex condigno, sieve ex iustitia absolute, sed tantum ex
hypothesi, id est, posita liberali Dei promissione, non esset reprobanda,
sequitur; respondeo, absolute non posse hominem a Deo aliquid exigere, cum
omnia sint ipsius; tamen posita eius voluntate and pacto, quo non vult exigere
a nobis opera nostra gratis, sed mercedem reddere iuxta proportionem operum,
vere possumus ab eo mercedem exigere; quomodo seruus non potest absolute a
domino suo vllum premium postulare, cum omnia quae seruus acquirit, domino suo
acquirat; tamen si domino placeat donare illi opera sua, and pro ijsdem tanquam
sibi non debitis mercedem promittere, iure mercedem pro suis operibus
postulabit. Touching the matter it self, Durands opinion, if he had no other
meaning, but that our merits are not absolutely just and condign, but
hypothetically in respect of Gods liberal promise, were not to be rejected: I
answer, that man cannot absolutely exact any thing of God, seeing all things
are Gods own; nevertheless, his will and covenant being made, that he will
not exact our works of us freely, but will reward them according to their
proportion: we may truly require hyer of him, like as a bondsman cannot
absolutely require any reward of his lord, seeing every thing which the
bondsman gains, is gotten and gained to his master: yet for all that, if it
shall please his master and lord to bestow his works on him, and to promise
reward for the same, as if they were not due unto him, then may the bondseruant
justly demand reward for his works.

Thus says the Jesuit Bellarmine; and consequently, this is all that all
papists say, or can say, for the life of popish doctrine. Out of whose words I
note first, that his brother Durands opinion has put him to his best trumpe.
Secondly, that Durands opinion (as is already proved) is this; viz. that the
merit of works in the best liver upon earth, cannot truly and properly be
called meritum ex condigno, condign merit; but only merit in way of
acceptance, and in respect of Gods free mercy, and promise made unto man
without all deserts. Thirdly, that Bellarmine grants this opinion in this
sense: For he says plainly, If Durand admit merit in respect of Gods
promise, his opinion cannot be reproved. Fourthly, that our Jesuit makes good
that doctrine, which I here defend, as which is the self same, that Durand
holds. And consequenly, if Bellarmine and his popish fellows and followers,
would stand constantly to their own doctrine, which they publish in printed
books; we and they should soon agree, and these great controversies would
have an end. Fourthly, that man cannot absolutely exact any thing at Gods
hands, because all things are Gods own. Fifthly, that in respect of Gods good
pleasure and covenant freely made to man, we may truly require reward of God.
Yea, my self grant, that we may not only truly, but also justly require
reward at Gods hands, in regard of his promise freely made unto us. But I ever
deny withal, that any reward is due to our best works; for any condign
merit or desert of or in our works, Gods free acceptance, mercy, and promise
set apart. For as Saint Austen gravely says; Aug. lib. 9. confess. cap. 13.
Vae etiam laudabili vitae hominum, si remota misericordia discutias eam. Woe
even to the best liver upon earth, if thou examine his life, thy mercy set
apart. Answer o papists, if ye can; and if ye cannot, then repent, and yield
unto the truth for shame. I challenge you, I provoke you to the combat; I
adjure you all jointly, and every one of you severally, for the credit of
your cause, for the honor of your Pope, and the life of popish doctrine, which
now lies bleeding, and will shortly yield up the Ghost, if some sovereign
remedy be not speedily provided for the same.

The sixth Article. Of the Popish distinction of mortal and venial sins.
ALthough it be true, that all sins are not equal, but one greater than
another: and although it be also true, that in a good and godly sense, some
sin may be termed mortal, and some venial; which yet may more fitly be
called, sins regnant, and not regnant: nevertheless most true it is, to the
everlasting confusion of all impenitent papists, that every sin is mortal of
it own nature, and only venial by way of Gods free acceptance and mercy,
for his own name sake, and merits of his dear son our Lord Jesus.

I prove it first both briefly and evidently. For Christ himself tells us
in his holy Gospel, Matthew. 12. v. 3.
that we must give a straight account of every idle word in the general day of
judgment. And for no other end doubtless must this account be made, but
only, because every idle word is flatly against the law of God. This the
papists can never deny, it is evident to every child. And yet must they
likewise confess, that idle words be those sins which they call venials. And
consequently, they must confess against their wills, and against their
professed Romish doctrine, that all sins are mortal, that is to say, against
the law of God.

This doctrine of our Savior Christ Jesus is confirmed by the testimony of S.
John his beloved Apostle, 1. Ioh. 3. v. 4.
where he tells us, that every sin is (...), that is, the transgression of
Gods law, as is already proved at large in the fourth article of
concupiscence. And the Hebrew word (...), which signifies a declining from the
right way, does plainly confirm the same.

Secondly, because our popish Rhemists confess in plain terms, Rhemists in
1. Joh. 3. v. 4.
that every sin is a swaruing from the law of God. For doubtless, that which
swarueth from the law, is truly said to be against the law, but not agreeable
to the law.

Thirdly, because the famous popish Friar and Romish bishop Josephus Angles
teaches the same doctrine in his book dedicated to the Pope himself. These
are his own express words: Josephus Angles in 4. sent. p. 215.
Omne peccatum veniale est alicuius legis transgressio. Patet, quia omne
veniale est contra rectam rationem, and agere contra rectam ratione^, est agere
contra legem naturalem, precipientem non esse a regula rectae rationis
deuiandum. Every sin venial is the transgression of some law. This is
clear, because every venial sin is against right reason; and to do against
right reason, is to do against the law of nature, which commands us not to
depart or swerve from the rule of right reason. Lo, every venial sin is
against right reason, and against the law of nature, which is given to every
one in his creation, in his birth or nativity.

Fourthly, because Durandus, another famous papist, confuteth the late received
popish opinion of Thomas Aquinas, which the Pope and his Jesuits hold, to wit,
that venial sins are preter legem, non contra: Besides the law, but not
against the law. Duran. in 2. sent. di^t. 42. q. 6.
These are Du^ands own words: Ad argumentum dicendum, quod omne peccatum est
contra legem dei naturalem, vel inspiratam, vel ab eis deriuatam. To the
argument answer must be made, that every sin is against the law of God,
either natural, or inspired, or derived from them. And this opinion of M.
Durand, is this day commonly defended in the popish universities and schools.
So says Friar Joseph, these are his words: Jos. Angl. in 2. s. page 275.
D. Thomas and eius sectatores tenent, peccatum veniale non tam esse contra
legem, quam preter legem. Sequitur; Durandus tamen and alij permulti hanc
sententiam impugnant, affirmantes peccata venialia esse contra mandata. Et haec
opinio modo in scbolis videtur communior. S. Thomas and his followers hold,
that a venial sin is not so much against the law, as besides the law. But
Durand and many others impugn this opinion, auouching venial sins to be
against the commandments. And this opinion seems now adays to be more
common in the schools.

Here I wish the reader to note by the way, out of the word ( modo, now adays)
the mutabilitie of Romish religion. For in that he says ( modo, now adays) he
gives us to understand, that their doctrine is now otherwise than it was of
old and in former ages. A note worthy to be remembered. For the old Roman
religion was catholic, pure, and sound, and with it do not I contend: but I
impugn late Romish faith and doctrine, which the Pope and his Romish
Schoolmen have brought into the Church.

Fifthly, because their canonized martyr John Fisher, the late bishop of
Rochester, teaches the same doctrine so plainly, as every child must needs
perceive the truth in that behalf. Roffensis art. 32. a^u. Luth.
These are his express words: Quod peccatum veniale solum ex dei misericordia
veniale sit, in hoc tecum sentio. That a venial sin is only venial through
the mercy of God (and not of it own nature) therein do I agree unto you.
Thus says our bishop. And as he tells me, that he agrees with Luther
therein: so do I tell our Jesuits, that I agree with him, with Durand,
Almaine, and the other papists, that teach the same doctrine.

Sixthly, because Gerson, another famous popish writer, holds the same
opinion. These are his express words: Nulla offensa dei est venialis de se,
Jo. Gers. de vita spiritual. lect. 1. part. 3. in 1. corol.
nisi tantum modo per respectum ad diuinam misericordiam, qui non vult de facto
quamlibet offensam imputare ad mortem, cum illud posset iustissime. Et ita
concluditur, quod peccatum mortale and veniale in esse tali, non distinguuntur
intrinsece and essentialiter, sed solum per respectum ad diuinam gratiam, quae
peccatum istud imputat ad poenam mortis, and aliud non. No offense of God is
venial of it own nature, but only in respect of Gods mercy, who will not de
facto imputa, every offense to death, though he might do it most justly. And
so I conclude, that mortal and venial sins, as they be such, are not
distinguished intrinse cally and essentially, but only in respect of Gods
grace, which assigns one sin to the pain or torture of death, and not
another.

Thus writes this famous popish bishop, who was a man of high esteem in the
counsel of Constance. Whose only testimony (if his words be well marked) is
able to confound the papists, and to strike them dead. For first he tells
them plainly, that every sin is mortal of it own nature. Secondly, that no
sin is venial, save only in respect of Gods mercy. Thirdly, that God may
most justly ( iustissime) condeme us for the least sin we do. Note seriously,
gentle reader, the word ( iustissime.) Fourthly, that mortal and venial
sins are the same intrinse cally and essentially, and differ but
accidentally, that is to say, they differ in accident, but not in nature; in
quantity, but not in quality; in mercy, but not in deformity; in the
subject, but not in the object; in imputation, but not in enormitie; save
only, that the one is a greater mortal sin than is the other. For (as
Gerson avouches) we may justly be damned for the least sin of all, howsoever
other papists do flatter themselves in their cursed deformed venials.

Seventhly, because sin in general is the transgression of Gods law, as S.
Ambrose defines it, yea, every word, deed, or desire against Gods law, as S.
Austen describes it, Their words are set down in the fourth article of this
discourse.

Eighthly, because the Jesuit Bellarmine unawares confesses the same against
himself. These are his own words: Respondeo, Bellar. t^m. 1. page 804.
omne peccatum esse contra legem dei, non positiuam, sed aternam, vt Aug. recte
docet. Omnis enim iusta lex, sieve a deo, sieve ab bomine detur, ab aterna dei
lege deriuatur. Est enim aterna lex, vt malum sit viol are regulam. I answer,
that every sin is against the law of God, not positive, but eternal, as
Austen teaches rightly. For every just law, whether it be given of God, or of
man, is derived from the eternal law of God. For the eternal law is, that it
is evil to offend against the rule. These are our Jesuits own words, which
(as every child can easily discern) do evidently confute himself and his
Romish doctrine. For first, under every sin must needs be contained their
venial sins, or else some sins shall be no sins; which implies flat
contradiction. Secondly, he tel^eth us, that every sin, and consequently
venial sins are against the eternal law of God. Thirdly, he grants, that
they are not only besides the law, sed contra legem, but even against the law.
Fourthly, hence it is clear and evident, that the law eternal is the chief
and principal law of all other laws, seeing from it all other laws are
derived.

Ninthly, because the papists cannot possibly yield any sound reason, why in
the sins of theft one shall be mortal, and another venial. For example
sake, let us suppose one at one time to steal so many eggs as will make a
mortal sin by Romish doctrine; another at another time to steal so many as
will make a venial sin by the same doctrine: then I demand of our papists,
Why God cannot justly condemn the thief to hell that steals but so many
eggs; and for all that can justly condemn him to eternal torment, that
steals but one only egg above the said number. For this must they do, and a
good reason here of must they yield (which I am well assured they can never do)
or else confess every sin to be mortal, and so against their wills to
subscribe to mine opinion. Answer o papists if ye can; if ye cannot then
repent for shame, and yield unto the truth.

The seventh Article. Of popish unwritten traditions.
THe papists bear the world in hand, that many things necessary for man's
salvation, are not contained in the holy scriptures of the old and new
testament: and consequently, that none can be saved, but such as believe their
unwritten traditions, and what their Pope tells them. For the exact knowledge
whereof, I put down these propositions.

The first Proposition, with the first reason.
THe written word or holy scripture, contains in it self, every doctrine
necessary for man's salvation. I prove it, by the manifold texts both of the
old and new testament; by the authority of the holy fathers, and by the the
testimony of renowned and best approved popish writers.

Ex testamente veteri.
Locus primus. Deuteronomy. 4. v. 2.
Ye shall not add to the word which I speak unto you, neither shall ye take any
thing away from it. Again thus, Deuteronomy. 12. v. 32.
That which I command, that only do thou to the Lord. Neither add any thing,
nor take any thing away. Ios. 1. v. 7.
Again thus, Only be thou strong, and of a valiant courage, Ios. 23. v. 6.
that thou may observe and do according to all the law, which Moses my
servant has commanded thee. Thou shall not turn away from it, neither to the
right hand nor to the left. Be careful that ye keep all things which are
written in the book of the law of Moses; that ye decline not from them,
neither to the right hand nor to the left.

By these manifold texts we may see evidently, that the holy scriptures are
most perfect, and that nothing may be taken from them, neither any thing added
to them. But doubtless, if all doctrine necessary for man's salvation, were
not sufficiently contained in them, then of necessity, many things should be
added to them. Bellarmine (the mouth of all papists) answers to these and the
like places, that they are not spoken of the written word precisely, Bellarm.
tom. 1. col. 183. A. B.
but of Gods word generally, which is partly written, and partly unwritten. Non
ait, inquit ille, ad verbum quod scripsi, sed quod ego precipio. He says not,
(quoth our Jesuit) to the word which I have written, but which I command. But
doublesse, this is a miserable shift, and a very childish answer. For first,
God himself wrote his own words in two tables of stone, Deuteronomy. 5. 22.
and then delivered them to Moses. Yea, after Moses had broken the said tables,
in his vehement zeal against Idolatry; Deuteronomy. 9. 17.
God commanded Moses to hew two other tables of stone like to the first, in
which he writ again the words that were in the first tables, Deuteronomy. 10. v. 1.
4.
and commanded Moses to put them up in an arc of wood. Deuteronomy. 1. 5.
Secondly, Moses expounded the law of God to the Israelites at large. Which
large explication of the law, God himself commanded him to write, Deuteronomy. 31. v.
19. 24.
and to give the same to the Israelites; that they might put it in the side of
the arc of the covenant, and there keep it for a witness against them.
Thirdly, God commanded Iosue to keep and observe all things, which were
written in the book of the law, Ios. 1. v. 8.
which Moses had delivered to the Levites: charging him to meditate therein day
and night, that he might do according to the same. Fourthly, Moses tells us
expressly, Deuteronomy. 9. v. 10.
that the two tables written with the finger of God, contained all the words,
which the Lord spoke to them in the mount out of the midst of the fire, in the
day of the assembly. Fifthly, God commanded that the king of the Israelies, so
soon as he should be established in his throne, Deuteronomy. 17. v. 18.
should write out the Deutronomie (or law repeated) in a book; according to the
example, which the priests of the Leuiticall tribe should give him, that he
might meditate therein all the days of his life. Sixthly, Iosue made a covenant
with the people, Ios. 24. v. 25, 26
and gave them a law in Sichem, and wrote all the words in the book of the
law. Which words were nothing else but a repetition of the covenant written by
Moses; which covenant Iosue was commanded to observe so strictly, Ios. 1. v. 7.
that he might neither decline to the right hand, Deuteronomy. cap. 1. per totum.
nor to the left. And the same law contained all those precepts, Deuteronomy. 11. 1.
ceremonies, and judgments, which God commanded Moses to teach the people of
Israel.

Locus secundus. Ne addas quicquam verbis eius ( Dei) ne forte arguat te, and
inueniaris mendax. Thou must ad nothing to Gods words, Prou. 30. v. 6.
lest he reprove thee, and thou be found a lier. This text Saint Hierome
understands of the holy scriptures, to which no man may ad any thing, be it
more, be it less. The scriptures therefore are most perfect and absoute, and
contain every doctrine needful for us to know.

Locus tertius. Esa. 8. v. 20.
Ad legem magis, and ad testimonium: Quod si non dixerint iuxta verbum hoc, non
erit eis matutina lux. To the law, and to the testimony. If they speak not
according to this word, there is no matutine or true light in them,

Lo, they that refuse to be taught of Gods prophet, who is the mouth of God;
and seek help at the dead, which is the illusion of Satan; are here reproved
as men void of knowledge, and as blind leaders of the blind. And withal they
are charged to seek remedy in the word of God, where his will is declared.
They and we must ever in all doubts and difficulties, have continual recourse
to the law of God; which law is here termed the testimony, because it is the
testification of Gods will toward man; because there is set down, what God
requires of us; because we may find in it, whatsoever is necessary for us to
know. For the Prophet joins the testimony with the law, not as a thing
distinct from it, but as an explication of the same. As if he had said, ye
must in all doubts have recourse to the law of God, because it is the
testimony of his holy will. Hier. in 8. cap. Esa.
Saint Hierome yields the like sense; and interpretation of this place; these
are his words. Si vultis nosse quae dubia sunt, magis vae legi and testimonijs
tradite scripturarum. Quia si noluerit vestra congregatio verbum domini
quoerere, non habebit luce^ veritatis, sed versabitur in erroris tenebris. If
ye will know the things that are doubtful, ye must have recourse to the law,
and to the testimonies of the scriptures. For, if your people will not seek
Gods word, they cannot attain the light of truth, but shall walk in the
darkness of error.

Locus quartus. Mementote legis Mosis serui mei, quam mandaui ei in Horeb ad
omnem Israel. Mal. 4. v. 4.
Remember the law of Moses my servant, which I commanded to him in Horeb to all
Israel. Mark these words seriously, because they prove evidently, the
question now in hand. For this Malachias being the last of Gods Prophets, and
foreseeing by the spirit of God, that the Israelites should be without
Prophets a long time, even till the coming of Christ; does here exhort them
diligently, to be mindful of the law of Moses. As if he should say; the time
is at hand, when ye shall be destitute of Prophets, and therefore ye must
mark well what the law says, and do according to the prescript rule thereof.
But what is the reason, why he makes no mention of the Prophets? doubtless,
because all things (as you have already heard) are fully comprised in the
written word of the law. For, although the law and the Prophets were until
John; Matt. 11. v. 13.
the one foretelling Christ's coming by word, the other by tipes and figures:
yet was the doctrine of the Prophets nothing else in deed, but an explication
of the law; and consequently, Malachie willing the Israelites to remember the
law of Moses, does thereby sufficiently insinuat the doctrine of the Prophets,
as who are nothing else but the interpreters of Moses. For from the law they
might neither turn to the right hand, nor to the left. That the law contains
the whole Christian doctrine, necessary unto salvation, Lyra. and. Corth. in
23. cap. Mat.
two famous. popish doctors ( Lyra and Dionisius Carthusianus,) do testify:
whose words shall be alleged expressly, when I come to the places of the new
testament.

Ex nouo Testamento.
Locus primus. Ioh 20 v. 30.
Haec scripta sunt, etc. These are written, that you may believe, that Jesus is
Christ the son of God: and that in believing ye might have life through his
name. Here the reader must observe seriously with me, that this Gospel was
written after all other scriptures of the old and new testament; even when the
canon of the scriptures was complet, perfect, and fully accomplished, viz.
almost an hundred years after Christ ascension into heaven, about the
fourteenth year of the reign of Domitianus then emperor. Which observation
being well marked, all the sottish cauils of the papists will easily be
avoided. Now let us see, how the ancient fathers do understand this place of
scripture.

Saint Cyrill has these words; Cyrillus lib. 12. in Johan. cap. vlt.
Non omnia quae Dominus fecit, conscripta sunt, sed quae scribentes tam ad
mores quam ad dogmata sufficere putarunt; vt recta fide and operibus ad regnum
coelorum perueniamus. All things which our Lord did, are not written: but those
things only, which the writers deemed sufficient, as well for manners as for
doctrine; that by a right faith and good life, we may attain the kingdom of
heaven.

Saint Austen has these words; Aug. in. Johan. tract. 49. tom. 9. in initio,
Cum multa fecisset dominus, non omnia scripta sunt: electa sunt antem quae
scriberentur, que saluti credentium sufficere videbantur. When our Lord had
done many things, all were not written; but so much was chosen out to be
written, as was thought to be sufficient for the salvation of the faithful.

Lo, gentle reader, so much is comprised in the holy scriptures, as is
necessary for our salvation, as well in those things which concern our life
and manners, as in things concerning faith and doctrine. Which if the papists
will grant us, they may keep their unwritten traditions, until Gods people
have need thereof. For I see not, why they should enforce us to admit them,
except they were necessary, either for faith, or at the least for good manners:
both which notwithstanding, not the scriptures only, but the fathers also do
deny.

Locus secundus. Non enim subterfugi, Act. 20. v. 27.
quo minus annuntiarum vobis omne consilium Dei. For I have not spared to show
unto you, the whole counsel of God. This portion of scripture, is understood
of things pertaining to our salvation; as two famous popish writers, Nicholaus
Lyranus and Dyonisius Carthusianus, do contest with me.

Carthusiauus has these words; Carthus. in 20. cap. act. apost.
Sed cum alibi scriptum sit; quis consiliarius eius fuit? sapiens quoque
dixerit; quis homini poterit scire consilium Dei; quomodo potuit Paulus omne
consilium Dei annuntiare hominibus? and respondendum, quod non simpliciter de
omni consili^^ Dei intendit, sed de omni consilio Dei, quantum ad humanam
spectai salutem. Quemadmodum etiam ait saluator; Romans 11. 34. sap. 9.
omnia audiui a patre meo, nota feci vobis. But seeing it is written else
where; who has been his counselor? and seeing the wise man also says; what
man can know the counsel of God? how could Paul show unto men, all the
counsel of God? answer must be made, that he means not simply of all the
counsel of God; but of all the counsel of God, so far forth as
appertains to man's salvation. As our savior also says; all things which I
heard my father, I have notified unto you.

Lyra teaches the very same doctrine, Lyra. in 20. cap. act. apost.
I omit his words, for the regard I have to brevity. By whose judgment it is
most evident, that the whole counsel of God touching our salvation, is
contained in the holy Scriptures. And it will not help the papists to answer
or say, that all the counsel of God was preached, but not written. For first,
the Apostle says, he was called to be an Apostle, severed into the Gospel of
God, Romans 1.
which he had promised before by his prophets in the holy Scriptures. Secondly,
he avouches plainly, that he taught none other things than those which the
prophets and Moses did say should come to pass. Act. 26. v. 22.
Thirdly, Lyranus and Carthusianus, two renowned papists, tell us, that all
necessary doctrine is contained in the precepts of love. Carthusianus has
these words: Omnia precepta, Carthus. in 22. cap. Matt.
documenta, and hortamenta legis ac prophetarum, ordinantur ad horum
obseruantiam mandatorum, and virtualiter continentur in cis, sicut conclusiones
in primis principijs. All precepts, documents, and exhortations of the law and
the prophets are ordained to the keeping of these commandments, and are
virtually contained in them, as conclusions in the first principles.

Lyranus has these words: Lyra in 22. cap. Matt.
Propter hoc omnia mandata legis and monitiones, non sunt nisi quaedam
explicationes istorum duorum mandatoru^. Quia omnia ordinantur ad dilectionem
dei and proximi; and similiter doctrina prophetarum ad hoc ordinatur. For this
cause all the commandments of the law, and all admonitions, are nothing else
but certain explications of these two commandments. Because all things are
ordained to the love of God and of our neighbor: and in like manner, the
doctrine of the prophets is referred to the same end.

Fourthly, the Jesuit Bellarmine tells us, that the books of the prophets and
Apostles are the infallible rule of faith. Bellar. tom. 1. col. 2.
These are his express words: Illud in primis statuendum erit, Propheticos and
Apostolicos libros iuxta mentem ecclesiae Cath. and olim in Conc. 3. Carthag.
and nuper in Conc. Trid. explicatam, verum esse verbum dei, and certam ac
stabilem regulam fidei. This must be set down for a ground and sure
foundation, that the books of the prophets and Apostles, according to the mind
of the Catholic Church declared aforetime in the third counsel of Carthage,
and of late in the counsel of Trent, is the true word of God, and the sure and
stable rule of our faith.

The same Jesuit in another place has yet more manifast and clear words,
Bellar. tom. 1. col. 4.
which are these: Quare cum sacra scriptura regula credendi certissima
tutissimaque sit, sanus profecto non erit, qui ea neglecta spiritus
interni^soepe fallacis, and semper incerti iudicio se commiserit. Wherefore,
seeing the holy Scripture is the most certain and most secure rule of faith,
he is not well in his wits doubtless, who having neglected the same, shall
commit himself to the judgment of the internal spirit, which often
deceives, and never is sure or found.

These words of our Jesuitical Cardinal (if they be well marked) will not
only confound himself, who elsewhere teaches the contrary doctrine, but also
evidently prove the controversy now in hand. For first, he says, that the
books of the Apostles and Prophets rightly expounded, are the infallible rule
of faith. Secondly, that the holy Scripture is the most safe and most secure
rule how to believe. Thirdly, that he is mad, whosoever will give credit to the
inward spirit, and not stay himself upon the written word. All which
doubtless confound him and his Jesuitical brood; as who will not rely upon
the written testimonies of Gods truth, but seek after unwritten falsehoods and
vanities, and ground their faith upon the same.

Fifthly, S. Austen teaches the selfsame truth, when he tells us flatly,
that nothing is contained in the Gospel and epistles of the Apostles, which is
not also comprised in the law and the Prophets. These are his express words:
In eo tanta praedicatio and prenuntiatio noui testamenti est, August. contra
Adimant. cap. 3. tom. 6. page 121.
vt nulla in euangelica atque Apostolica disciplina reperiantur, qua^uis ardua
and diuina proecepta and promissa, quae illis etiam libris veteribus desint. In
the old testament, the new testament is so largely preached and foreshewed,
that nothing can be found in the discipline or doctrine of the Gospel and of
the Apostles, although they be hard and divine precepts and promises, which are
wanting in those old books. This being so, it follows of necessity, that
all things needful to salvation, are contained in the Scriptures. For S. Paul
preached all the counsel of God; S. Paul's preachings are contained in the
doctrine of the prophets; the doctrine of the prophets is contained in the law;
the law was written with the finger of God; Ergo a primo ad vltimum, all things
necessary for our salvation, are contained in the written word of God.

Locus tertius. Because from thine infancy thou have known the holy
Scriptures, (...). Which are able to make thee wise unto salvation, 2. Tim. 3.
v. 15.
through faith which is in Christ Jesus. Thus says S. Paul. But doubtless, if
so much be written as is able to make us wise to salvation; we stand in need of
no more, it is enough. Let the papists keep their unwritten traditions to
themselves, let us rely upon the written truth. Let us be wise unto salvation,
contenting our selves with that which it pleased God to reveal in his written
word, and let them be presumptuous and curious to follow man's inventions, and
to believe unwritten vanities.

The second reason, drawn from the authority of the holy Fathers.
Dionysius Areopagita, who lived in the days of the Apostles, De diuinis
nominib. cap. 1. in initio.
does lively deliver this truth unto us in these express words: Omnino igitur
non audendum est, quicquam de summa abstrusaque diuinitate aut dicere aut
cogitare, praeter ea quae nobis diuinitus scripturae diuinae countiarunt. In no
wise therefore may we make bold to speak or think any thing of the most high
and ineffable divinity, save that only which holy writ has revealed to us
from heaven.

S. Augustine, that glistering beam and strong pillar of Christ's church,
avouches plainly, that all things necessary for our salvation are contained
in the written word, as is already proved in the former reason: and he
confirms the same doctrine in another place, where he has these express
words: In his enim quae aperte in scriptura posita sunt, Aug. de doctrina
Christ. li. 2. cap. 6 and cap. 9. tom. 3.
inueniunter illa omnia, quae continent fidem moresque viuendi; spem scilicet
atque charitatem. For in those things which are plainly set down in the holy
Scripture, all things are found which contain faith and manners, that is to
say, hope and charity.

The same S. Austen in another place has these express words: Credo quod
etiam hinc diuinorum eloquiorum clarissima authoritas esset, Aug. de peccat.
merit. and remiss. lib. 2. cap. vlt. tom. 7.
si homo sine dispendio promissae salutis illud ignorare non posset. I believe,
that even in this point also we should have most clear testimony of holy
writ, if a man could not be ignorant thereof, without the loss of his
salvation.

S. Irenaeus has these words: Non emim per alios dispositionem salutis nostrae
cognouimus, Irenae. li. 3. cap. 1
quam per eos, per quos euangelium peruenit ad nos; quod quidem tunc
preconiauerunt, postea vero per dei voluntatem in scripturis nobis tradiderunt,
fundamentum and columnam fidei nostrae futurum. For we know the dispensation of
our salvation, by them only by whom the Gospel came to our hands, which
Gospel they first preached: but afterward by Gods appointment they delivered
the same unto us in writing, that it might be the foundation and pillar of our
faith.

Tertullianus an ancient writer, Tertullian. contra Hermogen. page 373.
(who lived above 1300 years ago) has these express words; Adoro
scripturae plenitudinem, quae mihi and factorem manifestat, and facta. An autem
ex aliqua subiacenti materia facta sint omnia, nusquam adhuc legi. Scriptum
esse doceat Hermogenis offiicina: si non est scriptum, timeat vae illud
adijcientibus aut detrahentibus destinatum. I reverence the plenitude,
fullness, and perfection of the scripture; as which shows to me, both the
maker, and the things which are made. But that all things are made of some
subiacent matter, I never could yet read any where. Let Hermogenes his shop
show us, where it is written. If it be no where written, let him be afraid of
that woe which is provided for them that add or take away from the Scripture.

Lo (gentle reader) these three most ancient fathers do teach us many very
excellent documents. First, that we know the dispensation of our salvation by
Christ's Apostles. Secondly, that we received the Gospel from them. Thirdly,
that they first preached the mysteries of our salvation, delivering the Gospel
by word of mouth. Fourthly, that afterward they committed the same to writing.
Fifthly, that the Scripture was written by Gods own appointment. Sixthly, that
it was written for this end and purpose, That it might be the pillar and
foundation of our faith. Seventhly, that we may not speak or think any thing
of God, which we find not written in Gods book. Eighthly, that the holy
Scripture is perfect, and contains all things necessary for us to know.
Ninthly, that all such as teach or believe any doctrine not contained in the
Scriptures, must drink of the cup of eternal woe for their pains. Let us
proceed and see, what other fathers of later times tell us.

S. Cyprian (who lived about 249 years after Christ, Cyprian ep 74. ad
Pompeium. cont. epist. Steph. col. 229.
viz. above 1300 years ago) has these words: Vnde ista traditio? Vtrumne de
dominica and euangelica authoritate descendens, an de Apostolorum mandatis and
epistolis veniens? Ea enim facienda esse quae scripta sunt, deus testatur, and
proponit ad Iesum Nave dicens; Non recedet liber legis huius ex ore tuo, sed
meditaberis in eo die ac nocte, vt observes facere omnia quae scripta sunt in
eo. Si ergo aut euangelio precipitur, aut in Apostolorum epistolis, aut astibus
continetur, obseruetur diuina haec and sancta traditio. From whence came this
tradition? Did it descend from the authority of our Lord, or his Gospel? Or
came it from the mandates of the Apostles, or their epistles? For, that those
things must be done which are written, God himself does witness, and propose
to Jesus Naue, saying: The book of this law shall not depart from thy mouth,
but thou shall meditate therein night and day, that thou may observe to do
all things which are written in it. If therefore it be either commanded in the
Gospel, or be contained in the Epistles, or in the Acts of the Apostles, let
this divine and holy tradition be observed.

Thus writes S. Cyprian, showing plainly, that all traditions ought to be
examined by the written word, and nothing to be admitted, which is not
contained in the same, or grounded thereupon. Where I note by the way, for the
help of the reader, that though Cornelius, then bishop of Rome (whom now the
papists term Pope and his holiness) together with the whole national synod
of all the bishops of Italy, had made a flat decree touching rebaptization:
and though also Pope Stephanus his holiness had confirmed the same decree, and
commanded it to be observed: and thirdly, though our papists of late days do
obstinately affirm, that their Pope cannot err when he defines iudicially.
Yet this notwithstanding, S. Cyprian teaches and tells us plainly and
roundly, Eusebius. lib. 7. hist. cap. 2, 3, 4.
that in his time the bishop of Rome had no such authority, as this day he
proudly and antichristianly takes upon him: for he roundly withstood the
decree of Pope Stephanus, who then was bishop of Rome, and both sharply
reproved him, and contemned his falsely pretended authority. And for all
that, S. Cyprian was ever reputed an holy bishop in his life time, and a
glorious martyr being dead. But, if the bishop of Rome had been Christ's vicar,
and so privileged, as our papists bear the world in hand he is, then
doubtless S. Cyprian must needs have been an heretic, and so reputed and
esteemed in the Church of God. For, if any Christian shall this day do or
affirm as S. Cyprian did, or publickely deny the Popes falsely pretended
prymacie in any place, country, territories, or dominions, where popery
bears the sway, then without all peradventure he must be burnt at a stake,
with fire and faggot for his pains.

S. Athanasius has these words: Sufficient sanctae ac diuinitus inspiratae
scripturae, Athanas. contrae gentes, seu idola.
ad veritatis iuditionem. The holy scriptures inspired of God, are sufficient,
for the discussion and manifestation of the truth. Where the reader must
observe with me, that Athanasius contending against the Gentiles, that their
idols were not gods; and proouing that Christ was true God and true man by the
Scriptures; and withal auouching, that the Scriptures were sufficient to
decide and determine the controversy; should have made a very foolish
argument, and have concluded nothing at all, if any necessary truth had been
wanting, and not fully contained in the holy scriptures.

S. Epiphanius has these words: Epiph. haeres. 65.
Nos vniuscuiusque quaestionis inuentionem, non ex proprijs ratiocinationibus
dicere possumus, sed ex scripturarum consequentia. We cannot show the
invention of every question out of our own proper reasons, but by consequence
of the scriptures.

S. Cyrill has these words: Cyrillus lib. 2. de recta fide ad regin. tom. 2.
Necessarium nobis est diuinas sequi literas, and in nullo ab earum prescripto
discedere. It is necessary for us to follow the holy scriptures, and not in
the least jot to depart from the prescript rule thereof.

S. Chrysostom has these words: Chrysostom. in Ps. 95. tom. 1. prope fine^.
Si quid dicatur absque scriptura, auditorum cogitatio claudicat, nunc annuens,
nunc haesitans, and interdum sermonem vt friuolum aduersans, interdum vt
probabilem recipiens. Verum vbi e scriptura diuinae vocis prodijt testimonium,
and loquentis sermonem, and audientis animum confirmat. If any thing be spoken
without the scripture, the cogitation of the auditors fails, sometime
yielding, sometime staggering, and sometime rejecting the speech as frivolous,
sometime receiving it as probable. But, so soon as the testimony of Gods
voice is heard out of the scripture, it confirms both the word of the
speaker, and the mind of the hearer.

The same S. Chrysostom in another place has these words: Chrysostom. hom. 41.
in Matt. 22. in opere imperf.
Quicquid quaeritur ad salutem, totum iam adimpletum est in scripturis. Lo,
these holy fathers and ancient writers (who all of them lived above a thousand
and one hundred years ago) teach the selfsame doctrine with the former
fathers. They tell us first, that the holy scripture is sufficient to decide
all controversies. Secondly, that we must affirm or hold no doctrine, but that
which we find in the scriptures. Thirdly, that we must not in the least point
of doctrine depart or swerve from the rule of holy scripture. Fourthly, that in
the holy scripture is fully comprised whatsoever is necessary for man's
salvation. But let us yet hear the verdict of some others.

S. Ambrose has these words: Ambros. de fide ad Great. lib. 1. cap. 4. tom. 2.
Non negamus, imo potius horremus hanc vocem. Sed nolo argumento credas sancte
imperator, and nostrae disputationi. Scripturas interrogemus; interrogemus
apostolos; interrogemus prophetas; interrogemus Christum. We deny not, but
rather abhor the word. Yet, holy emperor, I would neither have you believe
our argument nor our disputation. Let us ask counsel upon the scriptures; let
us ask the Apostles; let us ask the Prophets; let us ask Christ himself,
and so know what is the truth.

S. Basil has these words: Si quicquid ex fide non est, Basilius in ethicis,
definit, vlt. prope finem.
peccatum est, sicut dicit apostolus; fides vero ex auditu, auditus autem per
verbum dei; ergo quicquid extra diuinam scripturam est, cum ex fide non sit,
peccatum est. If whatsoever is not of faith, be sin, as the Apostle says;
and if also faith come by hearing, and hearing by the word of God; then
doubtless, whatsoever is not in the holy scripture, the same is sin, because
it is not of faith.

The same S Basil in another place has these words: Basilius ad Eustath.
medieum, epist. 80.
Stemus arbitratu in spiratae a deo scripturae; and apud quos inueniuntur
dogmata diuinis oraculis consona, illis omnino veritatis adiudicetur sententia.
Let us be judged by the scripture, which came from God by inspiration; and
whose doctrine shall be found consonant to Gods Oracles, let the truth be
judged to be on their side.

S. Hierome has these words: Hier. in cap. 23 Matthew. Vide Paul. Burgens. in 1.
cap. Osee.
Hoc quia de scripturis non habet authoritatem, eadem facilitate contemnitur,
qua probatur. This opinion is as easily rejected as it is affirmed, because it
has no authority from the scriptures.

The same S. Hierome in another place has these words: Hier. in Psalm. 86.
Quomodo narrabit? non verbo, sed scriptura. Videte quid dicat qui fuerunt, non
qui sunt: vt exceptis Apostolis quodcunque aliud postea decatur, abscindatur,
non habeat postea authoritate^. Quamuis ergo sanctus sit aliquis post
Apostolos, quamuis disertus sit, non habeat authoritate^. Quonia^ dominus
narrat inscriptura populoru^, and principu^ horam qui fuerunt in ea. How shall
he show it? not by word, but by the holy scripture. Mark what he says, who
were, but not who are; to the end, that the Apostles being excepted, whatsoever
other thing be afterward spoken, it must be rejected, it must have no authority
at all. Wherefore, though a man be holy, though he be learned, yet seeing he
comes after the Apostles, let him be of no authority. For our Lord speaks
to us in the scripture of his people, and of the princes that were therein.

The same Saint Hierome in an other place has these words; Hier. in lere.
cap. 9. tom. 5.
Erog nec parentum, nec maiorum error sequendus est, sed authoritas
scripturarum, and Dei docentis imperium. Therefore we must neither follow the
error of our parents, nor of our ancestors, but the authority of the
scriptures, and the commandment of God teaching us.

The third reason, drawn from the authority of famous popish writers.
John friar the late bishop of Rochester, Roffencis, art. 37. aduers. Luther.
pa, 411.
one highly renowned amongst the papists, and with them canonized for a Saint
and glorious Martyr, so as his authority must perforce be of credit against
them, has these express words; Scriptura sacra conclaue quoddam est omnium
veritatum, quae Christianis scitu necessaria sunt. The holy scripture is a
certain storehouse of all truths, which are needful to be known of
Christians.

In another place the same famous papist has these words; Roffens. aduers.
art. Luther. verit. 4.
Contendentibus itaque nobiscum haereticis, nos alio subsidio nostram oportet
tueri causam, quam scripturae sacrae. Therefore when heretics contend with
us, we must defend our cause by other means, than by the holy scripture.
These are the very express words of their own famous popish bishop, of their
holy Saint, of their glorious matyr; who labored with might and maine for the
Popes usurped soueraintie, and defended the same in the best manner he was
able. And yet for all that, he has bolted out unawares and against his will,
(such is the force of truth, which must needs in time prevail) so much in
plain terms, as is sufficient to overthrow all popery for ever, and to
cause all people that have any care of their salvation, to renounce the Pope
and his abominable doctrine to their lives end. For first, our popish bishop
tells us plainly, and without all dissimulation, (his mouth being now opened
by him that caused Balaams ass to speak) Numer. cap. 22. v. 28.
That in the holy scripture, as in a plentiful storehouse, is laid up for us
and our instruction, all knowledge necessary for man's salvation. Again, the
same popish bishop, Saint, and Martyr, (of papists so esteemed and reputed)
tells us roundly, That they must not (because forsooth they cannot) defend
and maintain their popery by the authority of the scripture, but by some
other way and means, to wit, by man's inventions and popish unwritten vanities,
which they term the Churches traditions. Now gentle reader, how can any
papist (who is not given up in reprobum sensum for his just deserts) read such
testimonies against popery, Romans 1. v. 24.
freely confessed and published to the world by papists, even when they
bestirre themsulues busily to maintain their Pope and his popish doctrine; and
for all that continue papists still, and be carried away headlong into
perdition; believing and obeying that doctrine, which cannot be defended by the
written word of God, which is the storehouse of all necessary knowledge; 2.
These. 2. v. 12. Romans 1. v. 24.
They doubtless are either very senseless, or so blinded for their former
sins, that they cannot behold the sun shining at noone tide: me thinks they
should be ashamed, to hold and believe that doctrine; in defense whereof, they
can yield no better reasons. But let us yet hear what other renowned popish
writers tell us; who doubtless will not bewray their own cause, but against
their wills. Howbeit as the wise man says, Magnaest veritas, and praeualet; The
truth is of such force as it must needs prevail, 3. Esdr. 4. v. 42.
and in time have the upper hand.

Melchior Canus another popish bishop, Melch. Canus de llocis theolog. lib. 7.
cap. 3.
and a very learned schoole-doctor, has these express words; Cum sit
perfectus scripturarum canon, sibique ad omnia satis superque sufficiat; quid
opus est, vt ei sanctorum and intelligentia iungatur, and authoritas. Seeing
the canon of the scripture is perfect, and most sufficient of it self to every
end, and in every respect; what need have we to join therewith, either the
exposition or the authority of the fathers. Thus writes this great learned
papist, not denying the sufficiency of the holy scripture, but requiring the
commentaries of the fathers, for the better understanding of the same. Whose
opinion I do approve and commend in that respect, as is evident to all that
shall peruse my book of Motives.

Thomas Aquinas, Aquinas, p. 1. q. 36. art. 2. ad primum.
(whom the Pope has cannonized for a Saint, and his doctrine for authentical)
teaches us not to believe any thing concerning God, saving that only which is
contained in the scripture expressly, or at least significantly. These are his
own words: Dicendum, quod de Deo dicere non debemus, quod in sacra scriptura
non inuenitur, vel per verba, vel per sensum. We must answer, that nothing is
to be verified of God, which is not contained in holy writ, either expressly, or
in sense.

The same popish doctor in an other place has these words: Aquinas, p. 3. q
42. art. 4. ad primum.
Quicquid enim ille (Christus) de suis factis and dictis nos legere voluit, hoc
scribendum illis tanquam suis manibus imperauit. For whatsoever Christ would
have us to read of his doings and sayings, the same he commanded his Apostles
to write, as if he had done it with his own hands. Lo, in these words
Aquinas avouches very plainly, that all things necessary for our salvation,
are contained in the scriptures. For in Christ's deeds, are contained his
miracles, his life, his conversation: in his sayings semblably, are contained
his preaching, his teaching, his doctrine; and consequently, whatsoever is
necessary for us to know. If then this be true, as it is most true, (for the
papists neither will, See the Jesuit Bellarmins doctrine, in the end of the
sercond exposition, and note it well.
nor can deny the doctrine of Aquinas) that whatsoever Christ would have us to
know, of his miracles, of his life, of his conversation, of his preaching, of
his teaching, of his doctrine, the same is now written in the scriptures: no
man doubtless, but he that will cum ratione insanire, can deny all things
necessary for our salvation, to be contained in the holy scriptures.

To this doctrine delivered by Aquinas, agrees their own renowned professor,
and most learned schoole-doctor Franciscus a victoria, Victor. de sacra. page
120.
that Spanish friar. His express words are these; Non est mihi certum, licet
omnes dicant, quod in scriptura non continetur. I do not think it certain
and sure, although all writers affirm it, which is not contained in the
scripture.

The same popish doctor and friar, Victor. relect. 8. de augment. charit p. 308.
in another place has these words: Propter quas (opiniones) nullo modo
debemus, discedere a regula and synceritate scripturarum. For which opinions we
must by no means depart from the rule and synceritie of the holy scriptures.
Lo (gentle reader) our popish friar will believe no doctrine, which is not
contained in the scripture; although all writers teach the same. Mad men
therefore may they be deemed, that will believe whatsoever the Pope tells
them, though it be never so repugnant to the scripture. Vide tu Anselm. in 2.
tim. cap. 3. and Lyran. in matt. 19.
Anselmus and Lyra two other famous popish writers, do teach us the self same
doctrine.

The second Proposition.
All persons of what sex, state, calling, or condition soever they be, may
lawfully, and ought seriously to read the holy scriptures; as out of which,
even the simplest of all may gather so much as is necessary for their
salvation. This I say, against that popish, ridiculous, unchristian, and very
pestilent abuse, where the Pope delivers to the people, as it were by was of
apostolical traditon; the scriptures, sacraments, and church-seruice, in a
strange tongue to them unknown. Which to be flatly against the practice of
the primitive Church, I have proved copiously in my book of Survey. Here
therefore I will only show, that it is both lawful and necessary for all
sorts of people that desire to attain eternal life, to read diligently the
holy scriptures.

S. Chrysostom discourses at large of this subject in many places of his
works; Chrysostom. in proaemio epist. ad. Romans
but I will content my self with some few for the present. In his commentaries
upon Saint Paul he has these words: Et vos itaque, si lectioni cum animi
alacritate volueritis attendere, nullo alio preterea opus habebitis. Verus enim
est sermo Christi, cum dicit; quaerite and inuenietis, pulsate and aperietur.
Verum quia plures exijs qui huc conuenere, and liberorum educationem, and
vxoris curam, gubernandaeque domus insesereceperunt, atque ideo non sustinent
totos se labori isti addicere, saltem ad percipienda quae alij collegerunt,
excitamini: tantum ijs quae dicuntur audiendis impendite diligentiae, quantum
colligendis pecunijs. Tam etsi enim turpe sit non nisi tantum a vobis exigere,
tamen contenti erimus, si vel tantum prestetis. Nam hinc iunumera mala nata
sunt, quod scripturae ignorantur. Hinc erupit multa illa haereseon pernicies;
hinc vita dissoluta, hinc inutiles labores: quemadmodum enim qui luce ista
priuatisunt, recta vtique non pergunt: ita qui ad radios diuinarum.
Scripturarum non recipient, multa coguntur continuo delinquere, vtpote in
long peioribus tenebris ambulantes; quod ne nobis vsu veniat, occulos ad
splendorem Apostolicorum verborum aperiamus. If therefore you will read the
scriptures with alacrity of mind, you shall need no other help at all. For
Christ's word is true, when he says: Seek, and ye shall find; knock, and it
shall be opened unto you. But because many of you are charged with wives,
children, and domestical regiment, and so can not wholly addict your selves to
this study: yet at the least be ready to hear what others have gathered,
and bestow so much diligence in hearing what is said, as you do in scraping
worldly goods together. For albeit it be a shame to require no more of you,
yet will I be content, if ye do so much. For, the cause of infinite evils, is
your ignorance in the scriptures: From hence springs the manifold mischief
of heresies; from hence, dissolute life; from hence, vain and unprofitable
labors. For, even as they that are bereaved of this light, cannot go the
right way: so they that do not behold the beams of the holy scriptures, are
enforced inconintently to offend in many things, as walking in far greater
darkness.

This is the golden censure of Saint Chrysostom, rightly surnamed the golden
mouthed doctor. Out of whose doctrine, I gather these worthy observations:
First, that whosoever studieth the scriptures seriously, and with alacrity,
shall find therein, and understand so much, as is necessary for his salvation.
And consequently, that our disholy father the Pope, debarreth us of the
ordinary means of our salvation; when he upon pain of excommunication,
inhibiteth us to read the scriptures in our vulgar tongue, unless we have his
license and dispensation so to do. And he has I confess, some reason thus to
deal: because forsooth popery would have a short reign, if every papist
might freely read the holy scripture, and other godly books written for their
instruction. But alas, they are so bewitched with his blessings, that they
think they shall be damned, if they do but read this my discourse, or any other
opposite to popery, not having his license so to do. But all his priests are
licenced; and so they can pretend no excuse, if they do not frame some answer
hereunto.

Secondly, that it is a very shame, for men charged with wives, children, and
families; that they do but only hear sermons, and do not withal study the
holy scriptures; and consequently, that it is much more shame for others that
be more free, not to read them diligently; and greatest shame of all for a
bishop, to approve or commend them that will not so do,

Thirdly, that heresies, dissolute life, and all other evils, do proceed of
ignorance, and of not reading the holy scriptures.

The same Saint Chysostome in an other place has these words. Chrysostom. in 9.
ca. genes. hom. 29. to. 1.
Propterea obsecro, vt subinde huc veniatis, and diuinae scripturae lectionem
diligenter auscultetis; nec solum cum huc venitis, sed and domi diuina b^blia
in manus sumite, and vtilitatem in illis positam magno studio suscipitc.
Sequitur Paulo inferius. Tantum igitur lucrum oro, ne per negligentiam
amittemus, sed and domi vacemus diuinarum scriptur arum lectioni, and hic
presents non in nugis and inutilibus colloquijs tempus decoquamus. I beseech
you therefore, that you will come hither now and then, and attend diligently
the reading of the holy scriptures; neither that only when ye come hither, but
at home also take the holy bibles into your hands, and with great study
embrace the profit contained in them. I pray you therefore, let us not
negligently loose so great gain, but when we are at home, let us then apply
our selves to read the holy scriptures: and being here, let us not spend our
time idly and vainly.

By these testimonies, (to omit many others) we may perceive most evidently,
how grievously Saint Chrysostom lamenteth, that the people in his time were so
negligent in reading the holy scripture. What therefore would that holy father
say, if he lived in these our days, in which the Pope burns such scriptures,
as the people understand in their vulgar tongue: In which he commands all
church-seruice to be in strange and unknown language: In which he
excommunicateth all say-persons be they never so well learned, 6. decret. lib.
5. cap. quicunque.
that reason of matter of faith, or dispute of his power? What would he say,
if he heard priests pronounce absolution in their popish sacrament of penance,
which neither the penitents, nor the priests themselves do often understand?
Nay, what would he say, if he were this day in popish Churches, where they do
not only read their Churchseruice in Latin, but also Latin homilies or
sermons unto the vulgar sort; which yet they term an exposition of the
scripture: which manner of proceeding is practiced every festival day of nine
lessons, in the time of their mattens? In fine, what would he say, if he knew
the rude vulgar sort, who are commanded to hear the Gospel read in Latin,
and withal should see them listening with their ears, least any word should
not be heard, though impossible of them to be understood? would he not, and
might he not justly say with the holy Apostle, 1. Cor. 14. v. 24.
that they were mad? Yes doublesse, it cannot be denied.

Origin, who lived above a thousand and three hundred years ago, does not
only exhort the people seriously to read the scriptures, but withal shows
plainly, that in his time they were read in the vulgar tongue. These are his
words: Origin hom. 4. pe super leuit. pro finem.
Certe, si non omnia possumus, saltem ea quae nunc docentur in ecclesia, vel
quae recitantur, memoriae commendemus. Doubtless, if we cannot bear away all
things contained in the scriptures, yet at the least let us remember those
things which are taught and read in the Church. Lo, in these golden words he
speaks not only of sermons, but also of the Gospels, Epistles, Prayers,
Lessons, and histories of the Bible. For sermons are contained in the word (
docentur, which are preached;) and the rest in the word ( recitantur, which are
read or rehearsed:) but certes, if such things had been read in a strange and
unknown tongue, the vulgar sort could not have committed them to memory. And
consequently, to no end or purpose should Origin have made this exhortation.
And the objection which is common in the mouths of our papists, That Saint
Peter affirms the scriptures to be obscure and hard to be understood
(notwithstanding the great brags and insolent vaunts of our Rhemists) is too
too foolish, Rhemist. in 2. Pet. cap. 3.
and of no force at all. For first, Saint Peter says not, that the whole
scripture is hard to be understood, but some things in S. Paul's Epistles.
Secondly, he speaks not solely and barely of the unlearned, but of the
unlearned which are unstable. Thirdly, he speaks not generally of all readers
of the scripture, but of those wicked ones, which deprave not only S. Paul's
Epistles, Vide D. Chrysostom. in proemio epist. ad Romans in in^io.
but also all other scriptures, to their own perdition. Howbeit, to debar
all the godly, who with all humility and reverence desire to read the
scriptures; and to abandon one only particular evil, by taking away the good
wholly and generally; may well be resembled to those unskillful physicians, who
cannot deliver their patients from any particular disease, except they take
away their lives. But wise Solomon was of another mind, Prou. 8. v. 8, 9.
when he affirmed all the words of wisdom to be open and easy to every one
of understanding, that is, which have a desire to the truth, and are not
blinded of the prince of this world. For, as by the fool, he means every
wicked man: so by a man of understanding he means every one that is godly.
Hereupon it is said, Psalm. 25. v. 9.
that God reuealeth his secret counsels to all that fear him: John. 7. v. 17.
That whosoever will do the will of God, John. 8. v. 31: 32
the same shall know his doctrine: That they which abide in Gods word, shall
know the truth: Matthew. 11. v. 25.
That God reuealeth his will unto the simple and unlearned ones, and hides his
secrets from the wise and prudent: Ps. 119. v. 105.
That the whole body of the scripture, from the head to the foot thereof, is
termed a lantern to ourfeet, and a light unto our paths: That Gods word is
like a candle, shining in a dark place, until the day dawne, and the day star
arise in our hearts: 2. Pet. 1. v. 19.
That the spiritual man does understand all things which are necessary for
his salvation: 1. Cor. 2. v. 15.
for so Lyra and Dionysius Carthusianus, two great learned papists, do expound
the place. And consequently, if Gods word be hidden to any, it is hidden to
those that perish, to those whose understandings the God of this world has
blinded, 2. Cor. 4. v. 3, 4.
that the light of the Gospel of the glory of Christ, should not shine unto
them.

S. Chrysostom has these golden words: Chrysostom. in 2. These. cap. 2. hom. 3.
Quid opus est concionatore? Per nostram negligentiam necessitas ista facta
est. Quamobrem namque concione opus est? Omnia clara sunt and plana ex diuiais
scripturis; quaecunques necessaria sunt, manifesta sunt. What need is there of
a preacher? Our negligence has caused this necessity. For to what end is a
sermon needful? All things are clear and evident in the holy scriptures, what
things soever are necessary, the same are manifest.

The same S. Chrysostom in his Commentaries upon the Epistle of the
Colossians, Chrysostom. in Coloss. hom. 9. col. 1290.
has these words: Audite quotquot estis mundani, and vxoribus prae estis ac
liberis, quomodo and vobis potissimum precipiat scripturas legere; idque non
simpliciter, neque abiter, sed magna diligentia, Sequitur Paulo inferius.
Audite obsecro seculares omnes. Comparate vobis biblia, animae pharmaca. Si
nihil aliud vultis, vel nouum testamentum acquirite, Apostolum, Acta,
Euangelia, continuos ac sedulos doctores. Si acciderit maestitia, huc veluti
apothecam pharmacorum introspice. Hinc tibi sum solamen mali, sieve damnu^
euenerit, sieve mors, sieve amissio domesticorum. Imonon introspice solum, sed
omnia iterum atque iterum versa, menteque illa contine. Hoc demum malorum
omnium causa est, quod scripturae ignorantur. Iterum; doce puerum tuum Psalmos
illos canere Philosophiae plenos. Hearken all ye that are encombred with
worldly affairs, and have charge of wives and children, how you specially are
commanded to read the scriptures, and that not simply nor slenderly, but with
great diligence. Hear I pray you, all secular persons. Provide and furnish
your selves with bibles, the sovereign medicines of your souls. If you will
have no other thing, at the least provide the new Testament, the Apostle, the
Acts, the Gospel, the continual and diligent doctors. If any grief come,
turn thine eye unto the scripture, as to the Apothecaries shop full of
medicines. From hence receive sollace of evil, whether damage, or death, or
loss of worldly goods chance unto thee. Yea, look not only to the scripture,
but volue and reuolue all things contained therein, and keep the same in mind.
For this is the cause of all manner of evils, that men are ignorant in the holy
scriptures. Teach your children to sing Psalms, which are full of Philosophy.

Thus writes this holy father, teaching us at large, how necessary and
needful a thing it is for every one to study and read diligently the holy
scriptures. For first, he tells us plainly, that all necessary points of
doctrine are so plain and manifest, as one may understand the same without the
preacher. Secondly, that they who are charged with wives, children, and worldly
affairs, are specially and more than others, commanded to read the
scriptures: The reason hereof he yields in another place; because the more
they are encombered with the cares of the world, the more need they have to
enjoy the helps of the holy scripture. These are his words: Quid ais homo?
Chrysostom. conc. 3. de lazaro, tom. 2. col. 1340.
Non est tui negotij scripturas euoluere, quoniam in numeris curis distraberis?
Imo tuum magis est, quam illorum. Neque enim illi perinde scripturarum egent
presidio, atque vos in medijs negotiorum vndis iactati. What say thou o
man? Is it not thy part and duty to read the holy scriptures, because thou art
encombred with many worldly cares? yea, it is so much more thy charge than it
is theirs: For they have not so great need of the help of the scriptures as
you have, who are tossed in the midst of the waves of worldly troubles.
Thirdly, that all secular persons of both sexes must furnish themselves with
the holy Bible. Fourthly, that they must not only read the scriptures barely
and slenderly, but that they must do the same with great diligence. Fifthly,
that the scriptures do minister comforts for all sorrows, and sovereign
medicines for all sores. Sixthly, that the ignorance of the scriptures is the
cause of all evils. Seventhly, that parents must teach their children to sing
Psalms, yea, even those Psalms which are replenished with Philosophy.

S. Austen teaches in the same manner, August. de doct. Christ. li, 2. cap. 9.
that all things necessary for man's salvation, are plain and easy to be
understood. These are his express words: In his enim quque aperte in scriptura
posita sunt* inueniuntur illa omnia, quae continent fidem moresque viuendi. For
in those things which are plainly set down in the holy scripture, are found
all things concerning faith and manners.

The same S. Austen in another place has these words: August. de doct. Christ.
li. 2. cap. 6.
Magnifice igitur and salubriter spiritus sanctus ita scripturas sanctas
modificauit, vt locis apertioribus fami occurreret, obscurioribus autem
fastidia detergeret. God has so tempered the holy scriptures, that by manifold
places he might provide against famine, and by those which are more obscure, he
might cleanse the loathsomenesse of our stomach. And his reason hereof
follows in these next words: Nihil enim fere de illis obscurit atibus
eruitnr, quod non planissime dictum alibi reperiatur. For almost nothing is
contained in obscure places, which is not most plainly uttered in some other
place.

The same father in an other place has these words; Nec solum vobis
sufficiat, Aug. de tempor^ ser. 55.
quod in ecclesia diuinas lectiones auditis, sed etiam in domibus vestris aut
ipsi legite, aut alios legentes requirite, and libenter audite. Let it not be
enough for you, only to hear Gods word in the Church; but also read it your
selves in your houses, or else procure others to read it, and hear you them
willing.

Out of these words of this holy writer, and ancient father, we may learn
many godly lessons. First, that all things needful for our salvation, are
plainly set down in the scriptures. Secondly, that things which are obscurely
touched in some places, are plainly handled in other places. Thirdly, that
the scriptures are obscure in some places, to exercise our wits, and to cleanse
the loathsomenesse of our stomachs. Fourthly, that we must read the scriptures
at home in our houses, and not hear them read in the Churches. Fifthly, that if
we cannot read them our selves, then must we procure others to read them to us,
and mark diligently what they read, and hear them with desire and alacrity
of mind.

Saint Hierome is consonant to Saint Austen and Saint Chysostome, Hieron. in
Ps. 133.
affirming, that in his time (which was about 1200 years ago) both monks,
men, and women, did contend who could learn more scriptures without book. These
are his express words; Solent and viri, solent and monachi; solent and
mulierculae hoc inter se habere certamen, vt plures ediscant scripturas; and in
eose putant esse meliores si plures edidicerint. Men, women, and monks, use to
contend one with another, who can learn more scriptures: and herein they think
themselves better, if they can learn more.

The same Saint Hierome in an other place, speaking of the education of a young
maid of seven years old, has these words; Hieron. ad Gaudentium, tom. 1.
fol. 44. B.
Matris nutum pro verbis ac monitis, and pro imperio habeat. Amet vt parentem,
subijciatur vt dominae, timeat vt magistram. Cum autem virgunculam rudem and
edentulam septimus aetatis annus exceperit, and caeperit erubescere, scire quid
taceat, dubitare quid dicat; discat memoriter psalterium, and vsque ad annos
pubertatis libros Salomonis, euangelia, Apostolos, and prophetas, sui cordis
thesaurum faciat. Let her mothers beck to her, be in steed of words,
admonitions, and commands. Let her love her as her parent, obey her as her
lady, and fear her as her mistress. And when the rude and toothlesse girl
shall be seven year old, and shall begin to be bashful, to know when to be
silent, and when to speak; then let her learn the Psames by heart, and
without book: and till she be twelve years of age, or marriageable, let her
make the books of Solomon, the Gospels, Apostles, and Prophets, the treasure
of her heart. Thus writes Saint Hierome: out of whose golden words I note
these golden observations. First, that both men and women in his days, did
study and read the scriptures, as diligently and painfully as the monks.
Secondly, that in his time they thought themselves the happiest people, who
could con by heart the most texts of holy scripture: Whereas amongst the papists
they are deemed most holy, that can by heart no scripture at all, but abstain
from the reading thereof, as from the poison of their souls. Thirdly, that
young women being but seven years of age, must be acquainted with the holy
scriptures, and learn by heart the book of Psalms. Fourthly, that from seven
years upward until puberty, that is to say, until the twelft year of their
age, they must read seriously the books of Solomon, the Gospels, Apostles, and
Prophets, and set their whole delight therein. And the same holy father in his
Epistle to the godly matrone Celantia, Hieron. ad Celant. tom. 1. fol. 50. A.
does persuade her for the best course of her life, to be continually
conversant in the holy scriptures. These are his words; Sint ergo diuinae
scipturae semper in manibus tuis, and iugiter mente voluantur. Let therefore
the holy scriptures be always in thy hands, and let them be incessantly tossed
or rolled in thy mind.

Saint Theodoretus tells us with good liking thereof, Theodor. lib. 5. de
Graeca, affect. curat. page 521.
that in his time the scriptures were translated into all manner of languages,
and that they were not only understood of doctors, and masters of the Church,
but even of the lay people, and common artificers. His express words I will
allege, which are these; Hebraici vero libri, non modo in Graecum idioma
conuersi sunt, sed in Romanam quoque linguam, Aegyptiam, Persicam, Indicam,
Armenicaque, and Scythicam, atque adeo Sauromaticam, semelque vt dicam, in
linguas omnes, quibus ad hanc diem nationes vtuntur. Sequitur paulo inferius,
fossoresque adeo ac bubulcos inuenias; plant arumque consitores de diuina
trinitate, rerumque omnium creatione discertantes. The Hebrew books are turned
not only into the Greek tongue, but also into the Roman language also, into
the Egyptian, Persian, Indians, Armenian, and Scythian, as also into the
Sauromatick tongue, and to speak all in a word, into all tongues, which this
day are in use amongst nations. And after he has told us, that the
Church-doctrine, is known to all manner artizans of both sexes; he adds, that
we may find ditchers, deluers, neatheards, and gardiners, disputing even of the
blessed trinity, and of the creation of all things. VVhereupon it is evident,
that in the ancient Church, and in the time of old religion, (as the silly
foolish papists call their Romish inventions, which is in deed a newly invented
religion, as I have proved in my Survey of popery) every nation had the holy
scriptures in their vulgar language: and that in those days, all the
Christians did read the holy scriptures so seriously, that both men and women,
of all trades and conditions, were able to dispute of the holy trinity, and of
the creation of the world. Which two points doubtless, are the most
difficult, obscure, hard, and intricate articles, in the whole course of
theology.

The Jesuit Bellarmine, (a wonderful thing to be heard, and a most incredible,
saving (that the truth must needs in time have the upper hand) confesses so
much unawares, as is able sufficiently to prove and conclude my intended scope
and proposition. Bellar. tom 1. ed. 191. lib. 4. de verbo Deiscrip. to. cap.
11. a.
These are his express words; His notatis, dico illa omnia scripta esse ab
apostolis, quae sunt omnibus necessariae, and quaeipsipalam omnibus vulgo
praedicauerant; alia autem non omnia scripta esse. These observations being
marked, I answer, that all those things were written by the Apostles, which
are necessary for all men, and which the Apostles preached openly to all the
vulgar people; but that all other things were not written. Thus writes our
skillful Jesuit, who in the name of all papists, (being as it were their mouth)
says all that can be said, in defense of late Romish religion. Out of whose
words I note first, that all thing necessary for all men and all women, old
men, young men, maids, and babes, rich and poor, noble and ignoble, are set
down and contained in the holy scriptures. Secondly, that all things contained
in the written word, are necessary for all people. Thirdly, that those things
which are not contained in the written word, were never preached openly to all
people, but secretly to some few persons in secret corners; peradventure to our
Jesuits and Iesuited popelings, saving that their sect was not then hatched, as
which is not yet eighty years old. Fourthly, that those things which are not
contained in the scriptures and written word, are not necessary for all
people, but only for Jesuits and papists, to bring them to perdition. Fifthly,
that seeing on the one side, all things needful for all men and all women, for
young and old, rich and poor, noble and ignoble, are contained in the
scriptures; and seeing withal on the other side, that all things in the
written word are necessary for all people, (mark well what I say, gentle
reader, for I build my work upon that foundation which the Jesuit has laid)
it follows by necessary consequution, that all people ought seriously to
read the holy scripture: as also that they may safely contemn all unwritten
traditions, as nothing needful or pertaining to them. But let us hear our
Cardinal Jesuit once again speak for himself and for the honor of this holy
father the Pope. Bellar. de verbo dei, lib. 3. cap. 2. tom. 1. col. 129.
These are his express words: At in nouo testamento, quia Christus impleuit
figuras and prophetias; etsi multi non intelligant sententias scripturarum,
intelligunt tamen ipsa mysteria redemptionis, etiam rustici and mulieres. But
in the new testament, because Christ has fulfilled the figures and the
prophesies; although many do not understand the sentences of the scriptures,
yet do they understand the mysteries of our redemption, even the common
country fellows and the very women.

Thus writes our Jesuit, affirming, that even women and the very rustickes of
the country, do understand the scriptures, so far forth as pertains to
the mysteries of their redemption: and I pray you, why then does the Pope
debar them from the reading thereof? What more knowledge is needful over
and besides the mysteries of man's redemption? It is all the knowledge which
Saint Paul desired to have: 1. Cor. 2. v. 2.
who (as he says of himself) esteemed not to know any thing among them, save
Jesus Christ, and him crucified. I therefore conclude by our Jesuits own free
grant, that it behooves all men and women, children and maids, diligently to
read the holy scriptures, seeing they may understand therein all the mysteries
of their redemption, viz. all knowledge necessary for their salvation. Which
knowledge is so necessary, as nothing can be more. Deuteronomy. 11. v. 18, 19, 20.
Ye (says God by the mouth of his servant Moses) shall lay up these my words
in your heart and in your soul, and bind them for a sign upon your hand, that
they may be as a frontlet between your eyes. Deuteronomy. 6. v. 8, 9.
And ye shall teach them your children, speaking of them when thou sit in
thine house, and when thou walk by the way, and when thou lie down, and
when thou risest up. And thou shall write them upon the posts of thine house,
Deuteronomy. 4. v. 9.
and upon thy gates. But our papists object against us, that when the fathers
exhort all men and women to read the scriptures, Rheme* testament in prefatio,
sect. 15.
they speak as pulpit-men agreeably to their audience, and the peoples
default; but not as teachers in the school, making exact and general rules to
be observed in all places and times. To which I answer first, that the truth
must be spoken as well in the pulpit as in the school. Secondly, that the
doctrine in pulpit is and ought to be as exact, absolute, and necessary, as
the doctrine in school: The sole and only difference is or ought to be this,
viz. that the pulpit has ever the prick of exhortation annexed, which the
school wants. For the preacher may not speak at randon in the pulpit, but
even there must he have the girdle of truth about his loins. Thirdly, that
holy David regarded no such popish distinction, Psalm. 119. v. 9.
when asking, whereby a young man shall cleanse his ways? he answers thus: By
study, meditation, and keeping of the law of God. Neither the godly men in
Berhaea, Act. 17. v. 11.
when they daily searched the scriptures, even to examine the doctrine of the
Apostles by them. Our papists object likewise, 1. Tim. 2. v. 12.
that S. Paul will have women to live in silence, and not to chat and prattle
of the scriptures. I answer, that though S. Paul will not permit women to
teach publickely before men; yet does he neither forbid them to read the
scriptures, nor yet to teach privately, when due circumstances do occur. For
the same Apostle Tit. 2. v. 3.
elsewhere commands mothers to teach godly things to their children. So
Solomon, the wisest child that ever was among the sons of Adam, one Christ
ever excepted, confesses plainly and humbly, what doctrine his mother
Bethsheba taught him. Prou. 31. v. 1.
So Priscilla, wife to Aquila the Jew born in Pontus, expounded the scriptures
to the Jew Apollo, Act. 18. v. 26. 2. Tim. 1. v. 5. and 2 Timothy 3. v. 15.
borne at Alexandria, a very eloquent man. So Timothy was thoroughly instructed
in the scriptures by his mother Eunice, and by his grandmother Lois. By which
notable example it is evident and clear to every one, that neither mothers
must forbear to teach, nor yet young babes forbear to learn the holy
scriptures.

The third Proposition.
Traditions must be examined by the holy scriptures, which is the true
touchstone of verity; and then only admitted, when they are found to be
consonant to the same. For proof of this proposition, the very name or word
(Canonical) is of it self sufficient. For (Canon) is a Greek word, which
signifies a rule, and there upon those books are called the Canonical
scriptures, which are the rule of our faith. And consequently, whatsoever is
not consonant to the scriptures, the same ought to be rejected, as pernicious
and swaruing from the rule of our faith. For this cause does the Prophet Esaias
send us to the law, Esae. 8. v. 20.
and to the testimony, there to try the truth. For this cause does the
Prophet Malachie exhort the people ever to be mindful Mal. 4. 4.
of the law of Moses. For this cause does the Prophet David tell us, That Gods
word is a lantern to our feet. Psalm. 119. v. 105
For this cause says S. Peter, That Gods word is a light shining in dark
places, 2. Pet. 1. v. 19.
until the day star arise in our hearts. For this cause did Christ himself
exhort the Jews to John 5. v. 39.
read seriously the holy scriptures. For this cause said Christ, That the
Pharisees erred, Matt. 22. v. 29.
because they knew not the scriptures. Act. 17 v. 11.
For this cause did the men at Berhaea try the truth of S. Paul's doctrine by
the scriptures. For this cause does S. John exhort us not to believe every
spirit, 1 John 4. v. 1.
but to try the spirits, if they be of God. For this cause does S. Paul
pronounce him accursed that preaches any doctrine not contained in the
scriptures. Gal. 1, 2.
For both S. Austen and S. Basil do expound that place of the written word.
Aug cont. literas Pet l. li. 3. cap. 6. tom. 7.
And the truth thereof is already proved, because the Apostles taught no
needful doctrine, which they did not after commit to writing.

S. Cyprian would not yield to Stephanus then bishop of Rome, in the
controversy concerning rebaptization; but sharply reproved him for leaning
to tradition, Cyprian epist. ad Pompeium. 74.
and demanded of him, by what scripture he could prove his tradition. For, in
his days it was not enough to allege tradition for the proof of any
doctrine. And much less was it a rule in Saint Cyprians time to follow the
bishop of Romes definitive sentence, in matters of faith and doctrine. Though
our sottish and blind papists in these latter days do admit and reverence his
sentence, even as the holy Gospel. See S. Cyprians words in the first
proposition.

When the Arrians would not admit the word ((...)) because it was not found in
the scriptures, the fathers of the counsel did not then allege traditions
for proof thereof; neither did they say, that many things must be believed
which are not written: but they answered simply, That though that word were not
expressly written, yet was it virtually and effectually contained in the
scriptures. This assertion is evident by the testimony of Saint Athanasius,
Athanas. de decret. nic. synod. tom. 2. prope fine^.
whose words are these: Sed tamen cognoscat quisquis est studiosioris animi,
has voces tametsi in scripturis non reperiantur, habere tamen eas eam
sententiam quam scripturae volunt. Although the express words be not found in
the scripture, yet have they that meaning and sense which the scripture
approoueth and intends, as every one that studieth the scripture seriously,
may easily understand.

Origin in Matt. hom. 25. and hom. 1. in 1. cap. Ier.
Origin gives counsel to try all doctrines by the scriptures, even as pure
gold is tried by the touchstone. His words are set down at large in my book
of Motives, and they are well worth the reading.

Tertullian has these words: Tertull. aduers. praexe. in principe.
Id esse verum, quodcunque primum; id esse adulterum, quodcunque posterius. We
must know, that that it is the truth, whatsoever was first; and that that is
counterfeit, whatsoever comes after the first.

S. Austen Aug. de vint. eccles. cap. 10. non long ab initio, 10. 7.
has many golden sentences and worthy testimonies to this end and purpose.
One only I will here recount, where he has these words: Nemo mihi dicat, o
quid dixit Donatus, aut quid dixit Parmenianus, aut Pontius, aut quilibet
illorum: quia nec Catholicis episcopis consentiendum est, sicubi forte
falluntur, vt contra canonicas dei scripturas aliquid sentiant. Let no man say
to me, oh what said Donatus, or what said Parmenianus, or Pontius, or any of
them; because we must not consent even to Catholic bishops, if it so fall
out, that they err in any point, and speak against the canonical scriptures.

Saint Chrysostom, Chryso. in 2. Cor. 7. hom. 13. in fine.
surnamed the golden mouthed doctor, agrees uniformly unto the other fathers
in many places of his works. One only period shall for the present suffice,
where he has these golden words; Quomodo autem non absurdum est propter
pecunias alijs non credere, sed ipsas numerare and supputare, prorebus autem
amphoribus, aliorum sententiam sequi simpliciter; presertim, cum habeamus
omnium exactissimam trutinam, and gnomonem, acregulam, diuinarum inquam legum
assertionem. Ideo obsecro and (oro omnes vos, vt relinquatis quidnam hinc vel
illi videatur, deque his ascripturishaec etiam iniquirite, et veras diuitias
difcentes eas sectemur, vt and aeterna bona assequamur. How can it but be
absurd, that in money matters we will not credit others, but will tell the
money our selves; and for all that in affairs of greater importance, (which
concern the health and salvation of our souls) we can be content simply to
follow the judgment and opinion of others; especially, when we have the most
exact balance, squire and rule of all things, I mean the plain testimony of
Gods laws. I therefore pray and beseech you all, that you will reject what
this man or that man thinks, and search the truth out of the scriptures; that
learning true riches, we may follow them, and so attain eternal life. Behold
here (gentle reader) a most excellent and Christian exhortation, a very godly
and golden aduiso, given us by this holy father. If we will not (says he)
trust others to tell our money, but for surenesse will tell it our selves; much
less should we trust others, and much less depend upon their judgments and
sayings, in matters touching our salvation: but our selves must learn and know
such things, by diligent reading of the holy scriptures. Neither must we
believe what this or that man says, but what we find to be true, by painful
study of the holy scriptures. Now let us hear attentively, what the best
approved papists teach us, concerning this important and most weighty
controversy.

Franciscus a victoria, Victor. de augm. charitat. relect. 8. page 308,
a learned schoole-man and Spanish popish friar, yields his opinion in these
express words: Propter quas (opiniones) nullo modo debea us discedere, a
regula and synceritate scripturarum. For which opinions we may in no wise
depart from the rule and synceritie of the scriptures.

Again, Victor. de sacra. page 120.
in another place he has these words: Non est mihi certum, licet in hoc
conueniant omnes, quia in scriptura non habetur. I do not think it sure and
certain, although all writers agree thereunto, because it is not to be found
in the holy scriptures.

Melchior Canus, another learned schoole-doctor and renowned popish bishop,
confirms the same doctrine in these words: Canus de lecis, lib. 3. cap. vlt.
Fatemur non audiendos esse sacerdotes, nisi docuerint iuxta legem domiui. We
grant, that we must not give ear or hearken to the priests, except they shall
teach us according to Gods law.

Lo, the papists affirm plainly, that no doctrine is sound, or to be
received, but that only which is tried to be true by Gods word. Neither may we
believe the doctrine of any popish priest, unless it be agreeable to Gods law.
Now doubtless, if the Pope will be tried and judged by this doctrine, which
his best doctors have published to the world (the spirit of God having enforced
them thereunto) we shall soon agree in all controversies of religion. And
certes, this their doctrine is so certain and evident, that the Jesuit
Bellarmine sings the same song with them; which my self could not easily
have believed, if I had not read his own testimony in his own book. Bellar.
de conc. lib. 2. cap. 2. in fine.
These are his express words: Sine dubio singuli episcopi errare possunt, and
aliquando errant, and inter se quandoque dissentiunt, vt nesciamus quisnam
eorum sequendus sit. It is without all doubt, that all bishops severally may
err, and sometime do err, and do so disagree among themselves, that we
cannot in the world tell which of them we may safely follow. Thus you see even
by the Jesuits verdict, that in the popish Church, all their bishops do so
err, and sometimes so dissent one from another, that no papist can tell indeed
which of them it is best to follow. To which doctrine I will very willingly
subscribe, aduising this Jesuit and all other Iesuited papists to remember well
this doctrine, and not to hang their souls henceforth upon their iarring and
doting popish fathers; whom (as their dear Jesuit and renowned Cardinal
Bellarmine tells them) they may not safely follow. And least the Jesuit or
some for him shall answer me or say in his defense, That albeit all popish
bishops may err severally, and dissent among themselves, as is already said;
yet can they not err, when they are called together in a synod or counsel,
and the same confirmed by the Pope. This is all doubtless that posibly can be
said in defense of popish doctrine: And consequently, if I shall once prove
this to be a rotten foundation, then must all popish buildings raised upon the
same, fall down, and be even with the ground. Mark (gentle Reader) my sincere
reply, which I shall pithyly and plainly set down in this behalf. Wherein
for perspicuitie sake, I will proceed by way of conclusions.

The first Conclusion.
The Pope was never present at the counsels in the East Churches, by himself
and in his own person. This conclusion is freely confessed by the Jesuit
Bellarmine, Bellar. de conc. lib. 1. cap. 19.
who alleges two reasons for the Popes absence: The one forsooth, because it
was not convenient, that the head should follow the members: The other, because
the emperor would ever sit in the highest place. Out of whose words, I must
needs note two important points by the way: The one, that in the ancient
Church the highest place in the counsels, was ever reserved to the emperor:
The other, that the East Churches did never acknowledge the Popes primacie,
which he this day arrogantly challenges over all kingdoms and regalities. To
which twain, this pleasant adiunct perforce must be annexed, viz. that our
humble father the Pope (who calls himself hypocritically seruus seruorum
dei) would never come to the counsels, because forsooth he could not endure to
see the emperor sitting in the highest place.

The second Conclusion.
The Pope staying at home himself, sends his legates to the counsels, to
supply his place, to whom for all that he cannot commit his authority. This
conclusion must needs seem strange to a great many; but I will confirm it
with the testimony of such a worthy and renowned papist, that all whosoever
shall once hear or read it, cannot but give credit to the same.

Melchior Canus is the man, from whose pen I received it; the case is evident,
Canus lib. 5. de authoritat. cone. cap. 5. page 102.
these are his words: Decreta quae a legato contra sedis Apostolicae
traditionem approbantur, non habent Romanae ecclesiae authoritatem; nec aliter
se habent, quam si a concilio sieve legatis prodnissent. Sequitur; solidam
auctoritatem quam in confirmandis and fratribus and dogmatibus Petrus habet, in
legatos transfer non potest. The decrees which the legate shall approve
against the tradition of the Church of Rome, have no authority from the Church
of Rome; neither are they of any more force, than if they had proceeded from
the counsel without the consent of the legates. The sound authority which
Peter has in confirming his brethren and decrees, he cannot transfer unto
his legates. These are the express words of Canus, that worthy bishop, and
strong pillar of popish doctrine. Out of whose words I note first, that decrees
of counsels be of no force, when they have not the consent of the Popes
legates. Secondly, that the decrees of counsels, even when they have the
consent of the legates, are of no force at all, if the legates shall agree to
any thing which is against the Popes mind. Thirdly, that the Pope cannot
translate or give his authority unto the legates. And consequently, that the
Pope abuses the whole world shamefully, when he calls together all bishops
in the Christian world, to decide and determine controversies in religion; and
for all that, will approve nothing that they do or decree, unless it be
agreeable to that which himself decrees apart in his chair at home.

The third Conclusion.
General popish counsels in these our days are even as a nose of wax; and
the decrees thereof are as uncertain as the wind. I prove this conclusion by
very strong and irrefragable reasons. The Jesuit Bellarmine has these words:
Nos dicimus, Bellar. de council. lib. 1. cap. 18. to. 1.
concessum episcoporum in concilijs legitimis esse verum indicum concessum; and
little decreta and leges, necessario sequendas. We say, that the consistory of
bishops in lawful counsels, is the true assembly of judges; and that their
decrees and laws must be observed of necessity.

But in another place the same Bellarmine sings another song in these
express words: Idem enim est, Bellar. de council. lib. 2. cap. 11.
sieve pontifex express concilium reprobet, sieve concilium agat contra
pontificis sententiam. For it is all one, whether the Pope disanull the
counsel expressly, or the counsel do against the Popes mind.

Again, the same Bellarmine in another place avouches, that the greater part
of voices must bear the sway in counsels. These are his own words: Non potest
fieri, Bellar. de council. lib. 1. cap. 21.
vt aliquando ad finem controuersiaru^ deueniatur, nisi detur locus maiori
parti suffragiorum. It cannot be, that there should ever be made an end of
controversies, except the greater part of voices may have the upper hand.

Again in another place, Bellarm. de conc. lib. 2. cap. 11.
he has these words; Est autem verumdecretum concilij, quod fit a maiori
part; alioqui nullum esset legitimum concilij decretum, cum semper aliqui
dissentiant. It is the true decree of the council, which has the consent of
the greater part: for otherwise there should be no lawful decree made at all,
seeing some do evermore dissent.

This notwithstanding, their famous bishop Melchior Canns, Canus de locis lib.
5. cap. 5. page 164.
does roundly tell us another tale. These are his express words. Non itaque
quod in humanis conccssionibus fit, plurimum apud nos sententia praeualet; and
paulo post; non enim numero haec indicantur, sed pondere: pondus autem
concilijs dat summi pontificis, and grauitas and authoritas. Quae si adsit,
centum patres satis sunt, sin desit, nulli sint satis, sint quamlibet plurimi.
It is not therefore with us, as it is in humane assemblies, where more voices
ever do prevail. For these matters are not to be judged by number, but by
weight. And the councels receive their weight, from the gravity and authority
of the Pope. Thus writes our popish bishop Canus. Now who sees not, that the
decrees of popish councels, are as uncertain as the wind? For the Jesuit
tells us, that more voices must needs prevail. But Melchior their renowned
bishop, is of another mind: that be they many, be they few, what part soever
the Pope likes, that same shall be true. For after the fathers have fasted
long, prayed, much, consulted gravely, deliberated maturely, decreed soberly,
commanded strictly, and accursed severely; neither others, nor yet themselves
can tell, what shall be of force therein. For all must be as shall best content
the Popes humor, sitting right stately in his chair at Rome.

The fourth Conclusion.
No bishop can in these our days have voices in councels, but such as will
first swear obedience to the Pope, and promise to defend his cannon law. This
conclusion though it contain gross absurdities, yet is it so clear, as
Bellarmine that Iesuitical Cardinal cannot deny the same, Bellarm. de conc.
lib. 1. cap. vit.
These be his words. Istud iuramentum non tollit episcoporum libertatem, quae
in concilijs necessaria est. Iurant enim se fore obedientes summo pontifici,
quod intilligitur donec pontifex est, and dum iubet ea quae secundum Deum and
sacros canones iubere potest: sed not iurant se non dicturos quod sentiunt in
concilio, vel se no^ posituros eum, si haereticum esse conuincant. This oath
takes not away the liberty of bishops, which in councels is necessary. For
they swear that they will be obedient to the Pope; which is to be understood,
so long as he is Pope, and while he commands those things, which he may
command agreeable to God, and to the holy cannons; but they swear not, that
they will not speak what they think in the council, or that they will not
depose the Pope if they prove him to be an heretic.

Thus writes Bellarminus, whose only testimony is most sufficient in all
popish affairs: as who is the Popes sworn and tenderly beloved vassal, and
whose books are dedicated to the Pope himself. Out of his words I note
first, that all clergy men admitted to give voices in councels, are sworn
simply wholly to obey the Popes constitutions.

Secondly, that the said persons are sworn to believe, that the Pope cannot
err in his judicial decrees of faith and manners; that no councels are of
force, without the Popes confirmation; that councels confirmed by him, are
aproued by the holy Ghost; that he can excommunicate and depose, all emperors,
and empresses, all Kings and Queens, all bishops and archbishops in the
Christian world; that he can by his pardons deliver all souls out of
purgatory, and go himself to the devil. For all these and a thousand like
things, are strictly comprised in his canons, and consequently in their most
lamentable oath.

Thirdly, that they are sworn to admit his decrees, who (as they freely grant)
may for all that be an heretic.

Fourthly, that they are sworn to reverence and obey his judgment in all
matters of faith, whom they may judge and depose for heresy.

Fifthly, that their fundamental article, by which they make the Pope judge
over all controversies; is quite overthrown, and turned vpside down, in this
Bellarminus his explication. For when he says (While he commands etc.) he
grants every bishop freedom to examine and judge, when the Pope commands
things agreeable to God and the canons. Which liberty, if the papists would
constantly perform, all true Christians and perfect Catholics, would soon
agree with them. For none that believe aright, will deny obedience to the
Pope, when he preaches, teaches, or commands any thing which is agreeable
to God and holy canons. But good Christians finding his canons to be disholy,
and his decrees to be against God; do think as Bellarmine here teaches them,
that they are not bound to obey him. And that the reader may fully understand
the abomination of the oath which all popish bishops swear unto the Pope; I
will here set down the express words, as I find the^ verbatim in the Popes
own decretals; Decret. libr. 2. tit. 24. cap. 4.
Ego N. episcopus, ab hac hora fidelis ero S. Petro, sanctaeque Romanae
ecclesiae, dominoque meo papae N. eiusque successoribus canonice intrantibus.
Sequitur; papatu^ Romanae ecclesiae, and regulas sanctorum patrum adiutor ero,
ad defendendum and retinendum contra omnes homines; sic me Deus adiuuet, and
haec sancta euangelia. I ( John Watson) bishop, will be faithful from this day
forward, to Saint Peter and to the holy Church of Rome, and to my L. (
Boniface) the Pope, and to his successors elected canonically; and I will be an
helper to keep and defend against all people, the Popedom or papal
sovereignty, and the rules of the holy fathers; so God me help, and the holy
Gospel.

Lo here gentle reader, open and flat rebellion is required, and by
evangelical oath confirmed, of subjects against their sovereigns. For, the
bishops of every country, are the subjects of the kings of the same countries;
and yet do they swear to defend the Popes usurped jurisdiction, and most
bloody tyranny, against their natural dread sovereigns. For they swear to
defend the Popes usurped authority, against all people, without exception.
Which his diabolical usurped primacy, (as I have proved at large else where)
extends it self to the translation of empires, kingdoms, and regalities.

These conclusions being well marked and remembered, the answer to the mighty
objection, which is as the foundation of popery, will be plain and easy,
viz. that popish bishops may as well err, when they are assembled together in
a general council, as when they preach, teach, or write asunder. For first,
the Pope himself will not show his face in any council, because the emperor
must sit above him, as is evident by the first conclusion. Seconly, when the
Pope sends his legates to councels to supply his place, he does but delude
the world by that fact; seeing he cannot impart his authority unto them, as by
the second conclusion is apparent. Thirdly, popish councels and synodes in
these after ages, are flexible as a nose of wax, and as uncertain as the
weathercocke, as is clearly proved in the third conclusion. Fourthly, no
bishops of late ages can have voices in popish councels, but such as will first
swear obedience to the Pope, and promise by oath to defend his usurped power,
and most execrable canon law, as by the fourth conclusion will appear. Fifthly,
that decree is true and just, which is concluded by the gerater part of the
bishops there assembled; and yet the Pope sitting at Rome in his chair, will
reject such decrees at his good pleasure, and define the sentence of fewer
voices to be of force. This observation is evidently confirmed, by the due
proofs of the third conclusion. Sixthly the decrees of councels must needs be
obeyed, as the papists tell us; and yet the Pope may reject them, and disanull
them at his pleasure, even dreaming in his chair at home, or riding abroad on
his white palfrey. This to be so is evident to every one, that shall seriously
peruse the third conclusion. Yea, our papists of Rhemes in their commentary
upon the new testament, Rhemes test. in act. 15.
tell us plainly and roundly; that the determinaon of councels is needless,
because the Popes judgment alone is infalliable. Wherefore they ad this
clause to salve the Popes proceedings, That councels are called not for
necessity sake, but for the better contentation of the weak. I therefore
conclude against the popish supposed bulwark, that seeing all bishops may err
severally, as the Jesuit Bellarmine has taught us; and seeing also that the
constitutions in popish councels are nothing else in deed, but the bare decrees
of one only bishop, as is already proved; it follows of necessite, and
cannot be denied, that all bishops in the popish Church may err egregiously;
and that as well jointly as severally, as is to be seen at large in my Golden
balance of trial: to which treatise I refer the reader for better
satisfaction, both touching the Popes double person, and concerning his private
and public errors, In the interim, I must needs tell the papists; that a
general council is above the Pope; that a general council has power to
depose the Pope; that a general council did de facto depose John the 12 long
sithence, and John the 13 of that name; as I have proved at large by sound
popish testimony, in my Anatomy of popish tyranny. And thus have I proved,
that the sole and only scripture inspired from heaven, is the infalliable rule
of truth; and that all traditions must be examined by the same, and then
addmitted when they be consonant thereunto, not otherwise: howsoever antiquity
be pretended in that behalf.

The fourth Proposition.
Popish unwritten traditions are so uncertain and doubtful, Ratio. prima.
that the best learned papists are at great contention about them, and cannot
possibly be accorded therein. For the proof of this proposition, it were
enough to call to mind that great and endless strife, which was in the Church
about 1400 years sithence, between Victor then Bishop of Rome and the bishops
of Asia. The controversy was among them, concerning the keeping of Easter.
Tradition apostolical was alleged earnestly, and both sides did stoutly
defend the same.

The same tradition was in controversy before Polycarpus the bishop of Smyrna,
Eusebius. li. 5. hist. cap. 23. and cap. 24. per totum.
and Anicetus the Bishop of Rome. But neither could Polycarpe persuade
Anicetus, nor Anicetus persuade Polycarpus; albeit they both agreed as dear
friends. The story is set done at large, by Eusebius a learned father and most
famous historiographer. But Victor the Bishop of Rome dealt so furiously in
that controversy, that Ireneus and other bishops of Gallia, did sharply
reprove him for the same. What need more be said for the variety and
uncertainty of traditious: For first, the bishops that thought and taught thus
diversely of tradions, did all of them live within 200 years after Christ; at
which time the Church was in in good estate, and stained with very few or no
corruptions at all. Secondly, the one side doubtless, must needs be seduced
with false and unsound traditions: For apostolical doctrine was uniform and
constant, and could not possible be contrary to it self. Thirdly, Saint
Policarpe, Polycrates, and the other bishops, did in those days make no more
reckoning of the bishop of Romes opinion, than they did of another man's.
Fourthly, they all were so far from acknowledging the bishop of Rome, to be
the supreme head of the Church, and that he could not err; that they all with
uniform assent affirmed him to defend a gross error, and to hold a false
opinion; that they all reputed themselves his equals, touching government
ecclesiastical: that they all very sharply reproved him, and with might and
maine withstood his proceedings. Whereas this day, if any bishops,
magistrates, or other potentates in the world, (where popery bears the sway)
should do the like; they might all roundly be excommunicated, and not only
deposed from their jurisdiction, but also be burnt with fire an faggot for
their pains. Fifthly, if Saint Polycarpe had cause in his time, being the
flourishing age of the Church, to doubt of romish traditions; much more
doubtless have we cause, at this day to stand in doubt thereof; in these
doolefull days I say, in which iniquity has gotten the upper hand; in which
the bishops of Rome have brought an huge multitude of errors into the Church,
and seduced a great part of the Christian world.

Another controversy touching traditions, Ratio secunda. Chrisost. hom. 47. in
mat. col. 405.
is for and about the keeping of Lent. For albeit Saint Chrysostom tell us
plainly, that Christ did not command us to imitate his fast, but to learn of
him to be humble and meek in heart; yet do the papists this day mordicus
defend it, to be an apostolical tradition; yea, many of them are so blinded
and besotted with unsavory traditions and superstitious illusions, that they
deem it a greater sin to eat flesh in Lent, than to commit adultery,
murder, or perjury.

Of this unwritten tradition, falsely supposed apostolical, Eusebius. lib. 5. hist.
cap. 24.
Eusebius Caesariensis, a famous historigrapher of great antiquity, writes in
this manner. Non solum de die paschae agiter controuersia, sed and de ipsa
specie ieiunij. Quidam enim putant vno tantum die obseruari debere ieunium;
alij, doubus; alij vero, pluribus; nonnulli etiam, quadraginta. Quae varietas
obseruantiae non nunc primum, neque nostris temporibus coepit, sed multo ante
nos: ex illis vt opinor, qui non simpliciter quod ab initio traditu^ est,
tenentes, in alium morem, vel per negligentiam, vel per imperitiam, postmodum
dicidere. The controversy is not only touching the day of Easter, but alos
concerning the very king or manner of fasting. For some think, they must only
fast one day, some two days, others more days; and there be that think, they
should fast forty. Which variety of fasting did not now begin first,
neither yet in our days, but long before our time; I think by them, who
keeping not simply what they received from the beginning, did afterward fall to
another manner, either of negligence, or else of ignorance.

Socrates in like manner reports hystorically, that they differed no less in
their manner of eating, than they did in their days of abstaining. For some
(says he) would eat no living thing; othersome of living things, ate only
fish; Histor. tripart. lib. 9. cap. 38.
some together with fish, did eat also birds; but some ate only bread, and
others at night ate all kind of meats without difference. Yea, he tells us
in the same place, that the Romans fast three weeks before Easter, besides the
Sabbath and the Lords day. And that the Illyrians and Alexandrians do fast six
weeks, and yet do they all term their fasts Lent. By which testimonies every
man may easily perceive, how doubtful and uncertain unwritten traditions be.

Thirdly, Ratio tertia.
there was another endless controversy concerning traditions, between the
Greeks and the Latins; whether the Eucharist ought to be celebrated in leauened
or in unleavened bread.

Fourthly, Irenaeus a very ancient father, affirms out of Apostolical
tradition; Ratio quarta. Irenae. lib. 2. cap. 39.
that Christ was forty years old, when he suffered his bitter passion. Papias
another father, says upon the like tradition, that Christ should reign 1000
years after the general resurrection. Eusebius. lib. 3. cap. vlt. Andrad. de
trad. lib. 2. p. 126
Basilius another holy father says, that Zacharias the son of Barachias,
slain between the altar and the temple, was father to S. John the baptist.
These absurdities the papists are this day ashamed to hold; and yet did these
fathers receive them by Apostolical so supposed tradition, as their own famous
doctor Andradius grants willingly.

Fifthly, popish tradition tells us, Ratio quinta.
that all the bishops of Rome one after another have taught succesiuely the
selfsame doctrine with S. Peter. Howbeit their own dear doctor and religious
friar Nicholaus de Lyra, avouches plainly, roundly, and boldly, to the whole
world, that many bishops of Rome have fallen away from the faith, and become
flat Apostataes. And least this my narration be thought strange unto many, that
our holy fathers the Popes should be Atheists or Apostataes, and that their own
dear brethren, in high esteem among them, would never so write of them; I
will deal plainly in this important point, and after my wonted manner set
down his own express words. Lyranus in cap. 16. mat.
Thus does he write: Ex quo patet, quod ecclesia non consistit in hominibus
ratione potestatis vel dignitatis, ecclesiasticae vel secularis; quia multi
principes, et summi pontifices, et alij inscriores, inuenti sunt a side
apostatasse. Propter quod ecclesia consistit in illis personis, in quibus est
notitia vera, et confessio fidei et veritatis. Whereby it is evident, that the
Church does not consist in men by reason of power or dignity, either
ecclesiastical or secular; because many princes and Popes, and others of the
inferior sort, are found to have been apostataes, and to have swarued wholly
from faith. For which cause, the Church consists in those persons, in whom,
there is true knowledge, and confession of the faith and of the truth.

Thus writes this learned papist (whom their own so supposed martyr sir
Thomas Moore called a great clearke, as he was indeed) whose words are well
worthy to be engraven in marble with golden letters. For by his judgment it
is clear and evident, that not they who sit in S. Peter's chair, are ever the
true and lawful successors of S. Peter, but they only and solely that confess
and preach S. Peter's faith and doctrine: as also that their received maxim (
vbi Papa, ibi Roma; vbi Roma, ibi ecclesia catholica) is false, vain, and
frivolous. We therefore this day impugn nothing in popish proceedings, but
the selfsame indeed, which famous popish doctors reproved before our time, and
that in their public writings published freely to the whole world. Which
thing, whosoever will seriously ponder as my self have done, that man must
perforce detest and abhor all popish superstitious trumperie. But of this
argument I have discoursed at large in my book of Motives.

Sixthly, Ratio sexta.
popish tradition tells us, that the blessed virgin Marie, the true mother
of true God and true man, was conceived without original sin, and that the
bishop of Rome did for that end ordain a feastiuall day of her conception, to
be kept upon the eight of December. But by your leave, Aquinas p. 3. q. 14.
art. 3. ad primum. Bernard. epist. 174. p. 207.
Aquinas their own Angelical Doctor affirms resolutely, that she was
conceived in original sin. Yea, their other holy doctor and dear friar
Bernard does very sharply reprove the Cathedral Church of Lions, because
they observed the feastiuitie of the conception of the blessed virgin; and the
calls that their practice, the novelty of presumption, the mother of
temeritie, the sister of superstition, and the daughtet of leuitie. That done,
he adds these words: Hoc non est virginem honor are, sed honori detrahere.
This is not to give honor to the virgin, A. D. 1475.
but to take honor from her. Yet Pope Sixtus the fourth did institute the
feast of the conception.

Seventhly, Ratio sept.
popish tradition tells us, that the emperor Constantine, worthily surnamed
the Great, was baptized at Rome in a font, there remaining to this day, my self
have seen the same. Howbeit, Hieronymus, Eusebius, Socrates, Theodoritus,
Sozomenus, Cassiodorus, and Pomponius, do all affirm very constantly, that he
was baptized at Nichomedia.

Eighthly, Ratio octaua.
popish tradition has brought flat idolatry into the Church, teaching to
adore them as saints and Gods friends, who were known heretics, and professed
enemies to God and his Church. This to be so, their own dear friend, and
brother Platina will tell them, when he affirms the dead corpse of Hermannus
to have been worshipped for a saints relics at Ferrara, Platina in vita
Bonifacij octaui, vide Martinum so. onum* page 237. in append.
the space of twenty years together; who for all that was an heretic, as
the same Platina avouches. Where two special things are to be observed
seriously: first, the uncertainty of unwritten traditions: secondly, the
danger in giving credit to the same. Now, it remains for the better
contentation of the reader, to make answer to such objections in defense of
popish traditions, as the papists have ever in their mouths, and boast of them,
as if they were insoluble.

The first Objection.
We do not know, which books of the scripture are canonical, and which are
not, but only by the unwritten traditions of the Church: And yet is this a
matter of faith, and very necessary unto salvation.

The answer.
This is that mighty objection, wherein the papists glory and boast beyond
all measure; and say more rashly than wisely, that it can never be truly
answered. I therefore shall desire the gentle reader to ponder well my words,
and then to judge of the matter, as right reason shall prescribe. My answer is
this. First, there is great ods between the primitive Church and the Church of
late days. Durand. in 3. s. d. 24 quaest. 1.
Which to be so, the famous popish doctor Durandus will contest with me. For
the Apostles (as Durand says wisely) heard Christ's doctrine, saw Christ's
miracles, and were replenished with the holy ghost; and consequently, they must
needs be fit witnesses of all that Christ did and taught. But these adjuncts
cannot be rightly ascribed to the late bishops of Rome and their cursed
Iesuited brood. Secondly, the old testament was delivered by the Jews, and
confirmed by Christ and his Apostles; and therefore as the papists admit that
tradition, and withal do reject their other manifold unwritten traditions,
which the Jews in their Talmud affirm to be of Moses; Bellarm. tom. 1. col.
187.
even so do we receive this tradition, and reject all unwritten traditions
contrary to the same. Thirdly, the books of the new testament are but an
exposition of the law and the Prophets; Vide Aug. tom. 6. page 184.
as I have already proved in the first proposition of this present article:
And consequently, it may be discerned and tried by the same; Act. 17. v. 11.
as the godly Bereans tried S. Paul's preaching. Fourthly, when we affirm all
things necessary for our salvation, to be comprised and contained in the
scriptures; we then speak of them, as they are acknowledged and agreed upon,
both among the Jews for the old Testament, in the which the new is
comprehended; and jointly for the old and new, throughout the Christian world.
And so this tradition is not excepted, but virtually implied in our
affirmation. Fifthly, the scriptures canonical are discerned from not
canonical even of themselves, like as light is discerned from darkness,
hardness from softness, and sweetness from bitterness. Psalm. 119. v. 105,
2. Pet. 1. v. 19.
Thy word o Lord (says the Prophet) is a lantern to my feet, and a light unto
my paths. We have a right sure word of prophecy (says S. Peter) whereunto
if ye take heed, as unto a light that shines in a dark place, ye do well,
until the day dawne, and the day star arise in your hearts. Yet most true it
is, that the faithful only can discern it. 2 Cor. 5. v. 3.
For as the Apostle says, If Christ's gospel be hid, it is hid in them that
perish: in whom the God of this world has blinded the minds of them which
believe not, least the light of the Gospel of the glory of Christ should
shine unto them. And the same Apostle elsewhere teaches us, 1. Cor. 2. v. 15.
that the spiritual man judges all things. Which text, two famous papists,
Lyranus and Carthusianus do expound, 1. Ioh. 2. v. 27.
of things partaining to our salvation. S. John is consonant to S. Paul,
affirming, that the unction which the faithful have received, does teach them
all things. Yea, Christ himself says, That his sheep do hear his voice.
Ioh. 10. 3. ibid. v. 4.
And he adds, that they follow him, because they know his voice. But
doubtless, if Christ's sheep, that is, the faithful and Gods elect people,
do know his voice, and therefore do follow him; then by a necessary
consequence, they can know Christ speaking to them in the holy scripture, and
so can discern holy writ from profane fables or stories, Melchior Canus a
famous papist, makes this case clear; his words are set down in my Golden
balance.

Sixthly, the formal object of our faith is veritas prima, the first verity,
De diuinis nominib. cap. 7.
or God himself, as Dionysius Areopagita. tells us. Yea, Aquinas that famous
papist surnamed their angelical doctor, teaches the self same doctrine. Non
enim fides inquit, diuina alicui assentitur, nisi quia est a Deo reuelatum.
Aquinas, 2. 2. q. 1. art. 1. 0.
For divine faith (says Aquinas) will not yield assent to any thing, unless
it be revealed of God. Which truth of doctrine, Saint Austen confirms in
these golden words; Augustine. in epist. Ioannis, tract. 3. tom. 9. col. 408.
Iam hic videte magnum sacramentum fratres, sonus verborum nostrorum aures
percutit, magister intus est. Nolite putare quenquam hominem aliquid discere ab
homine. Ad monere possumus per strepitum vocis nostra: si non sit intus qui
doceat, inanis fit strepitus noster. Quam multi hine indocti exituri sunt?
quantum ad (...) pertinet, omnibus locutus sum, sed quibus vnctio illa intus
non loquitur, quos spiritus sanstus intus non docet, indocti redeunt.
Magisteria forinsecus adiutoria quaedam sunt and admonitiones, Cathedram in
coelo habet qui corda docet. Sequitur; interior Magister est qui docet,
Christus docet, inspiratio ipsius docet. Vbi illius inspiratio and illius
vnctio non est, forinsecus inanit^r perstrepunt verba. Now brethren, behold
here a great sacrament; the sound of our words pierces your ears, but the
master that teaches you is within. Think not, that man learneth any thing of
man: we (preachers) may admonish by the sound of words; but if he be not
within that teaches, in vain is our sound; how many will go hence untaught?
For mine own part, I have spoken to all; but to whom that unction speaks not
inwardly, whom the holy Ghost teaches not within, they go home untaught, as
they came. The outward teachings are some helps and admonitions; but he
sits in his chair in heaven, that teaches the heart, The master is within
that teaches, it is Christ that teaches, it is his inspiration that
instructs. Where his inspiration and his unction is not, there the outward
noise of words is in vain: Thus writes this ancient and learned father, with
many more words to the like effect. By whose doctrine we may learn
sufficiently, if nothing else were said: that howsoever men teach, how soever
Paul plant, or Apollo water, yet will no increase follow, unless God give the
same. I therefore conclude, that we do not believe this book or that book to
be canonical, because this man or that man, or the Church says so; but that
the scripture is (...); that it has in it self that dignity, which is worthy
to have credit; that the declaration of the Church, does not make us believe
the scripture, but is only an outward help to bring us thereunto; and that we
therefore indeed believe the scripture, and this or that book to be
canonical, because God does inwardly teach us and persuade our hearts so to
believe. For certes if we should believe, that this or that book is
canonical scripture, because the Church says so; then should the formal
object of our faith, and the vltimate term into which our faith is resolved,
be man, and not prima veritas, or God himself, as Areopagita and Aquinas teach
us. And it will not help the papists to reply out of Saint Augustine, That he
would not have believed the Gospel, unless the authority of the Church had
moved him thereunto. For S. Austens words are these; August. contra epistol.
Manich. tom. 6. cap. 5. page 79.
Nisi authoritas ecclesiae me commoueret. I would not have believed the
Gospel, if the authority of the Church had not jointly moved me thereunto.
For we must note, that there is a great difference between mouere and
commouere. Mouere is to move absolutely, and a part by it self; but commouere
is to move respectively and together with another thing. So Saint Austens
meaning is nothing else indeed but that the authority of the Church did
outwardly concur with the inward motion of the holy Ghost, to bring him to
the faith of the Gospel. Now, Saint Austens meaning is this and and none other;
viz. that he makes much more account of the universal Church, than of
Manichaeus and his accomplices; because the Church did first move him to hear
the Gospel preached, and to give some credit to the same. I say (some credit)
because the Churches authority did only move him to believe the Gospel, fide
humana, non fide diuina: with humane faith, not with faith divine. For this
divine faith, with which we Christians do believe the Gospel, proceeds not
from the outward teaching of man, but from the inward instruction of the holy
Ghost, as I have out of the same Austen already proved. Yea, the self same
father declares in the same chapter, that he speaks of himself as being a
Manichee, not as being a Christian. What (faith Saint Austen) would thou say
to him, that should answer thee, I do not believe it, but for the authority
of the Church? And this sense is confirmed, because S. Austen confesses in the
very same chapter, that the authority of the Gospel is above the authority of
the Church. Cap. 5. cont. epist. fundam.
And in the chapter aforegoing, after he has told us what kept him in the
catholic Church, and there has reckoned up the consent of peoples and
nations; authority begun with miracles, nourished with hope, increased with
charity, established with antiquity: succession of priests from Saint Peter's
seat, and the name of Catholic; he adds, that though these things be great
motives to keep him in the unity of the Church, yet must the truth of the
scriptures be preferred before them all. In regard whereof, he promises to
give more credit to Manichaeus than to the Church, and to yield unto his
doctrine, if he shall be able to prove it out of the scripture: In the mean
while he must give him leave to prefer the credit of the catholic Church
before his bare words, especially, seeing the Church, but not Manichaeus, was
the outward means and external help, that brought him to the faith of the
Gospel.

The second Objection.
The baptism of infants is a matter of faith, but not contained in the holy
scriptures, ergo not all things necessary for man's salvation are therein to be
found.

The Answer.
I answer, that it is contained in the scriptures, and I prove it by sundry
reasons. The first argument is drawn from the covenant. For infants being
within the covenant, ought not to be debarred from the sign and seal thereof.
Genesis 17. v. 7.
I will establish my covenant between me and thee, and thy seed after thee in
their generations, for an everlasting covenant, to be God to thee, and to thy
seed after thee. Genesis 15.
Again, you are the children of the Prophets, and of the covenant which God
made to our fathers, Genesis 22.
saying to Abraham, even in thy seed shall all the families of the earth be
blessed. Act. 3. v. 25.
Again, repent, and be every one of you b^ptised in the name of Jesus Christ,
Act. 2. v. 38, 39.
for the remission of sins, and ye shall receive the gift of the holy Ghost.
For the promise was made to you, and to your children, and to all that are a
far off, even so many as the Lord our God shall call. Romans 11. v. 16.
Again, if the first fruits be holy, the whole lump also is holy: And if the
root be holy, the boughs also. Matt. 19. v. 14.
Again, suffer the young children, and stay them not from coming unto me: for
to such belongs the kingdom of heaven And where Saint Matthew has little
children, Luke 18. v. 17.
then S. Luke has, (...); infants, which can neither understand, 1. Cor. 7. v.
14.
nor come. Again, your children are holy young children therefore must be
baptized.

The second argument is drawn from the analogy of the figure of the old
testament. For circumcision to which baptism succeeded, Coloss 2. v. 11.
did pertain to both ages, as well to young as to old. In whom also ye are
circumcised with circumcision made without hands, by putting off the body of
the flesh subject to sin, by the circumcision of Christ: buried with him in
baptism, in whom ye are also risen again through the faith of the operation
of God, who raised him up from the dead. Thus says Saint Paul: by whose words
we may learn sufficiently, that baptism did succeed to circumcision, for the
same end, use, and purpose: viz. that by it we may, putting off the body of
sinful flesh, be buried together with Christ, and rise again with him through
faith.

The third argument is drawn, from the practice of the Church. Mat. 28. v. 19.
For the Apostles of our Lord Jesus were commanded to baptize all sorts of
people withour exception. Go therefore, and teach all nations, baptising them
in the name of the father, and of the son, and of the holy Ghost. Again, we
read in the history Apostolical, that the whole house of Lydia was baptized,
Act. 16. v. 15.
neither young nor old being excepted. Act. 16. v. 33.
Again, we may find in the acts, that the keeper of the prison at Philippos
was baptized, and all they of his household incontinent. 1. Cor. 1. v. 16.
Again in another place, we may read, that the whole family of Stepha^^s was
baptized, not one at all exempted.

The Objection.
Infants have no faith, ergo they may not be baptized.

The Answer.
I deny the antecedent, because their faith and profession is this; to be
borne of the faithful, in the unity of the Catholic Church. Again though
they have not actual faith, Mar. 9 v. 42.
yet have they faith fundamentallie, and by inclination. In which sense our
Lord Jesus does reckon them among the faithful, when he says in this manner;
Whosoever shall offend one of these little ones that believe in me, it is
better for him if a millstone were hanged about his neck, and he were cast into
the sea. Infants therefore, when they are baptized in the Church for faithful,
are then deemed to believe after their manner. Who, albeit they have not faith
in act, yet have they the spirit, and virtue, or foundation of faith, by Gods
operation in them. Neither ought this thing to seem strange unto us. For, if
the infants of the wicked ones have infidelity and impiety, though not in act
yet in inclination by nature, as writers grant; then truly may it be said,
that the infants of the faithful have faith and piety, though not in act, yet
in inclination by grace. For grace cannot be of less force through Christ,
than nature through the fall of Adam. for God says plainly; Genesis 17. v. 7.
I will be thy God, and the God of thy seed after thee.

The third Objection.
We believe the trinity of persons in unity of substance, but this is not
in the scripture, Ergo.

The answer.
I deny the assumption; for the trinity of persons is plainly avouched in the
holy Gospel, where it is thus written; Ioh. 14. v. 26.
But the comforter which is the holy Ghost, whom the Father will send in my
name, he shall teach you all things. Thus says our Lord Jesus. In which words,
we see mention made of three distinct persons; first, of the Father, which
sends; secondly, of the holy Ghost, which is sent; thirdly, of the Son, in
whose name he is sent. 1. Ioh. 5. v. 7.
Again in another place it is thus written; There are three which bear
record in heaven, the Father, the Word, and the holy Ghost, and these three
are one Item Matthew. 28. verse 19.

The fourth Objection.
It is not to be found in the holy scrpture, that Christ is consubstantiall,
and of the same substance which the Father. Ergo.

The Answer.
The antecedent is false. Zachar. cap. 13. v. 7.
For first, in the prophecy of Zacharias I find these words; arise O sword,
upon my shepherd, and upon the man that is my fellow, says the Lord of
hosts. Esa. 9. 6.
Secondly, in many places of the new testament. Joh. 10. 30.
First, in these words; I and my Father are one. Secondly, Ioh. 10. 38.
in these words; If ye believe not me, believe the works; that ye may know and
believe, that the Father is in me, Phillip. 2. 6.
and I in him. Thirdly, in these words; Who being in the form of God, Heb. 1.
3.
thought it no robbery to be equal with God. Io. 1. 2.
Fourthly, Mat. 1. 21. and v. 23.
in these words; She shall bring forth a son, and thou shall call his name
Jesus; for he shall save his people from their sins. For this respect says
holy Athanasius, Athanas. de decret. Nic. synod. tom. 2.
that albeit the words be not expressed in the scriptures, yet have they that
meaning which holy writ approoueth, Answer o papists, if ye can; if not,
repent for shame, and yield unto the truth.

The eight Article. Of the impossibility of keeping Gods commandments, in
popish sense.
TOuching this article, the reader must seriously observe with me this adiunct,
(in popish sense) because it is both emphaticall and of great moment. For I
will not affirm simply and absolutely, that Gods children can not keep his
commandments in a godly sense and Christian meaning; but this I constantly
deny, and at this present intend in God to prove the same effectually against
all Jesuits and Iesuited papists, That none have kept, do keep, or can keep
Gods commandments in popish sense and meaning. viz. that none are so pure,
holy, and free from sin, that they can stand with God in judgment, and
challenge eternal life, as of debt due unto them for their holy life. Mark
well gentle reader, my discourse; for I hope in God to hit the nail on the
head, and to set down that which will be as heavy to the papists heart, as a
piece of lead.

The Apostle tells us in plain and very express words, That the best livers
upon earth are sinners. In multis enim offendimus omnes. For we all offend in
many things. But certes, Jacob. 3. v. 2.
if it be true, as it is most true indeed, (for S. James being inspired with
the holy Ghost cannot lie) That the holy Apostles committed many sins; then
doubtless it is not in every ones power, to keep Gods commandments; neither
will it help the papists to distinguish after their wonted manner, of mortal
and venial sins. For, besides that I have proved already in the sixth
Article, that every sin is mortal in it own proper nature; both the Greek
word (...), which signifies the transgression of the law; and also the Hebrew
word (...), which signifies a declining from the right way, do evidently
convince the same. For it can never be truly said; that he performs and
keeps the law, which transgresses the law or swarueth from the same. It is
the truth which S. Paul alleges out of the law; Gal. 3. v. 10.
Cursed is every one that abides not in all things which are written in the
book of the law, to do them. It is also the truth, which S. James says; lac.
2. v. 10.
That whosoever keeps the whole law, and yet fails in one point, is become
guilty of all. To which may be added innumerable texts, both of the old and
new testament, that the best livers upon earth do sin, and transgress Gods
commandments. Holy Moses tells us in the first book of his Pentatench,
That when God saw that the wickedness of man was great on the earth, Genesis 6. v.
5.
and that all the imaginations of the thoughts of his heart were only evil
continually, then it repented God that he had made man on the earth. Job
tells us, That God found no stedfastnes in his Saints; Job. 15. v. 15. and
35. 5.
yea, he says farther, That the heavens are not clean in his sight. And he
adds these words; How much more is man abominable and filthy, which
drinks iniquity like water. The kingly Prophet says, that in Gods sight,
none that lives can be justified. Psalm, 143. v. 2.
Wise Solomon says, that no man living is able truly to say, Prou. 20. v. 9.
he is clean from sin. The same wise man says in like manner, that the just
man sins many times. Prou. 24. 16.
Esaias says, that all our righteousness is as filthy clouts. Esa. 64. 6
Esdras says, he was ashamed for his own sins, Esdr. 9. 6.
and for the sins of the people, because their trespass was grown up unto
heaven. Romans 3. v. 9. 10. 12. 19. 23.
Saint Paul shows at large, that all men are sinners, and that no man is able
to be justified by his works. All says he, both Jews and Gentiles are under
sin. There is none righteous, no not one: they have all gone out of the way;
they have all been made altogether unprofitable: there is none that does good,
no not one. Now we know, that whatsoever the law says, it says to them which
are under the law, that every mouth may be stopped, and all the world be
subject to the judgment of God. There is no difference, for all hane sinned,
and are deprived of the glory of God, and are justified freely by his grace,
through the redemption that is in Christ Jesus. Again in another place, he
has these words: Romans 10. v. 3.
For they being ignorant of the righteousness of God, and going about to
stablish their own righteousness, have not submitted themselves to the
rightenesse of God: the case is clear and evident. For as the Prophet says,
Psalm. 130. v. 3. 4.
If God should mark our iniquities, and reward us after our deeds, none of us
were able to endure it.

Now, let us hear S. Austens grave sentence, concerning this controversy.
August. de doctrina Christ. lib. 1. ca. 22. to. 3.
Diliges inquit, proximum tuum sicut teipsum: Deum vero ex toto cord, and ex
tota anima; and ex tota mente, vt omnes cogitationes tuas, and omnem vitam, and
omnem intellectu^ in illu^ conferas, a quo habes ea ipsa quae confers. Cum
aute^ ait, toto cord, tota anima, tota mente, nullam vitae nostrae partem
reliquit, quae vacare debeat, and quasi locum dare, vt alia ve velit frui. Thou
shall love thy neighbor, says he, as thy self; but God with thy whole heart,
with thy whole soul, and with thy whole mind; that thou may co^ferre upon
him all thy thoughts, and all thy life, and all thine understanding, of whom
thou have received the self same which thou do confer or give. But when
he says, with all thy heart, with all thy soul, with all thy mind, he has
left no part of our life which may be vacant, and as it were give place, to
have fruition of any other thing.

The same Saint Austen says again in another place; That this commandment
of loving God with all our heart, cannot be perfecty fulfilled of any man in
this life: These are his words; August. de perfect iustit. ratioc. 16. col.
969. tom. 7.
In quae plenitudinc charitatis praeceptum illud implebitur: Diliges dominu^
Deum tuu^ ex toto cord tuo, and ex tota anima tua, and ex tota mente tua. Nam
cum est adhuc aliquid carnalis concupiscentiae, quod vel continendo froenetur,
non omnimodo ex tota anima diligitur Deus. Non enim caro sine anima
concupiscit, quamuis caro concupiscere dicatur, quia carn aliter anima
concupiscit. Tunc erit iustus sine vllo omnino peccato, quia nulla lex erit in
me^bris eius repugnans legi mentis eius, sed prorsus toto cord, tota anima,
tota mente diligit Deum, quod est primum summumque praeceptum. Cur ergo non
praeciperetur homini ista perfectio, quamuis came in hac vita nemo habeat? Non
enim recte curritur, si quo currendum est nesciatur. In which fullness of
charity that commandment shall be fulfilled. Thou shall love thy Lord thy
God, with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy mind. For
whiles any part of carnal concupiscence is remaining, which may be suppressed
by containing, God so long is not in every respect loved with all the soul.
For the flesh coueteth not without the soul, albeit the flesh be said to
covet, because the soul coueteth carnally. Then shall the just be without any
sin at all, because there shall be no law in his members rebelling against
the law of his mind, but he shall love God wholly with all his heart, with all
his soul, and with all his mind, which is the first and chiefest commandment.
Why therefore should not this perfection be commanded unto man, although no
man can have it in this life? For they cannot run aright, who know not whither
they should run.

Out of these words of this holy father, and great learned writer, I gather
these worthy lessons: First, that by Gods holy commandment all men are bound
to love God, with all their heart, with all their soul, and with all their
mind: Secondly, that whosoever suffers any part of his life to be vacant, and
to have fruition of any other thing, cannot fulfill this precept of loving God:
Thirdly, that this precept of love, cannot be perfectly kept in this life:
Fourthly, that original concupiscence remaining in the regenerat, is the
hinderance and breach of this commandment. Fifthly: that this perfection of
love is lawfully commanded, albeit none living does or can attain unto it.
And consequently, that it is not possible to any pure mortal man, perfectly to
keep Gods commandments.

Aquinas the Popes great doctor and canonised saint, grants freely and
affirms constantly, That the precept of loving God with the whole heart,
cannot be kept perfectly in this life. These are his own express words:
Respondeo, Aquinat. 22. q. 44. art. 6. in corp.
quod praceptum aliquod dupliciter potest impleri. Vno modo perfect, alio modo
imperfecte. Sequitur; intendit Deus per hoc praeceptum, vt homo Deo totaliter
vniatur: quod fiet in patria, quando Deus erit omnia in omnibus, vt dicitur, 1.
Cor. 15. and ideo plene and perfect in patria implebitur hoc praeceptum: In
via autem impletur, sed imperfecte. I answer, that the precept may be
fulfilled two ways; one way perfectly, another many imperfectly. God intends
by this precept, to have man wholly united to himself; which shall be effected
in heaven, when God shall be all in all. And therefore this precept shall be
fulfilled perfectly and fully in the country, but in the way it is fulfilled
imperfectly. (That is to say, perfectly in heaven, which is called our
country; and imperfectly on earth, which is termed the way.)

Out of these golden words of the famous schoole-doctour Aquinas, (whose
doctrine two Popes have authorized for authentical) I observe these points of
great importance. First, that God by commanding all men to love him with their
whole hearts, did intend to unite all men wholly unto himself; so as no part of
their love should be left vacant, to be bestowed otherwise. Secondly, that this
precept of loving God as we are bound, can be kept perfectly in heaven only.
Thirdly, that it is not impossible in this life, to keep Gods commandments
in a godly sense and meaning; because we may keep them in some sort and
measure, though not in that high and perfect degree which the law requires at
our hands. For our great popish doctor (mark well his words) says plainly
and constantly; In via impletur preceptum, sed imperfecte. The precept is
fulfilled in the way, (or in this life) but vnperfecty. So that, when the
papists triumphing before the victory, cry out against us with open mouths,
That we charge God with impiety, affirming him to have commanded to man
things imposible: they may as well and with as much right and reason, exclaim
against their own dear doctor Aquinas, and consequently against their own
holy fathers the Popes, August. Hunnaeus in epist. ad Pium 5.
Vrbanus the fourth, and Innocentus the fifth; who have commanded and strictly
charged to receive his doctrine as sent from heaven, concerning both faith and
manners. For my self do here teach the self some doctrine with Aquinas, as
his own express words very flatly purport. For my wonted manner is, to
confute popery by the testimonies of best approved popish writers.

Bernardus the Popes dear monk and reverend Abbot, iumpeth with Aquinas in
these express words; Berner. in cant. sermon. 50. tom. 1. col. 931.
Quomodo ergo iubenda fuit, quae implenda nullo modo erat? Aut si placet tibi
magis de affestuali datum fuisse mandatum, non inde contendo, dummodo aquiescas
and tu mihi, quod minime in vita ista ab aliquo hominum possit, vel poterit ad
impleri. Quis enim sibi arrogare id audeat, quod Paulus ipse fatetur non
comprehendisse? nec latuit preceptorem, precepti pondus hominum excedere vires:
sed iudicauit vtile ex hoc ipso suae illos insufficientiae admoncri, and vt
scirent sane, ad quem iustitiae finem niti pro viribus oporteret. Ergo mandando
impossibilia, non preuaricatores homines fecit, sed humiles, vt omne os
obstruatur, and subditus fiat omnis mundus Deo: quia ex operibus legis, non
iustificabitur omnis caro coram illo. Accipientes quippe mandatum, and
sentientes defectum, clamabimus in coelum, and miserebitur nostri Deus; and
sciemus in illa die, quiae non ex operibus iustitiae quae fecimus nos, sed
ecundum suam misericordiam saluos not fecit. How then was it commanded, which
by no means could be performed? or if thou rather think, that the
commandment was given of affectuall charity, I will not contend with thee
therein; so thou also wilt yield unto me herein, That no man in this life is
able to keep and perform the same. For who dares to challenge that to
himself, which Paul confesses he could never attain unto? neither for all
that was the commander ignorant, that the weight of the commandment did
surpass the power and reach of man; but he deemed it a thing profitable for
them, that hereby they should be admonished of their insufficiency, and might
know to what end of righteousness they ought with their best endeavors to
apply themselves. Therefore by commanding things impossible, he made not men
preuaricatours, but humble; that every mouth might be stopped, and all the
world made subject unto God; because by the works of the law, no flesh can be
justified in his sight. But after that we have received the commandment, and
thereby perceive our own want, we must cry up to heaven, and God will have
mercy on us; and then shall we know, that he has saved us, not for the works
of righteousness which we have done, but according to his own (free) mercy.
Thus writes their own dear Abbot Bernardus: out of whose words, I observe
many excellent documents. First, that God has given us those commandments,
which we cannot possibly keep and perform. Secondly, that God knew right well,
that it is not in our power to keep his laws. Thirdly, that God commanded to
us impossible things, that we might thereby acknowledge our own insufficiency,
and wholly rely upon his favor, help, and mercy. Fourthly, that we might hereby
know, that our salvation proceeds of mercy, and not of the works of
righteousness which we have done, and wherein the papists seek merit and
justification. So then, the doctrine which I now teach, is not my doctrine
only, but the flat doctrnie of Saint Austen; yea, and the self same doctrine
which the best learned papists have taught before me.

That it is not possible for man, to keep Gods commandments perfectly in
this life; no other proof is needful, save only the Lords Prayer. For in it,
the best liver upon earth is taught, to ask forgiveness and pardon for his
sins: and doubtless where pardon must be demanded, there the law is not
exactly observed. The usual practice of all papists, Nota, quod ne veniale
quidem peccaium potest in deum referri. Ergo auertit a fine vltimo. Ergo est
peccatu^ mortale.
is consectarie hereunto. For in their ordinary and daiely masses, as also in
their quotidian auricular confessions, they confess three several times their
most grievous sins, in these words; Mea culpa, mea culpa, me a maxima culpa.
In which public daily confession, they must eitheir confess, that they deal
hypocritically, dissemble damnably, and mock God most irreligiously; or else
doubtless, that they cannot keep Gods commandments, as they bear the world
in hand they do. Now it remains, that I answer to some popish objections,
which the papists deem and repute insoluble.

The first Objection.
The young man told Christ, Mat. 29. v. 20.
that he had kept all the commandments, from his youth up. Whom Christ
reproved not, as though he had not kept them indeed, but exhorted him to
perfection, in selling all his possessions.

The Answer.
I Answer both with Saint Austen and Saint Hierome, That the young man
answered untruly, when he said, he had kept all the commandments. Saint
Austen has these words; August. epist. 89. col. 264.
Ille quidem tristis, abscessit, qui viderit quemadmodum illa legis mandata
seruauerat. Puto enim quod se arrogantius quam verius, seruasse responderat. He
went away sorrowful, who knew how he had kept the commandments of the low.
For I think, he answered more arrogantlie then truly, that he had kept them.
Sant Hierome says plainly and roundly, Mentitur, He lies. And the
circumstance of the texts going before and following, do purport no less unto
us.

The second Objection.
Saint Paul says, Romans 2. v. 13.
For note the hearers of the law are just with God, but the doers of the law
shall be justified.

The Answer.
Saint Paul means nothing less in these words, than that a man in Gods sight
can be justified his works: But he goes about to conclude all under sin,
and so to have need of the glory of God; because none is able to perform and
keep the law. For his whole scope and intent is this; to prove that the Jews
did in vain boast against the Gentiles that they had the law, seeing they did
not keep the same. As if he had said; if ye will be justified by the law, ye
must perform and keep the law, which ye do not. for not the hearers of the
law, but the doers are just in Gods sight. I willingly grant, and will it not
deny; that if any of you papists can perfectly observe and keep the law, the
same papist shall be justified by the merit of his works: but if any such
papist could be found, (which I am sure is impossible) yet should that papist
hear what Saint Paul says of holy Abraham. For says he, if Abraham were
justified by works, Romans 4. v. 2.
he has glory, (or whererein to boast) but not before God.

The third Objection.
If thou will enter into life, Mat. 19. v. 17.
keep the commandments.

The answer.
Our Savior Christ does not show in this place, how men do attain unto
eternal life; but he shows what perfect observation of Gods law is required
of them, who look to be justified by the works of the law. This my answer
is cleared, by the question proposed unto Christ, which was this; What good
thing shall I do, that I may have eternal life? Christ answered; If thou will
have eternal life by doing good works, then must thou keep Gods
commandments. Vide B. in. 3. cap. ad gal.
But this is impossible, as is already proved.

The fourth Objection.
Christ says, Mat. 11. v. 30.
My yoke is easy, and my burden is light. 1. John. 5. v. 3.
And Saint John says, his commandments are not heavy.

The Answer.
The law of God is impossible to be kept in such perfection, Non lequitur hic
de iugo and onere legit, sed Euangeli^.
as the same requires at our hands, as I have already proved. Nevertheless,
the yoke of Christ is sweet, and his burden light, to all them which believe
in him. Act. 15. 10, 11.
For (as Saint Peter says) The yoke of the law is such a burden, as neither
we, nor our fathers were able to bear: but we belleeue to be saved by the
grace of our Lord Jesus. Gal. 3. 13.
Christ has taken away the curse of the law: Romans 8. 3.
Christ has satisfied for our transgressions of the law: Col. 2. 14.
Christ sent by God in the similitude of sinful flesh, blotted out the hand
writing that was against us, and nailed it upon the cross. There is no
condemnation to them which are in Christ Jesus. Romans 8. 1.
Christ is our justification, our sanctification, and our redemption. By faith
in Christ, we do overcome the world. 1. Cor. 1. 30.
Christ is so merciful, 1. Ioh. 5. 4.
that he refreshes all those which come unto him. Mat. 11. v. 28.
This being so, we may truly say, that in Christ we fulfill the law: because
he is our righteousness, our sanctification, and our redemption; because he
has overcome death; because he has clothed us with his righteousness; Col.
2. 14.
because he has covered our nakedness with his garments; 1. Joh. 5. 4.
because in him we have gotten the victory, Act. 15. 11.
over hell, death, and damnation.

This is it that Saint Austen says, August. libr. 1. retract. cap. 19.
in these golden words; Omnia ergo mandata tunc facta deputantur, quando
quicquid non fit, ignoseitur. All the commandments are then reputed as done,
when whatsoever is not done, is (of mercy) forgiven.

The first Objection.
Saint Hierome says, Hieron. cont. ^^^lag. lib. 3. and 4.
He is to be detested as a blasphemer, that affirms God to have commanded
any impossible thing. August. sermon. 6. de temp tom. 10.
And Saint Austen says, God can neither command things impossible, because he
is just, neither condemn a man for that which he could not avoid, because he
is merciful.

The Answer.
I answer first, that he is to be detested as a blasphemer, that affirms
God to have commanded any thing unto man, which was either impossible in it
self to be done, or to be done of man as man. I say (impossible in it self)
because otherwise, Christ himself could not have fulfilled the law: which to
hold, is flat blasphemy against the Son of God. I say (impossible to be
done of man, as man;) because otherwise, the Protoplast Adam could not have
kept the law: which to hold, is most absurd, and against all learning and
learned men.

Secondly, that he is to be detested as a blasphemer, whosoever affirms, that
any man in particular being a true believer, cannot keep and fulfill Gods
commandments; in him, of whose fullness we have all received, Ioh. 1. 16.
and whose righteousness is ours, by his free gift and grace. 1. Cor. 1. 30.


Thirdly, that Gods commandments may in some measure (that is to say,
imperfectly) be kept even in this life, of all the regenerate. And this not my
answer, but even that answer which the famous papist Aquinas makes, Aquinas,
22. q. 44. art. 6. ad prim.
to the objection out of Saint Hierome: whose answer is very sufficient to
stop the mouths of all papists, seeing his testimony is to them as if it were
an oracle from Heaven. To Saint Austen the same answer is very consonant, as
both by the precedent and subsequent words will appear. And if there be any
papists, Omittatur haec clausula, meo iudicio.
whose appetites this answer cannot satisfy: of those papist I would demand
this one thing, This is a Dilemma which no papists can avoid.
Why infants not baptized before their death, are justly damned for original
sin, seeing they could not possibly avoid the same?

He that would know Saint Austens meaning more fully, both touching this
objection and others of like quality, may read the same holy Father in his
book De Corrept. and gratia; and therein find much excellent matter for his
contention in that behalf. August. de correp. and great. cap. 12. and 13. tom.
7.
Answer o papists, if ye can; if not, repent for shame, and yield unto the
truth.

(...).
(...).

