A treatise of the new India, with other new found lands and Islands, as well
eastwarde as westwarde, as they are known and found in these our days, after
the descripcion of Sebastian Munster in his book of universal Cosmographie:
wherein the diligent reader may see the good success and reward of noble and
honest enterpryses, by the which not only worldly riches are obtained, but
also God is glorified, and the Christian faith enlarged.

Translated out of Latin into English. By Ryrcharde Eden.

Praeter spem sub spae.

To the right high and mighty Prince, the Duke of Northumberlande, his grace.
I Read in ancient writers (most noble prince) how that mighty king and
conqueror of the world, Alexander the great, at such time as he beheld ye
tomb of fearse Achilles, and therewith called to his remembrance how
excellently the Poet Homere had set forth his heroical factes, which
notwithstanding he thought to be much inferior unto his, he sighed and
said: Oh the most fortunate, which haste found such a tro^pe to magnifi thy
doings, meaning hereby, that the fame of Achilles was no less notable to his
posterity by homers writing, the^ it was in his life time by his own marcial
affairs. Whereby we may perceue such magnanimity to have been in our
predicessours, men of noble and stout courage, yt they thought it not
sufficient in their life time to deserve praise and honor, except the same
might also redounde to their posterity, yt they might thereby be encouraged
to do the like. Which thing truly has been ye cause, yt in all ages, noble
enterprises have been commended, and such as have attempted ye same, have been
honored. Wherefore if honest co^mendacions be a just reward dew to noble
enterprises, so much do they rob and spoil from ye dignity thereof, which in
any point diminishe the same: no less confoundinge the order of things, then
he which cloteth an ape in purple, and a king in sackecloth. This I speak y^
rather, because there chaunsed of late to come to my hands, a shiete of
printed paper, (more worthy so to be called then a book) entytuled of the new
found lands. The which t^tle when I readde, as one not utterly ignorant
hereof, having before in my time readde Decades, and also the nauigations de
nouo orb, there seemed too me no less inequalitye between the title and the
book, then if a man would profess to write of England, and entreated only
of Trumpington a vyllage within a mile of Cambrydge. Wherefore partelye moved
the good affeccion, which I have ever borne to the science of Cosmographie,
which entreately of the descripcion of the world, whereof the new found
lands are no small part, and much more by y^ good will, which of duty I bear
to my natyue country and countreyme^, which have of late to their great praise
(whatsoever succeed) attempted with new viages to search ye seas and new found
lands, I thought it worthy my travail, to their better comfort, (as one not
otherwise able to further their enterprise) to translate this book out of
latin into English. The which, albeit it do not so largely or particulerlye
entreat of every part, region or commodity of ye said new found lands, as
the worthiness of the thing might require: yet sure I am that as well they which
set forth or take upon the^ this viage, as also they which shall hereafter
attempt ye like, may in this small book as in a little glass, see some clear
light, not only how to learn by the example damage, good success, and
adue^tures of other, how to behave them selves and direct their viage to their
most commodity, but also if dew success herein should not chance according
unto their hope and expectacio^ (as oftentimes cha^ceth in great affairs,) yet
not for one foil or fall, so to be dismayed as with shame and dishonor to leave
with loss, but rather to the death to persist in a godly, honest, and lawful
purpose, knowing that whereas one death is dew to nature, the same is more
honorably spent in such attemptes as may be to the glory of God and
commodity of our country, then in soft beds at home, among the tears and
weping of women. Which manlye courage (like unto that which has been seen and
proved in your grace, as well in forene realms, as also in this our country)
if it had not been wanting in other in these our days, at such time as our
sovereign Lord of noble memory King Henry the.viij. about the same year of
his raygne, furnished and sent forth certain ships under the governance of
Sebastian Cabot yet living, and one sir Thomas Perte, whose faint heart was the
cause that that viage took none effect, if (I say) such manly courage whereof we
have spoken, had not at that time been wanting, it might happelye have comen
to pass, that that rich treasurye called Perularia, (which is now in Spain
in the city of Civil, and so named, for that in it is kept the infinite
riches brought thither from the new found land of Peru,) might long since
have been in the tower of London, to the kings great honor and wealth of this
his realm. What riches the Emperor has gotten out of all the new found
lands, it may well appear, whereas only in the Islands of Hispana or
Hispaniola and Cuba and other Islands there about, were gathered in two
months twelve thousand pounds weight of gold as your grace may read in
this book, in the descripcion of the Islands. Yet speak I here nothing of
perles, precious stones, and spices. Neither yet of the great abundance of
gold, which is engendered almost in all regions near unto the AEquinoctial
line. And whereas I am advertised yt your grace have been a great fortherer of
this viage, (as you have been ever studious for the commodity of your
country,) I thought my trauayl herein could no ways be more worthily
bestowed, then to dedicate the same unto your grace: Most humbly desiringe
your honor so to accept mine intent herein, as one whose good will has
not wanted to gratify your grace with a better thing if mine ability were
greater. Thus Almighty God preserve your grace in health and honor long to
continue.

Your graces poor orator Rychard Eden.

Rychard Eden to the reader.
WHereas in this Book (well-beloved Read^r) you may ^eade ma^ye strange
things, and in manner incredible, except the same were proved most certain by
daily experience, and approved authority, (as shall hereafter appear) I
thought it good for thy bett^r instruction to make this Preface, whereby t^^u
might more plainly and sensibly comprehend ^he reasons and causes, if not of
al, yet of some of the chiefest things, which are contained in the same^
Therefore whereas thou shall r^ade of the great abundau^ce of gold, precious
stones and spices, which the Spaniardes and Portugales have brought from the
South parts of the world, as from the new found lands and Islands, the
sodeyn straungenes or greatness of the thing shall not so much amase thy wits,
and gender in thee incrudelitie, if thou consider the saying of wise Solomon,
who affyrmeth yt there is no new thing under the Sun, nothing new under the
Sun.
and that the thing that has been, comes to pass again: which saying does
greatly co^fyrme the truth, of such things as are spoken of in this Book,
whereas the same perhaps to some me^ might otherwise seem in manner incredible,
if the like had not been seen in ^yme paste, and approved by authority of
most holy scripture, which declaring the great wysdo^, riches, and noble
viages of King Salomo^, 3. Reg. 4
says that God gave him wisdom and understanding exceeding much, and a large
heart, and that he prepared a navy of ships, 3. Reg. 9
in the port of Azion Gaber, by the brinke of the red sea, which sailed to
Ophir, and brought from thence.xxi. score hundredth (which is.xl^. M.) weight
of gold. Agay^e, 3. Re. 10.
that the weyghte of gold which was brought to Solomon in one year, was.vi.
hundredth, three score and.vi. tale^tes of gold, whereas the Hebrew talente,
called Talente Haebraicu^ sanctuarii, was of our st^rling money 500. pound,
and Talent Haebrai^um uulgare, was half so much. Likewise yt si^uer was
nothing worth in the days of Salomo^, and yt he made silver and gold in
Jerusalem as ple^tiou^ as stones Agay^, 2. Par. ^
that he ouerlayd the house of the Lord with precious stones beauti^ully, 1.
Par. 3.
and the gold wherewith he covered it, was gold of Paruaim. Also that the
kings navy of ships went once in three year to Tharsis, Tharsis Gold Apes
Elepha^tes.
and brought Gold, Silver, Apes^ Peacockes, and Elephantes teeth, Which words
surely seem so to confirm such things as are spoken of in the nauigacions
whereof this book entreats, that nothing can make more for the truth of the
same: Salomo^s ships.
and briefly to speak of the places whether Salomons ships sailed for Gold,
as Tharsis and Ophir. Ophir.
This ought to be co^sydered for a general rule, that nearest unto the south
parts of the world between the two Tropikes under ye Equinoctial or burning
line, where the sun is of greatest forse, Where Gold is engendered.
is the chiefest place where gold is engendered, although it be sometimes found
in cold regio^s as in Scotland, in Crayford more, likewise in H^ngary,
Scotland Hu^gary
yet nether pure of it self, nor in great quantity: the reason whereof is
largely declared in the ^ookes of George Agric, and Albertus Magnus. And whereas
it is written in ye ^oke of Kings in the Acts of Solomon that he prepared his
ships in Azion Gaber, 3. Reg. 9 Azion Gaber.
being by the brinke of the readde s^a, and sailed from thence to Ophir for
Gold, it is apparaunt, that (howsoever the names of things have altered and
perisshed in time) he sailed from thence southwarde toward the Equinoctial
line, the Equinoctial line.
for as much as there is none other passage out of the narownesse of the
readde sea, but only into the main South sea, by the which the Portugales
even at this day make their viage to Calicut, Calicut.
Samo^ra, Madagascar, and such other Islands in the South east parts of the
world, where Gold, Spyces, Apes, and Elephantes are now found in like
manner. Tharsis in cilicia.
But as for Tharsis bey^ge a city of Cilicia in Asia the l^sse and the na^iue
countreye of S. Paul the Apostle, and situa^e much more toward the North,
the^ is Judea, and in manner directlye over against Judea on the othersyde of
the sea called Mare Mediteraneu^, and in the same clime, in the which stands
the Island of Sicilia, Sicilia.
and the city of Civil in Spain, Civil in Spain
it hardelye agrees with the principles of Philosophy and common experience,
that gold should be there engendered in like abundaunce as in Regions more
toward the south, much less Elephantes and Apes, which are no where engendered
far from the AEquinoctial line, or beyond the two Tropikes, nor yet will
engendre if they be brought into those parts of the world. The like is to be
understand of Popingiayes and spyces, Spyces.
and diverse other beasts, fruits, and trees, which are engendered in ce^tayne
climes of the world, and will not prospere in other places: the reason whereof
were here to long declare. Pepper.
For like as pepper will not grow in Spain, no more will the Orange tree
bring forth fruit in England. Orange tree.
Wherefore, it may seem by good reason, that the Gold, Apes, and Elephantes
teeth which were brought from Tharsis (if it were Tharsis of Cilicia) were not
enge^dered there, but rather brought thither by merchants from the south
parts of the world, out of Mauritania, Marmarica, Ethiopia, Libia, and Arabia,
or otherwise by land, from the East India, East India.
like as at this day, the great multitude of Spyces, Gold, Precious stones,
Sylke, and Iuerye, which is at Calicut and Cambaia, grow not al in the
regio^s there about, but are brought thither from diverse other countries, as
does more largely appear in this Book. And that Salomo^s factours for
exchau^ge of other marchaundyse, bought the same in Tharsis, Solomon boughte
gold of marcha^tes.
be^^g bro^ght thither from other countries, as it is written in the third
Book of the Kings, that Solomon had great plenty of Gold of Merchants and
Apothecaries. So that to conclude, I would rather think (saving reformacion of
other better learned) that this Tharsis (and not Tharsis of Cilicia,) from
whence Solomon had so great plenty of Gold and Iuerie, were rather some other
country in the south parts of the world, then this Tharsis of Cilicia. For^
not only old and new Histories, daily experience, and the principles of
natural Philosophy do agree, yt the places most apt to bring forth gold,
spices, and precious stones, the south and south east.
are the South and Southeast parts of the world, Mat 12
but also our Savior Christ approves the same, ^. Reg. x 2. Par. 9 the queen
of Saba, the queen of the south
declaring that the Queen of the South (meaning the Qu^ne of Saba) came from
the vtmoste parts of the world to hear the wysdom of Solomon. And like as by
the authority of these words it is plain from what parts of the world she
came, the same to a philosophical head is apparent by s^che r^ches and
presents as she brought with her. For albeit that in the Chronacles of
Solomon it is ^ot written by expressed words that she came from the Southe,
yet is it written that she came to Jerusalem with a very great train, 2, par.
9 3. Reg. x
with camels laden with spyces, sweet odours, and exceading much gold and
precious stones, which descripcion does well agree, Saba in Ethiopia under
Egypt.
both with the situacion of the city of Saba in Ethiopia under Egypt: and also
with the country of Saba, being in the middel of Arabia, Saba in Arabia.
inuironned about with great rocks wherein is a great wood of Precious trees,
some of Cinomome and Cassia, and some bringing forth frank^ncense and myrre, as
writes Plinius lib. 12. and Theophrastus li. 9. de Hist. Plant. Wherefore the
Queen of ^aba might worthily be called ^he queen of the South, forasmuch as
both Saba (or rather Sabat) in Ethiopia, which Josephus thinks to be the
Island of Meroe, now called Elsaba, being in the river of Nilus, and that the
queen came from thence, and also Saba in Arabia, are situate far Southwarde
from Jerusalem, even in manner in the midst of the line, called Tropicus
Can^ri, and the Equin^ctinal line, the queen of Saba came from the Island of
Meroae.
^here the Pole Artike is eleuate not passing.1^. degrees or thereabout (as in
Meroae) where as the same pole is eleuate at Jerusalem. 22. degrees: whereby
it may appear yt the queen of Saba (who^ Christ calls the queen of ye
south,) came from the south parts about.xi. hundredth and.xl. miles from
Jerusalem, for the same distaunce is from Saba in Meroe to Hier^salem, as
between Rome and England. From Rome to England.
^ut as touching this matter, it shall suffyse to have said thus much. Now
therefore to return home from these far countries, The viage of our men to
cathay
and to speak somewhat of this viage which our countreymenne, have attempted
to sail into the East parts, by the coasts of Norway, Lappia, and
Finmarchia, Norway Lappia, Finmarchia.
and so by the narrow tracte of the Sea by the coasts of Grouelande, into the
frosen sea, called Maroae, Congelatu^, and so forth to Cathay (if any such
passage may be found) which only doubt does at this day discorage many
faynte hearted men, specially because in the most part of Globes and Mappes
they see the continente or fyrme land, Globes and mappes.
extended even to the North Pole without any such passage. Which thing ought to
move no man greatly, ^orasmuch as the most part of Globes and mappes are made
after Ptolomeus Tables: Ptolomeus.
Who, albeit he was an excellent man, yet were there many things hyd from his
knowledge, as not sufficientelye tried or searched at those days, as
manifestly appears in that he knew nothing of. America.
America with the hole fyrme land adherent thereunto, which is now found to
be the fourth part of the earth. Neither yet knew he any thing of the passage
by the Weste into the East, by the strayghtes of Magellanus as you shall read
in this Book, The strayghtes of Magellanus.
Neither of the Islands in the Weste Ocean Sea, the Islands of Molucca
nor of the Islands of Molucca situate in the main East Indian Sea. And as
touching this passage, albeit, it were not known in Ptolomeus days yet other
auctors of later time, who perhaps have had further experience of the thing
(as good reason is) do write not only that there is a passage by the North
Sea into the main East Sea, Passage by the north sea into the East.
but do also further declare, how certain ships have safelye sailed
through the same, Pius secu^dus. lib. i. Capit. ii. note well the passage by ye
North sea.
as Pius secundus (otherwise called AE^eas Siluius) an excellent aucto^e
descrybeth in his Book of Cosmographie, where he has these words following. Of
the North Ocean Sea, whether it may be sailed about or not, the contencion is
greater, yet is it apparaunte that the greateste part thereof about Germany,
Augustus the emperor.
has been searched by the commandment of Augustus the emperor, even unto the
promontorie or lands end of the people, Cimbria.
called Cimbri. Caspia. the wars of ye Macedonians
The seas also and coasts of Caspia were so searched during the wars of the
Macedonians under the dominion of Seleucus and Anthiocus, that al most all the
North on every side was sailed about. Pliny rehearses the testimony of
Cornelius Nepos, Plinius. Cornelius Nepos Su^uia, called also Succia nere unto
^o^^^and and norway.
who writes that the king of Sueuia (or Swethelande) gave to Metellus celer,
proconsull or leauetenaunte of France, certain Iudians or men of Jude,
which saylinge out of India for mar^haundyse, were by tempest drieuen into
Germany. We also read in Otho, that under thempyre of the Germaynes, there
was a ship of Indians taken in the North sea of Germany, A ship of Indians
driven from the East into the North seas.
and drieuen thither by contrary wynd from the East parts: which thing could
by no means have comen to pass, if (as many men think) the North sea were
not nauigable by reason of extreme cold and Ise. And these be the very words
of Pius Secundus, whereunto I add, that this, notwithstanding, if it should
so chance, that either there can no such passage be found, or the same so
dangerous, or otherwise that the very cut thereof by which only perhaps
any ships might pass, could not be found, yea, or to cast the worste, if
they should perish in this viage, yet I would wish all men to be of such
courage and constancy in these affairs, as are valiant capitaynes in the
wars: who, if by misfortune they take a foil, do rather study how by some
other ways to recover their honor and reputacio^ diminished by the same, then
with shame, loss, and dishonor, ever afterward to give place to their
enemies, or forswear the wars. Wherefore, to conclude, if no good can be
done this way, it were worthy the adventure to attempt, if the same viage may
be brought to pass, another way, as by the straight called Fretu^ trium
fratrum, The viage to Cathay Westwarde and by north
westward and by North from England, which viage is sufficiently known to
such as have any skyll in Geographie. As for other lands and Islands in the
west sea, where the Eagle (yet not in every place) has so spled his wings,
that other poor birds may not without offense seek their pray within the
compass of the same, the earth compassed about
I will speak nothing hereof, because I would be loath to lay an egg, whereof
other men might hatche a serpent. Wherefore to let this pass, and to enter into
another matter. Forasmuch as in these our days has chanced so great a secret
to be found, as the like has never been known or heard before, (what soever
God meant to keep this mystery hyd so long) I thought it good to speak
somewhat hereof: trusting yt the pleasant co^templacio^ of the thing it self,
shall make the length of this preface less tedious, especially if it find a
reader whose soul delyteth to praise God in his works. The thing therefore is
this, how the hole globe of the world (of the earth and wate^ I mean) has
been sailed about, by the West into the East, as does more largely appear in
this book in the nauigacio^s of Magellanus, The vi^ge of magellanus.
who from Spain sailed Westward to the Ila^des of Molucca being in the East
sea, The Ila^des of Molucc^
far beyond ye furthest parts of East India: and the portugales came to the
same Islands from Spain sailing Eastward by the coasts of Aphrica, Arabia,
and the uttermost India beyond the river of Ganges where, in ye Indian sea the
said Ila^des of Molucca are situate. A thing surely most wonderful, and in
manner incredible, but that the same is proved most certain by experience,
Experience, yt teacher of al sciences
the teacher and mestres of all sciences, for lack of whose aid (experience I
mean) like as many great wits have fallen into great errors, so by her
aid, many base and common wits have attained to the knowledge and practice
of such wonderful effects, Sense and understanding.
as could hardely be comprehended by the discourse of reason. Which thing or
other like, I suppose was the cause why the noble Philosopher Aristoteles
said: A sentence of Aristotell.
Quod nihil est in intellectu quod non fuit prius insensu, that is, that
nothing is in understanding, but the same was first in sense, that is to say
subject to ye senses. Yet would I not that any rash wit should hereby take
hold, as thought either Aristotle or I, meant that sense were more excellent
the reason, but rather that reason using sense, takes his principles and first
seeds of things sensyble, and afterward by his own discourse and searching
of causes, increases the same from a seed to a tree, as from an acorne to an
oak. Experience joined with speculacion
Naught else to say, but that experience to be most certain which is joined with
reason or speculacio^, and that reason to be most sure which is confirmed with
experience, according as the Phisicians determe^ in their science, that
neither practyse i^ safe without speculacio^, nor speculacio^ with out
practyse. Wherefore, whereas men of great knowledge and experience, are to great
affairs, their attemptes have for the most part good success, A per^^ler
proves no universal.
as does most plainly appear in all histories: notwithstanding that some
ignorant men will allege that certain rash adue^tures have prospered well:
which saying proves no more the^ if a man should say, that twice or thrice a
man unarmed slew a man armed (as did sometime the wyld Irishme^ at bulle^)
Ergo, what is knowledge and learning.
it were better to fight unarmed the^ armed. And whereas I have here spoken of
knowledge joined with experience, I mean by knowledge yt which we commonly call
learning, whether it be gotten out of books (which are the writings of wise
and expert men) or otherwise by conference and educacio^ with such as are
learned: meaning naught else by learning, but yt gathering of many men's wits
into one man's head, and the experience of many years, and many men's lives, to
the life of one, who^ we call a learned wise, and expert man. The which
defynicion and effect of learning, Baltassar Castaglionae.
the noble and learned cortier Baltassar Castaglione (the auctour of the book
called in the Italian tongue il cortegiono,) diligently consideringe, A false
persuasion of y^ fre^shm^
does greatly blame and reprove the frenshmen in that they think yt the
knowledge of letters does hinder the affairs of war, yt which persuasion he
proves by many reasons and examples to be most false. But as concerning the
matter whereof this book entreats the great Philosopher Albertus Magnus,
Albertus Magnus
only by learning, without experyence, affyrmed that habitable or temperate
Regions might be under the Equinoctial or burninge line, ^^perat regions under
ye Equinoctial line
as appears in his Book de Natura locorum, contrary to the opinion of other
writers which were before his time, and yet is now proved by experience to
be most true, albeit not in all places under the said line, the cause
whereof were here to long to declare. And like as Albertus Magnus by knowledge
of Astronomye (wherein he excelled) came to the understanding hereof, even so
that great Clerk (but better dyuyne then Philosopher,) Sayncte Augustyne and
also Lacta^tius, An error of s^ Augustine and Lactantius.
for lack of like knowledge in that science, fell into a chyldishe error,
denyinge that there is any people, called Antipodes, antipodes
of whom the great Astronomer of one time, Ap^anus.
Apianus writes in this manner. Antipodes are they, which walk with their
fete dyrectelye contrary against ours, and have the heaven dyrectelye over
their heads as we have. Yet have we nothing common with them, but all things
contrary: for when the Sun causes Summer with us, then is it Myddewynter
with them: and when it is day with us, it is night with them: And when the
day is longeste with us, then is the longeste night with them, and the
shorteste day. Which, Lactantius, Lacta^tius.
a man otherwise well learned, in his third Book. Capittulo four and
twentye, childisshelye erringe, with his light and opinionate arguments,
denies that there is any such, and mocketh the Astronomers, because they
affirm the earth to be round, the rou^dnes of ye earth.
which nevertheless they prove with most certain and apparente
demonstracions of Geometrye, and vn`ayleable experymentes. Whom, S. augustyne.
Sayncte Augustyne following, in his sixtenth Book. de Ciuitat, Dei. Capittu.
ix. writes after this sort. Such as fable that there is Antipodes, that is
to say, men of the contrary part, where the sun ryseth when it falls
to us, and to have their feet against ours, we ought by no reason to
beeleue. Those be the words of Sayncte Augustyne. Notwithstanding (says
Apianus) put thou no doubt Gentle Reader, Apianus.
that the Apostles of Christ were Antipodes the one to the other, The
apostles, Antipodes the one against the other.
and stood fe^te to feet the one against the other, when James thelder and
brother to John the Euangeliste, the son of Zebedens, was in Spain in
Galitia, and Thomas the Apostle in the higher India, they were most
certaynelye Antipodes, walking feet to feet one against the other, almost as
directly as a diametrical line. For the Spanyardes are Antipodes to the
India^s, The spanyardes and the India^s are Antipodes.
and the Indians in like manner to the Spanyardes. Which thing also the
excellent and aunciente Auctour Strabo confyrmeth to be true, and likewise
Plinius Not. Hist. lib. 2. Cap. 67 Volateranus also, and all other
Cosmographers and Astronomers. Hitherto Apianus: and to declare my opinion in
few words, I think it no great marueyle that Saint Augustyne should
fall into an error in the science of Astronomy in which he trauayled but as
a stranger, forasmuch as he erred in many things in divinity which was his
chief profession: S. augustine of the heresy of manicheus
and was long of the heresye of Manicheus before he was converted by Saint
Ambrose: S. augustines book of retractes.
and writ also at the length a Book of retractes, in which he corrects
his own errors. And I believe plainly that, that excellent wit of his,
could not have remained long in yt error if he had been well exercysed in
Astronomy, or had known any such ^xperyence as is spoken of here before,
how the Spanyardes by the Weste and the Portugales by the East compassed
about the earth, which could never have come to pass if the earth were not
round ( Quantum ad maximas sui parts) as they call it. For, as for hills and
Mountains, Mountains, let not ye rou^dnes of the earth.

A galle.


though they be never so great, yet in respect to the byggenes of the earth,
they do no more let the roundnesse hereof, then do the little knobbes of
the berrye, which we call a galle, let the roundnesse of the same. Where^ore
I am certaynely persuaded, that if Saynct Augustyne had continued his study in
Astronomye (as it had been pytye he should) or were alive at this day, he
would also have retracted this error. But if here any supersticious head
shall think it a heinous matter in any point to contrary Saint Augustyne,
let him hearken how Augustine him self says: that he will neither his
writings or other men's, of how great name or fame soever they be, A
Sentence of S. augustines.
otherwise to be believed then the same shall, by reason be approved to be
true: Neque quorumlibet disputaciones^ etc. And like as the great Philosopher
Aristotel, when he write against his master Plato of the question de ^dais,
and against Socrates who by the oracle of Apollo was proved to be most wise,
and certain of his friends asked him why he durst be so boulde, he answered
that Plato was his friend, and so was Socrates: but truth his friend more then
they both, even so I think it no iniurye nor contumelye to Saynct Augustyne,
if the same were said of him also geuynge him otherwise his dew
commendacions, Co^me^dacio^ of s. augustine
as he was surely an excellent^ man, of dyuyne wit, and knowledge, and so
trauayled in setting forth Christ's true Relygion in those turmoylous days,
in perpetual combatte, against learned heretykes and Princes of the world,
that he is worthelye called a Doctor and Pyller of Christ's Church. And as
for Lactantius, Lactantius.
the intent of whose wrytinges was chiefelye to ^hys end, to dyminisshe
thestimacion of Philosophye, (as at those days it was necessary to do among
the Gentyles) and to advance Gods word, (which they contemned for the
symplicitie of the same,) albeit, he attempted as far as his learning would
serve him, to make all things in Philophie uncertain, yet are his arguments
so slender, that unless GOD by the secret working of his spyryte, had
called the Gentyles to the true Faith, I fear me least few or none of them,
(specyallye of the great wits) would have been converted by ^actantius
arguments. How he dalyeth in denyinge the earth to be round, and that it
is possible that it might be long and round, (like an Egg,) or otherwise
long and holowe like a boat, (meaning I suppose that the Sea might be
contained in the holownesse of the same, with such other opinyons grounded of
no reason, it were to long to rehearse. Yet, forasmuch as he was a learned
manne, and for the better satisfyinge of such wits as ar^ desyreous to know
some appearaunce of truth by natural reason and demonstracions, Of the
roundenes of ye earth.
let us admytte that the earth were round after any of those fasshions
which he describes: yet can it not be denied, but that it is contained
within the holowenesse (if I may so call it) of the air, the earth hangs in
ye air
having the heaven in every place dyrectelye over every part of the same, as
says the Poet and Philosopher Virgill, Caelum undique sursum: Except
perhaps Lactantius should think that it honge by some thing, or were
otherwise borne up with pyllers as the Poets Fable, that the Gyaunte Atlas
bears the world on his shoulders, the fable of Atlas.
whereby they mean that a man of valiente mind must stoutelye bear the
chances of the world. Of which hangeinge or bearing of the earth, the word
of God bears up the world^
I read a better and more true saying in the holy Scripture, where it is
written, Fert omnia uerbo or^s sui, that is, that God sustayneth and bears
all things with the word of his mouth.

Job. 26.
Holy Job also says, that the LORD ^tretcheth out the North over the
emptye, and hangs the earth upon nothing: Meaning by nothing, the air,
because to our senses it appears in manner as nothing: Or otherwise that it
is not dependynge of any other substance, but to be sustained only by the
power of GOD who has appointed the Elements their places and lymittes, The
elements.
and causes the heuye to stand fast: as wyt^esseth Moses in his song,
saying: Exo. xv.
By the wind of thy nostrels the waters gathered together, the flouddes stood
still as an heap, and the deep wa^er congeled together in the heart of the
Sea. Wherefore if the heaven be round (which no man can reasonably deny
that ever saw the Sun and sterres move.) And if the earth be the center of
the world dependinge as we have said before, then m^ste it needs follow,
that they which inhabiting the Northweste parts of the earth, have the Pole
Artike eleuate thyrtye degree^, The ele^atio^ of ^he pole.
must needs be Antipodes to them which inhabitinge the Southeaste parts of
the earth, have the Pole Antartike eleuate in the same degree, and so the like
to be understand of all other eleuacions and degrees. And if here any will
object, that either the earth or firm land is not so large, or so far
exte^ded, the large^es of the eart^
or other wise not inhabited although it were so large, or that the sea i^
greater then the land, to this I answer, that no man knows further hereof
then is tried and found by experience, as we have said before. And albeit
that the sea were larger then the firm land, yet forasmuch as there are
Ilande^ found in all places of the main Sea, Il^^des
and in manner all inhabited, there is no reason to the contrary, but that the
people of those Islands may be Antipodes to such as dwell on the fyrme land,
on the contrary part, whether the earth be round and long, yea or square, (if
you will) notwythstandynge. But with what certain demonstracion^ the
Astronomers and Geometricians, Astr^n^mers and Geometricia^^.
prove the earth to be round, and the Sphericall or round form to be
most perfect, it were to long to declare^ I will therefore make an end of
this matter with the saying of Sayncte Paul in his Oracion, Act. xv^
to the men of Athens. That GOD made of one bloudde, all nations of men, to
dwell upon the hole face of the earth.

I had intended here (well beeloued Reader,) to have spoken somewhat of such
strange things and Monsters, whereof mention is made in this Book, to the end
that such as by the narownes of their understanding are no^ of capacity to
conceive the causes and natures of things, might partly have been satisfied
with some sensyble reasons^ But being at this time otherwise hindered, it shall
suffice al good and hone^t wittes^ that whatsoever the Lord ha^h pleased, Psa.
135
that has he done in heaven and in earth, and in the Sea, and in all deep
places^

Ecclesiasticus. Capit. i.

The eye is not satisfied with sight, and the ear is not filled with bearinge.

The Table.
Of the Island of Iaua. Of the Island of Madagascar. Of the Island of zanzibar.
Of the two Islands in the which men and women dwell a sunder. Of the mighty
Empire of Cathay, subject under the dominion of the great Cham or Cane,
Emperor of Tartaria. Of certain Provinces subject under the dominion of the
great Cham. Of the Province of Mangi. Of the Region of Tangut. Of the new
Islands, how, when, and by whom they were found. Of the two Islands Iohanna
and Hispana. Of the Canibales, which eat man's flesh. Of the manners of the
inhabitants of Hispana. How Christophorus Colu^bus, after that he had found
the new Islands, returned to Spain: and preparing a new navy, sailed again
to ye Canibales. How Colu^bus the Admiral, passed many Ila^des and what
chanced to him and his in that viage. Of the new India, as it is found and
known in these our days. Of the Adamant stone, otherwise called the Di^mant.
Of the Kingdo^s and cities of Narsinga and Canonor How the Elephantes in India
are prepared to the wars. Of the beast called Rhinoceros. Of Calicut, the
most famous markette town of India. Of the manners of the Indians in Calicut.
Of Pepper and other spyces which grow in the Region of Calicut. Of the birds
and beasts which are found in the Region of Calicut: and of the wine of the
tr^e. From whence all kinds of spyces are brought to ^he city of Calicut. Of
the Island of zaylon, and of the cinomome tree. Of the city of Tarnasseri, and
of the manners of the cytezyns. Of the excellent city and Kingdom of Pego. Of
the Island of Sumatra, or Taprobana. Of the Island of Bornei. Of the Island of
Giaua. How the Spanyardes abused the submission and ^rendship of the
inhabitauntes of the Islands. How the Portugales sought new Islands in the
East parts, and how they came to Calicut. How Magellanus by a straight or
narow arm of the Sea, sailed by the Weste into the East to dy^ers Islands,
where also he was slain. How the Spanyardes came to the Islands of Molucca,
and of the people with great hanging ears. The third nauigacio^ of
Christophorus Colu^bus. How Pinzonus companion to the Admiral, sought new
Islands. The four nauigacions of Americus Uesputius to the new Islands. The
first viage of Uesputius. The second viage of Uesputius. The third viage of
Uesputius. The fourth viage of Uesputius. How the King of Portugale subdued
certay^^ ^laces in India, and of the rich city of Malacha. Of the Island of
Medera, and the fortunate I^^^^es, otherwise called the Islands of Canaria.

Finis.
Of the new India, as it is known and found in these our days. In the year
of our Lord. M.D.LIII. After the descripcio^ of Sebastian Munster in his
Book of the universal Cosmographie. Libr. v. De terris Asiae Maioris. And
translated into English by Richard Eden.
THere are two viages or nauigacions made out of Europa into India. The one
southeast from spain, The ^^ther i^ southweste.
by the coasts of Aphrica and Ethiopia, even unto Arabia to the city called
Aden. And from thence to the Island of Ormus, and from Ormus to the city of
Cambaia, The city of Cambai^
and from thence even unto the city of Calicut. Calic^^.
Cambaia is situate nere unto the floudde Indus. This city is of great power,
rich, and abundau^t in all kinds of grain and corn. The soil hereof
brings forth sundry kinds of sweet oyntmentes, and cotton which grows on
certain trees called Gossampini, Gossipiu^, B^mbage o^ cotto^ of the tre^s.
this cotton, is otherwise called Bombage or sylke of the trees. The King of
Portugal subdued this city, and bylded hard by the same a strong fortress:
with which thing the Turk b^eing sore grieved, The ^urkes navy against the
king of Portugale.
commanded a great navy of ships with great sumptuousnes to be
furnisshed in the goulfe called Sinus Arabicus: to the end that he might drive
the Portugalles out of India, and the better to accomplish this his purpose,
he appointed one Soliman a noble man of war (being also the Captain of
Alcayre,) to be the admiral general, or governor of his navy, having in his
retenue.xx. thousand soldiers beesyde mariners and gonners, which were in
number four thousand. This navy was appointed in the haven Suezio, beeinge a
port of the red sea, in the year of Christ.1538. And arrived first at the
city Aden: The city of Aden.
where laying anchor. the governor of the navy sent letters to the king of
Aden, certifying him that he would take his viage into India, from thence to
expel the King of Portugal. The King of Aden which was the^ tributarye to
the King of Portugal, received the Turks letters thankefully, The king of
Aden is hanged.
offering him self and all that he might make, to so mighty an Emperor,
desyringe the gouernoure to come forth of the ship, and to behold the city
obedient and ready at his commandment, in the which also according unto
his dignity and office, he should be worthily interteyned: but the governor
again allured and entysed him to come out of his city, and so by craft
circumuented him, that he took him priesoner, and commanded him to be hanged
on the sail yard of the ship, and with him four other of the rulers of the
city of Aden, affyrming that he was commanded of the Turk so to handel them,
because the cytiezins of Aden had not only made a leage with the Portugales,
The destruction of the city of Aden.
but had also paid the^ tribute: which nation the Turk plainly intended to
drieue out of India. And thus after the Kings death, that most rich and
beautiful city, was ^uer a pray to thieves, spoylers, and murderers without
resystaunce. Then the gouernoure departing from thence, left there behind him
a garrison of two thousand men of war, and saylyng forward on his viage, he
came to the city called Dium, The turk besieges the ^yti^ of Dium.
which the Portugales held: and his army was greatly increased by the way,
as well by la^d as by sea, by reason of the great confluence of the Turks which
on every side resorted to him, so that in a short space they rolled before the^
a bulwark or cou^tremure of earth, in man^r as big as a mountain, which by
little and little they moved near unto the trenche or ditche of the castle, so
that they might safely stand behind the bulwark, (thus raising a mount.) they
besieged the castle on every side, and battered the walls and towers thereof
very sore: yet that notwithstanding, were at the length enforsed to depart,
The turk is repulsed.
not without great loss and slaughter of their soldiers: for this Dium, is
the s^rongest city that is under the dominion of Cambaia: but the city of
Cambaia, The excellency of the city of Cambaia^
is situate in the goulfe called Guzerat, and is well inhabited, and in manner
most excellent of all the cities of India, and is therefore called Cayrus, or
Alcay^, or Babylon of India. It is enuiro^ned with a wall, and has in it very
fair byldinges, ye Sultan or chief ruler hereof, is of Mahumets sect as are
ye Turks. Lacha is gu^me of a tree, and is used in dying o^ silk.
Lacha grows there more ple^tifully the^ in any other country. The
inhabitau^tes, for the most part go naked, covering only their privy parts:
they bynd their heads about with a clothe of purple color. The Solda^ or
prince of this city, has in a redines for the wars.xx. thousand horsemen,
he has also a mighty and magni^ical court. When he waketh in ye morning there
is heard a great noise of cimbals, dru^slades, timbrelles, shames, pipes,
flutes, tru^pettes, and diverse other musical in^^rumentes, hereby signifying
that the king lives and is in health and merye: in like manner do they while
he is at dinner. To the kingdom of Cambaia, The ^yngdo^ of Ioga.
is the Kingdom of Ioga next adioyni^g, which reaches far on every side.
In this kingdom, by reason of the great heat of the son, the bodies of me^
begin to wax black and to be scorched: the people of this countreye have
ringes hanging at their ears and colers about their necks of sundry sorts,
albeset and shyninge with precious stones. The soil hereof is not very
^ruitful, this region is rough with mountains, the byldinge are despicable,
and ^uyl to dwell in: there is beyond this, an other Kingdom called Dechan: The
Kingdom of ^echa^
this city is very beautiful to behold, and fruitful in manner of al things:
the king hereof uses great pride, and solemnity: his pompes and triumphs are
in manner incredible, they that wayt upon the king, wear on the upper parts
of their shoes certain shyning precious stones, as Piro^i (which are a kind
of Rubies or Carbu^cles) with Diama^des and such other. But what manner of
Iewelles they use in ye stead of collers, eareringes, and ringes, you may well
consider, whereas they give such honor to their f^te. In this kingdom is said
to be a mountain, The diamonde stone.
out of the which Diamandes are dug.

Of the Diamande stone, called in Latin Adamas.
THe Diamande is engendered in the mines of India, Ethiopia, Arabia, Macedonia,
and Cyprus, and in the gold mines of the same countries. That of India
excels all other in beauty and clearenes: that which is of the color of
iron, is called Siderites, The stone ^iderites.
it is ofte^tymes found in color like unto cristal, and though it be sometimes
like thereto in whytnes, yet does it differ from cristall in hardness, in so much
that if it be laid upon an anuil, The hardne^ of the di^^ond.
and strongly strike^ with a hammer, the anuyl and hammer shall sooner be wounded
and leap away, then the stone perished or diminished: it does not only
refuse the forse of Iron, but also resists the power of fire, whose heat is
so far unable to melte it, that it can not so much as heat it, if we give
credit to Pliny, and is also rather made purer thereby, then any ways defiled
or corrupted: nevertheless, How the diam^^d is made soft.
the singular and and excellent hardness of this stone, is made so soft with ye
hoate blood of a Goat or a Lion, that it may be broken: and if it be put with
molte^ lead in hoate fornaces, it waxes so hoate that it wylbe dissolved: yet
are not a^l Diama^des of such hardness, for that of Cyprus, and also that of
the color of Iron called ^iderites, may be broken with hammers and perced
with another Diamand: his virtue is to be bewray poisons, and to frustrate
thopperacion thereof, and being therefore greatly esteemed of Kings and
Princes, it has ever been of great price. The mo^tayne of diamantes.
The mountain of India out of the which the Diamandes are dug, is compassed
with a wall on every side, and kept with a strong defense.

Of the kingdoms and cities of Narsinga and Canonor.
THe king of Narsinga, in riches and dominion excels all other Kings in
those parts. The chief city where the King is resident, The city of
Narsin^^.
is in situa^ion and fynenes, much like unto the city of Milayne, but that it
s^andeth in a place somewhat declyning and less equal. This king has ever in
a red^nes many thousands of men of arms, as one that is ever at war with
other countries, borderers nere about him. He is given to most vile Idolatry,
and honors the devil, even as does the king of Calicut. The manners and
fashions of the inhabita^tes, are after this sort. The gentlemen or such as
are of greatest revenues. use to wear an inward cote or peticote, not very
long: having their heads bound about with listes and rowles of sundry
colors after the manner of the Turks. The common people, cover only their
privy parts and are beside all together naked. The king of Narsinga
The King wears on his head a stately cap made of the rich cloth of Asia,
being two ha^dfulles in length. When he goes to ye wars, he wears a
vesture of ye silk called Goss^mpine, which he covers with a cloak adorned
with plates of gold: ye hemme or edge of his cloak is beset with all manner of
ouches and Iewelles. the rich trappi^g of the kinge^ horse.
His horse is judged to be of such valor if you respect ye price, as is one of
our cities. And this is by the means of ye innumerable multitude and sundry
kinds of precious s^ones, and perles where with ye ^rappers, barbes, and other
furnitures of his horse are covered, with an incredible po^pe and glory. The
soil of Narsinga, bears nether wheat nor grapes, and ^s in manner without al
kind of fruits, except ^itrons and gourdes: the inhabitants eat no bread,
but ryce, fish and flesh, and also walnuttes, which that country bears,
there begin spyces to be found, ^pices of Narsi^ga.
as ginger, pepper, mirabolanes, Cardamome, Cassia, and diverse other kinds of
spyces.

The city of Ca^^nor.
Cananor is a very excellent city, fair and beautiful in all things,
saving that the King thereof is an Idolater. This city has a haven whether
the horses of Persia are brought, but their tribute or custom, is exceeding
great: the inhabitants live with ryce, flesh, and fyshe as do they of
Narsinga: in the wars they use the sweorde, the round target, spears and
bows, and have now also the use of gonnes, they are all naked saving their
prieuie parts, and go bear headed, except when they go to the wars, for
then they cover their heads with a red hatte which they fold double, and
bind it fast with a list or band. In the wars they use neither horse, mule,
or ass, nether that kind of camels which we commonly call dromedaries: The
use of ^lepha^t^^ in the wars.
but use only Elepha^tes. There is also in the kingdom of Narsinga another
godly city called Bisinagar: The ^^tie Bisinagar.
it is compassed about with a wall, and situate on the side of a hill,
being.viij. miles in circuit having also in it a famous market place. The
soil is very fruitful, there are all delicate things to be found that may
increase the pleasures of this life. There may no where be found more
pleasant feldes and woddes for hauking and hu^tinge, Hauki^^ and hu^tinge.
a man would think it were a very Paradyse of pleasure. The king of bisinagar
The king of this city is of great power, he keeps daily many thousands of
me^ at arms, vsinge Elephantes in the stead of horses. And has ever four
hundredth Elephantes prepared for the wars.

How the Elephantes in India are prepared to war.
THe Elepha^t is a beast very docible and apt to be taught, and little
inferior from human sense, excellinge all other beasts in fortitude and
strength. Therefore ye Indians, when they prepare them to the wars, put great
packsaddels upon the^, which they bind fast with two chains of Iron, coming
under their belyes. Upon the packsaddels, The E^^pha^te^ ^^wre.
they have on every side a little house or tower, or cage, (if you list so to
call it) made of wood These towers ar made fast to the neck of the beast with
certain sawed bordes of the thickenes of half a hand breadth. Every tower
receives three men. And between both the towres^ upon the back of the beast
sytteth an Indian, a man of that country which speaks unto the beast.
Elepha^tes understands the language of th^yr cou^trei.
For this beast has marvelous understanding of the language of his natyue
country, and does wonderfulli bear in memory benefytes showed unto him. It
is also most certain that none other beast draws so nere to the excellence
of humayne sense or reason as does this beast, as may most plainly appear,
if we consider, how he is given to love and glory, to a certain friendly
gentleness and honest manners, joined with a marvelous discrecion, to know good
from evil, more ready to reco^pe^ce benefits the^ revenge injuries, which
excellent properties are not to be found in other brute beasts. Therefore when
the Elephantes go forward to ye wars, Seven armed me^ upon one Elepha^t
seven armed me^ are appointed to be carried upon one Elephant, bearing with
the^, bows, iauelins, sweordes and targettes: also the long snout of the
Elepha^t (which they call his hand) is armed with a sweorde of two cubits in
length, and in breadth and thickenes a handful, standinge right forth, tied
fast to the snowte of the beast, and thus being furnished, they proceed to
the battle: and whereas occasion requires to go forward or backwarde, the
ruler of the beast gives him warninge, whose voice he understands and
o^eyeth: The ruler speaks to the Elephant.
stryke him, says the ruler, forbear him, be fearse against these, abstain
from these, the beast obeys him in all things, as though he had humayn
reason, but if it so chance that being made afraid with fire (which thing
they fear above all other) they begin to fly, they can by no means be
allured to stop their course, or return again, for the people of that
nacio^, can with many subtyl devises as often as the^ lists, raise up fires
to make those beasts afraid. The Elepha^tes ioynte^.
There be some men which think that Elephantes have no joints in their
legs, which opinion other affirm to be untrue, for they have joints as have
other beasts, but that they are very low and almost at their fete. The females
are of greater fierceness then the males, and of much greater strength to
bear burde^s: they are sometime taken with madness, declaring the same by their
furious running. An Elepha^t excedeth in greatness three wild oxen called
Bubali, The bigness and shape of the Elephant^
and is much like of hear, and eyed like a swine, having a long snout, ha^ging
downward, with the which he puts into his mouth whatsoever he eats or
drinks, for his mouth is under his throat, not much unlike the mouth of a
swyne: his snowte has holes in it, and is holowe within, with this they
overthrow ye stu^pes of trees: and that of such bigness, that the forse
of.xxiiij. men is not able to do the same. The two great tuskes which they have
coming far ^ute of their mouth, the painters err herein.
or placed in the upper iawe, having on every side lappes hanging down of
the bigness of two hand breath. Their fete are round like unto a flat trene
dishe, having five toes like hoeues undivided, of the bigness of great
oystershelles. Understand the handebredth with the thu^be stretched forth.
Their tails are like unto the tails of wild oxen, three handful in length,
having but few hears. The males are higher then the females. They are of
sundry bigness: some are of.xiij^ ha^dfulles hye, some of.xiiij. and some.xvi.
Their pase in going, the Elephantes pa^e.
is somewhat slow and walowinge, by reason whereof, some which ride on them
and have not been accustomed thereto, are provoked to vomitte, even as they were
tossed on the sea. Yet it is great pleasure to ride on the young Elepha^tes, for
they go as softely as ambeling moiles. When you attempt to geat up, to ride on
the^, they bow down toward you, as though they would ^ase you with a sterope,
that you may the easelier geat up, which nevertheless cannot well be done with
out help. They are all unbridled, having neither with nor collar about
their necks, but go with their heads altogether lose. And because they are
not covered with bristels or big hears, they have not so much as in their
tail any help to drive away flies. The Elephante is vexed with flies.
For even this great beast also (says Pliny) is troubled with this little
vermyne. Their skin is very rowghe, and full of chappes, and riftes, like
the bark of a tree, being somewhat filthye and full of swette, which by heat
resolved into vapoure, by savor draws flies unto it: How the Elepha^t
kylleth flies.
therefore when any flies or other creping verme^ are entered into the said
riftes of their skins, suddenly bending and drawing together their skin,
they hold them fast and kyl them, and this is to the^ in the stead of a tail,
a mane, or rough and bristeled hear.

Of the beast called Rhinoceros.
Rhinoceros is commonly found in the same country, where Elephantes are
engendered, Enmity between the Elephant and Rhinoceros.
and is borne an enemy to the Elepha^t (as says Pliny) no less seking his
destruction then does the dragon: wherefore the Romans considering the natures
of these beasts, were wont to put the^ together upon the theater or stage, for
a spectable, thereby to declare the natures of enemies. The Rhinoceros ii. horns
This Rhinoceros has two horns, whereof the one is of notable bigness, growing
out of his nosethrilles, and is of flat form, and as hard as Iron. The
other grows above in his neck, and is but a little one, but wonderful
strong: when this beast attempteth to invade the Elephant, he fyleth and
whetteth his horn on a stone and stryke that the belly of the Elephant, which
place he knows to be most open to his stripes, and easyest to receive hurt,
because of the softenes thereof, which he cutteth with his horn as with a
sweord. the fight between Rhinoc^ros and the Elepha^t
Some auctours write that Rhinoceros is unequal in bigness to the Elephante:
but ^ulius Solinus says, that he is as long as the Elephante, but has ^horter
legs: when Rhinoceros therefore and the Elephant join together in fight,
they use their natural weapons: the Rhinoceros his horn, and the Elephante
his tuskes, wherewith he so violentlye beats and teareth the ^kinne of
Rhinoceros being as hard as horn or shell, Rhinoce^os naturally ar^ed.
and scarcelye able to be pearsed with a dart, that he nevertheless enforseth
him to fall down. Rhinoceros again on the other party so wounds the belie
of the Elephante with the horn of his nosethrilles, if he do not preuente his
strokes, yt he faints with bleding. In the year of Christ.1513. the first day
of May, was brought out of India to Emanuel the king of Portugale RhinoceroS
alive, Rhinoce^os seen in Portugale.
of the color of box, somewhat variable and as it were chekered, covered with
shelles like scales, or rather like shieldes. This beast was in bigness equal
to an Elepha^t, but had shorter legs, and was armed on every part. He had a
strong and sharp horn in his nosethrilles, the which (as I have said) he
fyleth, when he prepares him to fight. All this great hatered between these
two beasts, is for ye best pastures which one strives to take from the other
as some writers say. In the year of Christ.1515. King Emanuel, set forth a
spectacle in the city of Lisbona, in which was a combat between the Elephant
and Rhinoceros. Rhinoceros ouercometh the Elephant.
A sight doubtless worthy great admiracio^. But in this fight, the Elephant
had the overthrow.

Of Calicut, the most famous market town of India.
THe city of Calicut is in the continente or main land. And the houses
thereof adjoining to the sea, It is not walled about but conteyneth in
circuit.vi. thousand houses, not adhere^t together as the manner of bylding is
with us, but one being distant from another, a further space. It is exte^ded in
length a thousand pases. The houses thereof, Low and simple houses.
are but simple and very low, not passinge the heygth of a man of horseback
from the ground.

In the stead of a roof, they are covered with bows of trees, hard and
thick couched together, the cause hereof is, that if the earth there be in
any place dug five handful depth, the water springs forth, by reason
whereof they can lay no deep foundacions for their houses, sufficient to bear
any heavy roof. The King of this city is given to Idolatry, The ^ing
ho^oreth ^he devil
and honors the devil himself. Yet he denies not but that there is a God
which made heaven and earth. And the same to be the chief auctone and first
cause of all things. But says that he has committed the rule and judgment
of the world, to the devil, to whom he has ge^en power to reward men with
good or bad according to their desert^s. This devil they call Deumo, but the
mighty God and maker of the world, they call Iamerani, The Image of the devil
The king has in his Chapel the Image of this devil Deumi, sytting with a
diadem or crown on his head, much like unto the myter which the Romayne
Bishops wear, The bishop of Romes vicar at Calicut.
save that this devils myter has four notable horns. He sytteth gapinge and
has a great wide mouth, with four teeth and a deformed nose, lowringe eyes,
a grimme, terrible, and threatening cou^tenau^ce, with hooked hands like
fleshehookes, and feet not much unlike the feet of a cock. Al such as behold
this horrible monster, are suddenly astonished. For it is surely a thing most
vile to behold, and no less terrible. The chapel is on every side full of
painted deuyls: and in every corner thereof sytteth a devil made of copper,
and that so workemanly handeled, that he seems like flaming fire, The devil
eats souls.
miserably consuming the souls of me^. This devil with his right hand,
puts a soul to his mouth, and with his left hand, he takes another from a
place beneth. Every morni^g their Priests (called Bramini) wash the Image of
the devil with rose water, The de^illes chaplins
or such other sweet liquoure, and perfume him with diverse sweet savors,
kneling on their knees and praying unto him. Sacrifice to the devil.
Every seventh day, they take the blood of a cock and put it in a silver
vessel, full of burning coals: addinge thereunto innumerable odoriferous gummes
and pouders to make a sweet smoke or fumigacion. Then the Priest takes his
senser with burning coals, putting thereto frankencense, and thus makes his
oblacion to Satan, during which time of sacrifice, a little silver bell, is
ronge continuallye. The king sytteth not down to his meat, the chapleins
offer to the devil.
until four of his chapleins have offered part of the same meat to the
devil. And when the King goes to dinner, he sytteth on the ground without
either carpet or table cloth. And as he sytteth at diner, four of the priests
wait upon him standing: The priests wait on the king.
not approchinge nere unto him by the distaunce of four pases, giving reverent
attendau^ce unto the kings talk. When he has dyned, the Priests take the
meat that is left, Crows had in estimacio^
and give it to the crows to eat: which birds they have in such estimacion,
yt it is not lawful to hurt the^. When the king shall marie a wife, he goes not
to bed with her, until she be defloured of ye high Priest, The priests defloure
ye queen.
who^ the king for his pains rewards with.v.C. pieces of gold.

Of the manners of the Indians in Calicut.
NExt after the King, ye priests which serve ye Idols, Priests
are had in chief reverence. Next unto them, the Magistrates, Magistrates.
called Ner^, are no less esteemed then among us Senatoures or Lords of the
counsayl. When these go abroad, they carry with them swords, targettes, bows
and iauelins. Such as are counted of the third order, are in like place with
them, Artificers.
as are Artificers with us. They of the fourth order, live by fishinge. And to
them of the fyfthe order, ^a^ourers.
perteyneth the gathering of pepper, wine, and walnuttes. The basest and
poorest sort, are they which sow and gather ryce, being conte^ned both of the
priests and Senators. The King, the Queen, and the inhabitants of the
city, have almost no apparel, covering only their fylthy parts with cotton
of the tree called Gossampine, and not with silk: and are beside al together
naked. They go barefoted and bareheaded. The succession of the kingdom.
When the King is dead, if there remain alive any heirs, males, either
children or brethren, or br^thers children, they succ^de not in the kingdom:
for by custom of the countreye, the systers sons are inheritours to ye
crown: but if there be no such lyuinge, he succedeth in the kingdom which is
nearest of blood to ye king, of which costume, the reason is (as they say)
because the Priests defloure the Queen's. As are ye priests, such is ye
people,
When the King takes any far journey, or rydeth a hunting, the Priests
wait upon the Queen at home, and keep her company: for nothing can be more
thankful to the king, The priests keep ye que^e.
then to have the Queen thus accustomed in adulterye with the Priests by
which common prostitucion of the queen, he may well judge that the children
borne of her, are not to be esteemed as his own: and therefore assigns the
right of his inheritance to his systers children, as to the nerest of his
blood, because his brothers children (as is said before) may not succeed him
in the kingdom by the custom of the country. The noble men and merchants
use this fashion among the^ selves. Such as have wives, Exchau^ginge of wives.
do often times change their wives, one friend with an other for thencrease of
further friendship. At which exchaunging of wives, one of them speaks to
another after this manner. Forasmuch as you are my very friend, let us change
wives: on such condition, that I may have yours and you mine. The other asks
him if he speak in earneste. He swears yea: let us go the^ (says his
fellow) to my house: when they are come thither, the good man calls forth his
wife, saying unto her: Woman, come hither and follow this man: for he shall from
henceforth be thy husband. She asks him if he speak in earnest: Obedience in
^uyll.
he answers, in good earnest. The^ says the woman: I will follow him gladly.
He takes her away with him, and in like manner sends his wife to his friend.
And this is the custom which they use in chau^ging of wives. But the children
remain with their first father. Other of these Idolaters use diverse other
customs. For among some of them, One woman married to seven me^.
one woman is married to seven husbands, which lie with her by course one after
another. And when she has brought forth a child, she sends it to which of
her seven husbands she list: who may in no case refuse it. When they eat,
they lie along on the ground, and have their meat in great disshes, or treys
of copper. In the stead of spones, they use leaves of trees. Their meat, is
ryce, fish, spyces, and fruits of the common sort. The punishment of murder.
If any man commit murder, and be apprehended, he is punisshed after this
manner.

They have a kind of gallows made, with a post of the length of four
pases: On the which, not far from the top, are fastened two staves with
sharp ends, ye one lying over the other after the manner of a cross: the^ the
body of ye offender is thrust through upon one of ye staves. And so the
miserable wretch hangs until he have given up the ghost. Sin redeemed
for money.
But if any man wound another, or beat him with a staff, he redemeth
thoffence, payinge to the king a certain of gold. When they pray, Superstition^
they go first before the rising of the sun, to some river or standinge
water, wherein they plunge themselves, to the intent to wash the^ clean:
Outeward cle^lynes.
And so beeinge washed, they touch nothing until they have at home at their
houses, poured forth their prayers before their Idols. Deuylishe gestures.
When they lay them selves down on the ground, secretly to pray, they make
certain deuylishe gestures like unto mad me^, staring with their eyes, and
turning them inward after a strange sort, with no less deforminge their
countenance, very monstrous to behold. When the king prepares him to ye
wars he has in a readynesse a hundredth thousand fotemen. For of horsemen
they have no use, but only of such as fight on Elephantes. All that are of the
Kings band, have a silken fyllet of scarlet color, tied about their heads.
When they go to the wars they use round sweordes, targets, iauelins, and
bows.

Of Pepper and other spices which grow in the region of Calicut.
PEpper grows in ye suburbs of the city of Calicut. There is some also
gathered within the city. The stalk of pepper is very weak: How pepper
grows
so that it can not stand vpryghte, without a stake or proppe to sustein it,
as have ye vynes. It is not much unlike unto Iuie: and in like manner crepeth
and stretches forth it self: embrasing and ouerspreading such t^ees as grow
nere unto it. This tree (or rather shrubbe) is divided into many branches, of
the length of two or three hand breadth. His leaves are like the leaves of an
Orange tree: sauinge that these are somewhat grosser and fatter, wi^h small
veins running between on the contrary side. On every twigge there ha^geth six
thick clusters of beries, a hand breadth in length, and of the color of wild
grapes. They are gathered in the months of October and November: Inclininge
yet to a grene color, and so laying the^ on mattes or couerlettes, they set
them in the sun to be dried: where, within the space of three days, it waxes
black, even as it is brought hither. They use neither cutting nor digging, or
other tillage, Fruitful ground without tillag^
but only the simple and pure fruitfulnes and increase of the earth. Pliny
says that the trees of pepper are like unto our juniper trees. And that in
his time, some affyrmed yt they were brought forth only in the front of ye
mount Calicasus on the southsyde toward the son. But the Portugals, which in
this our days sail into the Eastpartes, have found it otherwise. The region
of Calicut, bears also Ginger: Ginger.
which doubtless is a root, and is often times found of the weighte of.xij.
ounces: but al are not of like bigness. This root enters no deper into ye
ground, the^.iii. or.iiii. ha^dbredth, like unto the read. When ginger is
dug out of ye ground, A ro^e for a sed^
they leave the knotte or ioynte of the root, in the pytte out of which they
dug the ginger: covering ye same with earth as a sede, against the next
year to increase and bring forth more ginger. It is found in plain ground of a red earth, as ar Mirabalanes. There grows also diverse other fruits and
shrubbes unknown to us, Fruytes unknown to us.
as laceri, graccara, amba, Carocapel, Comolanga, and such other of which some
have the taste and savors of quinces, some of peaches, some of damask prunes,
some of melones, and some of figs, etc. Aloe grows also in that regio^:
Aloe.
and is a certain gum, gathered from a little tree, which is fastened in the
earth, only with one root after ye manner of a staff, pytched in the ground.
The body of the tree, is tender and read, of strong savor and bitter taste.
It sometime puts forth drops of gum without any cuttinge. And this of
India, is much better then that which grows in Judea.

Of birds and beasts which are found in the region of Calicut: and of the
wine of the merueylous tree.
THere is found in Calicut, diverse and sundry kinds of four footed beasts
and fowls. As lions, wild boores, hearts, hyndes, wolves, kyne, wild oxen,
goats, and Elepha^tes: which nevertheless are not engendered there, but brought
thither. There be also grene popingiays, Papingiayes of diverse kinds.
and some white feathers of variable colors, lying like scoutchins Some also of
purple color. Of these there is such plenty, that they are feign to appoint
me^ to keep the^ from the rice which grows there in the feldes. They are
merueilous chatteringe and of small price. There are also birds called Sarau,
Sweet si^ginge of ^irdes
somewhat less then popingiayes, but make a much sweter noise. There are also
many other kinds of birds unlike unto ours: Of which, every morning and
evening is heard such a harmony and so sweet a noise, that nothing can be
more delectable: In so little mouths consists in manner al music, and
therefore the inhabitauntes live in great pleasure, as though they were in an
earthly paradise, Earthly paradise
where flowers are ever springing, and trees continue grene all the hole year.
The heaven is beneficial unto the^, and the air most temperate continually.
te^perate air.
So that they are nether bytten with cold in winter nor burnt with heat in
somer, but live as it were in continual spring time. Continual spring
The same regio^ bri^geth forth also Marmasets and Munkeys, Munkeys.
which are great hinderaunce to ye men of the country: and specially to the
poor sort, beecanse they clyme the walnut trees, and spylle the sweet
liquoure of the fruit thereof, of which the Indians make most pleasant wine.
For these India^s have a tree most excellent above all other trees of the
world, which brings forth dates like unto the Palm tree. A tree of sundry
commodit^es^
This tree serves the^ for firewood: and bears a kind of walnuttes most
delicate to be eaten: Also a kind of cords, soft cloth, wine, oil, and
sugar. But chiefly it brings forth this excellent kind of nuttes like unto
dates. From these they take away the first rynde or bark and cast it in the
fire. The other fruit is not much unlike Gossampin^ cotton, or sylke. Silk
of trees.
Of the flowers they make cloth like silk: the flax which is left, they
spinne again, and make thereof small roopes or cords. Ropes of trees.
The last bark or rind, contains the nutte, whose thickenesse is no more
the^ the little finger of a ma^s hand. Furthermore the sweet liquoure or
wine, Wine of trees.
is engendered with the nutte, so that as the nutte grows, the liquoure also
increases: In so much that when the nut is full grown, the lyquoure fyllethe
the inn ward parts of of the same. And this liquoure or wine, is most
clear, not much unlike unto rosewater: Of which nevertheless is made a very
fat oil. Oil of water.
They cut also the trunk or stock of the tree in ye morning and evening: by
which means they gather a most excellent liquour, which they sees on the
fire, and make thereof so merueylous a drink, that if a man drink thereof
beyond measure, he is drieuen into fury and madness. This liquour is used there
in the stead of wine. But let us now return to the beasts which are found in
Calicut. Serpents grow there unto such houdge greatness, Serpe^ts as big
as swine
that they are in manner as big as swyne. They have heads much larger the^
bores heads. They are four foted, four cubits in length, engendered and
co^uersaunte in fennie and marrishe grounds. Serpe^ts without ^oyso^.
The men of that cou^trei say that these beasts are without poison. There are
also found other kinds of serpents: of the which one kind has so mortal
venime, that if they draw never so little blud, it causes present death.
There are other serpents which in qua^tite represent the serpent called Aspis.
Again, othersome are much higher of which there are great plenty. The men of
the country think yt they are spirits fallen from heaven: Serpe^t^ counted
for heavenly spirits.
and therefore have them in great reverence. They have conceived this opinion of
them, because that in manner with touching, they bring present death. And this
is the cause whi there is so great abundaunt of serpents, that by the kings
commandment it is not lawful to hurt the^: and therefore they wander safelye
where them lists, and are esteemed of them as things that bring good fortune.
For whereas the men of ye country, go abroad about any business, they take
it for good luck to mete any of them by the way. The popingiayes of India,
grene popingaies
are for the most part, of grene color beside ye head, which is either read or
yelowe like gold. They have a great and large tongue, and are therefore of a
louder voice, and speak more plainly. They learn the first and second year
such things as are taught them. And bear them longer in memory. They drink
wine, and use their fete in the stead of hands when they feed.

Of the sundry kinds of Spices, which are found in Calicut, and from whence
they are brought thither.
GInger grows in Calicut, yet is there much brought thither from the city
of Canonor. Canonor,


Cinamome comes from the Island of Zaylon, Zaylon
which is fyftye leages beeyonde Calicut Eastwarde.

Pepper grows in Calicut: but much more is brought thither from Corimucol,
Corimucol.
which is.xij. leages beyond Calicut.

Cloves are gathered in a place, called Meluza, Meluza,
certain leages distant from Calicut.

Nutmegges and Mace, grow in Molucha, Molucha
being distante from Calicut hundredth and three score leages, and somewhat more.

Musk and Castoreum, is brought from the region of Pego, Pego,
which is from Calicut, almost hundredth and fyftye leages.

Pearls of the biggest sort, are gathered near unto the Island and city of
Ormus, Ormus,
situate in the goulfe called Sinus Persicus: And are sent from thence to
Calicut, as to the general market town of all the East parts.

Spikenarde, and Mirabalanes, as brought from Cambaia to Calicut. Cambaia.


Frankencense, and Myrre, come from Arabia. Arabia.


Aloe, and Camphyre, are brought from Kyui, or China.l. l^ages from Calicut.
China.


Samoto^.
Long pepper comes from Samotor. Cardamome ye greater, is brought from Canonor.

Darnasseri.
Presilium, or brasyll, comes from Darnasseri, otherwise called Tarmasseri,
almost.CC. leages from Calicut.

Of the Island of Zaylon, and of Cinomome found there.
ZAylon is a very large region^ and brings forth chefelye Elephantes in
great plenty. Elepha^tes.
It has also Mountains of merueylous length: at the roots whereof ar found
Rubines, Hiacinthes, Sapphires, Topases, precious stones.
and such other precious stones. In this Island grows the Cinomome tree,
Cinomome.
not much unlike y^ bayetree, specially in the leaves. It brings forth
graynes much like unto baye beries, but somewhat less and whytishe. That which
we commonly call Cinomome, is nothing else but the bark or rynde of a tree,
which is gathered after this manner Every third year they cut of the branches
of the trees, and take of the bark or rynde thereof, which is our Cinomome.
They cut not the body of the tree, but only the branches. When it is first
gathered, it is grene, and not perfectly sweet until it be kept a month. This
Island is situate under the Equinoctial line, The Equinoctial ly^e
where is continual spring all the year. The inhabitauntes wear clokes,
with one arm out uncovered, and have clothe made of Gossampine cotton, or of
silk. weapo^^ of redes
A read is to them in the stead of sword, rapyre, and iauelyne. And are
therefore seldom slain in the wars.

Of the city of Tarnasseri, and the manner of the cytezins there.
Narsinga
THe city of Tarnasseri, is distaunte from the Kingdom of Narsinga.xiiij.
days sailing Estward, and has a king of great puyssau^ce and marvelous
rich. The soil of this city, brings forth wheat, cotton of Gossampine
trees, and ple^tie of silk. The fields bring forth all kinds of fruits:
quinces also and oranges. It is replenisshed with many and sundry kinds of
beasts as well wyld as tame, as kyne, sheep, gotes swyne, hearts, hyndes,
wolves and lions. There are also seen those kinds of cattes which bear the
rich furs called Zibellim, ^he beast which bears the furre called Sable^.
which we call Sables. In all the fields and woods of this region are found
many Peacockes, Faulcons, and most fair Popingiayes of white color
intermingled with seven variable colors. There is also marvelous plentye of
hares and partryches. There are many other strange kinds of fowls: Foule^
of marvelous bigness.
and specially such as live by pray, which are much higher then Eagles:
whose upper beakes are of such bigness and hardness, that handles for sweordes
are made thereof. Also the cocks and hens of this region are much higher
and bigger then ours. When the people of the countreye go to their meat, they
lie down on the ground without carpet or cloth: Yet use they wooden
vessels. workemanlye made. Their drink is water myxte with sugar: but the
poorer sort, drink only water. Their beds are made of Gossampine cotton,
Bedde^ of silk.
with couerlettes also of cotton or sylke. They go all in general barefooted
except the Priests. Priests
The King of this city, does not commytte his wife to the Priests to be
defloured, as does the king of Calicut, the queen defloured of white men.
but to white men, as are the christians and Turks. For this office is not
committed to the Idoloters. But after that the new married queen has been thus
defloured the first night, if ever after she do dishonor the King her
husband, by violating the faith made to him, Adulteri punisshed with death
from thencefoorth never to know any other man carnally, her punishment is
death incontinently. When the Kings or the Priests dye, their bodies are laid
on a great fire, and the ashes thereof reserved in erthen pottes, putting
thereto a portion of salt petre, and buryinge the same in their own houses.
How the king is buried.


While the bodies are burning, they cast into the fire al kinds of sweet
sauouring gummes, and spices: as Aloe, Frankencense, Myrre, Storax, Coralle,
sandalles, and such other innumerable: In the mean time blowing tru^pets and
shawmes, M^^stre is^
after the manner of the^ which among the gentiles were canonized into ye
number of the gods. And within xv. days after ye husbands death, the que^ne
dies willing^ly.
the wife calls to her all her kinsfolks, bidding them to a banquet: and fo
being decked with all her jewels, she proceeds with the^ to the place where her
husband was buried, where a grave is redye dug for her, enclosed about with
silke^ cloth, having in it a fire made of sweet wood. When the woman has
thus feasted her kynsfolkes, she eats much of the herb called Betola, the
her^ Betola^
whereby she is driven into a madness. In this mean while, innumerable
tru^petters (wearing such vestures as they use in the deuyls service) go as it
were on procession about the grave, while the woman runs up and down,
daunsing continually like a frantike body. And thus when the ceremonies are
fynished, she casts her self headlong into the fire and grave: What
^redulitie may do in false religion,
and that with no less cherefulnes the^ if she should be received into heaven.
And unless the woman should perform this custom, she should incur most
vile infamy, and be a mocking stock to all her nacio^, Honor dear boughte
as one that loved not her husband. But the common people use not this custom:
but only the rulers and princes. And therefore the king him self is often times
present at these solemnities.

Of the kingdoms and cities of Pego and Bangella.
the king and city of Bangella
FRom the city of Iarnasseri, to the city of Bangalla, is.xi. days saylinge.
This city has a king: and the country is very fruyteful with great plenty
of wheat, flesh, sugar, ginger, and gossampine cotton: and has therefore very
rich marcha^tes. There yearly passes from this city fyftie ships frayghted
with gossampine cotto^, and silk clothes: Sil^^^
which are carried from thence to the Turks, Syrians, Arabians, Persians,
Ethiopians, and Indians. Here are also found certain Christian merchaunt men,
which come out of Thempire of the great Cham of Cathay: Chr^^^i^ men of Cathay
bringing with them Aloe, Castoreu^ and the sweet gu^me called Laserpitium,
with other sweet savors. In this city, the men spinne and card and make
clothe, and not the womenne. From this city Eastwarde, is another great city
called Pego, The (...) of (...)
being situate by a very fair river. The King of this city, is an Idolater,
and has innumerable men of worre, both horsemenne and footemenne. The soil
bears wheat plentifullye: and brings forth in manner all kinds of
beasts, and has therefore great abundaunce of flesh Yet are there but few
Elephants: But of other beasts and fowls, great plenty as is at Calicut:
and specially of popingiayes, which are of louder voice the^ in any other
place. There is little trafficque or marchaundise in this region, Ru^ies
shyning by night
except jewels and precious stones and specially Rubies, called Pyropi, which
are brought thither from the city of Capelan. Lacha, Lacca, or ^^acta^ is
(...) tree (...).
These precious stones shine so brighte in the dark night, as though it were
the son beams. The country adjoining, brings forth Lacha, Sandalum,
called saunders: Also brasile, gossampine cotton and sylke. ^^laccha
From Pego to the city of Malaccha (which some call Melaqua) is eyghe^ days
saylinge: where on the other side is seen a great Island called Sumatra, ^^matra.
otherwise Samotra, and was in time paste called Taprobana. ^aproba^a.
This Malaccha, has a goodly and commodious haven: by reason whereof, more
ships arrive there then in any other place: bringinge with them spyces and
other marchaundise in great abundance. The region is not generally fruytful,
yet has it wheat and f^eshe: but great scarceness of wood. The souls wander
in the feldes as they do in the region of Calicut. But the popingiayes are
here much fayrer. It brings forth also spices, saunders, tin, elepha^tes,
horses, sheep wild oxe^, pecockes, and such other kinds of beasts. It is not
lawful there to bye and sell^ except you bye spices and sylke. It is also
there very dangerous to walk in the city in the night season, because of
the theft and cruelnes of the inhabita^tes, which kill one another like dogs.
And therefore the marchaund strangers lodge not out of their ships. How the
Portugales subdued Malaccha, shall be said hereafter in the descripcion of the
new Islands.

Of the great and rich Island of Sumatra, or Samotra, sometime called
Tabrobana.
^he Ila^d of Taprobana.
SOme think this Sumatra, to be that Island which of the old writers is called
Tabrobana. It is very great and rich: and has in it four Kings crowned
with Diademes. They are Idolaters: in religion, manner of lyuinge, and apparel,
not much unlike the King of Tarnasseri. They exceade all other men in
bigness of body. They have greye or blewe eyes, and are of cruel
countenance, and terrible voice. They are long lived, Me^ of a hundredth ^eres
of age.
and live even until an hundredth years of age. The sea in certain channels is
of such height and depth, that no anchor may come to the bottom thereof. The
inhabitants are great fyshers on the sea, and have great pleasure to take the
shelle fysshe, called the Tortoyse of the sea: of which, some are of such
houdge bigness, that the shelle of one of them may suffice to make a house well
able to receive a hole famelie. Shelle^ of fishe^ for houses.
For some of them bear shelles of xv. cubits in length: and are therefore apt
for that purpose. The most part of this Island is burnte with heat, and has
in it many desolate places and wildernesses. There are found many and great
Pearls. Great pearles^
For their money, Coined gold and silver for money
they use coined gold, silver and tynne. The golden coin, has on the one
side a devils head graven, and on the othersyde a chariot which Elephantes
draw. This region brings forth more plenty of Elephantes, of greater
stature, and a better broede, then are found in any other place. In the sea
about this Island, are often times seen the great monstrous fysshes, Fishes of
monstrous bigness
and kind of Whales, called Balene, which bring many inco^modities to the
inhabitants. They are of such monstrous bigness, that when they approach to the
Sea banks, they seem like unto hills: they have rough backs full of sharp
pricks. And except men walk very warely by the sea banks, they are in
danger to be suddenly swalowed up of these monsters. Some of the^ have so
great and wide mouths, that they sometimes swallowe whole ships with the
me^. This country brings forth Lacha, Lacca, or Lacta, (...).
which steyneth silk and cloth in high read or crimison color. It is
engendered in a tree, not much unlike unto our walnut trees. There is also great
plenty of pepper, higher the^ is found in other places. In their mother tongue
pepper is called Molaga. It is sold there by measure, Pepper sold by measure
as wheat is with us, and not by weight. There is so great ple^tie hereof, that
there are yearly certain ships lade^ therewith to Cathay Cathay.
where ye air is colder. From Sumetra to the Island of Banda, the Il^ad of banda
which is but rude and barren, and of plain and low ground, whose
inhabitants are barbarous, and little differinge from beasts, having low
houses, and no apparel but shertes, barefoted and bareheaded, with long hear,
of despicable stature, dulle witted, of no strength, and Idolaters. The soil
of this country, brings forth nothing but nutmegges, and a few other
fruits. The s^alke or bodi of ye nutmeg tree, The nutmeg tree
is not much unlike ye stalk of a peache tree, bringing forth like branches
and leaves, but somewhat narower. Before these nutts be ripe, ye mace crepeth
on the tree, like a flourishing rose. Mace
And when the nutte waxes ripe, the mace embraseth it round about. And so they
gather both together in commune, at a time appointed: for they use no
distribucion thereof, but he that gathers most, has most. This tree brings
forth his fruit plentifully without any art of husbandrye or tyllage. They
are gathered at such time as we gather chestnuttes From this Island within six
days sailing, is the Island of Monoch, the Ila^d of Mo^och.
in the which cloves are found, as also in other Islands, thereto adioyninge.
The tree which bears cloves, has his stalk not much unlike unto the box
tree, with leaves like the Cinomome tree, but somewhat rounder. Cloves.
And when the cloves begin to wax ripe, they beat the trees with redes,
spreding first couerlettes or mattes under ye same. The ground where these
trees grow, is of ye color of cleye or sand. This regio^ is situate so low,
that ye seven stars called Septen^riones (being not far from Vrsa mayor,
Charles Waine.
called charles wayne) ca^ not there be seen, Pole Antartike.
because y^ south pole (called pole Antartike) appears above the earth.

Of the Island of Bornei.
THe Ila^d of Bornei (which some call Porne) is distant from Monoch fifty
leages. The inhabitants are Idolaters, Idoloters.
very quick witted, and of manner of living not greatly to be discommended. They
use not al one kind of apparel. Some wear shertes of gossampine cotton, some
beasts skins, and some high cappes like myters, of read color. This Island
brings forth yearly great plenty of Camphora, called camphyre, Ca^phire
which they affirm to be the gu^me of a certain tree. Of this Island I will
speak more hereafter in the nauigacions toward the East parts.

Of the Island of Giaua.
The Island of Gyaua, is distant from Bornei, v. days sailing toward the
south. This Ila^d is so great, yt it co^teineth in it many kingdo^s: y^
inhabita^tes a^ given to idolatri. It brigeth forth silk, Silk grows in
woods.
which of it self grows there plentifullye in the wooddes. The precious
stone called Smaragdus (which is ye true Emerode) is found there more
excellent, The ^maragde or emerode Gold and copper.
then in any other place of the world. It has abundaunce of gold and copper
of the best kind. The soil bears wheat and other corn, withal kinds of
fruits in great plenty. When the men of this country go to the sea, their
weapons are bows, arrows of redes
and arrows of redes. They use also to infect their arrows with venime,
arrows infected with venime.
and to blow them out of a trunk as we do pellets of claye: with the which
if they draw never so little blood, present death follows immedialye. They
have also this custom, A strange custom
that when they see their parents by reason of age to be unprofitable, they
bring the^ to the market town, and there sell them to the people called
Anthropophagi, Anthropophagi
which eat ^leshe, of whom they are incontine^tly slay^e, and eaten. The same
do the^ with the younger forte also, if they fall into any desperate disease.

Of the Island of Iaua.
THere are two Islands of this name, as Iaua the more and Iaua the less. The
biggest reaches forth toward the South, and is said to have in it many
kingdoms. The inhabitants are Idolaters and have a peculier language. In this
Island is great plenty of pepper, Spyce^
Nuttemegges, Spikenarde, Galangale, and other spices. Mani merchants of
other countreies are wont to resort thither, and geat great riches by ye
spices which they carry from thense. In this Island also are people called
Anthropophagi, which are wont to eat men's flesh.

Of the Island of Madagascar.
THis Island is counted to be one of the greatest and rycheste Islands of the
world. The inhabitants are of Mahumets sect as are the Turks. Mahumetistes
It brings forth many Elephantes, Elepha^tes.
by reason whereof there is great plenty of Iuerye which is the Elephantes to
the. For it is thought that there is no greater plenty of Iuerie, Iuerie
the^ in this Island and in the Island of Cuzibet. the Ila^d of Cuzibet.
They eat the flesh of none other beasts, but only of Camels, Camels flesh
eaten.
because the Island is full thereof, and also that it is found to be more
wholesome for the people of that country then any other flesh. There are also
in this Island many woddes that bring forth read sanders, woddes of read
Sa^ders
for the which many merchants resort thither. In the sea about this Iland^
great whales are taken, Whales Amber,
out of the which amber is gathered. There are lio^s, leopardes, Lions and
Leopardes.
hearts, hyndes, goats, and many other beasts and fowls, by reason whereof,
they use much haukinge and huntinge.

Of the Island of Zanzibar.
THe Island of Zanzibar, has a peculier King and language. The inhabitants
are idolaters, and are of gross and short stature: Big men of low stature.
but if their heygth did answer to their thickenesse and breadth, they
might seem to be giauntes. They are all black, and go naked, only covering
their pryuie parts. The hear of their heads, is merueylouslye corlde. People
deformed.
They have great mouths, nosethrilles flyrtting upward and wide, with great
ears and cruel eyes. Their women are deformed by reason of their great eyes,
great mouths, and great nosethrilles. They live with milk, flesh, ryce,
and dates. Ryce and Dates.
They lack wine: Yet they make a pleasant drink of ryce, sugar, and other
spices. ^rinke of spices
Many merchants resort thither for yuerie and Amber, Amber.
for there is great plentye of Elephantes and great whales.

Of the two Islands, in one of the which dwell only men, and in the other
only women.
IN the main sea, there are two Islands, distante the one from the other
about.viij. or.ix. leages toward the south, situate between the city of Aden
and Calicut. In one of the which dwell only men without the company of women,
and is called the Island of men. the Ila^d of men.
And in the other dwell only women, without men, and is called the Island of
women. the Ila^d of women
They are Christians, christians
and contract matrimony. The women never come to the Island of men, but the
men are accustomed to vysyte the women once in the year, and tarry with them
three months continually, every man with his own wife in his own house:
after which time they return again to her own Island, where they remain all
the year after. The women keep the me^ children with them until they be xv.
years of age, and then send them to their fathers. The women have naught else
to do, but to take charge of their children, and to gather certain fruits.
But the men labor and have care how they may find their wife and children.
They are exercysed in fyshing, Fishing
and sell fyshes both new taken and old dried, to marchaunte strangers,
whereby they receive great commoditios.

Of the great Empire of Cathay, being under the dominion of the great Cham
(which some call the great Can) Emperor of Tartaria, in old time called
Scythia.
THe superior or high India, which is now called Cathay, is a region
exceeding large and of great power, whose Emperor is ye great Cham of
Tartaria, the great Cham of Tartari
having under him many Provinces, people and Princes, and innumerable Ila^des
in the great East sea, called the great Ocean. He has under his dominion
great and famous cities, Famous cities under the great Cham.
as are these: Cambalu, Quenquinafu, Mi^n, Cacausu, Canglu, T^dinfu, Tingui,
and diverse other. Among the people of this country, one man has many wives,
many wives.
which declare their love to their husbands after this sort. When the husband
is dead, every one of his wives plead their cause before a judge, What
natural affection may do
to prove which of them was most loving to her husband and best beloved of
him: so yt she which by the sentence of the judges is found to have been most
faithful and dilige^te, decketh herself most gorgiously in all her sumptuous
array, and proceeds like a Virago stoutly and cherefully to the fire, where
the corpse of her husband was burnte, castinge her self into the same fire,
embrasing and kissing the dead bodi of her husband, until she also be consumed
by the fire, which she reputeth for an honorable sepulture: whereas his other
wives are esteemed to live in shame and infamy. They join in marriage, neither
in respect of riches or nobilite, but only for love and beauty: and rather
for ye increase of posterity, then for plea^ure. There is also another
strange custom among these Indians: A stra^g^ custom
and yt is, that whereas the poorer sort are not able to give any dowry with
their daughters to marriage, they bring the^ forth, eue^ in ye flower of their
age to ye market place, with tru^pettes and such other instruments as they use
in the wars. Where, the multitude being called together, the maids first
of all, discouere their back parts, even up to the shoulders, and afterward
their forepartes in like manners. And upon this declaring their poverty and
nakedness, are married to such as like the^ best. This people of Cathay, The
people of Cathay.
are of the nation of the^ which in time past were called Scythians, a kind of
men (as says Haitho) of subtle wit: affyrming that only they see with two
eyes, and that all other men beside them are blind of the one eye. Their
quickenes of wit is great, but their boasting is more. The hole nacio^ is
persuaded that they greatly excel all other me^ in subteltie of wit and
knowledge. The inhabitants are white men, with small eyes, without beardes,
and utterly void of all godly knowledge. Idolotours.
For some of them pray to the sun, some to the moon, some to Images, some to
an ox, and some to other monsters of their fantastical supersticion. They
have no law written, and are of no faith. And albeit that in workema^ship and
arts they are marvelous wyttie, yet have they no knowledge of dyuine or godly
things. It is a timorous kind of men, and greatly fearinge death. And are
therefore in their wars, more politic then valient. In the wars, they use
arrows, and certain other kinds of weapons unknown to men of other
countries. The money which they use, Money of paper
is made of a certain paper, beeinge four square, with ye Kings image
printed thereon. Their household stuff is of gold and silver and other metals.
Gold and Syluer^
they have great scarcenes of oil. The great Emperor of Cathay, keeps his
court in the rich and mighty city called Cambalu, the city of Cambalu.
being the chefest city of all the Empire, and of such greatness that it
conteyneth in circuit six l^ages. This city is four square, so that every
quadrature or side of the wall, has in it three principal ports or gates. Also
in all the corners of the walls, are very fair palaces, in which the
artillery or armure of the city is reserved. The streets are made very
straight and right forth: so that from any one gate to the other being
directly over against the same, a man may se plainly through the city, having
ye houses on every side like palaces, placed in goodly order, most beautiful
to behold. Without the city, there are twelve great suburbs, adhere^t to
the.xii. gates of ye city, whether the merchants and strangers, Marcha^^yse.
have their continual recourse as to ye burse or street. It can not be spoken
what great abundaunce of marchaundise and riches is brought to his city: a man
would think that it were sufficient to serve all the world. Precious stones,
precious stones and spyces.
pearls, silk, and spices of diverse kinds are brought thither, from India
and Mangi, and other regions. There passes not a day in the year in which
there are not about a thousand waynes lade^ with silk which are brought to
this city by strange merchants. No^e.
What great pomp, glory, and forniture of all things, is observed in the
Emperors court, the king of Cathay his court
it can not be spoken. He has in his court twelve thousand horsemen, which
have the custody of his body: and distribute their waytinge days after this
order, yt whereas one of ye captains of this gariso^ with his three thousand
soldiers has waited upon the kings person, three days, another captain
in like order with as many men succedeth in his rowme for other three days,
and likewise an other after him, executethe the same office. When the Emperor
makes any bankette, it cannot be said what great pomp is observed. He has
sytting at his left hand his chefest queen who^ he most estemeth: The Queen.
and at his right hand his sons, and such as are of the kings blood: but
they sit somewhat lower and further of. The other noble men which wait not,
sytte in a place yet somewhat lower. All such as in the court sit at meat, use
none other drinking cups then of gold Golden plate.
The Princes which wait on the Emperor at his meat, worldly glory.
have all their mouths covered with fine silken clothes, least in any case
they should blow or breath on the kings meat or drink. And when the Emperor
lifts up his cup to drink, all the musicions and minstrels that stand about
him, play on their instruments, while in the mean time all such as wait on
him, stoop down and make low courtesy. How great honor is exhibited to
this Emperour', and how many precious and rich presents are offered unto him
by his Princes, Dukes, Leave tenauntes and presydentes of provinces, and rulers
of cities, no man is able to express, forasmuch as he has under him in manner
innumerable Kingdoms, Provinces, Nations and Dominions, which are on every
side about Cathay, and acknoweledge him to be their only Lord and King, whom
they honor and reverence as a great God and mighti Mahumet. A living Idol.
In what pomp and triumphant magnificence he shows him self when he goes to
hawk or hunt, and how many tents he pitcheth in the field, which being seen a
far of, a man would think to be a great city, he that desires to know,
let him read Paulus Venetus, Paulu^ venetu^
in the second book of his nauigacions into India, where he shall find things
to marueyl at. In Cathay they make a pleasant drink of ryce and certain
spyces, Drink of rice and spyces.
which in drinking excels the swetenes of wine. In many places they have
great lack of wood: In the stead whereof, Dug cole.
they dig out of the mountains a certain kind of black stone which burn
in the fire like coals, and continue so long, that if they be kyndled over
night, they keep fire unto the morning.

Of certain Provinces and regions subject under the dominion of the great
Cham Emperor of Cathay.
THere passes through the kingdom of Cathay, a certain great river called
Pulisachnites, which emptieth it self in the great Ocean sea, by the which
river, ships have their passage into that land. Over this river is a very
fair bridge of marble, A great bridge of marble.
being in length three hundredth pases, and in breadth, eyghte pases,
with.xxiiii. arches, and graven Lio^s on every side, adourning the rayles or
highest margentes of the same. From hence it is not far to the fair and
great kingdom of ^ainfu, the ki^gdome of Tainfu.
in the which are many goodli vynes. For in the kingdom of Cathay there grows
no wine, but is brought the there from this region. In this kingdom is great
use of marchaundyse, and has plenty of conning artificers, Co^nyng artificers.
so that all the armure which the great Cham uses in his wars, is made there.
Toward the region of Mangi, is situate the river Caromoram, which for the
great breadth and depth, has no bridge. In this region is great abundaunce
of Ginger, Ginger.
silk, birds, and specially Phesantes. Somewhat beyond this, is the great
city of Quenquinafu, Quenquinafu.
being the chief city of the same kingdom. In this region are found many
muskeca^tes. the mus^e catte.
This beast in this countreye, is but little and fair, about the bigness of
a mean catte, with gross hear like a heart, having blunte claws on his
fete, with two long teeth in the upper iawe, and two in the nether iawe: and
has nere unto the navel a bladder full of a certain matter like unto blood,
being of wonderful ^tagrant sauoure, Siuet or musk.
and is the true musk.

Of the Province of Mangi, and merueylous cities contained in the same.
THe Province of Mangi, has in it many notable and great cities, in the which
is great exercise of marchaundyse: Marcha^dyse.
and specially in the city of Conigangui, is sold great plenty of salt.
^alte.
In the city of Panchi, there is great sale of silk. Sylke.
In the city of Sianfu, Cloth of gold.
is made great ple^tie of clothes of gold and silk. In the city singui, is a
famous market where great abundance of marchau^dise is brought by the river.
Nere unto the city of Caigui, grows plenty of blade and ryce, Ryce.
that it is carried from thence to the court of the great Cham. In ye city of
singui, are nu^bred to be about six thousand bridges of stone, VI. ^ bridges
of stone.
having so high arches, that great ships may pass under the same without
bowing down of the mast. There is another city called Quinsai, the great city
of Quinsai.
which is so fair and great, that there is thought to be no bigger in all the
world. It conteyneth in circuit, a hundredth Italien miles, which make xxv.
leages. It has twelve thousand bridges of stone, Xij. M^ bridges of stone.
and those so high that great ships with the maste standing up right, may
pass under. This city is situate in a marrishe ground, much like unto venes.
Therefore if they should lack bridges, they could not pass over from the one
side of the street to the other. Artificers.
It has innumerable artificers and many merchants. Merchants
The cytezins live pleasantly, and specially the women, which are fayrer the^
in other parts of ^ndia. Toward the South side of the city, there is a great
lake or poole within ye walls of the city, which co^teyneth in circuitie
about.viii. leages, having about the banks thereof many noble men's houses,
very fair both without and within. E^mmo^ ba^keti^ge houses.
In the middeste of this lake, there are two little Ila^des and in every of the^
a goodly palace, in y^ which are reserved al such ornaments and vessels as
they use for their marriages and solemn feastes^ for whereas any of the
cytezins entende to make any great banquet, or feast, they bring their gestes to
one of these palaces, where they are honorably enterteined. In the streets of
ye city, are certain common towers, into y^ which, A good prouysio^ again^te
fire.
al such as dwell near thereto, carry their goods and stuff, if it so
chance, ye fire be in the city. The inhabitants are Idoloters: and eat the
flesh of horses and camels, Flesh of horses eaten.
and of other unclean beasts. The great Cham has in this cyt^e a myghtie
garrison to the intent to avoid rebellion, A p^ouision against rebellion.
theft and murder. For on every bridge there wayteth daily and nightlye.x.
watchmen for the same purpose: and because the Province of Mangi is exceeding
large, the great Cham has divided it into nine Kingdoms, assigninge unto
every one a peculier King: which are al of great power, and yet subject to
the great Cham. One of them dwells in the city of Quinsai. In this Province
of Mangi, Anthropophagi.
is an other Kingdom, called Fugui, in which the people eat man's flesh,
so that they dye not of any disease. They drink the blood and eat the flesh
of such as are slain in ye wars. Hens having hear in the stead of
feathers.
There are hens found in this region, which in the stead of feathers, have
hear much like cattes hear of black color: And lay very good eggs.

Of the regio^ of Tangut, and of the great deserts, and voices of deuylles
heard in the same, and of the Salamandra.
the way from Persia to Cathay.
FRom the Kingdom of Persia, there are two iourneyes to the region of Cathay.
For either the south side must be observed toward India, or else to pass by
the provinces of Carcham, Cotam and Peim, Northeastwarde to the city of Lop,
the city of Lop.
being the greatest and most notable city in all that region, lying between
the East and the North at the entrau^ce at the great desert. In this city, al
such merchants, The journey by ye deserts
as entende to pass the deserts, make preparacio^ for all things necessary
for their yourneye: And rest in the same, until they are well provided of
strong asses and camels to carye there vitayles. And when in ye desert their
vitayles begin to fail the^, they kyl their asses or leave the^ there in the
wyldernes, because they can no longer provide them of pasture, until they have
passed over the deserte. But they preserve their camelles, because they are
sustained with less meat, and bear greater burdens. In this deserte are
often times found bitter waters: Bitter waters^
but more often fresshe and sweet waters: so that in manner every day for the
space of thyrtye days, a man may find fresshe water, but that in so little
quantity that it does not suffice all the merchants which pass that way
together. That deserte is very full of of mountains. And when you are come to
the low and plain ground, the residue of the journey is all together by the
sands: it is through out baren and saluage, so that it is not able to nourishe
any beasts for lack of pasture. In this wilderness are often times heard and
seen, as well by day as by night, Illusio^s of evil spirits.
sundry illusions of evil spirits. And therefore such as travail through
the same, have need to take great head least they disseuer or depart far in
sundre, or least any linger behind his company, as well for that he may hereby
lose the sight of them by reason of mountains or hills, lyinge beetwene, as
also because there are heard voices of deuyls, voices of deuyls.
calling the^ that wander alone, by their proper names, conterfeyting the
voices of their company that goes before, by this means withdrawing them
from the right way, and bringinge them to destruction. There is often times
heard in the air, as it were a noise of musical instruments: Strange noises
in the air.
but more often like the sound of drumslades or timbrels. This great desert
being passed over, they come to the city called Sachion, the city of Sach^o^
which is situate in the enteraunce of the great Province of Tangut, where
among certain Mahumetistes, are found a few Christian men called Nestoriani
of the sect of Nestorius. christians of the heresy of Nestorius.
There are also many Idoloters, having their monasteries consecrated to
diverse Idols, Monasteries of Idoloters.
to which they offer many sacrifices, and attribute great honor to deuyls. And
when a man has a son borne, he forthwith commends him to some Idol, A
strange custom
in whose honor he nourishes a ram all that year, which after that his
son be twelve months old, at the next feast of the same Idol, he and
his son offer with many ceremonies. When this oblacion is finished, they
bring the sacrificed f^eshe to a place appointed, where al his kinsfolks
being gathered together, they eat that flesh with great religion, and keep
the bones reverently in a certain vessel: but in the funeralles of the dead,
they use these ceremonies and supersticions. Ceremonies in funerals
All the neighbors of the dead, provide that the dead corpse be burned: which
custom all the people of the East parts do observe. Yet some of the^ keep ye
dead body by them certain days before they burn it: As some, seven days,
some for the space of a month and some six months, preparing for the same a
close cheste, so inuoluinge with cereclothe, and ponderinge with spyces the
body therein enclosed, that no evil sauoure may pass forth. This done,
they paynte the cheste very curiouslye, and cover it with a precious clothe,
placinge their dyninge table hard by the same, where they dyne continuallye as
long as the dead body is thus reserved at home. A gross and vain persuasion.
And in the dinner time for the space of one hole hour, they set wine and
meat upon the cheste, supposing the soul of the dead body to be partaker of
the same. The Region of Tangut, the region of Ta^gut.
is very large, and conteyneth in it many private Provinces, as the Province
of Camul, of Cinchital, and Suchur, with diverse fair Cities, which are all
Subject and obey to the great Cham of Cathay. Some of the inhabitants believe
in Mahumet: Mahumetistes
some acknowledge Christ after the heresye of Nestorius. In the land of
Chinchital, is a Mountain out of the which is dygged the mine of stele and
Audanici. Stele.
There is also found the Serpente called Salamandra, Salama^dra.
which lives in the fire without any hurt. Of the hear of this serpent, is
made a certain cloth, which being cast in the fire when it is foul, is
thereby made clean and very white if it remain there for ye space of an
hour. Such other innumerable and marvelous things, Paulus Venetus.
writes Paulus ^enetus that he has seen and found in his nauigacions into
these parts: of whom also I have gathered thus much, lettinge pass many
other things whereof he speaks more at large.

Here ends the descripcio^ of the Nauigacions from Spain to the new India
Eastward, and follows of the new Islands and India found in the West Ocean
sea, from Spain Westward and Southweste.
Of the new India and Ila^des in the West Ocean sea, how, when, and by who^
they were found.
CHristophorus Columbus, Christophorus Colu^bus.
a Gentlemen of Italy, and borne in the city of Cenua, when he had been long
conuersaunt in the King of Spaynes court, he applied his mind to search
unknown parts of the world. And for his better furtheraunce herein, made
humble peticion to the king, to aid him in this his enterprise, which
doubtless should redownde to his great honor, and no little commodity to all
the hole countreye of Spain, if by his help and charges, he might find new
regions. But the King and Queen laughed him to scorn, saying: Great
enterprises have ever ben counted pha^tasticall.
that his ymaginacion was but vain and fantastical. At the length, eight
years being passed over, and Columbus still persistinge in his purpose and
suit, the King began to give ear to his talk, and after much reasoninge and
debating of the matter, determined to try the wit of the manne. the first
^^age of Christophorus Colu^bus.
And there upon commanded a foyst and two brigantines to be furnished with all
kind of ordinance and vitayles: which being prepared, the first day of
September, in the year of Christ 1492, Columbus departed from the coasts of
Spain, and went forward in his viage long desired. the Islands called Gades.
And when he had passed the Ila^des called Gades, he diuerted toward the
fortunate Islands called Insulae Portuna^ae, which are now called Canariae, The
Ila^des of ^anaria
because they are full of dogs. They were in time past called Fortunate, for
the excellent temperatenes of the air, and great fruytefulnes. Columbus
departinge from hense, sailed toward the Weste, and at the length found
certain Islands, of the which two were very great, whereof the one he called
Hispana, and the other Iohanna.

Of the two Islands Iohanna and Hispana.
AS Columbus came to the Island which he called Iohanna, Iohanna
he heard a merueylous sweet noise of innumerable birds, and especially of
Nightingales which wandered in the thick wooddes in the Month of Nouembre. He
found also most fair Ryuers, sweet to drink, and many goodly haue^s. And
as he sailed by the costs of the Island Southweste ward, and could find no
end, he thought it had been the main land, and therefore determined to draw
back, being partly enforsed by roughnes of the sea: and thus returning some
what Eastward, he came to an Ila^d which he afterward called Hispana,
Hispana, or Hispaniola.
where arriving to the land, he and his company was seen of the Inhabitants
of the Island, which sodeinly fled into the thick woods: whom the Spanyardes
pursewinge, took a womanne whom they brought to their ship, entreatinge her
very gentillye, fyllinge her with delicate meats and wine, and clothing her
in fair apparel, and so let her depart: for they go naked, and are not used
to delicates. And as this womanne returned to her company, some being moved
by the lyberalitie decla^ed unto her, came by great multitudes to the sea
banks, bringinge gold with them, which they changed for earthen pottes, and
drinkinge glasses. gold for earth and glass.
Thus a further friendship by this means contracted, the Spanyardes begone
more diligently to search their manner of lyuinge and manners, and so understood
that they had a king. the king of the Island.
And therefore entering further into the Island, they were honorably received of
the king. They vewyde their houses, and merueyled to see them so bylded without
the use of Iron, Bylding without the use of Iron.
which they are utterly without: in the stead whereof they use a certain stone,
wherewith they cut and saw their timbre.

Of the people called Canibales or Anthropophagi, which are accustomed to eat
man's flesh.
Whereas the people of the forenamed Ila^des, fled at the sight of our men,
the cause thereof was, that they suspected them to have been Canibals,
C^nibales Anthropophagi.
that cruel and fearse people which eat ma^s flesh, which nation our men had
ouerpassed, leaninge them on the southsyde. But after they had knowledge of the
contrary, they made grievous co^playnt to our men, of the beastly and fearse
manners of these Canibales, the fearsenes of the canibales.
which were no less cruel against them, the^ the Tiger or the Lion against
tame beasts. Declaring furthermore, yt when soever they take any of them under
the age of.xiiij. years, they use to gelde them, and francke the^ until they
be very fat, as we are wo^t to do with capons or hens: and as for such as
draw toward.xx. year old, to kill them forthwith and pull out their guts,
and eat the same fresh and new, with other extreme parts of the body, ma^s
flesh poudered.
poudering the residue with salt, or keeping it in a certain pickle as we do
iegottes or sansages. Yet eat they not the women, but reserve the^ to
increase, as we do hens to lay eggs. And if they take any old women, they
keep the^ for drudges. And therefore when the Canibales make incursion, the
people of these Ila^des fly with all speed. For albeit they use arrows, yet
are they not able to resyste their fearsenes.

Of the manners of the inhabitants of the Island of Hispana and of such things
as are found there.
THe inhabita^tes of this Island, Roates in ye stead of bread
use in ye stead of bread, certain rotes like unto navy rotes, having the
taste of soft and grene chestnuttes. Gold with the^ is in estimacio^, Gold i^
estimacion.
for they ha^ge certain pieces thereof at their ears: they go not out of ye
limities if their own co^trie, nor exercise any marcha^dise with strangers: How
gold i^ gathred.
they gather gold in ye sa^des of a certain river which springs out of very
high mo^taines They gather it with great labor and melte it and cast it,
first into masses or wedges, and afterward into broad plates. They have no
four foted beasts, except connies: they have serpents of monstrous greatness,
Serpe^ts without ve^^^^.
but without hurt or venime. They have also wild turtle doves and duckes,
much greater the^ ours, and gese whyter then swannes, saving yt they have
read heads. They have also many popingiayes: Popingiayes.
some grene, some yelowe, and some not much unlike them of India, with read
circles about their necks This Island brings forth also Mastix, Aloe, Spices
and Gu^^es
and such other gu^mes: and especially certain read graynes, which are
sharper then pepper.

How Columbus, after he had found new Ila^des, returned again to Spain, where
preparinge a new navy, he took his viage to ye Canibales.
COlumbus, not a little ioyeful of the lands newly found, the spring time
drawing nere, he determined ^o return to his country: leaving with the king
of the Island.38. men which should diligently search the situacion of the
Island, the manners of the people, and the natures of trees and fruits. But he,
soyseninge up his sails, directed his viage toward Spain, bringing with him
ten men of the said Island, The Indian to^g
to the end that they might learn the Spanishe tongue, which they might easily
do, because all the words of their language may well be written with our
letters. Columbus, Colu^bus, at his return, i^ made
after this his return, and fortunate success in his first viage, was
honorablye received of the King and Queen, and greatly magnified with
innumerable glorious tittles: willinge that he should no more thenceforth be
called Columbus, Admiral of the Ocean sea.
but the Admiral of the great Ocean sea: and prepared for him toward his
second viage.xvij. foistes and.xij. briga^tines, The second viage of Columbus
well furnished with all kind of artillerye and plenty of vitayles, and in them
twelve hundredth men well appointed: Corn also to sow, and al kinds of seeds
and plants. For, except pine apple trees and date trees, there grow none in
these Islands that are known to us. The Admiral took also with him al sorts
of Iron tools to the intent to byld towns and fortresses where his men might
lie in safegarde. Therefore the first day of September departing from the
Islands called Gades, Gades.
with a prosperous wind he arrived at the Island of Canaria the first day of
October: The Ila^des of Canaria.
from whense directing his viage toward the left hand, he sailed toward ye
South, and at ye length came to the Ila^des of the Canibals. And because he
came thither on the Sundays called the Dominical day, the Ila^^ of Dom^nica^
he called the Ila^d where he arrived, Dominica: which when he perceived to be
but saluage and rude, he sailed on further: and in twenty days sailing, came
to another Island replenished with al kinds of trees, Insulae Crucis.
from which came a marvelous fragrant savor: By reason whereof, some being
allured by the pleasantnes of the place, went a land, where they saw no kind
of lyuinge beasts, Lisertes
sauinge lysertes of wonderful houdge greatness. This Island he called Insula
Crucis, which was also an Island of the Canibales, as afterward they proved in
deed. For as they sailed about the Ila^d, they found certain low cotages made
of trees, Houses of trees^
like unto stagies. For they set trees upright in order round about, fastening
posts in them cross over, where unto the trees cleave fast, so that by this
means they ca^ not fall. They frame the roofes of the^e cotages, with sharp
tops after the manner of rownde tents. And last of al, they enclose and cover
these trees thus set in order, with the leaves of date trees, and certain other
trees, to the intent to make the^ a stronger defense against wynd and wether. And
within the cotage, they tie the posts together with ropes of bombage cotton,
and a certain long root. They have couches made, one above another, the
flowers whereof they straw with heye and cotton. And as soon as they had
spied our men, they fled incontinente. And when our men came into their
houses, they found in them certain young men bound to posts, Young men
stalle^ to be made fat.
and kept to be made fat and likewise many o^de womenne which these Canibales
kept to be their drudges. Fi^e co^e^pe.
They found there also earthen vessels of all sorts, in which they sodde
men's flesh with poping^ayes, geese, and duckes flesh, al to gether in one
v^ssell. They roasted also man's flesh upon spyttes. reserving the bones of the
arms and legs, which they use in the stead of Iron, to piece and typpe
their arrows. For they are utterly without Iron. The found also the head of a
young man, yet bleding and fastened to a post. But certain womenne which had
fled from the Canibales to our men, the Admiral commanded to be
gorgiously decked after the manner of our women, and with many rewards to be
sent again to their own company. By means whereof, Canibales allured with
ly^beral^te^
the Canibales being allured by the lyberalitie and gifts of our men, hoping
that they also should be likewise rewarded, came running toward our men: but
when they drew somewhat nere unto them, they fled immediately into the next
wooddes. And thus our men departing from thence, returned to the Island of
Hispana.

How the Admiral passed many Islands, and what things chanced to him and
his company in that viage.
AS the Admiral departed from the Island of the Canibales, and went foreward on
his viage, he passed by many Islands: among the which was one called Matinina,
Matinina An Ila^d of women only.
in which dwell only women, after the manner of the^, called Amazones, as he
learned of the men of the Islands which he brought with him into Spain at his
first viage, and saved them from the fearsenes of the Canibales. He passed
also innumerable other Ila^des, of which to some he gave names, The names of
sundry Islands
as Mons Farratus, Sancta Maria rotunda, Sancta Martinus, Sancta Maria antiqua,
and Sancta Crux, Into the which our men entering to thintente to fetch fresh
water, found four Canibales, which had taken four young women: who, as soon
as they had spied our men, wringed their hands, seming thereby to desire aid
of our men: at whose coming to deliver them, the men fled into the woods and
left the women. Shortly after, our men saw a boat coming on the sea with.viij.
me^ and as many women: with whom our men bickeringe lost one of their
companions, by reason that these barbariens are accustomed to infecte their
arrows with venime: arrows infected with venime.
yet our men prevailed and slew part of them, and brought the resydue by
forse to the Admyrall. As they departed from hence, they found many other
Islands, but such as they could not come to for the roughnes of the sea and
multitude of rocks. But some of the smallest briga^tines which drew no great
depth, went somewhat nearer, and noumbred above seven and forty Islands, and
called the place Archipelagus. Archipelogus.
Sailing from hence, they found another Island called Buchema, Buchema
into the which ye Canibales make sundry incursions, by reason whereof the
inhabitants are at continual war with the^. Thus at the length, the Admiral
with his hole navy returned to the Island of Hispana: but in an evil time. For
they which he had left there for a garrison, were all dead: as were also
they which he took with him from the same Island into Spain to use them for
intrepretours. Of which seven dyed by change of the air. Change of air is
dangerous.
One of them was permitted of the Admiral to depart, when the navy came
near to his country. The residue stole away priu^lye, and swamme to land:
but the Admiral doubting whether all his men were dead or no, which he left
in the Island, commanded certain ordinance to be shot of, that by the noise
thereof they might have warning to come forth, if any ^aye lurkinge in
corners: but none appeared, whose fa^tall days had fynisshed their life. At
the length, the king dissembleth with the Admyrall.
the king of the Island being thereto enforsed, declared the hole matter to the
Admyrall as well as he could by interpretours: affyrming that there were in
the Island other Kings beside him: and of greater power then he, which were
sore offended that the Spaniardes had subdued the Islands: and in revenge
thereof, came to the town where the Spaniardes lay, which they overcame and
burnt, and slew all the me^ therein: and that he also at the same conflicte,
taking part with our me^, was sore wounded with an arrow on the arm, for the
better trial whereof he bore his arm in a towell, because it was not yet hole
of that wound. But shortelye after they had knowledge, that the King feigned
this tale: so that he hardely escaped the hands of the Admiral, who was
determined with some kind of punishment to have examined him further. But he
suspecting the matter, fled into ye inner parts of the Island, declaring
thereby, that he was the destruction of our men: who^, certain of our company,
pursuinge, found many marvelous things: Gold found in rivers and
mountains.
and especially ryuers in which is found much gold, and a moun^ayne, whose
sand is sparkeled with gold. In this place, the Admiral bylded a city, which
he compassed about with a wall. And departing from hence, he searched almost
all the Island: in ye inner parts whereof he bylded a tower, and named it, S.
Thomas tower, which he made to the intent that he might the more safely search
out the secrets of so plentiful a region, and especially the gold mines of
the same: and thus leauinge a garrison there, he departed, taking with him
three foystes, wherewith he sailed to seek new Islands, the Islands of Cuba and
Iamiaca.
and came first to the Island of Cuba, and from thence to Iamiaca, being
greater then Sicilia, very fruytful and well inhabited. Which, when he had
vewed, he departed from thence, and sailed about the sea costs where he saw
innumerable other small Islands, A multitude of Islands
standinge so thick, that the ship was in manner borne a land: and was
therefore enforsed to return home, the same way which he came.

How the Spaniardes abused the submissio^ and frendeshippe of the inhabitants
of the Islands.
IN this mean time, the Spaniardes which the admiral had left in the Island of
Hispana, had evil entreated the inhabitauntes: so that for want of vitayles
and food, they begone to famyne: imputinge the fault hereof unto the
Christian me^, The cruelty of the Christian me^
which had dug up all the roots wherewith they were accustomed to make their
bread. And whereas they yet perceived, that ye Christien men intended to
continue there, they sent an ambassador to the admiral to desire him to
restrain the outragiousnes and cruelty of his men, at whose hands they
sustained such injuries and violence, as they scarcely looked for at the hands
of mortal enemies. Declaringe further, that under the pretense of seking for
gold they committed innumerable wro^ges and mischievous acts, Cruelty of
coue^ousnes.
spoyl^ng in manner all the hole region: and that for the avoiding of such
enormities and oppressions, they had rather pay tribute, then to be thus
daily vexed with incursio^s, and never to be at quiet. Upon this complaynte it
was agreed, that they should pay yearly tribute to the Christian king and
that they should apply the^ selves to gather and increase their rotes, Bread
of rotes.
which were to them in the stead of flower and wheat: and so consumed that
with great labor they could scarcely find any in the wooddes. They paid
therefore for their tribute, The tribute of the barbarians
every three months, certain pound weyghtes of gold: but such as had no gold,
paid spyces, and gossampine cotton. In the mean time the Spaniardes, who
should have been occupied in digging for gold, Disobedience ^oloweth Idleness
gave the^ selves to play, wanto^nes and idleness, co^temning, and falling into
hatered with their governor, by which their lice^ciousnes, the people of the
Ila^d being provoked, became more disobedient and wyld, degeneratinge from al
kind of honesty and faithfulness: yea y^ spaniardes also became so negligent in
seking for gold, yt sometime the charges exceaded the gaynes. Nevertheless in
the year of Christ, 1501. they gathered within ye space of two months twelve
thousand pounds weight of gold. Note.
But the Admiral appoyntinge his brother Bartholomeus Columbus, Bartholomeus
Colu^bus,
to be governor of the Island, he in the year.1495. determined to return to
Spain, to certifye the king of al these matters. In which viage, he manfullye
defended him self in battayl against the rebels of certain other Islands
which had co^spyred against the Spanyardes.

How the Portugals sought new Ila^des in the East parts, and how they came to
Calicut.
IN this mean time that ye Spanyardes sought new and unknown lands in the
West parts, the Portugales attempted to do the same in the East parts. And
least one of them should be a let or hinderau^ce to the other, they divided
the world between them by the authority of the Bishop of Rome, The bishop of
rome deuideth ye world.
Alexander the.vi. of that name. And that on this condition,, hesperides, or
Caput u^ride.
that from the Islands called Hesperides (which are now called Caput ueride)
the one should sail Westwarde, and the other toward the South pole, How the
Spanyardes and y^ Portugales divided the world between them.
thus deuyding the world between the^ in two equal parts. So that whatsoever
unknown lands should be discovered in the East parts, the same to be dew
to the Portugales: And all such as should be found in the Weste parts, to
appertain to the Spanyardes. Whereby it came to pass, that the Spaniardes,
ever by the South, sailed into the Weste, where they found a large main la^d,
with Ila^des great and little innumerable, having in them great ple^tie of gold
and pearls, Gold and Pearls
and other great riches. But the Portugales, by the Southe, and costs of the
Islands called Hesperides, and Equinoctial line, The Equinoctial ly^e.
and Tropicus Capricorni, came y^ into East, by the goul^e called Sinus
Persicus, even unto the costs of India, with in the river of Ganges, The river
of Ganges
whereas is now the great market town, and kingedo^ of Calicut. Calicut.
And from thence to the Ila^d of Taprobana, Taprobana
(now called Sumetra, Zamara or Samotra Samotra.
) and so forth to Aurea Chersonesus, whereas is now the great city of
Malaccha, the great cy^ie of Malaccha
being one of ye most famous market towns of al ye East parts. From Malaccha,
they entered into a great goulfe, by which they came to the region of ^inar^m.
the regio^ of ^inaru^
Not far from Malaccha, are the Islands called Molucca, the Islands of Molucca
in which al kinds of spyces grow and are brought to the city of Malaccha.
But the Spany^rdes having knowledge what great commodity the Portugales had
received by the Islands of Molucca, attemted to prove if they also might find
the same Islands in sailing so far Westward, Sailing into the East by the west
that they might at the length by West and southwest come into the East, as by
good reason they presupposed the roundnesse of the earth would permit, the
ro^^d^es of ^he earth.
if they were not otherwise let by the fyrme or main land lyinge in the way
and stoppinge their passage, The firm land
whereof as yet was no certeyntie known. And this did they to the intent that
by this means they might more easelye and with less charge bring spyces
from thence into Spain. Spice^ the vi^ge from the West in to the East.
Therefore, the manner of this viage was, that they should sail from the
Weste, under the lowest hemispherye or half compass of the earth, and so to
come into the East. A thing surely that might seem very hard to attempt,
because it was uncertain whether that, most prudente and beneficial nature,
(who works al things with most high providence) had not so divided and
separated the East from the West, partly by sea, and partly by land, that
there might by this way have been no passage into the East. For it was not yet
known, whether that great region of America, America.
(which they call the fyrme or main land) did separate the Weste sea from
the East: The firm land.
But it was found that that fyrme land exte^ded from the West to the South:
And that also toward the North parts were found two other regio^s, whereof
the one is called Regio Baccalearum, Regio Baccalearum.
and the other Terra Florida: Terra Florida.
which, if they were adherent to the said fyrme land, there could be no
passage by the Weste seas into the East India, forasmuch as there was not yet
found any strayghte of the sea, whereby any enteraunce might be open into the
East. In this mean while, the king o^ spay^ sends forth ships.
the king of Spain being elected Emperor, prepared a na^uie of five
ships, over the which he appointed one Magellanus to be captain, The viage
of Magellanus, by the west into ye east.
commaundinge him that he should sail toward the coasts of the said fyrme
land, dyrectinge his viage by the south parts thereof, until he had either
found the end of the same, or else some streyghte whereby he might pass to
those odoriferous Islands of Molucca, The Ila^des of Molucca.
so famously spoken of for the great abu^daunce of sweet savors and spices
found therein. The ships therefore, being well furnisshed with all things
necessary, Magellanus departinge from Civil in Spain, the tenth day of
August, in the year of Christ.1519. came first to ye Ila^des of Canaria, The
Il^des of c^naria.
and from thence to the Islands called Hesperides: from which dyrectinge his
course between the West and the East toward the said fyrme land, in few days
with prosperous sailing, he discovered a corner or point of the said main
la^d, called Promontorium S, Muriae, Promontorium s. Marie.
where the people dwell, called Canibales, Canibales
which are accustomed to eat man's flesh. From hence he sailed on southwarde
by the long tracte of this firm la^d, which reaches so far into ye south
and extends so many degrees beyond ye circle called Tropicus Capricorni, yt
the south pole (called pole Antartike) is there elevated forty and six
degrees. The eleuacio^ of the south pole, 46 degrees
And thus being brought into the East, they saw certain Indians gatheringe shel
fyshes by the sea banks: The Region of giau^tes.
being men of very high stature, clothed with beasts skins. To whom, whereas
certain of the Spaniardes went a land, and showed them belles and painted
papers, they begone to dance and leap about the Spaniardes, with a rude and
murmuring song. At the length there came three other, as though they were
ambassadors, which by certain signs desired ye Spaniardes to go with the^
further into the la^d, making a countenance as though they would intertayn the^
well, where upon, ye captain Magellanus sent with the^ vii. me^ well instructed,
to thinte^t to ^earche ye regio^ and manners of the people. And thus they went
with the^ into ye deserts, Cotages covered with beasts ski^nes.
where they came to a low cotage covered with wild beasts skins, having in
it two ma^sio^s, in one of yt which were women and children and in the other
only me^. They interteined their gestes after a barbaros and beastly manner,
which nevertheless seemed to the^ princelike: Onager.
for they killed a beast, not much unlike a wild ass, whose flesh (but
half roasted) they set before our me^, without any other kind of meat or
drink. Here were our me^ of necessity constrained to lie al night under these
skins, by reason of the great abundaunce of snow and wind. Abu^dau^ce of
s^owe and wind.
And when it was day, our me^ were very earnest with them, and would in manner
have enforsed them to go with them to the ship: which thing they perceauing,
covered them selu^s from the head to the foot with certain horrible beasts
skins, and painted their faces with sundry colors. Thus taking their bows
and arrows, and bringing with them other of their company, of much greater
stature and terrible aspect, the^ they were, they showed them selves to our
men in array, as though they were ready to fight. But the Spanyardes, which
thought that the matter would have comen to hand strokes, commanded a piece
of ordinance to be shot of. The which although it did no hurt, yet these
hardy giauntes, The Giau^tes ar put to ^^yght.
which a little before seemed to be as bold as though they durst have made war
against Jupiter, were by the noise there of put in such fear, that they
forthwith began to entreat of peace. Our men ente^ded to have brought some
of these Gyauntes with them into Spain for the straungenes of the thing: but
they all escaped out of their hands. Magell^nus therefore understanding that
it were unprofitable to tarry there any longer, and that also the sea was very
rough, and the wether stormy and boysteous, and that furthermore the firm
la^d exte^ded further toward the south, it so much, that the further they
sailed that way, they should find in so much ye colder, he deferred his
proceeding unto the month of may, extreme winter in may.
at which time, ye sharpenes of winter, exceadeth with them, when as with us,
summer is begone. He found there great plenty of wood. The sea also ministered
unto them great abundau^ce of shelfishe, beside other fyshes of sundry kynd^s.
He found likewise many springes of fresh and wholesome waters: and used
hu^tinge and taking of fowls. Only bread and wine, was lackinge in the ship.
The south pole was there elevated forty degrees. ^he south pole eleuate.xl.
degrees


How Magella^us by a straight or narrow arm of the sea, sailed by the west
into the East to diverse Islands: where also he was slain.
THe winter now being past, the xxiiij. day of Auguste, Magellanus departed
from the place aforesaid, and still followed the tracte of the firm land
toward the south, until at the length, the.xxvi. day of November, he found in
that firm land, The ^^rayght of Magel^anus.
certain open places like unto strayghtes or narrow seas. Into the which
entering with his navy, he commanded that certain ships should search the
goulfes on every side, if any way or passage might be found into the East. At
the length, they found a certain deep straight, by the which they were
persuaded yt there was enteraunce into some other main sea, in so much that
Magellanus attempted to sear^he ye same. This straight was found to be sometime
of ye breadth of three Italian miles, sometime of two, and sometime of ten, and
reached somewhat toward the West. The altitude or eleuacion of the south pole in
this place, The altitude of the south pole.li^. degrees.
was found to be.lii. degrees. They could see no people stering in the costs
of this entrau^ce Therefore Magellanus seeing this land to be rough and saluage,
and vnpleasau^t to abide in, by reason of extreme cold, he thought it not
worthy the travail, to spend any time in serching the same. Therefore sailing
forward in his viage thus attempted by ye said strayghte, (which is now called
the straight of Magellanus) he was thereby brought into another mayn sea, ^he
main sea beyond the strayghtes.
very great and large. The length of this straight or narrow sea, is esteemed
to be a hundredth spanishe miles. The land which he had on his right hand, he
doubted not to be main land: The fyrme land
and that on the left hand, he supposed to be Islands. Magellanus saw
likewise the fyrme land to be extended directly toward ye North: wherefore
letting pass that great land, he sailed by that great and large sea between
the West and the North: and that for this intent, that at the length he might
by the West come into the East, and again under the burning line called Zona
Torrida, The burning line Torrida Zona^
being well assured that the Islands of Molucca (which he sought) were in the
East, The Ila^des of Molucca
and not far from the Equinoctial line. When they had thus sailed for^ie
days, and came now again under the line or circle called Tropicus Capricorni,
Tropicus capricorni.
they found two little Islands inhabyted, but very barren, and therefore called
the^ unfortunate Islands. Departinge from thence, they sailed on for a great
space, and found a certain Island which ye inhabitants called Inuagana, the
Ila^d of Inuagana.
where the eleuacion of the North pole, (called pole Artike) was.xij. degrees:
And the length from the Islands called Gades, The Ila^des of Gades called Cales
Males.
by the Weste, was judged to be c.lviii. degrees. Thus proceeding, they saw
diverse other Islands, and that so many, that they supposed they had been
brought into a great sea like unto that called Archipelagus, Archipelagus.
where with signs and poyntinges (as the du^me are wo^t to speak with the
dumme) they asked of these Indians, the names of the Islands, whereby they
learned that they were in Acatan, Acatan.
and not far from the Island called Selani, Selani.
well inhabited and replenished with abundaunce of al things necessary for the
commodities of this life. Sailing therefore toward the Island of Selani, they
were with a contrary wind drieuen on the Island of Massana, ^assana.
from whense they came to the great Island a^ Subuth, S^buth
where ye Spanyardes were well enterteyned of the King of the Island, who
brought the^ into a certain cotage, and set before the^ such delicates as he
had. Their bread, Bread of the tru^ke of trees.
was of the trunk of a certain tree, cut in pieces, and fried with oil. Their
drink was of the humor ^r ioyse which droppeth out of the branches of the
date trees, Drink of the droppi^g of date ^^^es.
when they are cut. Their meat was such as they took by foulinge, with such
fruits as the contrei brought forth. This Island was very rich of gold and
ginger. Gold and Ginger
In these parts Magellanus made war against the inhabitauntes of certain
other Islands: In which conflicte, the spaniardes having the overthrow
Magellanus was slain with seven of his men. Magellanus is slain.
When the Spaniardes had thus lost their captain, they elected a new
gouernoure of their navy, appointing one Johannes Serranus to that office. the
new captai^e Serranus is betrayed of his bondma^
Magallanus had also a bond man borne in the Islands of Molucca, whom he had
bought in the city of Malaccha. This bondsman understood the Spanishe tongue:
and where as the captayn Serranus could do nothing without him, who now lay
sick by reason of the wou^des which he had received in the said conflicte, so
that he was feign to speak sharply to him and threaten to beat him or he
could geat him out of the ship, he here upon conceived so great hatered and
indignacion against the Spanyardes, the king of Subuth co^spyreth against the
Spanyardes
that he went immediatlye to the King of Subuth, declaring the covetousness of
the Spaniardes to be insatiable, and yt they would shortly use cruelty against
him also, and bring him into s^biectio^ and servitude. The barbarous king
believed his words, and therewith pryuelye with the aid of the other Islands,
conspired against the Spanyardes, and took or slew as many of them as came to a
banquet whereunto they were bidden under pretense of friendship. The captain
Serranus is taken prisoner.
Among the which also, Serranus the Captain was taken priesoner. But the
resydue of the Spanyardes which remained in the ships, being taught and
warned by the evil chance which befell to their companions, and fearing
greater deceytes and conspiracies, lift up their ankers and gave wind to their
sails. In the mean time was Serranus brought bound to the sea banks,
desiring his companions to deliver or redeem him from that horrible cap^iuitie
of his enemies. But the Spaniardes, albeit they took it for a dishonor, to
leave or forsake their Captain, yet fearing fraud or further dissimulacio^,
they sailed aside from that Island, and came to the Islands of Gibeth and Porne.
The Il^des of Gibeth and Porne.
In this main sea, were two great Islands, whereof the one was called Siloli,
Siloli.
and the other Porne the less, where our me^ were well entreated. The
inhabitants of Porne honor the sun and the moon: they keep also a certain
civil justice and fre^d^y love one to another. And above all things, desire
peace and ydlenes. Peace and Idlene^^
Therefore their chief study is, in no case to moleste their neygboures or
strangers, or to be injurious to any man. They have little houses, made of
earth and wood, and covered partly with rubbishe, and partly with ye bows of
date trees. They take as many wives as they are able to keep. Their common
meat, is such as they take by foulinge or fisshinge. They make bread of ryce:
Bread of Rice.
^ drink, of the liquour which droppeth from the branches of date trees,
cut. Some use marchaundyse in the Islands nere about them: some apply the^
selves to huntinge and fysshing, and some to husba^dry. Their apparel, is of
Gossampine cotton. They have great abundaunce of camphyre, Ca^phire
ginger and cinomome.

How the Spaniardes came to the Islands of Molucca, and of the people with
great hanging ears.
THe Spaniardes taking their leave of the king of Porne, departed: dyrecting
their viage toward the Islands of Molucca, which were showed unto the^ by the
same King. They came first to the costs of the Island called Solo, where are
found Pearls as bygge as turtle doves eggs: Pearls as big as turtle doves
egges^
but they are gathered in the depth of the sea. The inhabitants of this
Island, at such time as the Spanyardes came thither, took a shelfysshe of
such houdge bigness, A marvelous bi^ shelfish^
yt the flesh thereof wayed.xlvij. pound weight. Whereby it is apparaunt ye
great pearls should be found there forasmuch as pearls are the birth of
certain shelfishes. From hence they came to the Island of Gilona, Gilona.
in which are certain people having hanging ears of such length, Men with
hanging ears.
that they hang down to their shoulders. Whereat as the Spaniardes marueyled,
the men of the Island told the^, that not far from thence was another Ila^d
in which were a kind of me^, not only with ha^ging ears, but also with ears
of such breadth and length, that with one of them they might cover their hole
head. But the Spanyardes, The sp^nyardes arrive a^ the Islands of Molucca.
who sought for gold and spyces, and not for monsters, sailed dyrectly to the
Ila^des of Molucca, where they arrived, the eyghte month after the death of
their governor Magellanus. These Islands are five in noumbre, the names whereof
are these. Tharant, Muthil, Thedori, Mare, and Mathien. Some of them are
sytuate on this side the Equinoctial line, some under it, and some beyond it.
Some bear cloves, some Nutmegges, and some Cinomome. They are not far
distaunt the one from the other. They are but little and narowe. The
inhabitants are very poor, because there is no increase of any other thing
saving only of spyces. They live with bread and fyshe, and sometime
popingiayes. They lurk in low cotages: And in fine, all things with them are
despicable and vile, beside peace, idleness, and spices. In Thedori is great
plenty of cloves, as also in Tarante and Mathien. The trees which bring forth
cloves, The tree that bea^eth clo^es.
grow not, but on rocks and broken cliffes, where sometime they grow so
thick, that they appear like a little wood or grove. This tree, both in
leaves, biggenes, and heyght, is much like unto the baye tree. It bears the
fruit in ye tops of every brau^che. The budde springs out first, and the^
in it the flower, not much unlike the flower of an orange tree. The cloue is
first read: but after being scorched by the heat of the son, it is made
black. The inhabitauntes divide the groves of these trees between them, as we
do the vynes. The Island of Muthil, brings forth cinomome. This tree, the
cinomome tree.
is full of small branches and baren, best lyking in a dry soil, and is very
like unto the tree, that bears the pomgranate. The bark of this tree, by
reason of the great heat of the son, rising from the branches, or body of
the same, is gathered and dried at the son, and is so made perfect
cinonomome. Near unto this, is another Island, called Beda, greater and larger,
then any of the Islands of Molucca. In this Island grows the Nutmegge, The
nutmeg tree
whose tree is big and high, and much like unto the walnutte tree, for as is
the walnutte, so is this fruit defended with a double covering, as first with
a grene husk, under the which is a thin skin or rimme like a net,
encompassing the shell of the nutte: which skin we call the flower of the
nutmegge, but of the Spanyardes, it is called mace, Mace.
an excellent and hole some spyce. The other covering, is the shell of the
nutte, within the which is the fruit it self, which we call ye nutmegge. The
nutmegge Ginger
Ginger grows here and there in all the Islands of this Archipelagus, or
main sea. Of the which, some is sown, and some grows of it self. But that
which is sown, is the better. The herb of this, is like unto that which
bears saffrane, and has his root, (which is Ginger,) much like unto the
same. In this mean time came two other ships out of Spain: whereof the one
sailed directely to the point of Aphrica, Promon ^ torium bon^ sp^^
called Promontoriu^ bone sp^i: And the other by the great main South sea, to
the coasts of that continent or fyrme land whereof we have spoken here before.
It shall suffyse that we have hitherto declared of the nauigacions which the
Spanyardes attempted by the Weste to sail into the East, by the straygh^e of
Magellanus, where the passage by Sea is open into the East, by the continente
or fyrme land of the new world, called America. Now therefore let us
return to the other Nauigacions of Columbus, Colu^bus the adm^ral, first
finder of the new Ilande^
otherwise called the Admyrall, who long before was the first fynder of the
new Islands, and of the said main or fyrme land, and yet found not that
straight or narow sea, by the which Magellanus sailed from the West into the
East.

The third nauigacion of Christophorus Columbus.
IN the year of Christ.1498. Columbus the Admiral departed from Spain with
eight foistes, and arrived first at the Islands of Medera, the Islands of Medera
where he divided his navy into two parts. For.v. of these ships he
directed to the Island of Hispana: Hispana, or Hispaniola.
and with the residue, he sailed toward the south, entendinge to pass over
the AEquinoctial line, and from thense to turn toward the West, to search
such lands as were hitherto unknown to the Christian men. Coming therefore to
Caput ueride, he sailed to the burning line, Great heat under the burning
line.
called Torrida zona where he found so great heat, that he was in danger of
death: but returninge his ships toward the West, he found a more wholesome
air and (as God would) came at the length to a land well inhabyted, where
there came against him and his, a boat with.xxiiij. young men, armed with
bows, arrows, and shieldes, covering only their privy members with a clothe
of Gossampine cotton, having also very long hear. The admiral, (as well as
he could by signs) allured them to co^municacion. Signs and pointing
But they trusted not our men, fearing some deceate. The Admiral perceauing
that he could naught prevail, by signs and tokens, he determined with Musical
instruments to appeal their wildness. As the minstrelles therefore blewe
their shaulmes, the barbarous people drew near, suspecting that noise to be a
token of war, whereupon they made ready their bows and arrows. But the
Spaniardes drawinge nearer unto the^, cast certain apparel into their bote,
willing by this token of frendshippe to concile them, although all were in
vain. For they fled all away. Wherefore the Admyrall departing from thence,
came to a region called Parias, ^he fair ^egio^ of Parias
well inhabited and full of civil people, declaring much humanity toward
strangers. They showed our men Pearls and Gold, Gold and Pearls
and such other riches, desyring them to come a land, where they ge^telly
entreated them. When our me^ asked them where they had such plenty of gold:
they (with home poynting was in the ^tede of speech) declared by signs and
tokens, that they had it in certain mountains, and that they could not
without great danger resort thither, by reason of certain fearse beasts in
those parts, ^earse ^ea^t^s,
and also because of the cruel people called Canibales, Canibales
which inhabit those mountains. But the Admiral, because his wheat failed,
was enforsed to depart thence. Dyrectinge therefore his viage toward ye North
east, he came to the Island of Hispana, where he found all things confounded
and out of order. For the Spanyardes which were left in the Islands, refused
to obey the Admiral and his brother, the Spanyardes refuse to obey the admiral
mouinge grievous co^playntes against them before the King of Spain, and at
the length sent them thither bound.

How Petrus Alonsus sought new Islands.
AFter that the Admyrall had incurred the indignacion of the King, many of
his companions, such as had been brought up with him, and were expert
Sea men, decreede to search other parts of the world yet vnvnknowen. Among
which number was Petrus Alonsus, who with a ship well furnished, sailed to
Parias, Parias.
and from thence to Curtana, Curtana.
where he begone to exercise marchaundise with the inhabitants, receauinge
Pearls for belles and nedles. Pearls forbelles and nedles
Entering also into the land, he was honorably entertained. In their woods, he
saw innumerable Peacockes, Peacockes.
nothing unlike unto ours, saving that the males differ little from the
females. In this region are great plenty of Phesantes. Phesa^ts
Alonsus departinge from hense, sailed to the regio^ of Canchietes, The Region
of Ca^chietes
being six days sailing from Curtana, toward the West. In this region is
great abundaunce of gold, Popingiayes, Gossampine cotton, and most temperate
air. From hence he sailed into another fruiteful regio^, but inhabited with
wild men, which could by no gentilnes be allured to frendshippe. Departinge
therefore from thence, he came to the region of Ciniana, The region of Ciniana.
whereas pearls are found in great plenty: but before he came there, he
chanced to come among the Canibales: against whom, dischargeing a piece of
ordinance, he drove the^ easily to flight. But Alonsus thus laden with
pearls, Pearle^
returned home into Spain.

How Pinzonus, companion to the Admiral, sought new Islands.
VInce^tius, otherwise called Pinzonus in the year of Christ.1499. prepared
four brigantines, and sailed first to the Islands of Canaria, and from thence
to Caput ueride. From whence directing his viage toward the south far beyond
the Equinoctial line, he found men in a certain Island, but such as he could by
no means concyle unto him. Therefore leauinge them, he came to another land,
in which were innumerable naked Naked people.
people, dissimuling that they desired to join friendship with the Spaniardes.
And whereas one of our me^ cast a bell among them out of the ^hippe, Gold
for belles.
they again cast to the Spanyardes a mass or piece of gold: which, one of
our company somewhat to bold, attemptinge to take up, they sodeynlye took
him and carried him away with merueylous swiftenes: but our me^ leaving their
ships, made have to help their fellow, in so much that the matter came to
handstrokes. This conflict was so sharp, A conflict between the wild men and
the Spaniardes.
that our men had much a do to escape with their lives, by reason of the
fearsenes of the barbarians. Departing therefore from thence, they sailed
toward the Northeaste, and came to the region of Payra, The Region of Payra.
and to the Islands near about the same in the which are woods of sanders
wherewith the merchants lade their ships, woods of Sa^ders.
and carry it into other conntreys. In this Region also grow the trees, which
bear Cassia fistula of the best kind. The tree y^ bears Cassia fistulae.
There is also found a four foted beast of monstrous shape, A mo^sterous
beast^
whose former part is like unto a wolf, saving that the feet are like unto
the fete of a man, with ears like an owl: Having also beneath his common
belie, an other belie like unto a purse or bag, in which he keeps his young
whelps so long, until they be able safely to wa^der abroad alone, and to
geat their meat with out the he^pe of their parents.

The whelps while they are very young, never come out of this bag but when
they suck. This portentous beast with her three whelps, was brought to
Ciu^le in Spain, and from thence to Granata.

Of the four nauigacions of Americus uesputius to the new Islands.
AMericus uesputius, being sent with Christophorus Columbus, in the year of
Christ.M.cccc.xcij. at the commandment of Ferdinando King of Castile,
Ferdina^do king of castile
to seek unknown lands, and well instructed in sailing on the sea, after a
few years, set forward four viages of his own proper charges. That is to
wit, two under the said King Ferdinando, and two other under Emanuel, king of
Portugale, of the which he himself writes after this manner.

The first viage of Americus uesputius.
IN the year of christ, M.cccc.xcvij the.xx. day of May, we came with four
ships, to the fortunate Islands, called Insulae fortunatae, Insulae fortunate
where the North pole has his eleuacion. xxvij. degrees, and.xl. minutes. And
from thence within the space of.xxvij days, we came to a la^d more Westwarde
then the fortunate Islands, where the North pole was eleuate xvi. degrees:
where also we found a nation of naked people, Naked men.
of innumerable multitude, which as soon as they saw us, fled to the next
mountain. From hence within two days sailing, we came to a safe port where we
found many men, which with much ado, we could scarcely allure to
communicacio^, although we proffered them belles, lokinge glasses, cristallyne
cups, and such other iewelles. But at the length perceauing our good will
and liberality toward them, Wild men allured with ge^tlenes
they came to us by heaps, and joined frendshyp with us without all fear.
They go all as naked as they came forth of their mothers womb. They suffer no
hear on their body saving only on their head, in so much that they pull of ye
hears of their brows. They are all so perfectelye ex^rcysed in swimminge,
People, expert i^ swimminge.
that they can continue therein, for the space of two leages without any thing
to bear the^ up and especially the women. Their weapons are bows and
arrows. They arm their arrows with ye teeth of beasts and fyshes, because
they lack Iro^ and other metals. They keep war against their borderers which
are of strange language. They fight not for the enlargeing of their dominion,
forasmuch as they have no Magistrates: nor yet for thincrease of riches,
because they are content with their own commodities: but only to revenge the
death of their predicessours. At their meat, they use rude and barberous
fashions, lying on the ground without any table clothe, Cabens hanging between
tree^.
or couerlet. They sleep in certain great nets made of Gossampine cotton
and hanged a lofte in the air beetwene trees. Their bodies are very smothe
and clean by reason of their often washinge. They are in other things fylthy
and without shame. Wom^^ in co^m^.
They use no lawful coniunccion of marriage, but every one has as many women as
him lists, and leaves them again at his pleasure The women are very
fruiteful, and refuse no labor all the while they are with child. Wom^^ very
strong and fruitful^
They travail in manner without pain, so that the next day they are
cherefull and able to walk. Neither have they their bellies wrimpeled, or
loose, and hanginge pappes, by reason of bearinge many children. Their houses
and cabbens, are all in common. Ho^ses, made of trees.
Their houses are fasshyoned like unto belles: and made of great trees
fastened together, covered with the leaves of date trees, and made very strong
against wind and tempests. Houses of marvelous bigness.
They are also in some places so great, that in one of them six hundredth
persons may lodge. They use every seventh or eight year, to remove and change
their dwelling places, because that by their long continuance in one place,
the air should be infected. They use no kind of marchaundise or bying and
selling, being content only with that which nature has left them. Riches and
superfluities co^te^ned
As for Gold, Pearls, precious stones, iewelles, and such other things,
which we in Europa esteem as pleasures and delicates, they set naught by.
They have no kind of corn. Bread of a certain root.
Their common fedinge, is a certain root which they dry and beat and make
flower or meal thereof. They eat no kind of flesh except man's flesh: Man's
^lesh eaten
for they eat all such as they ky^l in their wars, or oherwise take by
chance When he had thus vewed the countreye, and co^sydered the manners of the
people, we determined to sail further, down by the lands side, and came
after a few days, to a certain haven, where we saw about twenty great
houses, raised up much after the fasshion of belles^ There came unto us a
great multitude of me^ under pretense of frendshyp. Some swimminge, and some in
botes. Who, as soon as they drew near unto us, A conflict
suddenly bent their bows against us, where we defended our selves manfully.
In this bickeringe, we slew of them about twenty, beesyde many that were
wounded: But of our me^, were only five hurt, which were all perfectelye
healed. Thus departinge from this haven, we sailed on^ and came to another
nation, in co^uersa^ion and tongue utterly differing from the first. For
coming out of our ship, A gentle nation
we were very fre^dly entreated of the^, where we continued for the space of
nine days. Parias
This region is very fair, and fruitful, having many pleasant woods,
which continue grene all the year long. They have fruits innumerable,
utterly unlike unto ours. Fruits unlike unto ours.
The Region is situate dyrectelye under the line, called Tropicus Cancri. The
inhabitants them selves, call it Parias. Saylinge far beyond this Region,
and ouerpassinge many countries and nations, fyndinge Gold every where, Gold
every where^
(but in no great quantity) we came to another nation full of gentleness and
humanity, where we rested.xxxvij. days. These people made grievous complaynte
unto us, that there was, Canibales
not far from them, a certain fearse and cruel nation, which vexed the^
sore, and made incursion into their ^ountreye at a certain time of the year,
kyllinge them and violentlye carrying them away, to the intent to eat them, in
so much that they were not able to defend them selves against their
fearsenesse. Which thing when they had so lamentablye declared unto us, and
we had made them promise that we would revenge their so many injuries, they
joined unto our company seven of their men. Thus we went forward: and after
seven days, came to an Island, called ^ty^ where these fearse people dwelte.
An expedicion against ye Canibal^^
Who, as soon as they had espied us, came armed against us. We joined with
them in battle, which continued for the space of two hours. At the length
we drove them to flyghte, and slew and wounded a great number of them, and
took.xxv captives. But of our men was only one slain, and.xxi. wounded, and
shortly after restored to health. We gave to those seven me^ which went with
us, three men of our prisonners and four women, whom with great reioysinge
they carried with them into their countreye: and we returninge home toward
Spain, with many captives came first to a port of Spain called Calicium,
where we sold our priesoners, and were ioyefullye received: In the year of
Christ.M. cccc.xcix. the.xv. day of Octobre.

The second viage of Vesputius.
IN the month of May following Vesputius attempted another viage and came by
the Ila^des of Canaria, even unto the burninge line, called Torrida zona, and
found a land beeyonde the Equinoctial line, the Equinoctial line.
toward the South, where the South pole is eleuate five degrees. And whereas he
could find no apt enteraunce into the land, and sailed up and down alonge by
the same, he espied a boat in which was about twenty men: who, as soon as
they saw the Spanyardes, lepte into the Sea and escaped all, except two, which
they took. In their bote which they forsook, were found four young men which
they had by force taken out of another country, having their privy memb^rs
newelye cut of. These, Vesputius took into his ships and learned by their
signs and tokens, that they had been taken of the Canibales, Canibales
and should shortly have been eaten. But departinge from these costs, and
saylinge on forward, they came to a commodious haven, where they found much
people, with whom they joined frendshyp, and fell to chaungeinge of ware,
receauinge for one bell, five hundredth pearls for one bell.
five hundredth Pearls. In this land they drink a certain kind of wine,
made of the iuyse of fruits and seeds, being like white and read sydar. Wine
of the iuyse o^ fr^tes
Departinge from hence, and saylinge yet further, they found a certain Island
in which was a beastly kind of people, and simple, yet very gentle. In this
Island is no fresh water: An Ila^d without fresh water.
but they gather the dew which in the night season falls upon certain leaves
much like unto the ear of an Ass. They live for the most part, by sea
fish. They have no cotages of houses: but have certain broad leaves, Broad
^^aues.
wherewith they defend them selves from the heat of the Sun, but not from
showers: but it is very lykely, that it rayneth but little in that Island.
Vesputi^s with his company departinge from hence, sailed unto another Island:
into the which when he had entered, he found certain cotages, and in them
^wo old women, and three young wenches, which were of so great stature, that
they marueyled thereat. The la^d of Giaunte^.
And whereas our men stryued with them to bring them to the ship, to
thintente to have carried them into Spain, they espied cominge toward them six
and thyrtie men, yet of much greater stature then were the women, bearing with
the^ bows, arrows, and great stakes like unto clubbes: at the syghte of
whom, our men being afraid, made haste to their ships. But these
Gyauntes folowinge them even to the Sea side, bended their arrows toward the
Spanyardes, until they discharged two pieces of ordinances, with the horrible
sound whereof, they were immediately drieuen to flight. Our men therefore
departinge from thence, called that Island, the Island of Giauntes. And came to
another nation, which frendlye entreated them, and offered them many Pearls:
Pearls
in so much that they boughte.xix. marks weyghte of pearls, A hundredth and
xxx. pearls in one shelfishe.
for a small price. They gave us also certain shelfysshes, of the which some
contained in them a hundredth and thyrtie Pearls, and some fewer. Departinge
from thence they came to the Island of An^iglia, Antiglia.
which Columbus had discovered a few years before. Leauinge this, they sailed
directely to Calicium, Calicium
a port of Spain, where they were honorably r^ceaued.

The third viage of Vesputius.
VEsputius being called from Castile to serve Emanuel the King of Portugale, in
the year of Christ, M.ccccc.ij. the tenth day of May, departed from the
haue^ of lisburne, and sailed down by the coasts of the sea Atlantike, The
sea Atla^tike
until he came under the Equi^^ctial line. And the.xvij. day of Auguste, they
arrived at a cer^ayne land where they found a kind of beastly people. This
land is situate toward the South, five degrees beyond the Equinoctial line. A
great multitude of the inhabita^tes were gathered together, and as well as they
could by signs and poyntinges, desired our men to come alande and to see
their country. There were two in the ship, Thre^ of the Spanyardes slain
and eaten.
which took upon the^ to vewe the land, and learn what spyces or other
commodities might be had therein. They were appointed to return within the
space of five days at the uttermost. But when eight days were now paste, they
which remained in the ships, heard yet nothing of their return: whereas in
the mean time great multitudes of other people of the same land resorted to
the Sea side, but could by no means be allured to communicacion. Yet at the
length they brought certain women, which showed them selves familier toward
the Spaniardes: Whereupon they sent forth a young man, being very strong and
quick, at whom as the women wondered, and stood ga^inge on him and feling his
apparel: Fearse and cru^ll women.
there came suddenly a woman down from a mountain, bringing with her
secretly a great stake, with which she gave him such a stroke behind, that he
fell dead on the earth. The other womenne forthwith took him by the legs,
and drew him to the mountain, while in the mean time the men of the
countreye came forth with bows and arrows, and shot at our men. But the
Spaniardes dischargeing four pieces of ordinance against them, drove them to
flighte. The women also which had slain the young man, cut him in pieces eue^
in the sight of the Spaniardes, shewinge them the pieces, and rosting them at a
great fire. The me^ also made certain tokens, whereby they declared that not
past.viij. days before, they had in like manner served other christian me^.
Wherefore ye Spaniardes having thus sustained so grievous injuries unrevenged,
departed with evil will: sailing therefore further toward ye south, they found a
nacio^ of great multitude, A ciuil^ people.
and of much ge^teler co^dicions, with who^ they remained.viij. days,
bartering and cha^geing ware with the^. Sailing on yet farther, they went beyond
ye line called Tropicus Capricorni, where the south pole is eleuate.32.
degrees: and whereas in those parts they found no great riches, they sailed yet
further south ward until y^ pole was eleuate.lij. degrees: the sout^ pole
eleuate.^^ degrees.
where they came into such a tempeste, that they were enforsed to gather up
their sails, and to row only with the maste, directing their viage toward the
costs of Ethiopia, from whence they returned again to Lisburne in Portugale.
lisburne


The fourth viage of Vesputius.
THis nauigacio^ was attempted in the year of Christ. M.ccccc. iij. but was
not brought to the end hoped for, by reason of a misfortune which chanced in
the goulfe of the sea Atlantike. Vesputius intended in this viage to sail to
the Island of Melcha, the Ila^d of melcha
being in the East, in which is said to be great riches, and the stacion of
restinge place of all ships coming from the goulfe Gangeticus, and from the
Indian sea. This Melcha, is situate more toward the West, and Calicut more
enclininge toward the south. Calicut.
Vesputius came first to y^ grene Ila^des, called Insulae uerides: Insulae
uerides.
and sailed from them to Serraliona, being in the Southe parts of Ethiopia:
from whence saylinge on yet further, he saw in the midst of the sea an
Island, high and merueylous: where also the M. Pilate of this navy, A ship
wrack.
lost his ship by running upon a rock: but all the mariners escaped. This
ship was of three hundredth tun, and had in it all the power of the navy.
When Vesputius had entered into the Island, he found it rude and uninhabited: yet
was it full of birds: but had no beasts except Lisertes with forked tails,
Liserte^ and S^rpe^ts
and S^rpe^tes. Thus making provision for necessaries, he was enforced to
return to portugale, failing of his purpose.

How the king of Portugale subdued certain places in India: and of the rich
City of Malacha.
Forasmuch as therefore in the years folowinge, there we^e more often
nauigacions made from the West by the south into the East, and the Portugales
had now found a safe passage by ye sea, the Portugales bil^ ^ortes in the East
parts.
they thought it expedient for their better safety, to make certain
fortificacions and places of refuge in the East. The which their intent the
better to accomplish, King Emanuel appointed one Alphonsus an exper^e man on
the sea, Alpho^sus
to be captain of this viage. Who, desyring to revenge the losses and injuries
which the Portugales had before sustained, sailed directly to Aurea
Chersonesus, Aure^ chersonesus.
now called Malacha, a merueylous great and rich city, the great and rich
city of Malach^
whose king is an infydel of the sect of the Moors: for even thus far was
the sect of Mahumet extended. Alphonsus therefore at his coming thither
besieged the city, and made war against the Saracens which held the same.
Sarace^s
In this conflict a great noumber of their enemies being slain, Malacha
besieged
the Portugales ^ntred into the city by forse, and kept the ^am^, permitting
free liberty to their soldiers to spoil, kill, the ki^^ fights on an
^lepha^t.
and burn. The king himself, fyghting upon an Elephante, and being sore
wounded, fled with the resydue of his company. A great number of the Moors
were slain with the loss of a few Portugales: many were taken, and great
spoil carried away, in the which were seven Elephantes, and all kinds of
ordinances perteyning to the wars, made of copper, to the noumbre of two
thousand pieces. Plenty of copper.
The city being thus taken and sacked, and the enemies drieuen to flyghte,
Alphonsus the Captain the better to provide for the sauegarde of the
Christians, builded a strong forte at the mouth or entrance of the river
which runs through ye city. At this time, that is to wit, in the year of
Christ. M.ccccc.xij. there were in Malacha many strangers and merchants of
diverse nations, Merchants.
whereby the city was replenished with great riches and abundaunce of spyces.
Spyces
They of their own mocion, desired to make a leage with Alphonsus, and were of
him gently received: So that for their better safety, he permitted them to
^well in the houses near about the forte. And by this means, this markette
town was re^dified and brought to much better state then ever it was before.
These things thus happily atchiued, and al things in Malacha set in good
order, Alphonsus leaving in the forte a garrison of.vi. hundredth valiante
soldiers, returned into India, the city of Goa.
where he besieged the chief castle of the city of Goa, which (he) a few
years before, had with no small danger of our men, and great slaughter of
their enemies, subdued the dominion of Emanuel king of Portugale, and was now
possessed of the mores, he ma^fully recovered again, and enforsed them to
render up the same. The Ambassadors make a leage with Alpho^sus
Also the ambassadors of the King of Narsinga, the King of Cambaia, and the
King of Grosapha with the legates of diverse other kings and Princes, offered
them selves to be at a leage with Alphonsus, and thereupon brought their
presents unto him. No less power and dominion obtained the king of Spain in
the Islands of the Weste parts: the west Islands
In so much that at his commandment, were builded six towns in the Islands
of Cuba. Cuba.
Likewise in the Island of Iucatana, Iucatana
was builded a great city with fair houses. The Island of Cozumella,
Cozumella or Sancta Crux.
the Spanyardes called Sancta Crux, because they came first thither in May,
on the day of the Inuencion of the Cross. In the Island of Hispana or
Hispaniola, Hispana.
were erected.28. sugar presses, Sugar presses.
to press ye sugre which grows plentifully in certain canes or redes of
the same country. From hence also is brought the wood of Guaiacum, The wood
called Guaiacu^.
otherwise called, Lignum sanctum, wherewith diverse diseases are healed by the
order of the new dyete.

Of the Island of Medera, and the fortunate Ila^des, otherwise called the
Islands of Canaria.
Between Spain and the Ila^des of Canaria, is the Island of Medera, Medera, or
Madera.
which the Spaniardes in our time found uninhabited and saluage. But perceauinge
that the soil thereof, was very fruitful, they burnt the woods, and made
the ground apt to bring forth corn, and builded many houses, and so tilled
the same, that at this day is no where found a more fruiteful land. It has
in it many springes of fresshe water and goodly ryuers, upon the which are
bylded many saw mylles, Saw milles.
wherewith many fair trees, like unto Ceder and Cypress trees, Fair tree^
are sawed and cut in sunder, whereof are made most fair tables, coberdes,
cofers, and chayres, and such other curious works made of wood. These trees
are of read color, and sweet savor, the bodies and branches whereof are
brought into Spain in great plenty. The King of Portugale thought it good
to plant in this Island, that kind of redes in which sugar grows: Suge^.
wherein he was not deceived in his opinion. For they grow there most
fruitefully, and bear sugar which excels the sugre of Candye or Sicilia.
There were also vynes brought out of Candye and planted in this Island, Vynes.
where they prosper so well, that for ye most part they bring forth more grapes
then leaves, and those very great. In this Island is also great plenty of
Partriches, wyld doves, and Peacockes, wild bores, and diverse kinds of other
beasts, which only possessed the Island before men did inhabit the same. Also
the Islands called Insulae fortunatae, (which are now called Canaria, the
Islands of Canaria.
for the multitude of dogs which are in them) are said to be no less
fruytefull. These Islands are ten in noumbre, of the which seven are
inhabited, and three remain desolate. They which are inhabited, are called by
these names: Fracta laucea, Magna sors, Grancanaria, Teneriffa Ginera, Palma,
and Ferrum. At Columbus first coming thither, the inhabitants went naked,
without shame, religion or knowledge of God. But in success of time, four of
the greatest Ila^des embrased the Christian faith. christians
They have each of them a private language. Teneriffa and ^rancanaria, are
bigger then the other. Teneriffa may be seen afar of, to the distaunce of
fifty leages, in a fair and clear day. The reason whereof is, that in the
midst of the Island, A mount of burninge brimstone.
ryseth a marvelous great and strong rock, which is thought to be.xv. leages
high, and casts ^oorth continuallye great flames of fire and pieces of
brimstone, as does the monnt Etna in the Island of Sicilia. The people of these
Ila^des, live with barlye bread, flesh, and milk. They have also great
plenty of Goats, wild Asses, and Fygges. Fygges
They lack wine and wheat.

Whether under the AEquinoctial circle or burninge line (called Torrida zona)
be habitable Regions.
Libr. i. Capit. v.
PIus secundus (otherwise called Eneas Siluius, of this question, writes in
this manner. It has been much doubted whether habitable regio^s may be found
under the Equinoctial line. Eratosthenes is of thoppinion, Eratosthenes.
that the air is there very temperate. So thinks Polybius also, Polibius.
affirming that the earth is there very high, and watered with many showers.
Possidonius.
Possidonius supposed that there is no Mountains under the Equinoctial. Some
thought that the Equinoctial line was exte^ded beyond the earth over the main
Ocean sea: the Equinoctial lin^^
which thing the Poet Homere seems to insinuate, the poet Homere
where he faineth that the horses which draw the chariote of sun, drink of
the Ocean sea^ and the sun it self to take his norishement of the same.
Which sentence Macrobius also follows. Macrobius.
Neither was Albertus Magnus far from this opinion, Albertus Magnus.
who supposes yt the sun draws up so much moisture under the Equinoctial
circle, as engenders the clouds under the poles, where by reason of
thexcedinge coldness, air is continualli turned into water. But Ptolomeus
thinks the earth to be extended beyond the Equinoctial, Ptolomeus.
whereas he places a part of ^he Island of Taprobana, Taprobana
under the Equinoctial, and also many nations of the Ethiopians. Ethiopes
Many have thought that thearthly Paradyse was set under that line: which
opinion is contrary to thauctoritie of holy scripture which witnesses the two
famous fluddes Tigris and Euphrates to spring out of Paradise: Tigris and
Euphrates.
which nevertheless we know from the North parts to fall into the goulfe
called Sinus Persicus: Sinus Pe^sicus.
but as concerning the heat under the Equinoctial line, the nearenesse of the
sun, The nearenes of the su^ne.
or the direct beams of the same, are no sufficient causes why under that
line should be no habitable regions, if we consider how those places are
otherwise shadowed, Teperate^es under the Equinoctial.
and tempered with the moystenes and dewes of the nights, which are all the
year through of equal length with the days. Yet will no man deny, Torrida
zona.
but that under the Equinoctial throughoute all the burninge line there are
many wildernesses and desolate places, lacking water, and incommodious for the
life of man: Albeit even in Ethiopia, Ethiopia
people dwell near to the ryuers and woods. Pliny also says that one
Dalion, Pliny.
and and Aristocleon^ and ^ion, and Basilides, went Southward beyond Meroae
which is almost under the Equinoctial. And that Simonides who writ the
descripcion of Ethiopia, dwelte five years in Meroae: the Ila^d of meroae
which Island (being in the fyrme land and compassed about with the River
of Nilus) he affyrmed to be situate.972. thousand pases beeyonde Syenes of
Egypt, Syenes in Egipte.
as the searchers of Nero declared. But at Sienes the Astronomers appoynte the
summer conversion of the sun: The conversion of the su^ue.
and that there the burning line begins, Of the furlo^ge^ of Italy viij.
do make one Italie^ mile, co^teyning a. m, pases.
being distaunte from the AEquinoctial four and twenty degrees, that is,
twelve thousand furlonges. Whereby we may perceive that Meroae is situate some
what beeyonde the myddest between the Equinoctial and Sienes. Ptolomeus also
descrybeth the Region of Agisimba to be inhabited beeyonde the Equinoctial.
Agisimba


Likewise the Mountains of the Moon, called Montes Luna, Montes Eanae.
of the which, the fennes or marises of the river Nilus have their spring and
original. Pal^des Nili.
He adds hereunto that there are certain Ethiopians called Anthropophagi,
Ethiopes Anthropophagi.
that is, such as eat man's flesh, which inhabit regio^s beyond the
Equinoctial about the space of.xvi. degrees. Gabi^able regions how far
^xtended.
And thus the inhabitacion of men is found to be extended.x. hundredth thousand
pases beyond the Equinoctial line. Which space conteyneth no less then two
clymes of the earth. Cli^^.
And a clyme is a portion of the world between South and North, wherein is
variacion in length of of the day, the space of half an hour.

Finis.
Thus ends the fyfth book of Sebastian Munster, of the lands of Asia the
greater, and of the new found lands, and Islands. 1553.

Imprinted at London, in Lombarde street, By Edward Sutton.

To al adventurers, and such as take in hand great enterpryses.
Who has hot of sowrenes felt the bitter taste,
Is not worthy of swetenes to take his repast.
To crack the nutte, he must take the pain,
The which would eat the carnell feign.
Who that of bees fears the stinge,
Shall never by honey have great wonninge.
As the sweet Rose brings forth the thorn,
So is man truly to joy and pain borne.
The bird upon hope byldeth her neste,
Where oftentimes she has but evil rest.
Yet is she not ther^y drieuen ^o such fear,
But yt she performs the same the next year.
much casti^g of periles does noble courage swage
Yet do not I commend rashenes or outrage.
What foles do fable, take thou no hed^ at all,
For what they know not, they call pha^tastical.
Naught venture no^ght have, is a saying of old
Better it is to blow the cole, then to sit a cold.
For^us fortuna adiuuat, the Latin proverb says,
But fails to such as faint and lack faith.
God gives al things, but not ye bull by ye horn
The plowma^ by travail increases his corn.
As fortune fauereth you may be rich or poor,
As Cresus or Irus that beggeth at the door.
Omnis iacta sit alea.


