THE HVNTING of the Romish Fox.

Presented to the popes holiness, with the kiss of his disholy foot, as an
odoriferous and redolent posie very fit for his gravity, so often as he
walks rightstately, in his goodly Palace Bel-videre.

Mat. 3. 2. Repent, for the kingdom of heaven is at hand. EST PERI^T ET NVENTA



Imprinted at London by Richard Bradocke. Anno. 1598.

To the right worshipful M. William Cardinal, M. Humphrey Porfrie, M. Edward
Sianope, and M. John Fern Esquires, and four most worthy pillars of her
Majesty's Counsel, established in the North paerts of England.
DEcay of pure religion, and dissolute life (right worshipful,) have ever
been so great an eyesore to the Godly and well affected magistraites; as none
can be ignorant, or stand in doubt thereof, that will seriously peruse the holy
Scriptures, and histories ecclesiastical. Holy Moses was so Exodus 32. ver. 8.
19.
fervent in Gods true religion, that when he saw the Israelites worshipping
and dancing before the molten Calfe, his wrath waxed so hot against them,
that he cast the two tables of the testimonies out of his hands, and brake them
in pieces; even the tables of stone, which were written with the finger of God
himself. King Ezechias bracke in pieces the brazen Serpent, which God himself
commanded 2. Reg. 18 Numb. 11 8,
Moses to set up. And this he did for this sole and only respect, because
even unto his days, the children of Israel did burn incense to it. For which
and the like religious factes, it is said of him in holy write, that he
walked uprightly in the sight of God, so that after him was none like him among
all the kings of Judah, neither were there any such before him. The Prophet
Elias was so constant and courageous. in true religion, that he was not
afraid to tell Achab that idolotrous 1. Reg, 18, verse. 18,
king, that he and his fathers house did trouble Israel, in that they had
forsaken the Lord, and followed after Baalim. In which courageous spirit, he
procured fire to come from heaven, and to consume the messengers, which the 2.
Reg. 1. v. 2. 10. 12.
wicked king Ahazias sent out against him, because he reproved his adolatry
done to the Idol Beel-Zebub, that god of Ekron; in which spirit the
psalmoghaphe David cried out, that the zeal of Gods Psalm. 69. verse. 9.
house had eaten him up, and that the rebukes of them that rebuked God and his
truth, were fallen upon him. In which spirit, S. Paul sharply reproved the
sorcerer Bar-Iesus, calling him the Act. 13. verse. 10.
child of the Devil, because he sought to auert Sergius Paulus the proconsull,
from the faith of Chrisi Jesus, in which spirit, S. Peter smot Ananias with
sudden death, because he told a leasing to the holy Act. 5. verse. 5. 2. Tlm,
4. verse. 14 Joan Ep, 20
Ghost. In which spirit. S. John forbids to receive him into our house, or
once to salute him that is an enemy to the word of God. Which being true as
it is true indeed, I cannot but from the depth of my heart, lament the
iniquity and apostasy of these latter days, in which days, they who
profess the faith of Christ in show of words, do indeed deny Esaias. 29.
13. Mat, 15. 8. 1. Joan. 5, 18, Mat. 7, 15.
the faith, do indeed crucify again the son of God, and make a mock of
him, in which days, false prophets come in sheep clothinge, but are
inwardly ravening wolves, in which days, as S. Bernard says, the beast
mentioned in Bernerd, ad Gars, ep. 125.
the reuclation, to whom a mouth was given speaking blasphemies, sits in
Peter's chay^e at Rome, as a Lion reddy to take his pray, in regard whereof,
that I may in some measure of my small tale^t, co^curre with others of better
skill, for the redress of intolerable errors of late years crept into the
Church; I have with great watchings, painful studies, and nightly
lucubrations, found out the secret Caves, Dens, and holes, to which the
Romish Fox, that deuoureth the innocent Lambs of Christ's foulde, resorteth
usually, and hides himself therein from time to time covertly. For the
profitable hunting of which Fox, in way of Christian merry desport: I have
provided fourteen couple of well mouthed Romish hounds, who all follow the
sent roundly with a lustye cry, even to the gates of Rome. Which treatise I
have principally compiled, for the common good of the vulgar sort, and of other
young students, who either for want of books, or for lack of time, or
other defectes, can not so easilye epsy the subtle ways, of this Romish
Fox, or find out his secret dens. In it the ignorant shall easilye find
much necessary Doctrine for their better instruction in the truth; In it the
waueringe and doubtful sort, shall find enough for their confirmation; in it
the constant and found Christians, shall not want matter for their spiritual
consolation in it the Papists themselves, if they will read it, shall find
enough, either for their spedy conversion, or for their greater condemnation:
all which I have comprised in so small a room, as every one may carrye the
same in his bosom, which treatise I dedicate to your worshippes for these two
special causes. First, because I would give some external sign of a gratfull
mind, for your manifould kind christian courtesies toward me; again, for
that your worships zeal in favoring all faithful subjects and good
christians, specially the preachers of Gods holy word; has worthilye deserved
far greater things, if my small power could afford the same, and I do it the
rather, because your rare zeal in furthering Gods true religion and virtue,
and in punishing vices and disloyalty, does this day show it self as a
lantern in these North parts, where none are more contemned, none more
hardely dealt withal, whether in court or countye, (if never so small a
surmise can he pretended against them,) then the preachers of Christ's holy
gospel; where none are less regarded, none less favored, even with some
placed in authority, then those that are sound in religion, and for ward in
her majesty's affairs; where mal-contents and disloyal recusants, shall find
more favor in one hour, then zealous Chrystians and true hearted subjects in
a whole year. Happy therefore is this Realm of England, that bath a
princess so zealous for the maintenance of God true religion^; so careful,
for the peace of her people; so merciful, to all offenders; so bountiful to
all well deserving subjects; most noble Queen Elizabeth. And happy yea thryse
happy are these North-Parts, which in these latter days are blessed, with such
zealous, prudent, painful, and well affected governors. Go forward therefore
as ye happily have begun, most faithful servants to God and the Queen. Let
nothing be more dear to you, then the love of God and his religion, nothing
more joyful, then the faithful service of your natural sovereign; nothing
more laborious, then to minister justice indifferently, as well to the poor as
to the rich, so shall God be glorified, your Prince honored, and your native
country receive comfort in your well doing. Accept this small present I pray
your worships, with such mind as I do exhibit the same. And so I humbly take
my leave.

Your worships most bounden, Thomas Bell.

The names of the Hounds, that hunt the Romish Fox.
Victoria. Couarruvias. Aquinas. Vignerius, Fumus. Lyra, Gerson, Syluester.
Rhenanus. Grelerius. Polydorus. Soto. Caietanus. Gratianus. Roffensis.
Socrates, Alphonsus, Panormitanus, Durandus. Platina. Carranza. Bellarminus,
Sigebertus. Palmerius. Bergomensis. Polanchus, Philaster, (sianus Dionysi:
Carthu*
Glossa decretalium.

THE HVNting of the Fox.
The first Hounde.
Give me leave O holy father of Rome, to tell you in the way of charity, what
your own beloved vassales, have in printed books reported of your holiness,
Gods spirit no doubt enforcing them thereunto. Thou O disholy Pope, fearing
that thy Antichristian usurped primacie, would in time be turned vpside down,
if every man might freely examine thy doctrine and tyrannical constitutions,
according to Gods sacred word the true touchstone of verity; have by an
abominable decree in thy detestable canon-lawe, made it flat sacrilege to
dispute of thy power, I will forge nothing of mine own brayn, I will deal
sincerely in every point, even as I will answer at the dreadful day of dome,
and therefore do I exhort the gentle readers, to mark well what I say.
Franciscus a victoria, one O pope, of thy dominican Friars, and the learned
divine that ever Spain brought forth does constantly thus report the matter;
non spectat ad subditos determinare aut examinare Victoria rel^ct, 4. de
potest. papae and concilii, propos. 16.
quid possit Papa aut quid non possit, and quomodo tenea^tur parerevel non,
quia sacrilegium est disputare de poteutia principis, and praecipue Papae. It
belongs not to popish vaslals, to determine or examine what the pope may do,
or what he may not do, and wherein they ought to obey, or not; because he has
made it sacrilege by his law, to reason and dispute of his power. Consonant
hereunto is a decree of the late counsel of Trent, by which it is made
unlawful as well to the clergy as to the layicall people, to read either the
old or the new Testament translated into the vulgar tongue; and that under
the pain of the Popes curse, unless such person or persons be by him Pius. 4.
in bulla synod, Trident.
licensed thereunto. Yea, it is strictly inhibited by the said counsel, that
no person or persons whosoever, shall print, read, keep, or lend any book at
all; save such only as are not oriously known to be allowed by the Pope, and
why I pray your holiness, did you make this most cruel law? doubtless,
because if learned books might be allowed publicly, your heathenish late
Romish religion, would soon receive a deadelye wound. For notwithstanding
this your tyrannical law, and many other decrees of like sort, your own
dearest hounds do still hunt your holiness, even to very death.

The second Hounde.
THy hellish glosses O Pope of Rome, do tell us manifestly that thou can
change the nature of things, that thou can apply the substantial parts of
one thing to another, and that thou can make of nothing something; and
consequently, that thou can make thy self another God. For although it may
seem a wonder, that any not bewitched by the master Devil of Hell, would
ever utter such folly and open blasphemy; yet do I neither say any thing of
malice, neither urge any one jot against thee O Pope, but those very things,
which thine own The Popes treachery is discovered by his own dearlings.
dear Doctors, have in printed books published to the world, and this I
observe to my great comfort, wishinge al Christian readers to note the same
seriously; that thou O Pope with thy late predecessors, would long
sythence have musseled the mouths of these hounds, if the holy Ghost for the
good of his elect had not appointed the contrary to be done, thus therefore O
Pope writes thine own approved gloss, even upon thine own decretals; sic
Papa dicitur habere caeleste arbitrium, et ideo etiam G^^sa, ^iq. 1 decretal
tit, 7, Cap, 3.
naturam rerum immutat, substantialia vnius rei applicando alij; et de nihilo
potest aliquid facere. So is the pope said to have celestial arbitrament, and
therefore does he change the nature of things, by applying the substantial
parts of one thing to an other; and he can make that which is nothing, to be
something. Behold here most execrable blasphemy, that ever was or henceforth
can be, for it is proper to God alone to make something of nothing by his
peculier work of creation. This to be so, neither ever did, or can any divine
deny.

The third Hound
Tell me O Pope, have not thy sworn vassals written of you, that Christ him
self has engraven in thy thighs, that thou art king of kings, and Lord of
Lords? as this also, O sweet Jesus, that though thou carry a thousand souls
to hell, yet may noman say to thee, why do thou so? sundry I know have so
written, but Johannes Gerson shall speak for himself and the rest; I will not
alter one word or syllable that he says. Thus does he write; Sicut Christo
collata est omnis potest as in caelo et in terra, siceam Christ us omnem Joan:
Gerson de potest ate ecclesiae concl. 12. part. 3.
Petro suisque successoribus dereliquit, undo nec Constantinus Siluestro papae
contulit, quod non esset prius suum, sed reddidit unjust detentum. Porro;
sicut non est potestas nisi a Deo, sic nec aliqua temporalis vel ecclesiastica,
imperialis vel regalis, nisi a Papa; in cuius faemore scripsit Christus, Rex
regum, dominus dominantium; de cuius potestate disputare, instar sacrilegij
est; cui neque quisquam dicere potest, cur it a facis? mentior, sinon
inueniantur haec scripta, ab illis etiam qui sapientes sunt in oculis suis. As
all power was given to Christ, in heaven and on earth; so Christ left all that
power, to Peter and his successors (for ever.) Wherefore the Emperor
Constantine gave nothing to Pope Syluester, which was not his own before, but
he only restored that, which was unjustly kept from him. Further, as there is
no power but of God, so is there neither any temporal nor ecclesiastical,
neither imperial nor regal, but only of the Pope; in whose thighs Christ
has written, the King of Kings, the Lord of Lords; of whose power to Behold,
here the blasphemy of Antichrist.
dispute; it is even as sacrilege; to whom no man may say, why do thou so?
Let me have the lie if these things be not found written, even by those that
seem wise in their own conceits. Thus writes Master Doctor Gerson, who
though he lived in the altitude of Popedom, yet could he neither digest nor
conceal these antichristian blasphemies, ascribed to the Pope against the
Son of GOD. Nevertheless, the Popes themselves did challenge the same, and
took no small delight therein. For thus writes Pope Gregorye the ninth of that
name; ad firmamentum caeli, hoc est, vniuersalis ecclesiae, fecit deus duo
magna luminaria, idest, duas instituit Gregor. 9. lib. 1. decret, tit, 33. Cap,
6.
dignitates, quae sunt pontificalis authoritas and regalis potestas; sed illa
quae praeest diebus, idest, spiritualibus, mayor est; quae vero carnalibus,
minor, vt quanta est inter solemn and lunam, tanta inter pontifices and reges
differentia agnoscatur. To the firmament of heaven, that is, of the universal
Church, God made two great lights, to wit, he ordained two great dignities,
which are the authority of the Pope, and the power Mark here the Popes goodly
sermon.
of the King; but that power which rules spiritual things, is greater, and
that which rules things carnal, is lesser; that there may be as great
difference known between Popes and Kings, as there is between the Sun and
the Moon.

The fourth Hound.
TEll me O Pope, is not thy Romish Purgatory so sotted and senseless a
thing, as it can neither be proved by the scriptures, nor yet by the ancient
writers? have not thine own renowned children, Syluester Prieras, who was
sometime master of thy sacred palace, and for his profounde knowledge surnamed
Absolutus Theologus, as also thy glorious so supposed Martyr John Fisher our
late Bishop of Rochester, uttered so much in printed books to the view of
the world? I wot it is so, and that all the world may know the vanity and
abomination of late Romish religion, I will set down their express words.
Thus therefore writes Syluester; Indulgentia nobis per scriptura^ minime
innotuit, licet inducatur illud apostoli, (si quid donaui Syluester de indulg.
vobis,) sed nec per dicta antiquorum doctorum sed modernorum, the Popes
pardons were not known to us by the holy scriptures, although some do allege
S. Paul for that purpose; nether known by the ancient father, but only by
the late writers. Loc, pardons, and consequently purgatory being the ground
thereof, cannot be proved out of the scriptures. My Lord of Rochester has
these express Roffensis con, assert, Luther, arti 18. prope initium.
words; sed and graecis ad hunc vsque die^, non est creditum purgatorium esse.
Legate qui velit graecorum veterum commentarios, et nullum quantum opinor, aut
quam rarissimum de purgatorio sermonem inueniet. Sedneque Latini simul omnes,
at sensim, huius reiveritatem co^ceperunt: and paulo post; non absque maxima
sancti spiritus dispensatione factum est, quod post tot annorum curricula
purgatorij fines, and indulgentiaru^ vsus ab Orthodoxis sit receptus; quamdiu
nulla fuerat de purgatorij cura, nemo quaesiuit indulgentias, nam ex illo
pendet omnis indulgentiarum existimatio. Si tollas purgatorium quorsum
indulgentiis opus erit? his enim si nullum fuerit purgatorium, nihil
indigebimus, contemplantes igitur aliquandiu purgatorium incognitum fuisse,
deinde quibusdam pedetentim, Partim ex reuelationibus, partim ex scripturis
fuisse creditum, atque ita tandem generatim eius fidem ab orthodoxa ecclesia
fuisse receptissimam, facillime rationem aliqua^ indulgentiarum intelligimus.
Quum itaque purgatoriu^, ta^ sero cognitu^ ac receptu^ ecciesiae fuerit
vniuersae, quis iam de indulgentijs mirari potest, quod in principio nascentis
ecclesiae nullus fuerat caru^ vsum; caeperunt igitur indulgentiae, post qua^ ad
purgatorij cruciatus aliquandiu trepidatum erat. The Greeks to this day, do not
believe there is a purgatory. Read who will their commentaries, Loc, a great
learned man and a famous popish bishop and Martyr, does plainly tell us, the
vanity and late birth of Romish pardons.
and he shall find either very seldom mention of purgatory, or rather none
at all, for neither did the Latin Church, conceive the verity of this matter
all at once, but ley surely by little and little; neither was it done without
the great dispensation of the holy ghost, that after so many years Catholics
both believed purgatory, and received the use of pardons generally; so long as
there was no care of purgatory, no man sought for pardons. For of it depends
all the estimation, that we have of pardons. If thou take away purgatory, to
what end shall we need pardons. For if there be no purgatory, we shall need no
pardons. Considering therefore how long purgatory was unknown, the^ that it was
believed of some by little and little, partly by revelations, and partly by the
scriptures, and so at the last believed generally of the whole Church, we do
easily understand the cause of pardons, since therefore purgatory was so
lately known, and received of the whole Church; who can now admire pardons,
that there was no use of them in the Primitive Church. Pardons therefore began
after the people stood in some fear of purgatory. Thus O Pope, writes thine
own dear Bishop, whose testimony must needs be of great credit with
thee. Whose words notwithstanding, if they be well marked with the due
circumstances thereof, are able of themselves without more ado, to perswad any
man living, to detest all popish religion. For first we learn here, that the 1
greeks never believed purgatory, no not to the days of this Bishop, who
lived within these three score years last past. Secondly, that the church of
Rome 2
(now the mother of all superstition,) did not believe the said purgatory, for
many hundreds of years after S. Peter's death, whose successor for all that,
thou O Pope, boasts thy self to be. Thirdly, that 3
this purgatory, which is now the foundation of papistry, crept by little and
little, not all at once, into the Latin 4
Church. Fourthly, that purgatory was found out by revelation from heaven, 5
(or if you had rather so think, from the deuell of Hell,.) Fifthly, that
pardons came not up, until purgatory was found out: the reason hereof says
our popish Bishop, is this; because forsooth, if there be no purgatory, all
popish pardons are needless. Sixthly, that pardons were not 6
heard of, nor known to the Primative 7
Church. Seuently, that pardons then began, when men began to fear the pains
of purgatory: but of this matter I have written more at large, in my book of
Motives.

The Fifth Hound.
TEll me O Pope, have thou not imposed upon thy Monks, Friars, and Nuns,
such an heavy yoke, as they are not able to bear? Is not the prohibition of
matrimony, contrary to Christ's institution, to the doctrine of the Apostls,
and to the practice of the Primitive church? was not Pope Syritius the first
man, that made any settled law for that purpose? was not the marriage of priests
allowed in the Church, for one thousand years after christ? does not thine
own Gratianus tell us, even out of thine own approved decrees, that many
priests sons have been Popes of Rome? Does he not name, Bonifacius,
Agapitus, Theodorus, Syluerius, Faelix, Hosius, Gelasius, Densdedit, and many
others? Does not thine own gloss upon the same text, think it better to say
they were all bastardes, then to grant them to be legitimate children,
lawfully begotten in holy wedlock? does not the same gloss allege for his
excuse, that vit iu tollitur per successionem, the fault is taken away by
virtue of their holy succession; comes not the same Gratian roundly upon the
gloss, and affirms plainly, that priests might marry lawfully every where,
until the late inhibition made by Siritius? does not Socrates that famous
Greek historiographer tell us, that Bishops of the east Church, did in his
time beget children of their lawful wives, and that even in the time of their
priestly function? This thing I have proved so effectually in my book of
Survey, as all the papists in Europe are not able to disprove the same. Here
only I will add the flat testimony of Socrates out of his ecclesiastical
history, whose express words are these; non pauci illorunt (Episcoporum)
Socrates, hist, lib, 5, Cap, 21.
dum Episcopatum gerunt, liberos ex vxore legit tima procreant; Many of them
says Socrates speaking of Bishops, do beget children of their lawful
wives, even in time of their Episcopal or Byshoplike functions. these words
are so plain, that they need no gloss.

The sixth Hounde.
TEll me O Pope, do not so many intolerable excommunications, and so many
dissolute dispensations, come daily and hourly from the chuch of Rome, as
thereby the state of us Christians is now become more servile, then was of old
the condition of the Jews. I wot it is so, thine own doctors, Uictoria,
Syluester, Fumus, Gerson, Rhenanus, and Geilerius affirm the same, as I have
proved at large in my book of Survey. One only Victoria I will here allege,
whose express words are these: videmus quotidie a Romana curia tam largas,
imo omnino tam dissolutas dispensationes profectas, vt orbis far non possit,
Victoria de potest, Papae et con, relect, 5, page, 139,
non solum in scandalum pusillorum, sed maiorum. We see dailye so large, yea
altogether so dissolute dispensations come from the court of Rome, that the
world cannot endure it, neither is this dissolutio^ to the scand all only of
the weak, but even of the perfect sort, and those that are the wisest among
the rest. Again he writes thus; ego vbisupra Page 149.
nullam dispensationem in particulari condemno, sed video duo; primunm, quid in
fine anni sunt tot dispensationes factae, vt nescio an sint tot qui legem
seruent, secundo, video quod omnes qui petunt adferunt dispensationes. I
condemn no dispensation in particular, but I see two things; First, that in
the end of the year there are so many dispensations gotten, that I know not
if so many keep the law: secondly, I see all that ask, bring dispensations
with them. In another place, the same Victoria has these words; Paulatim ad
have i^temporantiam deuentum est, vbisupra page ^51.
and hunc tale in statum, vbi nec mala nostra, nee reme^^a pati possumus. Da
mihi The Church of Rome is now brought to a most miserable state.
Clementes, L^^s, Syluestros, and omnia permitta^ arbitrio eoru^. Sed vt nihil
grauius dicatar in recentiores Pontifices, certe multis partibus sunt priscis
illis inferiores. By little and little we are brought to these inordinate
dispensations, and to this so miserable state, where we are neither able to
endure our own griefs, nor the remedies which should mitigate the same. Yet
give me Clements, Lines, Syluesters, and I will commit all things to their
charge. But to speak favorably of our late Popes, they are doubtless far
inferior to Popes of old time Lo, the Chuch of Rome is not now, as it was in
old time.

The seventh Hound.
TEll me O Pope, have not thy predecessors made their beginning like Foxes and
thieves and in the end dyed like dogs? have not thine own religious Friars,
made report of this verity? I wot it is so, and Carranza together with thy
sweet Platina shall witness the same with me. Platina has these express
words; qua quidem bearitudine Ioanes caruit, fur certe in pontificatu^, and
latro; non enim vt par fuerat, per ostium intrauit. Which happy life Pope John
Platina in vit^^ Joan, 18.
wanted, as who was a these and a robber, for he entered not in by the door,
as he should have done. Again, in an other place the same Platina writes in
this manner eo enim tum pontificatus deuenerat, vt qui plus largitione and
ambitione, non dico Platina in vita Syl, 3.
sanctitate vitae et doctrina valeret, is tantum inde dignitatis gradum, bonis
oppressis and reiectis obtineret, quem morem vtinam aliquando non retinuissent
nostra tempora. For to that pass was the Popedom now brought, that who so
could excel others in giving bribes, and in ambition, I say not in godly life
and sound doctrine, Extortion and ambition is the life of popery.
(for that was far from them,) he only should have the degree of honor, and
good men should be rejected; which usage would to God it had never been in our
time. Harken O Pope, is it not now with your Bishops of Rome, as it was with
Annas, Caiphas, and others of old time among the Jews? thy holiness can it not
deny, but let Carranza byte thee in the haunch, whose express words are
these: intrauit vt Vulpes, regnauit vt Lupus, mortuus est vt Canis. He entered
as a fox, he Carranza in summa con. sol. 369
reigned as a Wolf, he died as a dog. He spaketh of Pope Boniface, the eight
of that name. This Carranza, albeit he were one of the Popes dear Friars, is
for all that a well mouthed Hound.

The eight Hound.
TEll me O Pope, can not thy holiness with plenitudine potestatis, euacuate
hellish purgatory, and deliver all souls tormented there, and send them
straight away to heaven? nay, can thou not free all men from all punishment
due to their sins here on earth? I am sure thou can, for thy dear doctors
Fumus, Syluester, and Vignerius, have so affirmed to me. Fumus shall speak
for all, whose express words are these; Papa posset liberare omnes animas
purgaporij, etiam si plures essent, si quis pro sis faceret Fumus in verbo,
Papa, 11.
quod iuberet, peccaret tamen indiscrete concedendo; and in hoc sensis dicunt
Doctores, quod non potest spoliare Purgatorium. The Pope could deliver all the
souls out of purgatory, albeit they were very many, if one did that which he
appointed to be done, marry the Pope should sin, for his indiscreet dealing
therein. Thus writes our holy friar, who adds well in the ending, that the
Pope wants sometime his capp of discretion, to which The Pope does sometime
want his cappe discretion.
I will make another addition, if percase it may stand with the Popes good
liking, to wit, that since as Popery tells us, the fire of purgatory is the
self same in nature with the fire of Hell, if therefore his holiness had but
one drop of charity, he would never suffer so many souls to abide that
doolfull misery. Yet I must needs grant, that in so doing his holiness
should want discretion; because forsooth, if there were no souls in purgatory,
then for trentals, diriges, and Masses, men would not bestow one quatrine
upon his vassals.

The ninth Hounde.
TEll me O Pope, can not thou Free a man by thy plenary pardon; from all
punishment due in this life and in the life to come? I know thou can do it,
because thine own dear Syluester so affirms. These are his express words;
qui plenariam indulgentiam rite assecutus Syluester. de indulg, par. 33
est, si eo instanti moreretur, euolaret statim ad caelum. He that has orderly
gotten the Popes plenarie pardon. if he should dye presently, he should fly to
heaven out of hand. Thus writes Syluester the Popes Theologus absolutus. Where
now, if it were not sacrilege to dispute of the Popes power, as I have proved
it to be; I would ask this one question, why; any souls abide in purgatory,
since a plenarie is sufficient for their discharge, Pardon my boldness I pray
your holiness.
which for all that, the Pope grauntteth usually, as a thing very frequent
during mine own aboade at Rome, Is it because he cannot? that is contrary to
his own doctrine. Is it because it stands not with discretion, there is
as much discretion to do it for the dead, as for the living. Is it because he
will not? so it seems, and then he wants charity, as I have already said.

The tenth Hound.
TEll me O Pope, does not thy sottish religion tell us, that thou may err
as a private man, but not as Pope or a public Person? as if it were said,
thou may sit in thy pontificalibus, O monster of the world.
thou may ride upon thy white Palfrey, thou may talk and write they
pleasure, and that even while thou art Pope, and so utter heresies and
blasphemies whatsoever, and yet for all that can thou never teach or define
any error or heresy, as being Pope indeed. I wot it is so, thy chiefest
Doctors have so told me. Vignerius has these express words; si dicatur,
summus pontifex errare potest, and vigner de potest, condendi symbolum, page,
337.
in animo suo concipere aliquem articulum Orthodoxa fidei contrarium, and etiam
priuatim proferre, vt legitur de Anastasio secundo. Si ergo posset nouum
symbolum edore, fides ecclesiae vnius hominis periculo subiaceret; dicendum,
quod summus pontifex vt priuata persona errare potest, non tamen vt est summus
pontifex. Ideo si vt priuata persona symbolum edere tentaret, non esset
symbolum; maxim vbi a vera fide deuiaret. If any say, that the Poope may err.
and conceive in his heart any article contrary to the Catholic faith, and
also utter the same privately, as we read of Pope Anastatius the second: If
therefore he could make a new creed the faith of the Church should be
subject to the hazard of one man. We answer says (Vignerius,) that the Pope
may err as a private person, but not as Pope or the hie Bishop. Therefore if
he should make a creed as a private man, it should be no creed at all;
especially, where he swerued from the right faith. Behold here gentle reader,
upon what rotten stuff the Papists would have us to ground our faith. We
must say they, believe that the Pope cannot err, and yet are we sure that he
can err, and that he has already erred in very deed. We must likewise
believe, that he cannot but teach the truth; and yet must we also believe, that
he can both teach heresy, and be an heretic himself. We must furthermore
believe, that heart will not derest Popery.
as you have already heard; that it is sacrilege to dispute of the Popes
power, and yet must we both dispute of his power, and straightly examine his
doctrine, as also know constantly, whether he speaks publicly as a public
man, or privately as a private man. And nevertheless when we have done all that
we can, we know no more what to think or say of his doctrine, then when we
have an E^le by the tail. For when he shall tell me, I must believe this and
that; then if he speak as a private man, where is my says? but let us here
the cry of some other hounds. That famous papist Ioh^ures Gerson, sometime the
chancellor John Gerson in sermon, de pasch. part. 3.
of Paris, has these express words; hoc fecit latroni, qui verisimiliier
nondum compleuer at paenitentiam pro omnibu peccatis suis, qui fuit illa hora
propria beatificatus, and vidit deum facie ad faciem, sicut sanctiin Paradiso.
Propter quod insuper apparet falsitas doctrinae papae Ioannis 22. quae damnata
fuit cum souo buccinarum coram rege Philippoper Theologos Parisienses, and
credidit potius Theologis Parisiensibus, quam curiae. This he did to the
thief, who by likelihoode had not yet accomplished penance for all his
sins, who was blessed in that very hour, and saw GOD face to face, as do
the Saints in Paradise, by reason whereof, further appears the falshoode of
the doctrine of Pope John, which was condemned with the sound of Trumpetes,
before king Phillippe by the divines of Paris, and the king believed the
divines of Paris, rather then the court. In which words we have to note.
First, that Master Gerson avouches the thief crucified with Christ, to have
seen God face to face in that hour, and so to have been blessed. Secondly,
that he reproves the false doctrine of Pope John. Thirdly, that his doctrine
was condemned with the sound of trumpets, in the presence of the king of France
Fourthly, that the king gave more credit to the divines of Paris, then to the
judgment of the (Pope,) or court of Rome. Fifty, that neither the king, nor
the learned Papists, did at that time grant to the Pope such power and
authority, as the Pope this day does insolently challenge to himself. Sixthly
that the Pope taught false doctrine even in a weighty matter of says. Which
thing not only Gerson affirms, together with the divines of Paris, as you
have heard; but Pope Adrian himself testifies the same, as the zealous papist
Alphonsus de castro, Alphonsus, lib. 3. adubaeres, prope finem.
reports in these express words; sexta haeresis docet nullam animam ante
diem iudicij, esse beatam, quum vt ait, nulla anima an^e illum diem videt deum.
Huius haeresios authors sunt Armeni, eandem etia^ tuentur Greci, post istos
surrexit Johannes, 22. huius nominis pontifex. Sed ne verbis meis aliquis in
hac part deroget, verba Adriani papae refera^, qui in suo quarto sente^tiarum,
in calce cuiusdam quaestionis de sacramento confirmationis, it a ait; nonissime
fertur de Ioanne, 22. quod public docuit, decla rauit, and ab omnibus teneri
mandauit, quod a nimae purgata aute finale indicium non habent sola^, quae est
clara and facialis visio dei; and vniuersitatem Parisiense ad hec induxisse
dicitur, quod nemo in ea poteraet gradum in Theologia adipisci, nisiprimitus
hunc errorem iurasset se defensurum, and per petuo ei adhaesurum. Haec
Adrianus. The sixth heresy teaches, that no soul is in eternal bliss before
the day of dome, because as it says, no soul before that day, sees God, the
Armeni are the authors of this heresy, and the Greeks hold the same. After
these rose up Pope John, the 22. of that name. But least any man distrust my
words in this point, I will receite the words of Pope Adrian, who in his fourth
book of sentences, in the end of a certain question of the sacrament of
confirmation, says thus; last of all, it is reported of Pope John the 22. that
he publicly taught, declared, and commanded The Pope commands his Vassals,
to swear to false doctrine.
all men to held (this opinion) that the souls of the just, have not before
the day of dome, the sole, which is the clear and faciall sight of God. And it
is said, that he induced the University of Paris to this; that no man should
take degree in the same, but, he that first did swear to desend this error, and
to mantain the same for ever. Thus says Adrian, who was him self the Bishop
or Pope of Rome, and the most excellently learned Bishop, that ever was in
that sea. And it will not serve the turn to say as the Jesuit Bellermine
does, in the defense of popish faith: to wit, that Pope John erred as a private
man, but not as Pope, for that distinction does not only want a good
foundation, whereupon it should be built, but also it flatly destroys the
plain text: the reason hereof is most evident, even to every child. First,
because 1
Pope Adrian says, (docuit,) he taught. Secondly, because he says, 2
(public,) publicly. Thirdly, because 3
he says, (mandauit,) he commanded all to hold it. Fourthly, because none
could be made graduate, save only he that held 4
this opinion. Fifthly, because every graduate 5
did swear, to hold and defend it forever. So then, the Pope may err, not only
as a private man, but also in the public decree of faith, and that even by the
consent and testimony of Adrian, who was Pope himself; yea, who for learning
and knowledge as the papists themselves confess, was one of the rarest Popes
that ever came at Rome. But of this point, I have spoken more largely, in my
book of Motives.

The eleunth Hound.
TEll me O Pope, do not thy Doctors dear, wrest the scriptures most clear,
that so they may serve thy turn? thou must for shame confess it, for thine
own sworn vassal Polydorus Virgilius, does witness it to be so; these are
his express words; Non secus isti iurisconsulti Polydorut. lib. 4 cap. 9.
aliquoties detorquent sacras literas quo volunt, ac sutores sordidas solent
dentibus extendere pelles: These popish Legistes and Canonistes, do now and
then so wrest and writhe the holy scriptures; even as Cobblers do gnaw with
their teeth, and stretch out their filthy skins. Out of these words I note
first, that this 1.
Polydore was a great papist himself, and so this testimony must needs be of
great force against the papists. I note secondly, 2.
that he speaks not of the meanest and basest sort of papists, but even of
the best, and of their renowned Doctors; because he means Hostiensis, their
grande and famous Canonist. I note thirdly, that their mangling and wresting of
the holy scriptures, is most intolerable; The papists wrest the scripture,
and that without the same, they cannot possibly maintain their wicked
doctrine.

The 12. Hounde.
TEll me O Pope, does not Dominicus Soto thine own Dominican Friar, tell us
with open mouth, that no souls abide in Purgatory above ten years? Do
not thou for all that, give pardons Soto in 4. lib sent. did. 19 q. 3. arg 2.
for ten thousand years? do not thy Romish priests take money, to say
Masses for those that were dead and buried, seven thousand years ago? the
usual practice which my self have known, does prove it to be so; I have also
proved the same in my book of Motives and more at large in my book of Survey.

The 13 Hounde.
TEll me O Pope, do not thou teach thy children, that they are justified by
their own merits, and by their works of supererogation? and yet does not thy
dear Friar Johannes de Combis, oppose himself roundly against that wicked
heresy, Gods holy spirit moving him so to do? I wot it is so, for these are
his express words; Hoc patet, quiae Deus semper remunerat supra Joan* de
Combis lib; 5. theolog. verit. cap. 1^
meritum, sicut punit citra condignum. All this is evident, because God
evermore rewards us above our merits, and also does ever punish us, less
then we deserve. For which respect, Saint Austen says gravely, Ue etiam
laudabilvitae hominum, si remotae misericordiae discutias eam. Woe, even to the
best liver of all, if thou (O GOD) Aug. lib. 9. confess. cap. 13.
shall examine his life, thy mercy set apart.

The 14. Hound.
TEll me O Pope, does not thy famous Canonist and most reverend Bishop,
Couarruuias, tell us without blushing, that albeit the doctrine of thine
Angelical Doctor Aquinas, be confirmed for Authentical by sundry Popes before
thee, The Popes doings and doctrine, must needs be defended.
yet must the contrary opinion be defended of necessity? because forsooth
says Couerruuias, the life of popery cannot otherwise saved be. These are his
expresle words; Nec me latet D. Thomam praevia maxima deliberatione afferere,
Couern. To. 1. ca. 20 part. 11. in ^ed. col. prima.
Romans pontificem non posse propria dispeae satione continentiae solenne votum
monathorum tolere, and paulo post, oportet tamen primam opinionem defendere,
neque passim fiant, euertantur omnino. Neither am I ignorant, says
Couerruvias, that Saint Thomas affirms after great deliberation, that the
Bishop of Rome cannot with his dispensation, take away from monks their solemn
vow of chastity, this notwithstanding, we must defend the first opinion, least
the common practice of the Pope be turned vpside down. Out of these words,
sundry very necessary 1
observations may be gathered. First, that the best learned Papists, do not
agree 2
about the Popes Authority. Secondly, that great learned papists among whom
Aquinas is one, do deny the Popes resolution, judgment, and authority, and
that even in the highest points of doctrine. Thirdly, that false and absurd
opinions 3
must be defended, for the credit and safegarde of the Popes religion. What a
beggarly thing is popery.
Fourthlye, that most miserable is the Popes religion, which must have such
beggarly shifts, for the maintenance of the same.

The 15. Hound.
TEll me O Pope, do thou not reject the sixth general synod, because it
prescribes limits to thy holiness? do thou not like wise reject one part
of the general counsel of Constance, for that it prefers the authority of
the counsel against thee? does not thine own Jesuit Bellarmine, reject the
Epistle of Damasus to Hierome, and an other of Hierome to Damasus? does Lo,
how roundly the papists reject the fathers.
not thy renowned canonist Navarre, reject the common opinion, so often as he
disliketh the same? does not Cardinal Caietanus contemn a whole multitude of
Fathers, when they seem to him to hold against the scriptures? does not
Melchior Canus a most learned papist, oppose himself against the Thomistes and
the Scotistes? Against all both old and new writers? all this is true, I
know it well, and I houe proved it, in my book of Motyues. One or two
testimonies I will here set down, because they are very profitable for the
Reader. Caietanus has these express words; Si quando occurrerit nouus sensus
textui consonus, Caietan. in praefat. in quin que lib. Mos.
nec a scriptura sacra, nec ab ecclesiae doctrina dissonus, quamuis a torrente
doctorum sacrorum alienus, aequas se praebeant censores. Memineriut ius sum
vnicuique tribuere, solis scripturae saecrae authoribus reseruata est
authoritas haec, vt ideo credimus sic esse quod ipsi ita scripserunt, nullus
itaque detestetur nouum sacrae scripturae sensum, ex hoc quod dissonat a
priscis doctoribus. Sed scrutetur perspicatius textum ac contextum scripturae,
and si quadrare inuenerit, laudet Deum, qui non alligauit expositionem
scripturarum sacrarum priscorum doctorum sensibus, sed scripturae ipsi integrae
sub catholicae ecclesiae censurae. alioquin spes nobis ac posteris tolleretur
exponendi scripturam sacram, nisi transferendo (vt ainnt) de libro in
quinternum. If at any time a new sense occur, which is consonant to the text,
and not dissona^t from holy writ or doctrine of the Church, although it swarne
from the opinion of never so many fathers; yet let the Readers judge there of
indifferentlye, and according to equity. Let them remember to give to every
one his right, because this privilege is only granted to the writers This
testimony of Caieta^^, is worthy to be noted.
of the holy scriptures, that we must therefore believe it to be so, because they
have written so, Let none therefore loath a new sense of holy scripture,
because it dissenteth from the old Doctors, but let him exactly consider the
text and context of the scripture, and if he find it to agree, let him praise
God, who has not tied the exposition of the holy scriptures, to the opinions
of the old Doctors, but to the integrity of the scripture it self, under the
censure of the Catholic Church. For otherwise, neither we nor our posterities
shall have any hope to expound the scripture, but only to translate out of one
book into another. Thus we hear the cry of a well mouthed hound; to wit, the
verdict of our learned Caictain, our great Thomist, our religious The holy
scripture ought to be the trial of every doubtful question.
friar, our Cardinal of Rome. By whose grave resolution, well worthy to be
written in golden letters, it is evident to every child, that no sense, though
neuerso new; no exposition, though never so strange, no opinion, though
different from never so many fathers, must, or ought to be rejected, if it be
agreeable to the holy scriptures. And consequently it follows by the said
resolution, that every truth is to be tried by the scriptures, and none at
all by the fathers. Melchior Canus an other learned papist, is of the self
same opinion. These are his express words; Vbi ego si Thomistae Canus de
locis, lib. 8. cap. 5. Ep. 245
omnes cum Scotist is existant, si cum antiquis iuniores vellent contra me
pugnare, tamen superior sim necesse est, non enim vt no^nulli putant, omnia
sunt in the logorum authoritate. Wherein, though all the Thomistes stand with
the Scotists, though the old writers with the young fight against me, yet
shall I of necessity have the upper hand over them. For all things do not
as some think, rest in the authority of diuins. And why should any man,
depend upon the judgment of men, seeing O Pope thine own sweet Jesuit
Bellarmine, does tell us plainly, that all Bishops do so dissent among
themselves, and so swerve from the truth of the scripturs, as he knows not in
the world whom to follow. These are his express words; At sine dubio
singuli episcopi Bellarm. lib. 2. de conc. cap. 2.
errare possunt, and aliquando errant, and inter se quaudoque dissentiunt, vt
nesciamus quisnam eorum sequendus sit. But without all doubt, all Bishops may
err one after an other, and they sometime do err, and sometime dissent one
from an other, so as we cannot in the world tell, whom it is best to follow.
Out of these words, I note first, that God 1
who caused Balaams Ass to speak, has enforced our Jesuit against his will
to Nu, 22. 28.
confess the truth. I note secondly, 2
that there is no Bishop in the world, but he both may err, and sometime
does err, and consequently, that the Pope of Rome is either no Bishop at all
by his own Jesuits grant, or else that he both may err, and does err in
deed. Of which testimony I make the the greater account, because it
proceeds from a Jesuits mouth. For none more forcible weapons can be used
against Popish doctrine is most forcible against it self.
the papists, then to beat them with their own swords. I note thirdly,
that by our Jesuits confession, every 3
Bishop has so many errors, that the people cannot tell whom to follow. I
note fourthlie, that since every ancient 4
father both may err and does err, and that by popish grant, there is no
reason, why the papists should urge us as they do, to stand to the censure
of the fathers in every thing, Nay they ought to give us leave to examine
their writings, Ad amussim scripturarum, according to the true meaning of the
scriptures: because the great papists, Caietanus, Canus, and Bellarminus, do
all three grant the same, as is already proved. Add heereunto the sent of
the next hounde.

The 16. Hound.
TEll me O Pope, do not thou take away all freedom and liberty granted
of old time to all assemblies and synodes. Do not thou deny voices, and
definitive sentence, to all persons in all counsels, even to the Emperor
himself, admitting none, though never so learned, but Bishops only, to
judge of doubts in faith or religion? do not thou absente thy self from
all counsels, and yet reseruest all judgment to thy self, sitting in thy
chair at home? do thou not with all this, take thy Bishops sworn, even
when they are made Bishops, to defend thy papal Tyranny and laws whatsoever?
I wot it is so, and I have proved it in my book of Motives. I will
nevertheless in this place briefly show the same, by the testimony of three
Romish Hounds. The first hounde is Gregory, who was himself the late
Bishop of Rome. His express words in his decreetals, are these; Ego N.
episcopus, Greg. lib. 7. decret. lit. 24. cap. 4.
ab hac hora sidelis ero S. Petro, sanctaeque Romanae ecclesiae, dominoque
meopapae N. eiusque successoribus Canonice intrantibus. sequitur; papatum
Romanae ecclesiae, and regulas sanctorum patrum, adiutor ero ad defendendum and
retinndum contra omnes homines; sic me Deus adiuuet, and haec sancta euangelia.
I (John Fisher) Bishop, will from this day forward be faithful to saint
Peter and to the holy Church of Rome, and to my Lord (Boniface) the Pope, and
to his successors chosen canonicallie, and I will be an helper to defend the
popedom or papal authority, and the rules of the holy fathers against all
people; so God me help, and the holy Gospel. Out of these words, it may be
easily gathered, that the decrees of late Romish counsels, are in these our
days of no force at all. The reason is evident, because none but Bishops have
definitive voices in the said counselles, neither can the said Bishops decree
any thing, against either the Pope or the Church of Rome. For as we see by the
Popes tyrannical constitution now alleged, all Bishops are sworn to be
faithful to my Lord the Pope, and to defend whatsoever he has set down,
against all people in the world. Te second hound is Bellarmine our Romish
Jesuit, whose express words are these; Istum iuramentum non tollit
Episcoporum libertatem, Bellarm. lib 1. de conc. cap. vlt.
quae in conciliis necessaria est, iurant enim se fore obedie^tes summo
Pontifici, quod intelligitur donec Pontifex est, and dum iubet ea quae secundum
Deum and sacras canones iubere potest; sed non jurat se no^ dicturos quod
sentiunt in concilio, vel se non deposituros ei^ si haeretiou^ esse conuincant,
This oath takes not away the liberty of Bishopps, which in counsels is
necessary. For they swear that they will be obedient to the Pope, which is to
be understood, so long as he is Pope, and while he commands those things,
which he may command, agreeable to God and the holy cannons; but they swear
not, that they will not speak what they think in the counsel, or that they
will Mark this doctrine of our Jesuit.
not depose him, if they prove him to be an heretic. Out of these words of 1
the Jesuit, I note first, that he saw right well, that this oath brings no
small discredit, to the late Romish religion; in regard whereof he seeks
many shifts, to save the Popes credit if it might be. I note secondly, 2
that all clergymen admitted to give voices in counsels, are sworn wholly to
obey the Popes constitutions. 3
I note thirdly, that the said persons are sworn to believe, that the Pope
cannot err in his judicial decrees of faith or manners, that no counsels are
of force, without the Popes confirmation; that all counsels confirmed by him,
are approved by the holy Ghost: that he can excommunicate and depose, all
Emperors, Kings, Queens, and Bishops in the Christian world: that he can
deliver by his free pardons, all souls out of purgatory, and a thousand other
things, of like homely quality, for all such matters are contained, in the
Popes holy holy cannons, and consequently, in their most lamentable oath. I
note fourthlye, that they 4
are sworn to admit his decrees, who as they believe, may be an heretic. I
note fiftlye, that they are sworn 5
to admit his judgment in all matters of faith, whom yet them selves may
judge and depose for heresy. (Fie, fie upon all filthy popery.) I note sixthly,
that the popish fundamental article, in appointing the Pope judge over all
controversies; is quite overthrown and turned vpside down in this Bellarminus
his explication. For when he says, (while he commands etc.) he grants
every Bishop freedom, to examine and to judge of the Popes co^stitutions.
Which liberty, if they would constantly perform, all true christians would
agree with them. For none that believe rightly Would to God this were observed
amongst the papists.
in God, will deny obedience to the Pope, When soever he preaches or teaches
any thing, which is ag^eeable to God and holy cannons. But true christians
finding his canons to be disholy and his decrees to be against God; think as
Bellarmine here teaches them, that they may judge his bad dealing, and are
not bound to obey him. The third hound is Melchior Canus, whose Canus, lib. 5.
de aut^or, conc. cap. 5. page 102.
express words are these; Decreta quoe a legatis contra sedis apostolicae
traditionem apprebentur, non habent Romanae ecclesiae authoritatem, nec aliter
se habent, quam si a consilio sine legatis prodijssent. Sequitur, solidam
auctoritatem, quam in confirmandis and fratribus and dogmatibus Petrus habet,
in legatos transfer non potest. The decrees which the legates shall approve
against the tradition of the Church of Rome, have no authority from the Church
of Rome, neither are they of any more force, then if they had proceeded from
the counsel without consent of the Legates. The sound authority which Peter
has in confirming his brethren and decrees, he can not transfer unto his
Legates. Thus writes Canus, that great pillar of Popish Doctrine. Out of
whose words I note first, that decrees of counsels 1
be of no force, without consent of the Popes Legates. I note secondly, that 2
the decrees of counsels, even when they have the consent of the Legates, are
for all that of no force, when the Legates condescend to any thing against the
Popes mind. I note thirdly, that the 3
Pope cannot give or translate his authority to the legates; and consequently,
that the Pope does no little abuse the whole world, when he calls together
Late Popish counsels are of no authority.
all Bishops in the world. and yet will allow nothing that they do, unless
it be the same that he decreth in his chair at home.

The 17 Hound.
TEll me O precursor of Antichrist, if thou be not that Antichrist himself?
do not thou take upon thee to depose Kings, and to dispossess them of their
Scepters and regalities? do not thou challenge authority to make Kings?
do not thou tell them, that they have not their power from God, but through
thee and thy means? I wot it is so, thy domicican Friar Syluester reprooueth
it, thy Jesuit Bellermine confirms it, and thy sworn Vassals, Campion,
Ballard, and their accomplices, did put the same in execution. Syluester has
these express Syluester. de papa, par 2.
words; nec obstat, quod potestas imperialis est adeo concessa secundum multa
iura, quia est a deo mediante Papa; quia eam concedit non vt homo, sed vt
vicarius dei. Nec sunt sic distinctae potestates, spiritualis scilicet and
temporal^s, quin vna alteri subaliernetur ad instar solis and Lunae; nec sunt
distinctae, quasi semper sint in diuersis, sed quia sunt ordinata ad distincta,
scilicet spiritualia and temporalia; and in vno eodemque summo pontifice, est
vtraque in summo. It skilleth not that many laws affirm imperial power to be
of GOD. For it is but from God does not make kings but by the Popes means.
GOD, by the Popes means who grants it not as man, but as the Vicar of GOD.
Neither are the two powers, the spiritual and the temporal so disti^ct, but
that they remain subordinate the one to the other, after the resemblance of
the Sun and the Moon. Neither are they distinct as being always in diverse
subjects, but as ordained to distinct things, spiritual and temporal. For
they both are in one and the same Pope, even in the highest degree. These
words gentle Reader, need no interpretation, they are full of open
blasphemy, as all that have eyes may see. Bellerminus has these words;
Childericum deposuit Papa, and in eius locum Pipinum Caroli magni patrem
Bellerm, de tom, pontifice, lib, 5, cap, 8, and, lib, eod, cap, 7.
regem creari iussit. The Pope deposed Childericus, and commanded to place
Pipinus father to Charles the great, in his throne. Again in an other place,
the same Bellermine has these express words; at si isti ijdem principes
conantur auertere populu^ a fide, omnium consensu possunt and debent priuari
suo dominio. But if these princes go about, to auerte the people from the
faith (of the Church of Rome, for so he means,) then by the consent of all,
they may and must be dispossessed, of their scepters and Regalities. Again, in
the second Chapter he says Bellerm, cap, eodem.
thus; quod si Christiani elim non deposuerunt Neronem, and Dioclesianum, and
Iulianum apostatam, ac valentem Arianu^, and similes; id fuit, quia deerant
vires temporales Christianis. If the Christians in time past, did not depose
Nero, Diocletian, Julian, Valens, and such like Emperors; the cause thereof
was this, because they wanted power and force, and were not strong enough for
that attempt. Again, a little after he has these words; at non tenentur
Christiani, imo Bellermin. cap, eodem.
nec debent cum euidenti periculo religionis, tolerare regem infidelem. But
Christians are not bound to tolerate a King that is an infidel, (or not a
papist, as the Ie suite understands the word, who will have none to be
christians: but papists;) nay, they must not tolerate such a one, with the
evident peril of religion. And our Ie suite has this reason, to persuade us
thus to think; because forsooth says he, de iure humano est, Bellerm. vbi
super.
quod hunc aut illum habeamus regem. It is by the law of man, that we have this
or that man to be our King. This is the doctrine of our Jesuit, and
consequently of the Pope himself. Out of which disloyal and most unchristian
assertion, I infer. First, that the Pope and his 1
Jesuits would most willingly, depose our most gracious Sovereign from her
royal throne and regalitie, if they were of force and power so to do. I
infer secondly, that our Jesuit does here approve 2
peremptorily, many naughty and abominable factes; as well in the sight Lo,
the fruits of popery is flat and open treason
of god, as in the eyes of the world. First, the diabolical excommunication
of Pope Pius. Secondly, the disloyal fact of Murton, who brought the same into
this Realm. Thirdly, the publishing thereof by Felton. Fourthly, the
practicing of the curse or excommunication, by Sanders, Fitz-Morice, Ballard,
and others their sedicious accomplices. Fifthly, the renewing of the printe, and
the dispercing of the copies at Rome, by our Jesuits, Persons and Campion,
which thing was done during mine own abode at Rome, as a very compendious
preparatiue, for their more commodious entrance into this land. I infer
thirdly, that all subjects are by this doctrine, styrred up and encouraged to
manifest rebellion, as also to have no scruple of conscience in so doying, the
reason hereof is evident, because if kings receive their authority from man,
as this Jesuit avouches; then may kings indeed be displaced by man, as
Romish parasites and irreligious Pollitikes, do bear the world in hand. But
God himself tells us another tale, by his anointed king Solomon the wise;
per me reges Pro, cap, 8 verse. 15.
regnant, and legum conditores iusta decernu^t. By me king do reign, and
Princes decree justice. By me princes rule, and all nobles, and judges of the
earth, And the apostle says, non est potestas nisi a Deo. There is no power
but of Romans 13. 1.
GOD.

The 18, Hound.
TEll me O holy disholy father of Rome, how thou have aspired to thy Lords
titles? will thou hold thy peace? must I needs speak for thee? doubtless the
glossers of thy Canons, gave thee all thy Lordle titles, themselves being blind
bayards, and very beggarly fellows. For by reason of their poverty, they
flattered and sought to please; and by reason of their ignorance, they writ
many things, which they did not understand. The great papist Franciscus a
Victoria, has these express words; sed glossatores iuris hoc dominium
dederunt papae, cum ipsi essent pauperes rebus and doctrina. But the glossers
Victor, de potest: ecclae, relect. 1 sect, 6. page, 39.
of the popish Canon Law, gave this dominion and these royal titles to the
Pope, when them selves were blind bayards and beggarly fellows. O noble birth
of Popery.

The 19 Hounde.
TEll me O three headed Cerberus, who blasphemously namest thy self the Vicer
universal of Christ Jesus; who was he that first gave thee, the primacye
Popish pri macie began with blood and is mainteyned with fire.
and the headship of the Church? was it not that blodie Phocas the parricide?
did he not ravish many godly matrons, and murder the godly Emperor Maur^ius
together with his wife and children? did not thou shortly after obtain of
him, that the church of Rome might be called the head of all churches? I am
sure it was so: for so write thine own zealous Papists and renowned
Cronographerss; Sigebertus, Plalmerius, Bergonensis, Polidorus, and others.
Sigebertus has these very words; post que^ Bonifacius Romanae ecclesiae
presidet. Hic obtinuit Sygebert, in cron.
apud Phocam ^mperatorem, vt ecclesia Romanacaput esset omnium ecclesiarum,
cumprius Constantinopolitana id vsurpare tentasset, After whom Boniface
governed the Church of Rome. He obtained of the Emperor Phocas, that the
Church of Rome should be the head of all Churches; and this he did, because the
Church of Constantinople writ it self the head of all Churches. by whose
testimonye it is most evident, as ye see, that the Church of Rome never sought
for the primacie over other Churches, until the church of Constantinople
proudly challenged that name. For which proud appellation. S. Gregory surnamed
the great, that holy and learned Bishop of Rome, stoutly withstoode John the
Bishop of Constantinople, tearming him Antichrist, and the Gregor. lib. cap.
pe. 6 194.
name Antichristian. And because his own assertion plainly recited, is most
forcible to persuade the reader, I will set down his own express words,
which are these; ego autem fidenter dico, quia quis quis se vniuersalem
sacerdotem vocat, vel vocari desiderat, in elatione sua, Antichristum
praecurrit. I speak boldly, that whosoever either calls himself universal
Priest, or desires so to be called, is for his intolerable pride, become the
precursor of Antichrist. So then, the Church of Rome for the space of six
hundred years after Christ, continued in equality and uniformity with other
Churches; even until the year of our Lord, 607. at which time Bonifacius A.
D. 607
the third of that name, was proudly exalted by Phocas as is already said.

The 20 Hounde.
TEll me O Pope, thou that makes thy self the foundation and rock, upon which
the Church is built; do not thine own dear darlings affirm boldly, that the
church is neither built upon Peter, nor upon thee, but upon the faith and
confession that Peter made? I wot they do so, and thou shall hear their
express words: Dyonisius carthusianus Dionisius Carthus. in 16. cap. Math.
has these words: super hanc petram quam confessuses, hoc est, super meipsum
lapidem angularem, montem altissimum, de quo ait apostolus, fundamentum aliud
nemo potest ponere, praeter id quod positum est, quod est Christus Jesus. Upon
this rock which thou have confessed, that is, upon mine own self the
cornerstone, the 1. cor. 3. 11.
high mountain of which the Apostle speaks: another foundation can no man
lay, then that which is laid, which is Jesus Christ, upon this rock I say,
will I build my church, that is, the congregation of the faithful. Thus
writes thine own Friar, and thy dear Doctor. Nicholaus de Lyra confirms
this verdict in these express words: and ego dico tibi, pro te and pro socijs
tuis, quin it is es Petrus. 1. confessor verae petrae quae est Christus. Et super
hanc petram quam confessus es, id est, super Christum, aedificabo ecclesiam
meam, and portae inferi, id est, persecutiones tyrannorum et tentationes
spirituum malignorum non praeualebunt ad uersus eam, a vera fide subuertendo.
ex quo patet, quod ecclesia non consistit Iyran, in 16, cap. Mat.
in hominibus ratione potestatis vel dignitatis ecclesiasticae velsecularis,
quiamulti principes, and summi pontifices, and alij inferiores, inuenti sunt
apostatasse a fide; propter quod ecclesia consistet in illis personis, in
quibus est notitia verae, and confessio fidei, and veritatis.

And I say to thee for thee and for thy fellows, that thou art Peter that is
to say, the confessor of the true rock which is Christ. And upon this rock
which thou have confessed, that is, upon Christ, will I build my Church, and
Hel-gates, that is, the persecutious and tentations of wicked spirits, shall
not prevail against The Church is built upon Christ, and confiteth not of
wicked Popes, but of those persons that confess the faith of Christ.
it in subuerting it from the true faith. Whereby it is evident, that the
Church does not consist in men, by reason of power or dignity, either
ecclesiastical of secular; because many both Princes and Popes, and others of
the inferior sort, are found to have revolted and made an appostasie from the
faith, for which cause, the Church, consists in those persons, in whom there
is true knowledge, and confession of the faith and verity. Lo, by the verdict
of Lyra a great learned papist, that which was spoken to Peter, was spoken to
him, not as to himself alone, but to him for, and in the behalf of his
fellows. And the rock upon which Christ promises to build his Church, is
not Peter, but his own person, even our Lord Jesus. But this point is handled
atlarge, in my book of Survey. To which as also to my book of Motives, the
papists would ere this, have framed some answer, if they knew in the world,
how to devise the same. But the truth must needs in time, have the upper hand.

The 21 Hounde.
TEll me O pope, thou that bear the world in hand, that the particular
Church of Rome can not err? is not that Church which cannot err, the whole
congregation of the faithful? I wot it is so, and thine own children do
testify the same against thee. Panormitanus a famous popish Archbishope, and
thyrenowmed canonist, has these expres words; ecclesia uniuersitatis errare
non Panormit. apud Silu. deside, s. 9.
potest, scilicet in fide vel articulis fidei; and pro hac tantum christus in
euangelio orauit ad patrem. The church universal cannot err, to wit, in the
faith, or in the articles of our belief; and for this church only was
Christ's prayer when he prayed to his Father in the Gospel. Syluester has
these words: and sicintellige glossam dicentem, quodecclesia quae errare non
potest, dicatur non papa, sed congregatio fidelium, Siluefter, de eccles. 5, 4.
quae silicet tenet fidem, quam Petrus cum aliis populis docuit. And thus must
we understand the gloss which says, that the church which cannot err, is
not the Pope: But the congregation of the faithful, that is, such as hold
that faith firmly, which S. Peter with other (godly) people taught. By which
testimony, every one may see that has eyes, that all the ancient writers,
even the papists themselves, did ever more both think and write, that the
church which could not err, was only and solely the whole company of the
faithful, which thing our Jesuit Bellermine, as one that forgets
himself, confesses, unawares in these express words: secunda opinio est,
pontificem etiam vt pontifex, posse esse baereticum and Peller, lib. 4 de rom,
pont cap. 2.
docere haresim. sequitur, hanc opinionem tuentur aliquot Parisienses, vt
Gerson and Almain in libris de potestate ecclesiae, nec non Alphonsus de
Castro, libro primo, cap. 2. contra haereses, et Adrianus sextus papa. The
second opinion is, that the Pope even as Pope, may be an heretic and teach
heresy. Certain doctors of Paris follow this opinion, as Gerson and Almaine,
Alphonsus also and pope Adrian him self. Lo both papists and the Pope
himself tell us, that the Pope even as Pope, may be an heretic and teach us
a false The Pope as pope may teach a false faith, and flat heresy.
faith, and yet must we believe, that whatsoever he desires or teaches as
Pope, is as true as the Gospel, or else be reputed heretics for our refusal
in that behalf, and if it rest in the Popes power, be also burned at a stake.

The 22 Hound.
TEil me O monstrous Pope, do not all thy priests in all their absolutions,
ascribe remission of sins and eternal life, to the merits of man's works? I
wot they do so, I know your practice right Polanchus de modo aud^en^^. onsess.
well, and Polanchus our Iesuire has published the same in print. These are
his express word; passio D. N. I. Christi, merita, B. V. Mariae, and omnium
sanctorum, and quicquid bonifeceris, vel mali sustineris, sit tibi in
remissionem peccatorum tuorum, in augmentum gratiae, and praemium vitae
aeternae. The passion of our Lord Jesus Christ, the merits of the
blessedvirgin Marie, and of al Saints, whatsoever good thou shall do, and what
punishment soever thou shall suffer, be to thee for remission of thy sins,
for increase of grace, and for reward of eternal life. Thus does our Jesuit
truly set down, the usual practice of the Romish Church, and of all popish
Priests dispersed whersoeuer. This practice is agreeable to the hymn made of
Thomas Becket late Bishop of Canterbury. In hymn Tho Caut.
These ar the words; Tu, per Thomae sanguine^ quem pro te impendit, fac nos
Christ scandere, quo Thomas ascendit. By the blood O Christ, which Thomas for
thee did spend make us come thither, whither Thomas did ascend. Which doubtless,
is blasphemy intolerable.

The 23. Hound.
TEll me O Pope, if it like your holiness; what malice, hatred, and dissension,
has been among you Popes, and that in most weighty and important matters? even
in matters of faith, and fundamental points of your religion? did not Pope
Stephanus the sixth of that name, persecute the very name of Formosus? did he
not disanull his giving of orders? did he not degrade them, that had received
orders by him? did not Pope Romanus, abrogate the whole Acts of Pope
Stephanus? did not Sergius the third persecute the very Carranza, in summa
council. Fol. 354. and fo. 355
name of Formosus? did he not cause his head to be cut of, after his body was
laid in the grave? Carranza and Platina do so write of thee and thy brethren,
O holy father of Rome.

The 23. Hounde.
Confess the truth O cruel Pope; disssemble no longer with the world. Do
not thy wicked laws, charge all men, women, and children of mature age, to
make auricular confession of all their Caietan. in summual. Page 590:
thoughts, words, and deeds? does not for all that, thine own Cardinal
Caietaeine tell thee, that it is a thing impossible to be done? did not
Johannes Geilerius a very grave and reverend divine, who was a long time the
preaher at Argentoratum, complain, oftentimes to his trusty friends that it
was impossible for men to make their confessions, as the Popes law required? I
wot he did so, and thine own dear friend Beat us Rhenanus does so affirm. I
have set down his express words, in the 12. chapter of my Survey. And here I
note by the way, that there were ever some good men amongst the The truth is
and ever was confessed by some, eue^ among the papists.
papists, as this Godly Geileirus, who disliked and reproved as far as they
durst; the absurdities and abomination, of late Romish doctrine.

The 24 Hound
TEll me O Pope, is not thy late Romish religion, like to a patched beggars
cloak, with clouts upon clouts? do we not know, how every clout was put one
to an other, by whom and at what time? I wot we know it, and my self have
proved it; in my book of Survey. If any papist can deny it; let him answer
that, that I have written there.

The 25. Hound.
TEll me O pope, do not thou make havoc of Christ's gospel? do not
thou dissolve that matrimonye, which Christ himself pronounces to be
indissoluble? do not thou dispense with persons lawfully married, that the
husband may take an other wife, and the wife an other husband? I wot thou
do it, and thine own dear Doctors Nauarrus and Couerrunias, do testifiye
the same against thee Navarre has these express words, Diuiditur
(matrimonium) ante consummationem per dispensationem Papaeinsta de can sa
factam. Matrimony is dissolved before Na^arr. in. (...). cap. 22. par. 21.
consummation (or carnal copulation) by the Popes dispensation, if it be
granted upon just cause. And the same Navarre anoucheth boldy in the place
already quoted, that Paulus the third, and Pius the fourth late Bishops of
Rome, did give such dispensations in his time to certain married persons, at
the same Nauarrs request; Couerrunias has these words; Nec me latet Paulum
quartum summum ecclesiae pontificem, an: 1558. hac vsum fuisse dispensatione
Couarrau. t^m 1 cap. 7 par 4. ^. 3. (...).
quibusdam ex causis, quas iustissimas esse idem summus ecclesiae praesul
existimauit; idem paulo ante Julius tertius fecerat in eodem matrimonio, cum
ecclesiae vninersali presideret. Neither am I ignorant, that Pope Julius the
fourth put this dispensation in practice, for certain causes which the same
Pope thought to be most just. The Pope does dissolve ^^^trimony at his pleasure.
Julius the third likewise when he was Bishop of Rome, granted the same
dispensation in the same matrimonial contract See more hereof, in my book of
Motives.

The 26. Hounde.
TEll me O Pope, do not thou teach us, that the Virgin Mary was conceived
without sin have not thou for that end appointed the feast or festival day
of her conception? does not thine own sweet Behold flat Idolatry, inpopish
sole^nity.
Bernard forsake thee herein; does not he sharply reprove the Carhedrall Church
of Lions, for the self same thing? does not he term that practice, the nouelty
of presu^ption, the mother of temerity, the sister of superstition, and the
daughter of leuitie? do not S. Austin, S. Ambrose, S. Chrysostom S. Bid,
Eusebius, Remigius, Anselmus, Bonauentura, Aquinas, Hugo, and all the resti,
sing the self same song? are any with these idolatrous Pope) in this point of
doctrine, save only thy late hatched Jesuits and Seminaries? few or none I
The Pope and his Jesuits, are against all the fathers
assure thee, as I have proved in my Survey, and in my book of Motyues. To
which books I earnestly wish, that some of thy vassals would once frame some
answer

The 27. Hounde.
TEll me O pope, thou that commau^dest thy Church-seruice, to be said and song
in a unknown language which the common people, and the greater part of the
priests cannot understand; were not all prayers and other service of the
Church, in the vulgar tongue as well in the primitive Church, as many hundred
years after Christ, I wot it was so, and I have proved it in my book of
Survey. But harken O Pope what thine own Lyra tells thee he is a well mouthed
hound, take heed lest he bite thee, for these are his words; (Cae^eru^ si
benedixerit.) 1. Tu sacerdos vel episcope (spiritu) 1. absque hoc quod populus
intelligat (qui Lyra. in 1 cor. 14.
supplet locu^ idiotae quasi diceret, quid proficit populus simplex and no^
intelligens q. d. nihil aut modicu^, quia nescil se co^formare tibi qui
estainister ecclesiae, respo^dendo Amen. Propter quod in primitiua ecclesia,
benedictiones and cetera co^munia fieba^tin vulgari. But if thou shall bless,
that is, thou that art priest or Bishop; (in spirit,) that is, so as the people
understand not what thou say, what pro fit shall the simple and igno^^^ people
have? truly either very little or none at all, because they cannot conform
themselves to thee, who are the minister of the Church, in saying Amen to thy
giving of thanks. For which cause both prayers and other common the church
service ought to be in the vulgar tongue.
things, were done in the vulgar tongue in the primitive church. Out of which
words I note first, that the church-seruice in old time, was made in the vulgar
tongue, which S. Paul's doctrine. I note thirdly, that the people receive Lyra a
learned man indeed, avouches very constantly to be the doctrine S. Paul. I
note sixthly that the late Romish religion is far different and nothing like,
to the old catholic religion and practice of the primitive Church.

The supplement, for the solace of the well affected Reader.
FIrst, the Church-seruice was made in primacy began, in the year, 607. by the
tyranny of the Emperor Phocas, at the earnestsuit of Boniface the bishop of
Rome and third of that name. Thirdly, the Popes pardons were never heard of,
until the year 1300. Fourthtly, the marriage of priests was not prohibited,
till the year 385. at which time Syritius then Bishop of Rome, made a wicked
law in that behalf. Fifthly, popish purgatory took no root in the Romish
Church, till the year 250. sixthly, popish pilgrimage began in the year, 420.
seventhly, the merit of works, de condigno, was disputable about the year,
1081. eighthly, the invocation of saints and adoration, was not known or hard
of, till the year, 370. ninthly, the communion under both kinds was never
thought unlawful, till the year, 1414. tenthly, the Popes Bulls were not
authentical, till the year 772. eleuenthly, auricular confession was not
established, till the year, 1215. twelftly, general counsels were ever
summoned by the Emperors. These and many other importa^t matters, are proved
at large in my book of Survey; and here noted briefly for the help of the
simple vulgar sort.

(...).

