A DISCHARGE OF Five Imputations of MIS-ALLEGATIONS, falsely charged upon the
(now) Bishop of DVRESME, by an English Baron.

SHOWING, That no solid or real Answer is to be expected, from the Romish
Party, to his late Book (against their Mass) so greatly maligned by them.

LONDON, Printed by M. F. for R. Milbourne at the sign of the Greyhound in
Paul's Churchyard. 1633.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, the Lord Ar: Baron.
RIght Honorable, (whom, for honor sake, in an Epistle reprehensive, I have
not named in full syllables) I had no sooner heard that your Lordship had
excepted against my Book, concerning the Mass, but I labored both by my
importunity of letters unto you, and solicitation of an Honorable friend, to
be acquainted therewith, having first understood, that you had objected the^ to
some Protestants, by way of Traducement; and then imparted them to a female
tongue, which you knew to be as shrill and loud as Bow-bell, to convey it into
the ears of others round about, in the vilest terms of Falsificator and
Impostor. A pestilent air, which presently after was heard blustering at the
Court: Whereunto I addressed my Answer, Satisfactorie, as I thought. And about
five weeks after I received a Reply from your Lordship closely sealed up,
with diverse seals, for secrefie sake: But, behold a Miracle! the same Reply
flies out amain, the Seals (as it were the Doors) being shut, which
dispersed abrod by the wings of Report, preoccupateth the ears and minds of
the most of your Profession, within the County of Hampshire, to my great
ignominy and reproach. All which your Obliquity of dealing I received from the
intelligence of Persons without all Exception: Whereby I learn that your Aim
was not your own Satisfaction (then pretended) but my defamation. So that your
Lordship may not now be offended, to see your own private letters present
themselves again unto you in public Print, and attended with this my
Discharge and Answer unto them. For you were not to think, that when as you
had placed the Candle upon the top of the Table, I should hide it under a
bushel: but seeing that you would not pinion your (...), that is, flying words
and voices, I have also given this my Answer liberty, to meet with them upon
the same stage.

Your Lordships Exceptions are partly against my Allegations, and partly
against my Style of writing; and you will be known to be the sole Author of
both: but your Lordship will con me thanks, if for your credit-sake I
attribute the Objections against my Allegations rather to some Romish Suggester
than to your self; when you shall perceive the manifold falsities of the
Objections, from point to point. Nor will your known wisdom permit me to
believe, that you would offer to challenge a Bishop, in matters of his own
profession (unto whom you are pleased to ascribe more than ordinary Attributes
of learning) and to impute such errors unto him with that Confidence, as to
wish that another Bishop of the same profession might be Umpier between us;
except you had first consulted with some Romish Priest; especially seeing that
in your Reply you judge your own Romish writers not to be warrantable enough,
which come forth without the License and Approbation of their Superiors.
Howsoever, as well for your Satisfaction, as for mine own Justification, I
have returned unto your Lordship such a reasonable and Conscionable an Answer,
which I dare permit to the Umpirage of any Romish Doctor, or Bishop, were it
your Bishop of Bishops the Pope himself. Yet shall not either Popeship,
Doctorship, or so much almost as any Schollership be necessary in this case,
wherein, as when any felon is brought before a Judge, or a Justice, that was
(...), that is, deprehended in the manner, they need not be troubled with any
further examination, then the view of the stolen stuff, which was taken upon
him. In like manner (were the Author either your self, or any other) your
falsehood in objecting of Falsities will be so apparent, that the reader shall
not need to busy his brains with any further Disquisition than the view and
perusal of the words excepted against. In a word; These and all other like
Accusations, used by M. Parsons, or any other, have been shown hitherto to
have been as causeless, as if it had befallen spiritually to my Adversaries,
as it happened corporally to the enemies of Lot, when they sought to assail him,
but could not find the door.

The other point of your Exceptions, touching the Bitterness of the Style,
being a subject of humane Affection, rather than of Theological judgment, I
shall not gainsay, although you shall challenge it to your self; who hearing
me, upon good proofs, condemning the Romish Mass of Superstition, Sacrilege,
and Idolatry; pass by this in silence, and only quarrel the Denominations, in
calling your Mass Superstitious, Sacrilegious, and Idolatrous. Now forsooth, o
the Bitterness of the Style! But o violent Cavillation, may I say. Much like as
if I had friendly admonished your Lo: for your safety sake, to avoid such a
By-way, because it is hau^ted with thieves; or to forbear to taste of such a
Cup, which is infected with poison; or to refrain the next house, wherein is
the pestilence; all this should be received without regret: notwithstanding
you should take offense, that I should call the way Theevish, the Cup
poyso^able and the house Pestilent. All the rest of your Instances of Bitterness
labor of one and the same fault, which is Impatience, not to suffer Errors and
Vices to be arrayed with their suitable Attributes of Erroneousnesse and
Vitiousnesse; as if you would deny the child his proper name. But Honey and any
sweet thing seems Bitter to one in an ague, yet the cause is the distemper of
the Party. Others spit out, as loathsome, that, which is Bitter in their
mouths, although it would be never so Cordial at their hearts; and this
disease is somewhat akin to a Phrenzie. And that your Lordship should blame me
for confuting Errors, and condemning faults in such bitter names, without which
they could not be so much as named, much less confuted, or condemned; is a
fault in it self, which I will not name, for fear you should accuse me of
Bitterness. He that would indeed busy his pen in blotting out the Bitter
Styles of outrageous Raylers, may spend his life time in expunging whole Books
of your own Romish writers; but especially in Gretzer the Jesuit his defense
of Bellarmine, and Stapleton his Counter-blast, both which have been studied by
some, only to furnish themselves with store of salt, vinegar, and gall, for
personal Invectives.

As for my self, none ever more abhorred that Caninam eloquentiam, that is,
Doggish eloquence; never did any (be it spoken without arrogance) insult less
upon so great advantages; witness the same Book almost throughout; nor shall
any unpartiall Reader find in any of the Places, which your Lordship has noted
of Bitterness, any one Term, which may not be held medicinable, and which
the matter it self did not compel me unto, who have had this Testimony from
a Royal mouth, K. J.
that I used not to Flite: else should I not in my younger years have played
the Ass, as it became me, when I sustained whole loads of reproachful and
ignominious terms of Grasshopper, Lewd Lad, and very Ass, cast upon me by the
old man M. Parsons, without any retaliation on my part, but rather glorying
that I might be thought worthy the name of Ass, in that cause, wherein I did
carry my Savior Christ, by supporting and defending his Truth.

So little cause had your Lordship, in any reason, to threaten me, with any
unruly pen. But let come that Pen, when it will, and though it be drenched in
bitterest waters of Mara, I am ready for it, and sure I am, that I shall be
avenged of the Penman. But how? Didicit quis maledicere? and ego contemnere,
as it is in Tacitus; yet only Contemning it, is but Heathenish; I shall
encounter a rough and reviling speech with a Soft Answer, imitating
Physicians, whose Aphorism it is, Calida curantur frigidis. Yet may this be
but only natural, I will be a Christian, and practice the lesson of our Lord,
and Master, who teaches us to revenge others Cursings of us with our Blessings
of them: even as I now do with your Lordship, notwithstanding the Malignancie,
which I have found, I desire of God to bless this my Answer unto you, that as
it must be for Conviction, so it may be for your Conversion, that you with us
may at length learn to serve God in Spirit and Truth, by Jesus Christ. Amen.

Your Lo: in all Christian affection, THO: DURESME.

A SECOND ADVERTISEment to all Priests and Jesuits of the English Seminaries,
wishing to them Grace, and Peace in Christ JESUS.
THis Epistle (I confess) is somewhat large, yet so, that as it is much
necessary, both for you to read, and for me to write, that you may know the
Reasons, whereby I seek to persuade Others, that they are not to expect from
you any Real and conscionable Answer to that Book of the Mass, by occasion
whereof some of you have used so vile, vehement, and malignant detractions and
calumniations against me. For, first, as that Painter in Pliny, who as soon
as he had finished his Picture, in his opinion perfect, and to life, betook
himself behind the Table, to harken what fault any Spectator should find
with it. I likewise after the publishing of that Book, convincent as I
thought, stood attentive to understand what exception any Reader would take:
and behold* as there a shoemaker intruding himself among other spectators, and
noting the fashion of the Girdle in that Picture to be amiss, was answered by
that Artist, Ne Suitor supra crepidam: even so has one adventured to impute
Mis-allegations to that Book, in such manner, as deserving to be dismissed by
the Author in this sort, Ne Sciolus supra Captum: the exceptions being such,
that it may well be said of them; The very repeating them is a refuting them,
as some also have acknowledged. Yet has this been of late, your only manner
of answering, although it be indeed but a mere Tergiversation, that is, a
shameful flying all the forces of confutation of your Romish Mass; as men in
battle, seeking to evade, when they are in despair to invade.

The experience which I have had hereof, heretofore, may be to me a ground of
prophecy for the time hereafter, to wit, that no Real answer shall be had
from any of you. And Real I call it, when Res cum re, Ratio cum ratione
concertat, as Tully speaks; but not that which is exercised only in
Cavillation, about words and syllables. For were the exceptions now taken by
your Objector never so true, yet notwithstanding, what then would become of his
cause? but are they false? what then shall we think of his conscience? let
these two be put to the trial. First, do you not know, that when two witnesses
of Ten are disabled, yet the other Eight, remaining in the eye of Justice
untouched, and untainted, must carry the cause? Suppose therefore that those
few Exceptions, against my Allegations, were true, yet how should five, or, if
it were fifty erroneous Citations prevail against two Thousand (for I conceive
they are no fewer) other Testimonies therein faithfully alleged in the same
Book? whereby your Ten Romish Transgressions against one command of Christ [DO
THIS,] are abandoned; your many Romish Depravations of the sense of the Holy
Ghost, in those words of Christ, [THIS IS MY BODY] are infringed; the Romish
Novelty of your doctrine of Transubstantiation is discovered; your six Romish
Contradictions, against the truth of the Bodily nature of Christ, are confuted;
the Romish Capernaiticall eating of Christ's flesh is exploded; and the Romish
Sacrilegious Sacrifice, together with her Idolatrous worship in her Mass, is
irrefutably condemned.

As for false Imputations of falsehood, as they must needs be damnable to the
Author, who accusing another in his own guilt, (...), condemns himself,
Romans 2. 1.
as the Apostle teaches: so, to the party unjustly taxed, it cannot be but
matter of advantage and estimation; for Brazen plates, fixed on grave-stones,
(you know) the more they are trod upon by men's dirty feet, the greater is their
luster, and brightness, as soon as the dust is but blown away. Semblably the
more the Accusations be, which are unjustly charged upon any Adversary, the
more shall his reputation flourish, as soon as the fraud and falsehood of the
Accuser shall be detected; except it be among men that so stupifie their
conscience, that they will not see even that which they see.

Such a one, of your own order, some few months past, having only so much
modesty, as to conceal his own name, dehorted a Knight by letters, from
reading the Observations, which I had concerning the Mass, by putting him in
mind of M. Parsons Book of Sober Reckoning, objecting Mis-allegations unto
me: but suppressing all mention and memory of my Encounter, in answer unto
him, by whom he was proved to be indeed but a Drunken Reckoner, yet not with
wine, but with a far worse spirit of lying, as your own fellow- Priests will
tell you, in the sequel of this discourse.

Another reason may be, the Remembrance of those Books of Apologies, Appeal,
Encounter, Causa Regia, which (notwithstanding many promises, or rather
threatenings of Answering) have lain still upon your hands; beside the former
book of the Romish Grand Imposture, which wounds the very Head of Romish
religion, concerning the Church, even as this other does strike at the fat
Belly thereof, your Romish Mass. So that this later Book may seem to be
secure, till that be first assaulted, seeing that, by instinct of nature, every
sensible creature is prone, above all parts of the body to defend the head.

But principally am I confident, I shall have no other answer to this Book,
except only either a Nihil dicit, or a Nihil ad rem, not because it is my
book (For I alas, I am but the Collector, and Composer) but because it is
yours, fighting against your Romish Mass, with your own Principles,
Conclusions, and Confessions; as also confronting you with your own
Contradictions, Absurdities, Falsifications, and Perjuries, (Bis perit, qui
armis suis perit) beside the evidences of Scriptures and Fathers, which are
impreinable. All these are so many Barracadoes, to hinder all approach, against
the Materials of that Book. I may not conceal from you a Riddle. It was but
some few weeks since your foresaid Lord intimated unto me, that my Book of
the Mass is to be answered, and that he thought he could take that Opponent
off, for some time. My answer then was, that the days of my life could not be
long, but whatsoever length of days God should give me, I could not bestow it
better than in defense of his Truth, and therefore desired his Lp to let the
party whosoever take his course. Howbeit the dog-trick, which once M. Parsons
played with me, would not suffer me to give says to that Insinuation, who
avouched in print, that my books of Apology were then in answerin^ by a
Doctor, at Gratz in Austria, assigning also the time when it was to be
published; when as he, honest man, believed it not himself, but spoke it only
by his Equivocating spirit of Mental Reservation (being a great Master in that
black art himself) and thereby has taught me how to expound the words of
this Lord delivered unto me. The Book (says he) will be answered (reserving
in his mind) when yesterday shall be to morrow: and, a Jesuit has it in hand
(sub-understanding to burn it;) and that he will go thorough it (bearing in
his thought) with an aule, or a needle: and, It will be a Book of some
bigness (meaning) mathematical, and invisible. So that this your will-be is
but that old lesson, learnt at Rome, from the Crow, which sitting on the Top of
Tarpeys hill, cried still (...), expounded by that Poet, Est quia non potuit
dicere, dixit Erit.

I return to your selves, lest that you may think this Discourse to be
tedious, know then that the Lord, the Opponent, will tell you a merry Tale by
the way; nor may you think this Rejoinder unnecessary, seeing that the Lords
Reply has already inveigled Lords and Ladies so far, as to think his
Exceptions answerlesse. But be you (Beloved) lovers of Truth, from what Organ
soever it come, in whatsoever Apparel it shall appear. For, God is Truth.
Thus writes he, who promises unto you certain Additionalls to the now
impugned Book of the Mass, of such requisite Explanations, Confutations, and
Corroborations, as will dispossess, I hope, even the spirit of Prejudice it
self, out of every intelligent and conscionable Reader, among you, as will
shortly be published, if God permit. Our Lord Jesus preserve us All to the
glory of his saving Grace.

Still your Debtor, T. D.

THE SVMMARY CONtents of this Discharge, concerning the Five Allegations
excepted against.
THe first false Exception is made by a fraudulent Omission of the Particle
[etc.] which Particle evidently justifies the Allegation. Number. 3. The second
Exception is objected with a Triple falsity. I. It is objected that Suarez is
produced alone, to hold A senseless body of Christ: whereas Suarez in the same
place is alleged to affirm the same, with many Others. N. 49. II. Falsity is,
in denying that Suarez is rightly alleged to say so, in respect of the
Natural power of Christ: albeit the very same words, According to his natural
power, be expressly alleged. N. 50. III. Falsity, by imposing that
Contradiction on the Bp: whereof he was but only the Relater, and the Church of
Rome it self the proper Author. N. 52.
The third false Exception is objected with a double Falsity. I. In making it
an Exception against Mis-allegation, wherein there is no Exception at all. II.
By confounding a Cause Ordinary, and Extraordinary, together. N. 53.
The fourth false Exception is in objecting words, as alleged out of Bellar:
which appear by a diverse and different Character not to have been cited out
of Bellarm. N. 54. The fifth and last false Imputation of Mis-allegation,
objected by two tricks of Falsity, against the evident words of that
Allegation. Number. 57. Confuted from Bellarmine. N. 58. The five former false
Exceptions retorted, for the justifying of the late Treatise against the Mass.
N. 59.
The Contents of the Reply, made in defense of the Lords first Exception,
concerning his fraud of concealing the Particle [etc.] Seven Evasions made for
the avoiding of that his own ougly Blot of Falsehood; not without as many
falsities, from Number. 3. to 13.
The Contents, concerning eight Tropes and figures in the words of Christ his
Institution. In the first part of Christ his speech, the word [THIS] is
necessarily figurative. N. 17. and 43. II. The word, BREAK, spoken of Christ
body, is necessarily figurative. Number. 34. And the word, EAT, Number. 32. 34. And
the word, GIVEN. Number. 20. 21. and 22. In the second part of Christ's speech, the
word, THIS, is necessarily figurative. Number. 11. 13. and 28. II. The word, CUP.
Number. 10. 11. and 26. And the word, SHED. Number. 20. 22. 25, and 26. And the word,
TESTAMENT, Number. 10. 12. 13. and 26. And the word, DRINK, spoken of Christ's
blood in the Romish sense. Number. 35.
The Contents touching other points, in confutation of the Reply. How the words
[This is my body] are words of Consecration. Number. 11. and 24. That they are not
Romishly Operative. N. 14. The Replyers absurd Reconciliation of the
Contradictions of Romish Doctors, by answering, that they differ only in modo
loquendi. Number. 36. 37. His merry Tale, Number. 38. and miserable intanglement, in
the Application thereof. Number. 39. The Theoreme, Symbolica Theologia non est
Argumentativa, how to be understood. N. 43. S. Augustine chosen Vmpier, by
consent, to decide the question concerning the sense of Christ's speech, whether
it be Figurative, or Literal. Number. 44. 45. That the Exceptions, taken against
the Lo: Bishop, do much confirm the maine cause through out his Book of the
Mass. Number. 59.
The Contents of an Answer to a Romish Priest his late false Imputation of
Mis-allegations; by objecting the Book of M. Parsons Sober Reckoning. M.
Parsons his art of passing by material points, which made against the Romish
Positions, and Practices. Number. 60. He was an elegant Penman. Number. 61. Judged
by Romish Priests, because of his false dealing, unworthy to accuse another of
falsehood. Number. 62. His Ten apparently false Imputations of Mis-allegations. N.
63. His Grief before his death. N. 64. The Popes Proviso, in behalf of Romish
Clergy, making it almost impossible that any one shall be convicted of Crimes.
N. 65.
The Contents of the Lay Lords Exceptions to the Bitterness of Style;
expressed in five Instances. In the first he unwittingly condemns the Romish
Church of Sacrilege and Idolatry. Number. 67. In the second he is more offended
with the Appellations of vices, then with their vitiousnesse. Number. 68. In the
third he wresteth Metaphorical Terms to be Literal, that he might wring
out of them some juice if Bitterness. Number. 69. In the fourth, duly examined,
he rathor justifies his adversary. Number. 70. In the fifth he most odiously
traduceth the Lo: Bishop, as if he had accused all Romish Professors to be
guilty of Treason. Number. 74. The Lo: Bishops express Asseveration to the
contrary. Number. 74. 75, unto Number. 81.
Contents of other Points annexed. Examples of Mansuetude objected, and
answered. Number. 71. 72. A distinction of Bitterness, Medecinall, and
Vindicative. Number. 73. The Lo: Barons Accommodation to friendlinesse. Number. 82.
But yet his threatening the mischief of an Unruly Pen. Number. 83. The Conclusion
of all. Nnm. 84.
FINIS.
Faults escaped in some Copies.
Page 16. lin. 5. read, Lords Suggest. p. 87. in marg. for Number. 20. read, 26.
p. 179. marg. * lin. 2. read, Gavantius.

Besides there are some Numbers omitted in the Margent, opposite to the
Suggesters words: as, p. 118. add Number. 38. p. 161. add, N. 49. p. 175. add,
N. 55. p. 205. add, Number. 61. p. 209. add, N. 63.

A DISCHARGE OF the Five Imputations of MIS-ALLEGATIONS charged upon the Lo:
Bp. by an English Baron.
As also of his Exceptions against the Style.
The L. Baron his Entrance.
RIGHT HONORABLE. Number. 1.
I do affirm, that I am not satisfied neither in the bitterness of your
style, nor in the certainty of your Allegations.

The Lord Bps. Answer.
AND I deny (Right Honorable) that you have taken any just exception to
either of Both. But before I can proceed, I shall crave a double Courtesy of
your Lordship, one is, that since our greatest contention will be about
Figurative speeches of Christ, concerning his words of Institution of the
Sacrament of his Body and Blood; I may have the liberty to use and practice a
Figure called (...), by only altering your Method: satisfying, in the first
place, your Exceptions against the Allegations; and, afterward, to give you an
account, for the Acerbity of the Style. Because every Reader (I suppose) will
rather affect material discussions, than verbal skirmages; and more
especially, for that it will much more concern me, to defend my Integrity, in
cyting my Authors, than to secure my Discretion, touching any Aberration in
Style: for as much as every act of discretion depends upon seven several
Circumstances, wherein the breach of any one is accounted a full forfeiting of
that which we call Prudence, and discretion. In the second place, I entreat
leave (in the first part of this Discharge) to leave your Lopp:, that I may
combat with your Suggestor, because I shall be constrained, sometime, to make
him know himself. Thus much being obtained, let us Two go about our business,
He to his Objections, and I to my Retorsions.

The first part of this Discourse, which concerns the Allegations.
The Lords Suggester.
I Say, N. 2.
I am not satisfied with the Certainty of your Allegations.

The Lord Bps. Answer.
ANd I can say, it had been more for your credit, that you had been satisfied
with the truth of those Allegatio^s, than to prove your self, by your false
Criminatio^s (as you must needs) so luckless a man, that you can have no
greater Adversary than your self.

The first Principal Exception against the Allegations by the Lords Suggester
(in his Letters) as follows.
IN your Dedicatorie Epistle you say that though your Adversaries will not
allow any Trope to be in those words of Christ, N. 3.
Hoc est corpus meum, Yet (whether they will or no) they are forced to
acknowledge in them six Tropes; which six Tropes, though in the same place
you quote them not, yet (Page 87. and 88.) you allege them to be (Bread)
(Eat) (Given) (Shed) (Cup) (Testament:) which being all different words from
those Four words of Christ, (Hoc est corpus meum) or (This is my Body) I am
not satisfied, that any of those Authors, cyted by your Lordship, have
acknowledged any Trope in those Four words (This is my Body.)

The Lord Bps. Answer, discovering the inexcusable Falsehood of this first
Objection.
IF I had said simply, as is here affirmed, that your Romish Doctors confessed
six Tropes in those only Four words of Christ, [Hoc est corpus meum: This is
my Body] I should have been less satisfied, than either you (my Lord) or yet
any Romish Adversary, and assuredly I should have plainly be-assed my self
for so gross a mistake* but so far was I from that error, that contrarily my
words (as they are to be seen in the Dedicatorie Epistle) were, that our
Romish Adversaries confessed six Tropes in the words of Christ, Hoc est corpus
meum, etc. that is, This is my Body, etc. or, And so forth; or, as if it had
been said, in the words following. Now your Suggestor, that he might make me
so absurdly false, as to have put the six confessed Tropes in the compass of
these Four words, has played me a fine trick of legerdemaine, by concealing
the Particle etc. whereby the words following are necessarily employed, and
putting it up in his pocket. And for your Lordship, after your often reading of
that etc. so distinctly set down, to connive at him in such a vile piece of
Conning (I had almost said Coozenage) truly it was not honorably done. As for
example, your Lordship is Catechizing your Son, saying, My Son, remember
you get by heart the twelve Articles of your Creed, I believe in God the Father
Almighty, etc. By and by your Suggester pulls you by the sleeve, saying, O my
Lord, you told your son of twelve Articles of the Apostles Creed; and now you
affirm that all the twelve Articles are comprehended in these seven words; I
believe in God the Father Almighty. So he, leaving out the etc. what would
your Lordship say to such a stupid cavillation? would you endure it? Yet is
this just parallel to his first Exception against me.

It is a vulgar opinion to think that when one, being toward a journey, does
stumble upon the threshold in going out, it does abode but some ill luck: even
so, what can this his first imputatio^ of falsehood, being so false, else
prognosticate, but that he will be found as faithless in all the rest?
Nevertheless, before I demostrate as much I shall desire no belief. But what
now? albeit this his falsehood be thus transparent, that every Abcdarian Boy can
see thorough it, by expounding the word, etc. yet notwithstanding, as if
boldness and blindness had made a match or marriage together, he, under your
Lordships own hand, made a Reply, seeking thereby to cover his former Falsehood
with (as it were net-worke) the multiplication of many other open Untruths.

The Lords Suggestor his Reply, for covert of his former Falsehood.
WHereas I had objected, N. 4.
that in your Dedicatory Epistle you show that our writers, denying any Trope
to be in those Four words of Christ, (Hoc est corpus meum) are notwithstanding
enforced to confess six Tropes in the same words; which you say is vertigo
mera: your Answer is, that you expressly said, In the words of Christ, Hoc est
corpus meum, etc. which (etc.) might have been a wall of brass to keep me
from farther wandering, for that that Particle (etc.) did not only imply the
words of Consecration (Hic Calix est Testamentum in sanguine meo) wherein the
Jesuits have confessed two Tropes in one word (Testamentum) but also it met
with Bellarmines reasons, in defending the want of Tropes in the words of
Institution (because, says he, they are words of Precept, words of Doctrine,
words of Testament:) who was therefore confuted in the words of Christ (Bread)
(Break) (Given) (Shed) all Tropicall, as is also confessed.

The Lord Bps Answer, showing the Suggester his wilfulness in falsifying, in
his first Exception; even from his own Confession.
IT is true that I answered so, and that truly, proving thereby the Exception
to have been as wilfully false as if he had professedly falsified: which
furthermore appears thus; he saw, knew, and in his words in this place
afterward acknowledges, that I declared the six Tropes then specified to
consist in these words, Brake, Given, Shed, Drink, Cup, Testament; all which
follow after the particle, etc. And therefore could he not possibly conceive,
that I meant they were comprehended in the Four words [This is my body] which
go before the same etc. no more than a man can imagine his own occiput, or
nodle, being the hinder part of his head, can be said to be his Nose, which
stands directly on his face. which yet is herein the more evident, because
the word, etc. is, in its proper sense, as much as, In the words following*
even as properly, as if it had been expressly delivered thus: There are six
Tropes in the words of Christ his Institution [This is my body] and in the
words following, Given for you, and the like. Therefore I say truly, that that
particle etc. might have been unto my Opponent as a wall of brass, to keep
him from wandering, except he himself had a front of steel, as it seems he
had, when he durst make any Reply, in defense, of this his shameless falsity.
But let us hear what he can say.

The Lords Suggestor his first Evasion.
TO this I reply, N. 5.
that no Catholic ever held, that there was no Trope in Christ's words (Hoc est
corpus meum) with the addition of (etc.)

The Lo: Bps Answer.
CAll you this a Reply? As much as to say, No Catholic ever held that there
was no Trope in that Parable, The Sower went out to sow his seed, with an etc.
Therefore, in this sentence of Christ, there was no other Trope implied in the
word etc. as namely, way-side, stony, and thorny ground, and the like. If your
Suggester have no better skill to avoid his first foul blot of falsehood, his
game is desperate. Let me pose him; either he, in his first Exception against
that sentence, knew that etc. to imply other words following, or else he held
that it did not refer the Reader to the other words following in the speech
of Christ. If he held that the etc. did imply the words following, why then
did he conceal it? if he thought it did not, why did he not confute it? the
first of these bewrays his fraud, the other his folly. And this his wilful
defense of his witless error argues his Obstinacy.

The Lord Suggester his second Evasion.
SEcondly, N. 6.
I say, that it is improper to add an [etc.] to any sentence that carries a
full sense it self, and is brought to a period. Deuteronomy. 5.
As for example: Thou shall not covet thy Neighbors wife, nor his ox, nor his
ass, nor any thing that is his, etc. John was clothed with Camels hair, Mar.
1.
and he did eat Locusts and wild honey, etc. Teach all Nations, Matt. 28.
baptizing them in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the holy
Ghost, 1. Ioh. 5.
etc. There be three that bear witness in earth, the Spirit, the water, and
the blood etc. These and very many more like places are in the Scripture, where
the Particle [etc] being added, it would not only be improper, but also would
alter the sense of the holy Ghost.

The Lord Bps. Answer.
NAy, but if your Lp: had not consulted rather with this Suggester
(peradventure your Ghostly Father) than with the Holy Ghost, you might have
discerned two notable Untruths in this second Evasion, the Holy Ghost it self
in Scripture being Judge. Because, first, in the Gospel, penned by the holy
Ghost, there is a prescript form set down of the Lords Prayer, whereof your
Lp: chancing to speak, saying, There be diverse Petitions therein, as for
example, Hallowed be thy name, [etc] your Suggester, at the first hearing
hereof, admonishes you, saying, My Lord, your Lp: has lost most of the
petitions in your Pater Noster, because you have added an [etc.] to a full
period of a speech, which carries a full sense in it self: and thereby have
you altered the sense of the holy Ghost. Would your Lp: admit of such a
Critic, and not reject him as a senseless depraver of the sense of the holy
Ghost?

His second Error is, to think that the period of Christ's speech [This is my
bodie] must necessarily be fixed at the word Body: when as notwithstanding the
Relation, used by the Evangelist S. Luke, the Scribe of the holy Ghost, is
otherwise; Luc. 22. 19. This is my Body given for you. Do this in remembrance
of me. You see where the period is set, and that the word, Given, is enclosed
within the list: which word, Given, is afterward confessed to be Tropicall; and
therefore overthrows your conceit of a Literal sense quite, as if no
figurative word could be impailed within the Periodicall Sentence of Christ.

The Lords Suggester his third Evasion.
THirdly, those words of Christ, which Bellarmine, N. 7.
and other writers maintain to be void of Tropes, are set down by Bellarmine
to be only [Hoc est corpus meum.]

The Lo: Bps Answer.
THis is as truly false, as were the former, for Bellarmine denies that there
are Tropes, not only in these words [This is my body.] but also in these
other, [Given] and [Shed] as your Suggester knew to have been cited by me.
Book 6. Page 4. which makes this his Error to be a wilful falsity.

The Lords Suggester his Confirmation of the former Evasion.
ANd your self charge them with a vertigo mera, N. 8.
for that they banishing all Tropes ab Eisdem, do notwithstanding acknowledge
six Tropes: which you could not do with any Color, if they did not
acknowledge those six Tropes to be in eisdem: for no man can deny, that Christ
used diverse Tropes in other his speeches, though he used none in these. But no
Catholic writer does acknowledge six Tropes in eisdem. And now when I
expected the proof* thereof, I am turned over to seek it in the hidden
construction of [etc.]

The Lo: Bps Answer.
ANd justly are you turned over to that [etc.] yet not as to a Construction,
which any can call hidden, that shall not suffer himself to be blind-folded by
your Suggester, who here again doubleth his falsehood, saying, that I alleged
those six Tropes, confessed by Romish Authors to be in eisde^, that is, in the
same Four words of Christ [This is my body] simply; whereas he knows, and
even now has acknowledged, that it was in eisdem, that is, in the same words
of Christ, [This is my body, etc.] therefore not simply, but with an etc.
Whereby his wilfulness of Falsifying is further detected.

The Lords Suggester his fourth Evasion.
FOurthly, N. 9.
although you allege that Christ's words are [Hoc est corpus meum] etc. yet
seems it strange to me, that all the six Tropes, which you would prove, and
which you say Catholics confess, are smothered up in an [etc.] no one Trope
being by any Catholic writer confessed, or by your self proved to be in
Christ's words, [Hoc est corpus meum.]

The Lo: Bps Answer.
HEre are but two Untruths in this one Evasion, but I must needs say they are
loud and lewd ones; first, to tell me that I have not proved any one Romish
writer to have confessed any one Trope in these words of Christ, [This is my
body.] The second is, that I my self have not confessed any Trope in them.
What not my self, Sr Suggester? blush you not, who have read the Book 2. Page
72. Where, in the first Section, there is a proof specified in this speech of
Christ [This is my body] in two words, the Pronoune [This,] and the Verb [Is.]
And diverse pages following are spent wholly in proof of both.

His other Assertion is, that no Catholic (meaning, Romish Writer) has been
alleged to confess any Trope or figure in these words of Christ, [This is my
body.] So he, although knowing right well, that I produced (Book 2. page 88.)
your Romish Gloss, authorized by Pope Greg. 13. (which therefore ought to be
of equal estimation with many Romish Doctors put together) which Gloss says:
This Sacrament is called the body and blood of Christ improperly, so that the
sense is, This signifies Christ's Body. Which is the proper and express
language of us Protestants. Besides, in the Book 2. page 78. the Title of a
Section is this: That the Pronoune, [This] in these words [This is my Body,] is
Tropicall; which I proved out of your Romish Doctors, by an Induction of the
diverse senses of the word, This: which, whether it demonstrated Bread, or Body
of Christ, or Individuum vagum, yet every way is the sense improper and
figurative. In the first, by the Confessions of Doctors on all sides. In the
second, by the confession of diverse Romanists, which called that Sense Absurd.
In the third, by other Romish Authors, who condemn this, as being full of
Absurdities. And all were discussed at large in my Book 2. cap. 1. and 2. in
five full leaves; yet your Suggester shameth not to deny all this. It may be
your Lordship is, by this time, ashamed of your Proctor.

The Lords Suggester his fifth Evasion.
But in your Letter you say, N. 10.
that that particle (etc.) does imply the other words of Consecration, [Hic
calix est Testamentum in sanguine meo:] in which you say our Jesuits confess
two Tropes. To this my fifth Replication is, that it seems strange to me,
that in your Letter you affirm that these Words of Christ [Hic calix est
Testamentum in sanguine meo] are the other words of Consecration; which does
infer that Christ's words [Hoc est corpus meum] are also words of Consecration
of the Sacrament, under the Species of Bread. Which point in your Book Page 7.
and 8. you deny, charging the Roman Mass to have changed Christ's manner of
Consecration, by attributing Consecration to Christ's words (This is my Body:
This is my blood,) where you endeavor to prove both by Reasons and Witnesses,
produced out of a book of the Archbishop of Caesarea, that the Consecration,
used by our Savior, was performed by his Blessing by Prayer, which preceded
the pronunciation of these words, [Hoc est corpus meum.] And Page 11. you say
directly, that these words of Christ are not the words of blessing and
Consecration: and the like sayings you have in other places of your Book.

The Lo: Bps. Answer.
IT seems strange to this my Adversary, that I have contradicted my self. Is
not this kindly spoken, and to my credit? But to the matter. I think it not
strange in him, who has been deprehended in so many falsities already, that
He should not deal ingenuously in this. For in my Book, writing professedly
upon the words of Consecration, I proved exactly out, of the Confession of the
Archbishop of Caesarea, that those words [This is my Body] are not properly
the words of Consecration: But in my Letters to your Lordship, speaking but
obiter of them, I called them Words of Consecration, by that liberty of
Schools, Dato and non concesso; than which what kind of speech can be more
familiar among men? One is to pay unto your Lordship twenty pounds, and in
tendering the payment unto you, says, There is here (my Lord) sixteen pounds
in silver, and four pounds in good gold: upon trial, the gold is found to be
counterfeit, yet the man is instant, saying again and again, The gold is
good: and your Lordship perceiving his pertinacie, says unto him, Friend, as
for your good Gold, take it to your self, and pay me my money in silver. Now
comes your Suggester upon you, saying, This is strange my Lord; You said once
that the gold was counterfeit, and therefore refused it, and now you will call
it good gold.

Just so deals your Suggester with me, Who called these words [This is my
Body] words of Consecration, only in imitation of the Romish phrase, and not in
approbation thereof. But of this more hereafter. Yet now what is all this to
the point in question? (which is) why your Suggester did so fraudulently
conceal the Particle [etc] when he made his first Exception against me? Just
as if a man, being questioned for having found about him some hidden, and
concealed, stolen stuff, should by way of digression turn his talk to another
matter, telling that it seems strange unto him that this his Examiner (the
justice of Peace) had bound over to the Assizes three of the most honest men in
the Parish. Whether this Evasion could satisfy for this man's false
concealment of his theft, your Lordship may judge.

The Lords Suggester his sixth Evasion.
ALso I say, N. 11.
that if (etc) point to these other words of Consecration, [Hic calix est
Testamentum in sanguine meo:] and that Catholics confess some of the six
Tropes to be in these words: My answer is, that these words, and those other
words of Christ [Hoc est corpus meum] are not the selfsame words, though they
both belong to the Sacrament; yet they do not belong both to one and the same
Species: so as if any Catholic have confessed a Trope in [Hic calix est
Testamentum in sanguine meo:] yet having not confessed any one Trope in [Hoc
est corpus meum] they are unjustly charged with a Vertigo, for having confessed
six Tropes in Eisdem.

The Lo: Bps. Answer.
BUt seeing that contrarily I have proved from the Confession of Romish Doctors
(as you have heard already) a Trope in Eisdem, viz. the same words of Christ
[This is my Body,] although other of them deny to admit any Trope therein,
therefore have not I unjustly imputed a Vertigo, or spirit of giddiness unto
them. But your Suggester (as one transported with a worse spirit of falsity)
denies that I had proved a confessed Trope in Eisdem, namely, in the very
words in question [This is my Body:] even as he does, in saying, If any have
confessed any Trope to be in the words [Hic calix est Testamentum etc.] If any
(says he) as if this could be doubted by Any, which afterward the Suggester
himself confesses to be true. What disease will you call this?

But he adds a Reason, why I, saying that there were confessed Tropes in
Christ's words [This is my Body] etc. the Particle [etc.] could not imply the
same; which you call your Consecrating words, [This is my Body:] because (good
my Lo: mark his Reason) although they belong both to the same Sacrament, yet
they belong not to the same Species. So He. Would this man (think you) have
dealt so with the rankest beggar that walks in the streets? A poor man being
asked, how many colors* he has in his patched Cloak? Six, Master, says
he, Black etc. meaning other five colors, blue, white, russett, red, green.
Soft man, says your Suggester, that [etc.] (or, so forth) could not imply
those other colors, after spoken of, because they differ in Specie, that is,
are colors of diverse sorts. Witless!

The Lords Suggester his last Evasion.
THe seventh Reason, N. 13.
why Catholics deny any Trope to be in [Hoc est corpus meum] or in [Hic est
sanguis meus] and yet may perhaps confess that in strict Construction there
may be some Trope in [Hic calix est novum Testamentum in sanguine meo;] --

The Lo: Bps. Answer.
THere are three patches in this last piece of this the Suggesters Reply, which
I will deliver distinctly. The first is in saying, that Romish Writers may
perhaps confess that in strict Construction there may be some Trope in [Hic
calix est novum Testamentum in sanguine meo: This Cup is the new Testament in
my blood;] although he knew that in my Treatise (Book 2. page 87.) I proved
that these two words, Cup, and Testament, are to be improperly and Tropically
understood, by the Confession (first) of your learned Bishop Iansenius: These
words, Cup, and, Testament (says he) cannot be properly taken in that speech
of Christ [This Cup is the new Testament in my blood;] whether the Cup be taken
for the vessel used for drinking, which was a temporal thing, and therefore
could not be the Testament of Christ, which is aeternall: or else whether it be
taken for the matter in the Cup, for it being the Cup of the new Testament,
could not be the Blood it self; So he. Next was the Confession of the Ies:
Salmeron (in the same page) The Cup being taken for the thing contained in the
Cup: and, Testament, for the Legacy given by Testament. To whom was added the
Ies: Barradius, confessing that, In the word, Testament, there is a Figure.

All these were then, in your Suggesters knowledge, most certain; and yet he
now, playing the Lame Giles, comes here halting in, saying, Perhaps some of
our Chatholikes confessed, in a strict construction, some Trope. There may be
some Trope in these words. Again, you may mark how gingerly he treads his
Maze; he admits that they Confess Some Trope, he says not some Tropes,
although Three Tropes were confessed therein; and that not only in a strict
Construction, as he would have it, but upon a necessary Explanation. Will your
Lordship be pleased to put him in mind of his so many and manifest Collusions.

The Lords Suggester, touching the Romish words of Consecration.
-- THough both these places be in the Scripture, N. 14.
and are both belonging to the Sacrament, is, for that the first of them
(meaning, Hoc est corpus meum) are all of them words of Consecration, and
Practical, effecting what they say; and that none of them can be wanting, all
being necessary to the making of the Sacrament: but in the latter words,
neither Calix, nor Testamentum are the necessary Words of Consecration, or the
form of the Sacrament, seeing the Sacrament may be without them.

The Lo: Bps. Answer.
HIs first Assertion is, that the words, [This is my body, and, This is my
blood] are words of Consecration, and Practical, effecting that which they
say: and so, indeed, your Romish Church teaches, meaning thereby an operative
power of Transsubstantiating Bread into the Body of Christ. But now must I
entreat your Lpp: to look to the tenor of Christ's Speech, according to all
the 3 Evangelists, and St. Paul himself, in relating the other words of Christ
his Institution; and you shall find that the thing, whereof they say [This is
my blood] is spoken expressly of the Cup, or Chalice, [This Cup is my blood.]
So then you are to choose, whether you will think that by these your
Consecrative words, effecting that which they say, the Cup it self be
converted into the Blood of Christ: or rather to acknowledge, in these your
Consecrative words, a Figurative sense.

Secondly, he affirms that in the other words [This Cup is the new Testament
in my blood] neither the word, Cup, nor the word, Testament, are the words of
Consecration, or belonging to the form of this Sacrament. Then (say I) must
he confess, that the Romish new form of Consecration is not necessary,
wherein the word, Calix, Cup, is expressly set down, thus: Hic est Calix
sanguinis mei: This is the Cup of my blood. Where, by the way, your Romish
Church is to be challenged for an Innovation, in that which she holds to be
a fundamental point in her Mass, which is her Form of Consecration,
differing from all other Forms, and Tenors either in Scripture, or in any
Ancient Tradition of Primitive Antiquity.

Tell us again, if the Consecrating words [This is] are indeed Practical,
effecting that which they say, [This is the Cup, or Chalice] then your Priest
saying, This is a Cup, at every Romish Mass, does thereby make a material
Cup, or Chalice. Ponder these things (my Lo:) and see whether you can digest
your Romish doctrine; if you can, then, O dura ilia! must I say. Thus has your
Lo: heard the diverse Evasions, used by your Suggester, each whereof ignorance
begot, and folly brought out; to wit, a child altogether after the image and
likeness of both its Parents, as can be*

Of the six Tropes, in Christ's words of Institution, objected by the Lo:
Bishop, in confutation of the Romish doctrine.
The Lords Suggester his Preface to his own Reply hereunto, by his first
Evasion.
But now to come to these Six words, N. 15.
which you say are (and would make us to confess to be Tropicall) it is first
to be understood as granted, (for that it cannot be denied) that they must be
Christ's words (who only had power to institute a Sacrament. Next, that they
must be such only words of Christ, as were spoken by him to the end to
Institute, or consecrate this Sacrament: for otherwise no man denies but that
Christ spoke many things in Parables, and Figures. The question is not whether
St Paul, saying that They that eat it unworthily do eat their damnation,
spoke figuratively; or whether Christ, saying It is the Spirit that quickens,
the flesh profits nothing, spoke figuratively.

The Lo: Bps Answer.
YOur Lp: perceives right well, what is exacted of me: be as willing (I pray
you) to hear what I answer; (namely) first, if I have not proved a Figurative
sense in both these speeches of Christ, viz. [This is my body: and, This is my
blood:] Next, if I furthermore have not shown the six Tropes, now in
question, to be found by the confession of Romish Doctors in the other words of
Christ's Institution, then let me be held utterly unable, and unworthy to give
your Lp: any Satisfaction. Proceed we to the trial.

The Lords Suggester his second Evasion.
FOr if we shall prove that those words of Christ, N. 16.
whereby he Instituted and Consecrated this Sacrament, were not Tropicall, but
real, and to be understood Literally, then your accusation of our men,
confessing Tropes in Christ's other words, though you could make it good, yet
were it to no purpose.

The Lo: Bps Answer.
YOur Suggester knew, doubtless, it was to good purpose, to prove that there
were diverse Tropes in other words of Christ's Institution, besides these Two,
which you call Consecratory, which are [This is my body, and, This is my
blood,] even because they directly repulse the Answer of your great Achilles
Card: Bellarmine; who, for defending these now-mentioned speeches of Christ,
[This is my body, and, This is my blood] from being Tropicall, maintained that
all speeches Testamentary, Doctrinall, and of Command, and Precept, ought to be
proper and Literal. Whereby he could not mean only the words, which you
call Consecratory, [This is my body: This is my blood] because these are not
words of Command at all, such as are, Eat ye, Drink ye, and notwithstanding
are Tropicall: and the other words, Given, Shed, are Both as Doctrinall as are
your said Consecratory speeches of Christ, and nevertheless confessed by your
Doctors to be Tropicall. Yea and those same words, Cup, Testament, albeit they
be both as Testamentary, as are your supposed Consecratory sayings of Christ,
are yet also judged by Them to be Tropicall. All these were proved, Book. 2.
Page 96. whereby your Cardinals defense is utterly overthrown, as you know;
yet dares your Suggester face it out, saying, that This is to no purpose.

The Shackles, which the Lords Suggester draws upon his own heels, by his
voluntary Promise.
But if these words of Christ, N. 17.
alleged by your self, Book 2. page 71. viz. [This is my body: This is my
blood] are confessed by our men to be necessarily Figurative, then will I not
only confess that you have rightly condemned our Writers of a Vertigo, but
also confess that I am satisfied in this point, and acknowledge my former
error.

The Lo: Bps Answer.
IF this could be a Satisfaction to your Suggester, then might he have been
twice satisfied already, out of the Book 2. page 72. where the Title of the
Sect: is set down in these words; That a figurative sense is in these words of
Christ, [This is my body:] from the Principles of Romish Schools. Which was
also performed, by proving a figure in the Pronoune, This, in the same speech
of Christ [THIS is my body:] which word, This, (by confession on both sides)
must relate either to Christ's body, or to a common substance, called Individuum
vagum, or else to the word Bread. But, by the confession of your own Doctors,
the Pronoune, This, could not properly demonstrate Christ's body, because (by
your Romish Doctrine) Christ's body, at the pronunciation of the word, This, was
not yet present in the Sacrament. Neither could it properly betoken your
Individuum vagum, or confused substance, because (by the confession of Others)
that sense is full of absurdities. Lastly, if it should betoken Bread, as to
say, This bread is my body, then (say they, with unanimous voices) it is
impossible not to be Tropicall; even as well as when it is said, This Egg is a
stone, or, This man is an Ass.

Which point may be more Emphatically confirmed by the other words, which you
call Consecratory, [This is my blood:] where the Pronoune, This, relates to
the Cup, wheresoever that speech of Christ is recorded in Scripture, Matt. 26.
27. and Mar. 14. thus [He took the Cup and gave It (the Cup) to them, saying,
Drink ye all of This, (viz. Cup) for This (namely still, Cup) is my blood. And
Luke cap. 22. and S. Paul. 1. Cor. 11. rehearse Christ's words thus: [This Cup
is the new Testament in my blood.] So that the word, This, points out always
the Cup. But the Cup cannot properly be called Christ's blood, nor possibly be
changed into his Blood, as all the world of Divines have always confessed.

Our second Proof was founded upon your Churches Confession, in her public
and privileged Gloss, expressly saying, that these words [This is my body] are
improperly taken, meaning, This signifies my body, as was set down Book 2.
page 88. Now that your Suggester should here desire of me to be satisfied, by
letters, in that which formerly he received in print; it argues either a
cheating Concealment of that proof, or else a doggish appetite, which will
never be satisfied.

The Lo: Bishops Conclusion, upon the Premises.
ALl that your Suggester hitherto has done, is (as your Lp: may perceive) for
saving his first desperate blot of untruth, in concealing that Particle [etc]
that so he might more eagerly charge me with falsehood; and after (in defense
of his deceitfulness) huddle and multiply seven more Untruthes, which have
been particularly discovered in these his former seven Evasions, now already
specified: wherein, as a man ready to sink into the water, he catches at each
thing about him, be it reed, rush, or very shadow, to save himself from
drowning, but all in vain. Even so has he, being unable to make any solid
defense, snatched only at mere fancies, void of all semblance of Truth.
Persuade him (I pray you) that leaving all further Prefacing, he would come to
the Tropes, now in question.

Particularly now of the Six Tropes, confessed to be in the words of Christ's
Institution of the Sacrament of his blessed Body and Blood.
The Lords Suggester.
THe six words, N. 18.
which our men (as you affirm) confess to be Tropicall, are [Given, Shed,
Cup, Testament, Bread, Eat.]

The Lo: Bps Answer.
ALthough these six were most precisely mentioned, yet were the other Tropes,
concerning those other words [This is my body,] and, [This is my blood] as
exactly discussed, and proved to be likewise Tropicall.

The Lords Suggester his malign Suspicion.
But if you hold that Christ made no new Testament, N. 19.
which you give some occasion to suspect, by the great esteem and approbation
you make in very many places in your Book of Calvin, and Beza, and their
Writings (for which I am very sorry) then must I confess that I am not
satisfied therein. For Calvin, and Beza, and all other Calvinists, that I have
read, do maintain that there is but one Testament; and by Consequent no new
Testament.

The Lo: Bps Answer.
IT had been better you had first suspected your own judgment (friend
Suggester) then either to grieve at my Approbation of the writings of Calvin
and Beza, or yet to tax them of error in this case. For the first, I would
know among which kind of men you will be reckoned, I mean of those, who are
likewise Sorry; whether among the^, who never read Calvin, or Beza; or them who
have read, and did not understand the^; or else of them (who are the worst sort
of Malignants) who knowing their orthodoxe meanings, do not withstanding
traduce them, as you have done. Else show, if you can, where they have denied
that there are two Testaments, distinctly differing from each other, in their
immediate Subject: the immediate Subject of the old Testament being Blessings,
Earthly and Temporal, as the land of Canaan, and the outward Temple of
Jerusalem; albeit remotely these were Types of the immediate Subject of the new
Testament, namely, of Blessings spiritual and eternal, as the heavenly
Canaan, and Jerusalem which is above (says the Apostle) the Mother of us all.
Which Spiritual and Eternal, notwithstanding, are Typically the subject of the
old Testament, figuratively comprehended therein. This Doctrine is so far from
all Suspicion of error, that it confuteth the Jewish, and other Heretical
opinions to the Contrary. When will this man leave his quarrellous Ambages, and
return to the matters in question?

Of the first two of these Tropicall Words of Christ his Institution, [GIVEN,
and SHED.]
The Lords Suggester his first Evasion.
NOw as concerning these words [Given and Shed] you allege Page 87. N. 20.
Valent. for one, and Salmeron for the other, as if they had said they were
merely Tropicall: Valent. saying of [Body given for you] that is, Which shall
be offered for you on the Cross. And Salmeron of this word, [Shed,] saying,
That it was so said, because it was very shortly after to be shed on the
Cross. Confirming that his Exposition, For that it is not denied, but that it
is the manner of Scripture to speak of a thing, as now done, which is after to
be done. To this I reply, first that your Quotation is but of one Author only*
for either of these Proofs, which does not satisfy your Assertion in your
Epistle, where you say thus* In Christ's Sacramental words, or words of
Institution, Adversarii nostri Tropos sex, velint nolint, coguntur agnoscere,
as if All, or the Greater part of Catholics held it.

The Lord Bps. Answer.
THis man (the Suggester, I mean) has so enured himself to falsifying, that
he can hardly speak a Truth. The first Reply is to persuade a Lord, that I had
but two Romish Doctors, to witness, that when Christ said [This is my Body,
Given for you] he meant, Given shortly after his death on the Cross, by a
Figure called Enallage. And when he said, [This is my blood, shed for you] he
had the same meaning, of Being to be shed at his Passion: and that I had not
the greater part of their Doctors to verify my words, when I said, Adversarii
nostri confitentur, Our Adversaries confess. Which is an unjust Reckoning,
because although (Book 2. page 87) I used the Testimonies but of Two; yet Book
6. page 6. I produced a witness without all Exception, even your learned
Bishop Iansenius, testifiing that in these words of Christ [This is my blood,
shed for you] by the word, Shed, is Commonly understood (says he) the Future
time, when it was to be shed upon the Cross. Where the Common understanding
(you know) is equivalent with Greater part.

His second Aberration is, that whereas one Jesuit attributed one Trope, or
Figure, to the word [Given,] another Jesuit noted the same Figure in the word
[Shed;] there being an equal propriety of speech in either. Your Suggester
holds it an Incongruity of speech, in me, to say, Adversarii nostri, Our
Adversaries hold Tropes; how then will he give your Lordship leave to affirm,
saying of those two men (who should have your Lordship in suit of law) My
Adversaries have suits against me; but judge this term of speech to be but a
Soloecisme?

The Lords Suggester his second Evasion.
SEcondly I say, N. 21.
that admitting these sayings of Valent. and Salmeron for sufficient, to prove
that they may be, or are extended to the future time of the Cross, yet neither
of them denies these words to be spoken in the present time of the Sacrament:
which unless they deny, they are here alleged to small purpose.

The Lord Bps. Answer.
THen belike your Suggester does conceive, that your Jesuits to say, that a
Verb [Given] being properly of the Future time. i. Shall be given, could
likewise as properly signify the Present time, Is given. But sooner shall he
himself be able at once to look up to heaven with one eye, and down with the
other, than find this his conceit fancyed by any Author that ever knew his
Grammar; and yet will this Sophister adventure to make it good.

The Lords Suggester, alleging the vulgar latin Translation.
ANd that this is no new Invention of ours, N. 22.
our Latin Text does plainly show, where we use both the Present, and the
Future Tense.

The Lo: Bps Answer.
YEs; an Invention (I dare say) new, and never heard of, before now that this
Suggester has vented it out, in an imaginary flash, against common sense. The
Latin Translation uses, indeed, both Tenses, Given, in the present Tense, and
Shed, in the future: but does use neither of them both in two different senses
properly; to tell us that, Given, being properly of the Present Tense, has the
proper sense also of the future. The like may be said of the word, Shed.

How is not this fellow afraid to make your Latin Translation to be more
absurd than indeed it can be, especially he himself (if he be a Priest) being
sworn to the Authority thereof? If Rules fail, he will try what he can
work by an Example; a very rare one I must needs say, and without any other
example.

The Lords Suggester his notable Example.
AS if I had said, N. 23.
I do give an hundred pound pension, and I will give it, the future promise
does not diminish the present gift; much less in this, where the future
promise is but a Collection, but the present Gift is certain.

The Lo: Bps. Answer.
THis Suggester is somewhat confused, I may not suffer him to do his Acts in
Tenebris. But yet because here is an Example of giving so large and honorable
a Pension of an hundred pounds, I will by your good license (my Lord) apply my
self in some part to your Lordship* Be it then that you say you do Give, or
that you Will give an hundred pound pension to a man, I say, it is bountifully
said, and like an honorable Lord: but our question is not merely of the
different Tenses, but of the different Senses of [I give,] and [I will give,]
in their proper and several significations, being spoken of the same thing.

Hearken therefore, if you please: when you say [I give] thee this hundred
pounds, and in so saying give it him, then the sense of the Future Tense, [I
will give it] is false and superfluous; because it cannot properly be said to
be given hereafter, which is already Given. And if you say, [I give it him] in
a future signification, meaning that you [will give it hereafter,] then was
your other words, [I give it him] unproper and figurative (the present Tense
being put for the future:) or else you must confess it was false, and you did
but equivocate with him, by promising to give that which you meant not, for you
gave him but words. But will you say that in both these Speeches [I give] and
[I will give] you speak properly? take heed (my Lord) for so, after that you
have Given an hundred pounds in present, saying, I give; you are further tied
by your other saying [I will give,] to give him another hundred more, to make
good your promise. Is not your Lpp: beholding to your Suggester for this piece
of service, which he has done for you, by the rarity of his Wit, quasi,
without it?

The Lords Suggester his third Evasion, by a plain Paradoxe.
THirdly, N. 24.
I say that those words are neither Christ's Sacramental words, nor his words
of Institution, (whereby he instituted the Sacrament) as you call them page
88. nor his words of Consecration, which your self in your letter do rightly
term true Consecratory words.

The Lo: Bps. Answer.
HOw I called those words [This is my Body,] words of Consecration, without any
Contradiction to my self, or advantage to your Romish Cause, I have made
manifest already. For this present, I am to discover his Paradoxe in this, that
he denies the words, Given, and Shed, to be Sacramental words. This I call a
new Invention, indeed, and an egregious Paradoxe, because you shall never be
able to produce any Writer, among your Romish Professors, who has not
acknowledged these words, Blessing, Breaking, Given, (spoken on Christ's part)
to signify Sacramental Acts. Or yet these words, Take ye, Eat ye, Drink
ye, to be Sacramental Precepts, on the Receivers part. Or these words, [Body
given, and Blood shed,] to be Sacramental Narrations, betokening the thing
Mystically offered; as well as these words, Do this in remembrance of Me, to
be Sacramental Explications of the use and end of this Sacrament; and all
these Sacramentalls to belong to Christ his Institution. I believe your
Suggester his despair, to show the Contrary, in any Romish Writer, will never
permit him to make trial hereof.

The Lords Suggester his fourth Evasion.
FOurthly I say, N. 25.
that your self both page 87. but especially page 7. in the 6. Book affirm
that these words [Given, and Shed] are to be understood in the future Tense, as
relating to the Cross, but not to the Sacrament: and so though some of our men
do imagine Tropes in them, yet being denied to appertain to the Sacrament,
they cannot be in the number of Eisdem, and so make nothing to the matter in
hand; neither can a Vertigo be imputed to our men, that they acknowledge a
Trope in them.

The Lo: Bps Answer.
SOme of your Romish Doctors undertook to prove, that the words, Given, and
Shed, are properly taken for the present Time; as your Card: Bellarmine, with
Some others have done, as was shown Book 6. page 4. and 5. and are
contradicted by others, who have testified that the opinion of your Doctors is,
to interpret them to signify the offering up of his Body, and shedding his
blood afterward on the Cross, as your Lp: was taught even now. Therefore the
vertigo was not unjustly imputed to our Romish Adversaries, one side denying,
and another affirming two Tropes to be in these two words of Christ's
Institution, Given, and Shed. And if your Suggester saw not thus much, you may
justly suspect that his head was troubled with the same disease.

Of the Tropes in the the next two words, CUP, and TESTAMENT.
The Lord Suggester his notably false, yet most peremptory Assertion, and
Evasion.
AS for the words, N. 26.
Cup, and Testament, I answer, as I did to the former; first, that the Authors,
by you cited, are too few for you to ground your Accusation against Adversarij
nostri, who are many hundred thousands, upon the opinion of so few.

The Lo. Bps Answer.
THe Authors, whom I produce to prove that, Cup, by a figure, was taken for the
matter contained in the Cup; and the word, Testament, by another Trope, taken
for the Legacy given by Testament, were three, viz. your Bishop Iansenius,
Salmeron, and Barradius; the two last being both Jesuits. And if three persons
be not so far plural, as to be called Adversarij in the plural number, I
know neither Greek, Latin, nor English Grammar.

But these (says the Suggester) are but few, and there are Many hundred
thousands of the contrary opinion. This is that which I have called an
Assertion no less false then Peremptory, as will now appear.

The L. Bishops second Answer, concerning the Suggesters prodigious
Peremptorinesse.
WHat? an hundred thousand Authors granting in these words of Christ [This is
my blood shed for you] that the word, Shed (spoken of Christ at his last
Supper) has the sense of the Present Time? Never was there any Bayard more
bold in his leap, than this Suggester has been lavish in this his
Asseveration; seeing that it may be rather affirmed, that your Romish Doctors,
were they a thousand thousand, discussing this point, would swear that the
word, Shed, properly taken, could not be understood of the time of Christ his
Instituting this Sacrament. The reason may be this, Dici de, sequitur in esse
in, that is to say, never can any thing be affirmed properly of that, which
properly is not. But the Blood of Christ was not properly shed at the time of
his Supper: therefore is it impossible to affirm truly, that this is properly
said to have been shed.

Harken in the first place to your great Oracle Bellarm: delivering his
judgment in this point (whose sentence I alleged, Book 6. p. 8.) The blood of
Christ (says he, speaking of the time of the Sacrament) does not pass out of
his body. Whereas Christ* (says your Alfonsus) once shed his blood upon the
Cross, he is never to shed it any more: whereby it is proved also, his true
blood never to be any where without his body. Our third witness was your Ies.
Coster, thus: Christ (says he) suffered a true effusion, or shedding of blood
upon the Cross, his blood being separated from his body: but here (namely in
the Sacrament) is only a Representation of his Blood. So he.

To reduce these Confessions into form of arguing. Wheresoever there is a true
Effusion, or Shedding of Blood, there is a Separation of Blood from the Body.
But Christ, neither at the time of Instituting this Sacrament, nor yet after
his Resurrection, had any true separation of Blood from his body. Ergo, he had
not either then, or after, any true and proper Shedding of blood. And
consequently cannot his Blood be said properly to be Shed in this Sacrament.
Where now will your Suggester find out one of Ten Thousand men, who will deny
this Consequence? If he himself can but imagine thus much, I, for my part,
shall never envy him the property of a vertiginous man.

The Lords Suggester his second Evasion.
SEcondly, I say that neither (Calix) nor (Testamentum) though they may in some
sense be called Sacramental words: N. 27.
yet can they not be called the Sacramental words: for that the Sacrament may
be without them, and so are not in the number of Eisdem.

The Lo: Bps Answer.
THe Suggester will be still Idem in eisdem, that is, absurdly superfluous, as
I have proved evidently already. That which we are taught of him here, is,
that these words Cup, and Testament, although they be Sacramentalls, yet are
they not to be called The Sacramentals. O most excellent subtilty! whereby this
man's hands and legs, in like manner, although they be called Corporal parts
of his body, yet may not one say, that they are The corporal parts of his body.

The Latin Translation uses indeed both Tenses, [Datur] Given, in the present
tense, and [Effundetur] Shed, in the future; but it does use neither of them
both singly, in two different senses; as to tell us, that Given, being of the
Present Tense, has the sense also of the Future: or that Shed, being rendered
in the Future Tense, has likewise the sense of the present time. For to
conceive two literal senses of one and the same words, as to say [Is shall be]
is as absurd in Grammar, as to affirm out of the Sea-card of one and the same
wind, that it stands North-South. If Rules fail, he will try what he can
work by examples.

The Lords Suggester his Objecting of the plain speeches of the Evangelists.
Besides, N. 28.
it is a Maxim in Divinity, that the obscure Texts of Scripture are to be
expounded by those Texts that are plain and easy to be understood. But the
words of St Matthew, and St Mark [This is my Blood] is much more plain than
[This Chalice is the Testament in my Blood.] And therefore ought to be, and are
preferred by all Antiquity before the other words of St Paul. And now to lay
aside those plain words of S. Matthew and S. Mark, and to entertain those
other words of S. Paul, only because they are more subject to cavills, and to
figurative expositions, is Nodum in scirpo quaerere.

The Lord Bps. Answer.
THe Maxim is most true, but this application, as if S. Matthew, or S. Mark
would relieve him, to prove a literal sense in these words [This is my blood]
is as untrue: because (as has been said) S. Matthew, and S. Mark both are as
plain for an unproper sense, as either S. Luke, or. S. Paul could be. For the
speech of Christ, in S. Matthew, and S. Mark, stands thus* He took the
Cup, and when he had given thanks he gave it, (viz. the Cup) unto them,
saying, Drink you all of this, (namely, Cup,) for this (sc. Cup) is my blood.

Inasmuch therefore as This Cup was that which Christ called his Blood, which
Cup (as you have heard, Book 2. page 79. from the confessed Maxim of Maxims)
can no more properly be called Christ's blood, than (according to your own
example) a man can properly be termed an horse: Therefore must the Pronoune,
THIS, signify the matter in the Cup, as the Sacrament of Christ's blood; and
therefore Sacramentally called his Blood. Wherefore can he not justly say,
that I have sought a knot in a rush, but rather this man's Objection is not
worth a Rush.

The Lords Suggester his foul Intanglement.
THirdly I say, N. 29.
that the custom of speech, where, by the word (Cup) the liquor contained in
the Cup is of every man understood; and by the word (Testament) is meant that
Act or deed, whereby the Covenant, or Testament is given or confirmed, is so
commonly and so usually understood of all men, that he would be thought to be
rather the figure of a man, then a man that should now deny them to be allowed
for direct speeches. In matter of Philosophy, Consuetudo est altera natura; in
the Law, Consuetudo facit jus; and Consuetudo legi quandoque praejudicat: Shall
we say that he writes not good French, who writes est for et, and en for
an? or that he writes not good English who, for Liege people, writes Liege
people?

The Lo: Bps Answer.
IT is a jolly matter to see a man turn to his wits again. The Suggester
says (as well as can be wished) that it is now plain, that the word, Cup, is
put for the liquor in the Cup: whereby is confessed that it is plainly a
Figurative speech; as when one says to his friend, Sir, take you my Purse to
keep, meaning, the money in his purse. Such speeches may we allow to be
current, but yet not to be direct speeches, as the Suggester would have it. But
will it please your Lp: to ask of your Suggester, upon this confession, what
is become of that your Suggester, who talked even now of an See above N. 20.
hundred thousand, who denied any Trope in the words, Cup, or Testament,
against the opinion of some few; and was encountered with a greater number than
he brought, and is now confounded by his own Contradiction? where is the
Vertigo now, my Lord?

His quaint Crotchet of Peeple and People, though peradventure it be applauded
by you, or some ignorant people, yet cannot be but hissed at by any of sound
judgment; because in our question, concerning the word, Cup, (the word, Cup,
being put for the liquor in the Cup) it does necessarily vary the sense:
because the Cup is no more the Liquor in the Cup, than the liquor in the Cup
can be properly called the Cup. But whether the word be written Peeple, or
People, it alters not the sense of the word, and is therefore senselesly
applied to our Question concerning the Cup.

And now I will requite him with as delicate a conceit out of your Romish
Schools. It is disputed, concerning the conversion of the Bread into the body
of Christ, thus. Innocent. de offic. Missae l. 3. c. 29. Dicunt quidam, quod
panis convertitur in Corpus Christi, quia Corpus sub eisdem panis accidentibus
loco panis incipit esse: sicut dicitur a Grammaticis, quando mutatur A, in E,
cum a praesenti Ago, formatur praeteritum Egi.
It is like as when it is said of the Grammarians (meaning some of your
Doctors) that the letter, A, is changed into the letter, E* as when Ago in the
present tense is made Egi in the preter-tense. This must needs be a dainty to
your Suggester, my Lord; much good may it do him.

Of the Trope, in the word, BREAD.
The Lords Suggester.
AS concerning the word, N. 30.
Bread, I answer briefly, that neither did Christ use that word in the
Institution of the Sacrament, neither do you allege any Author of ours, for
to prove it to be Figurative. That place in the sixth of St. John, by you cited,
your selves acknowledge not to belong to this Sacrament: and the other place,
by you cited, out of the 10. Chapter of 1. Cor. 10 your self acknowledge to be
spoken of the Mystical Body of Christ, which is his Church. Neither are those
words Christ's, but St. Paul's, who could not institute a Sacrament; so as this
word, Bread, is not to be brought within the compass of your, (etc.)

The Lo: Bps. Answer.
WHo can deny, when it is said by the three Evangelists, as well as by S. Paul,
that Jesus took Bread, and blessed it, but that which he blessed was made a
Sacrament; and that which he blessed, the Text says, was Bread? In the next
place he would persuade your Lordship that I proved not the Speech of Christ,
in calling Bread his Body, to be Figurative, out of your Romish Doctors;
notwithstanding that (Book 2. page 75. unto 82.) diverse leaves were spent in
the proof only of this.

His third Untruth is, by intimating that I proved not this out of S. Paul to
the Corinthians, but only spoke of Bread, mentioned 1. Cor. 10. which speech of
Bread, there signifies only the Mystical body of Christ, which is his Church;
albeit* I directly insisted upon that of 1. Cor. 11. where Bread is so called
after Consecration, not only Bread, but also Bread broken, to signify Christ's
natural body crucified upon the Cross. (See Book 3. page 133.)

And yet behold another lavish Untruth of this unconscionable Suggester.
Neither do you (says he, speaking of Protestants) acknowledge the word,
Bread, to belong unto the Sacrament. Why man? all Protestants teach and
profess Bread and Wine Consecrated to be the Sacrament it self, and call
them both, The Sacrament of the Body and blood of our Lord. How then possibly
should they not acknowledge them both to belong unto the Sacrament? As
Circumcision of the flesh was called the Covenant. In the form of Baptism, [I
baptize thee in the name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost] the word, Water,
is not mentioned; will the obstinacy of this man say, that therefore Water
belongs not unto the Sacrament of Baptism? or that it is not indeed the
Sacrament? against that general definition of a Sacrament set down by S.
Augustine, and retained in your Schools, A Sacrament is a visible sign of an
invisible Grace. So is Water, in Baptism, a visible sign of the purgation of
the soul, by Grace of the remission of sin; and so are Bread and Wine
Visible signs of Christ's Body crucified, and Blood shed for the remission of
sin; and our Sacramental Corporal eating is also a Sign of our Christian
and spiritual refection thereby. Fie, fie, my Lord, that you should lend your
ears to such a miserable Seducer*

Of the Trope in the word, EAT, used in the Institution of Christ.
The Lords Suggester his first Evasion.
AS for the word, N. 31.
Eat, first I say, that though Christ said [Accipite, and manducate] yet were
not those any part of the Sacrament, or Consecratorie words, nor those words of
Christ, whereby he instituted this Sacrament.

The Lo: Bps. Answer.
THough it be not within the Compass of those words of your Consecration of
this Sacrament [This is my Body] yet are they properly belonging to the
Sacramental use, and therefore might as necessarily require a proper sense and
meaning as any other words of Christ his Institution, that belong either to the
Sacrament, or matter of the Sacrament, if (as your Doctors have taught) Christ
his Sacramental Speeches be void of Figures. And that, in every Celebration of
this Sacrament, Eating is necessary, your Suggester himself (if he be a
Romish Priest) must as necessarily confess; for you have heard your Doctors
granting a necessary duty in the Priest, wheresoever he celebrateth this
Sacrament, to eat it with his own mouth. See Book 2. page 48 and 54.

The Lords Suggester his Objection.
WHich Sacramental and Consecratorie words, thirteen of the ancient Fathers,
cyted by Allen, Bellarmine, Brereley, etc. and Bishop Jewel in his Reply, and
the Communion book, in the Catechism for examination of Children before
Confirmation, and Dr. Fr. White, now Bishop of Elie, in his Reply, and Calvin
and Beza in diverse places of their works; and your self in your last letter
confess to be [Hoc estcorpus meum.]

The Lo: Bps. Answer.
HOw these words may be called words of Consecration, but improperly, I have
already signified; and shall (God willing) manifest fully in the second
Edition, by differencing the Consecration of Ordination, and Accommodation,
from the Consecration of Benediction. For, indeed, if those words [This is my
body] should be held to be the words of Benediction, which is properly called
Consecration, then should you exclude Christ his own Benediction, which is
expressly set down before these your words of Consecration, as it is in the
Evangelists; Jesus took Bread, and BLESSED it, and after he had given
thanks, he gave it to them, saying, Take, Eat, this is my Body. And so shall
we be found to agree amongst our selves, whereas (by the Confession of your
own learned Archbishop Caesariensis) your Romish Doctors are involved in
irreconciliable Contradictions, as you have seen them alleged by me, Book
1. page 8.

The Lords Suggester his Conclusion, in this his first Evasion.
SO as the word, N. 32.
Eat, being none of those Sacramental words of Christ, cannot be brought in
the compass of your (etc.)

The Lo: Bps. Answer.
THis is right the Cuckowessong, so often repeated. The word, Eat, is not
mentioned in those Four words of Christ [This is my body,] therefore it cannot
be brought within the compass of, etc. as though (etc.) were there set as an
hedge to exclude me from showing any Tropes in the words of Christ's
Institution, beside only those precedent words [This is my body:] and not
rather, according to the proper nature of every etc. (which has been used by
all Writers in the world) as a gap, to make passage to the other following
words of Christ's Institution; I say, of his Institution, and not only of
Consecration, as your Suggester pertinaciously replyeth, contrary to my
express words, Book 2. page 80. in the very Title of the Sect. 14. thus: Many
Figurative Speeches, used by Christ, even in his words of the Institution of
the Sacrament, by your own Confessions.

Which so plain an expression of mine own meaning might teach your Suggester
to eat his former words, and Assertion, concerning not only the word, Eat,
but the other Tropicall words of Christ, already mentioned. And do you not
see, my Lord, how my former (etc.) still sticks in your Suggesters throat? it
will not down.

The Lords Suggester his second Evasion.
CHrist, N. 33.
indeed by the word, Eat, intends to show the use of the Sacrament, which
though it were not used as Christ appointed, yet were it a Sacrament, as your
self Page 8. confess, where you say that Christ made it a Sacrament by his
Blessing, by Prayer, which preceded these words [This is my Body:] and by
Consequent, before the Apostles did Eat. Also page 36. where you acknowledge
the Reservation of the Sacrament to be ancient, so it be for a Sacramental
eating thereof: Whence it will follow, that it is a Sacrament before, and
without the Eating of it: and that Christ's words, [Take and Eate] were not his
Sacramental, or Consecratorie words, or the words whereby he did institute
the Bread to be a Sacrament, seeing it is a Sacrament, though it be not Eaten.

The Lo: Bps Answer.
SAy you so? Is it a Sacrament, although it be not eaten? you have no other
Sacrament in the celebration of the Eucharist, but that which you call a
Sacrifice, and this Sacrifice (says your Suarez Ies: Tom. 3. Disp: 75. Sect 2.
Prima sententia est, Sacerdotal^m Su^ptienem ess^ de necessitate Sacrificii,
quatenus est perfecta consumptio, and inntatio victimae oblatae, Sic moderni
Thomistae, Soto. Ledesima, quos secutus est Bellar. l 1. de Missa. c. ult. But
Salmeton Ies. To: 9. Tract. 29. p 223. At hoc non pertinet ad esseatiam
Sacrificii.
Bellarmine, and other modern Divines) cannot be, except that the Priest Eat
it, as I have also showed you in the sixth book of the Treatise of the Mass.
And the necessity hereof they ground not upon those words, [This is my Body,]
but upon the words of Command following, [Doe this.] Ask your Suggester how
he can reconcile himself to those your Doctors.

Of the Words, BREAK, EAT, and DRINK, out of Maldonate and Brerely.
The Lords Suggester, his Exceptions.
But you allege Maldonate to say, N. 34.
that the Eating of the Body is a Figurative Speech.

The Lord Bps. Answer.
IF I knew that I had injured either of these Authors, it would grieve me at
the very heart. First then to Maldonates Eating, and after to M. Brerely his
Drinking. I produced (Book 2. page 86.) not only your Ies. Maldonate, but your
other Ies. Suarez also, affirming that those words, Break, and Eat, cannot
properly be affirmed of the body of Christ without a Figure. And that those
sayings, Christ's body is broken, and, Christ's body is eaten, taken in the
literal sense (they say) are false. Besides, your Ies. Salmeron (cited Book
5. page 228.) proves the same irrefutably. This real Eating (says he)
requires a real tearing with the teeth that thing which is eaten. But the
body of Christ (says he) is not torn with the teeth.

Can your Lordship think your Suggester to have been a rational man, to
charge me with not doing Maldonate right, now that you see the direct and
express confession of Maldonate himself? or can you account him a
conscionable man, who knowing that both Suarez and Salmeron confessed and
proved the words Brake, and, Eat, to be spoken figuratively, to conceal my
evidence? This practice (my Lord) why do you not detest? I pass to Mr Brereley.

Of the word, [DRINKE.] The Lords Suggester.
ANd M. Brerely, N. 35.
That the blood is not properly drunk out of the Chalice, seeing the blood
has the same manner of existing, as under the form of Bread, to wit, not
divided or separated from the body. But you had done Brerely more right, if you
had repeated his words as they are; Seeing the blood in the Chalice: for
Brereley inte^deth not to say, that the Blood is figurative, but that the
being of the blood in the Chalice, whereby it seems to be divided, from the
body, is not properly said to be drunk out of the Chalice, if we attend to
the strict propriety of speech. The like is to be said of Maldonates words,
concerning the Eating of the Body, which appears in the same sentence, viz.
Quia ipsi modi, qui significantur his verbis, non convenient corpori Christi.

The Lo: Bps Answer.
MR, Brerely his words (by me cited, Book 2. page 87.) were these: If we
attend unto the propriety of speech, neither is the blood of Christ properly
drunk out of the Chalice. What can we call wrong in this Citation? Forsooth,
Mr Brereley's words are not, Drunk out of the Chalice, but, Blood In the
Chalice is drunk. Would not a man think that your Suggester was In, or else
newly come Out of the Winecellar, when he made this exception? Where I,
because the liquor is not properly Drunk, before it be out of the Cup, lest
MR. Brereley my Adversary might seem to speak less properly, altered his
phrase. O that my Adversaries were such as would so kindly handle my writings,
by so altering them, that they be better than they seem to be, and not
everywhere almost deprave my words and meanings! But be it Drunk In, or Drunk
Out of the Cup, Mr. Brereley plainly acknowledges an Impropriety in the phrase
of Drinking Christ's Blood, which is the very Point in question, and which I
contended for from this his testimony.

Nor this only, but (Book 1. page 641.) I showed the general doctrine of the
Church of Rome, in the point of Concomitancie, to be this, viz. That Blood is
still in the veins of Christ's body, as it was before the consecration of this
Sacrament. So that Christ is received as whole man in his perfect body;
whereupon I inferred, that, because a man could not properly drink the blood of
a man, whose blood is still in the veins thereof: therefore can he not be
said properly to drink it, because it is received under the form of a solid
body, and not under the form of blood, or any liquid thing. As yet therefore
Maldonate, and Brereley remain our faithful Advocates. And if your Suggester
shall prove the contrary, I shall think that he was a sober man, when he made
this his Reply.

The Lords Suggester.
SO as neither Maldonate, nor Brereley, does differ from other Catholic
Writers in the true sense and meaning of Christ's words, or that they think
[Hoc est corpus meum: Hic est sanguis meus] are Tropicall.

The Lo: Bps Answer.
IF they differ not from other Catholic Writers in the meaning of Christ's
words, now spoken of, which are Eat, and Drink, then will it necessarily
follow, that other Catholic Writers differ not from them; and so we shall all
be good friends, professing unanimously that these two words [Eate, and drinke]
belonging to Christ's Institution, are Tropicall; the very point which I
undertook to prove. It is not so?

The Lords Suggester.
Only they differ in modo loquendi, N. 36.
which kind of difference I presume shall not be urged as essential in a
matter of this Consequence, they agreeing in substance with all other
Catholic Writers, as their whole books do plainly show.

The Lo. Bps Answer.
IT is your presumption indeed, and that a very Childish one too. For better
manifestation hereof, I shall presume that your Suggester cannot be so absurd
as, by the word Substance, to mean any Physical and bodily substance, but
only the subject matter which is in controversy. And the matter in
Controversy is concerning the foresaid words of Christ's Institution, Eat, and
Drink, whether they be properly, or literally taken, or improperly, and
figuratively. Some of your Doctors hold them to be properly spoken, others deny
this, and say, this is a false sense (as you have heard.) Now your Suggester
will needs play the Moderator, saying, that they agree in substance, namely, in
the matter in question, though they differ in their manner of speaking; although
the manner of speaking is here become the very matter in question.

Just as if when the Lords in the Star Chamber do variously censure a
defendant, some judging him guilty, and some quitting him, and holding him
innocent; your Suggester should reconcile this difference, saying, that though
the one part held him guilty, and the other unguilty, yet do they not differ in
substance, but only in the manner of speaking. When the two adulterous Elders
were examined, concerning Susanna, what tree it was in the Garden, under which
the act was done, one said, under a Mastick, the other, under an Holme tree:
they differed only in modo loquendi, and yet were they both thereby proved
false witnesses. Albeit otherwise agreeing in one intention, to accuse Susanna
of whoredom; even as we have noted your Doctors by the division of their
tongues, to have been false Teachers.

The Lords Suggester.
ANd because I find, that in this your Book, N. 37.
you do endeavor in all points of difference to prove your Tenet by the
confession of the Catholic party, whose sayings you allege: which do not, as
I conceive, differ in substance, but only in modo loquendi.

The Lo: Bps Answer.
YOu repeat your Reply, I must have like liberty to repeat the effect of my
Answer. When the question is of Proper and improper signification of words, the
manner of speech is the Substance of the matter in question. It is a known
story of the Tradesman in London dwelling at the sign of the Kings Crown,
who said unto his son, Behave thy self well, Son, and I will make thee heir
of the Crown: his words were afterward brought within compass of Treason,
albeit others thought the word, Crown, to have been taken by the Speaker in a
figurative sense, yet did he forfeit both his own Crown and life, even for
the literal signification of the word, Crown, and was hanged only upon a
difference de modo loquendi, that is, the manner of speech.

Accordingly now, when the whole structure of the Romish Mass, concerning
either Corporal presence, Transubstantiation, or Adoration of the Host, do all
depend wholly upon the Manner of Christ's speech [This is my body] in the
literal and proper sense; and that our confutation of all these superstitious,
sacrilegious, and Idolatrous Doctrines, is grounded upon the improper and
figurative meaning of the same words: if all this difference in the manner of
speech be no substantial matter of difference, let your Suggester but answer,
why your Roman Church burnt so many Protestants, only for differing from her in
the manner of speech, viz. interpreting Christ's speech [This is my body]
figuratively contrary, to the literal exposition thereof? If he shall say,
that she did it unjustly, then was she a bloody Iezabel: and if he answer,
that notwithstanding it were a Difference, in manner of speech, yet was this
sufficient matter to condemn them to the fire; then is he to be sent to
school again among Petites, to learn what it is to differ in modo loquendi.

The Lords Suggester his offer to tell a Tale.
I will, under your favor, endeavor, by an example in the same kind, to show
how weak these kind of proofs are.

The Lo: Bps Answer.
WIth very good leave (friend Suggester) but see it be not such, as shall
bewray your own folly, and expose you to the scorn of any intelligent Reader,
you had best.

The Lords Suggester his merry Tale.
IN K. Edward 2d his time (as I remember) at what time the University of Oxford
was much addicted to the learning of those, who by some were called Nominals,
for that they were strict in examining the nature and signification of every
word, Merton College, being seated upon the walls of the Town, and so wanting
room to make good and commodious walks, the Master and Fellows of the house
being desirous to walk in the meadows that lay close to the walls, thought
good to send three of their Company to the King, then lying at Woodstocke; who
being admitted to his presence, one of them signified to his Majesty that they
were sent by the College to demand Licentiam faciendi ostium: the second
presently interrupting him, said, that he was mistaken, for that a License to
make a door was not a satisfaction to them, for so they might have a license,
and yet the door never made, and therefore his desire was to have, Ostium
fieri: whereunto the third replied, that they were both mistaken, for so it
might be still in fieri; but that his Petition was to have Ostium factum:
whereunto the first replied again, that they were not so unmannerly as to
desire Ostium factum, for that were to demand that the King should make them a
door, but desired that they might have leave posse ostium facere. But the
second again opposing him, and the third opposing the second, and the King
growing weary, he answered them, that though he understood their request, yet
would he not give them satisfaction, till they would agree in modo loquendi.

The Lo: Bps Answer.
IF that I had not heard your Suggester make so often mention of Ostium, a
door, I should have thought it had been a Tale of a Tubbe, it is so fond: but
let us take it as it is, and make the best of it we can. Only it might have
becom'd him, to have had a better conceit of the worth of that College in
Oxon, so famous for Antiquity and learning, then to imagine that it should be
so utterly forlorn of true Oratorie and Grammar, as that three choicest
Scholars therein should not be able to express this Message in latin
intelligently, especially to so great a King, but that they should deserve to
be sent home, like the men of the town of Gotham, as wise as they came. By the
way, you may tell your Suggester that he is no Real man, who did not know what
Nominals meant, when he says, they were strict in examining the signification
of words: for they were therefore called Nominals, because they held Vniversals
to be, not Res, but Nomina.

The Lords Suggester his Application, upon his Tale.
NOw as it cannot be objected to any of these, N. 39.
that they differed from the rest in the Substance of their demand; so neither
can it be said of these Catholic Writers, that they differ one from the other
in the substance, as their Books do sufficiently witness, though they differ
in the manner of utterance.

The Lo: Bps. Answer.
HIs promise was to bring in an Example of the same kind; and he is partly as
good as his word, for it is indeed equally ridiculous; For it cannot be of the
same kind, except the Application stand right, as thus: As those Scholars in
their Tales, even so the Romish Writers (as namely Bellarmine, Allen, and
others, who have written Expositions upon the manner of Christ his Institution)
have been so defective in uttering of their meaning, concerning the same speech
of Christ, that they have merited (like to the former Gotthamists) to be
dismissed with laughter for speaking so foolishly.

Or else that he think it to be a more suitable Application, if it stand thus;
As the foresaid Scholars, in explicating their meaning concerning the making
of a door, have contradicted one another, some delivered it in the sense of
the time to come, de ostio faciendo, and some other explaining it of the time
past, de ostio facto, (as the Example shows:) even so your Romish Doctors, in
interpreting Christ's words, have been repugnant one to another, by
interpreting Christ's sayings in diverse senses, some Properly, and some of them
Figuratively. All which is so far from weakening my Proofs, that nothing
could fortify them more, to show that your Doctors are found professedly to
differ in modo loquendi. As for Example, in the words [Given, and Shed;] Some
expounding them (as you have heard) properly in the Present Tense, and Some
improperly in the Future. This may serve to manifest the pervicacie of your
Suggester, who notwithstanding holds on his pace.

The Lords Suggester.
NEither is it possible they should differ in substance in their Printed
Books* N. 40.
for that no Book among them is allowed to be Printed without the Examination
of the Superiors, men well known and approved for their faith and learning.

The Lo: Bps. Answer.
What is this I hear? One suggesting, upon any pretense, that to be
Impossible, which he knows has been proved throughout the whole Treatise of
the Mass, to be infallibly true? As namely, that there is scarce any one
Objection made by Protestants against your Romish Doctors, which is not by
others of the same Profession as fully confirmed. Whereupon we may infer,
for a further Confirmation of the point now in question, that if those
faithful and learned Superiors have authorized the writings of those Doctors,
by whose Testimonies our Protestant Reasons are so plainly avouched, both in
our Objections against your Romish Doctrine, and in our Confutation of yours;
then must you necessarily grant us one further advantage, which is, that the
same learned and faithful Superiors have so farie justified our Protestant
Profession. But what talk you of these your Superiors, as if they could not
Contradict one another, when as the Superiors of all these Superiors, and
Oracles of your Church, your Romish Popes are found not only in other
Doctrines, but even in the questions concerning the Romish Mass, manifestly
contradictory one to another? as this our Treatise of the Mass has plainly
discovered. See in the Index of Fathers at the word Pope.

The Lords Suggester.
ANd if (this notwithstanding) any error were afterward found in any Book, N.
41.
the Inquisition presently condemns both the Book and the Author, if he do
not submit to the correcting of his Book. And this to be true is well known
by your Lordship, who in one part of your Book calls it Booke-butcherie.

The Lord Bps. Answer.
YOu say very true, This practice of your Inquisitors, in expunging out of the
Books of Romish Doctors all their ingenuous Confessions, whereby our
Protestant doctrine and defense has been avouched and justified, I have called
a Book-butcherie. If your Lordship should know any great Personage questioned
about any Criminal delicts, some whereof were also Capital Transgressions, to
have violently cut out the tongues of all such, whom he did suspect could
bring any matter of Accusation against him, would your Lordship think much to
hear this cruelty called a Butcherie, and not rather judge such a fact to be a
most infallible Argument of a guilty Conscience in that party? even so the
Indices Expurgatorii, wherewith the Testimonies of your own Authors,
witnessing for our Profession in their Books, be so many Indices, yea Iudices,
to convince and condemn your now-Romish Church to be an unjust and shameless
Patroness of a false Cause. What the mischief of this practice must be, mine
own experience can best tell. I alleged out of Polydor Virgill a sentence
expressly printed in his first Edition, out of Polydor's own Original and
Autographe: which sentence by your Indices Expurgatorii was commanded to be
there blotted out, and afterward to be left out in the next Editions of
Polydore, and so it was. M. Parsons finding the sentence wanting in the latter
Editions of Polydore, rayleth down right upon me, and notes me for a notable
falsificator, never taking knowledge of the truth of the Allegation, as it was
set down and is now to be read, in the first proper and true Editions of
Polydore. Can there then be a more Satanicall Art of delusion, than this is of
your Indices expurgatorii, whereby you may have a faculty to play the Thieves,
by stealing out of the Books of your own Romish Doctors, all such their
ingenuous Confessions, marked for defense of the doctrine of Protestants, and
then take the liberty to call us liars, for avouching their Testimonies, albeit
never so truly?

The Lords Suggester his last, and most General Evasion.
LAstly, N. 42.
if these Allegations of Tropicall or Figurative Speeches were true, yet do I
not see what Argument you can draw from hence; or how you can hence prove any
thing against our Tenet.

The Lo: Bps. Answer.
IF your Suggester cannot see what Argument can be drawn from these
Allegations, brought to prove a Figurative Sense in the words of Christ his
Institution, and consequently in the words which you call Consecratorie, it is
because his sight is dim, and he had not a fit pair of spectacles to help
him; whereby he might perceive, that upon the no-proper sense of the words,
[This is my body] it must follow that there is no Transsubsta^tiation in your
Romish Mass, no Corporal presence, no real Sacrifice, no proper Eating, no
lawful Divine Adoration thereof. All which are substantial Points, although
depending de modo Loquendi. Finally, I would gladly see some color of Reason,
why the foresaid Allegations should not be of force.

The Lords Suggester, his Confirmation.
SEeing your selves plainly confess, N. 43.
and it is most true, that Figurative Speeches afford no certain proof in
matters of faith: M. Downeham in his Book of Antichrist page 169. saying, It
is a rule in Divinity, that Theologia Symbolicanon est argume^tativa: and the
same is affirmed by Willet in his Synopsis page 27. and by others, whose
Sayings here, for brevitie sake, I omit, presuming that it will not be denied.

The Lo: Bps Answer.
IF I should deny this, I should contradict my self, who in my latin
Apology, (part. 2. lib. 5. cap. 4.) have defended this Position, by the
Confession of your own writers, to be the Confutation of the Extravagant
glosses of your Popes, and Popish Doctors. Among which we may reckon that of
Pope Innocent the 3. who, to prove that his Papal Authority was above the
Imperial, alleged that Scripture Genesis 1. God made two great Lights, the Sun
to govern the Day, and the Moon to govern the Night. And now our Suggester
will have you, in effect, to know, that this is but a Lunatique Argument,
because it is Symbolicall, no way able to prove that the Imperial, as the
Moon, had borrowed its Authority from the Papal, as from the Sun. Your Pope
Boniface the VIII. argued thus; Luc. 22. Peter said to Christ, Behold here are
two swords: and Christ answered, It is enough. He said not (says your Pope)
it is too much, and therefore both the Temporal and Spiritual Sword are in
the Pope, as he is Vicar of Christ. So he, which Consequence your Suggester now
teaches to be no better than a wooden dagger, or rather a fools babble,
because this kind of Symbolicall Reasoning is of no force. And indeed this
Papal Crotchet has been (in my Latin Apology part. 2. lib. 5. cap. 28.)
confuted by your two Jesuits, Maldonate, and Suarez, as being a violent
distorturing of holy Scripture.

The same may be said of your two eminent Cardinals Baronius and Bellarmine;
from that Text Act. 10. where, in a vision, it was said to Peter, Kill and
Eat: which being spoken of the killing and eating of beasts, the first word,
KILL, your Baronius urges against the state of Venice, to show that the Pope
being S. Peter's Successor, had power to compel them by violence. The other
word, EAT, Bellarm. wresteth to prove the Pope to be the Head of the Church,
but why? For, to eat (says he) is the property of the Head. These and a
thousand such Symbolicall (I had almost said, Diabolical) profanations of
Scripture might be produced out of your Romish Writers, upon all points of
Controversy, which justly do fall (quasi in spongiam) upon this Thesis, viz.
Symbolicall Arguments make no necessary Conclusions.

But what makes this against us, concerning the matter in question, which is
the figurative words of Christ, This is my body? The position makes only
against them, who extract either a Literal sense out of a Parabolicall and
figurative speech, as Origin did, when having read that Scripture, There be
some that castrate themselves for the Kingdom of God (which was but a
Parabolicall speech) he did really, and therefore foolishly castrate himself.
Or else, when men turn the words of Scripture, properly and literally spoken,
into a figurative meaning, as your Popes dealt with Sun and Moon, and with
Peter's Swords. But by that Thesis was it never forbid, whenever in Scripture
the name of the thing signified is attributed to the Symbol or sign, that then
the Symbolicall and Sacramental speech should be judged Tropicall. But this
kind of exposition was always approved of Christ, and by his Church. So here,
Christ taking Bread, and breaking Bread, which was the Symbol and sign of
Christ's body, and saying of the same Bread This is my body] it is not possible
that the sense should be Literal, but altogether figurative, as has been
most evidently and copiously proved unto you by direct confessions (in my
Treatise of the Mass, Book 2. p. 84.) of your own Divines, and by examples
in Scripture, (lb. p. 85.) to wit, the sign of the Passing over called the
Passover; Baptism, the sign of regeneration, called Regeneration; the Rock,
but a sign of Christ, called Christ: in each one of these the symbols being a
sign and figure, the speech must infallibly be figurative. And therefore
Bread, being a figure of Christ's body, is called Christ's body figuratively. But
your Romish literal exposition, from this Symbolicall, has been proved to be
as false as the other is true, by the confessions of your Doctors, alleged,
Book 2. page 79. What has your Suggester now gained (my Lord) by his
Objection of a Symbolicall Argument, excepting only that he has showed
himself to be an ignorant and superfluous Litigator?

The Lords Suggester his relying upon the Authority of S. Augustine, in this
Question.
THe rather for that S. Augustine, N. 44.
Epist. 68. says, Non nisi impudentissime nititur quis aliquid in Allegoria
positum prose interpretari, nisi habeat manifesta testimonia, quorum lumine
illustrentur obscura.

The Lo: Bps Answer, by consenting to the Authority of S. Augustine.
THis being your last Allegation, and reserved, for the last confirmation of
your defense, to the last Sentence of your Reply, does tell me, in effect,
that you have chosen S. Augustine to decide this whole cause, as one, who
albeit he were alone in your choice, yet may be to us, for determining the
point in question, as it were, All in all. That therefore you may perceive you
have to deal with a tractable Adversary, be it known unto you, that I shall
desire none other, rather than this Umpier, whom you your selves have chosen,
and the Testimony which you have now objected: only exacting that we may
stand to the Arbitrament of so honorable a Moderator. It is the fashion that
in such a case Parties be mutually bound in some sums of money, to stand to
the award of him, who is chosen to compound the difference. We shall need no
other forfaiture on either part, then the loss of the cause, which you may
seem to yield unto, by your single choice of this so singular a Father, and I
for my part shall accord to the same condition.

S. Augustine his Vmpirage and full Determination of this whole question,
concerning the exposition of Christ his speech; whether it be figurative or
not; first from the rules of Interpreting.
THe words in question are these words of Christ his Institution [THIS IS MY
BODY:] N. 45.
the question it self is concerning the sense of the same words which you call
Consecratory, and Operative; whether it be (as you say) Proper and literal, or
(as we have affirmed) the meaning be Improper, Figurative, and Tropicall. S.
Augustine his judgment may be gathered from S. Augustines own Rules of
interpreting Sacramental speeches; as also from his other Assertions,
concerning the property of a Body. I shall deal clearly in both.

The first general Rule of S. Augustine, is recorded by your Ies. Salmeron.
(in 1. Cor. 15. Disp. 24. Ad 1. August. (says he) has delivered this Rule,
When as words, being taken properly, and according to a literal exposition,
yield a sense impossible and absurd, then must we have recourse to a Tropicall
and figurative interpretation. This Mayor is (as you hear) S. Augustine his
own. But in this speech of Christ [This is my body] Bread (by S* Aug.) is
called the Body of Christ; which (as your Bellarm* says) being properly taken,
is Impossible: and as Absurd (say others) as to say a man is a horse. (Both
which are alleged in the Treatise of the Mass, Book. 2. page 79.) Therefore
for the right expounding of these words of Christ [This is my body] we are
necessarily to have recourse to a figurative Interpretation.

You can require nothing in your answer to this Syllogisticall Argument, but
that it may appear unto you, that S. August. held that to be Material Bread,
which he gave to be eaten, when he said [Take, eat, this is my body.] And this
was proved unto you (Book 5. page 21^) where S. Augustine affirmed of Judas,
that he received the Bread of the Lord. That is, will you say, the body of
Christ, which he calls Bread, either because it has the form of bread, or
else because it had been Bread, or because it is Spiritual bread of the
soul. Nay (will Augustine say) none of all these, for I said, that though
Judas received the bread of the Lord, yet he received not that which the other
Disciples received, namely, The Bread the Lord: whereby I distinguished, The
Bread the Lord, which was Christ's body, received by the faithful, from the
Sacramental Bread of the Lord, received by Judas.

Our second Argument is taken from S. August. his other second General Rule,
concerning Eating. For Christ, as he said Take my body, so he said also, Eat,
this is my body: to teach, that such as is the Being of a thing (be it proper,
or figurative) such is the Eating thereof. But of Eating Christ's body there was
alleged unto you (Book 2. page 100.) the general Rule of S. August. to wit;
Wheresoever the word, or precept of Christ's speech does command any flagitious
thing, it is figurative* (as for example) where it is said, Except you eat the
flesh of the Son of man. So he. And that we may understand he excluded all
Corporal eating of Christ's body, whether visible, or invisible, he explaineth
his meaning to have been Spiritual only, by the mouth of the soul, telling
us in his next words, We Eat, in belief of Christ's passion, by a secret and
profitable remembrance that Christ's flesh was crucified for us. So he.

S. Aug. his third Rule was produced (Book 2. page 95.) which strikes at the
heart of the Question, viz. That Sacraments be Signs, which have the
appellations of the things, which they represent: therefore do they carry the
names of the things themselves. So he. And this is verified by the example,
which you have already heard, to wit, the Sign of the Passover, called the
Passover: Circumcision, the Sign of the covenant, called the Covenant: the
Rock, the Sign of Christ in his passion, called Christ: and Baptism the Sign
of Christ's burial, called his Burial.

But where (will you say) shall we find in Augustine the subject of the
question, which is, that the sign of Christ's body is called his Body? which
would put the point out of all question. I answer, even in the place above
cited, out of S. Augustines own words, saying that As Baptism is called
Christ's burial, so is the Sacrament of the body of Christ called his body.
Which is likewise said by S. Aug. out of another part of his works, and has
been cited, Book. 6. page 36. which satisfies your objected Testimony out of
S. Aug. Not to interpret the places of Scripture Allegorically, except there be
some other manifest Testimonies of Scripture, whereby other more obscure places
may be illustrated. Here I might add, that if the body of Christ be properly
so called, and accordingly extant in this Sacrament, then being (as your Church
teaches) properly offered, it should be a proper Sacrifice. But S. Aug.
(cited, book 6. p. 36.) has taught you that The body of Christ is so said to
be sacrificed here, by a Similitude, as Easter day is called the Day of Christ's
Resurrection.

Arguments out of other Positions of S. Augustine.
THe Romish doctrine, N. 46.
which admits not of any figure in Christ's words [This is my body] does
thereby conclude, that after the words of Consecration the substance of Bread
vanishes, and that there is nothing materially remaining but the Body of
Christ: and that the same Body is extant in every consecrated Host, howsoever
the Hosts be severed one from another, and yet that it is not Circumscribed in
any space, but is wholly in the whole, and in every part of the Host.

All these are the Consequences of your Literal Expositions of these words of
Christ, wherein you have had S. Augustine an utter Adversary from point to
point; saying of the first, Our eyes see Bread in this Sacrament (speaking of
Bread after consecration, as has been cited, book 3. page 119) And of the
second, in concluding against Heretics an Impossibility that Christ's body
could be in two places at one instant, as namely, in the Sun and Moon, (as
was alleged book 4. page 171.) And this he confirmed, by teaching that it is
a property of the Deity (whereby the Holy Ghost is proved to be God) to be in
diverse places at once, as I related unto you Book 4. page 187. Lastly, he is
Adversary to the third point also, determining that every Body, whatsoever,
fills the place wherein it is, and cannot be whole in any part thereof, which
you might have red Book 4. page 192.

By all which S. Austines Rules you may see S. Austines Position, now objected
by your Suggester, to be fully observed. For we have in Scripture most
manifest places, which prove these words [This is my body] to be Figuratively
understood, because in Scripture whenever the Sign (as the Bread) being
called Christ's Body, has the appellation of the thing signified (whereof I
gave you many Examples throughout the Book 2.) the speech is always
Tropicall. Farewell now to your Lordships learned Suggester. I expect now to
hear your Lordship speak in your own language, for a Conclusion.

The Lord Baron himself.
MY Lord. N. 47.
I find by your letter, that you will take it in a degree of kindness to be
advertised (though by an Adversary) by private letters, with any thing that he
may think erroneous, to the end that you may either satisfy him in the truth
of the writing, or otherwise correct it in the second Edition.

The Lo: Bps. Answer.
IT is true (my Lord) and he that knows me, knows this my disposition. For
does an Adversary, although even with an adverse mind, acquaint me truly with
my Error? I then say to him, Sic inimice places: or does a friend conceal from
me mine error, as doubting to offend me? I say, Sic and amice noces; for I
desire to go as upright in my writing, as I would in my walking. And that your
Lordship may know I mean sincerely to reform my Aberrations, whatsoever shall
come to my knowledge, I shall tell you of one Error your Lordship has passed
by, which I purpose (God willing) to correct. For although I accounted
expressly but Six Tropes in the words of Christ his Institution, yet I now
perceive, by the discussing of this your Suggesters Reply, that I had
demonstrated, by infallible proof, Eight Tropes in them.

Therefore I must enlarge my former Reckoning, and instead of VI. write VIII.
if this may any-whit work to your Lordships Satisfaction; besides other
Explications, which (God willing) I shall add upon the like occasions.

The Lord Baron himself.
Which is so Christian and noble a saying, N. 48.
as that I am encouraged to send you this part of my Reply to your letter,
which I will finish ere long, and send it according to your direction; rather
choosing to send this abrupt part, then by delay to give you the least Cause of
suspicion, that I either brake my promise, or was unwilling to give
satisfaction to your just and conscionable motion.

The Lo: Bps. Answer.
ANd I wish the Reply had been as Christian, just, and conscionable; but your
Suggester is not the man (I dare assure your Lordship) from whom I may expect
any conscionable dealing; after this experience which I have had of his so many
doublings and jugglings. Nor may I say I have been clearly dealt with by your
Lordship, in promising a full Reply concerning my Allegations, in the time of
the late whole vacation, and returning me a long Reply only to that one small
Particle [etc.] Now if your Answer, in satisfiing but one only falsehood of
your Suggester, in his first Exception, has been now almost half a year in
finishing, your Lordship can tell, by the Rule of proportion, how long I must
stay for a Replication to the other, wherein his (or if you will your
Lordships) other Calumnious and false Taxations have been discovered in my
Answer to your Lordship, the which he shall be never able to expunge. A tree
is known by his fruit, and the fruit which hitherto we have found in the
Reply, now made, may tell your Lordship (concerning that which remains, if
ever it come to ripeness) that we are not to look for grapes of thorns, nor
for figs of thistles.

The Lord Baron himself.
ANd as for the privatenesse of our Intercourse by Writing, if your Lordship
will be pleased to keep it private, it shall not be published by me.

The Lo: Bps. Answer.
IT shall not -- says your Lpp: and it needs not, say I, because you your
self published it long ago, although not in Copies (it may be) yet in your
verbal ostentations. So that if the publishing of this Tractate can do you
any pleasure, you must be beholding to your selves.

THE SECOND PRINCIPAL EXCEPTIon taken against my Allegations.
The Lords Suggester.
IN the same Dedicatory Epistle, speaking of the body of Christ, you say;
Corpus (ut ipsi aiunt) omni movendi, sentiendi, intelligendique facultate
destitutum; id est, coecum, surdum; intellectionis expers. And page 203. you
have written thus: Christ's body in the Sacrament is (you say) without power of
motion of sense, and of understanding. And I rest unsatisfied both of your
(Ipsi aiunt) in the latin, and your (you say) in English: for these words
sound as if Catholics taught this Doctrine, or at least the major part of
them: but in your quotation, page 196. (where this point is handled) you
produce Suarez only.

The Lo: Bps Answer.
SVarez only? I will not be so unmannerly as to tell your Suggester that this
is One lie, but sure I am it is as evident an Untruth as could be uttered:
because in the objected place, (Book 2. page 196.) when Suarez is cited, he is
alleged as a Contest, both he himself confessing that Christ, as he is said
to be in this Sacrament, is void of sense, etc. and testifying of other
Doctors of your Church, saying; (in the Margin) Alii, and Nonnulli; and by name
reckons among those Others, Thomas Aquinas, your Angelical Doctor (to whom
he might have added Scotus.) And therefore was not your Ies. Suarez the only
witness, no more then the foreman of a Jury may be said to be Alone, when he
gives in his Verdict in the name of other his fellows, be they eleaven, or
more. Therefore this last part of your Suggester his Exception, which
concerns the Authors words, is (as you see) most false; and as faithless
will he be found in his Exception against the sense of the words of the same
Jesuit.

The Lords Suggester his Exception, touching the Sense of Suarez.
WHose words (as your self cite them) bear another Sense, N. 50.
far different from what he is here cited.

The Lo: Bps. Answer.
SUrely then have I been exceedingly to blame; but then shall I believe you,
when you shall show it.

The Lords Suggester.
FOr he only affirms that the body of Christ in the Sacrament is destitute of
those faculties (naturally considered) but says plainly; Corpus Christi (ut
est in Sacramento) potest per se moveri localiter a Deo. And this is no new
doctrine, neither does this prove that the body of Christ is coecum, surdum,
exanime.

The Lo: Bps. Answer.
SVarez meant (says he) that the body of Christ, in this Sacrament, is
destitute of these foresaid faculties, as naturally considered: which I
confess to be truly affirmed by your Suggester. And this being true, I
furthermore affirm, that he has as falsely accused me to have alleged Suarez
his words in a far different sense: for, I delivered the very same sense of
your Suggester in his own express words thrice, thus; No power naturally, of
himself, to move himself: No natural faculty of sense, without a Miracle, to
move and see. Not able without some Miracle, to apprehend things past in his
understanding. And so are to be expounded his words objected, Potest per se
moveri localiter a Deo: (adding, which your Suggester like a sly youth passed
by) Loquor de potentia Dei absoluta, I speak (says he) of the absolute power
of God; signifying that alalthough by his Divine power he could, yet by his
humane and natural power he could not move himself, or see, or hear, or
understand things past. Which I called then a Brutish (I might have added a
Brain-sicke and impious) Doctrine, derogating from the Article of Christian
faith, concerning the glorified Body of Christ. What more?

The Lords Suggester.
Christ's body walked upon the waters, N. 51.
not naturally, but by the omnipotency of his Godhead. The like may be said of
his coming to his Disciples, the doors being shut: his issuing out of the
Tomb, the stone being not removed: and his penetrating of the heavens. Which
because they were not done naturally, it does not therefore follow that the
body of Christ was coecum, surdum, intellectionis expers.

The Lo: Bps Answer.
IF it follow not that he, who naturally, and without a miraculous power,
cannot possibly see, hear, or feel, is therefore to be said to be naturally
dumb, deaf, and senseless, then may he as well deny, that either Bartimaeus,
whose eyes Christ miraculously opened, had been blind; or he in the Gospel,
to whom Christ restored miraculously his hearing had been deaf; or that
Lazarus, when he was miraculously raised out of his Grave, had been so long
senseless, who naturally, and without a miracle, had not seen, heard, or used
any faculty of Sense. Which proves your Suggester, in his objection, to be,
indeed, void of common sense, as well as he is in that which follows.

Christ's body (says he) walked miraculously on the water: and passed through
the doors of the house, yet for all that could not be said to be blind or
deaf. As much as to say, a man cannot be said to be blind in his eyes, who
has agility in his legs to move himself, albeit Blindness be not incident
to the eyes, more then sight is to the heels. Surely, that party is truly
blind in himself, who is only miraculously made to see? This did never any
deny, that was in his right mind?

The Lords Suggester.
BEsides, N. 52.
in diverse places of your Book, your self accuse us for praying unto it,
(namely, the Sacrament) as to a living thing: but for us so to pray unto it,
and yet affirm it to be Coecum, surdum, intellectionis expers, are two
Positions so opposite the one to the other, and yet both affirmed by your
self, as that I must needs affirm that I am not satisfied therein.

The Lo: Bps Answer.
ASsuredly; my Lord, neither can I be satisfied, when I hear so absurd a
Contradiction as this is; no more than I can be satisfied with the impudent
boldness of your Suggester, in putting this gross contradiction upon me. For
your Romish Church holds both that Christ, as he is in the Sacrament, is
senseless (as was proved out of the place now objected out of my book
concerning the Mass:) and the same Church of Treatise of the Mass, Book 4.
page 196. and Book 7. page 100.
Rome also prescribes a manner of praying to the same Host. She then is the
Author of this contradiction, whatsoever it be, and you kiss, and adore her; I
am but only a true Relater, and I must be buffetted. Say, my Lord, where is
the vertigo now?

The third principal Exception, against the Allegations, by the Lords
Suggester.
IN the same Epistle Dedicatory you have these words: N. 53.
Ad nostram quod attinet Sacratissimam Eucharistiam, quia a Ministro Elementa
consecrantur, and benedicuntur, non minus Sacramenta sunt quam Baptismus. yet
Page 117. of your 7. Book you pretend that the Sacrament works as the
preaching of the word of God does, Ad modum Recipientis: which (were it by
Judas, or by a transformed Devil) yet the seed being Gods it may be fruitful,
whatsoever the Seedman be. And page 116. of your first Book you say that it is
no Sacrament before it is Consecrated: which Positions being so opposite, I
cannot frame any due construction to my Satisfaction.

The Lo: Bps Answer.
I Must again necessarily complain both of the ignorance and malignity, which
your Suggester bewrayes in this Exception. For, first, none but an Ignorant
would have objected a Contradictio^ in these two Positions, because they were
spoken in a different respect. For speaking of an ordinary Case, I said (and
truly) that the Sacrament ought to be consecrated by a lawful Minister: but in
an extraordinary Case, wherein it is not possible to understand the lawful
Calling and ordination of the Minister, it is otherwise. And this sense I
sufficiently explicated (Book 7. page 117.) by calling this second, a Case
perplexed, and Indeprehensible. In which difference of Respects, I may say of
King Saul, that he was, and was not a Prophet. Because if the word, Prophet, be
taken for one, whose ordinary office and function is to prophecy, so was Saul
never accounted a Prophet. But if, by Prophet, be understood only an
extraordinary Rapt and Act of Prophesying, so is it true which is written of
him, And Saul was reckoned among the Prophets. Next, the scope and aim of the
Suggester is (as he has professed) to charge me with wrong Allegations of my
Authors, yet he saw no more in this, but (as his imagination seduced him) a
Contradiction only to my self; which discovers a malign itch to have made
me a Falsificator like himself, but this his humor is Hectic in him, and
breaks further out in his next Exception.

The fourth principal Exception against my Allegations, by the Lords Suggester.
Page 4. you say, that it is granted of all sides, that the Mingling of water
with the wine is not of the essence of the Sacrament, but of its own nature
Indifferent. And for proof thereof you allege Bell. li. 4. de Euch. cap. 11.
Quinto. Where Bellarmine speaks of Cyprians opinion therein. It is true, that
Bellarmine seems not to allow that opinion, that the mingling of the water
with the wine is so of necessity to be used in the Sacrament, as that without
it there is no Sacrament: but that it is a thing Indifferent, Bellarmine
denies, and says plainly, lib. 4. cap. 10. that the Catholic Church has
ever believed that the Mingling of water with the wine is so necessary, as that
without a deadly sin it cannot be omitted. And Tilemannus Heshusius, in his
Book De Erroribus Pontificiorum, condemns the Catholics for teaching, that
Mingling the water cannot be omitted without a mortal sin; and by consequent
that the Catholics hold it is not a thing indifferent.

The Lo: Bps Answer.
IN alleging the sentence of Bellarmine, I went no further then Bellarmine his
own words, set down in the place objected (Book 1. page 4.) saying, Mixture
of water is not of the essence of the Sacrament. As for the words following, to
say of this, that it is Indifferent, was mine own words, and no part of the
Allegation, as the diverse Character of writing, which is different from the
other, does manifestly declare: which being also but spoken obiter, to meet
with some Refractory spirits among our selves, who think nothing Indifferent,
which was used of Christ, and not in any opposition to any Romish Doctrine,
deserves not your Suggesters exception against it. Otherwise I might easily
have confuted your Romish Tenet, by proving that nothing can be justly denied
to be of the Essence of a Sacrament, which is a material part thereof. And I
could have confirmed mine own Assumption, by proving it to be Indifferent, in
respect of Christ's Institution, as (God willing) the second Edition will show;
when I shall have occasion to thank your Suggester for drawing me into a
further Consideration of this point, occasioning me to find a Testimony in
Bellar: which will utterly condemn all your Ten Romish Transgressions,
discovered in the first Book. In the interim, your own Romish Interpreter of
the Romish Mass may stay your appetite a while. He plainly tells you, that
Barthol. Gaventius Comment. in Rubricas Missalis Breviarii Romani in Rubrica
[Sit admixta aqua.] Miscere aquam vino (inquit) est de praecepto Ecclesiae
tantu^. Conc. Trid. Sess. 22. And he cites also Suares. See B^rth* also part.
3. tit. 4 pa. 142. lib. Missalis.
The mixing of water with wine, in this Sacrament, is commanded only by the
Church; alleging his Authority, for so saying. And none of your Doctors will
deny, but that whatsoever Ceremony is commanded only by the Church, the same
is in its own nature Indifferent.

The fifth principal Exception against my Allegations, by the Lords Suggester.
THere has been of long time a difference between us, N. 56.
whether the Lay People ought to receive in both kinds. And your Lo. page 5.
to make the truth appear to be of your side herein, has these words: There
are but two outward material parts of this Sacrament, the one concerning the
Element of Bread, the other touching the Cup. The Acts concerning both, whether
in Administering, or Participation thereof, are charged by Christ's Canon upon
the Church Catholic unto the ends of the world. The tenor of his Precept, or
Command, for the first part is, [Do this:] and concerning the other likewise
saying, [This do ye as often] whereof your own Doctors, as well Jesuits, as
others, have rightly determined with a large consent. Though these words be
plain enough, yet lest we might mistake the meaning, Page 42. your L: writes
thus: That in the public and set Celebration of the Eucharist the Communion
in both kinds might be given to all sorts of Communicants that be capable of
Both. And Page 43. you affirm, the Precept of Christ to be for the use of both
kinds to all lawful Communicants. And for the proof hereof you refer us to
your Marginall notes set down Page 6. Now if the Doctors and Jesuits cited
Page 6. do, as you say, with a large consent determine those Positions, which
you have set down Page 5. Page 42. and 43. then have I no reason but to be
satisfied.

The Lord Bps. Answer.
IT is very true, that Book 1. page 43. the Title of the Sect. is this, viz.
Proving the Precept of Christ, for the use of both kinds, to all lawful
Communicants: which in the same Sect. I seek to make good, first by proving
those words of Christ [Do this,] whether they be spoken of the Bread, or of the
Cup, to be words of Precept: and for proof hereof I refer the Reader, in the
Margin, to Book 1. page 6. where your Jesuits and others expound the words
[Do this] to be words of Precept. What Is wrong now? Marry your Suggester
imagines that I would persuade you, that I meant hereby to prove, that all the
Testimonies (which I alleged p. 43.) acknowledged that Christ had given a
Precept, for all Communicants, as well Laics as Ecclesiastics, to participate
of both kinds, which is notoriously false, as the objected place it self does
make manifest in these express words; [Do this] spoken of the Bread, and [Do
this as often] spoken of the wine, are words of Command: but of what? this is
our next Inquisition.

So then our first Inquisition was only to determine, that by those
testimonies of Bellar: and of others, the words [Do this] concerning either
kind, are words of Command; but whether they commanded both kinds to all
persons, or no, it distinctly belonged to the second Inquisition, and was
performed in the same Sect. afterward, in confutation of Bellarm* his third
Evasion. And certainly except some strong intoxication had possessed your
Suggesters brain, he could never have quarrelled so vainly: and that more
especially, because supposing that I had promised to have proved the words [Do
this] to be confessed by the Romish Doctors, to teach a Command for the use of
both kinds, as well to Laics as Priest; yet this also was justly and fully
performed in the very place here objected (Book 1. page 6.) where your Card.
Bell: and Jesuit Barradius teach a command, in behalf of Laics, in the words
[Do this] for the Bread. And your Card. Allen, with the Ies. Valentia
maintaining the like Command in the other words [Do this] touching the Cup, for
Laics also. yet let us try what Instances he gives for color of his former
exception.

The Lords Suggester.
YOur first quotation is out of Barradius, N. 57.
whom you allege to say [Facite] viz. quod feci -- Christus accepit panem,
gratias egit, benedixit etc. idipsumque praecepit Discipulis suis, eorumque
successoribus Sacerdotibus. Whence I conceive that Barradius did not, by the
word, Sacerdotibus, mean the lay people, not that the lay people were
Successors to the Apostles.

The Lo: Bps Answer.
SUrely, friend Suggester, this can be no argument of any great learning in
you, that you will have it known, that you know the word, Sacerdotes, to
signify Priests and not the Lay People, which every Accedentiarie boy in
schools knows as well as you. But your mind is to prove, that Barradius his
Testimony was falsely cited, namely for proof, that Laics as well as
Ecclesiastics are commanded to Communicate in both kinds, by virtue of that
Command of Christ, in saying of both [Doe this:] which I have showed to be your
vast Untruth, as both the reference proves (page 43.) which is only to prove
that the words [Doe this] are Commandatorie; as also the place, whereunto the
Reference is made, (page 6.) confirms, where Barradius, speaking of Christ's
words, concerning the Bread, said, [Doe this] is spoken Commandatorily. your
next Instance will be as impertinent.

The Lords Suggester.
YOur next quotation is out of Bellarmine lib. 4. de Euch. cap. 25.. Resp.
mirab. whom you make to say, N. 58.
Illud [Hoc facite] posuit post datum Sacramentum, ut intelligeremus jussisse
Dominum ut sub etc. But the true words of Bellarmine are, Lucas illud [Hoc
facite] posuit post datum Sacramentum sub specie panis, post datum autem
calicem illud non repetivit, ut intelligeremus, jussisse Dominum sub specie
panis omnibus distribueretur Sacramentu^, sub specie autem vini non item. Where
I note, that in the first part of this sentence all those words (sub specie
panis, post datum autem calicem illud non repetivit) in which words the whole
substance of Bellarmines sentence consists, and which is directly opposite to
what Bellarmine is alleged to say, are omitted. And in the second part of this
sentence, which Bellarmine has purposely set down, to confirm and make
plain his former opinion, the essential part thereof is also omitted, for he
is alleged only to say, Ut intelligeremus jussisse Dominum ut sub etc, Whereas
Bellarmines words are: Ut intelligeremus jussisse Dominum, ut sub specie panis
omnibus distribueretur, sub specie autem vini non item.

The Lo. Bps Answer.
IF the Devil himself should winnow me, by his examination in this point, he
could not find any fault either of Commission, or Omission, in my citing the
words of Bellarmine. And this would Bellarmine his Ghost tell this your
Suggester, if it should appear unto him, saying: Sir, My Adversary (the
Bishop) has not mistaken my meaning, but you his, who intending nothing else
(page 4.) than to prove that the words of Christ, in saying [Doe this as often
etc.] are also words of Command, and I affirmed as much. As for the other part,
concerning the Cup, and the words which you say he omitted (Sub specie autem
vini non jussisse, that is, Christ did not likewise command concerning the
Cup;) you could not infer that he omitted the effectual part of his proof:
for his proof was only to show that [Doe this] were words of Command whether
we understand [Doe this] spoken of the Bread, or [Doe this as often as etc.]
spoken of the Cup, both which are words of Command (as every man of common
sense will confess;) although Non item (as I said) not to Command alike,
because [Doe this,] spoken of the Bread, I said were simply words of Command.
But [Doe this as often etc.] spoken of the Cup, although they were words of
command, yet not simply so, but conditionally only, as thus, [Doe this, as
often as you do it, in remembrance of me.] And (friend Suggester) you must
further know that he was so far from omitting my Objection against
Protestants, touching Christ's conditional speech [Doe this, as often as you
shall do it, in remembrance of me] that (which you conningly forbear to
acknowledge) he did fully confute (in the same Sect. page 45.) that which you
now object against him.

So would Bellarmine have told your Suggester, whom I must further challenge
for a double fault. First, for his charging me falsely, with a fraudulent
omission of words, when there was no cause at all to cite them. Secondly, for
that he himself omitted my Confutation of Bellarmine, when it served directly
for my justification.

The Lord Baron his own Epilogue, pleading Charity.
THese Particulars I have set down both to satisfy your Lordships desire, N.
59.
that I should set down somewhat in writing, that a Trial might be made
whether I had reason not to rest satisfied in those Allegations; wherein I must
acknowledge, that your Lordship shall do a work of Charity to give me
satisfaction.

The Lo: Bps Answer, justifiing himself in all his other Proofs, even by the
Exceptions now taken against him.
IT were to be wished, your Lordship had sought satisfaction in Charity; but
they, that can discern of Qualities, will say that there is a great Gulf
between Charity and Malignity. The one seeks the reformation of him, whom he
impeacheth, the other works, as much as may be, his ignominy and
blemishment; which was your Aim (my Lord) in all your Exceptions, which
notwithstanding may in some sort plead for me. For were it, they were Five, or
if you will five times five, Errors committed in the number of two thousand
other Testimonies, sincerely alleged, shall not the Exceptions against so few
be an approbation of all the rest? and if so; what then must become of your
Romish Church, in her Mass, but that (as the seventh Book of that Treatise
proves) it is to be counted a vile Brothelhouse of Superstition and Idolatry?

My Lord, I should proceed to the second Charge, but I give you to wit, that I
am now arrested in the way, by a Romish Priest: I shall make a present dispatch
with him; only be you pleased to afford me your presence, for the time, and
judge what discharge I can make. Fear not (my Lord) I shall not desire any to
be Surety for me.

A LATE SLANDErous Crimination, made BY A ROMISH PRIEST against the Lo: Bp. by
objecting M. Parsons his Sober Reckoning against him.
THe words of the Romish Priest, N. 60.
in his letter to his friend, are as follows: Let that Knight take heed, how
he trusts him, who was never brought to a Sober Reckoning, but was fond,
false, or impertinent. So he, alluding to the Book of Mr. Parsons, called, The
Sober Reckoning.

The Lord Bishops Answer to the Romish Priest, showing the Faithlesnesse of
his Crimination.
THe Objector, doubtless, had reason to conceal his name, even for his own
faithlesnesse sake: which is decernible enough, in his fradulent concealing of
my answer to M. Parsons. Who writ a Book called A SOBER RECKONING, full
fraught with many vile and ougly Aspersions, and imputations of falsities
aganst me; and I returned him an Answer, in a Book entitled an ENCOUNTER,
satisfying, from point to point, every Exception, and leaving M. Parsons on the
score for so many, and as many more Falsifications, as he in that his Reckoning
did charge me with. Both the Books have been now above twenty years extant;
yet has there not appeared any one Priest, out of the multitude of their
Romish Seminaries, that upon examination of both our Reckonings, did, or could
except against any one farthing of my accounts; or would allow as much as one
word in writing, for the clearing of your S. Robert, in the least parcel of
his Reckoning. I do not think but your Lordship (who will be known to have
read all our Protestant Books) can testify this which I say.

So that this Tenebrio, by objecting against me a false and perfidious
Reckoning, were it never so Sober, (for the Devil can be a liar, although he
cannot be unsober) and by concealing my just Justification, falls into that
double Condemnation, whereof it is written; Prove. 17. 15.
He that justifies the wicked, and he that condemns the righteous, they are
both abomination to the Lord. Now this Tenebrio is become both, He, and He.
And although this slander were written but by one, yet I know, it has been in
the mouths of many of your Romish Professors, who, when they can say nothing
else, to my latter Book of the Mass, they gull one another with the mention
of Imputations of false Allegations, set down in M. Parsons his Sober
Reckoning. Therefore have I apprehended this occasion, to deliver somewhat
concerning M. Parsons; the rather, because he is one, whom your Lordship has
singled out, as a Pattern of moderation: to the end that you may see the
miserableness of your Cause, which must be supported by such Frauds and
Falsehoods, as his have been.

The Lo: Bps Justification of himself, against M. Parsons; First, in general,
inserting, for his Readers delight, M. Parsons his Syllogism, and notable
Trick of not answering.
THe Egyptian dog, passing by the River Nilus, is said cautelously to lick
here and there of the water, not daring to lap any space of time any one
where, for fear some Crocodile catch hold of him, and devour him. I once
published a book called a Full Satisfaction, written for the discovery of the
Rebellious Positions and Practices of Romish Priests. M. Parsons fell upon it,
with all the strength of his wit, singling out here and there that which he
thought might seem to impeach my sincerity in some Allegations of Authors; but
the most material points, concerning the Rebellious Doctrine it self, he
commonly pretermitted in, I think, an hundred places: and was not this to lap
here and there, and run away? And good reason, for in these pretermitted
places were solid proofs of Romish rebelliousnesse, a Crocodile, which he
durst not meddle with in that his Dispute.

His nimblenesse and agility in frisking in this kind, was manifold. One I may
not omit, which may recempence, in some part, your merry tale with a mad trick,
which he played me, in answering to a confutation of his Syllogism. I made a
Prosyllogisme, which Mr Parsons in his ignorance called my Syllogism; and then
in his insolency took upon him to correct it, and to condemn me for want of
Logic; after, in his scurrility, to send me to Cambridge, to learn more:
howbeit out of his kindness, he willingly taught me himself by a form of
Syllogism, of his own framing, which he calls a true form of Syllogism,
and a good form of Reasoning, according to the true rules of Logic.
Notwithstanding, in this form of Syllogism, wherein he meant to express the
greatest skill he had, he bewrayed the grossest errors he could, if he had
studied to be absurd. For besides three other Faults, which were repugnant to
all Rules of Logic, the masterpiece of his ignorance, or monster rather, was
his Fourth Error, by changing of the Copula, in the premises, which was
Makes, as [Maketh competent Judges.] and turning it into, Are, in the
conclusion, to wit, [Are competent Iudges] The absurdity whereof I illustrated
by the like, as if one should argue thus.

Every one in framing his last will and Testament [maketh] his own Executor.

But William Cade frames his last will and Testament,

Therefore William Cade [is] his own Executor.

Or else thus.

Every good huswife [maketh] a good pudding.

But Alice Webb is a good huswife,

Therefore Alice Webb [is] a good pudding.

Your Lp: professes some schollership, say then, was it not reason that I
should call Mr Parsons to a further account, for this his misshapen Creature,
which he called a True form of Reasoning? he therefore coming to make (as he
called his book) a Sober Reckoning, reckons indeed after his fashion; for the
first, second, and third Errors, saying; Lastly, his third Quarrel is etc. as
if the third had been the last, whereas the fourth, of changing the Copula, was
the Last. But Mr Parsons skipping by the fourth, takes his heels at the first
sight of this other Crocodile, and answers nothing at al, knowing that the
Absurdity thereof, if it had been published, would have exposed him to the
hisses and scorn of all the Sophisters in his own College at Rome.

As for that his Reckoning, there is not any conscionable man, whom I will not
invite with all earnestness to read, and examine, but yet with both his eyes;
by comparing it, and my Encounter together. I shall, before I finish this first
part of my Discharge, give you a sufficient scantling of Mr Parsons his
disposition, in Calumniating me, which I must do by degrees.

The excellency of Mr Parsons his Pen, in respect of others of his order.
THe English Seminaries of Romish Priests abroad never harbored a more
excellent Scribe, then was Mr Parsons, whether we observe his Elegancie in
Style, dexterity in Invention, Subtilty in contrivance, Audacity in
undertaking, or Acerbity and scurrility, in his invectives against his
Adversaries; as all of his profession have witnessed, by their admiring, and in
a manner only not adoring, certainly in doting on him. The Unruliness of
whose Pen, and the virulency thereof, none has more felt than my self; as well
in his Book of Mitigation, as in his (Antiphrastically so called) Sober
Reckoning.

That Mr Parsons his Pen, by reason of falsity and bitterness, made him
unworthy to object Falsifications to any other; by the censure of Romish
Priests.
BY the law of Nations, N. 62.
no infamous person may be admitted for a compete^t Accuser of any other; much
less when the infamy he labors of, is the faculty of Lying. But who shall
now accuse this Accuser Mr Parsons of Lying, which is the fowlest of crimes, as
that wherewith God himself (such is the Transcendencie of his Truth) cannot
possibly dispense? But it seems he has met with the Pen of some as bitter
and unruly as his own; for the Romish Priests have blazoned him (Summarily)
saying: Mr Parsons was expelled out of his College in Oxford for Libelling. An
infamous Libeller he was; nor was there a lewder to be found, or more
scurrulous: of the Tribe of Dan, Coluber in via. For cogging and lying, as
notorious a wretch as was in his age: a cosening Mate, a Caitiffe, who might be
set on the pillory for forgery: A most barbarous fellow, using Machavilian
Atheism. So they, besides many other-like noble Emblems; yet is this the man,
whom this Lord presented (among four more) as a President of Moderation, void
of Bitterness. But upon this decyphering of him, I might justly require, that a
man of no Credit may not be admitted to discredit another. yet I shall entreat
your Lp. to esteem of all those their Invectives, as of fiery flashes of
intemperate brains, except I shall be able to confirm as much, by an Experto
Creed, in verifying as much from his own Unruly pen against my self.

TEN PARTICVLAR Instances of such false Imputations of Falsities, by Mr
Parsons, unto the Lord Bp: which any sensible man may discern at the first
view.
I Shall forbear all repetition of any other Falsifications, which may require
an intelligent and rational Reader to be our Judge; I confine my self wholly
to such Accusations of his, which are obvious to sense, and which any vulgar
man, who understands the language, at the first sight may cry out upon, and
condemn, both of galsome bitterness, and of wilful fraud and falsehood.

I. Out of Polydore Virgil, Polyd. Virgil. de Invent. rerum. lib 4. cap. 10.
(Before it was purged by the Romish Inquisitors)
I alleged an observation showing how the names of some Popes fell out to be
assumed per Antiphrasin; as being homo maleficus, to be called Bonifacius;
being Timidus, to have the name of Leo, and diverse other the like. The
bitterness of M. Parsons his Accusation against me, because of this
Allegatio^, was this; It is a malicious Minister, having neither simplicity nor
truth, but of a lost conscience by a manifest and malicious cavillation. Harken
now to his falsehood; for, when it was made known that I alleged that passage
out of the genuine book of Polydore, wherein originally it was set down by
himself, and not in the after-Editions, corrupted by their Romish Inquisitors:
wherein the former sentence of Polydore (as most of all his other ingenuous
Confessions) have been since effaced and cancelled, which made any whit for
advantage to Protestants causes; M. Parsons (a Sober reckoner forsooth) makes
no other Reckoning but this See the Encounter, cap. 14. p. 229.
: I had not (says he) that part of Polydore by me. Do you mark, my Lord,
he could not say, that he was ignorant of that perfect Edition of Polydore,
which might have justified me, but that He had it not by him.

So then the Case is this; The Accuser M. Parsons has by him a false knave
(that I may so call their corrupted Edition of Polydore) to witness against
me, and knows of another witness, an honest fellow (namely true Polydore in
his own first Edition) who would have justified me to the full, whom he
passes by and neglects, because he is not at hand. And what is, if this be
not a wilful blindness? which may deserve his own Bitterness to be retorted
upon himself, whereby he traduced me for A man of no truth, and of a lost
conscience.

II. Out of Carerius I delivered these words, Mitigation. cap. 6. pa. 234.
Vere Celsus, whereunto M. Parsons thus: Nay, but it should have been, vero;
and there is but one Edition of the book of Carerius. Harken now how upon this
it thundereth and lighteneth; Where is this man's innocence? (says M. Parsons)
Can this be ignorance? can it be done but of purpose? and consequently by a
guilty conscience: what may a man believe of all that he says, when we see him
entangled in such foolish treachery? This is his bitter vomit (as your Lp:
sees) but now observe his falsehood; for I alleged the Colen Edition of
Carerius, where it did appear to the view of many Romish Professors, that came
greedily to see it, and found the word, Encount. cap. 12. p. 183.
vere, and not vero. And at length M. Parsons was willing to credit me thus
much, after he had said, There was but one Edition of Carerius. Therefore was
his former Invective the venom of an unruly pen.

III. Emanuel Sa was produced, saying, Et forte potiori cum ratione. M. Parsons
his bitter Exception; It is to be Englished thus, perhaps with better reason:
but M. Morton left out the word [perhaps,] which was craftily done. Behold now
his own egregious fraud and craft; for although I had not the word, perhaps,
in my Translation, yet might he have seen that I used the word, See the
Encounter. c. 13. page 219.
peradventure, thus: Peradventure with better reason. What then but blindness
it self would have made that Accusation? but yet blindness of the worst
kind, which is wilful, not seeing that which he saw: for in the same book
of his, he one where repeated those my very words, And peradventure with better
Reason.

IV. I am accused to have said nothing to the Practices of Protestants.
Mitigat. c. 4. pa. 131.
This omission he calls, in his Bitterness, Dissimulation and hypocrisy.
Observe his falsehood, for he afterward was compelled to confess, that Sober
Reckoning. See my Encount. cap. 11. p. 173.
I did endeavor both before and after to discourse of their Practices. What
disease will your Lp: call that in him, who could not, or would not see that
which any man, that has a true sight and a temperate brain, could not but see?

V. I chanced to cite the Text of the Prophet Esaias 29. 9. You are blind, and
make others blind. M. Parsons bitterness: Mitigat. c. 2. page 88.
M. Morton has cited a Text, noting the Chapter and verse, wherein his fraud
might be discovered; wherein I note a rare singularity in this man, above all
others, by false alleging, corrupting, and mangling a Text of Scripture: let
any man read the place of Esaias it self, and he shall find no such matter,
either in words or sense. As though I had devised a Text for a purpose. Mark
his falsehood, for they are the express words of our English Translation; yea
and he that then raised this lewd clamor against me, when he comes to
reckon for this, answers; See my Preamble. p. 12 and the Encount. cap. 12. p.
181.
I saw not (says he) nor looked not on the English Translation. Do you hear?
he says not, that he could not have seen, or looked on the English
Translation: but he looked not, (that is) he would not, and notwithstanding
he would accuse me. A more perfect Character of a malicious Calumniator there
cannot be.

VI. Lambertus Schaffnaburgensis was brought in, saying, All the Bishops of
Italy; etc. M. Parsons exercises his Bitterness: Here the word, All, is
fraudulently urged, so that he deals not sincerely scarcely in any thing So
he, for only citing the word [All] albeit (see his falsehood) the word, Omnes,
All, are the express words of the Author, Encount. c. 14. page 208.
as manifestly, as in that saying of Christ, Come unto me All ye that are
beavy laden.

VII. The Testimony of Salmeron the Jesuit is used, to prove the Supremacy
of Kings. M. Parsons grows to be bitter, as follows. This is a trick of M.
Mortons art, to add, In Spiritual affairs, which is notably false. 1
Encount. B. 2. page 15. and 16.
But hearken to the Evidence, for my words, which are yet extant in that Book,
were these, In civil causes. The words, Spiritual, and Civil, one would
think might have as easily been discerned by any man of Sobriety, as the
Sun from the Moon.

VII. Tolossanus is cited; as a witness only; M. Parsons comes upon me with
a tart Invective: Can any thing be more fraudulently alleged? yet see his
falsehood; he could not say that I had done my witness Tolossanus wrong,
Preamb. p. 26. and Encount. page 191.
in alleging his Testimony, but not taking so much leisure as to look at him
in the Margin; he falls foul upon me, as if I had been the Author my
self. Some disease sure it was in his eyes, that he could not discern the
producer of a witness from a witness himself, especially in a Case of an
Accusation.

VIII. To make me like himself, Preamb. p. 72. and Encount. cap. 12. p. 167.
in fostering Traitorous Positions, he says; M. Morton justifies the saying
of Goodman. Bitterly, as you see, and as blindly outright; for my words were
thus: If I should justify Goodman, my heart would condemn my self. Was not
this sensible enough, my Lord, to any man of common sense?

IX. In the question about (...), Preamb. p. 75.
M. Parsons venting his acerbity, says; M. Morton has a shift to deceive his
Reader. Bitterly and Brain-sickly too, by your leave, for afterward he was
compelled to confess, Encount. c. 12. p. 169.
that the letters set down, for his direction, in the Margin, were so dim,
that he mistook them.

The Tenth Instance is touching the Oration of Q. Marie, Preamb. p. 80.
which I expressed out of Hollinshead, but what of this? The Minister lies
openly, citing him contrary to his meaning. Thus exasperate he is; Encount. c.
12. p. 117.
but why contrary to Hollinsheads meaning? Because (forsooth) Fox reports
that Oration otherwise. What is, if this be not open lying indeed? Like to a
Juglers trick of Legerdemaine, in deluding his beholders, when he conveyeth a
Ring into another man's pocket, and then calls the man Cozener when he has
done. Each one of these Falsehoods, wherein M. Parsons has been deprehended,
might impeach his Credit much; but all together, what do they, but proclaim
to the world, that he was either wittingly, or at least witlesly false in his
Accusations against me?

M. Parsons his Grief, before his death, published by a Romish Priest.
MR. Warmington a Romish Priest, N. 64.
in his book called A moderate defense of the oath of Allegiance, page 65.
has these words; It was reported from a Gentleman present in the City, in his
life time, and at his death, upon the acknowledgement, that he was the Author
of the Catholic Letter (whether with sorrow and grief for some points
unadvisedly and erroneously written, and brought in question in his old age; or
somewhat else, in one of the Books of Dr. Morton, touching the lawfulness of
the Oath of Supremacy in some Cases) soon after fell sick, and died within
eight days. So your Priest. Some others, who will be known to have known
somewhat, have said, it was because he had justified the base and bainfull
trick of mental Reservation out of eight speeches of Christ, in the eight
Chapter of S. John's Gospel. Which being known to some of the learned at Rome,
Encount. B. 2. cap. 10.
they held that his Collection was blasphemous; even as I also did, by an
Argument grounded upon his own Confession, wherein he held mental Reservation
unlawful in points of Doctrine and faith. Which being granted, it must follow
that it could be no less than Blasphemy to assume that the same mental
Reservation should be found in such speeches of Christ, in his holy Gospel,
which are the fundamental grounds of our Christian faith.

I have not mentioned all these particulars against M. Parsons, in the spirit
of Insultation, upon an Adversary deceased, (God forbid!) Nay, so far was I
from desiring his death, that (as one yet living can well witness, who brought
me the first knowledge of it) I wished, that God had le^gthned his days, that
he might have seen his own errors, before his death; I mean his reckoning of
fifty falls Allegatio^s, just as unjustly, as did the unjust Steward in the
Gospel, when he would have his masters Debtors write down fifty, but yet in a
far different manner. For that Steward reckoned Fifty, by subtraction, to
deceive his Master: but our Reckoner, by Addition and Multiplication, reckons
Fifty, to deceive his Reader. Notwithstanding, such was my Christian respect
unto him, that I wished he had grieved for them, as well as he is said to have
done for his Blasphemous abuse of Scripture. I hope with that Sorrow, which
causes repentance to salvation, never to be repented of, as the Apostle
speaks. It will be time, to draw to an end of this first part of my
Discharge, after I have acquainted your Lp: with that which follows in the
next place.

That the Romish Church has provided, that her Clergy can scarce possibly be
legally accused, be they never so Criminal.
POpe Silvester decreed that no Laick should accuse a Clergy man. N 65.
There might be some reason for this, in some cases: but he furthermore
constituted, and ordained, that a Bp: should not be held convicted under
Seaventy two Witnesses; nor a Priest, under 44; nor a Deacon, under 27* By
which means it was provided, that, were Bps, Priests, or Deacons, never so
wicked or dishonest, yet Laics (lest they should seem to slander them with a
matter of truth) durst give no other Censure or report of them, than of Pious
and honest men. What vicious Clerk would fear to dwell there, where all the
Crows are white, be they never so black; and where flat nosed people, are the
most comely? But yet are not these wise men in their Generation? They are. But
alas seely we; one Laicke, if a Lord, shall be of more credit, in the opinion
of Romish Professors, against a Bp, than seaventy two others of our Religion,
that should stand for his Justification. But the best is, the Bp: shall never
need any Proctor or Advocate for him, so long as God in his Goodness shall give
him power and liberty to defend his own Innocence. And now, leaving those
faithless Accusers, I shall more precisely attend your Lordship in the next
part of this Discharge, in answering your Exceptions against my Style, by
applying my speech unto your self.

THE SECOND PART of this Discharge, against the Exceptions taken to the Lord
Bishops Acerbity of Style, by the Lay Lord himself.
The Lord Baron himself.
I Am not satisfied in the Bitterness of your Style. N. 66.


The Lord Bps Answer.
IT may seem somewhat strange, that your Lordship, having as it were surfeited
of the bitterness of the Style, should complain, notwithstanding, that you
are not satisfied. But you require that I should discharge my self of this
your Taxation of Bitterness. Before I answer, I must ask, whether you except
against any one Bitter word, as unjustly applied to your Romish Doctors? Surely
I find not one, and so it must follow, that you quarrel a just Bitterness. Or
is it because the words are Unseemly? Then I take my answer from Philip King
of Macedon, who when Lasthenes and Olympius, with their Accomplices, complained
unto him, that they had been called Traitors, by some of his Subjects; made
them this answer: My Macedonians (quoth he) are but Rustiques, who can call a
Spade by no other name than a Spade. As well may I say, the Bitterness of my
Style, was Plainness, not Calumniousnesse; but what is that, you are about to
object?

The Lord Barons first Instance.
LEt any man peruse Card. N. 67.
Perron his volumes, whereof sundry parts are lately translated out of the
French into English, Card. Allen, Card. Bellarmine, Reynolds, Parsons, Campian,
Fitzherbert, Brerely, and others; and I am confident he shall find not any of
them to say, that the Protestant Church plays the Bawd, or that the
Protestant Communion is the Strumpet, or that they charge the Protestants with
Sacrilegious and Idolatrous Abominations, as is in the first page of your
Lordships Book, and in the Epistle Dedicatorie.

The Lord Bps Answer.
THis Observation is in deed of very great importance, whereby you may seem to
deserve praise and thanks of the Protestants, for this ingenuous
acknowledgement, (to wit) that although Protestants charge the Romish Church
with Sacrilegious and Idolatrous Abominations, (upon reasons, which your
Lordship has read in the eighth book of the Treatise of the Mass, in two
full Sections) yet Card. Bellarmine, Reynolds, Parsons, Campian, and Others,
never charge the Protestants with any Sacrilegious and Idolatrous profanation
at all. Which their Silence (as once I said) as it is an argument of their own
Guiltiness, so may it be a proof of our Integrity: otherwise we our selves
should not deny, but that if they could justly impute any such Idolatrous
impiety unto us, they might as justly call our Church, in that respect,
Strumpet and Whore (every Idolatry being a spiritual Adultery) as well as did
the holy Ezech. chapter 16. and chap. 23. Ose Chap. 3.
Prophets use the same Bitter terms against Judah and Israel in the same
respect; yet with mouths sanctified by the holy Spirit of God. And I cannot
make my self more perfect than were the Prophets of God.

The L. Barons second Instance.
OR that the Protestant Writers use odious Uncharitableness, N. 68.
intolerable Arrogance, vile Perjury, extreme Madness and folly, and plain
Blasphemy, Page 67.

The Lord Bps Answer.
IN the place, now quoted, I promised a Discovery of Crimes, which I laid to
the charge of Romish Writers, and in the Section it self I performed as much.
For, their preferring a Custom in your Church, which (as they confess)
Works less grace to the souls of Christian men, before a Custom of Christ
and his Apostles, confessed to operate more grace; I termed an Odious
Uncharitableness. Their open and professed extolling of the Wisdom of the
Romish Church, above the Wisdom of the Apostles, and the Practice of the most
Primitive Church universal, as well Greek as Roman, I called an Intolerable
Arrogance. Their swearing to admit all Apostolical Traditions, and yet to
reject some, I named vile Perjury (whereof there is a full Section in the
eighth Book.) Their advancing, in point of Antiquity, their Custom of Three,
or at most Four hundred years old, above the contrary Custom, before that,
for above a Thousand years, even to the days of Christ and his Apostles, I
judged to be plain Madness. And lastly, your Jesuits allowing a power to
your Pope, to dispense with the divine Law of God, I held to be Blasphemy it
self.

All these Points were truly discovered, and now my Style is challenged of
Bitterness by you. Who perceiving the Proofs, whereby I made evident such
Doctrines to be Sacrilegious, Idolatrous, etc. are you more offended with me,
for calling them so, than with them for making them such? Say now, upon your
second thoughts, is this a conscionable Taxation, my Lord? I would gladly have
learned what terms your Lordship would have supplied in this case? would it
have pleased you that I had called Uncharitableness amiable; the Arrogance
tolerable; the Perjury noble? So indeed do they, who masque the visages of
Sins with the vizard of Virtues; calling Drunkenness, Good-fellowship; Pride,
comeliness; Rage, valor; Bribery, gratification; a society of promiscuous
lust, the family of love. Not I, my Lord, I leave that faculty to them, who can
delight in transformed Devils.

The L. Barons third Instance.
OR that the Protestant Historians are unclean Beasts, N. 69.
Flat Liars, and the Believers of them stark fools. 157. page

The Lord Bps Answer.
THe matter was this, (but you will be loath to hear it.) Your Romish
Historians reckon up some Thirteen Miraculous Apparitions of true flesh, and
true blood seen (as they say) in the Eucharist; and of the Separation of one
from the other, the Blood being shed, and dropping out, and the like. To these
I oppose your Romish Theologues and Divines, confuting such kind of Relations
by good and solid Reasons; saying that in such Apparitions there could not be
true flesh: and others denying absolutely that Christ's blood can be properly
said to be shed out of his Body, after his Resurrection, as you have heard in
the first part of this Discharge. Hereupon I came to conclude saying; If
therefore credit may be given to your judicious Divines, then are, and were the
Authors of those Apparitions flat Liars, their Reporters incredible Writers,
and their Believers stark Fools. What have I here said, which your Divines
(who have avouched as much as I alleged) will not justify in condemnation of
such Delusions? Only I called the Historians, because of their indiscretion,
(metaphorically) Unclean Beasts, accordingly as ancient Fathers have done the
Believers of Fables. And did I not contrarily call your Divines, by way of
commendation, Clean Beasts that can chew the Cud? that is, discern Truth from
falsehood, as likewise the holy Fathers have taught; in which respect (as you
see) I named them also Judicious Divines. I demand therefore why your Lordship
should be more displeased with me, for calling those Historians Liars, and
their Believers Fools, than with your own learned Divines, who proved them to
be such? True zeal and jealousy for God would hate all feinings of Miracles,
as the worst kind of Lying, being indeed the counterfeiting of the Seals of
God Almighty; and whereby the Transgressor becomes guilty of highest Treason.

The Lord Barons Reply.
LEt me entreat you not to discourage me so much by this your Intimation, N.
70.
to make it fair play to call women Bawds, or Whores, or men Unclean Beasts,
stark Fools, arrant Liars, if we think we can by Argument prove them so. I
may doubt lest I my self differing from your Lordship in many of those
opinions (for which I hear others thus pitifully taxed) should incur the same
Censure, which if I thought would be, I would rather choose to sleep in a
whole skin, and leave ere I began.

The Lord Bps Answer.
NEver shall I seek to discourage your Lordship from any good endeavor,
howsoever you may dissent from that which I think. But I must confess that I
wish you had known what you did, when you writ thus: for the proof which I
brought, to make them appear to be such, was not mine, but the Confessions of
your own Romish Authors. And had it not been better for you Suavitar curasse
cutem, in quiet silence, than to have become so unjustly taxatious, and put
your self upon so desperate an enterprise?

The Lds Instance in his Letter.
WIth diverse such like Phrases, Page 27. 41, 42. 101. 106. 123. 126. 131. 137.
151. 177. 197. 223. 213. 200. and many others in the first Book, besides what
is in the second Book, which (as yet) I have not thoroughly perused.

The Lord Bps Answer.
PEruse the rest, I pray you, and when you have done, I shall desire you to set
them down expressly, and so I am sure the intelligent Reader will find, that
you had as much Reason to conceal these, as you had little Cause to reveal
the former.

I add, that your Lordship after your much raking, sifting, and winnowing of
the parts of the eight Books of that Treatise of the Mass, have found but
only five sour Grapes, which has set your teeth on edge, and are angry
therewith, albeit you met with five hundred other Passages, wherein I, having
the like occasion to use vexatious, and stinging terms, yet forbear, and
blunted the style of my Pen. What shall I say in this case, my Lord? Only I
say as the Apostle said unto such Partialists, You will forgive me this wrong.

The Lord Barons Objection, in his Reply.
My Objections, N. 71.
against Bitterness of Speech were not grounded upon, whether those Terms
might be in our own judegments sufficiently proved, but whether in a Treatise
publicly printed concerning one of the highest articles of faith, set forth
by an eminent person for learning and dignity, such bitter terms, and so many
of them, were either Charitable or seemly.

The Lord Bps Answer.
HEre are two as odd and uncouth Instructions, as I have heard of. The first
is, that no Writer may use Bitter speeches against a Crime, which he, in his
own judgment, deemeth may deserve such Bitterness: so that it must be a
Crime, now, to name a crime: to see one reeling in the street, and after
wallowing in his own vomit, and to call him Drunkard; to hear one swearing
outragiously, and to say he is Profane; to know one lead a lewd and filthy
life, and to condemn him of Iasciviousnesse.

The second Advice is, that no Person of Eminence ought to censure Any
publicly with Terms of Bitterness, in case of an High Article of Faith. This
would make well for Arians, Pelagians, yea and Atheists themselves, if in
denying of one, or other, or all Articles of Faith, they should not be
therefore censured, according to their deserved appellations; both charitably,
to reduce them from erring, yea and seemly too, because there is no better
Seemlinesse, than Congruity, as of manners, so of words. And this is, when
Epithets are suitable to the things and persons of whom we speak. S. Paul was a
person of great Eminence, and so was Peter also, yet Paul reprehended Peter to
his Face, for that, which if it had not been reformed, might occasionally have
brought in schism into the Church, and error in the Faith of Some.

The Lord Barons Objection.
HE, N. 72.
whose example ought to be preferred before all Examples, and whose precept
binds above all other, says, Estotemites, quia ego sum mitis. The woman that
was brought before him, for being found in Adultery, though there wanted no
proofs thereof, yet did not he call her Strumpet, because it was a just
imputation, but mercifully and mildly dismissed her, salved her credit, only
warning her to sin no more. S. Paul witnesses of him, that when he was
reviled, he did not revile again: S. Luke writing of S. Mary Magdalen, did
not, under color of a just imputation, call her Strumpet, but only says, Erat
mulier in civitate peccatrix.

The Lord Bps Answer.
CHrist was not only Mitis, but even ipsa Mansuetudo; and to his faithful
penitents, Propitiation it self; notwithstanding he called the Pharisees
Blind, the malicious Jews he termed Children of the Devil; Peter (for
tempting him) Satan; and Judas (because of his obduration of heart in sinning)
a Devil. The woman, deprehended in adultery, he indeed called not Strumpet,
for she carried her name printed in her forehead, (being (...)) She was taken
in adultery. If then he had named her so, had it been an Epithet either
Uncharitable, or Vnseeemely, as you have pretended? So should you have
blasphemously condemned the Law of God, Deuteronomy. 22. 12. the Prophets, Ezech. 16.
Ose 3. The Apostles, Romans 7. 3. and S. James 4 4. yea and Christ himself,
Matthew. 5. 28. Luke 16. 18. Mary Magdalen is not called in the Gospel
Adultresse, it is true, but yet worse, A woman in the City a sinner, by way of
Aggravation (namely) such a Sinner, in that trade of sinning, that there was
not another in the whole City comparable unto her, as your own Commentaries
will tell you. Yea and S. Paul, who himself would not answer the Reviler with
Reviling, yet held it a part of Christian justice to denominate wicked men by
their own vices, naming the Galathians, Foolish, and the Sorcerer Elymas, the
Child of the Devil.

The Lord Barons Objection.
ANd though I allege these examples to one that can much better teach me my
duty, N. 73.
yet I hope you will hold me excused, as being enforced thereunto, for the
defense of my being not satisfied in the Bitterness of the Style.

The Lord Bps Answer.
EXcept you had held me unworthy to be your Teacher, you would have been
satisfied with the distinction of Bitterness, which I gave you, without which
none shall ever be able to reconcile the speeches of the Prophets, Apostles, or
of Christ himself. There is a Bitterness (said I) Medicinal, and there is a
Bitterness pernicious and Vindicative. The Medicinal Bitterness has its'
Ingredients, Truth, and Charity, used either for correcting Manners and errors
in the parties reproved; or as Antidotes to others, to preserve them from
Moral or Dogmaticall contagions. The Pernicious Bitterness I call that, which
is envenomed either with Untruth or Maliciousness, and is exercised only in
Virulencie, for revenge, against them whom we seek to vex, which is
everywhere condemned in Scripture.

Take unto you a Similitude. The Jews, who offered Vinegar and Gall unto
Christ, if they had done it (as some guess) to stupifie his senses, thereby to
free him from extremity of pain, that Vinegar and Gall might have relished
somewhat of Charity: but if it had been done to add unto him a greater
vexation, it must needs be judged a Jewish cruelty. Nevertheless, if you add
a second member of lawful Bitterness, which may be called Judicial, you
shall not do amiss; in which kind may be reckoned Christ's Invectives, to
wit, O you Scribes and Pharisees, Hypocrites, and such like, by way of
condemnation. My Lord, if you would be so docible, as to take out this
distinction, it would both satisfy you, concerning my Bitterness, and
preserve you from Blasphemy against the Speeches of Christ, and his holy
Apostles.

The Lord Baron his fifth Instance, and most urgent, bitter, and gallfull
Exception against Bitterness.
TO my Exception against your saying in your Book, N. 74.
entitled Romish Positions, viz. That it is as hard a thing to find a loyal
Catholic, as a White Ethiopian, wherein you except against the word,
Catholic.

The Lord Bps Answer.
THe word Catholic, simply taken, I never excepted against, (for I have not
forgot my Creed) but against your Romish appropriation of it to your selves; to
whom it belongs far less (as I have proved in the Romish Grand Imposture)
than unto Protestants. I return to your Exception.

The Lord Barons Objection.
YOur own words being, N. 74.
We may as well expect Grapes from Thorns, or a White Ethiopian, as loyal
Subjection from this Religion.

The Lord Bps Answer.
WHereunto I answered you by Letters, that I was ever far from terming all
Papists disloyal, and I desired you to consider the place again, and I doubt
not but it alone will persuade your self, that I did not note all your Romish
Professors of Disloyalty, but spoke restrainedly; applying my speech to them,
who were inspired with the spirits of those Priests and Jesuits, whose
Positions were in that Book discovered to be fully Rebellious. Thus much I
then answered in presumption of mine own sincerity, having not seen that
place, in that my Book, not almost in twenty years space: and yet I think I
shall not err in that my divination, being now called to a further Reckoning.

The Lord Barons Objection.
TO which, N. 75.
I having perused the place again, I reply first that no man (who has read
your Books, or known your readiness in Writing or arguing) will easily
believe that your words (generally and without Exception) denying Loyal
subjection to be found in that Religion, do notwithstanding restrain your
general Position to such only as are discovered to be fully Rebellious: as
if you only meant, that they only of the Romish Religion are disloyal, who
are discovered to be fully Rebellious: or that they are disloyal who are
disloyal. No, my Lord, this savours not of your wit and learning, neither is
this your manner of Arguing.

The Lord Bps Answer.
THanks, my Lord, that you think I would not argue so absurdly, or otherwise
than I have done in other Cases, Rationably, I hope; Conscionably, I am sure.
Observe then, that the Tenth Reason there given is expressly against Romish
Priests only, who were possessed with those former seditious Positions therein
discovered. This was the Subject of the question in the same Book (Page 47.)
confirmed by the Examples of your Doctors and Jesuits (Page 50.) together with
the Practices of your Popes, in the place objected (page 51.) The Conclusion
was, that No Loyal Subjection could be expected (said I) from This Religion,
(to wit) This of that rebellious doctrine of your Romish Priests and Popes
there specified; and of no other. Which you might as well have seen, at the
first Reading, by distinguishing the Persons to whom, from the persons against
whom I writ. The former were the Romish Laics only, whether they were of the
Nobility, or Commonaltie, to whom the Epistle Dedicatorie was directed, whom I
called seduced, because of their Popish Religion; and sought to persuade them
to beware lest they also might be entangled in this other point of Romish
Rebelliousnesse; telling them that I had presented unto them that Discovery of
such Doctrines of their Priests, To the end that you (said I) through the
detestation of their (viz. Priests) Practices, might be brought to a suspicion
of their Enchantments, not doubting but when you have perceived the
damnablenesse of their Doctrine, you will easily avoid the danger of their
Charm. And in the end of the same Epistle (page 52.) immediately after the
words now objected against me, I added, saying: Thus have I proved, dear
Brethren, the dogmaticall doctrine of these men, (viz. Romish Priests) not
confuting them, for this I understood was not your desire, but revealing them.
Wherein Any, at the first sight, may observe that I produced the Romish Laics,
as men altogether ignorant of such Rebellious Positions, and Practices; when I
said, Not doubting but when you have perceived the damnablenesse of their
Doctrine: but what Doctrine? what but that, which was there proved to be
Rebellious?

As yet therefore I held them guiltless, and plainly distinguished them, in
this respect, from Romish Priests and Doctors, who were proved to be the
Authors of both; and thereupon also, in the end of the same Epistle, saying to
the foresaid Laics; Be you exhorted (my Brethren) to take this (meaning that
Discovery) as an Antidote to preserve you against all such poisonable
Positions and Practices, (viz. of Romish Priests.) Your friends (my Lord) of
your own Profession, would give you small thanks, if they should see here
rehearsed the whole speech, which you use in a vouching the full interest that
you have in your Romish Priests. I choose rather the defensive part for my
self, than the offensive against you; and therefore I expect what you can
further object.

The Lord Barons Objection.
YOu saying, N. 76.
there could not be expected any Subjection from this Religion, could not be
restrained to the Treasonable point only, because one Traitorous act cannot be
a Religion in it self.

The Lord Bps Answer.
TRue, one Act cannot be a Religion it self, but yet one Position and
Doctrine may. The Position of the Manichees, forbidding the Communion of the
Cup in the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, upon an opinion that there is a
Devilish Spirit in Wine, was but one of many of their Heresies: and yet may it
be lawful for us to say of this one Position of theirs, This is the Religion
of the Manichees. And my discourse, you know, was as well of your Priests
Positions, as of their Practices.

The Lord Barons Objection.
NEither does this extend only to Priests, N. 77.
for that all that are of the Romish Religion are as fully of that Religion, as
the Priests.

The Lord Bps Answer.
AS fully as the Priests? God forbid! for so should they also hold the
Traitorous opinions of Bellarmine, Allen, Reynolds, Stapleton, Creswell, and
Parsons, besides many others detected in the same Book; against which
Allegations M. Parsons himself (a man known unto you for his Malignity and
Adversenesse) could take no exception. My Lord, be advised, peruse this your
Objection again, and then tell me whether I have not deserved well of you, by
my not rehearsing your speech to the full, by a Figure (that you may better
like of Figurative speeches) (...).

The Lord Barons Objection.
I Was only troubled to find my self condemned, N. 78.
not for that I have any disloyal thought in my heart, but only for being of
the Romish Religion.

The Lord Bps Answer.
I Answer as did once our Savior, Does no man condemn you? neither do I;
far be it from me, that I should impeach your Loyalty, which I shall hope
is that, which the Apostle S. Paul taught of a Subjection, not for fear only,
but for Conscience sake also: and then may it not be the Subjection, approved
by Pope Paulus, and maintained by your Cardinal Bellarmine, and other Romish
Priests, which is to be subject with a [Donec] that is, Until there may be
power to resist; (as you have read in that book of Romish Rebellious
Positions, wherewith you are so much offended.) which kind of Subjection King
David would have called Brutish, as that of the Horse and Mule; which are to
be held in with Bit and Bridle. Only I cannot but be sensible of the Injury
done unto me, by your violent enforcing upon me a purpose to have condemned
all Lay Romanists for being of that Religion there discovered and condemned,
which was direct Treason.

You ought to have consulted with the College of Sorbon, and those Parisian
Doctors would have taught you to distinguish even of Romish Religion:
discerning ROMISH, in respect of the Romish Court, from Romish, in respect of
the Romish Church in general. The first, they know, has often harbored
seditious documents, which they have always impugned, for the defense and
preservation of the Gallicane Regalities and Liberties. Besides, there are two
ways to free your Laics from suspicion of that Doctrine, which your Priests
hold, and profess among themselves. The one is their own Ignorance, in not
knowing it; the other their Incredulity, in not believing it. I could give
instance in that Answer, which I had from an honorable Personage, of known
and experienced loyalty to his King and State, saying, that notwithstanding his
much acquaintance with Jesuits, yet they never uttered any Doctrine to him
savouring of deposing of Kings, or disturbing of Kingdoms for Religion-sake.
This, said I, as it may be an argument of their subtilty in concealing their
pernicious Positions; so much more may it be an evidence of your Lordships
Integrity, which (as it were) commanded them silence. Secondly, the not
believing your Priests, in such Doctrines, is the next point of security, which
I will presume many of your Laics (albeit otherwise professedly of the Romish
Religion) do detest, even from the unnatural heinousness thereof, as a
natural Turk or Jew would abhor a Parricide.

The Lord Barons Objection.
NEither am I the only Catholic who has been offended with that Book of
Romish Positions, N. 79.
but all that have read it.

The Lord Bps Answer.
IF you or any other have taken offense, which was not given, it cannot be my
fault: I must not think my self so far privileged, as that in defending the
Truth, I should not incur the Offense of some others. Habent sua fata
Libelli: and you know who expostulated, saying, Am I your Enemy because I tell
you the Truth? We read of them, who were Hearers of the Apostles of Christ,
that some scorned, and some believed. I wish you had rather been of this Some.
But what is next?

The Lord Barons Objection.
THere is a Book entitled, N. 80.
The converted Jew, written by a Jesuit, who spares not to print his great
dislike thereof: and I doubt not but the same is printed in other Books also.

The Lord Bps Answer.
WHy, my Lord? could your Lordship conceive, that when I writ this Book,
entitled A Discovery of the Rebellious Positions and Practices of Romish
Priests and Jesuits, that I expected or intended to please any Jesuit? A
Jesuit disliketh it! and I dislike his disliking. This is yet but a Paritie.
Jesuits are offended with the Discovery of their disloyalty, and so were,
often, the Jews with Christ's discovery of their Hypocrisy. There is a Parity
in this alalso. How-ever, I stand sufficiently armed with that Harness, which
S. Augustine once lent me; Malim ut scandalum committatur, quam ut veritas
amittatur.

The Lord Barons Objection.
But by the speech I had with your Lordship at London, N. 81.
I find that you are not now of that mind; of which I am very glad, and do
acknowledge my self satisfied, and will endeavor to give the same satisfaction
to others.

The Lord Bps Answer.
But stay a while, my Lord (I pray you) and tell me what mind you thought me
to be of, when I writ so unto you? If you imagine that I was of any other,
than I had been, at the writing of that Book of Discovery, and of those
words therein, whereunto you have laid your whole Battery, to oppugn them, you
are much deceived; and that you may know I have good evidence for me, to say
thus much, and for your Lordship to be persuaded thereof, in my next Book
(written in the defense of that Book of Discovery) I gave this express
acknowledgement, viz. I have writ against our Romish Adversaries, but not
without note of difference and distinction; being verily persuaded that Diverse,
even the Zealous among them, partly by light of the ingrafted Law of reason,
and partly from some glimpse of the Gospel of Christ, do abhor such Doctrines
and Practices, which have been discovered in cases of Rebellion and
Equivocation.

How like you this, my Lord? Does this please you? Then may it satisfy you for
my then-meaning, when I said, No loyal subjection can be expected from this
Religion, (namely, of those Popes and Priests.) And accordingly may it remove
the Scandal conceived from thence by your Lordship and Others. As for your
subsequent Requests, which you make, they are no way pertinent to our
discourse; I choose rather to hear of your friendly inclination.

The Lord Barons Accommodation.
YOu are an English man, N. 82.
and for that I must esteem you; you are a man of great Reading, and for that
I must respect you: you are a Bishop of the English Church and Religion, which
next to that Religion I profess, I prefer above all other.

The Lord Bps Answer.
EAch of these Respects I account as so many Obligations upon me, and such as
deserve a Correspondence; 1. To embrace your Lordship, in the name of English.
2. To wish that I were so learned, as to give you a full satisfaction. 3. To
pray to God for his spiritual benediction upon you, as I am a Bishop. 4. To
tell you that the Bosom of the English Church lies open to receive you, upon
your Profession of the truth of Religion, so happily established therein; which
I wish may be to your eternal comfort.

The Lord Barons tacit menacing.
ANd therefore I shall be sorry that any Unruly Pen should put it self in
competence with yours, N. 83.
which could show it self most Bitter.

The Lord Bps Answer.
YOur Lordship should not have threatened, as thinking to affright me with the
mention of an unruly Pen* I have not so long borne the brunt and violence of
the most enraged of all your Penmen, as to fear in any just cause, any man's
Pen, that is but made of a Goose-quill. Nor shall I seek a Supersedeas against
him that threatens: use your discretion, my Lord, in inciting some man of
Indiscretion against me; for such he must be, that shall be unruly in his Pen:
the Proverb is, Dementi gladium porrigere.

The Lord Barons Admonition.
YOu know what becomes a great Person to do, N. 84.
and in your Epistle Dedicatory you commended that saying of Artaxerxes to his
Soldier, Non ut maledicas te alo, sed ut pngnes. Good my Lord do as you say.

The Lord Bps Answer.
WHat is then Maledicere, think you, my Lord? if you take it as opposite to
Benedicere, then may your Romish Church assume this as her proper Character,
she being above all others the Mother of Cursings and Maledictions. And if you
take it for downright Reviling and Railing, then may the Encounter, which I
writ against Mr Parsons his scurrilous, calumnious, and bitter Invectives
against me, witness my extreme patience and moderation; as in the former part
of this Discharge has already been made manifest.

The Lord Bps Conclusion.
THe Apostle, when he extolled his own privileges, in comparing them with
others, which he did for the honoring of his Apostolical Function, against
the Calumnies of his Adversaries, he, lest he might incur the suspicion of
Arrogance, preoccupated, saying, I speak foolishly, 1 Cor. 11. 17. etc. 12. v.
11.
you have compelled me. So he, instructing thereby every Minister of Christ, of
the lawfulness of a selfe-Commendation, whenever it shall be extorted from
him by the iniquity of an envious and detractive Adversary, upon a necessity of
justifying and dignifying his own Calling. In which respect, Selfe-praise,
although it may seem foolish in the outward sound and ears of carnal men,
yet does it relish of true prudence, in it is propersense, and in the
apprehension of every Conscionable Christian. Wherefore if any words have
fallen from my quill, which may seem to savor of a like affectation, I shall
desire it may receive the like Construction; even for that I can, in like
manner, excuse my self, saying, You have compelled me, who have charged me
so unjustly with Mis-allegations.

To conclude, let me ask you first what Creature that is, which coming among
the varieties of flowers, sucketh sweetness out of them; next how different it
is from another Creature, which feeds wholly upon venomous herbs and flowers.
I would I had not cause to give you this Protasis. Notwithstanding I pray to
God for each of you, that by the knowledge and sight of your own errors, you
may be brought to the acknowledgement of Gods Truth, to the Glory of his
saving Grace in Christ Jesus.

All Glory be to God.

FINIS.

