A brief and true report, of the Execution of certain Traitors at Tiborne,
the xxviii. and xxx. days of May. 1582. Gathered by A. M. who was there
present.

Honos alit Arts.

The names of them executed on Monday, the xxviii. of May. Thomas Foord. John
Shert. Robert Johnson.


The names of them executed on Wednesday, the xxx. of May. William Filbie.
Luke Kirbie. Lawrance Richardson. Thomas Cottom.


Imprinted at London for William Wright, and are to be sold at his shop,
adjoining unto S. Mildreds Church in the Poultrie, the middle shop in the row.
1582.

To the godly and woorshipfull, Master Richard Martin, Sheriff, and one of the
woorshipfull Aldermen of this City of London. A. M. wishes all earthly
happiness and after this life a place among the chosen in the celestial
Paradise.
WHen I had gathered together (woorshipfull Sir) this little pamphlet,
reporting the end of certain lewd and disloyal Traitors, who under the
habit of hurtlesse Sheep, sought in the church of God, to play the part of
ravening Woolues: and that I my self having spent some time in Room and other
places, among them, where through I grew into such acquaintance with their
traitorous intents and dispositions, as before some of their faces I stood as
witness against them, to their reproof. I thought good to present the same to
your woorship; for that your self has been an eye witness, how I was there
challenged, and how through the grace of God, and the truth of so good a cause
as I dealt in, I defended my self To avoid therefore the speeches of people, who
now a days will judge lightly, and condemn quickly, because I was there
called forth, somewhat in words touched, and yet I thank God nothing
disprooued: I esteemed it a point of wisdom, to lay their obstinate ends
open to the view of all, not sparing my self in the words that were used
against me, which will cause the godly and virtuous to account them as they
were, and me as I am. This breefely compacted together, I present to your
woorships perusing, as my defense against slanderous tongues, in that I have
reported nothing therein, but the mere truth. Thus desiring God to bless
your woorship with all yours: in all humility I remain.

Yours to command, A. Monday.

The Execution at Tiborne, on Monday being the twenty and eight of May. 1582.
ON Monday, being the twentye and eight of May, Thomas Forde, John Sherte, and
Robart Iohnsonne Priests, having been before indicted, araigned, and as well by
their own testimony, as also sufficient witnesses produced to their faces,
found guilty, and condemned for high treason: intended, practiced, and
appointed, against her Majesty's most royal person, as also for the utter
ruin, overthrow and subversion, of her peaceable and well governed Realm,
themselves being sent as instruments, to deal for and in the behalf of the
Pope, in this disloyal and traiterous cause. According as Justice had before
determined were drawn upon Hurdels from the Tower of London, to the place
appointed for Execution. (Hsuing been so long time spared by her Majesty's
most royal and princely regard of mercy: to try if either the fear of God,
would take place in them, consideration and respect of their own duties
move them, or the mere love, and accustomed clemency of her Majesty might
win them, to acknowledge her to be their lawful Sovereign, and them selves
her Subjects bound to serve her, notwithstanding, any pretense or authority
to the contrary,) and not for Matter of their Popish superstition. All this
notwithstanding, they remained given over to their own wickedness, and
swallowed up in the gulf of their undutiful affection, which causes Justice
to stop before Mercy, committing them to the rewa^de of their leude and
unnatural dealing. All the way as they were drawn, they were accompanied with
diverse zealous and godly men, who in mylde and loving speehes, made known unto
them, how justly God repayeth the reprobate, how fatherly again, he receives
the obedient, how he overthrows the ungodly in their own devises, and
protecteth his chosen in all storms and afflictions: in remembrance of all
these, to bethink themselves of their wickedness passed, and to show such hearty
and zealous repentance for the same, that all be it, they had so grievously
trespassed, yet in contrite and humble sorrowing they might be graciously
received into his heavenly favor, whom they had moved and styrred by their
vnreuerent regard, to smite and chasten with the rod of his fury. Among which
godly perswasio^s, Master Sheriff himself, both learnedly and earnestly
labored unto them, moving al good occasions he might devise, to change the
obstinacy be perceived in the^, into a Christian, like humility and
repentance, but these good endeavors took no wished effect, their own evil
disposition so blinded them, that there was no way for grace to enter.

When they were come beyond S. Giles in ye feeld, there approached unto the
Hurdell, one of their own sect, and a Priest, as himself has confessed, who
in this manner spoke unto the prisoners. O gentlemen* be joyful in the blood of
Jesus Christ, for this is the day of your triumpth and joy. Being asked why
he used such words, he said unto the prisoners again, I pronounce a pardon
unto you, yea, I pronounce a full remission and pardon unto your souls. Using
these and other traiterous speeches, hold was laid on him. When as M. Sheriff
demanded what he was? he answered, he was the voice of a crier in the
wilderness, and that he was sent to prepare the Lords way. And notwithstanding
such means of resis^taunce as himself used, he was delivered unto M. Thomas
Norris Pursuuaunte, who brought him unto Newgate, where he confessed unto him
that he was a Priest, and that he had so long dissembled, as he would now
leave off and do so no moore.

Being come to ye place of Execution, Thomas Forde, was first brought up into
ye Carte, when as he began in this manner. Whereas I am come hither to die, for
matters laid unto my charge of treason, which should be conspired against the
Queen, within these two years or somewhat more. I give you to understand,
that of any such matter I am innocent and free, for that I can prove my
coming into England to be five yeerss since. Where upon Master Sheriff spoke
unto him and said, Forde, have mind on God, ask him and her Majesty heartily
forgiveness, who^ thou have so highly offended, thou do but delude the
people, for it is manifestly known, how thou art guiltye of the matters laid
to thy charge, here is thine own aunswers to show, affirmed under thine own
hand, and other witnesses to reprove thee. Where upon I my self was called
forth, who justified the causes to his face, that at his araignement was laid
to his charge, and he evidently and plainly found guiltye thereof. Then were
his aunswers whereto he had subscribed read unto him, which is in the book
lately set forth by authority, where upon he took occasion to tell a long
sircumstaunce, of a certain question moved at Oxenforde, as concerning,
taking arms against her Majesty, which horrible treason he seemed to approve
thereby. Then Master Sheriff willed him to ask her Majesty forgiveness,
offering him to stand his freende in attayning her graces mercy, if he would
change his former traitorous mind to become a true and faithful Subject,
acknowledging her to be his lawful sovereign Lady, notwithstanding any thing
that any Pope could say or do to the contrary. Whereto be answered, I have
not offended her Majesty, but if I have I ask her forgiveness and all the
world, and in no other treason have I offended then my religion, which is ye
Catholic faith, wherein I will live and dye. And as for the Queens Majesty,
I do acknowledge her supremacy in all things temporal, but as conserning
Ecclesiastical causes I deny her, that only belongs to the Uicar of Christ,
the Pope. In brief, he granted to nothing, but showed himself an impious and
obstinate Traitor, and so he remained to the death, refusing to pray in the
English tongue, mumbling a few Latin prayers, desiring those that were Ex
domo Dei, to pray with him, and so he ended his life.

In the mean time that he hanged, which was till he was dead, so great is ye
mercy of our gracious Princess. John Sherte was brought from off the Hurdell
to the gallows, where seeing Forde hanging. He began with holding up his
hands, as the Papists are wont to do before their Images. O sweet Tom, O
happy Tom, O blessed Tom. Then being stayed, Forde was cut down, and carried to
the place where his body should be quartered. In which time Sherte was brought
up into the Carte, where looking toward the dead body of Forde, he fell down
on his knees, and held up his hands to it, (saying again.) O happy Tom, O
blessed Tom, thy sweet soul pray for me. O dear Tom, thy blessed soul pray
for me. For which words being rebuked, the Executioner lifted him up on
feet, when as he prepared him to his confession, (saying) I am brought hither
to this place, to dye a death, which is both shameful, and ignominious, for
which I thanks thee my Lord God, who framing me to thine own simylitude and
likeness, has blessed me to this good end. There being stayed, because he
seemed to prolong the time to small purpose, the Sheriff willed him to remember
himself, for what cause he was come thither: how he had offended the Queens
Majesty, and that he was now to ask her forgiveness, Beside he might receive
her princely mercy: whereto with an Hipocriticall outward boldness, but an
inward faynting fear, (as afterward every one plainly beheld,) he gave this
answer. What Master Sheriff, shall I save this frail and vile carcass, and
damn mine own soul? No, no, I am a Catholic, in that faith I was borne, in
that faith will I dye, and here shall my ^ bood seal it. Then Master Sheriff
spoke unto him (saying) by the way as we came, you swore an oath, for which you
willed me to bear witness y^ you were heartily sorry. Now I pray you let me be
a witness, that you are as hartelie sorry for offending the Queens Majesty.
Why Sir (quoth he) I have not offended her, without it be in my Religion, and
if I have offended her, then I ask her forgiveness. Master Sheriff upon this
said unto him: is this the fruits of your Religion, to kneels to the dead
body of thy fellow, and to desire his soul to pray for thee. Alas, what can
it either profit thee, or hinder thee? pray thou to God and he will help
thee. Master Sheriff, (quoth Sherte,) this is the true Catholic Religion,
and whosoever is not of it, is dampened. I desire his soul to pray for me, the
most glorious Uirgin Marie to pray for me, and all the holy company of Heaven
to pray for me. At which words the people cried, away with the traitor, hang
him, hang him. O (...) (...) Master Sheriff) forsake y^ whore of Room (...)
wicked Antichriste, with all his abominable (...) and (...) and put thy whole
(...) Christ: whereto he answered. O (...) little remember the day, when as you
and I shall (...) both at one bar, and I come as witness against you, that
you (...) that holy and blessed Uiccar of Christ, the whore of Rome, at which
words ye people cried again: hang him, hang him, away with him. Then he began
his Pater noster in Latin, and before he had fully ended two petitions of it,
he fell into the Latin Creed, and then to the Pater noster again, afterward
he said the Aue Maria: which done, knocking him self on the breast, saying
Jesus, esto mihi Jesus, the Carte was drawn away, and he committed to the
Mercy of God. But then to manifest that his former boldness, was but mere
dissembling, and hypocrisy: he lyfted up his hands, and caught hold on the
Halter, so that every one perceived his fair outward show, and his foul
inward disfigured nature, also how loath he was and unwilling to die.

Robert Johnson, being brought up into the Carte, Master Sheriff according as
he had before, both declared unto him, her Majesty's mercy if he would repent,
and al so willed him to be sorry for his offenses against her, where of he seemed
to make small estemation, denying the treasons according as the others had
done, and appealinge likewise upon his religion. Then was I called forth
again, when as I gave him to understand, how notably he was approved guilty at
his araignement, and every matter sufficiently handled, how according as the
rest were, he was confounded to his face, whereto he would make no oher
answer, but said. Well Monday God forgive thee. The^ were his aunswers read
unto him, as they had been before unto the other twain, he not yielding
denial, but said he spoke them, and would do it again. Then was Athanasius
Creed moved unto him, which he granted to be the Catholic faith, whereof
the Pope was Uiccar, and that there was no other Catholic faith, but only
his. Why quoth the Preacher, the Pope is not named in it, I know not that
(quoth he again,) I have not read it. Then Master Sheriff desired him to say
his prayers in English, and he with all the company would pray with him. Which
he refusing to do, in his Latin prayers, the Carte was drawn away, and he
committed to Gods mercy.

The Execution at Tiborne, on VVedensday, being the thirtye of May 1582.
ON the Wednesday following, which was the thirtye day of May, in the same
manner as I have before expressed. Luke Kirbie, William Filbie, Thomas Cottom,
and Lauraunce Rychardson, were committed from the Tower of London, to the place
of Execution, and as the other were on the Mundaye before associated and
accompanied with diverse learned and godly Preachers, even so were these, as to
say, Master Charke, Master Herne, and diverse others, who all the way applied
such godly and Christian persuasions unto them, (as had not the Child of
perdition so meruailouslye blinded them) were of force to have won them into
grace and Mercy. The speeches they used to them by the way were needelesse
here to set down, for that they did especially concern causes to root out
that wicked opinion in them, and to establish a sound and perfect faith in
place thereof, but even as it was in the other, so it did agree in them.

But Luke Kirbie seemed to challenge me, as concerning I was able to approve
nothing against him, which he did because he supposed I was not there present:
but what passed between, him and me, you shall hear hereafter.

They being come to the place of Execution, William Filbie, was brought up into
the Carte, where conforming himself unto the death, his wicked treasons were
moved unto him, which obstinately and impudently he denied. Then was he
demanded if he would acknowledge the Queens Majesty his sovereign
Princess, and supreme head under Christ of the Church of England.

No (quoth he) I will acknowledge no other head of the Church, then the Pope
only: Where vyon his aunsweres were read unto him, and he not denying them in
any point, even as they were wicked and impious, even so he remained in them,
still appealing that it was for his Religion that he died, and not for any
Treason. But the contrary was proved unto his face, as well by sufficient
proofs, as also by the Traiterous aunswers, whereto he had subscribed with
his own hand. At last, as he was desired: he prayed for the Queens Majesty,
that GOD might bless her, and incline her heart to mercy toward the
Catholics, of which society he was one. Then they opening his bosom, found
there two Crosses, which being taken from him, were held up, and showen to
all the people, beside, his Crown was shaven. So after a few silent Latin
prayers to himself, the Carte was drawn away.

The next was Luke Kirbie, who being brought up into the Carte, offered long
circumstaunce of speech, as concerning that he was come thither to dye, hoping
to be saved in the blood of Christ: and much matter, which were needelesse
here to rehearse. Afterward, he began to say, that there were none could
approve him to be a tray tour: neither had he at any time attempted any thing
prejudicial to her Majesty, and that his adversaries, Sled, nor Monday, could
not vpbraide him with any thing. Whereupon Master Sheriff told him, that
Monday was there, and asked him if he would have him called to him. I see him
(quoth he) yonder, and let him say what he can against me.

Then was I commanded to come some what near him, when as he began in this
manner to me: O Monday consider with thy self, how untruly thou have charged
me, with that which I never said nor thought. Besides, thou know that when
thou came to ye Tower to me, before Master Liuetenaunt, and an other who was
there present then, thou wast demanded what thou thoughtest of me, and what
thou could say against me? when as thou made answer. Thou knew no
harm by me, neither could thou at any time say otherwise of me then
well: whereupon thou wast asked, wherefore thou reportedst otherwise at my
arraignement? Then the Sheriff said unto him, who can bear thee witness of
this? (Quoth he again) he spoke it before Master Lieuetenaunt, and an other
was by then. Then was he demanded what other he was that was present: which
(after a long trifling) he said was a Keeper, and named him: whereto I made
answer as follows.

Master Kirbie, I wish and desire you, in the fear of God, to remember your
self, for this is not a place to report an untruth, neither to slander any
man otherwise then you are able to prove. When as I came unto the Tower, and
made known to Master Lieuetenant, for what cause I was sent to speak with
you, you were brought into a Chamber by your Keeper: and what I moved unto
you, your self very well knows, as concerning my allowaunce being the Popes
Scholar: where, what answer you made, I have truly, and according as you
answered already set down in print. Master Lieuetenant neither moved any
such words to me, as here you reported, and I call GOD to my witness, that
not a motion of any such matter was once offered to me by Master Lieuetenant,
or by your Keeper. Your self then uttered that at sundry times in the
Seminary, there was diverse leude words spoken, which might better have been
spared and denied that you were not in my Chamber, when as I lying sick in my
bed traiterous speech as were moved by them, which were then present, whereof
your self was one, with diuer so other matters which you spoke unto me, which
Master Lieuetenant him self heard, and your Keeper being present. But if
this be true which you say, that it may be proved there was either such
words moved unto me, or any such answer made by me, I offer to sustain
what punishment the Law shall affoorde me. Then falling to an other matter,
for that this redounded to his own confusion, (as Master Lieuetenant can well
witness:) he began to talk of my being at Room, what freendshippe he had
showed unto me, and had done the like unto a number of English men, whom he
well knew, not to be of that Religion, both out of his own purse, as also be
freending them to some of the Popes Chamber, he made conueyaunce for them
thence, some time going forty miles with them: when (quoth he) had my dealings
been known, I should hardly have been well thought off: and I knew well
enough, that you were never bent to that Religion, albeit they thought the
contrary. Yea, I knew well enough, when you departed thence, that your
disposition was contrary to ours, and concealed it to my self.

O Kirbie (quoth Master Sheriff) this is very unlike, that you could afford
such favor to any, who were contrary to that Religion that you professed no,
no, if you knew any such there, you would rather help to persecute them, then
to pity them, as it is the nature of you all.

Master Kirbie (quoth I) it is very unlike that you had any such secret
knowledge of me, either of my Religion, or how I was secretly bent, as you
seem here to profess, for had I been such a one as you would persuade
these here, you knew me to be, would you have delivered me those silk
Pictures hallowed by the Pope which you did: and moreover, make known to me
sundry of your friends here in England, to whom I should convey them* O
Monday (quoth he) I confess I delivered to thee Pictures in deed, but thou
know I gave thee two Iulyes to go huie them with, I did it because I knew
thee to be such a one, and therefore I did misdoubt thee, for I would not
credit thee with my hallowed Pictures. Master Kirbie (quoth I) to deny your
own dooinges, is marvelous impudency: did not you in your Chamber, deliver
to me certain silk Pictures, which you told me at Seukelyes (...) being
there, were hallowed by the Pope, and what Indulgences were allowed them: one
of them, which was a Crucifixe you gave me, the other you willed me deliver to
your friends at Rheimes, and in England: and because they were so few (as in
deed I think they were no more but five) you gave me two Iulyes, to go into
the City to buie more, which I did: and having brought them to you, three or
four of the fairest you took from me, promising to get them hallowed at the
next Benediction: the other in deed you gave me, and I took them with me.
How say you now Kirbie (quoth Master Sheriff) would you have credited him
with such matters, had you not supposed him to be one of your own sect.
Master Sheriff (quoth he) what I have said, I knew very well. And after he
was gone from Room, I sent fifteen shyllinges to Rheimes, to be delivered to
him, but he was departed thence toward England, before it came.

Then Master Sheriff said to him again, you stand upon these points very
much, which there is none that are here, but will judge to be untrue. Thou
hear what he has said unto thee, and we have heard that thou deniedst
every thing. What say thou to thy Treasons, wherefore thou art come either
to dye^ wylt thou be sorio for them, ask God and her Majesty forgiveness,
for she is merciful, and we will carry thee back again, if we shall
perceive in thee any such motion, that thou will forsake thy former
wickedness, and become a good and faithful Subject. At these words, the
people among them selves, almost generally said: O exceeding mercy and
favor, what a gracious Princess have we, who affoordeth such mercy to those
that have so ill deserved.

Then Master Feeld the Preacher, in the book read his aunsweres to him, where
he had subscribed with his own hand. Whether the Pope might lawfully depose
her Majesty, or had any authority to take the title of her Crown and
dignity away from her, whereto Kirbie answered. This is a matter disputable in
Schools, and therefore I may not judge of it. I think this with my self,
that if any Prince fall by infidelity, into Turscisme, Atheism, Paganism, or
any such like, that y^ Pope has authority to depose such a Prince. And
being asked, if her Majesty were in any such: he said, he knew his own
conscience. Another Preacher being by, said unto him, that the Prince received
his aucthority from God, and that he was to be suppressed by none, but only by
God Again that Solomon said: By me (meaning by God) Kings reign, and Princes
decree Justice. By me Princes rule, and the Nobles Pro. 8. 15. 16
and all the Judges of the earth. Again S Paul says. Let every soul be
subject to the higher powers, for there is Roma. 13. 1. 2. 3. 4.
no power but of God, and the powers that be, are ordained of God. Who soever
therefore resists the power, resists the ordinance of God, and they that
resist, shall receive to them selves judgment. For Princes are not to be
feared forgood works, but for evil: will thou then be without fear of the
power, do well, so shall thou purchase praise of the same: For he is the
minister of God for thy wealth: But if thou do evil, fear, for he bears
not a sword for naught, for he is the minister of God to take vengeance on
him that does evil. If then the Pope be a Soul, he is to be obedient to the
higher powers. And being a subject to God, as all other Princes be: he must
not take upon him, what belongs to God. As for the authority that her
Majesty has, she has received it from God, neither is the Pope, or any
earthly Prince to deprive her thereof, but only God. Again, when Jesus was
brought before Pilate, Pilate said to him. Know thou not that I have power
to crucify thee, and have power to loose thee? To the which Jesus John. 19.
10. 11.
answered: Thou could have no power at all against me, except it were
given thee from above. Thus may you see, that what Prince so ever rules upon
earth, has his power and aucthority only from God: and not that any mortal
man can use the authority of a Prince at his pleasure. How say you to this?
whereto he would make no answer: But seemed to demand of them, if they
would deny, that if a Prince were in Paganism, Atheism, or governed by
infidelity: that such a Prince might not lawfully be deposed. Which the
learned Preachers answered in learned sort, approouing that as the power was
of God, so Princes were not to be deposed by any, but only by God.

No (quoth Kirbie again) has it not been disputed in Schools for these five
hundred years, and will you deny it? O Master Crowley, Master Crowley, and
there pawsed, as though that Master Crowley had agreede with him in such a
monstrous error. But Master Crowley him self gave me to understand, that at
such time as he conferred with the said Kirbie in the Tower, about the same
argument, that his answer was unto him. If any Prince fell into any such kind
of error, that Prince were corrigible, but of whom? not of any earthly Prince,
but of that heavenly Prince, who gave him his aucthority, and seeing him abuse
it any way, corrects him in his Justice. For by his attributing to the Pope,
this aucthority, he witnessed him to be Antichrist in y^ he will depose Princes
at his pleasure, and exalt him self above all that is called God, and forgive
men their sins at his pleasure likewise. All this was not sufficient to
mollify y^ obstinate mind of Kirbie, but he would persist still in this
deuill^sh imagination. Master Sheriff and the Preachers, seeing him wavering,
and not able to yield any reason for his arrogant opinion, labored as much as
in them lay to change it: and when all would not serve, they desired him in
hearty and humble manner to pray to God, to ash her Majesty forgiveness, for
the Treasons wherein he had offended her. Whereto he answered, that he had not
offended in any Treason, to his knowledge: whereupon they showed him his
Treasons, which were adjudged by the people, worthy of greater punishment,
then he was at that time to suffer, yet would not he acknowledge them. But
prayed to God for her Majesty, that she might long rule in her authority,
to confound all her enemies: and that his heart was free from any Treason to her
Majesty. Then preparing himself to his prayers, the Preachers desired him to
pray in English with them, and to say a prayer after them, wherein, if he could
find any fault, he should be resolved thereof. O (quoth he again) you and I,
were not one in faith, therefore I think, I should offend God, if I should
pray with you: At which words, the people began to cry, away with him: so
be saying his Pater noster in Latin, ended his life.

Then was Laurence Richardson brought up into the Carte, and to him Thomas
Cottom, to be executed together. But Cottom seemed to utter such words, as
though there had been hope he would have forsaken his wickedness, so that the
halter was untied, and he brought down out of ye Carte again: In which time
Laurence Richardson prepared him to death, confessing him self a Cathelique,
and that he would believe in all things, as the Catholic Church of Room did,
unto ye Pope he allowed the only Supremacy. In which traitorous opinion,
after certain Latin prayers, he was committed to God. Then was Cottom brought
up to the Carte again, and the good opinion had of him before, changed into
that obstinate nature, that was in them all, saying to Master Sheriff, that
before he came into England, he was armed for India, and thither if he might
be suffered, he would pass with as much convenient speed as might be. Then
looking to the body of Laurence Richardson, whereon the Executioner was using
his office, he lysted up his hands and said: O blessed Laurence, pray for
me, thy blessed soul Laurence, pray for me: for which words, both the
Preachers and the people rebuked him telling him that he ought to pray to none,
but to God only, all help of man was but in vain. Whereto he answered, he
was assured that he could pray for him. In brief, his Treasons being moved
to him, he denied all, albeit his own hand writing was there to affirm it. He
prayed for her Majesty, and said his Pater noster, and Aue Maria: and as the
Carte was drawing away, he said: In manus tuas Domine commendo spiritum meum,
and so he ended his life. Thus in brief have I set down the Execution of
these Traitors, desiring God, that the leude life of them and this lamentable
spectacle wytnessed to our eyes, may be a warning to us all, how by our
disobedience we provoke our Lord God to anger against us, and by our slacknesse
in duty, to our gracious and sovereign Princess, next under God, our only
supreme gouernesse, enforce her merciful hand to take up the sword of
Justice against us. God long preserve her Majesty, and her honorable
Counsel: confound Antichriste and his practices, and give all faithful
Subjects, the grace to bear true and loyal minds, to God, their Prince and
Country.

Let this suffice thee (gentle Reader) at this time: and if thou desire to be
more acquainted with their Romish and Sathanicall inglinges, read my English
Roman life, which so soon as it can be printed, shall be set forth. And
thus committing thee to the God of all truth, who give us the grace to cleave
to the Truth: I bid thee hartelie farewell.

God save the Queen.

