POSITIONS VVHERIN THOSE PRIMITIVE CIRCVMSTANCES BE EXAMINED, WHICH ARE
NECESSARY FOR THE TRAINING up of children, either for skill in their book, or
health in their body.

WRITTEN by RICHARD MVLCASTER, master of the school erected in London anno.
1561. in the parish of Saint Laurence Povvntneie, by the worshipful company
of the merchaunt tailers of the said city.

Imprinted at London by Thomas Vautrollier for Thomas Chare. 1581

TO THE MOST VIRTUOUS LADY, HIS MOST DEAR, AND sovereign princess, Elizabeth
by the grace of God Queen of England, France, and Ireland, defendresse of the
faith etc.
MY book by the very argument, most excellent princess, pretends a common
good, because it concerns the general train and bringing up of youth, both
to enrich their minds with learning, and to enable their bodies with health:
and it craves the favor of some special countenance far above the common,
or else it can not possibly procure free passage. For what a simple credit is
mine, to persuade so great a matter? or what force is there in common
patronage, to command conceits? I am therefore driven upon these so violent
considerations, to presume so far, as to present it, being my first travel,
that ever durst venture upon the print, unto your majesty's most sacred hands.
For in need of countenance, where best ability is most assurance, and
known virtue the fairest vvarrant, who is more sufficient then your
excellency is, either for cunning to commend, or for credit to command? And
what reason is there more likely to procure the favor of your majesty's most
gracious countenance, either to commend the work, or to command it way,
then the honest pretense of a general good, wherein you cannot be deceived?
For of your accustomed care you will circumspectly consider, and by your
singular judgment, you can skillfully discern, whether there be any
appearance, that my book shall perform so great a good, as it pretends to
do, before you either praise it, or procure it passage. In deed it is an
argument which craves consideration, because it is the leader to a further
consequence: and all your majesty's time is so busily employed, about many and
maine affairs of your estate, as I may seem very injurious to the common
weal, besides some vvrong offered to your own person, to desire your
Majesty at this time to read any part thereof, much less the whole, the
book it self being very long, and your Majesty's leisure being very little.
And yet if it may please your most excellent Majesty of some extraordinary
grace toward a most obsequious subject in way of encoraging his both
toilsome and troublesome labor, to take but some taste of any one title, of
smallest encumbraunce, by the very inscription, the pavv of a Lion may bevvraie
the hole body in me by the proverb, in your highness by the property, as
who can best judge, what the Lion is. For the rest, which neither your
Majesty's time can tarry on, neither my boldness dare desire that you should:
other men's report, which shall have time to read, and will lend an officious
countrieman some part of their leisure, will prove a referendarie, and
certify your highness how they find me appointed. I have entitled the book
POSITIONS, because entending to go on further, for the auauncement of learning
I thought it good at the first, to put down certain grounds very needful
for my purpose, for that they be the common circunstances, that belong to
teaching and are to be resolved on, ear we begin to teach. VVherin I crave
consent of my country, to join with me in conceit, if my reasons prove
likely, that thereby I may direct my whole current in the rest, a great deal
the better. Now if it may stand with your Majesty's most gracious good will
to bestovv upon me the favorable smile of your good liking, to countenance me
in this course, which as it pretends the public commodity, so it
threatens me with extreme pains, all my pain will prove pleasant unto me,
and that good which shall come thereby to the common weal shall be most
justly ascribed to your Majesty's especial goodness, which encoraged my
labor, and commended it to my country. Which both encoragement to my self,
and commendacion to my country, I do nothing doubt but to obtain at your
Majesty's most gracious hands, whether of your good nature, which has
alvvaye furthered honest attemptes: or of your Princely conceit, which is
thoroughly bent to the bettering of your state, considering my travel does
tend that way. For the very end of my whole labor (if my small power can
attain to that, which a great good will toward this my country has
deeply conceived) is to help to bring the general teaching in your Majesty's
dominions, to some one good and profitable uniformity, which now in the
midst of great variety does either hinder much, or profit little, or at the
least nothing so much, as it were like to do, if it were reduced to one
certain form. The effecting vvherof pretends great honor to your
Majesty's person, besides the profit, which your whole Realm is to reap
thereby. That noble Prince king HENRY the eight, your Majesty's most renowned
father vouchesafed to bring all Grammers into one form, the multitude thereof
being some impediment to school learning in his happy time, and thereby both
purchased himself great honor, and procured his subjects a marvelous ease.
Now if it shall please your Majesty by that Royal example which otherwise
you so rarely exceed, to further not only the helping of that book to a
refining: but also the reducing of all other school books to some better
choice: and all manner of teaching, to some redier form: can so great a good
but sound to your Majesty's most endless renown, whose least part gave such
cause of honor, to that famous King, your Majesty's father? By these fevv
words your highness conceiueth my full meaning I am well assured, neither
do I doubt, but that as you are well able to discern it, so you will very
deeply consider it, and see this so great a common good thoroughly set on
foot. I know your Majesty's patience to be exceeding great in very petie
arguments, if not, I should have been afraid, to have troubled you with so
many words, and yet least tediousness do sour even a svveete and sound
matter, I will be no bolder. God bless your Majesty, and send you a long,
and an healthful life, to his greatest glory, and your Majesty's most lasting
honor.

Your Majesty's most humble and obedient subject Richard Mulcaster

AVTHOR IPSE AD librum suum.
IN SITA naturae nostrae sitis illa iuuandi
Ignauum vitae desidis odit iter.
Parca cibi, saturata fame, deuota labori,
Prodiga nocturni luminis vrget opus.
Quod, simul ac lucis patiens fore viderit, edit,
Inde licet multo plena timore gemat.
Poenitet emissam per mill pericula prolem,
Quae poterat patriae tuta latere domi.
Iudiciumque timens alieni pallida iuris
Omine spem laedit deteriore suam.
Sed sine sole nequit viui, prodire necesse est,
Curaque quod peperit publica, iura vocant.
Fortunae credenda salus, quam prouida virtus,
Quam patris aeterni dextera magna regit.
Sic sua Neptuno committit vela furenti
Spem solam in medijs docta phaselus aquis.
Sed mihi spes mayor, cui res cum ge^te Deorum,
Quae certo dubijs numine rebus adest.
Perge igitur, sortique tuae te creed, parentis
Tessera parue liber prima future tui.
Et quia, qua perges, hominum liberrima de te
Iudicia in medijs experiere vijs,
Quidnam quisque notet, quidnam desideret in te,
Quo possim in reliquis cautior esse, refer.
Interea veniam supplex vtrique precare,
Nam meus error erat, qui tuus error erit.
Qui neutrius erit, cum, quis sit, sensero, quippe
Nullum in correcto crimine crimen erit.
Ergo tuae parts, quae sint errata, refer:
Emendare, mei cura laboris erit.
Namque rei nouitas nulli tentata priorum
Hac ipsa, qua tu progrediere, via,
Vtrique errores multos, lapsusque minatur,
Quos cum resciero, number superesse sinam?
Cui tam chara mei lectoris amica voluntas,
Vt deleta illi displicitura velim.
R. M.
THE ARGVMEMTES HANDLED IN EVERY PARTICVLAR TITLE.
Cap. 1. THe entry to the Positions, containing the occasion of this present
discourse, and the causes why it was penned in English. Cap. 2. Wherefore these
Positions serve, what they be, and how nrcessarie it was to begin at them. Cap.
3. Of what force circunstance is in matters of action, and how warily
authorities be to be used, where the contemplative reason receives the check of
the active circunstance, if they be not well applied. Of the alleging of
authors. Cap. 4. What time were best for the child to begin to learn. What
matters some of the best writers handle ear they determine this question. Of
lettes and liberty, whereunto the parents are subject in setting their
children to school. Of the difference of wits and bodies in children. That
exercise must be joined with the book, as the schooling of the body. Cap. 5.
What things they be, wherein children are to be trained, ear they pass to
the Grammar. That parents, and masters ought to examine the natural
abilities in children, whereby they become either fit, or unfit, to this, or
that kind of life. The three natural powers in children, Wit to conceive
by, Memory to retain by, Discretion to discern by. That the training up to
good manners, and nurture, does not belong to the teacher alone, though most to
him, next after the parent, whose charge that is most, because his
commandment is greatest, over his own child, and beyond appeal. Of
Reading* Writing, Drawing, Music by voice, and instrument: and that they be
the principal principles, to train up the mind in. A general answer to
all objections, which arise against any, or all of these. Cap. 6. Of exercises
and training the body. How necessary a thing exercise is. What health is, and
how it is maintained: what sickness is, how it comes, and how it is
prevented. What a part exercise plays in the maintenance of health. Of the
student and his health. That all exercises though they stir some one part
most, yet help the whole body. Cap. 7. The braunching, order, and method,
kept in this discourse of exercises. Cap. 8. Of exercise in general, and what
it is. And that it is Athleticall for games, Martial for the field, Physical
for health, preparatiue before, postparatiue after the standing exercise: some
within doors, for foul whether, some without for fair. Cap. 9. Of the
particular exercises. Why I do appoint so many, and how to judge of them, or
to devise the like. Cap. 10. Of loud speaking. How necessary, and how proper
an exercise it is for a scholar. Cap. 11. Of loud singing, and in what degree
it comes to be one of the exercises. Cap. 12. Of loud, and soft reading.
Cap. 13. Of much talking and silence. Cap. 14. Of laughing, and weeping. And
whether children be to be forced toward virtue and learning. Cap. 15. Of
holding the breath. Cap. 16. Of daunsing, why it is blamed, and how delivered
from blame. Cap. 17. Of wrestling. Cap. 18. Of fensing, or the use of the
weapon. Cap. 19. Of the Top, and scourge. Cap. 20. Of walking. Cap. 21. Of
running Cap. 22. Of leaping. Cap. 23. Of swimming. Cap. 24. Of riding. Cap. 25.
Of hunting. Cap. 26. Of shooting. Cap. 27. Of the ball. Cap. 28. Of the
circumstances, which are to be considered in exercise. Cap. 29. The nature and
quality of the exercise. Cap. 30. Of the bodies which are to be exercised.
Cap. 31. Of the exercising places. Cap. 32. Of the exercising time. Cap. 33. Of
the quantity that is to be kept in exercise. Cap. 34. Of the manner of
exercising. Cap. 35. An advertisement to the training master. Why both the
teaching of the mind and the training of the body be assigned to the same
master. The inconveniences which ensue, where the body and the soul be made
particular subjects to several professions. That who so will execute any
thing well, must of force be fully resolved, in the excellency of his own
subject. Out of what kind of writers the exercising master may store
himself with cunning. That the first grounds would be laid by the cunningest
workman. That private discretion in any executour is of more efficacy, then
his skill. Cap. 36. That both young boys, and young maidens are to be put to
learn. Whether all boys be to be set to school. That to many learned be
burdenous: to few to bare: wits well sorted civil: missorted seditious. That
all may learn to write and read without danger. The good of choice, the ill
of confusion. The children which are set to learn having either rich or poor
freindes, what order and choice is to be used in admitting either of them to
learn. Of the time to choose. Cap. 37. The means to restrain the ouerflowing
multitude of scholars. The cause why every one desires, to have his child
learned, and yet must yeilde over his own desire to the disposition of his
country. That necessity and choice be the best restrainers. That necessity
restrains by lack and law. Why it may be admitted that all may learn to
writ and read that can, but no further. What is to be thought of the speaking
and understanding of latin, and in what degree of learning that is. That
considering our time, and the state of religion in our time law must needs
help this restraint, with the answer to such objections as are made to the
contrary. That in choice of wits, which must deal with learning, that wit
is fittest for our state which answers best the monarchy, and how such a
wit is to be known. That choice is to help in schooling, in admission into
colleges, in proceeding to degrees, in preferring to livings, where the right
and wrong of all the four points be handled at full. Cap. 38. That young
maindens are to be set to learning, which is proved by the custom of our
country, by our duty toward them, by their natural ability, and by the
worthy effects of such, as have been well trained. The end whereunto their
education serves, which is the cause why and how much they learn. Which of
them are to learn. When they are to begin to learn: What and how much they
may learn. Of whom and where they ought to be taught. Cap. 39. Of the training
up of young gentlemen. Of private and public education, with their general
goods and illes. That there is no better way for gentlemen to be trained by in
any respect, then the common is, being well appointed. Of rich men's children,
which be no gentlemen. Of nobility in general. Of gentlemanly exercises. What
it is to be a nobleman or a gentleman. That infirmities in noble houses be not
to be triumphed over. The causes and grounds of nobility. Why so many desire
to be gentlemen. That gentlemen ought to profess learning, and liberal
sciences for many good and honorable effects. Of traueling into foreign
contries, with all the branches, allowance and disallowance thereof: and that
it were to be wished, that gentlemen would profess, to make sciences liberal
in use, which are liberal in name. Of the training up of a young prince. Cap.
40. Of the general place and time of education. Public places elementarie,
grammatical, collegiat. Of bourding of children abroad from their parents
howses: and whether that be the best. The use and commodity of a large and
well situate training place. Observations to be kept in the general time. Cap.
41. Of teachers and trainers in general: and that they be either Elementarie,
Grammatticall, or Academicall. Of the elementarie teachers ability and
entertainment: of the grammar masters ability and his entertainment. A
mean to have both excellent teachers and cunning professors in all kinds of
learning: by the division of colleges according to professions: by sorting
like years into the same rowmes: by bettering the students allowance and
living: by providing and maintaning notable well learned readers. That for
bringing learning forward in her right and best course, there would be seven
ordinary ascending colleges for tounges, for mathematikes, for philosophy,
for teachers, for physicians, for lawyers, for divines. And that the general
study of law, would be but one study. Every of these points with his
particular proufes sufficient for a position. Of the admission of teachers.
Cap. 42. How long the child is to continue in the elementarie, ear he pass to
the toungues and grammar. The incurable infirmities which posting have makes
in the whole course of study. How necessary a thing sufficient time is for a
scholar. Cap. 43. How to cut of most inconveniences wherewith schools and
scholars, masters and parents be in our schooling now most troubled: whereof
there be too means, uniformity in teaching and publishing of school orders.
That uniformity in teaching has for companions dispatch in learning and
sparing of expenses. Of the abbridging of the number of books. Of courtesy and
correction. Of school faults. Of friendlines between parents and masters.
Cap. 44. That conference between those which have interest in children:
Certainty of direction in places where children use most: and Constancy in
well keeping that, which is certainly appointed, be the most profitable
circunstances both for virtuous mannering and cunning schooling. Cap. 45. The
peroration, wherein the sum of the whole book is recapitulated and proofs
used, that this enterprise was first to be begone by Positions, and that these
be the most proper to this purpose. A request concerning the well taking of
that which is so well meant.
POSITIONS CONCERNING THE TRAINING UP OF CHILDREN.
First Chapter. THE ENTRY TO THE POSITIONS, containing the occasion of this
present discourse, and the causes why it was penned in English.
WHOSOEVER shall consider with any judgment the manner of training up children,
which we use generally within this Realm cannot but wish, that the thing were
bettered, as I my self do: though I do not think it good here to displaie the
particular defectes, because I am in hope to see them healed, without any so
sharp a rehersall, (for the error being once granted and well known straight
way craves help without aggrauation, and that way in helping must needs be
most gracious, which the party helped confesses least greiuouse.) If I should
discover all those inconveniences, whereby parents and masters, teachers and
learners, do but enterchaunge displeasures, if I should rip up those
difficulties, whereby the train it self, and bringing up of children is
maruellously empeached, I might revive great gauls, and even thereby worse
remedy the greifes. And though I remedied the^ yet the party pacie^t might
bear in mind, how churlishly he was cured, and though he paid well for the
healing, yet be ill apayd for the handling. Wherefore in helping things, that
be amiss I do take that to be the advice dest way, which saves the man, and
sowreth not the mean. If without quoting the quarrelles, I set down that
right, whereunto I am led, upon reasonable grounds, that it is both the best,
and most within compass, the wrong by comparison is furthwith bewraied, and
the chek given without any chiding.

The occasion of this discourse.
I have taught in public without interrupting my course, now two and twenty
years, and have alwaie had a very great charge under my hand, which how I have
discharged, they can best judge of me, which will judge without me. During
which time both by that, which I have seen in teaching so long, and by that
which I have tried, in training up so many, I do well perceive, upon such
lettes, as both my self am subject unto, and other teachers no less then I,
that neither I have don so much as I might, neither any of them so much as they
could. Which lettes me think I have both learned, what they be, and withal
conceived the mean, how to get them removed. Whereby both I and all other may
do much more good, then either I or any other heretofore have don. Wherein as I
mean to deal for the common good, so must I appeal to the common courtesy,
that my good will may be well thought of, though my good hope do not hit
right. For I do but that, which is set free to all, to utter in public a
private conceit, and to claim kindness of all, for good will meant unto all: as
I my self am ready both freindly and favorably, to esteem of others, who shall
enterprise the like, requiring every one, which shall use my travel, either as
a reader, to peruse, or as a reaper to profit, that he will think well of me,
which may cause him allow: or if he do not, that yet he will be sorry for me,
that so good a meaning had so mean an issue.

Why it is penned in English.
I do write in my natural English toungue, because though I make the learned my
judges, which understand Latin, yet I mean good to the unlearned, which
understand but English. And better it is for the learned to forbear Latin,
which they need not, then for the unlearned to have it, which they know not.
By the English both shall see, what I say, by Latin but the one, which were
some wrong, where both have great interest, and the unlearned the greater,
because the unlearned have not any but only such English helps, the learned
can fetch theirs from the same fountains, whence I fetch mine. My meaning is
principally to help mine own country, whose language will help me, to be
understood of them, whom I would persuade: to get some thanks of them, for my
good will to do well: to purchase pardon of them, if my good will do not well.
The parents and freindes with whom I have to deal, be mostwhat no latinistes:
and if they were, yet we understand that tongue best, whereunto we are first
borne, as our first impression is alwaie in English, before we do deliver it in
Latin. And in persuading a known good by an unknown way, are we not to call
unto us, all the helps that we ca^, to be thoroughly understood? He that
vndersta^ds no Latin can understand English, and he that understands Latin very
well, can understand English far better, if he will confess the truth,
though he think he have the habit, and can Latin it exceading well. When mine
argument shall require Latin, as it will ear long, I will not then spare it,
in the degree, that I have it, but till it do, I will serve my country that
way, which I do surely think will prove most intelligible unto her. For
though the argument, which is dedicate to learning, and must therefore of force
use the terms of learning: which be mysteries to the multitude, may seem to
offer some darkness and difficulty in that point: yet it is to be construed,
that the thing it self must be presented in her own colors, which the
learned can discry, at the first blush, as of their acquaintance, who must be
spoken to in their own kind: as the unlearned must be content to enquire,
because we strain our terms to have them entitled. And yet, in all my drift,
for all my fair promise, I dare warrant my country no more, then probability
does me, which if it deceive me, yet I have it to lean unto, and perhaps of
such pith, as might easily have beguiled a wiser man then me. But till I prove
beguiled, I will dwell in hope, that I am not, to deliver my mind with the
better courage, and thereby to show that I think my self right. For the
greatest enemy, that ca^ be to any well meaning conceit is, to mistrust his own
power, and to despair of his good speed where happy fortune makes evident
show.

Chapter 2. Wherefore these positions serve, what they be, and how necessary it
was to begin at them.
MY purpose is to help the hole trade of teaching, even from the very first
foundation: that is, not only the Grammarian, and what shall follow afterward,
but also the Elementarie, which is the very infantes train, from his first
entry, until he be thought fit to pass thence to the Grammar school. My
labor then beginning so low, am I not to follow the president of such writers,
as in the like arguments, have used the like method? The manner of proceeding
which the best learned authors do use, in those arguments, which both for the
matter be of most credit, and for the manner of best account, keeps alwaie such
a current, as they at the first lay down certain grounds, wherein both they
and their readers, whether scholars only, or judges alone, do resolutely
agree. Which consent enureth to this effect, that they may thereby either
directly pass thorough to their end without empeachment: or else if any
difficulty do arise in the way, they may easily compound it, by retiring
themselves to those primitive grounds. The Mathematical, which is counted the
best master of sound method, of whom all other sciences do borow their
order, and way in teaching well, care he pass to any either problem or
theoreme, setts down certain definitions, certain demaundes, certain
natural and necessary confessions, which being agreed on, between him and his
learner, he proceeds on to the greatest conclusions in his hole profession,
as those which be acquainted with Euclide and his freindes, do very well know.
Will the natural philosopher meddle with his maine subject, before he have
handled his first principles, matter, form, priuatio^, motion, time, place,
infinity, vacuitie, and such other, whereunto Aristotle has dedicated eight
whole books? What shall I need to take more pains in rehersall of any other
writer, whether Lawyer, Physician, or any else, which entreats of his
peculiar argument learnedly, to prove that I am first to plant by positions,
seeing the very divine himself, marches on of this foot and groundeth his
religion upon principles of belief? I profess my self to be a scholar,
whereby I do know this method, which the learned do keep, and I deal with an
argument, which must needs at the first be very nicely entertained, till
proof give it credit, what countenance soever hope may seem to lend it, in
the mean while. I may therefore seem to deal against mine own knowledge, if
I do not fortify my self with such helps, as upon probable reason, may
first purchase their own standing, and being themselves staid in place of
liking may help up all the rest.

I am specially to further two degrees in learning, first the Elementarie which
stretches from the time that the child is to be set to do any thing, till he
be removed to his Grammar: then the Grammarian, while the child does continue,
in the school of language, and learned tounges, till he be removed for his
^penes, to some University: which two points be both of great moment.

For the Elementarie: Because sufficiency in the child, before he pass thence,
helps the hole course of the after study, and insufficiency skipping from
thence to soon, makes a very weak sequel. For as sufficient time there,
without to much have, to post from thence to timely, draws on the residew of
the school degrees, in their best beseeming time, and in the end sends
abroad sufficient men for the service of their country: so to hedlong have
scouring thence to swiftly at the first, (for all that it seems so petie a
thing,) in perpetual infirmity of matter, procures also to much childishnes
in years to be then in place, when judgment with skill, and ripenes with
grayhaires should carry the contenaunce. And is not this point then to be well
proyned, where have is such a foe, and ripenes such a friend? Where pushing
forward at the first before maturitie bid on, will still force that, which
follows till at the last it mar all?

For the Grammarian: As it is a thing not unseemly for me to deal in, being
my self a teacher, so is it very profitable for my country to hear of,
which in great variety of teaching does seem to call for some uniform way.
And to have her youth well directed in the tounges, which are the ways to
wisdom, the lodges of learning, the harbors of humanity, the deliuerers of
divinity, the treasuries of all store, to furnish out all knowledge in the
cunning, and all judgment in the wise, can it be but well taken, if it be well
performed? or can it but deserve some freindly excuse, yea though good will
want good success? If occasion fitly offered by the way, cause me attempt any
further thing then either of these two, though I may seem to be beside my
school, yet my trust is that I shall not seem to be beside my self.

Now then dealing with these matters which appertain to men, and must be
allowed of men, if they deserve allowance, or will be rejected by them if they
seem not to be sound, whether have I need to proceed with consent or no? For
what if some shall think their penny good silver, and will not admit mine
offer? neither receive teaching at the hand of so mean a controwler? what if
some other grant, that there is some thing amiss in deed, but that my devise
is no mean to amend it? what if disdain do work me discredit, and why should
he take upon him? A petie companion, I confess, but till some better do deal,
why may not my petinesse full well take place? And if the ware which I do
bring, prove marchandable, why may I not make show, and offer it to sale? Such
instances and objections will be offered, with whom seeing I am like to
encounter, why ought I not at the first to resolve those, which will relent at
the voice of reason? and so entreat the other, which make more deintie, to be
drawn on, as my deutie being discharged toward the thing, by arguments,
toward them, by courtesy, if there be any strayning afterward themselves
may be in fault?

But because I must apply my positio^s to some one ground, I have chosen the
Elementarie, and him rather then the Grammarian: for that the Elementarie is
the very lowest and first to be dealt with, and the circunstances being well
applied unto him, may with very small ado, be transported afterward to the
Grammarian or any other else. And under the title of the particular
circunstance, (though it seem peculiarly to appertain to the Elementarie, by
way of mine example, which I do apply unto him primitiuely) yet I do travel
commonly with the general considerations in all persons which use the same
circunstance, in any degree of learning, as the places themselves hereafter
will declare. Which I do both to end these positive arguments at once, and to
make the precept also somewhat more pleasant to the reader, having the
entertainment of some foreign, but no unfit discourse.

The positions therefore which I do mean, The positions.
be these and such other. At what time the child is to be set to school. What
he is to learn when he is at school. Whether all be to be set to school.
Whether exercise be to be used as a principle in trayning. Whether young
maidens be to be set to learn. How to train up young gentlemen. How to
procure some uniformity in teaching. Of courtesy and correction. Of private
and public education. Of choice of wits, of places, of times, of teachers,
of school orders. Of restrayning to many bookish people, and many other like
arguments, which the nature of such discourses uses to hale in by the way.
Wherein I require my countreymens consent, to think as I do, and will do mine
endeavor to procure it, as I can, before I deal with the particular
praeceptes, and schooling of children. Which while I do, as I follow the
praesident of the best writers, for the method, which I choose, so for the
matter it self I will use no other argument, then both nature and reason,
custom and experience, and plain show of evident profit shall recommend to my
country, without either manifest appearaunce, or secret suspicion of a
fantastical devise: considering it were an argument of very small wit
knowing fantasticallnes to disgrace the man, and impossibility to displace the
mean: in so necessary a thing as I pretend this to be, to entermingle either
fantastical matter, for all men to laugh at, or impossible mean, for as many
to muse at. If earnest desire to have some thing bettered, do cause me wish
the amendment, I hope that will not be accounted fantastical, unless it be to
such, as do think themselves in health when they are deadly sick, and feeling
no pain, because of extreme weakness, do hold their freindes half foolish,
which wish them to think upon alteration of life.

Chapter 3. Of what force circunstance is in matters of action, and how warily
authorities be to be used, where the contemplative reason receives the check of
the active circunctance, if they be not well applied. Of the alleging of
authors.
SOme well meaning man, when he will persuade his country to this or that
thing, either by pen or speech, if he find any good writers authority,
which favors his opinion, he presumes straight way thereby both his own
persuasion to be sufficiently armed, and his countries execution to be strongly
warranted. Which his assurance is sometime chekt by wisdom, sometime by
experience: By wisdom, which forseeth, that the circunstance of the country
will not admit that, which he would persuade: by experience, which giving way
at the first to some probability, is in the end borne back by unfitting
circunstance. So that in those cases, where authorities persuade, and
circunstances controwle, such as use writers for their credit, must fear
circunstance for her chek. Because the miss in circunstance makes the author
no author, where his reason is altered, and the alledger no alledger, where
discretion wants. Seeing therefore my self deal with these two points of
authority and circunstance, both to confirm mine own opinion the surer, and
to confute the contrary sounder, where difference in opinion, shall offer to
assail me, I thought it good in the very entry to say somewhat of both,
considering their agreement does promise success, and their disagreement does
threaten defeat.

I do see many very toward wits, of reasonable good reading, and of excellent
good vtteraunce, both foreign abroad, and freindes at home marueilously
ouershoot themselves by ouerruling the circunstance, and ouerstraining
authority. For upon some affiaunce in their own wits, that they see all
circunstances, and some small assurance, that the authors which they read,
do soothe all that they say: they will push out in public certain resolute
opinions, before either their wits be settled, or their reading ripe: which is
then to be thought wisely ripe, when after the benefit of many years, after
much reading of the most and best writers, after sound digesting of that, which
they have red, and applying it all to some certain end: time has fined their
judgment, and by precise observing and comparing, both what others have said,
and what themselves have seen, has made them master the circunstance. Which
mastering of the circunstance, is the only rule, that wisemen live by, the only
mean, that wisdom is come by, the only ods between folly and wit. The
marking whereof is of so great a force, as by it each country discovers the
trauellour, when he seeks to enforce his foreign conclusions, and clingeth
to that countryman, which has bettered her still, by biding still at home. It
discrieth the young student, which is ravished with the object, ear he can
discern it, and honoreth the wise learned, whose understanding is so stayed, as
he may be a leader. The consideration of circunstance is so strong in all
attemptes, where man is the subject, as it makes of all nothing, and of
nothing all. The skill to judge of it is so lingering, and so late, because man
is the gatherer, and so long ear he learn it, as it seems to be reserved,
till he be almost spent. It is not enough to rule the world, to allege
authorities, but to raunge authorities, which be not above the world, by the
rule of the world, is the wisemans line.

I am to deal with training, must I entreat my country to be content with
this, because such a one commendes it? or to force her to it, because such a
state likes it? The show of right deceiues us, and the likeness of unlike
things does lead us, where it lists. Differences and ods discover errors,
similitude and likeness lead even wise men awrie. 1. Topic. de 4. instrume^tis
Dial.
The great philosopher Aristotle in fining of reason, makes the abilities to
discern these two points, where things like be unlike, and where the unlike
be like, two of his principal instruments to try out the truth. Which skill
to discern so narrowly, as it is not in all, so where it is, there is great
discretion, there will nothing be brought from authority to practice, but that
circunstance will praise, and yet hardly win. For though circunstance in our
country and others do seem very like, nay rather almost one, yet if our
country do admit, where any ods appears, though it offer the relenting, when
it comes to proof, she auentureth her self, and we which persuade, have great
cause to thank her, that she will harken unto us, as she also will thank us,
if she praise at the parting. Wherefore seeing the ground is so slipperie to
deal by authoirtie, and therefore to approve it, because such a one says it,
till judgment have subsigned, and circunstance sealed, I thought it good, as I
said before, to speak somewhat thereof, that I may thereby stay my self the
better, marching by them, and thorough them: and also remove some scrupulouse
opinion, that I use them not strangely, when I use them so, as they wish
themselves to be used.

But for the better understanding, with what warynes authority is to be used,
may it please you to consider, that there be two sorts of authors wherewith we
deal in our study: whereof the one regards the matter only, and by
inevitable argument enforces the conclusion. In this kind be the
Mathematical sciences, and all such natural philosophy, as proceeds by
necessity of a demonstrable subject. The other joins the circunstance with
the matter, as Moral, and politic Philosophy, as the Professions, as Poets,
as histories do, when they enforce not the necessity of their conclusion, by
necessity of the matter, though by the form of their argument, which
concludes of force, in matters of least force. The arguments of those Arts
and Professions, which be in this second kind, do depend upon appearance in
probable conjecture, and be creatures to circunsta^ce, wherein as man is the
mainest subject, so the respects had to man have the rain in their hand.

Hence comes it that laws in several lands do differ so much, that
Physic in several subjects is so several in cure, that Divinity in
ceremonies admits change, where the circunstance is observed, and yet the
truth not tainted.

Hence it comes that in diversity of states, there be diversities of stay,
whereby men govern, because circunstance commands. Whereunto, he that
affirms, must still have an eye, because it shows, what is seemly and
convenient, not in great states alone, but also in the meanest things of all:
because it moderateth both what soever men do: and in what soever respect they
do. In the first kind of authors and authorities, the truth of the matter
maintains it self, without he said or he did: because it is true by nature,
which stayed it, not by author which said it. And being so settled, it
ministers of it self no matter to debate, or at the least very little. For in
points of necessity, naturally inferred, the difference of opinion is no
proof at all, that the matter is debatable, but it is a sufficient argument of
an insufficient writer, if he pen his opinion, or of an ungrounded learner,
if his error be in speech, which harpeth still about some outward accident,
and never perceth the inward substance. So that in such conclusions there is
but one current, what forces the matter, and not what says the man: what
commandes the immutable truth, and not what commendes the changeable
circunstance. All the controversy is in the second kind, where circunstance
is prescription, wherein the writers credit oftimes authoriseth the thing, and
the truth of the thing does make the man an author: wherein unless he take very
good heed, which is the alleadger, he may do his writer exceeding great
injury, by bringing him to the bar, and forcing that upon him, which he
never dreamed on, and harm himself to, who mistaking his ground, misplaceth
his building, and hazardeth his credit.

Hence comes it, that so many fantastical devises do trouble the world,
while every man being desirous to breed somewhat worthy of commendacion either
for show of learning, or for shield of opinion, brings in the poor writers,
and enioyneth them speech, where in deed they be mute: and if they could
speak, they would ask the alledger why he did so abuse them. A general and a
very hard case in these our days, when the most erroneous opinions be
fathered upon the most honest writers, which meant nothing less, then that
which is threpte upon them. In matter of Policy this man wrote thus, and was
very well thought of, an other in some school points gave his censure in
this sort, and became of account. Transport the circunstance the allowance is
misliked, the alleadger laughed at: and yet the worthiness of the writer not
empayred at all, when he is rightly weyed, because he was forced: In this kind
of argument wherein I presently deal, it is no proof, because Plato praises
it, because Aristotle allows it, because Cicero commendes it, because
Quintilian is acquainted with it, or any others else, in any argument else,
that therefore it is for us to use. What if our country honor it in them, and
yet for all that may not use it her self, because circunstance is her check?
Nay what if the writers authority be alleged without consideration of their
own circunstance? who then offers his country the greatest wrong? is it not
he which wringeth the writer, and wreasteth his meaning? And yet such alledgers
there be, which pass it over smoothly, till they be espied, where then their
own weakness appears, the writers worthiness is evident, and his wrong
revenged, by discovering the wreaster. Wherefore he that will deal with writers
so, as to derive their conclusions to the use of his country, must be very
well advised, and diligently mark, that their meaning, and his applying be
both of one ground, and also how much of their opinion his country will admit,
which, as she will not be forced by idle supposalles, so pronounces she him to
be but a fleeter, who so ever shall offer to force her that way. If the matter
be well pikt, and properly applied, she embraces it forthwith, and gives it
the growing. Whether I shall perform so much my self, as I require in
others, I dare not warrant, but I will do my best, to use my author well, and
to observe the circunstance, and not once to profer any thing to my country,
which shall not have all those foundations, that I promised before, so much as
I can, Nature to lead it, reason to back it, custom to commend it, experience
to allow it, and profit to prefer it.

For alleging of Authors.
But here by the way, I must advertise my reader thus much, that I think a
student ought rather to inuest himself in the habit of his writer, then to
stand much upon his title, and authority, in proof or disproofe, seeing who
knows not, that all our studies be generally detters to the first devise, and
fairest delivery? Therefore to avoid length thereby, I will neither use
authority, nor example, seeing matter is the maine, and not the man's name,
saving only where one man's deposition vpholdes or overthrows: and the ground
of the example is so excellent in that kind, as it were to much unkindness,
not to let the person be known, where the fact is so famous. I will rest upon
reason the best, where I find it, the next where that fails, and conjecture
is probable, to prove such things, as reason must pattern. If the trial be in
proof, and experience must guide it, I will bind upon proof, and let trial
be the tuche.

For with the alleging of authors, either to show, what I have read or to
tuche common concordes, where any thing is to much, and nothing is enough, I
mean not at all to buisie my self. Because we heap but up witnesses, which
be nothing needful, in such cases, as be nothing doubtful, when we use many
gaie names all agreeing in one, and none saying but so: whereas the natural use
of testimonies is, to prove where doubt is, not to cloye, where all is clear.
In such cases for want of sound judgment, a catalogue of names, and a
multitude of sentences, which say but that is soothed, and no man denies, are
forced to the stage, to seem to arm the alleadger, which fights without
foe, and flies without fear.

In points of learning, which be won from quarrel, or resolute grounds,
which be without quarrel, and need no assurer, I refer my dealing to the
judgment of those, which can trace me, where I tread, and shall find my
truth, without the authors name, whom they will confess to be well alleged,
when I say, as he says, and prove as he proves, either by habit got by
reading, or by likeness in judgment, though I never red.

If controversy arise, and be worth the recounting the matter shall not
sleep: if it hang of the man, and without him be lame, the man shall not
slyp: but otherwise, no. Those that be learned know that witnesses, and wise
men's names be very good ware, where the question is, whether such a thing be
done, and they be said to know it, and that Rhetoric takes testimonies for a
principal proof, and very near the heart, as Logic places them in the
outmost of her arguments, being themselves of small pith, though their stuff
be worth praise, and both bind and loose, where reason bears the swaie, and
probability is to purpose. I do honor good writers but without superstition,
nothing addicte to titles. But for so much as Reason does honor them, they
must be content to stay without them selves, and use all means to prefer
her to presence, as their lady and mistress, whose authority and credit
procures them admission, when they come from her. It is not so, because a
writer said so, but because the truth is so, and he said the truth, the truth
gives him title, and that is it, which must pass, strong enough of it self,
and oftimes weakened in the hearers opinion, though not in it self, by naming
the writer: which commonly proves so when the hearer is wedded unto names, and
sworn to authority, not so much eying the thing which is uttered, as the
persons title by whom it is uttered. If truth did depend upon the person, she
would oftimes be brought into a miserable plighte, and look rufully upon it,
being constrained to serve fancy, and to alter upon will, whereas she is still
one, and should be bent unto, neither will her self bend, howsoever opinatiue
people do persuade them selves.

This the learned and wise know, whose courtesy I crave, as I wish them well:
for whose help and health, I undertook this pain, whose wisdom I appeal to,
if either diffidence do wrangle, or ignorance do quarrel. As for the
unlearned, I must needs ouertreat them, not to stand with me in points, where
they cannot judge themselves, if not for mine own, yet for their sakes, which
believe me themselves, and will give their word for me. In such points, as be
intelligible to both, I must pray them both to way me well, and ever to have
before them, that my will wishes well, howsoever I perform, wherein will
deserves well, and weakness prays excuse.

Chapter 4. What time were best for the child to begin to learn. What matters
some of the best writers handle, ear they determine this question. Of lettes
and liberty whereunto the parents are subject in setting their children to
school. Of the difference of wits and bodies in children. That exercise must
be joined with the book, as the schooling of the body.
THe first question that of any necessity comes in place, seems to be at
what years children be to be put to school: for neither would they be
differred to long for leasing of their time, nor hastened on to soon, for
hindering of their health. The rule therefore must be given according to the
strength of their bodies, and the quiknes of their wits jointly.

Such of the ancient writers, The ancient antecedents.
both Greek and Latin, as either picture us out the platfourmes of the best
framed commonweals: or do lend us the looking on of some such a paragon as in
some particular kind, they devise to be peerless, before they call it in
question, when their youth shall begin to learn, they do fetch the ground of
their train exceeding far of. As, what regard is to be had to the infant,
while he is yet under his nurse. Where they moile themselves sore, with the
manners and conditions of the nurse, with the fines or rudenes of her speech:
with the comelynes of her person and favor of her face. And in controversy
about milkes, sometime they prefer the mother, if her health, her complexion,
her kind of life, will best fit for her own: sometime they yield: but with
great choice to the foreign nurse: if any just circunstance do discharge the
mother, whom nature vnletted seems to charge most. Again they examine what
company is to be choosen for him, when he does begin first to crepe abroad,
whereby that good may begin betimes, which must continue long, and is greatly
furthered by choice of company, that pikked and choice play fellows may
succeed after a fine and well fitted nursery. Again, they debate in good
sadness, what an exquisite train is to be devised for him, when he is to go to
school, either private, or public, though they still prefer the public as
most beseeming him, which must live among many and never be recluse. And such
other considerations they fall into, which do well beseem the bringing up of
such a one, as they did but wish for: and we may not hope for: but by no
means can be applied to our youth, and our education, wherein we wish for no
more, then we hope for to have. Nay they go further, as whether may not
wishers? and appoint the parents of this so perfect a child, to be so wise and
so well learned, as is in very deed most consonant with their platte, but to
far surmonting the modele of my positions. Wherefore leaving those means,
which they do but devise, to bring up those people, which they do but pattern,
I mean to proceed from such principles, as our parents do build on, and as
our children do rise by, to that mediocritie, which furnishes out this world,
and not to that excellency, which is fashioned for an other. And yet the
pretense of these so fine picturers, by pointing out so absolute a president,
is, to let us behold thereby, both wherein the best consists: what colors it
is best known by: what a state it keeps: and also by what ready mean, we
may best approach near it, because despair to obtain the very best it
self, discourageth all hope. For that missinge any one of these so fined
circunstances, as our frailty will fail either in all, or in most, then we
mar the whole moulde. Howbeit we are much bound to the excellent wits of
those divine writers, who by their singular knowledge, approaching near to the
truest, and best, could most truly, and best discern, what constitution they
were of: and being of a good civil inclination, thought it their part, to
communicate that with their posterity, which they from so nighe, had so
narrowly decifred, as auailable to others, for this only cause, if there
ensewed no more of it, that in despair of hitting the highest, yet by seeing
where it lodged, with very great praise, they might draw near unto it. For as
it is but for paragons to mount quite above all, so is it worthy praise to rest
in some degree, which declares a pearcher, though ability restrain will,
that it cannot aspire whereunto it would.

But to return from this so exquisite, to our ordinary train, I persuade my
self, that all my countrymen wish themselves as wise, and as well learned,
as those absolute parents are surmised to be, though they be content with so
much of both, or rather with so little, as God does allot them: and that they
will have their children nursed as well as they can, without question where, or
quarrelling by whom: so as they may have that well brought up by nurture, which
they love so well, bequeathed them by nature. And that till the infant can
govern himself, they will seek to save it from all such perilles, as may
seem to harm it any kind of way, or by company or by occasion: and that
with such wariness, as ordinary circunspection may, or can work, in
considerate and careful parents. And finally that for his well schooling,
they that cannot, will wish it, they that can, will have it, with small charge
if they may, if they may not with some cost, and very carefully comme^d the
silly poor boy at his first entry, to his masters charge, not omitting even
how much his mother makes of him, if she come not her self and do her own
commendacions. So that for these antecedents, as they in precisenes do pass
us, so we in possibility go far beyond them. For our hope is at ankar, and
rides in assurance, their wish wandereth still, not like to win the rode.
These and such like circunstances they handle formally as in an absolute
picture, I tuche by the way, as being quite of an other persuasion, nothing
given to the impossible, where possibility must take place, though the
impossible Idaea, offer great force to fancy. Wherefore I will now take my
leave of them, and return to my question, when children be to be set to
learning. A thing in reason very worthy to be wayed, and in perfourmaunce, very
like to prove good, both for health of the body, and help of the mind, and
so much the rather to be well entreated, because it is the very first
principle, which enterteneth our train. My country pare^tes then, being so
natural to their children, both for care before school, and for choice in
schooling, I will commend to their charge, all that, which is to be considered
in their first infancy, and tendrest spring, before they be thought fit, to be
set to learning, which they will diligently look to, I am very well assured.
Because every thing draws liking, while it is pretty and young, and specially
our own which has nature to solicit, and needs no exhorting, to have it
well cherished, where there is no danger, but in to much dalying, neither yet
any fear, but in to fond cokkering.

But in very good earnest, Lettes.
when shall our boy be set to school? In all considerations, wherein upon the
resolution, something must be executed, and done, this thing is necessarily to
be first enquired, whether all, or most, or any of all the circunstances, which
be incident to the execution, be in, or without the parties power, which is to
execute, so as he may either proceed at his own liberty, if nothing
withstand him, or may not proceed, if he be thwarted by circunstance. For
otherwise the liberty to pass on, or the restraint, to stay, being not agreed
upon, he that directs by rule may be chekt by arrest. And where he biddes on
thus, circunstance may reply, Ifayth sir no. Wherefore I leave those parents
to their own discretion, in whom will seeks liberty, to do as she would, and
circunstance commandes her, to do as she may. The parent would have his child
begin to learn at such a time: circunstance says, no. He would have him
learn with such a man: some cause contrarieth. In such a place, in such a
sort: his power is to poor, to compass that he coueteth. Be not all these
lettes, and what so ever is so laid, to stop will of his will, where neither
counsel can give precept, nor the parent can execute, being so strongly
ouercharged? It is even like, as if one should say, the freeman and the bond,
be not both in one case. Precepts be for freemen, which may do as ye bid
them, but circunstance binds, and will be obeyed. Wherefore I must once for all,
warn those parents, which may not do as they would, upon these same lettes
which I have recited, or any other like, that they take their opportunity, when
so ever it is offered, because occasion is very bald behind, and seldom
comes the better. And seeing circunstance is their bridle, when they feel the
rain loose, course it on a maine, and take the benefit of time, the
opportunity of place, the commodity of the teacher, the equity of the manner,
and what so ever condition else, wherein the freedom of circunstance does seem
to befreind them. For saving with such a note as this is, I cannot direct them,
which can give no counsel, but where necessity is in ward, and liberty
keeps the keys.

Liberty.
But if the parent want nothing necessary, for his childs bringing up, neither
a place, both convenient for receipt, and commodious for distaunce, wherein to
have him taught: nor a teacher, sufficient for cunning, and considerate, for
either courtesy, or correction, who can train him up well: nor fit companions,
as so fit a place, and so good a master may pick out of choice, which will
throng unto him: And if the child also himself, have a wit apt to conceive,
what shall be put unto him: and a body able to bear the travel, which belonges
unto learning: me think it were then best, that he began to be doing, when he
may well perceive, without traveling his brain, thorough the hardness of the
thing, and need not be toiled to the wearines of his body, thorough the wise
handling, of his advised master. For being in the school, he may do somewhat
very well, though not very much, whereas roming about, he might hap to do ill,
and that very much.

At what years I cannot say, Variety of wits.
because ripenes in children, is not tied to one time, no more then all corn
is ripe for one reaping, though most what about one. Some be hastinges and will
on, some be hardinges, and draw back: some be willing when their parents
will: some but willing, when they will them selves, as either will to do well,
upon cherishing wisely, or pleasure to play still, upon cokkering fondly, has
possessed their minds.

But he that deserves to be a parent, must dispose himself to be also a
judge, in all these cases: and who is so ill freinded, as he has not one, with
whom to confer, to learn by advise, the towardnes and time of his young
sons schooling, if he be not able to look into it himself? They that
limitte the beginning to learn by some certain years, have an eye to that
knowledge, which it were pity were lost, say they, and may easily be gained
in those young years. I agree with them, that it were great pity, to lease
any thing, that need not be lost, without great negligence, and may be well
gotten, with very small diligence, not endammaging the child. But more pity it
were, for so petie a gain, to forgo a greater, to win an hour in the
morning, and lease the whole day after: as those people most commonly do,
which starte out of their beds to early, before they be well awaked: or know
what it is a clock: and be drousie when they are up, for want of their sleep.

If the child have a weak body, though never so strong a wit, let him grow
on the longer, till the strength of his body, do answer to his wit. For
experience has taught me, and calls reason to record, that a sharp young
wit hastened on to wounder at, for the quiknesse of his edge, has thereby
most commonly been hastened to his grave, thorough the weakness of body: to
the grief of the freindes, whose delight is cut of, and some wite of their
wit, for ouerhasting their child: Nay, what if it has pleased God to lend
him longer life? he never sinketh deep, but fleeteth still above, with some
quickness of conceit, continuing that wonder, which he wanne in his childhood:
never burdened with much to ballase his head: but still aunswering at
reboundes, the fairest crop of so hasty an harvest. Sometime his wit will
grow worse, the wonder will vanishe, the body will prove feeble, and soon
after perish.

But now if he live, with all these infirmities, of decaying wit, decreasing
wonder, puling body, he lives with small comfort, in such a world of
weakness, which usually comes of to much moisture, the corrupter of such
carcasses; the most vile, and violent massacrer, of the most, and best
students, generally for want of travel, saving only to their brain, which
the more it is occupied, the sorer it stilleth, and the sorer it stilleth, the
sooner it kills, the more the more pity. Wherefore I could wish the wittier
child, the less upon the spur, and either the longer kept from learning, for
turning his edge, as a to sharp knife: or the sklenderer kept at it, for fear
of surfait, in one hungring to have it. Yet must not this quickling be suffered
to do nothing at all, for fear he grow reasty, if that nothing be dumpishe,
and heavy: or pass beyond reclaim, if it be dissolute, and wanton.

The mean conceiuer, in some strength of body, is the best continuer, and as
he serves all places best, in his height of learning, so in all respects, ye
may venture on his schooling, when it shall please you, with but ordinary
regard.

A dull wit in a strong body, if ye like to have it learn, as by learning ye
find it: so till some degree, it may well learn, for necessary service in
the rest of his life: and may be hastened on boldly. For the body can bear
labor, it is so well boaned, and the wit will not cloye, it so hardly
receives. The sharpness of wit, the master will sound by memory, and
number: the strength of the body, the mother will mark, by complaint, and
cause.

A weak wit and as weak a body, is much to be moaned, for the great
infirmity, and can hardly be helped, because nature is to weak: and therefore it
must be thought on, as in a case of despair, again against hope: if any thing
be gotten, a grief to the freindes, which cannot amend it: small joy to him
self, which cannot avoid it.

A strong wit, in as strong a body, is worthy the wishing* of the parents
to bring forth, of the teacher to bring up. For as it is a thing of it self
not ordinary, so where it lights, it gives us the gaze, and bides all
beginninges, but that which is to soon, because God has provided that
strength in nature, whereby he entendes no exception in nurture, for that which
is in nature. Such spirits there be, and such bodies they have, if they will,
and may so keep them, with orderly regard, which is extreme hard unto them.
For that oftimes they will not do so, but distemper their bodies with
disordinate doings, when pleasures have possessed them, and rashenesse is
their ruler. Oftimes they may not, thorough variety and weight of important
affairs, which commands them too far in some kind of calling. But where
so ever they light, or what so ever way they take, they show what they be,
and always prove either the very best, or the most beastly. For there can
scantly be any mean in those constitutions, which are so notably framed, and
so rarely endued. And therefore those parents which have such children must
take great heed of them, as the tippes of evil, if they choose that way, or
the tops of good, if they mind that is best. For the middle and most
moderate wits, which commonly supply each corner in each country, and serve
most assaies, some ordinary mean will serve to order them: but where
extraordinary points begin to appear, there common order is not commonly
enough.

This is my opinion concerning the time, when the child shall begin to learn:
which I do restrain to the strength of wit and hardness of body: the one for
to receive learning the other not to refuse labor: and therefore I conclude
thus that the parent himself ought in reason to be more then half a judge of
the entry to schooling, as being best acquainted with the particular
circunstance of his own child. Yet I do not allow him to be an absolute judge,
without some counsel, unless he be a very rare father, and well able to be
both a rule to himself, and a pattern to others. Because most where men be
most blinded: where they should see best, I mean in their own: such a tyrant
is affection, when she has won the field, under the conducte of nature, and
so imperious is nature, when she is disposed to make affection her deputy.

Exercises.
But now for so much as in setting our child to school, we consider the
strength of his body, no less then we do the quickness of his wit, it
should seem that our train ought to be double, and to be applied to both the
parts, that the body may as well be preserved in his best, as the mind
instructed in that, which is his best, that the one may still be able to
answer the other well, in all their common executions. As for the training up
of the mind, the way is well beaten, because it is generally entreated on in
every book, and bears the honor and title of learning.

But for the bettering of the body, is there not any mean to maintain it in
health, and chiefly in the student, whose trade treads it down? Yes surely, A
very natural and a healthful course there is to be kept in exercise, whereby
all the natural functions of the body be excellently furthered, and the body
made fit for all his best functions. And therefore parents and masters ought
to take such a way, even from the beginning, as the childs diet, neither
stuff the body, nor choke the conceit, which it lightly does, when it is to
much crammed. That his garments which oftimes burden the body with weight,
sometimes weaken it with warmth, neither faint it with heat, nor freese it with
cold. That the exercise of the body still accompany and assist the exercise of
the mind, to make a dry, strong, hard, and therefore a long lasting body: and
by the favor thereof to have an active, sharp, wise and therewith all a well
learned soul. If long life be the childs blessing for honoring his parents,
why should not the parents then, which look for that honor, all that in them
lies, forsee in youth that their children may have some hope of that benefit,
to ensue in their age, which cannot take effect, unless the thing be begone in
their youth? Which if it be not by times looked unto, they afterward become
incapable of long life, and so not to ^nioye the reward of their honor, for
any thing that their parents help to it, though God will be true, and
perform that he promises, how so ever men hault in doing of their duty.
And yet tempting is pernicious, where the mean to hit right, is laid so
manifest: and the childs honor to his parents begins at obedience in his
infancy, which they ought to reward, with good qualities for honor, and may
work them like wax, because they do obey. This negligence of the parents for
not doing that, which in power they might, and in duty they ought, gives
contempt in the children some color of justice, to make their requital with
dishonor in their age, were it not that the Christian religion does forbid
revenge: which in presidentes of prophanisme we find allowed, where both
courtesy to such parents, as failed in education of their children is
countercharged by law: and dissolute parents by entreating ill, are well
entertained of their neglected children: the unfortunate children much moaned
for their chance, that they came to so ill an end: and the indiscreet
parents more rated for their charge, which they looked so ill to, whereby
themselves did seem to have forced such an end.

The mind will be stirring, because it stirs the body, and some good mean
will make it to furnish very well, so the choice be well made, wherein: the
order well laid, whereby: and both well kept, wherewith: it shall be thought best
trained. The body which lodges a restless mind by his own rest is betrayed
to the common murderers of a multitude of scholars, which be unwholesome and
superfluous humors, needelesse and noysom excrementes, ill to feel within,
good to send abroad.

Neither is it enough to say, that children will be stirring alwaie of
themselves, and that therefore they need not any so great a care, for
exercising their bodies. For if by causing them learn so and sitting still in
schools, we did not force them from their ingenerate heat, and natural
stirring, to an unnatural stillness, then their own stirring without
restraint, might seem to serve their turn, without more ado. But stillness
more then ordinary, must have stirring more then ordinary: and the still
breding of ill humors, which stuff up the body for want of stirring, must he
so handled, as it want no stilling to send them away. Wherefore as stillness
has her direction by order in schools, so must stirring be directed by well
appointed exercise. And as quiet sitting helps ill humors to breed, and
burden the body: so must much stirring make a way to discharge the one, and
to disburden the other. Both which helps, as I most earnestly require at the
parent, and masters hand: so I mean my self to handle them both, to the
helping of both.

In the mean while, for the entering time thus much. The wit must be first
wayed, how it can conceive, and then the body considered, how it can bear
labor: and the consorte of their strength advisedly maintained. They have both
their peculiar functions, which by mediocrities are cherished, by extremities
perished, have doing most harm, even to the most, and lingering not but some,
sometimes to the best. And yet haste is most harmefull, where so ever, it setts
foot, as we that teach alwaie find, and they that learn, sometimes feel.
For the poor children when they perceive their own weakness, whereof most
commonly they may thank haste, they both faint, and fear, and very hardly
get forward: and we that teach do meet with to much toil, when poor young
babes be committed to our charge, before they be ripe. Whom if we beat we do
the children wrong in those tender years to plant any hatred, when love should
take root, and learning grow by liking.

And yet oftimes severity is to sour, while the master beats the parents
folly, and the childs infirmity, with his own fury. All which extremities
some little discretion would easily remove, by conference before, to forecast
what would follow, and by following good counsel, when it is given before.
Which will then prove so, when the parent will do nothing in placing or
displacing of his child, without former advise, and communicating with the
master: and the master likewise without respecting his own gain, will
plainly and simply show the parent or friend, what upon good consideration he
thinks to be best. Wherein there will be no error if the parent be wise, and
the master be honest.

Chapter 5. What things they be, wherein children are to be trained, ear they
pass to the Grammar. That parents, and masters ought to examine the natural
abilities in their children, whereby they become either fit, or unfit, to this,
or that kind of life. The three natural powers in children, Wit to conceive
by, Memory to retain by, Discretion to discern by. That the training up to
good manners, and nurture, does not belong to the teacher alone, though most to
him, next after the parent, whose charge that is most, because his
commandment is greatest, over his own child, and beyond appeal. Of Reading,
Writing, Drawing, Music by voice, and instrument: and that they be the
principal principles, to train up the mind in. A general answer to all
objections, which arise against any, or all of these.
NOw that I have showed mine opinion concerning the time, when it were best to
set the child to school, the next two questions seem to be, what he shall
learn and how he shall be exercised, when he is at school. For seeing he is
compound of a soul and a body: the soul to conceive and comprehend, what is
best for it self, and the body to: The body to wait, and attend the
commandment and necessities of the soul: he must be so trained, as neither
for qualifying of the mind, nor for enabling of the body, there be any such
defecte, as just blame therefore may be laid upon them, which in nature be most
willing, and in reason thought most skillful, to preuente such defaultes. For
there be both in the body, and the soul of man certain ingenerate abilities,
which the wisdom of parents, and reason of teachers, perceiving in their
infancy, and by good direction auancing them further, during those young
years, cause them prove in their ripeness very good and profitable, both to
the parties which have them, and to their countries, which use them. Which
natural abilities, if they be not perceived, by whom they should: do condemn
all such, either of ignorance, if they could not judge, or of negligence, if
they would not seek, what were in children, by nature emplanted, for nurture
to enlarge. And if they be perceived, and either missorted in place, or ill
applied in choice, as in difference of judgments, there be many things
practiced, which were better unproven, to the loss of good time, and let of
better stuff, they do bewray that such teachers, and trainers, be they
parents, be they masters, either have no sound skill, if it come of
infirmity, or but raw heads, if it spring of fancy. If they know the
inclination, and do not further it rightely, it is impiety to the youth, more
then sacrilege to the state, which by their fault be not suffered to enjoy
those excellent benefits, which the most munificent God, by his no niggardishe
nature, provided for them both. If they found them, and followed them, but not
so fully, as they were to receive: if for want wherewith, it deserves pardon, if
for want of will, exceeding blame: and cries for correction of the state by
them hindered, and small thanks of the parties, no more furthered.

Wherefore as good parents, and masters ought to find out, by those natural
principles, whereunto the younglings may best be framed, so ought they to follow
it, until it be complete, and not to stay, without cause beyond stay, before
it come to ripeness, which ripeness, while they be in learning, must be
measured by their ablenes to receive that, which must follow their
forebuilding: but when they are thought sufficiently well learned, and to
meddle with the state, then their ripeness is to be measured, by use to
themselves, and service to their country, in peace, as best and most natural,
in war, as worse, and most unnatural, and yet the ordinary end of a
disordered peace. For when the things, which be learned do cleave so fast in
memory, as neither discontinuaunce can deface them, nor forgetfulness
abolishe them: then is ability upon ascent, and when ascent is in the highest,
and the country commaundes service, then study must be left, and the country
must be served.

Seeing therefore in appointing the matter, wherein this train must be employed,
there is regard to be had first to the soul, as in nature more absolute, and
in value more precious: and then to the body, as the instrument and mean,
whereby the soul shows what is best to be done in necessity of fine force, in
choice of best show: I will remitte the body to his own room, which is
peculiarly in exercises, saving where I cannot mean the soul, without mention
of the body, and in this place I will entreat of the soul alone, how it must
be qualified. And yet mean I not to make any anatomy, or resolution of the
soul his parts and properties, a discourse, not belonging to this so low a
purpose, but only to pick out some natural inclinatio^s in the soul, which as
they seem to crave help of education, and nurture, so by education, and
nurture, they do prove very profitable, both in private and public. To the
which effect, in the little young souls, first we find, a capacity to perceive
that which is taught them, and to imitate the foregoer. That wit to learn,
as it is led, and to follow as it is foregone, would be well applied, by
propriety in matter, first offered them to learn: by considerate ascent in
order, increasing by degrees: by wary handling of them, to draw them onward
with courage. We find also in them, as a quickenes to take, so a fastness to
retain: therefore their memory would straight way be furnished, with the
very best, seeing it is a treasury: exercised with the most, seeing it is of
receite: never suffered to be idle, seeing it spoils so soon. For in defaulte
of the better, the worse will take chair, and bid it self welcome: and if
idleness enter, it will exclude all earnest, and call in her kinsfolks, toys
and triffles, easy for remembrance, heavy for repentance.

We find in them further an ability to discern, what is good, and what is ill,
which ought forthwith to be made acquainted with the best, by obedience and
order, and dissuaded from the worse, by misliking and frown. These three
things, wit to take, memory to keep, discretion to dscern, and more if ye
seek, though but branches to these, which I choose for my purpose, shall ye
find pearing out of the little young souls: when you may see what is in them,
and not they themselves. Whose ability to increase in time, and infirmity to
crawle at that time is commended to them, which first begot them, or best can
frame them. Now these natural towardnesses being once espied, in what degree
they rise, because there is ods in children by nature, as in parents by
purchase, they must be followed with diligence, increased by order, encouraged
by comfort, till they come to their proof. Which proof travel in time will
perform, have knittes up to soon, and imperfect, flownesse to late, and to
weak.

But for the best way of their good speed, that wit may conceive and
learn well, memory retain and hold fast, discretion choose and discern best,
the chief and chariest point is, so to plie them all, as they may proceed
voluntarily, and not with violence, that will may be a good boy, ready to do
well, and loathe to do ill, never fearing the rod, which he will not deserve.
For wheresoever will in effecting, does join with ability to conceive, and
memory to retain, there industry will find fruit, The rule of discretion.
yea in the frown of fortune. By discretion to cause them take to that, which
is best, and to forsake that, which is worst, in common dealinges is common to
all men, that have interest in children, parents by nature, masters by
charge, neighbors of courtesy, all men of all humanity: whom either private
care by custom, or public cure by commandment of magistrate and law, does
compel in conscience to help their well doing, and to fray them from ill,
wheresoever they meet them, or when so ever they see them do that, which is
naught. And therefore that duty to help them in this kind for their manners,
is incident to masters but among others, though somewhat more then some others,
as to whom it is most seemly, because of their authority, and most proper,
because of their charge, whom knowledge best enfourmeth to embrew them with the
best: and power best assisteth, to cause them embrace the best: even perforce
at the first, till acquaintance in time breed liking of it self.

But this mannering of them is not for teachers alone, because they communicate
therein, as I have said already, both with natural parents, to whom that point
appertains nearest, as of most authority with them, and with all honest
persons, which seeing a child doing evil, are bid in conscience, to terrify
and check him as the quality of the childs offense, and the circu^sta^ce of
their own person does seem best to require.

Wherefore reserving for the teacher so much as is for his office, to enstruct
the child what is best for him in matter of manners, and to see to it, so much
as in him lies: to set good orders in his government, to see them always well,
and one way still executed and performed, I refer the rest to those, whom
either any virtuous consideration of them selves, or any particular duty,
enjoined by law, does charge with the rest, either by private discipline at
home, or by public ordinance abroad, to see youth well brought up that
way: to learn to discern that which is well from ill, good from bad,
religious from profane, honest from dishonest, commendable from blameworthy,
seemly from unseemly, that they may honor God, serve their country, comfort
their freindes, and aid one an other, as good countrymen are bound to do. But
how to handle their conceit in taking, and their memory, in holding, because
that appertains to teachers wholly: (for all that the parents and freindes,
will be medlers sometime, to further their young impes:) I will deal in that, and
show wherein children ought to be trained, till they be found fit for Grammar:
wherein nevertheless, both the matters, which they learn: and the manners,
which they are made to, serve for ground to virtue, and increase of discretion.

As I might very well be esteemed inconsiderate, if I should force any far
fet diuises into these my principles, which neither my country knew, nor her
custom cared for, so dealing but with those, and resting content with those,
which my country has severed to her private use, and her custom is
acquainted with of long continuance, I may hope for consent, where my
country commends, and look for success, where custom leads my hand, and
fear no note of novelty, where nothing is but ancient.

Amongst these my countries most familiar principles, Reading.
reading offers her self first in the entry, chosen upon good ground
continued upon great proof, enrowled among the best, and the very foremost of
the best, by her own effects, as very many so very profitable. For whether
you mark the nature of the thing, while it is in getting, or the goodness
thereof when it is gotten, it must needs be the first, and the most fruitful
principle, in training of the mind. For the letter is the first and simplest
impression in the trade of teaching, and nothing before it. The knitting and
iointing whereof grows on very infinitely, as it appears most plainly by
daily spelling, and continual reading, till partly by use, and partly by
argument, the child get the habit, and cunning to read well, which being once
gotten, what a cluster of commodities does it bring with all? what so ever any
other, for either profit or pleasure, of force or freewill, has published to
the world, by pen or printe, for any end, or to any use, it is by reading
all made to serve us: in religion to love and fear God, in law to obey and
please men: in skill to entertain knowledge, in will to expel ignorance, to
do all in all, as having by it all helps to do all things well. Wherefore I
make reading, my first and fairest principle of all other, as being simply the
first in substance, and leaning to none, but leading all other, and growing
after so great, as it raungeth over all, being somewhat without other, other
nothing without it: and a thing of such moment, as it is vainly begone, if it
be not soundly gotten, and being once sound it self: it delivers the next
master from manifest toil, and the child himself from marvelous trouble,
from fear where he fails not, from staggering, where he stops not, with
comfort where he knows, with courage, where he dare, a security to the
parent, a safty to each party. I wish the child to have his reading thus
perfect, and ready, in both the English and the Latin tongue very long before
he dream of his Grammar.

The reading of English first.
Of the which two, at whether it were better to begin, by some accident of late
it did seem somewhat doubtful: but by nature of the tongues, the verdit is
given up. For while our religion was restrained to the Latin, it was either the
only, or the onelyest principle in learning, to learn to read Latin: as most
appropriate to that effect, which the Church then esteemed on most.

But now that we are returned home to our English abce, as most natural to our
soil, and most propter to our faith, the restraint being repealed, and we
restored to liberty, we are to be directed by nature, and property, to read
that first, which we speak first, and to care for that most, which we ever use
most* because we need it most: and to begin our first learning there, where we
have most helps, to learn it best, by familiarity of our ordinary language,
by understanding all usual arguments, by continual company of our own
countreyme^, all about us speaking English, and none uttering any words but
those, which we our selves are well acquainted with, both in our learning and
living.

There be two special, whether ye will call them rules, or notes, to be
observed in teaching, whereof the first is: That things be so taught, as that
which goes before, may induce that, which follows by natural consequence of
the thing it self, not by erroneous missorting of the deceived chuser, who
like unto an unskillful host oftimes misplaceth even the best of his guestes,
by not knowing their degrees.

The second is, that those things be put unto children, which being confessed
to be most necessary, and most proper to be learned in those years, have lest
sense, to their feeling, and most labor, without fainting. For can any grown
man so moile him self, without to much cumber, with either the principles of
Grammar, or cunning without book, as a child will, the ones memory being
empty, the other being distracte with diversity of thoughts? Reason directes
years, and roate rules in youth, reason calls in sense and feeling of pain,
roate runs on apase and minds nothing else but either play in the end, or
a little praise for a great deal of pains. Now praise never wearies, nor pain
ever but wearies, and play pleases children with any, yea the greatest
iniquity of circunstance, whether the weather lowre, or the master frown, so
he will give them leave to go. Though the Latin tongue be already discharged of
all superfluities, exempt from custom, to change it, and laid up for
knowledge, to cherish it: and of long time has been smoothed both to the eye,
and to the ear: yet in course of teaching it does not naturally draw on the
English, which yet remains in her lees vnrackt and not fined, though it grow
on very fair. Our spelling is harder, our pronouncing harsher, our syllabe
has commonly as many letters, as the whole Latin word has. So that both
consequence, and hardness prefer the English. Even here must memory begin
her first train, and store her self with such stuff, as shall lay the best
foundation to religion and obedience, which beginning in these years, will
crepe on very strongly, and no less soundly: so that the child cannot but
prove very good in age, which was so consideratly entered in his youth. What the
things shall be, wherein both reading must travel, and memory must make
choice, I will show in mine Elementarie wherein the whole education before
Grammar shall be comprised.

Writing.
Next to reading follows writing, in some reasonable distance after, because
it requires some strength of the hand, which is not so soon stayed nor so
stiff to write, as the tongue is stirring and ready to read. And though writing
in order of train do succeed reading, yet in nature and time it must needs be
elder. For the pen or some other penlike instrument did carue and counterfeat
the letter or some letterlike devise first rawly and rudely, neither all at
once: then finely and fully, when all was at once: and thereby did let the eye
behold that in charact, which the voice delivered to the ear in sound, which
being so set down to utter the power and knitting of the articulate voice, and
afterward observed to express them in deed, caused writing be much used as
interpreter to the mind, and reading be embrased as expounder to the pen,
and expressing that in force, which the pen set down in form. Whereby it
must needs follow, that raw and rude charactes, were the primitive writing,
which being expressed what they did signify brought forth reading: and that
experience upon trial of their virtues made so much of them both, as she
recommended them to profit, to have them appointed for principles in the
training up of youth. So that reading being but the expresser of the written
charactes must needs acknowledge and confess her puniship to writing, of whom
she took both her being and her beginning.

To limite any one cause how writing began, or to run over the inuentours of
things to find out who devised it first, were to guess at some uncertain,
though probable conjecture, without any assurance, to build on, as the thing
it self is of small importance, for any to tarry on. It is more then likely,
whereof so ever the first charact came, that necessity caught hold of it, to
serve her own turn, and so enlarged it still, till it came to that
perfection which we see it now in. I will neither paint out reading with such
ornaments, as it needs not, neither praise writing with such arguments, as
it craves not. For it is praise enough to a good thing to be confessed good,
and what so ever is said more, is doubtfully to ground that, which is
determinatly granted, and to seek for defense when the forte is surrendered.
After that reading was reduced into form, and brought to her best, she fined
her foundresse, and is therefore above all praise, because she makes the eye,
the paragon sense, by benefit of that object. And writing it self has
profited so much, since it has been perfited, as it now proves the proppe to
remembrance, the executour of most affairs, the deliverer of secrets, the
messager of meaninges, the enheritance of posterity, whereby they receive
whatsoever is left them, in law to live by, in letters to learn, in evidence
to enjoy. To come by this thing so much commended, so, as it may bring forth
all her effects redily, and roundly, these notes must be kept. That the
master learn himself and teach his scholar a fair letter and a fast, for
plainness and speed: That the matter of his example be pithie, and proper, to
enrich the memory with profitable provision: and that the learning to write be
not left of, until it be very perfect: because writing being ones perfectly
gotten does make a wonderful riddance in the rest of our learning. For the
master may be bold to charge his child with writing of his gear, when he
finds him able, to dispatch that with ease, what so ever is enjoined him.
Neither shall that child ever complain of difficulty after, which can read
and write perfectly before. For first he has purchased Plato in the like case
of knowledge, terms Arithmetic and Geometry his two wings wherewith to fly
up to heaven, 7. De Rep*
from whence he does fetch the true direction of his imprisoned ignorant.
Secondly he has declared brusteth out into much beating, to the dulling of the
child, and discouraging of the master: and because of the to timely onset, to
little is done in to long a time, and the school is made a torture, which as it
bringes forth delight in the end, when learning is held fast, so should it
pass on very pleasantly by the way, while it is in learning: And generally
this I do think of perfiting, and making up, as children go on: (seeing the
argument it self does draw my pen so forcibly forward,) that it must needs
be most perfectly good. For what if opportunity either to go any further at
all, or at least to go so on, as their freindes did set them in, be suddenly
cut of, either by loss of freindes, or lack in freindes, or some other
misfortune? were it not good that they had so much perfectly, as they are
practiced in? which being imperfectly had, will either stand them in very small
steed, or in none at all. To write and read well which may be jointly gotten is
a pretty stock for a poor boy to begin the world with all.

Writing the English hand first.
The same reasons which moved me to have the child read English before Latin, do
move me also, to wish him to write English before Latin, as a thing of more
hardness, and redier in use to answer all occasions. Thus far I do think
that all my countrymen will join with me, and allow their children the use,
of their letter and pen. For those that can write and read may not gainsaie,
least I ask of them why they learned themselves? If they that cannot, do
mislike that they have not, I will ask of them, why they wish so often for them?

Drawing.
Some controversy before the thing be consideratly thought on, but none after,
may arise about this next, which is to draw with pen or pencill, a cosen
germain to fair writing, and of the self same charge. For pen and penknife,
incke and paper, compass and ruler, a deske and a dustboxe will set them both
up, and in these young years, while the finger is flexible, and the hand fit
for frame, it will be fashioned easily. And commonly they that have any
natural towardness to write well, have aknacke of drawing to, and declare
some evident conceit in nature bending that way. And as judgment by
understanding is a rule to the mind to discern what is honest, seemly, and
suitable in matters of the mind, and such arguments as fall within compass of
general reason exempt from sense: so this quality by drawing with pen or
pencill, is an assured rule for the sense to judge by, of the proportion and
seemelines of all aspectable things. As he that knows best, how to keep that
himself, which is comely in fashion, can also best judge, when comeliness of
fashion is kept by any other. And why is it not good to have every part of the
body: and every power of the soul to be fined to his best? And seeing that must
be looked unto long before, which must serve us best always after, why ought we
not to ground that thoroughly in youth, which must requite us again with grace
in our age? If I or any else should seem to contemn that principle, which
brought forth Apelles, and that so known a crew of excellent painters, so many
in number, so marvelous in cunning, so many statuaries, so many architectes:
nay whose use all modelling, all mathematikes, all manuaries do find and
confess to be to so notorious and so needful: both I and that any else might
well be supposed to see very little, not seeing the use of that, which is
labored for sight, and most delitefull to see. Neither is the devise mine, as
if it were, repentance has repulse. For what so ever I do allow in others,
which for the devise do deserve well, I deserved not ill, in mine opinion, if I
were my self the first deviser thereof. That great philosopher Aristotle in the
eight book and third chapter of his Politikes, and not there only, as not he
alone, joins writing and reading, which he compriseth under this word,
(...), with drawing by pen or pencill, which I translate his (...), both the
two of one parentage and petigree, as things peculiarly chosen to bring up
youth, both for quantity in profit, and for quality in use. There he says,
that as writing and reading do minister much help to trafficque, to
householdrie, to learning, and all public dealinges: so drawing by pen or
pencill, is very requisite to make a man able to judge, what that is which he
byeth of artificers and crafts men, for substance, form, and fashion,
durable and handsome or no: and such other necessary services, besides the
delitefull and pleasant.

For the setting of colors I do not much stand in, howbeit if any dexterity
that way do draw the child on, it is an honest man's living and I dare not
condemn that famous fellowship: which is so renowned for handling the pencill.
A large field is here offered to praise the praiseworthy, and to paint them out
well, which painted all things so well, as the world still wondereth at the
hearing of their works. But the praise of painting is no part of my purpose at
this time, but the appointing of it among the training principles, being so
aunciently allowed, so necessary in so many things, so great a ground to so
gallant a mystery, as that profession is, whereof Apelles was: and last of all,
so near a cosen to the fairest writing, whose cradlefellow it is.

Music.
Music makes up the sum, and is divided into two parts, the voice and the
instrument, whereof the voice resembles reading: as yealding that to the ear,
which it sees with the eye: and the instrument writing, by counterfeting the
voice, both the two in this age best to be begone, while both the voice and the
iointe be pliable to the train. The voice craves less cost to execute her
part, being content with so much only, as writing, and drawing did provide for
their furniture, when they began their household. The instrumente seems to be
more costly, and claims both more care in keeping, and more charge in
compassing. For the pleasantness of Music there is no man that does doubt,
because it seems in some degree to be a medicine from heaven, against our
sorrows upon earth. Some men think it to be too too sweet, and that it may be
either quite forborne, or not so much followed. For mine own part I dare not
dispraise it, which has so great defendours, and deserves so well, and I must
needs allow it, which place it among those, that I do esteem the chief
principles, for training up of youth, not of mine own head alone, but by the advice of all antiquity, all learned philosophy, all skillful training, which
make Music still one of the principles, when they handle the question, what
things be best, to bring youth first up in. If I had sought occasion of
raunging discourse which I still avoid, but where the opening of some point,
does lighten the thing, and may delight the reader, whom flat and stearne
setting down, by way of aphorism, would soon weary, (though many not of the
meanest would allow of that kind exceeding well:) I might have found out many
digressio^s long ago, or if I had taken hold of that which has been offered,
I have met with many such, since I began first to write: but of all, in all
sorts I do not find any, wherein speech might so spreede all the sails,
which she has, and the pen might use, all the pencilling, which she can: as
in painting out the praise and ornaments of Music. The matter is so ample,
the ground so large, the reasons so many, which sound to her renown: the thing
it self so ancient, and so honorable, so general, and so private, so in
Churches, and so without, so in all ages, and in all places, both highely
preferred, and richely rewarded: the princess of delites, and the delight of
princes: such a pacifier in passion, such a maistres to the mind, so excellent
in so many, so esteemed by so many, as even multitude makes me wonder, and with
all to stay my hand, for fear that I shall not easily get thence, if I enter
once in. I will not therefore digress: because there is better stuff in place,
and more fit for my purpose, then the praise of Music is. The Philosophers,
and Physicians, do allow the straining, and recoylong of the voice in children,
yea though they cry, and baule, beside their singing, and showting: by the
way of exercise to stretche, and keep open the hollow passages, and inward
pipes of the tender bulk, whereby Music will prove a double principle both
for the soul, by the name of learning, and for the body, by the way of
exercise, as hereafter shall appear.

But for the whole matter of Music, this shall be enough for me to say at this
time, that our country does allow it: that it is very comfortable to the
wearyed mind: a preparatiue to persuasion: that he must needs have a head out
of proportion, which cannot perceive: or does not delight in the proportions of
number, which speak him so fair: that it is best learned in childehood, when
it can do least harm, and may best be had: that if the constitution of man
both for body and soul, had not some natural, and nighe affinity with the
concordances of Music, the force of the one, would not so soon stir up, the
cosen motion in the other. It is wonderful that is written, and strange that we
see, what is wrought thereby in nature of Physic, for the remedying of some
desperate diseases.

Miscontentme^t.
And yet there grows some misco^tenteme^t with it, though it be never so good,
and that not only in personages of whom I make small account, but in some very
good, honest, and well disposed natures, though to stearnly bent, which
nevertheless, for all their stearnnes, will resign over their sentence, and
alter their opinion, sometimes of themselves upon deeper meditation, what the
thing in it self is, sometime by induceme^t, when they fall in with other which
are better resolved: but most chiefly the^, when Music it self consideratly
applied, has for a while obtained the favorable use of their listening ears.
The science it self has naturally a very forcible strength to try and to
tuche the inclination of the mind, to this or that affection, thorough the
property of number, whereon it consists, which made the Pythagorian, and not
him alone to plat the soul out so much upon number. It is also very pleasant
for the harmony and concent, whereby the hearer discouers his disposition, and
lettes pleasure play upon the bitte, and dalye with the bridle, as delight will
not be drowned, nor driven to hidebare. For which cause Music moves great
misliking to some men that way, as to great a prouoker to vain delites, still
laying bait, to draw on pleasure: still opening the mind, to the entry of
lightness. And in matters of religion also, to some it seems offensive,
because it carries away the ear, with the sweetness of the melody, and
bewitcheth the mind with a Syrenes sound, pulling it from that delight, wherein
of duty it ought to dwell, unto harmonicall fantasies, and withdrawing it,
from the best meditations, and most virtuous thoughts to foreign conceits,
and wandering devises. Answer.
For one answer to all, if abuse of a thing, which may be well used, and had
her first being to be well used, be a sufficient condemnation to the thing that
is abused, let glotonie forbid meat, distempering drink, pride apparel,
heresy religion, adultery marriage, and why not, what not? Nay which of all
our principles shall stand, if the persons blame, shall blemish the thing? We
read foolish books, whereat to laugh, nay wherein we learn that, which we
might and ought forbear: we write strange things, to serve our own fancy,
if we sway but a little to any lewd folly: we paint and draw pictures, not to
be set in Churches, but such as private houses hide with curtains, not to save
the colors, but to cover their owners, whose lightness is discovered, by such
lascivious obiectes. Shall reading therefore be reft from religion? shall
private, and public affairs, lease the benefit of writing? shall sense forgo
his forsight, and the beautifier of his object? Change thou thy direction, the
things will follow thee more swifte to the good, then the other to the bad,
being capable of both, as things of use be, and yet bending to the better.
Man's fault makes the thing seem filthy. Apply thou it to the best, the
choice is before thee. It is the ill in thee, which seems to corrupt the
good in the thing, which good, though it be defaced by thy ill, yet shines it
so clear, as it bewraieth the natural beauty, even thorough the cloud of
thy greatest disgracing. Music will not harm thee, if thy behavior be good,
and thy conceit honest, it will not miscary thee, if thy ears can carry it,
and sort it as it should be. Appoint thou it well, it will serve thee to good
purpose: if either thy manners be naught, or thy judgment corrupt, it is not
Music alone which thou do abuse, neither cannest thou avoid that blame,
which is in thy person, by casting it on Music, which thou have abused and not
she thee. And why should those people, which can use it rightly, forgo their
own good, or have it with embasing to pleasure some peuishe, which will not
yet be pleased? or seek to heal sores, which will festure still, and never
skin, though ye plaster them daily, to your own displeasure. But am I not to
tedious? This therefore shall suffice now, that children are to be trained up in
the Elementarie school, for the helping forward of the abilities of the mind,
in these four things, as commanded us by choice and commended by custom.
Reading, to receive that which is bequeathed us by other, and to serve our
memory with that which is best for us. VVriting to do the like thereby for
others, which other have done for us, by writing those things which we daily
use: but most of al to do most for our selves: Drawing to be a directour to
sense, a delight to sight, and an ornament to his obiectes. Music by the
instrument, besides the skill which must still increase, in form of exercise
to get the use of our small joints, before they be knitte, to have them the
nimbler, and to put Musicianes in mind, that they be no brawlers, least by
some swash of a sword, they chance to lease a iointe, an irrecouerable jewel
unadvisedly cast away. Music by the voice, besides her cunning also, by the
way of Physic, to sprede the voice instruments within the body, while they
be yet but young. As both the kinds of Music for much profit, and more
pleasure, which is not void of profit in her continuing kind. All four for
such uses as be infinite in number, as they know best, which have most
knowledge and the parents must learn, to lead their children to them: and the
children must believe, to win their parents choice, which may be in all, if
they themselves list, if they list not, in no more then they like, their
restraining conceit neither bridling, nor abbridging any other man's intent,
which seeks after more. And though all young ones be not thus far trained,
yet we may perceive, that all these be used, in particular proofs, and not to
be refused in general trade, where all turns be served, by setting foorh of
all things that be generally in use, though not generally used. Thus much of
these things at this time, which I do mean by Gods grace to handle in their
own Elementarie, as precisely and yet, as properly, as ever I can.

Chapter 6. Of exercises and training the body. How necessary a thing exercise
is. What health is, and how it is maintained: what sickness is, how it
comes, and how it is prevented. What a part exercise plays in the
maintenance of health. Of the student and his health. That all exercises
though they stir some one part most, yet help the whole body.
THe soul and body being coparteners in good and ill, in sweet and sour, in
mirth and mourning, and having generally a common sympathy, and a mutual
feeling in all passions: how can they be, or rather why should they be severed
in train? the one made strong, and well qualified, the other left feeble, and
a pray to infirmity? will ye have the mind to obtain those things, which
be most proper unto her, and most profitable unto you, when they be obtained?
Then must ye also have a special care, that the body be well appointed, for
fear it shrink, while ye be either in course to get them, or in case to use
them. For as the powers of the soul come to no proof, or to very small, if
they be not fostered by their natural train, but wither and dye, like corn
not reaped, but suffered to rotte by negligence of the owner, or by contention
in challenge: even so, nay much more, the body being of it self lumpishe and
earthy, must needs either dye in drowsinesse, or live in looseness, if it be
not stirred and trained diligently to the best. And though the soul, as the
fountain of life, and the quickner of the body, may and will bear it out for
some while, thorough valiantness of courage: yet weakness will not be
always dissembled, but in the end will and must bewraie her own want, even
then perauenture, when it were most pity. Many notable personages for
stomach and courage, many excellent men for learning and skill, in most and
best professions have then left their lives, thorough the plain weakness, of
their contemned bodies, when they put their countries in most apparent and
gladsome hope of rare and excellent effects, the one of valiantness and
manhood, the other of knowledge and skill. Seeing therefore there is a good in
them both, which by diligent endeavor may be auaunced to that, for which it was
ordained, and by negligent oversight, does either decay quite, or prou^s not
so well, as otherwise it might, I may not slightly pass over the bodies
good, being both so near, and so necessary a neighbor unto the soul:
considering I have bestowed so much pains already, and must bestow much more,
in the service of the soul: nay rather considering I deal with the body but
once, and that only here, whereas I entreat of the soul, and the furniture
thereof in what so ever I shall meddle with, in my whole course hereafter. If
common sense did not teach us the necessity of this point, and extreme
feeblenes did not force men to confess, how great feats they could do, and
how active they would prove, if their weak limbs and failing joints, would
answer the lusty courage, and brave swinge of their fiery and fresh
spirits: I would take pains to persuade them by arguments, both of proof in
experience, and of reason in nature, that as it is easy, so it were needful
to help the body by some train, not left at randon to liberty, but brought
in to form of ordinary discipline, generally in all men, because all men
need help, for necessary health, and ready execution of their natural
actions: but particularly for those men, whose life is in leisure, whose
brains be most busied, and their wits most wearied, in which kind students
be no one small part, but the greatest of all, which so use their minds as if
they cared not for their bodies, and yet so need their bodies, as without the
strength and soundness whereof, they be good for nothing, but to moan
themselves, and to make other marvel, why they take no more heed, how to do
that long, which they do so well, being a thing within compass of their own
care, and knowledge. For who is so gross, as he will deny that exercise does
good, and that so great, as is without comparison, seeing old Asclepiades is by
Galene confuted, and stawled for an ass: as Erasistratus also his dissembling
friend? or who is so sore tied either to study, or to stocks, as he cannot
stir himself if he will, or ought not if he may? But the matter being
confessed, even by the most idle, and unweildy to be healthful and good, I
shall need no more reason, to procure assent, and allowaunce for exercise. My
whole travel therefore must be to find out, and set forth, what shall be
requisite to the perfourmaunce of this point, concerning the train and
exercising of the body, that it may prove healthy, and live long: and be ready
to assist, all the actions of the mind.

Wherein therefore consists the health of the body, and how is it to be
maintained until such time, as nature shall dismantle, and pull it down her
self? To answer this question, and withal to declare, how great an officer
to health Galen also that great Physician, neither Galen only, ^. De sani.
tuen.
though sufficient alone, but all that ever lived, and were chief of that
liuerie, that who so can apply the mind well with learning, and the body
with exercise, shall make both a wise mind, and a healthful body in their
best kind. Wherefore seeing I have set down wherein the train of the mind
does consist, so much as the Elementarie course does admit, and must perform,
and so far as these my Positions require at this time, whose profession is
not to tarry, though it tuche them: I will now handle that other part of
exercise, wherewith the body is either to be kept in health, or to be helped to
health: and that not only in the Elementarie, to whom this treatise should
seem to answer, but also in the general student during his whole life:
which must always rule himself by those circunstances, which direct the
application of exercise, according to time age, etc. and shall be handled
herafter.

There be in the body of man, What is health and sickness.
the force of four elements, fire and air, water and earth, and the pith of
their primitive, and principal qualities, heat and couldnesse, moisture and
dryness, which the Physicians call the similarie parts, of the similitude and
likeness that they have, not the one to the other, but the parts of each to
their own whole, because every least part, or degree of these great ones,
bear the name of the whole, as every part or parcel of fire, is called fire,
no less then the whole fire, of water, water, of aier, aier, of earth, earth,
and every degree of heat, is heat, of cold, is cold, of moisture, is moisture,
of dryness, is dryness, though greater and smaller, less and more, be
epithetes unto them, as either their quantity, or quality does sprede or
close.

There be also in the same body certain isntrumental parts, compounded and
consisting in substance of the similarie, which the body does use in the
executing of the natural functions, and workinges thereof. Now when these
similarie parts be so tempered, and disposed, as no one does excede any other
in proportion to ouerrule, but all be as one in consent to preserve: and the
isntrumental parts also be so correspondent one to an other, in composition
and greatness, in number and measure, as nature thorough the temperature of
the first, may absolutely use the perfectness of the last, to execute and
perform without let or stop, what appertains to the maintenance of her
self: it is called health, and the contrary, disease, both in the whole
body, and in every part thereof. In the whole body by distemperature of the
whole, in some part, by composition, out of place, and disioynted, by greatness,
being to big or to small: by measure, being misshapen and fashionles: by
number, being to many and needless: or to few, and failing. This health
whether it be in the middle degree, wherein all executions be complete without
any sensible let: and no infirmity appears, that the body feels with any
plain offense* Or if it be in the perfectest degree, which is so seldom, as
never any saw, because of great frailty, and britlenesse in our nature: it
never continues in one estate, but alters still, and runs to ruin,
without both speedy and daily, nay without hourly reparation.

The causes which alter, and change it so, be sometime from within the body,
and were borne with it: sometime from without, and yet not without danger.
From within, the very property and pithe of our original substance, and
matter whence we grew, alters us first, which as it begins, and grows in
moisture, so it ends, and stays in dryness, and in the end decays the
body with to much dryness, which extreme though natural withering, we call
old age, which though it come by course, and commandment of nature, yet
bears it the name, and title of disease, because it decays the body, and
delivers it to death. From within also, the continual rebating, and falling
away of somewhat from the body, occasioneth much change, nay that is most
cause of greatest change, and kills incontinent by mere defect, if it be
not supplied.

To these two causes of inward alteration, there answer two other foreign
causes, both unwholesome, and perilous, the air, which enuironneth us, and
violence, which is offered us. The former of the two, decaing our health with
to much heat, cold, dryness, and moisture of it self: or by noysomnesse of
the soil, and corruption in circunstance. The second, by strong hand brusing,
or breaking, wounding or wiping away, of some one part of the body, or else
killing the whole consort of the body with the soul, and taking away life
from it. These four overthrows of our bodies and health, old age, waste,
air, and violence, find by help of nature, and art, certain oppositions,
which either divert them quite, if they may be avoided, or keep them of
longer, if they may be differred, or mittigate their malice, when it is
perceived. For foreign violence, foresight will look to, where casualtie
commaundes not, and cannot be foreseen. For infection by the air, that it do
not corrupt and mar so much as it would, wisdom will provide, and defend
the body from the injuries, and wrongs thereof. That old age grow not on to
fast, circunspectnes in diet, consideration in clothes, diligence in well
doing, will easily provide, both for the mind not to enfect, first it self and
then the body: and for the body not to enforce the mind, by too impotent
desires. That waste wear not, meat takes in chardge, to supply that is dry,
and decays: drink promises to restore moisture, when it does diminishe: the
breath it self, and arteriall pulse, look to heating and cooling. And Physic
in general professing foresight to prevent evils, and offering redress, when
they have done harm, so not incurable, does direct both those and all other
means. Now in all these helps, and most beneficial aides of our afflicted
nature, which deuiseth all means to save her self harmless, and deliteth
therein, when she is discharged of infirmities, to much stuffes and stiffles, to
little straites and pines, both undo the natural. To much meat cloyes, to
little faintes, both perish the principal. To much liquour drownes, to little
dryes, both corrupt the carcass. Heat burns, cold chilles, in excess both to
much, in defect both to little, and both causes to decaie. Mediocritie
preserves not only in these but in whatsoever else.

But now what place has exercise here? Exercise.
to help nature by motion in all these her workinges, and ways for health: to
increase and encourage the natural heat, that it may digest quickly and
expel strongly: to fashion and frame all the parts of the body to their
natural and best hauiour: to help to rid needelesse, and superfluous humors:
reffuse and rejected excrementes, which nature leaves for naught, when she has
sufficiently fed, and wishes rather they were seen abroad, then felt within.
And be not these great benefits? to defend the body by defeating diseases? to
stay the mind, by strengthening of her mean? to assist nature being both
daily, and daungerously, assailed both within and without? to help life to
continue long? to force death, to keep far a loufe?

Now as all constitutions be not of one and the same mould, and as all parts
be not moved alike, with any one thing: so the exercises must alter, and be
appropriate to each: that both the constitution may be continued in her best
kind, and all the parts preserved to their best use, which exercises being
compared among themselves one to an other, be more or less, but being applied
to the party keep always in a mean, when

But for diet to avoid inward dangers, and clothing to auert outward
injuries, and all such preuentions, as are not proper to teachers, though in
community more proper then to any common man: I set them over to parents, and
other well willers, which will see to them, that they fail not in those
things: and if they do, will fly to Physicians, by their help to salve that,
which themselves may forsee. For exercises I will deal, which to commend more
then they will commend them selves, when I shall show both what they be, and
the particular profits of every one of them, which I choose from the rest, were
me think very needless, and chiefly to me, which seem sufficiently to
praise them, in that I do place them among principles of prerogative. But as in
the soul I did pick out certain points, whereunto I applied the training
principles: so likewise in the body, may I not also sever some certain
parts, whereunto my precepts must principally be conformed? that shall not
need. For as in the soul the fruit of train does better and make complete
even that which I tuched not, and so consequently the whole soul: so in the
body, those exercises which seem to be appointed for some special parts,
because they stir those parts most, do qualify the whole body, and make it
most active. Wherefore as there I did promise not to anatomise the soul, as
neither dealing with Divines nor Philosophers: so do I not here make profession
to show the anatomy of the body, as meddling neither with Physicians nor
Surgeans, otherwise then any of them four can help me in exercise. To the
which effect, and end, I will only cull out from whence I can, such special
notes, as both Philosophers, and Phisicians do know to be most true, and both
the learned, and unlearned, will confess to be for them: and such also, as the
training masters may easily both help, and increase in their own trial. For
both reason, and rule, do always command, that the master be by, when
exercise is used, thorough whose ouerlooking the circunstance is kept, which
helps to health, and the contrary shunned, which in exercise does harm. In
the elder years, reason at the elbow must serve the student, as in these
younger, the masters presence helps to direct the child.

But to join close with our train. What parts be they in our body, upon
whom exercise is to show this great effect? or what be the powers thereof,
which must still be stirred, so to stay, and establish the perpetuity of
health, not in themselves alone, but in the whole body, by them? Where joints
be to bend, where stringes to tie, where synewes to stir, where streatchers
to strain, there must needs be motion: or else stiffness will follow, and
vnweildynesse withal: where there be conduites to convey the blood, which
warmeth, canales to carry the spirit, which quickneth, pipes to bestow the
air, which cools, passage to dismiss execrements which eases, there must
needs be spreding, to keep the current large, and each way open, for fear of
obstructions, and sudden fainting. Where to much must needs mar, there must
be forcing out, where to little must needs lame, there must be letting in: where
thickning threats harm, there thinning fines the substance: where thinning is
to much, there thickning must do much, and to knit up all in short, all those
offices, whereunto our body serves naturally, either for inward bestowing of
nurriture, and maintenance of life: or for outward motion, and executions of
use, must be chearished and nusled so, as that they do by nature well, and
truly, they may do by train, both long, and strongly. I shall not need to
name the parts, all in one ruk, as of set purpose, which be known by their
effects: and the exercises also themselves will show for whom they serve. But
for example first in the parts let us see, whether we can discern them by
their working, and properties, that thereby the exercise may be pickte, which is
most proper to help such effects.







which breeds a sowlish, and life spirit, as most pure, so most precious,
and rather a quality then a body, and uses it partly to further the working
of that princely, and principal part of man's soul, whereby he understands
and reasons: partly to help the instruments of sense, and motion, by mean
of the sineues, never suffering them to lack spirit: which is the chief and
capital cause, why these instruments do their duties well? He can tell what
the part is.
And so forth in all the parts as well without, as within sight, whose
properties when one hears and finding that they be helped by such a motion he
can forthwith say, that such an exercise is good for such a part:

Now again for exercises. Who hearing that moderate

Or that daunsing beside the warmth, drives away numnesse,

Or that ryding also is healthful for the hippes and stomach:

Or that loud speaking streatcheth the bulk exercises the

Or that loud reading scoureth all the veins, stirs the

Wherefore seeing exercise is such a thing, that so much enableth the body, whom
the soul has for companion in all exploites, a comfort being lightsome, a
care being lothesom, a courage being healthy, a clog being heavy, I will,
because I must, if I mean to do well, plat forth the whole place of exercising
the body, at ones for all ages.

Chapter 7. The braunching, order, and method, kept in this discourse of
exercises.
Because the special mark whereat I shoot, is to bring the mind forward to
his best, by those means which I take to be best, wherein I must of force
continue very long, as in my principal and chief subject, and in no place
saving this, entreat of the body, but only how to apply that to it, which I
pitche down here: I think it good therefore in this place to perfect, and
handle at full the whole title of exercises with all the circunstances
belonging thereunto, so sufficiently and fully, as my simple skill can aspire
unto: and as the present occasion of a position or passage uses to require,
leaving that which I do not meddle with, to those that shall profess the thing,
either for their own, or for their childrens health, wherein I will keep

But in handling of these four points, I mean to rippe up no idle question:
I term that idle, where health is the end, and the question no help to it,
but cause to discourse, and delay of precept. Such questions be these: who
first found out the art of exercise called Gymnastice, or whether it belong to
the Physician or no: being a preservative to health: or who first devised the
particular exercises: or who were most famous for the executing thereof, and a
number of such like discoursory arguments, which learned men having leisure at
will, as a schoolemaister has not, and willing to wade far, as my self
could wish, have mined out of the bowelles of antiquity, and entraules of
authority, sometimes sadly, and saing in deed much, upon evident and apparent
testimonies, sometimes simply, and surmising but some such thing, by very light
and slight conjectures: oftimes supported by bare guess, at some silly word,
or some more naked warrant. Wherefore to the matter.

Chapter 8. Of exercise in general and what it is. And that it is Athleticall
for games, Martial for the field, Physical for health, praeparatiue before,
postparatiue after the standing exercise: some within daores, for soul
whether, some without for fair.
ALL exercises were first devised, The division of exercises.
and so in deed served, either for games and pastime, for war and service,
or for surety of health and length of life, though sometime all the three ends
did concur in one, sometimes they could not. For why might not an healthful,
and a sound body, both serve in the field for a soldiar, and in the sand for a
wrastler? But we seldom read, that the athleticall constitution whose end was
gaming, whose exercise was pastime, whose diet was unmeasurable for any man to
use, did either deliver the world an healthful body, being strained beyond
measure, or a courageous soldiar, being unweildy to fight, as one compounded
and made of fat and fog, brawnie and burdenous.

The athleticall and gaming exercises, Athleticall.
were in general assemblies, to win some wager, to bear away the prise, to
be wondered at of the world, or to set forth the solemnities of their
festival service, and ceremonies in the honor of their idols: or in public
spectacle to adourne and set forth, the triumphant and victorious shows, the
sumptuous and costly devises of their princes and states. Wherein we read, that
particular men have showed such effects of strength, and sturring, by the
help of exercise, and train, as nature her self could never attain unto,
though she furthered the feat, and got her self the worst, both by empairing
of health, and hastening on of death, thorough straining to much. It is more
then marvelous to think on, and yet we find it of very good record, what
and how incredible weight, both of living creatures, and massier metal, one
man's force has been noted to have borne, by being only used to that burden.
Would any man believe it, if it were not of good written credit, that one Milo so
strutted himself, so pitched his feet, so peysed his body, as he remained
unremovable from his place, being haled at and pulde by a number of people.
Actiuitie has wrought wonders, swiftness incredible things, and what
property what not? where nature and ambition were backed with exercise and good
will, to do but one thing well.

Martial.
For the use of war, and defense, it is more then evident, that exercise
bears the bell: Can one have a body to abide cold, not to melte with heat,
not to starve for hunger, not to dye for thirst, not to shrink at any
hardness, almost beyond nature, and above common reach, if he never have it
trained? will nimblenesse of limbs away with all labor, surpass all
difficulties, of never so diverse, and dangerous grounds, pursue enemies to
vanquish, reskue friends to save, retire from danger without harm, thrust it
self into danger without danger, where no train before made acquaintance
with travel? Whereupon called the Romans their whole army Exercitus, but
because it consisted of a valiant number of exercised and trained men? which
were not to seek at a sudden, because they had used arms before? how could
commonweals where the territory was but small, and the enhabitantes few, have
still delivered themselves from mightier assailantes, then they seemed
defendantes? or in continual threats, of ieleous neighbors, how could they
still have kept their own, if that small territory, had not been thoroughly
employed, and that petie paucitie gallantly trained? whereby it was able for
hardness and sufferance to abide what not? For actiuitie and manhood, to have
mastered whom not? or at the least had good means, not to receive any foil,
where only the huger number, and the untrained multitude, were to try the
masterie in field against them?

Physical.
For health it is most manifest that exercise is a mighty great mistress,
whether it be to confirm that which we have by nature, or to procure that
which we have not by nature: or to recover that by industry, and diligence,
which we have almost lost, by misfortune and negligence. The exercises which do
serve to this healthy end, do best serve for this my purpose, and though an
healthful body be most apt and active, both for gaming to get wagers, and for
warring to win victories, yet in my exercises, I neither mean to dally with
the gamester, not to fight with the warrier, but to mark which way I may best
save students, who have most need of it: being still assailed by those
enemies of health, which wax more eager and hoar, the more weak and cold that
exercise is.

This exercise of ours by form of definition, What is exercise.
is said to be a vehement, and a voluntary stirring of ones body, which
alters the breathing, whose end is to maintain health, and to bring the
body to a very good habit. Does not exercise at this her first entry offer to
perform so much as I did undertake for her? health of the body, and an healthy
habit of all the limbs: which two effects, because they be good, who does not
desire them? and being got by exercise, why is it not in price? and being
reducible to order, why should it not be in train? They that write of
exercise, (...).
make three degrees in it, whereof they call the first a preparatiue, in Greek
(...), the next simply by the name of exercise (...) the third a postparatiue,
in Greek (...). (...).
The preparatiue served, not to pass rudely, and roughly into the maine
exercise, without qualifying the body by degrees before, because sudden
alteration works ill disposition. (...).
The postparatiue or apotherapeutike follows the maine exercise, to reduce
the body by gentle degrees, to the same quietness in constitution, wherein it
was, before it was so moved. Which two points because they rest most in the
masters consideration, which is to ouersee the train, I commit them to his
care: so to apply his cunning as he shall see cause in exercising his charge.
And yet herein I entend to help him, when I shall handle the circunstances
which direct exercises.

The third degree, (...).
which is enclosed between these two, is that same exercise, which I praise so
much, and upon whom the other two wait, whereof, as writers make to many, and
to finely minced distinctions, so I make account but of one at this time,
whereof I do make two branches, or spieces, the one to be used within doors,
and the other abroad, that whether the weather be fair or foul, the exercise
in some kind may never fail.

Chapter 9. Of the particular exercises, why I do appoint so many, and how to
judge of them, or to devise the like.
I will not here run thorough all the kinds of exercises that be named
either by Galene or any other writer, whereof many be discontinued, many be yet
in use, but out of the whole heap I have picked out these for within doors,
loud speaking, singing, loud reading, talking, laughing, weaping, holding the
breath, daunsing, wrestling, fensing, and scourging the Top. And these for
without doors, walking, running, leaping, swimming, riding, hunting, shooting,
and playing at the ball. Whereof though the very most be used oftimes, not in
nature of exercises, but either of pleasure, or necessity, yet they be all
such, as will serve well that way, and be so made account of among the best
writers, that deal in this kind: and for that some of them may be said to be
most proper to men, and far above boys play: you must remember, that I
deal for all students, and not for children alone, to whom it is in choice,
besides all these to devise other for their good, as circunstance shall lead
them. There may also be reasons, to persuade some men to mislike of, I do not
think all, but I suppose some, of these things, which I do appoint, as both
commendable and profitable exercises, with whom I will not here strive, but
desire them to judge of me, without prejudice, and to stay their sentence,
until they see in what sort I allow them. For knowing the cause of offense, I
might seem very simple, if I should simply allow that, which is disallowed
upon reason, and not misliked without manifest show of probable cause: and so
to reserve the thing, as I did not remove the blame. They must also think that
nothing is* abused, but that both may and ought to be well used, which well,
they must use, and refuse the ill: seeing where misuse draws blame, there
right use deserves praise.

Therefore I wish those that be of years, and ability to guide themselves to
call circunstance to counsel, and consideration to advise. For as
consideration shapeth the circunstance, so circunstance is a thing, which
makes all that is done, either to please or displease: to be sent away with a
cutting check: or to be bid tarry, with a cheary contenaunce. As for the child
in whom wisdom wants, to way with discretion, what it is that he does, the
master alone must supply all wantes, or bear all blames, though it be but a
simple recompense, to blame want of consideration, when harm is received.
Some man may also say, what needs so many, and mislike the multitude. Of many
to choose some, is usual in all choice, and where store is, why should choice
be stinted? he may lessen the number, that allows but of one, and I have
picked out the likest, to satisfy all in diversities of liking, who so shall
like any of these, may use them with me, or upon the like ground, may devise
himself other. In handling of each of these, I will first show for what
parts, to what end, and in what manner, they be profitable and wholesome being
moderatly used: then for whom, and with what danger, they be strained to the
contrary.

Chapter 10. Of loud speaking. How necessary, and how proper an exercise it is
for a scholar.
THe exercise of the voice which in Latin they name vociferatio, in Greek
(...), as them (...), which were the training masters, in English may be
termed ^owd speaking, of the height: for though it use all the degrees, which
be in the voice, yet is it most properly to take his name, of the lowdest and
shrillest, as the most audible in sound, and therefore fittest to give the name,
as all things else receive theirs, of some one quality of most especial note.
The ancient Physicians entertain it among exercises, because it stirs the
bulk, and all those instruments, which serve for the delivery of voice, and
utterance of speech: because it aideth, dilateth and comfort the lunges in
his windworke, it increases, cleanses, stre^gtheneth, and fineth the natural
heat: it makes the sound and sovereign parts of the body strong and pure:
and not lightly to be assailed by any disease: it mendeth the color, and
cheareth the countenance. Now that it has these properties they do prove by
natural arguments. That it practices and stirs the inward parts, and
vocal instruments, no man may deem, which will confess, that the mouth
alone, is the only port and passage for speech. That it increases the
natural heat, the breath it self does most evidently declare, because it is
always exceeding warm, when one exercises the voice, it is so thronged and
crusshed with taking in and letting out. That it cleanses and clears, there
be two causes to prove: the one is, because it makes the flesh more fine and
thin, and smoother to the hand, not only thorough stretching and straining
the skin, but by removing excrementes, which naturally thicken and make
rugged. The other is, for that by moving the vocal instruments the inward
moisture consumes and wastes, as it does appear by that thick and gross
vapor, which proceeds out of his mouth that speaks alowd, and other
congealed excrementes resting of old in other passages, which this exercise
expelled from the inward parts. That it both fines and strengthens the
natural heat, hereby it is more then plain. For that the inward vessels and
pipes be scoured thereby, and sundry superfluities expelled both at the nose,
and mouth, which as they darkened, weakened, and thickened the natural heat,
when they were within the body: so being dismissed themselves, they leave it
pure, fine, and strong, whereby the parts being sound and clear more strength
grows on to healthward, and less to disease. Hervpon it falls out, that
this exercise of the voice, must needs be a singular help for them, which
have their inward parts troubled with moisture, and be of cold co^stitution,
as also for such, as be troubled with weakness, or pewkishnesse of stomach,
with vomiting, or bitter rifting, with hardness of digestion, with lothing of
their meat, with feeding that feeds not, with faintness, with naughty
constitution, that corrupts the blood, with dropsies, with painful fetching
their breath, or but then casely, when they sit upright, with consumptions,
with any long disease, in the breast or midrife, with apostemes which are
broken within the bulk, with quartane agues, with fleame, and also for all
those, which be on the mending hand, after sickness: for those that are
troubled with the scurfe, or Egyptian lepre, called Elepha^tiasis, or whose
bellies be so weak, as they cannot avoid, but watery and thin excrementes, for
the hikup, for the voice, and her instruments, whether naturally resolved, or
casually empaired.

Now as this exercise advisedly, and orderly used, is very good for those
effects in these parts, so rashly and rudely ventured upon, it is not without
danger of doing harm, and chiefly to those which never used it before: it
fills the head and makes it heavy, it dulleth the instruments of the
senses, which are in the head. It hurtes the voice, and breaks the smaller
veins, and is very unwholesome for such, as are subject to the falling
sickness, because it shakes the troubled parts too sore: it is dangerous
when one is troubled with ill, and corrupt humors, or when the stomach is
cumbred, with great and evident crudities, and rawnes, because thorough much
chafing of the breath, and the breath instruments, it disperpleth, and
scatters corrupt humors, thorough out the whole body. And as the gentle
exercising of the voice, with often enterlacing of grave soundes, is wholesome,
so to much shrilnesse straynes the head, causes the temples pante, the brains
to beat, the eyes to swell, the cares to tingle. Further it is very
vnwholesom after meat, because the breath being chafed partly by reason of late
eating, partly by lowdnesse of the voice as it passes thorough, gawlleth the
throat, and so corrupts the voice. It is also enemy to repletion, to
weariness, to sensuality: for that in those people, which are subject to
those infirmities, the great and forcible straining of the voice, does oftimes
cause ruptures and conuulsions, so that the commodities, and incommodities of
the exercise do warn the training master to use it wisely and with great
discretion. The use of it for the motion is this, that I have said, but for the
help of learning, it is to some other very good and great purpose, to
pronounce without book, with that kind of action which the very property of
the subject requires, orations and other declamatory arguments, either made
by the pronouncer him self, or borrowed of some other, but chiefly the hoatest
Philippik, Catilinarie, and Verrine arguments, and the rest of that race,
either out of many Greek orators, or our one and only Latin Tullie, and
whether ye list to prose alone, or to be bold with Poets, Libro 1. (...). cap.
5. de furore.
and use their meeter. Coelius Aurelianus an ancient Roman Physician, though
borne at Sicca in Aphricke speaking of this exercise uses these words. They
did utter their beginninges or prohemes with a gentle and a moderate voice,
their narrations, and reasoning discourses with more straining, and louder:
their perorations, and closinges, with a descent, and fall of the voice. And is
not that to my saying?

The manner of this exercise, which Antyllus a very old Physician does show
in Oribasius, Lib. 6. cap. 8. De sani. tuen.
that wrate his books unto Julian the apostate, whose Physician he was,
agrees also with mine opinion. For having appointed certain preparatiues for
nimbling, and spreding the vocal powers, he says, that such, as exercised the
voice, did first begin low, and moderatly, then went on to further strayning,
of their speech: sometimes drawing it out, with as stayed, and grave soundes,
as was possible, sometimes bringing it back, to the sharpest and shrillest,
that they could, afterward not tarying long in that shrill sound, they retired
back again, slacking the strain of their voice, till they fell into that
low, and moderate tenor, wherewith they first began. Which words do not only
show, that it was thus used, but also how the voice is to be used, in this
exercise generally. But upon what matter, and argument was all this pains
bestowed? Those which were unlearned said such things as they could remember,
which were to be spoken aloud, and admitted any change of voice in the
uttering, now harshe and hard, now smoothe and sweet. Those that were bookish
recited either Iambike verses or Elegies, or such other numbers, which with
their current carry the memory on, but all without book, as far surmounting
any kind of reading. I have dwelt the longer in this exercise, because it is
both the first in rank, and the best mean to make good pronouncing of any
thing, in any auditorie, and therefore an exercise not impertinent to scholars.

Chapter 11. Of loud singing, and in what degree it comes to be one of the
exercises.
IT were to much to wish, that Music were the most healthy exercise, as it is
the most pleasant profession, because either to much delight would drown men
in it alone, or to much cloying would cause it be quite contemned. Wherefore as
it may not diminish other of their due, by occupying to much room, so by
change after other, and distance in it self, it continues in her own credit.
For both variety refreshes, and distance renews, where still the same
dulles, and continuance wearies. As Music is compounde of number, melody, and
harmony, it has nothing to do with gymnastick and exercise, but serves in
that sense either for delight and pleasure, and exercises desire: or in some
respects concerns the manering and training up of youth in matter of
knowledge, as I said before. Whereunto I was induced not only by argument, and
nature of the thing, Pla. 2.3.4. de Repub. Phil. (...). Aristot. 8. polit.
Galen. ^. De sanit. tuen.
but by great authorities of Plato, and Philo, of Aristotle and Galene, and
whom not? out of all antiquity, which both allow of the thing in nature, and
admit it in policy, into the best commonweals, as a great worker of much
good. But for as much as singing uses the voice for her mean, and the voice
instruments for her vtteraunce, and medleth with all sorts, and degrees in
sound base, mean, and triple, which in delivery do labor, and travel the
pipes, it is received among exercises of health, though it be not so forcible,
nor can pearce so far, as loud speaking does, which does not much care for
any fine concent, so it utter strongly, and strain within compass: whereas
Music to the contrary stands not much upon straining or fulness of the
voice, so it be delicate and fine in concent. 19. part. probl. 38,
And yet in Aristotle's opinion, it both exercises, and preserves the natural
strength because it stands upon an ordinate, and degreed motion of the voice.
We find in our own experience, that it sturreth the voice, spreads the
instruments thereof, and craves a clear passage, as it also lightneth the
laborer, and increases his courage, in carrying of burdens. It was used in the
old time Physicklike, to stay mourning and grief, for the loss of dear
freindes, or desired things. In curing diseases, which rise upon some
distemperature of the mind, the temperature of time iudicially applied, has
been found both a strange and a strong remedy. Always provided, that whether
ye say loud, or sing loud, ye neither say to long, nor sing to much, for fear
of a worse turn, if any entraill tear, with to much straining, as some times
has proved to true, for the afflicted party. But to make an end of Music at
this time, though it be neither so strong, nor so stirring an exercise, yet it
has made a great purchase, that it is allowed for one, and thereby esteemed a
double principle, of more value, where her force is more, in matters of the
mind, of very good worth, though of much less work in the health of the
body. Which seeing it is an exercise within door, it gains with the place a
good footing to grow fairer: for whether ye allow it for a cunning exercise, or
an exercised cunning, it exercises cunning, and increases by exercise.

Chapter 12. Of loud and soft reading.
REading is a thing so familiarly known, as there needs no great proof,
that it exercises the voice, and therewith all the health, whereof the
Physicians admit two kinds, into the raunge of exercises, which be furtherers
to health. The one quick, clear, and straining, the other quiet, caulme, and
staing, reading, because it stirs the breath, not slightly nor
superficially, but shows what it can do, in the very fountain and depth of
all the entrailles, it increases the natural health, makes the blood subtle
and fine, purges all the veins, opens all the arteries, suffers not
superfluous humors to thicken, neither to congeale and freese to a dreggie
residence within any of those places, which do either receive and lodge, or
distribute and dispose, the meat and nurriture. Lib. 1. c. 2.
Whereupon Cornelius Celsus an eloquent Romain Physician accounts it one of
the finest and fairest exercises. Libro 1. (...). cap. 1.
To prove that it is wholesome for the head, what more credible witnesses need
we, then Coelius Aurelianus, a diligent Physician, Lib. 11. Epist. 97.
and Annaeus Seneca a deep Philosopher? Coelius holds this kind of reading
to be very sovereign not only in headaches, but also in frensies and troubled
minds. Seneca used it to stay the rewme, and distillation from the head, which
troubled him sore, as a man being both of eager conceit, and earnest study.
where by the way, Coelius gives this note, whether ye mean to reskew the
pacient, from the headache, or the frantike from madness, by this exercise of
reading, that the matter which is read, be pleasant and plain, and nothing
hard to understand, to cause the wit to muse. For that such obiectes do no
less trouble the weak brain, then sore shaking or hard iogging does the
wearied body. Moreover clear reading and loud, does refreshe not only the
inward parts of the breast, but the stomach also: and comfort it in
feebleness, because thereby phlegmatike excrementes, are without pain both
thinned and consumed: whereupon it is held to be very wholesome, to mend a
feeble voice, to help the colicke, occasioned by cold humors, and to check
some consumptions. And to that end the young Pliny writes, that his uncle
did use it. When I have said that it is also good for the dry cowghe, I need
not say any more good of it here. Lib. de re med.
Auicen the Arabian and princely Physician speaking hereof, says that in the
beginning, this reading must be soft and caulme, then mount by degrees, and
when the voice seems to be in his strength, growing, and long, that then it
is hie time, to stay for that time, nor to strain till ye stick, but to
leave with some list, and ability to do more. The quiet and staid kind of
reading, saving that reading and speaking as besides the health of the body,
whereunto they are deputed, they may prove excellent and great deliuerers of
cunning, and well beseem the school: as to much in either does trouble the
scholar to much, which yet boys would defend, by the countenance of a
commended exercise, were it not, that in boys exercises, I do require the
masters presence, who will refourme that exercise against their will to his
own discretion. Thus much concerning this exercise, whereby the training
master may perceive, both what the learned have thought of it, and how much
the learners are like to gain by it.

Chapter 13. Of much talking and silence.
TAlking in Latin Sermo, as it is accounted an exercise for succouring some
parts, so both for eagerness, and heat, in the nature of speech, though not
of passion, it comes far behind others, and is therefore regestred among the
mean, and weak exercises. It is thought very fit for such, as be drousely
given: which have their senses daunted, either thorough dreaming melancholy,
or dulling phleame. For such kind of people by talking be cleared, their
minds awaked, their senses freed from the burden of their bodies. That talking
spendes phleame there is no plainer proof, the^ that they which talk much
spit still, which as it comes partly from the head, partly from the stomach,
partly from the chest: so it declares, that those parts delight in speech,
and receive comfort from speech, which makes room for health, where reume
kept residence. But as in these cases, it is counted healthful: so has it a
force to fill the head, with somewhat more then dinne, and to make it dumpishe.
And therefore in aches, and distemperatures of the head, clattering is
commended to the cloakbag by Physic. It is also a poison to the pained eyes:
ill for them that void blood either at the nose or from the bulk. Whereupon in
any such bleading silence is enjoined. And as silence is a mean both to stay
bleading, and to slake thirst, so talking dryes the toungue and prouockes
thirst, opens the passage, Lib. 27. cap. 6.
and promoteth bleading. In so much as Pline writes, that one Mecenas Messius,
a noble Romain, betook him self to voluntary silence, the space of three
years, to stay the casting of blood, which he fell into by reason of some
strain. To be short, as silence remedyeth the cough and hikup: so talking
pulls down, and pains the patient, when agues grow upward, and be in the
increase. Hereupon I conclude, that talking has great mean either to make or
mar, not only for the subject, whereon the toungue walks, but also for the
object, wherein health rests.

Chapter 14. Of laughing, and weeping. And whether children be to be forced
toward virtue and learning.
IF laughing had no more wherefore to be enrouled in the catalogue of exercises,
then weeping has, they might both be crossed out. And yet as they be passions,
that tend in some points, to the purging of some parts, so some may think
it, a very strange conceit, to laugh for exercise, or to weep for
wantonness. For as laugh one may, with an hearty good will, so weep none can,
but against their will, to whom it is allotted in the nature of an exercise, and
not quite questuarie, as to those wailing women, which wept for the dead,
whom they knew not alive. There be many and very easy, and much desired
means, to make one laugh though they have small cause, and less devotion to
be merry at all, but to make one weep, is still again the hair. For ill news
or matter to weep for, neither children, nor old folks, will thank you at
all. If you mean to make them weep for joy, or cry for kindness, that is
an other matter. If the master should beat his boy, and bring no cause why,
but that he sought to have him weep, so to exercise him to health, and to
rid him of some humors, which made him to moist, the boy would beshrew him,
and think his master beat him so, to exercise himself, though at the very
conceit of his masters mad reason, he might brust out in laughing straight
after his stripes, and so become a patron to the contrary exercise: a great
deal more gracious and more desired in nature, whose enemy grief is, and
weeping also: as a plain argument of an unpleasant guest. Howbeit seeing they
be both set down, by the name of petty, and pretty exercises, let them have
that is given them, seeing they are thought to stir, and clear some parts:
laughing more and better: weeping less and worse. And therefore the more
children laugh for exercise, the more light some they be, the more they weep
if it be not in jest* so much the worse in very good earnest. For I can hardly
believe that much laughter can avoid a fool, if it be not for exercise, which
is also somewhat rare: or that but a fool can weep for exercise, which
deserves the bat, to make him weep in earnest.

But for laughing in the nature of an exercise and that healthful, can there be
any better argument, to prove that it warmeth, then the redness of the face,
and flush of high color, when one laugheth from the heart, and smiles not from
the teethe? or that it stirs the heart, and the adjacent parts, then the
tickling and panting of those parts themselves? which both bear witness,
that there is some quick heat, that so moves the blood. Therefore it must
needs be good for them to use laughing, which have cold heads, and cold
chestes, which are troubled with melancholy, which are light headed by reason
of some cold distemperature of the brain, which thorough sadness, and sorrow,
are subject to agues, which have new dined, or supped: which are troubled with
the head ache: for that a cold distemperature being the occasion of the
infirmity, laughing must needs help them, which moves much air in the
breast, and sends the warmer spirits outward. This kind of help will be of
much more efficacy, if the parties which desire it, can suffer themselves to
be tickled under the armepittes, for in those parts there is great store of
small veins, and little arteries, which being tickled so, become warm
themselves, and from thence disperse heat thorough out the whole body. But as
moderate laughing is wholesome, and makes no too great change, so to much is
dangerous, and alters to sore. For besides the immoderate pouring, and
pressing out of the spirits: besides to much moving and heating, it oftimes
causes extreme resolution and faintness, because the vital strength and
natural heat drive to much outward. Whereupon they that laugh, do sweat so
sore, and have so great a color, by the ascending of the blood. And as the
natural heat, and fire it self do still covet upward, as to their natural
place, so must it needs be, that the lower rooms lie open, and empty in
their absence, whereby whether soever motion be marred, the natural heat dies,
and the vital force fails. Besides this, no man will deny, but that this
kind of laughing, does both much offend the head, and the bulk, as oftimes
therewith both the papbones be loosed, and the back it self perished. Nay
what say ye to them that have dyed laughing? where gladness of the mind to
much enforcing the body, has bereft it of life.

For weeping in the nature of an exercise, Weeping.
there is not much to be said, but that it is accompanied with crying, sobbing
groaning and tears, whereby the head, and other parts are rid of some needless
humor: though the disquieting do much more harm, then the purging can do
good, and the humor were a great deal better avoided some other way. Whereof
some children seem to be exceeding full, when fear of beating makes them
strain their pipes. Aristotle must bear both most blame for this exercise, if
it displease any, and most praise, 7. Polit. cap. vlt.
if it profit any, who in the last chapter of the seventh book of his
politikes writes thus of it, and for it. That they do not well which take
order, that children strain not themselves, with crying and weeping, because
that is a mean to their growing, in the nature of an exercise. And that as
holding the breath does make one stronger to labor: so crying and weeping in
children, do work the same or the like effects. And yet me think it should
be no exercise, by the very definition. For if it were vehement, yet is it not
voluntary, and though it did alter the breath, yet it bettereth not the body,
howsoever it serve the soul.

But seeing the gymnastikes have it, let us lend it them for their pleasure,
though we like it not for our own. It is generally banished by all Physicians
as being the mother to many infirmities, both in the eyes and other parts:
neither if it could be avoided in schools were it worthy the looking on: being
the heavy sign of torture and trouble. And though it sometime ease the greiued
mind to shed a few tears, as some for extreme anguish cannot let fall one,
yet children would be less greiued if they might shed none, as some hold it
a sign of a very shrewd boy, when he deserves stripes, not to show one
trikle. Some Physicians think by way of a conserve to the mind, that it
ought to be used in schools sometimes, though not voluntary, yet in form of
an exercise to warm shrewd boys, and to expel the contagious humors of
negligence, and wantonness, the two springes of many streaming euilles: as
playing would be daily, at some certain hours, then to use these exercises,
when books be out of season.

The greatest patron of weeping that I find, leaving Heraclitus to his
contemplation of miseries, is a sour centurion in Xenophon, Lib. 2. (...).
which sat at the table with Cyrus in his pauilion. He commends weeping,
whereto he had no great devotion, to discountenaunce laughing which he saw
allowed, and his reason is: because awe, fear, correction, punishements, which
commonly have weeping, either companion, or consequent, be used in policy, to
keep good orders in state, and good manners in stay, whereas laughing is never,
but upon some foolish ground. And yet both laughing for exercise may be for a
good obiecte, and occasion to make laughter, may well deserve praise, when the
mind being wearied either about great affairs that are already past, or
about preventing of some anguish which is to ensue, does call laughing to
help, to ease the one, and to auert the other. And this kind of weeping,
which the soldiar settes out so, concerns no exercise, though it commonly
follow all unpleasant exercises, where the party had rather be idle with
pleasure, then so occupied to his pain: but it tends to the impression, or
continuing of virtue in the mind: which should be so much the worse, because
that way it seems unwilling, where fear is the forcer, and not free will.
Which free will is the principal standard to know virtue by, which is
voluntary, and not violent: as it is not the beast mean, to bring boys
neither to learning, nor to virtue.

7. De Rep.
Socrates in Plato thinks, that an absolute wit in the best sorted kind,
and above all common sort, for civil society, ought not to be forced, as in
deed what needs he, being such a paragon? and that free will in such a one so
sifted is the right receipt of voluntary train. But we neither have such
commonweals, as Socrates sets forth, nor such people to plant in them, as
Socrates had, which he made with a wish: nor any but subject to great
infirmities, though some more, some less, by corruption in nature, which
runs headlong to unhappiness, and needs no beating for not being naught.
And therefore we must content our selves with that which we have, and in our
country which is not so absolute, in our children which be no Socraticall
saints, in our learning which will not prove voluntary, if the child play
voluntary we must use correctio and awe, though more in some, then some,
because in illness there be steps, as in excellency odds. Whereof there is no
better argument then that which this very place offers, not for the soldiars
saying, which so comme^deth awe, because his authority is to campishe, though
he that brought him in, and platted the best prince were himself no fool: but
for mine own collection. For if one need not to beat children to have them do
ill, whereunto they are prone, we must needs then beat' them for not doing well,
where nature is corrupt. Onelesse we meet with one, that will run as swift
vphill against nature, to do that which is good, as we all run down bancke,
with the swinge of nature, to do that which is ill. Which when I find, I will
honor him, as I do none, though I do often bear with some, in whom there
appears but some show of such a one. If under doing well, ye comprehend not
learning, ye must needs comprise virtue, and make her mean violence, against
all both heavenly Divinity, and earthly Philosophy, with whom all virtues be
voluntary, when reason is in ruff: but not in children even for compassing of
the best effects, whom custom and train must now and then force foreward, to
be ready for reason, when she makes her entry, which requires some years.
For howsoever religion, wisdom, duty, and reasonable consideration do work
in riper age, sure if awe be absent, in the younger years, it will not be
well. And who can tell, what even he that under law is most obsequious and
civil, would of him self prove, if law, which emportes awe* would leave him
at liberty?

Chapter 15. Of holding the breath.
THough all men can tell, what a singular benefit breathing is, whervnder the
use of our life is comprehended: yet they can best tell, which have it most at
commandment. For as they live with others, in society of common dealinges,
so they can execute any thing by the body, far better then others, whether
it be politic in the town, or warlike in the field. And all exercises have
this end, most peculiar and proper, by helping the natural heat, to digest
the good nurriture, and to avoid the offall, thorough out the whole body.
Which what is it else, but to set the breathing at most liberty, being best
discharged of impediment and let? And as the liberty of breathing makes the
soldiar to abide in fight long, the runner to continue his race long, the
daunser to endure his labor long, and so forth in the rest, which must either
have breath at their will, or else shrink in the midest: so the restraint and
binding of the breath, even where it is most at will, (for else it could not
abide the restraint,) has his commodity, by way of exercise to assist our
health.

Now in breathing there be three things to be considered, the taking in, the
letting out, and the holding in of the breath, whereof every one has his
private office to great effect, in residences, which linger within the body as
being loathe to depart: and furthereth those, that are in good way, and make
have to be gone. They that used this exercise by way of train to health, did
it in two sorts: for either they strayted only those muskles, which
appertain to the breast and bulk, and let those be at liberty which belong
to the midrife and belly, that the excrementes might have the readier way
downward, being once forced on: or they strayned both all the parts, and all
their muscles at one time, that the bowelles also which are beneth the midrife
might enjoy the benefit of the exercise, and be as ready to discharge, as the
other to drive down. But for the better and more daungerlesse performing
thereof, they were wont to swadle the chest, the ribs, and the belly. Because
the holding of ones breath unadvisedly and with to much strayning causes
ruptures and diverse other infirmities in the interior vessels of the body.
Their meaning was hereby, sometime to strengthen the inward and natural heat
being increased by exercise: sometime to help the breathing parts: sometime
to discharge the breast and belly of needless burden. For the breath being so
violently strayted, when it finds issue forces his own passage, and caryeth
with him some finish and thin excrement, either driving it before, if it lie
in his way, or drawing it with him, if he catch it by the way. Being of it
self such a strainer, and expeller, it is good for to open the pipes, to fine
the skin, to drive out moisture from under the skin: to warm, to
strengthen and to scour the spiritual and breathing parts, to make the
places of receipt more roomy, to increase strength in labor, to help the ear
in listening, to remove coldness or inflations from the entrailles, to stay the
hikup and the cowgh: which comes of some cold distemperature in the
windepipes, to remedy the colic, the weakness of stomach, the want or
difficulty of breath. So that all those ought to esteem of it, which have
their breathing and spiritual parts either cold or weak, or cloyed with
excrementes, or whose bodies can either with much ado or with none at all
expel and rid superfluous humors, or that be cumbred with much gaping and
yawning, with resolution or weakness of the toungue, or any vocalle
instrument. If it were to be perceived by no way else, very children let us
see, that holding of the breath does stir and strengthen that power in us,
wherewith we expel superfluities. For let them stay their breath either
laughing long, or weeping fiercely, or upon some such other occasion, and they
will either presently or very shortly after, disburden themselves one way or
other, by ordure, urine, or some other matter at the nose and ears. Now as
this exercise is healthful to many in good order: so contrariewise to some in
disorder it is very dangerous, because oftimes while the breath is to
forcibly stopped, the arteries in the jaws, and baulles of the eyes swell so, as
they will never come in temper again. It fills the head also with a gross
and stuffing humor, as may easily be seen by the swelling of the veins and
arteries in the neck, by the puffing about the eyes, by the redness of the
face, and by the strutting of the whole head, all which be manifest signs of
repletion. It is dangerous for those which be subject to the falling
sickness, because it increases the disease by that recourse, which the blood
has up into the head: as also to them which spit or cast up blood, for that
both the sound and whole inward vessels do burst with stretching, if they be
but weak: or being broken once before, and healed again, they will then
break out again, by reason of heat which is increased in the hollow of the
breast, and the ouerstraining of the said vessels withal. Moreover such as
from their birth have small entraulles and thin, or the rim of their belly
tender and weak: or that be troubled with renting and ruptures must in no case
mind this exercise, because it straineth those parts to sore, and lightly
teareth them, as it proves oftimes to pitiful true in young children, which
by holding their breath to long, either weeping or otherwise, oftimes break
either the rim of their belly, or the call of their cods, whereby the bowelles
and guts falling downward, they become miserably tormented with incurable
ruptures and burstinges: If trumpetters, and those that play upon wind
instruments were asked the question, whether they feel not the effect hereof
sometime, they would shake the head, and so sooth the demand, Hier. Mer cu.
lib. 3. cap. 6.
though they said no more. They do write of Milo the Crotoniate, a great
champion in those achleticall exercises, that he used to bind his forehead,
his breast, and his ribs with very strong tapes, and would never let his
breath go, till the veins were swelled so full, as they burst the tapes. But
this fellow had no fellow in any of those pastimes. It was he that bare the
bull upon his shoulder in the Olympian assembly by using to carry him of a
little young calfe. So great things be easily compassed, if they be set in hand
with, when they be but little, or meddled with, by little and little. The best way
to avoid peril in this exercise is to begin gently, and so to grow on by
degrees, and to leave be times before extremity bid hoe, and while ye be yet
able to do more, neither to force nature to the furthest.

Chapter 16. Of daunsing, why it is blamed, and how delivered from blame.
DAunsing of it self declares mine allowance, in that I name it among the
good and healthful exercises: which I must needs clear from some offensive
notes, wherewith it is charged by some stern people: least if I do not so, it
both continue it self in blame still, and draw me thither also with it, for
allowing of a thing, that is disliked, and by me not delivered from just cause
of misliking, which by my choice do seem to defend it. And yet I mean not
here to rippe up, what reading has taught me of it, though it seem to have
served for great uses in old time, both athleticall for spectacle and show:
militare for armor and enemy: and Physical for health and welfare: so many
and so notable writers, make so much and so oftimes mention thereof in all these
three kinds. Some dedicate whole volumes to this argument only, some
enterlace their brauest discourses with the particularities thereof, and those
no mean ones. And in deed a man, that never red much, and does but mark the
thing cursorily, would scant believe, that it were either of such antiquity, or
of such account, or so generally entreated of by learned men, all those their
writings still sounding to the praise and advancement thereof: howsoever in our
days either we embase it in opinion: or it self has given cause of just
embasement, by some peoples misuse. Many sorts of it I do read of, but most
discontinued, or rather quite decayed, that only is reserved, which bears
oftimes blame, machance being corrupted by the kind of Music, as the old
complaint was: machance because it is used but for pleasure and delight only,
and bears no pretense or style of exercise, directly tending to health, which
is our peoples moan now in our days. For where honest and profitable reasons
be not in the first front, to commend a thing, but only pleasant and
deliteful causes, which content not precise surueiours, there grows
misliking, the party that exercises, not pretending the best, which is in the
thing, and the party that accuses, marking nothing else but that, which may
move offense.

The sad and sober commodities, which be reaped by daunsing in respect of the
motion applied to health be these, by heating and warming, it drives away
stifnes from the joints, and some palsilike trembling from the legs and
thighs, whom it stirs most, it is a present remedy to succor the stomach
against weakness of digestion, and rawnesse of humors: it so strengthens
and confirms aching hippes thin shankes, feeble feet, as nothing more: in
delivering the kidneys or bladder from the stone, it is beyond comparison good:
but now such as have weak brains, swimming heads, weeping eyes, simple and
sorry sight, must take heed of it, and have an eye to their health, for fear
they be disie when they dance, and trip in their turning, or rather shrink
down right when they should cinquopasse. Such as have weak kidneys and
ouerheated, may displease them selves, if it please then to dance, and
increase their diseases, by increasing their heat.

The daunsing in armor, called by the Greeks (...), as it is of more motion
in exercise, so it works more nimblenesse in executing, when ye deal in the
field with your enemies. These be the fruits which are reaped by daunsing well
and orderly used, The blame that daunsing bears.
for the benefit of health, and the contrary displeasures, which are caught by
it, thorough inconsiderate applying of it, by the party which is not made for
it. The blames which good manners repine. For these two faults there is but
one general answer: that daunsing is healthful, though the daunsers use it
not healthfully, as other things of greater countenance be very good, though
the professors do not so, as their professions do enioine them. For the first
in particular, daunsing be an exercise, as both all antiquity does commend it
for, and I my self do allow of it by that name: it would by rule of Physic go
before meat, and not be used but long after, as a preparatiue against a new
meal: and a disburdener of superfluities, against a surcharge of new diet:
Howbeit there be in it some more violent measures then some: and in beginning
with the most staydest and most almanlike, and so marching on, till the
springing galliard and quicker measures take place, choice in every one, upon
knowledge of his own body, and his emptiness or saturitie may help health,
though the custom of each country command not only health, though to her
harm, but even the very science which professes the preservation of health,
if desire egg delight, to show it self in place. Whereupon the second blame of
daunsing, does especially

To keep things in order, there is in the soul of man but one, though a
very honorable mean, which is the direction of reason: to bring things out of
order there be two, the one stro^gheaded, which is the commandment of
courage, the other many headed, which is the enticement of desires. Now
daunsing has properties to serve each of these, exercise for health, which
reason ratifieth, armor for agilitie, which courage commends, liking for
allowance, which desire does delight in. But because it yeildeth most to delight,
and in most variety of pleasures, desire ministers most matter to blame,
daunsing by pleasing desire to much, has pleased reason to little, and when
reason obiecteth inconveniences, it turns the deaf side, and follows her
own swinge. For when the tailour has braued* where nature has beawtified:
when amiablenesse of person has procured agilitie by cunning, what gallant
youths in whom there is any courage, can abide not to come to show, having
such qualities so worthy the beholding? here will courage show her self,
though repentance be her port, here will desire throng in prease, though it
praise not in parting. All this does confess that daunsing is become servant
to desire, though not daunsing alone: and yet companions in blame be no
dischargers of fault. What then? for the general, seeing things which man
uses, cannot be quite free from misuse, it is half a virtue to win so much,
as there be as little misuse, as may be: and to charge the party that deserves
blame, with hinderance of health, with corruption of manners, with ill loss of
good time: which if he care not for, the precept may pass, though he pass not
for it. But howsoever daunsing be or be thought to be, seeing it is held for an
exercise, we must think there is some great good in it, though we protecte not
the ill, if any come by it. Which good we must seek to get, and pray those
masters, which fashion it with order in time, with reason in gesture, with
proportion in number, with harmony in Music, to appoint it so, as it may be
thought both seemly and sober, and so best beseem such persons, as profess
sobriety: and that with all, it may be so full of nimblenesse and actiuitie,
as it may prove an exercise of health, being used in wholesome times, and not
seeking to supplant rest, as the rule of health at this day complains. And
generally of all ages, me think it beseems children best, to enable, and
nimble their iointes thereby, and to stay their overmuch deliting therein in
further years. The very definition of it declares, what it was then, when it
was right, and what it is now, when it seems to be wrong, if right in such
things be not creature to use, and may change with time, without challenge
for the change. They define daunsing to be a certain cunning to resemble the
manners, affections, and doings of men and women, by motions and gestures of
the body, artificially devised in number and proportion. This was to them a
kind of delivery, to utter their minds, by signs and resemblances, of that
which came nearest to the thing, and was most intelligible to the lookers on.
But now with us, there is nothing left to the daunser ordinarily, but the bare
motion, without that kind of hand cunning (for so I term their (...)) because
the skill seemed then to rest most in the use of the upper parts, and
gesturing by the hand. The credit of our daunsing now is to represent the
Music right, and to cause the body in his kind of action to resemble and
counterfeit that lively, which the instrument in his kind of composition
delivers delicately: and with such a grace to use the legs and feet, as
the old daunsers used their arms and hands. And as in the old time both
men, wymen and children did use daunsing to help and preserve their health, to
purchase good hauiour and bearing of their bodies: so in these our days, being
used in time, by order, and with measure, it will work the same effects of
health, hauiour and strength, and may well avoid the opinion of either
lewdness, or lightness. Thus much for daunsing, as the motion is for health,
and the meaning for good.

Chapter 17. Of wrestling.
FOr wrestling as it is old and was accounted cunning sometimes, so now both
by Physicians in art, and by our countrymen in use, it seems not to be much
set by, being contemned by the most, and cared for but by the meanest. Yet the
ancient Palesira a term known to the learned, and joined with letters, and
Music, to prove the good bringing up of youth as a most certain argument of
ability well qualified, fetched that name of the Greek (...), which we in
English term wrestling, and was always of good note, as wrestling it self in
games gat victories, in war tried forces, in health helped hauiour, in the
body wrought strength, and made it better breathed. (...). 3. De exercitijs.
Clemens Alexandrinus which lived at Rome in Galenes time in the third book of
his Paedagogue, or training master, in the title of exercise, rejecting most
kinds of wrestling yet reserueth one, as very well beseeming a civil trained
man, whom both seemelinesse for grace, and profitablenesse for good health, do
seem to recommende. Then an exercise it is, and healthfully it may be used: if
discretion ouerlooke it, our country will allow it. Let us therefore use it
so, as Clement of Alexandria commendes it for, and make choice in our market.
Wherefore not to deal with the catching pancraticall kind of wrestling, which
used all kinds of hold, to cast and overcome his adversary, nor any other of
that sort, which continuance has rejected, and custom refused, I have picked
out two, which be both civil for use, and in the using upright without any
great stouping, the one more vehement, the other more for such as be upon the
recovery after sickness, as a kind of motion, which without any danger,
brings strength and stowtnesse. It is friend to the head, bettereth the
bulk, and strengthens the sinews. Thus much for wrestling, wherein as in all
other exercises, the training master must be both cunning to judge of the
thing: and himself present to prevent harm, when the exercise is in hand.

Chapter 18. Of fensing, or the use of the weapon.
THe use of the weapon is allowed for an exercise, and may stand us at this
day now living, and our posterity in great stead, as well as it did those
which went before us. Who used it warlike for valiantness in arms, and
actiuitie in the field, gamelike to win garlandes and prices, and to please
the people in solemn meetinges: Physicklike to purchase thereby a good hauiour
of body and continuance of health. Hereof they made three kinds, one to fight
against an adversary in deed, an other against a stake or pillar as a
counterfeit adversary, the third against any thing in imagination, but nothing
in sight, which they called (...), a fight against a shadow. All these were
practiced either in arms, or unarmed. The armed fensing is to vehement for our
trade, let them try it, that entend to be warriers, which shall find it their
freinde, if they mean to follow the field, where, as in all other things use
works maisterie. But we scholars mind peace, as our muses profess that they
will not meddle, nor have to do with Mars. All these sorts of fensing were used
in the old time, and none of them is now to be refused, seeing the same
effects remain, both for the health of our bodies, and the help of our
countries. That kind of fensing or rather that misuse of the weapon, which the
Roman sword players used, to slash one an other yea even till they slew, the
people and princes to looking on, and deliting in the butcherie, I must needs
condemn, as an evident argument of most cruel immanitie, and beyond all
barbarous, in cold blood, to be so bloody. For their allegation, to harten
their people against the enemy, and not to fear wounds: no not death it
self in the very deadly fight, that caryeth small countenance, Solo^ apud
Lucianu^ in (...).
where the Athenia^ comes in, which in cokfights and quailefightes, did so
harten their people: because those birds will fight till they fall: without
either embrewing their youth with blood, or acquainting their citisens eyes
with such sanguinarie spectacles.

A thing complained on in the time when it was used, even by them which beheld
it, Lib. 28. cap. 1. and lib. 36. cap. vlt. Epist. Lib. 2. Plato in Lachete.
as Pliny does note: and by the Christianes which abhorred it, as Cypriane
cries out of it in more places then one. But for the credit and countenance of
the exercise, that was then used, and is now to be continued, Plato, a man
whose authority is sacred among Philosophers and students, in his dialogue
surnamed Laches, where he handles the argument of fortitude and valiantness,
encourages young men to learn the use of their weapon: as being an exercise
which needs not to make curtsie to go with the very best and brauest in his
parish: either for traveling or strengthening the body, besides the cunning
of it self. The profits which health receives by all these three kinds be
these. He opinion of the best writers concerning fensing, or skill how to
handle the weapon: no worse in it self, though it be sometimes not worthily
used, as it is no less profitable, then has been said before: though it shake
and shiuer weak heads, swimming brains, and ill kidneys. The mo reasons any
man can bring of him self for any of these exercises, the more he fortifieth
my choice, which point them but out slightly.

Chapter 19. Of the Top and scourge.
HE that will deny the Top to be an exercise, indifferently capable of all
distinctions in stirring, the very boys will beat him, and scourge him to,
if they light on him about lent, when Tops be in time, as every exercise has
his season, both in day and year, after the constitution of bodies, and
quantities in measure. Of this kind of Top, that we use now a days, both for
young and old people, to warm them in cold weather, I find nothing in
writing, because having no iron ringes, nor pinnes, it ca^ neither be the Greek
(...), nor (...), though the running about be bold to borrow the last name
trochus. For they whirled about, and along, with a marvelous great, though a
pretty noise, and were pastimes for men even in the midst of summer, when our
Tops be bestowed, and laid up against the spring. It resembles the Latin Turbo
most, and the Greek (...). The place of Virgil in the 7. of his AEneis, where
he compares Amata the Queen in her fury to this Turbo which the boys
scourged about the wide haule: declares both what Turbo is, and whose play it
was, and that it best resembles our Top. Of (...) there was an old Greek
Epigram, which makes it either the like or the same with our Top. (...),
(...).
Which is to say, that children when they had their whirling gigges under the
devotion of their scourges, caused them to troule about the broad streates. The
harm this exercise may bring must be to the head and eyes, thorough stouping
to much forward, or to the back and shoulders by bending to much downwardes,
otherwise it warmeth the body, and works all the effects, which those
exercises do that either by moving the legs or arms most, and with all the
whole body in degree, enlarge and stir the natural heat either to provoke
appetite, or to expel superfluities. The more room the Top has to spinne in,
the better for the legs and feet, the bigger it is, the better for the arms
and hands. The vprighter one scourges, the better for all parts, whom
neither bending does crushe, nor moisture corrupt. It were to be wished, that
it were whipped with both the hands, in play to train both the arms, seeing use
makes the difference, and no infirmity in nature. As both Plato wishing the
same professes it to be most true and our experience teaches us, both in left
handed people, which use but the left, and in double right handed which use
both the hands a like, and bear the name of the right hand as the more common
in use. But because the place of Plato concerning the left hand is very
pithie to this purpose though I use not to avouch much in the Greek toungue,
yet me think I may not ouerpasse it. In the seventh book of his laws,
allowing the indifferent use of our feet and legs, he complayneth of to much
partiality used toward the arms and hands, Plato.
in these words, (...), etc. For the performance of any kind of labor there
is no difference, says he, in the legs, and lower parts. But for our
arms, thorough ignorant nurses and mothers, we be every one of us half
lamed. For whereas naturally both the arms be almost of equal strength,
thorough our own default we make the difference. And so he passes on still
proving the unnatural handling of the left hand, when it is left weaker then
the right hand is.

These be the exercises which I term within doors, because they may be
practiced at home under covert, when we cannot go abroad for the weather:
though all may be used abroad, if the room and the weather do serve abroad.
Wherein I take it, Lib. de parua pila.
that I have kept Galenes rule in choosing these exercises, and that they be all
both pleasant, profitable and parable, the perfect circunstances of all good
and general exercises, not to be costly to compass, nor unpleasant to loath
them, nor unprofitable to leave them. Those that require more liberty of
room, to raunge at will, or to forage in the field, be these, which I noted
before, walking, running, leaping, swimming, riding, hunting, shooting, and
playing at the ball.

Chapter 20. Of walking.
AMong those exercises which be used abroad, what one deserves to be set
before walking, in the order and place of train? what one have they more need
to know, which mind, the preservation and continuance of health? what one is
there, which is more practiced of all men, and at all times, then walking is? I
dare say that there is none, whether young or old, whether man or woman, but
accounts it not only the most excellent exercise, but almost alone worthy to
bear the name of an exercise. When the weather suffers, how empty are the
towns and streates, how full be the fields and meadows, of all kinds of
folk? which by flocking so abroad, protest themselves to be favorers of that
they do, and delight in for their health. If ye consider but the use of our
legs, how necessary they be for the performaunce of all our doings, nature
her self seems to have appointed walking, as the most natural train, that
can be, to make them discharge their duty well. And sure if there be any
exercise, which generally can preserve health, which can remedy weakness,
which can purchase good hauiour, considering it is so general, and neither
excludes person nor age, certainly that is walking. Hereupon Physicians when
they entreat of this argument, use always to give it, the place of preferment
and birthright in this kind. The ancient Princes, and commonweals so highly
esteemed of it, as in the places appointed for exercise, whether within their
great buildinges, or without, they seemed to mind no one thing more: and still
provided walking rooms* to serve for all seasons and times of the year, some
covert and close, some vncouert and open, some secret and hidden. The reason
why they thus regarded walking, was great, for as it seems to be, so it is in
very deed wholly consecrate to the use of health.

Is it ever red that the athlets or gamesters used walking for an exercise:
either in sportes, or in theaters, or in the solemnising of their sacred
ceremonies, whereunto they served? did either Plato handling this argument, 3.
De Rep.
or any good writer else say that walking was any way to train up soldiars
withal? Only Vegetius says in his discourse of warfare, Lib. 1. cap. 9. and
penul.
that it were good for soldiars to accustom themselves to walk quickly and
proportionately, for their better breathing: and Augustus Caesar, and Adrian the
Emperors, did ordeine by constitution, that soldiars both horsemen and
footmen should monthly be led abroad to walk and that not only in the plain
fields, but in all kinds of soil, to be able by that acquaintance with
grounds, to make difficulty at none. So that walking seems to be only
institute both by nature and custom for the use of health: and that in the
train of health, no one thing deserves better place then it does: because no
other thing besides health layth claim unto it.

Hereof there be two kinds, the one used after vehement exercises, the other,
which bears the name of the exercise it self. The use of slow walking after
exercise.
Concerning the former of the two, I have but thus much to say: because the
latter is my peculiar subject. That it comes in place, when other exercises
are dismissed, and finished, after purgations ministered by counsel of Physic,
after great vomiting: that it is good to refresh the wearied mind: to alter
and bring in order the spirits: to loose that which is strayted, to scour the
chest: to make one fetch his breath at ease: to strengthen the instruments of
the senses, to confirm the stomach, to clear and fine the body: and not to
suffer it after travail to melt or decaie, but to purge and cleanse it: and
that, which is of most account, to dissolve and bannish away all affections
that procure any feeling of weariesomnes, or disturbaunce to the body.

The second kind of walking has three sorts under him. Whereof the first
bears his name of the kind of motion, The three principal kinds of walking.
how: The second of the place, where: The third of the time, when the walking
is used. Which three also have particular branches under each of them, as
hereafter shall appear.

Walkinges which take their names of the motion how, Walking which is named
after ye time of moving
be either swift or slow, vehement or gentle, much or little, moderate, or sore,
long and outright, or short and turning: now bearing upon the whole feet, now
upon the toes, now upon the heels.

Of all these diversities in walking the moderate is most profitable, Moderate
walking.
which alone of all, that I rekened, has no point either of to much, or of to
little, and yet it is both much, and strayning, which be the two properties of
an healthful walk. It is good for the head, the eyes, the throat, the chest,
when they be out of frame: so the party spit not blood. For distilling from
the head, for difficulty of breath, for a moist and and pained stomach,
wherein the nurriture either grows bitter or corrupts: for the iaundise,
costifnesse, fleeting of the meat in the stomach, stopping of the urine, ache
of the hippes, and generally for all such, as either need to provoke any
superfluity from the upper parts downward, or to send that packing, which is
already in way to depart. Now to the contrary it is naught for agues, because
it increases heat, and so consequently the disease: for the falling evil, for
hauking up of blood: and in the time when one is making water.

Swift walking does heat sore and abateth the flesh, Swift and quick walking,
whereupon to ease the colicke, and to take away grossness, it is accounted a
very good mean.

Slow walking has the same effects, Slow walking*
that the apotherapeutike has. And therefore it is good for sickly weak old
men, and those which delight in, or need walking after meat, to setle it
better in the bottom of their stomach: or that be newly awaked from sleep,
or that prepare themselves to some greater exercise, or that feel any ache in
any part* or that have dry bodies. When one has the head ache it is good to
walk first slowly, and after a while a little faster, and stronger, strutting
out the legs. Slow walking is also good against the falling sickness:
because without any shaking to the head, it fetches the humors downward,
where it thinneth and disperseth them, and warmes the whole body, without
endammaging it. Finally in quartane agues, when the fit is past, in leprosies,
for tetters, ringewormes, cankars, and to procure easy fetching of ones
breath, it is very sovereign.

Vehement and to sore.
Vehement or to sore and to eager walking, is best for cold folks, and therefore
good to drive away trembling or quaking, it increases puffing and blowing, and
yet dissolueth, and disperseth wind. But it is ill for weak heads and feet,
and such as are in danger of the gout. For both the gout and the hippe ache do
oftimes come of to much and to sore walking. As to the contrary gentle walking
upon soft straw, or grass, or upon even ground is good for any gout or inward
exulceration, before meat, but not after. For weariness is their principal
enemy: which heateth and enflameth their iointes to sore: and thereby causes
them to draw still more matter from the parts further of, to feed their
continual flux.

Much and often.
Much and often walking is good for them that have a distempered bulk or head:
that perceive small nurriture in their lower parts, that in their exercises
need more vehement stirring.

Little and seldom.
Little walking is good for them, that use no bathing or washing after exercise,
which must needs walk after meat, to send it down, to the bottom of their
stomach, and for those which find some heaviness in their bodies.

Long and outright.
Long and outright walking is nothing so troublesome as the short, that makes
many turns. It is good for the head, and yet it sucketh up humors, and dries
to fast.

Long and quick.
Long and quick walking is good to stay the hikup or yeaxing.

Short and soon turning wearyeth sooner: and troubles the head sorer.

Circular or walking round about makes one disie, and hurts the eyes.

In walking to strout the legs, and bear upon the heels, is very good for
an ill head, a moist bulk, a strayned belly, and for such of the lower
parts, as prosper not, yea, though the party feed well: and generally for
all those, in whom superfluities steeme upward.

To bear upon the toes has been proved good for ill eyes, and to stay loose
bellies.

Bearing upon the whole feet is always incident to some of the other kinds,
and therefore joins with each of them in effects.

Walking which takes the name after the place, Walking which is named after
the place.
is either on hills and high grounds, or in valleies and low grounds:
again the low ground is, either even, or uneven: either under covert, or
abroad: in the sun, or in the shade. When one walks up against the hill,
the body is marueilously wearied, because all the sway and poize of it
presses down those parts, which are first moved. And for all that such
motions be heavy and slow, yet they cause one sweat sooner and sorer, and
stay the breath more, then the walking downhill does: because heavy things
bearing naturally downward, are forced upward against nature. Whereupon heat
which bears the body up, as in coming down it trauelleth not of his own
nature, so preasing upward it is burdened with the body, whereby it both
increases it self, provoke sweat, and stays the breath. This kind of
walk before meat is good for the bulk, which has not his breath at
commandment. Demosthenes strengthened his voice by it, Plut. in Demost.
pronouncing his orations alowd, as he walked up against the hill, whereby he
gat the benefit of breathing, to deliver his long periodes, without pain to
himself, or breach to his sentence. The knees are most toiled in this kind of
walking, being forced backward contrary to their nature, and therefore to their
grief.

Walking downhill draws superfluity from the head more then the other does*
Walking downhill.
but withal it is enemy to feeble thighs, because they both move the legs,
and support all the whole weight of the body above. The change and variety of
the motion causes that kind of walking to be best liked, which is sometime
vphill, sometime downhill.

When ye walk upon even or uneven ground, ye walk either in meadows or
grassie places, or in rowgh and brambly, or in sandy and soft. If ye walk in
a meadow, it is without all contradictio^ most for pleasure, because nothing
there anoyeth, nothing offends the sense, and the head is fed both with
variety of sweet odours, and with the moisture of such humor, as the meadow
yields.

Rough, brambly, and bushy grounds stuff the head.

Walking upon sand.
Sandy, and chiefly if it be any thing deep, because the walking in it
stirs sore, confirms and strengthens all the parts of the body: and
fetches superfluities mightily downward. In Augusti vita. cap. 80.
This was one of Augustus Caesar's remedies, as Suetonius writes, to help his
haulting and weak legs. For to clear the upper parts of that which cloyeth
them, there is nothing better then to travel in deep sand.

Walking in a close gallerie.
Walking in a close gallerie is not so good, because the air there is not so
fresh, free, and open, but pent, close, and gross: and therefore stuffeth the
body, onelesse the gallerie be in the uppermost buildinges of the house, where
neither any vapor from the ground can come: and the air that comes is pure
and clear,

The close walks, which were called cryptoporticus were not of choice but of
necessity, when extremity of weather would not let them walk abroad.

Walking in an open place.
Walking in an open place, and chiefly green, is much better and more
wholesome, then under any covert. First of all for the eyes, because a fine and
subtle air coming from the green to the body, which is more penetrable
because of stirring, scoureth away all gross humors from the eyes, and so
leaves the sight sine and clear. Further, because the body in walking waxes
hot, the air sucketh humors out of it, and disperseth what soever is in it
more then it can well bear.

Now in walking abroad there is consideration to be had to the soil. For
walking by the sea side ye thin and dry up gross humors, by rivers and
standing waters ye moist. Howbeit both these two last be naught, and specially
standing waters. Walking not near any water, as it is not so good as the walk
by the sea, so it is much better, then walking near any other water. Walking
in the dew moystes, and harms.

It is good to walk where birds haunt.
If ye walk in a place where birds haunt, it is of great efficacy to clear
by the breath, and to disburden the body so, as if ye did walk in some higher
ground. If there be no wind where ye walk, it clears by breath* it
disperseth excrements, it slakes and nippes not, and is good for colicks that
come of a cold cause. If there be wind, the Northern causes coughing, hurtes
the bulk, and yet confirms the strength, soundes the senses, and strengthens
the weak stomach. The Southwinde filles the head, dulles the instruments of
sense, yet it loses the belly, and is good to dissolve. The Westwinde
passes all the rest, both for mildness, and wholesomnesse. The Eastwinde is
hurtefull and nippes.

It is better walking in the shade then in the sun: It is better to walk in
the shade the^ in the sun.
as it is naught for the headache to walk either in the cold or in the heat.
And yet it is beter to walk in the sun, then to stand in it, and better to
walk fast, then slowly. Of all shades, those be the best which be under walls
or in herboures. It is very dangerous walking near unto dewye trees,
Dangerous walking under dewy trees
for fear of infectio^ by the sappie dew: because dew in general is not so
wholesome, it abateth the flesh, as wymen that gather it up with wool or
linen clothes for some purposes do continually try. Now if the dew come of
any unwholesome matter, what may it prove to? The best walking in shadows
simply is under myrtle and baye trees, or among quick and sweet smelling
herbs, as wild basell, penyroyall, thyme, and mynt, which if they be wild and
of their own growing be better to wholesome the soil, then any that be set by
hand: but if the better cannot be, What effect the fair and clear air has.
the meaner must serve. Again in this kind of walk the fair and clear air
lighteneth, scoureth, fineth, procures good breathing, and easy moving. Dark
and cloudie air heauyeth, scoureth not by breath, and stuffeth the head.

Walking which is termed after the time, Walking which takes his name after
the time.
is either in winter or summer: in the morning or in the evening, before meat
or after. The most of these differencies will appear the^ playnest, when the
time for all exercises is generally appointed, in consideration of
circunstance, as shall be declared under the title of time. In the mean while
walking whether in the morning or evening, ought still to go before meat.

The morning walk loses the belly, The good of ye morning walk.
dispatcheth sluggishnes, which comes by sleep, thinneth the spirits,
increases heat, and provoke appetite. It is good for moist constitutions, it
nimbleth and quickneth the head, and all the parts in it.

The good and ill of the evening walk.
The evening walk is a preparatiue to sleep, it disperseth inflations, and yet
it is ill for a weak head. Walking after meat is not good but only for such as
are used unto it. Yet even they may not use it to much. It is good also for
them, which otherwise cannot cause their meat go down to the bottom of their
stomach.

And thus much for walking, both regarding the manner of the motion, the place
where, and the time when. Which circunstances though they be many and diverse:
yet to purchase the commodities, which walking is confessed to be very full of,
they must needs be cared for: considering our whole life is so dealt with, as
if we hastened on death, against the which, this exercise may be rightly termed
an antidote, or counterreceit.

Chapter 21. Of Running.
THe manifest services which we receive by our legs and feet, in war for
glory, to pursue or save, in game for pleasure to win and wear, in Physic
for health to preserve and heal, do give parents to understand, that they do
suffer their children to be more then half maimed, if they train them not up
in their youth to the use and exercise thereof. To polishe out this point with
those effectual reasons, which auaunce and set forth nature, when she says
in plain terms, that she means to do good: or with those arguments,
wherewith the best authors do amplify such places, when they find nature so
freindly and forward, (as the anatomistes which survey the workmanship of our
body, and histories, which note the effects of swiftness, do wonder at
nature, and wish exercise to help her, for that which they see) were to me
nothing needful, considering my end is not the praise, but the practice of
that which is praiseworthy: neither to tell you, what Alexander the Macedonian,
nor what Papyrius the Romain did by swift foot, nor that Homere gave Achilles
his epithete of his footmanship, but to tell you that running is an exercise
for health, which if reason cannot win, whereof every one can judge, sure
history will not, where the authors credit may be called in question as to
much favoring the party whom he praises, wherefore I will leave of all manner
of by ornaments, wherewith such as be in love with running do use, to set it
forth, and directly fall to the several kinds there of which differ one from
an other, both in the moving it self, and also in the manner of the moving,
whereupon the effects, which follow must needs prove diverse according to that
diversity. Running of it self is held by the Physicians generally to be a
swift exercise, which needs neither much strength, nor great violence, and in
what sort so ever it is used, it is ill for agues.

The first kind of running which bears his name of the AEtius a learned
Physician writes, that he knew some which by walking and running only, were
delivered from all grief and peine there. But it is very unwholesome for such
as have ill heads. Whereupon Aristotle in his Problemes asking the question why
running which is thought to drive all excrementes downward, 5. part. probl. 9.
if it be vehement and swift should be offensive to the head, not in men and
wymen alone, but also in beasts, answers thus: that the swift motion,
because it strayneth the strength, and stays the breath, heates the head with
all, and swelles the veins therein: so that they draw unto them foreign mean
as cold or heat: and besides that, it enforces what so ever is in the breast
to ascend upward, whereby the head cannot choose but ache, which is the cause,
that swift running is naught for the falling evil. De parua pila. lib.
Galene thinks so basely of this kind of running, as he terms it, a thing
both an enemy to health, to great a thinner of the whole body, and such a
one, as has no manner of manly exercise in it. Besides this, it puts him
which runs so vehemently in danger of some great conuulsion, if he fortune
to encounter any violent stop by the way.

The second kind of running, which takes his name of the strengthens the
natural actions, prouokes appetite, helps and turns rewmes, and catarres,
some other way. And therefore it is commended for a remedy against the swiming
of the head, against the dry cough, if ye hold your breath withal, against
exulcerations in the inner side of the jaws, and the distorsion or writhing of
the mouth, which the Greeks call (...). For though at the first it seem to
provoke defluxions and distilling of humors, yet within a small time it
stays them: and therefore it is thought to be good for those, which are pained
with the Ischiatica, which have much a do to stir their legs at the first,
but after that they have run a while, they be so nimble and quick, as if
they had never felt any pain in those parts. It strengthens the stomach
mightily, and delivers the belly from wind, and cold passions: whereby it
is thought, and that not without great cause to be very good for the colike
and dropsy: it delayeth the swelling of the milt. For the gnawing of the
guts, and some diseases of the kidneis it is exceeding good, so the kidneies
be not either presently, or have not been of late, subject to some
exulceration. To say that it is wholesome for the legs and feet, were to
make a doubt, where none can be, considering running is their proper and
peculiar action. This exercise for all that it is such a friend to health: yet
bringes with it some inconveniences: for it is very laborious: it cools the
flesh and furthereth not the feeding. And as naturally of it self, it breadeth
no great harm, so if it meet with an ill head, or a weak bulk, or burning
and hot urine, it helps to draw on diverse diseases. He that has any rupture
in the twiste, or else where, must forbear running, as those also, which have
infected livers or gauled kidneies. If the chafed dear could speak, he would
desire the hunter to give him leave to piss, when he pursues him sorest, and
that for but so little respite, he would show him a great deal more pastime:
but the hunter which knows well that the skalding urine will not let him
run long, will not lend him that leisure: because he cares more for the fruit
of his own pray, the^ the effect of the deares prayer. All the other kinds
of running which follow, take their names of the manner of their moving, whereof
the first is the long outright running, which if it continue on gently though
long, it warmeth the flesh, and makes it plumpe, and is very good, for great
feeders, though it make the body slow and gross. Running straight backward,
and withal not hastily, is good for the head, the eyes, the streatchers, the
stomach and the loins. Running round about, thinnes the flesh and streaches
it, but chiefly the belly, and because of the quick motion, it gathers
moisture quickly. And therefore Hippocrates wishes them to use it, Lib. de
insomnijsla^guentium.
which dream of black stars, as the fore warning of some foreign disease.
It troubles the head and makes it dizie: it marreth both the bulk and the
legs, and therefore would be left. He that runs vphill straynes him self
sore, and does neither his bulk nor his legs any great good. He that runs
downhill makes his head giddy, shakes all within him, and tries the weakness,
or strength of his hippes. He that runs in his clothes sweateth sore, and
warmes his flesh more: and therefore it is good for them, that have the head
ache to run so* and those that have somewhat to do, to fetch their breath. He
that runs out of his clothes single or naked, sweateth much, which is much
more healthful how little so ever it be, then much more, 3. Lib. de Diaeta. 2.
part. proble. 21.33.42.
with the clothes on. Hyppocrates likes running generally more in winter then
summer. Oribasius in both, yea though summer be in his prime and chief heat.
The resolution is, when most sweating is best, which Aristotle says is in
summer.

Chapter 22. Of Leaping.
LEaping should seem to be somewhat natural, and cheerful, because at any
pleasant or ioyefull news, not only the heart will leap for joy, but also
the body it self will spring lively, to declare his consent, with the delited
mind, and that not in young folks alone, but also in the elder, whom we
commonly say that no ground can hold: so that leaping seems to stand the body
in such a stead for uttering of joy, as the tongue serves the mind to deliver
her delight by speech with laughter. The cattle and brute beasts bewraie their
contentment, and well liking, by the self same means, leaping and galloping
of them selves in their pasture when 'they be lustily disposed and in good
health. Though in training of the body by way of exercise, there be not so
much regard had to the mirth of the mind, as to the motion of the body: and
yet being an exercise it may not be unpleasant. In which kind it is noted to
be vehement, wherein both strength is used to make the body spring, and
swiftness to make it nimble: being naturally an interrupted race, as running
is a continued leap. It served the old world in game for bravery, and show
of actiuitie: in warfare to skip over diches and hard passages, in Physic for
an exercise of health, whereby it became more stately and imperial, because
the first famous Romain Emperor Augustus Caesar, Suetonius in Augusto cap. 83.
being troubled with the Ischiatica and stone in his bladder, and also having
some weakness in his left leg and feet, used this running leap, or leaping
race to help himself thereby. There be diverse kinds of leaping whereof I will
tuch the most likely.

Leaping and springing without intermission is good to increase the natural
heat, to help digestion, to dispatche raw humors, though afterward it anoie
the head and breast, because it shakes the head very vehemently: and by reason
of much bending and so pressing the back, it oftimes breaks leap running is
good for such diseases of the head, as have troubled it long. It helps the
bulk, because it uses no violent bending, nor pressing of the body, it
fetches down such needeles fumes, as otherwise would have been aspiring
upward: it chearisheth weak legs: which prosper not by nurriture, thorough
some trembling and Leaping as we do commonly call it and use it, does drive
idle superfluities downward thoroghly, but because it shakes the bulk to
sore, both by to violent moving and to forcible strayning, it is not good for
it: though it show a very deliver and an active body: both to stir and to
do any thing else. It drives also the stone from the kidneies into the
bladder: yet it hurts the knees by reason of violent and continual bending
them. The Lacedemonian wymen, whose picture Callimachus the painter, for his
foolish curiosity named (...), 34. Lib. cap. 8.
as Pliny reports, used to leap so, as their heels did hitte their hippes,
which manner of leaping does both purge and dry. But me think I here some
gentlewymen say, fie upon them Rigs. Not so. The laws and custom of their
country did allow, nay did command them to run, to leap, to wrestle, and
to do all such exercises, both as well, as men, and also with men. Their reason
was. They did think the child lame of the one side, whose mother was
delicate* dainty, tender, never stirring, never exercising, not withstanding,
the father were never so naturally strong, never so artificially trained. And
to prevent that infirmity in their own youth, they exercised their wymen
also, no less the^ their men. As Plato wishes his people in his common weal,
4. de Rep.
which he patterneth for the best. Skipping again the banck, as it helps the
hippes, so it hurts the breast: and the same downhill clears the head from
superfluities, which it fetches downward: It strengthens the legs, but it
shakes the bowelles to sore, which is very dangerous, for ruptures any where:
for the crooked swelling veins in the leg: for all gouttes: for all those,
in whom the humors upon any small occasion will fall down to the feet: Gal.
6. epi^. comme^. 3. aph. 2.
and cause them to swell. Further in cases where it were good to let blood or
to purge, if either years or some other impediment will admit neither, to
avoid superfluous humors, leaping will supply the room. As it is very ill
for those which piss blood: or be in a flixe: or have weak or ouerheated
kidneies: or that have at that time, or not long before had, some gaul or
exulceration in the kidneies. And yet though the kidneies be sound, leaping
will sometime loose a vein. Each kind of leaping is better accomplished by
holding of some weight in the hand for steadiness, then with the hand empty
and without his ballace.

Chapter 23. Of Swimming.
IN the old time, when they would point at a fellow, in whom there was nothing
to be made account of, they were wont to say, he neither knows letter on the
book, nor yet how to swim: whereby it appeareath that swimming, was both in
great use, and of great price in those days, which either first brought forth
by word or afterward maintained it, seeing he was held for no body that could
not, or but for a dastard which would not learn the slight to swim. The
train came because it was then best to learn, when the iointes were most
pliable, and yet strong withal. The end was either to save themselves in
fightes by sea, or in flightes by land, where they were to pass rivers, or to
assail enemies by water, or for other such services: as what if Leander say it
serves for love, and bring both Hero to witness, which was partaker of the
evil, and Musaeus the Poet, which described their misfortune? Which
considerations may recommende swimming to us also: who may stand in need of
it, upon the same causes, and in the like euentes that they did. But because it
is so necessary, it would not be discourteously entertained, and therefore
regard must be had in what water ye swim, for if ye swim in springes which
are naturally hot, it is stuffing, and yet good for the palsy so he that
swimmeth do use bladders, to ease him self withal, and lighten his labor. To
swim in marsh waters, and pooles, infecteth both the head and all the residue
of the body, because rotten, and corrupt vapors, enter the pores of the
body, together with the moisture. It is reasonable good swimming in lakes and
standing meres, which the larger they be and the clearer, the more commodious
and wholesome to swim in. But no kind of fresh water is so good to swim
in, as the running river is, chiefly for them, which be in health, to whom
besides many other commodities, it serves for a preparatiue to sleep. Yet it
is not good abiding long in any fresh water, for fear of perishing the sins
both with cold and moisture, whose issues be the crampe, and the swimmers
danger. But nothing at all, be it never so good for health, be it never so
defensible to save, can be gotten without peril in proving. And why should
swimming dream of security, and never think to drown? Does it not deal
with water, where there is no warrant, but wisdom to forsee? point the
place, point the fight, point the danger and a point for danger: but where
you cannot appointe the particularitie, ye cannot warrant the peril. Liuius.
C. Caes.
Cocles, escaped, it was in a small river, and reskue at hand. Scoena the
centurion escaped, he was near both ship and shore. Appian.
Nay Caesar himself saved him self from drowning, and held his lettres up
dry in the one hand. A sign of courage and cunning, as that man had enough:
but his ships were at hand, and it is not written, that either he swamme
alone, or any long way. But of all dangers to drown, there is least in the
sea, where the swimming is best: for the salt water as it is thicker then the
fresh, so it bears up the body better, that it may fleet with less labor.
The swimming in salt water is very good to remove the headache, to open the
stuffed nosethrilles, and thereby to help the smelling. It is a good remedy
for dropsies, scabbes and scurfes, small pockes, leprosies, falling away of
either leg, or any other part: for such as prosper not so, as they would,
though they eat as they wish, for ill stomachs, livers, miltes, and corrupt
constitutions. Yet all swimming must needs be ill for the head, considering
the continual exhalation, which ascends still from the water into the head.
Swimming in hot waters softeneth that which is hardened, warmeth that which is
cooled, nimbleth the iointes which are benumbed, thinneth the skin, which is
thickened, and yet it troubles the head, weakneth the body, disperseth
humors, but dissolueth them not. Swimming in cold water does strengthen the
natural heat, because it beats it in: it makes very good and quick
digestion: it breaks superfluous humors, it warmeth the inward parts, yet
long tarying in it hurtes the sineues, and takes away the hearing. Thus much
concerning swimming, which can neither do children harm in learning, if the
master be wise, nor the common weal but good, being once learned, if either
private danger or public attempt do bid them adventure. For he that owes a
life to his country, if he die on land, he does his duty, and if he drown
in water, his duty is not drowned.

Chapter 24. Of Riding.
IF any will be so wilful as to deny Riding to be an exercise and that a great
one, and fittest also for greatest personages, set him either upon a trotting
jade to iounse him thoroughly or upon a lame hakney to make him exercise his
feet, when his courser fails him. In all times, in all countries, among all
degrees of people, it has ever been taken, for a great, a worthy, and a
gentlemanly exercise. Though Aristophanes his testimony, were naught against
honest Socrates, yet it is good to prove, that riding was a gentlemanly train,
even among the principles of education in Athens. And Virgile in the legacy
sent to Latinus, describes the same train in the Romain children, which,
says he, exercised themselves on horseback before the town. And Horace
accuses the young gentleman in his time as not able to hang on a horse. But
to deal with stories either Greek, or Latin, for the Romain, or other nations
exercise in riding in a matter of such store, were more then needeles. The
Romans had their whole city divided into partialities, by reason of the four
factions of those exercising horsemen. Who of the four colors, which they
used, Russet, White, Gal. 7. meth. Pli. epist. 9. lib. 6. Martial. lib. 11.
Iuuenal.
Green, and Blew, were named Russati, Albati, Prasini, Veneti. For the wars
how great a train riding is, I would no country had tried, nor had cause to
complain, nor the subdued people to be sorofull, though the conqueror do vant
himself, of his valiantness on horseback. For health it must needs be of
some great moment, or else why do the Physicians seem to make so much of it?
They say that generally it increases natural heat, and that it purges
superfluities, as that to the contrary it is naught for any sick body, or
that has taken Physic hard before, or that is troubled with infection or
inflammation of the kidneies. They use to divide it into five kinds, Slow,
quick, trotting, ambling, and posting.

Slow riding they write that it wearieth the grines very sore that it hurts
the buttokes, and legs, by hanging down to long, and that yet it heateth not
much: that it hinders getting of children, and breadeth aches and lamenesse.

quick riding they say, that of all exercises it shakes the body most, and
that yet it is good for the head ache, coming of a cold cause: for the falling
evil: for deafness, for the stomach, for yeaxing or hikup, for clearing and
quickening the instruments of sense: for dropsies: for thickning of thin
shankes: Suetonius.
which was found true in Germanicus Caesar nephew to Tiberius the Emperor,
which so helped his spindle shankes. Again quick riding is naught for the
bulk: for a weak bladder, which must forebeare all exercises, when it has
any exulceration* for the Ischiatica, because the hippes are to much heated and
weakened, by the vehementnesse of the motion. Whereupon the humors, which are
styrred rest there: and either breed new or augment old aches.

Of trotting, it is said even as we see, that it shakes the body

Ambling as it exercises least, so it anoyeth least, and yet loses

As for posting, though it come last in reading, it will be

Chapter 25. Of Hunting.
HVnting is a copious argument, for a poetical humor, to discourse of, whether
in verse, with Homer, or in prose, with Heliodorus. Dian would be alleged, as
so avoiding Cupide. Hippolytus, would be used in commendation of continence,
and what would not poetry bring in to auaunce it, whose music being
solitary and woddishe, must needs be, nay is very well acquainted with the
chase. If poets should faint, the Persians would fight, both for riding and
hunting: so that if patrocinie were in question, we need not to enquire, they
would offer them selves, from all countries, and of all languages. But we need
not either for praise, or for proof, to use foreign aduocats. For hunting has
always carried a great credit, both for exercising the body, and deliting the
mind, as it semes to be very natural, because it seeks to master, and to
take beasts, and birds, which are naturally appointed for man's use, and
therefore though they be taken and killed, there is no wrong done them. lib. de
Venat. 1. (...).
The courteous Xenophon as delited himself therein, and all the ancient
writers, as subscribing to a truth, commend it marueilously, and chiefly, for a
proper elementarie to warlike uses, and Mars his school, whether for
valiauntnes or for policy, because the resemblaunces of the chief warlike
executions do fall out in hunting, as the quality or courage of the game
offers cause, either to use force and manhood, or to fly to devise and
sutteltie.

The Romain Emperors did exhibit public hunting unto the whole people in way
of pastime and pleasure. The Physicians make much of it: as being an exercise,
which contains under it most of the other stirring exercises, for they that
hunt, walk, run, leap, shout, hallow, ride, and what may they not do,
having the whole country for room, and the whole day for time, De parua pila
lib.
to do in what they list? And though Galene do restrain it to men of great
ability, as if hunting were not for every man to use, which is one of the
marks, whereby to know the best exercises, that they be parable, and
purchaceable even to mean purses: yet we see it in common to most, where
restraint by law does not forbid it. Neither is the charge in respect of the
exercise, but in respect of the game, whereon the exercise is employed. To hunt
a hare, and course a heart, to chase a bucke, and chafe a bore is not all one,
neither for provision, nor for peril though the exercise have small odds,
which being compounded of those exercises that I named, must needs have the
same effects, that those exercises have besides his own. To warm the body
very well, to disperse superfluites, to abate flesh, to lessen ouerflowing
moisture, to make one sleep soundly, to digest meat, and raw humors, to
quicken both the sight and the hearing, to keep of old age, and finally to
make the body most healthful, and the health most lasting.

Rases a notable Arabicke Physician, 3. Commen. 13 tract. cap. 3.
writes that in a great plague there remained almost none alive in a certain
town, save hunters only, which escaped by reason of their preserving exercise.
And Mithridates that famous king used hunting so much for his healthes sake, as
in seven years space, it is written that he never came within house, neither
in city nor country. And yet hunting is not good for the head, when it is
used with vehemence, as no other vehement exercise is.

There be but two kinds of Hunting to my purpose, the one on horseback, the
other one foot.

They that Hunt on horsebake, for so much as they sometime

Hunting on foot, has all the commodities, and incommodities

But of all Hunting that is still best, wherein we exercise our selves and our
own bodies most, not our hauks or howndes, because exercises be means to make
men healthful, and other things be means to bring that mean about. Such a
kind of hunting was it which Chiron, Machaon, Podalyrius, AEsculapius, the
parents and patrones of physike did use, whose delight thererin, is our warrant
in choice, because they being so great physicians, as physic went then in
Platoes opininon, did try that in their own persons, which they delivered to
posterity for the same use.

Chapter 26. Of Shooting.
THe physicians seem to commend shooting for the use of health sufficiently,
in that they make Apollo and AEsculapius the presidentes and protectors of
Archerie, which both be the greatest gods, and chiefest patrones of there own
profession. And that it is a thing to be beloved, and liked, what argument is
there that can be alleged of comparable force to that of Cupide himself,
which in the matter of love, does bend with his bow, and enamour with his
arrow? But in sadness to say enough of this exercise in few words, which no
words can praise enough for the commodities which it brings to the health of
the body: as it has been used by diverse nations, in diverse sorts, both on
horseback and on foot, both for peace and war, for healthful exercise and
pleasant pastime: so none either now does use it, or heretofore has used it,
more to health, and bettering of the body then our own countrymen do. As if it
were a thing somewhat natural to Islands, because they of Crete and Cyprus in
old stories, they of the Indian Islands in new stories are noted also for
near Shooting, strong Darting, and straight Slinging, whereof the Balear
Islands seem to take their name. Nay by all ancient monumentes Shooting
should seem to be both the eldest, and the vsuallest defense in fighting a
far of, which though it have now, and tofore have had great place in the
field for warfare: yet has it a great deal better place in our fields for
welfare: and therefore the more, because it consists both of the best
exercises, and the best effects of the best exercises. For he that shoots in
the free and open fields may choose, whether between his marks he will run
or walk, dance or leap, hallow or sing or do somewhat else, which belongs
to the other, either vehement or gentle exercises. And whereas hunting on foot
is so much praised, what moving of the body has the foot hunter in hills and
dales, which the rouing Archer has not in variety of growndes? Is his
natural heat more stirred then the Archers is? Is his appetite better then
the Archers is though the proverb help the hungry hunter? Nay in both these
the Archer has the vantange. For both his hours be much better to eat, and
all his moving is more at his choice: because the hunter must follow his game
of necessity, the Archer need not but at his own leisure. For his pastime
will tarry still, till he come to it, the hunters game is glad to get from him. In
fine what good is there in any particular exercise, either to help natural
heat, or to clear the body, or to provoke appetite, or to fine the senses, or
to stre^gthen the sinews, or to better all parts, which is not altogether in
this one exercise? Only regard to use it in a mean does warrant the archer
from danger to himself: and an eye to look about, does defend the passager
from peril by him. I could here speak much, if it were not to much, to say
eue^ so much in such a thing, being so fair a pastime, so pleasant to al
people, so profitable to most, so familiar to our country, so every where in
eye, so known a defense, such a mean to offend, as there is no man but
knows it to be a preservative to health, and therefore well to be numbered
among the trayning exercises. And chiefly as it is used in this Island, wherein
the rouing must needs be the best and most healthful, both for varieties of
motion in diversities of soil, and by using all archery, in exercising one
kind. For in rouing, you may use either the butte, or the prick by the way
for your mark, as your pleasure shall be. This exercise do I like best generally
of any rownde stirring without the doors, upon the causes before alleged,
which if I did not, that worthy man our late and lear-countrieman master Askam
would be half angry with me, though he were of a mild disposition, who both
for trayning the Archer to his bow, and the scholar to his book, has showed
him self a cunning Archer, and a skillful master.

In the midst of so many earnest matters, I may be allowed to entermingle
one, which has a relice of mirth, for in praising of Archerie, as a principal
exercise, to the preserving of health, how can I but praise them, who profess
it thoroughly, and maintain it nobly, the friendly and frank fellowship of
prince Arthurs knights in and about the city of London, which of late years
have so revived the exercise, so countenau^ced the artificers, so enflamed
emulation, as in themselves for frindly meting, in workmen for good gayning,
in companies for earnest comparing, it is almost grown to an orderly
discipline, to cherishe loving society, to enrich laboring poverty, to
maintain honest actiuity, which their so encouraging the under trauellours,
and so increasing the healthful train, if I had sacred to silence, would not
my good friend in the city master Hewgh Offly, and the same my noble fellow
in that order Sir Lancelot, at our next meeting, have given me a sour nodde,
being the chief furtherer of the fact, which I commend, and the famosest
knight, of the fellowship, which I am of? Nay would not even prince Arthur
himself master Thomas Smith, and the whole table, of those well known knights,
and most active Archers have laid in their chaleng against their fellow knight,
if speaking of their pastime I should have spared their names? whereunto I am
easily led, because the exercise deserving such praise, they that love so
praiseworthie a thing neither can of them selves, neither ought at my hand to
be hudled up in silence.

Chapter 27. Of the Ball.
THe play at the Ball seems compound, because it may be used, both within
doors, and without. Whereof good writers have delivered us thus much: that in
the old time there were diverse kinds of balls and diverse kinds of exercise
therewith, according to the diverse use of the ball either small or great: both
amongst the Romans and Greeks, whose names I use so much, because they were
best acquainted boh with the things, and with the right use thereof. Galene in
his first book of maintaining health, speaking of the Germains, who used then
to dippe their newborn children into extreme cold water over head and ears,
to try their courage and to harden their skin, says that he wrate those
lessons of health and exercise, no more to the Dutch and such rude people as we
also were then, then to bears, boares and lions: but to Greeks and such
people, as though barbarous in nature, yet by train and learning, were become
greekish as we now are, and the Romans then were. So that our examples be
fetched from these two nations, which either used the things most, and handled
them best: or else enriched their own tongues with all that was best, and when
they had so done set them over unto us. But of all their exercises with the
Ball, we have not any so far as I can guess, by their notes, though we
retain the name: and, yet our playing with the Ball works the same effects,
which theirs did, as it appears by their descriptions. Wherefore seeing they
be so far different from ours, and almost worn out of knowledge even to
curious conjectures, which seek to sift them out, I will neither trouble my
self with studying to set down their names: nor my reader with reading to
guess what they were, and how they were used.

Three kinds shall content me, which our time knows, wherein all the
properties of their balls, and all the effects of their exercises, be most
evidently seen. The hand ball, the footeball, the armeball.

The little hand ball whether it be of some softer stuff, and Galene bestows
an whole treatise upon the use and praise of it, wherein he compares it with
other exercises, and prefers it before all, for parabilitie, to be all men's
game: for profitablenesse, to do all men good: for pleasantness, to quick
all men's spirits, and in short knits up the some of his conclusion thus. That
the use of the little ball does plant in the mind courage, in the body health,
in all the limbs a trim and well proportionate constitution: so it be
moderately and advisedly executed. Playing at the ball in general is a strong
exercise, and makes the body very nimble, and strengthens all the vital
actions. The little handball is counted to be a swift exercise, without
violence, and therefore the rakketters in tennyse play, if they use it in that
kind, which is thought to be most healthful, must show them selves nymble
without strayning, and yet it falls out most commonly contrary, while desire
to win some wager makes the winners loose a benefit, which they wish for
more, and would gladly get to better their health by. This playing abateth
grossenes, and corpulence, as al other of the same sort do: it makes the flesh
sownd and soft, it is very good for the arms, the green and growing ribs,
the back, and by reason the legs are mightily stirred thereby, it is a great
furtherer to strength, it quickneth the eyes by looking now hither, now
thither, now up, now down, it helps the ridgebone, by stowping, bending and
coursing about: it is very good for bellies and stomakes, that be troubled
with wind or any pain which proceeds from cold. Now to the contrary it is
not good for ill and bleare eyes, raw stomakes, undigested meat, which have
more need of rest then stirring, and for such as will soon be turnesicke,
which the often turning about of the head and eyes cannot but cause. The playing
at tennyse is more coastly and straining to answer an adversary, but the
playing against the wall is as healthful, and the more ready, because it
needs no adversary, and yet practices every kind of motion, every joint of
the body, and all without danger. Children use this ball diversely, and every
way healthfully, in regard of the exercise: if accidentarie faults fall out
among children, in the use of the play, the parties must bear the blame, and
not the play.

The second kind I make the Footeball play, which could not possibly have
grown to this greatness, that it is now at, no^ have been so much used, as it
is in all places, if it had not had great helps, both to health and strength,
and to me the abuse of it is a sufficient argument, that it has a right use:
which being revoked to his primative will both help, strength, and comfort
nature: though as it now commonly used, with thronging of a rude multitude,
with bursting of shinnes, and breaking of legs, it be neither civil, neither
worthy the name of any train to health. Wherein any man may evidently see the
use of the trayning master. For if one stand by, which can judge of the play,
and is judge over the parties, and has authority to command in the place,
all those inco^ueniences have been, I know, and will be I am sure very lightly
redressed, nay they will never entermedle in the matter, neither shall there be
complaint, where there is no cause. Some smaller number with such ouerlooking,
sorted into sides and standings, not meeting with their bodies so boisterously
to try their strength: nor shouldring or shuffing one an other so barbarously,
and using to walk after, may use footeball for as much good to the body, by
the chief use of the legs, as the Armeball, for the same, by the use of the
arms. And being so used, the Footeball strengthens and brawneth the whole
body, and by provoking superfluities downward, it discharges the head, and
upper parts, it is good for the bowels, and to drive down the stone and
gravel from both the bladder and kidneies. It helps weak hammes, by much
moving, beginning at a mean, and simple shankes by thickening of the flesh, no
less then riding does. Yet rash running and to much force oftentimes breaks
some inward co^duit, and brings ruptures.

The third kind I call the Armeball, which was invented in Naples, not many
years ago, and answers most of the old games; with the great ball, which
is executed with the arms most, as the other was with the feet, and be both
very great helpers unto health. The arm in this is fensed with a wodden brace,
as the shin in the other with some other thing for meeting with a shrew. The
armeball increases the natural heat, makes way for superfluities, causes
sound sleep, digesteth meat well, and dispatcheth raw humors, though it stuff
the head, as all vehement exercises do. It exercises the arms and back
chiefly, and next to the^ the legs, and therefore it must needs be good for
such, as desire to have those parts strong and perfect, to digest their meat
at will, to distribute profitable juice to the whole body, and to avoid
needelesse matter, as well by sweat, as by any other kind of secret
euacuation. And yet it is very ill for a naughty back, for hot kidneyes, for
sharp urine, and generally for any that is troubled with infirmities and
diseases in those parts which are strained with stirring.

Thus much concerning the particular exercises, which I have picked out from the
rest, as most reducible to our time and country, wherein I have not followed
the ordinary division, which the training masters and Physicians do use, but
I devised such a one, as I took to be fittest for mine own purpose regarding
our soil and our seasons. Neither have I rekened up the other antique
exercises, but have let them rest with their friends and favorers, which be
long ago at rest. For the tumbling Cybistike, the thumping Pugillate, the
buffeting Cestus, the wrestling Pancrace, the quayting Discus, the barlike
Halteres, the swinging Petawre, and such old memorandums, they are to ancient
and to far worn from the use of our youth: the considering whereof may
rather stir conjecture, then stay assurance, what they were, when they were.
And of these which I have named, many be far beyond boys play, for who^
alone I do not deal, but for all students in general, neither yet do I
exclude either any age, or any person, if I may profit any else beside
students and scholars. Nether do I tie the train to these exercises alone,
but always to some, though not always to one kind. The cause and consideration
must lead all, which may bring forth the like, and why not the better upon due
and well observed circunstance? For though the general cause do direct much, yet
the particular circu^sta^ce directs more, being it self informed in the
general judgment. The most of these notes, which I have alleged, were given
in Italy, Greece and Spain, and that climate far distant, and much
differing from our degree. Wherefore our train upon consideration of the
degrees in soil, in temperature, in constitution, and such like, must
appropriate it self where the difference is apparent. Therefore both to use
these exercises which I have named, to the best, and to devise other by
comparison and circumstance, as cause shall offer, I will run thorough those
particularities, which either make by right, or mar by wrong applying, both
all that I have said, or that ca^ be devised in this kind, to preserve health.

Chapter 28. Of the circumstances which are to be considered in exercise.
THere be six circumstances, which lead and direct all exercises, and are
carefully to be considered of, by the trayning master. For either the missing
or mistaking of any one of them, may do harm to more then one, and the using
of them with circumspection and warynes, does procure that good to health,
which this whole discourse hitherto has promised.

The six circumstances be these, the nature of the exercise which ye entend to
use: the person and body which is to be exercised, the place wherein, the time
when, the quantity how much, the manner how, whereof I do mean to give some
particular aduertisements so as I do find the learned physicianes, and wise
health masters to have handled them in their writings, yet by the way least
any man either despair of the good, and therefore spare the proving, because
the form of exercise does seem so intricate, and there with all to much: or
if he be entered in trial, and think he shall fail, if he miss in some
little, because the charge is given so precisely, to keep all that is enjoined:
I wish him not to think either the error unpardonable, to regard, or the
thing vnauailable to health, if either all, or any one of these circumstaunces
be not absolutely hit. For as a perfect healthful body is not to be found by
inquiry, which is not to be hoped for in nature, because in so continual a
change such a perfitnes cannot chance, our bodies being subject to so many
imperfections: so is it no wonder for men to do what they may, and to wish for
the best, though still beyond their reach. If any can come near them, he
breaks no right of use, though he miss the rule of art, which always
enioyneth in the precisest sort, but yet rests content with that which
falls within compass of ordynarie circumstance. The reason is, art weyeth
the matter abstracte, and free from circumstaunce, and therefore having the
whole object at commaundemet, she may set down her precept, according to that
perfitnes, which she does conceive: but the execution being chekt with a number
of accidentarie occurrences, which art cannot comprehend, as being to infinite
to collect, must have one eye to her precept, and an other to her power, and
ask consideration counsel, how to perform that with a number of lettes, and
thwartings which, art did prescribe, either without any, or at the lest, with
not so many.

Chapter 29. The nature and quality of the exercise.
THe nature of the exercise which we use, either to recover health and
strength, if they be feebled: or to preserve them, that they feeble not, as it
is very forcible to work this healthful effect: so it deserves very
circumspect consideration, in applying and fitting it to the effect: that the
exercise in his degree of motion may answer the party in his kind of
constitution: least by iarring that way too far, they fall into a greater
discord. 1. Sanit. tuen.
Galene examining the things, which do please the displeased infantes, finds
out that all their natural unquietness is appeased by three natural means,
which the nurse uses, the pappe to feed, the voice to still, the arm to
move. Whereupon he concludes that meat to nourish, Music to delight, motion to
exercise be most natural, which being so, then for the preservation of nature,
she must needs have her own motion, which agrees best with her own
disposition. For as some exercises go before the maine to prepare the body,
and some follow to return it by degrees into his former state and temper: so
some be very vehement, strong, and strainable: other very gentle, courteous,
and remiss: which must have echone their application, according unto the
quality, and state of the body, whereunto they are to be applied. They be also
as far distinct and different, as particular circunstance can work alteration
in any respect, as their particular titles before did show, in their particular
braunching and division. And yet therein they swerve not from the generality
of Physic, which leaning upon some infallible grounds, yet lights still
upon some fallible euentes, which make the whole profession to seem
coniecturall, though in the best and surest kind of conjecture, if the
professor have studied to sufficiency and observed so long, till discretion
have said, the thing is thus. I will not therefore spend any more labor, about
a matter of so great confusion, but as they shall fall out, so will I apply
them, that by their proper use, their property may appear.

Chapter 30. Of the bodies which are to be exercised.
IN the body which is to take good of exercise, there be three points to be
considered: for either it is sickly having healthy and without valetudinarie,
neither

To speak first of the weak and sickish body, it is to be noted, as has
been already in part marked before, that sickness assaileth us three ways:
By distemperature, when either the whole body, or some part thereof is anoyed
with vnproportionate heat, cold, dryness, or moisture: or by misfashioning,
when either the whole body, or some part thereof, wants his due form, his
iumpe quantity, his just number, his natural seat: or by division, when any
part of the body being naturally united upon some weakness is dissolved and
sundred. And as diseases come by one, or all these three ways, so health does
defend it self by the contrary, good temperature, good form, good uniting of
parts. It is granted by the best though contraried by some of the soryest
Physicians, that sick bodies may be put to exercise: so it be well considered
before, what kind of weakness the body is in: and what kind of help may be
hoped for by the exercise. As for example in sickness which comes by
distemperature: if a body be distempered with to much heat, it may not be put
to any great or earnest exercise, for over heating. If it be to dry and
withered, it must forbear much exercise for fear of ouerdrying. If it be to
hot and dry both, or to hot and to moist both, it must quite abandon
exercise, as in the first kind enflaming, in the second choking. If it be cold
and dry it must either never be exercised or very gently. If it be cold or
moist, then exercise can do it no harm. If it be cold and moist, it may
boldly abide exercise: which variety comes upon the effects, that are
wrought by exercises, either in augmenting heat, and stirring humors, or
avoiding superfluities. Whereupon the general conclusion is: that no
distempered body may use, any great or vehement exercise though some there be,
which may venture up on some mean and gentle kind of stirring, whether the
infirmity concern the whole body, or be so in some part, as it shake not
the whole. If the infirmity in fashion be casual and come by late misfortune,
(for in this kind natural weakness is ever excepted) exercise may do good,
because it will make that straight, which was crooked, that smooth, which was
rugged, lay that which was swollen, raise that which was laid, empty that
which was full, fill that which was empty, open that which was close and shut:
and so forth, still working the contrary to the defect, and thereby the
amendment. If the fault be in quantity, great and swift exercises will abate,
and pull down the flesh, small and slow will fat and thicken it. If the fault
be in number, exercise helps, as vehement moving drives the stone and
gravel from the strait passages of the kidneyes to the broader, and from
thence down into the bladder. If the fault be in seat, no exercise is good,
because till the part be restored to his place and site, there is no moving to
be used, nor yet long after, for fear of displacing it again. If the fault
come by disunion, exulration, or gaul, the disvniting of the nobler parts, as
the brain, the stomach, the liver, and such other, specially if it be joined
with any ague excludes all exercises. The baser parts refuse not mean
stirring, as the skin being divided and disunited with scabbes, which come of
salt and sharp humors, by motion is freed and delivered of them. This
consideration is to be had in the exercising of sick bodies, whether the
sickness come by distemperature of humors, by deformity in composition, or
by disunion of parts.

Valetudinarie.
Concerning valetudinarie bodies, which be neither always sick, nor ever whole,
and such as be upon recovery after sickness, and aged men, whom years make
weak and sickish, thus I read: that exercise is very necessary for the two
first, to stre^gthen their limbs, to dispatche superfluities, to stir heat,
to restore the body to his best habit, always provided that the exercise rise
from some mediocritie and slownes by degrees to that height, which the parties
may well abide. For to earnest and rash exercise will empaire their health
more. Old men, as by want of natural heat, they grow full of superfluities,
so they must have some pleasant and gentle kind of exercise, both to stir
the heat, and to rid away those needless necessities, which of force
infer sickness, if they be not enforced away. And as they be naturally dry,
so they must use no exercise, which dries to much. Wherein these four
circunstances are to be considered. First their strength, which being Prodicus
the wary Philosopher in Plato, Antiochus the healthy Physician in Galene,
Spurina the considerate counselor in Pliny, could do strange things in
their old age, by good forsight in their former years, yet they be no
general presidentes. Secondly the form of their bodies. For as good
constitutions,

As for healthy and strong bodies, Healthy bodies.
they are to be esteemed not by absolute perfitnessse in measure and rule,
which will not be found, but by performing all natural functions, without any
grief or painful let: whereof in some places there is good plenty. For as
generally in so many ways to weakness, our bodies never continuyng any one
minute in the same state, perfect health in the absolutest degree is not to be
hoped for: so in the second degree of perfection, where no sensible let is, no
felt feebleness, but all ordinaries excellent, though no excellent
extraordinary, there be many bodies to be found healthful, lusty, and
lasting very long: as the soil wherein they bread and be is of healthfulnesse,
and wholesomnesse. Such a praise does Galene give to his own, 2. De tu. vali.
and Hipocrates his country: Nay that is the common proof, where small diet,
and much labor accompanies necessity in state, and good constitution in
body. Now these healthful bodies, as they daily feed, and digest well, so to
avoid superfluities, which come thereby, because no meat is so meet with the
body, as it turns all into nurriture, they must of necessity pray aid of
exercise, which must be neither to violent, nor to immoderate, but suitable to
their constitution, as in the private description the particular exercise
bewrays it self, and generally the general reason suffiseth such a trayner,
as can use the consideration of circumstance wisely. In exercising of healthy
bodies, there be five special then the cold and moist: because heat and
clearing, the two effects of exercise have their own subject whereon to
work, which must be weyed in complexions, and states of the body.

Chapter 31. Of the exercising places.
THat the place, wherein any thing is done, is of great force to the well or
ill performing thereof, and specially in natural executions, there can be no
better proof, then that we se, not only plants and trees, not only brute
beasts and cattle, but also even the bodies and minds of men to be altered
and changed, with the variety and alteration of the place and soil, so that
for the better exercising of the bodies to the preserving or recovering of
health, it is very material to limit some certainety concerning the place.
Wherein not to dwell long at this time, because in the common place both for
learning and exercising together, I shall have occasion to say more of this
matter: these four qualities are to be observed in the place. First the place
where ye exercise, must have his ground flowred top in sand, grauel, or deep
rushes? and so forth in the rest: as is most fit for the body exercised, it
were, yet wisdom may win thus much, that he may be as well aopointed, to
prevent the ill of every both season and circumstance, as possibility can
commonly perform. When great conquests had made states almost, nay in deed to
wealthy, and liberty of soil given them place to choose, they builded to this
end marvelous and sumptuous monuments, which time and wars have wasted, but
we which must do as we may, must be content with that, which our power can
compass, and if the worst fall, think that he which placed us in the world,
has appointed the world for us for an exercising place, not only for the body
against infections, but also for the mind against affections, which being
herself well trained, does make the body yield, to the bent of her choice.

Chapter 32. Of the exercising time.
TIme is divided into accidentarie and natural, and natural again into
general and particular. The natural time generally construed is meant by the
spring, the summer, the harvest and the winter: particularly by the hours of
the day and night. The accidentarie time changes his name still, sometime
fair, sometime foul, sometime hot, sometime cold and so forth. Of this
accidentary time this rule is given, that in exercise we choose, as near as we
can, fair weather, clear and lightsome to confirm the spirits, which
naturally rejoice in light, and are refreshed thereby: not cloudy, dark and
thick, wherein gross humors make the body dull and heavy: again when
there is either no great, or no very noisome wind to pearce the open pored
body, nor to much foreign heat to inflame the natural: nor to much cold to
stiffen it to sore.

2. Part. proble. 21.33.42.
For the natural time generally taken, Aristotle would have the body most
exercised in summer, because the natural heat being then least, and the body
therefore most burdened with superfluities, then exercise most helps: both to
increase the inward heat, 3. De diaeta.
and to send out those outward dettes. Hippocrates again giving three
principal rules to be kept in exercise, to avoid weariness, to walk in the
morning, makes this the third to use both more and longer exercise in the
winter and cold weather, and most of his favorites hold that opinion. The
reason is, because in summer the heat of the time dries the body enough, so
that it needs no exercise to wither it to much, 2. De tue^. vali.
where the air it self does dry it enough. Galene a man of great authority
in his profession, pronounces thus in general, that as temperate bodies are
to be exercised in a temperate season which he countes to be the spring: so
cold bodies are in hot weather: hot in cold, moist in dry, dry in moist:
meaning thereby that whenever the body seems to yield toward any
distemperature, then the contrary both time and place must be fled to for
succor. Of these opinions judgment is to choose, which it best likes. Me
think upon diverse considerations, they may all stand well without any
repugnance, seeing neither Hippocrates nor Galene, deny exercise in summer
simply, and Aristotle does show what it works in summer.

For the natural time particularly taken, thus much is said, that it is
unwholesome to exercise after meat, because it hinders digestio^ by
dispersing the heat, which should be assembled wholly to further and help
digestion. And yet both Aristotle, and Auicene, allow some gentle walking after
meat, to cause it so much the sooner setle down in the stomach, specially if
one mean to sleep shortly after. But for exercise before meat, that is
excedingly and generally commended, because it makes the natural heat strong
against digesting time, and driving away unprofitable humors, disperseth the
better and more wholesome, thorough out the whole body, whereas after meat it
fills it with rawnesse, and want of digestion: because moving marres
concoction, and lets the boiling of the stomach. Now in this place there be
three things to be considered.

First that none venture upon any exercise, before the body the worse and
weaker digestion, the yealower, the better.

Hippocrates condemn you, 2. Aph. 16.
for linking labor with hunger, a thing by him in his aphorisms forbid.

The third consideration is not to eat straight after the exercise, before the
body be reasonably settled. Yet corpulent carcases, which labor to be
lightened of their carriage, be allowed their vittail, though they be puffing
hot. The cause why this distance between moving and meat is enjoined, is
this, for that the body is still a clearing, while it is yet hot: and the
excrementes be but fleeting: so that neither the party can yet be hungry, nor
the heat entend digestion. Whereupon they counsel him that is yet hot after
exercise, neither to wash himself in cold water: nor to drink wine, nor cold
water. Because washing will hurt the open body, wine will straight way steeme
up into the head, cold water will offend the belly and lyver, yea sometime
gaul the sinews, nay sometime call for death.

Hours.
What hours of the day were best for exercise, the ancient Physicians for
their soil, in their time, and to their reason, appointed it thus. In the
spring about noone, for the temperatenesse of the air: in summer in the
morning, to prevent the heat of the day: in harvest and winter toward night:
because the morninges be cold, the days short, and to be employed otherwise:
and the meat before that time will lightly be well digested. But now in our
time, the diet being so far altered, and never a circumstance the same, no
time is fitter for exercise then the morninge somewhat before meat: though we
entreat the Muses not to wonder and muse at it, that we be so boulde with our
and their common friend, I mean the morning, seeing we seek to have learning
and health joined together. Which falling both most fit in the morning, does
lend us an argument to prove that they were ill sundred, whom the samenes of
time so unites together. In the morning the body is light, being delivered of
excrementes, strong after sleep, free from common lettes and without any
peril of indigestion, all which fall out quite contrary in the evening. If
any writer allow any other hour after meat, it is in some extremity of
sickness, not in respect of exercise: as when the weather is most lowering, and
children most heavy and dumpish, why is not then the fittest time to play, by
chearing the mind, to lighthen the body?

Chapter 33. Of the quantity that is to be kept in exercise.
ALL they which use exercises use them either not so much as they should, and
that does small good, or more then they should, and that does much harm, or
so as they should, and that does much good. Whereupon he that has skill to
cry ho, when he is at the height of his exercise, wherewith nature feels her
self to be best content, knows best wherein the best measure consists. But
how may one know the very pitche in exercise, and when it were best for one to
cry ho? principally by these two general limittes. Whereof the first is,
vapor mingled with sweat is sensibly perceived to proceed from the body:
when the veins begin to swell, and the breathing to alter. For whereas the end
of exercise is to strengthen the body, and to increase the natural heat,
whereby the wholesome juice is digested, and distributed to the nurriture of
the other parts: and unprofitable residences discharged: if the exercise come
not to these degrees of sweat, swelling, and breathing, it is to weak to work
those effects, which it does undertake. The second general limit is, to
continue the exercise so long, as the face and body shall have a fresh color,
the motion shall be quick and in proportion, and no weariness worth the
speaking shall be felt. For if the color begin to faint, or the body to be
gaunt, or weariness to wring, or the motion to shrink, or the sweat to alter
in quality from hot to cold, in quantity from more to less, which should
naturally increase with the exercise, then cry ho, for fear of thinning the
body to much, of consuming the good and ill iuyces together, of weakening the
natural heat, of destroying in stead of strengthening: because these be
evident shows, that the body wastes, cools and dries more then it should.

Now as these be general stays not to proceed further, but to rest when we
are well: so there be other more particular, wherein there is regard to be had,
to the strength or weakness of the party, to the age, to the time of the
year, to the temperature of the body, to the kind of life. For in all these
measure is a merry mean, and immoderatenes a remeadilesse harm.

They that be of good strength may continue longer in exercise, then any other,
without some great occasion to the contrary: though they faint, and feel some
little lassitude and wearines, because they will quickly recover themselves.
Those that be but weak must exercise but a while, because any small taint in
them, is long and hard to be recovered, and therefore their limit is to be
warm, and to be ware of sweating.

age must of necessity keep the mean lymit, because too much offendes them,
to little does them little good, both hinder the state of their bodies. Youth
from seven till one and twenty, will abide much exercising, very well:
wherefore they are allowed without danger to be hot and chafe, to puff and
blow, to sweat, to be weary also to some degree of lassitude: for being full
of excrementes by reason of there reacheles diet, they find great ease in
labor and sweat: and being strong withal, a little wearines makes them little
worse. And yet there must be great eye had to them, that they keep within
compass, and so much the more, the less they be above seven year old. For
too much exercise in those years marres their growing, and alters the
constitution of their bodies to the worse.

time of the year. In Winter the exercise may be great, till the body be
hot: but yet sweat not, lest the cold do harm. In the Spring more even till
it sweat, in the Harvest less, in the Summer least: because the air which
enuironeth the body, does then of it self so weary and weaken it, as it
needs neither sweating, nor heating, nor wearying with exercise, wherein
Hippocrates and his Physic will prevail against Aristotle and his
Philosophy.

For the temperature of the body: Moist bodies may abide bodies may very ill
away with any exercise, and if with any, it must be such as will neither cause
heat nor sweat. Could bodies may move till they be thoroughly warm. Hot bodies
must be deintily dealt withal. For heat, sweat, and great change of their
breathing be enemies to their complexion. Hot and dry for fear of increasing
their qualities to much must be content with either no exercise at all, or with
very little. Cold and dry may abide stirring in respect of their coldness, till
they be warm: but for fear of ouerdrying they must not venture upon sweat.
Hot and moist must use moderate exercise, because to little dyminisheth not
their superfluous moisture: to much melts to fast, and warmth to much.
Whereupon dangerous flixes ensue: so that they must needs avoid great
alteration of breath, and to much warmeth. Cold and moist may exercise them
selves till they blow, till they be hot, and till they sweat. To be short, of
any constitution this may best abide exercise, to empty it of needelesse
humors, to stir the natural heat, and to procure perfect digestion. Sickemen
may not dream of any definite quantity in their exercises, because according
to the variety of their infirmities, both their exercises, and the quantities
thereof must be proportionally applied: so that there can be no certain rule
set for the^.

Such as be newly recovered from sickness, or that be on the mending hand,
because their strength is feeble, their heat weak, their lymes dried up, must
content themselves with small and competent exercise, for fear of no small
inconvenience. Their limit therefore must be to stir, but not to change
breath, to warm, but not to heat, to labor, but not to be weary: yet as
their health grows, their exercise may increase.

For the kind of life. Such as live moderately and with great and avoid not
such residence, as of force breeds in them, and in the end will cause some
sickness crepe on, which comes without warning, because Jupiter, as both Hesiode
says, and Plutarch subscribeth, has cut her toungue out, least she tell,
when she comes, for that he would have her come stealing, ear she be
perceived, as Galene also makes the little unperceived, or for the smallness
contemned to be mother to all illes both of body and soul. Incontinence
breeds much matter for exercise: and therefore requires much, chiefly to
procure sound sleep, the captain cause of good digestion. Such as have not
used exercises before, and be nouices in the trade, must first be purged, then
by mean and moderate ascents, day by day be well applied, till they come to
that degree, wherein those are, which have been acquainted therewith before.
But in all those degrees and mediocrities, immoderate exercise must always be
eschewed, as a very capital enemy to health causing children not to prosper
nor grow: lusty men to fall into unequal distemperatures, and oftimes agues:
oldmen to become dry and ouerwearied. To conclude who is it, to whom it does
not some harm, and from whom it keeps not some great good. These be the
tokens, whereby immoderate exercises be discerned, if ye feel your joints to
be very hot: if you perceive your body to be dry and unequal: if in your
travel you feel some pricking in your flesh, as if it were of some angry
push: if after sweating your color become pale: if you find your self faint
and weary more then ordinary, which wearines, faintness and pricking, occupy
the credit of a great circumstance in physic, 4 De tue^da sanita.
of Galene, and greek physicianes called (...) of the latins and our Linacer
lassitudines, and come upon dissolution and thinning of gross humors, being
to many at that time to clear the body of, and pricking as they pass like
some angry bile within the body, whereby the body is both forced to make an
end of exercise, and withal is very wearysome, and stif oftymes after.

Chapter 34. Of the manner of exercising.
GAlene in the second book of his preservative to health knitteth up three
great things in very few words, that who so can handle the exercises in due
manner, with the apotherapeutike, or governing the body after exercise, and his
frictions to rub it and chafe it as it should be, is an absolute trayner in
his kind. Wherein we may see the use of chafing, and rubbing the body both to
be very ancient, and very healthful, to warm the outward parts, to open
the passages for superfluity, and to make one active and chearie to deal with
any thing afterward. It has his place every day at times, every year in
seasons, altering upon circumstance, but still both needful and healthful,
and clearith where it chafeth. For the apotherapeutike much has been said
already: wherefore this place must serve peculiarly for the manner of exercising.

They of old time to whom these rules were first given having all things at
their will, and sparing for no cost, neither straited for want of time, which
they disposed as they listed, and to whom the train because of their liberty
and leisure was properly bequeathed, did use many circumstances both ear they
entered into their exercise, and when they were in it, and also after that they
had ended it, ear they went to meat. Which their curious course, I will briefly
run through, only to let them see it, which can do no more but see it,
because the circumstances of our time will skant suffer any to assay it. After
that they felt their former meat fully digested, and had at leisure performed
what belonged to the purging of their bodies, they disrobed themselves, and
were chafed with a gentle kind of rubber, till that the freshnes of their
color, and agilytie of their joints seemed to call for exercise. Then were
they oynted with sweet oil so neatly and with such cunning, as it might sooke
into their bodies, and search every joint. That being done if they meant to
wrestle, they threw dust upon the ointment: if not, they went to the exercise,
which they had most fancy unto, which being ended they rested a while, then
with certain scrapers called Strigiles, they had all their filth scrapte of
their bodies: afterward they were chafed and rubbed again, then oynted also
again, either in the Sun or by the fire. Then to the bath, last of all
apparelling themselves they fell to their meat. And this was not one or two,
nor men of might alone, but every one and of every sort, nay, shall I say it?
even of every sex. A long and a laboriouse travel, and an argument of much
ease, and to much ado in that, which should be more common.

But in these our days, considering we neither have such places wherein, nor
the persons by whose help, nor the leisure by whose sufferance we may entend
so delicate a tendering of our selves, and yet for all that may not neglect so
great a mystery for our own health, as exercise is, though we cannot reatch
to the old, which perhaps we need not, smaller provision and simpler
fourniture, will serve our turn, and work the same effects, nay may fortune
better, by help of some circunstance peculiar to our selves. Therefore for our
manner and order of exercise, these few and easy considerations may seem to be
sufficient: To clear our bodies from superfluities echewaye, to comb our
heads, to wash our hands and face, to apparel our selves for the purpose, to
begin our exercise first slowly, and so grow on quicker, to rebate softly, and
by gentle degrees, to change our sweatie clothes, to walk a little after, last
of all our bodies being settled, to go to our meat. This is that which I
promised to note concerning the six circunstances of exercise.

Chapter 35. An advertisement to the training master. Why both the teaching of
the mind, and the training of the body be assigned to the same master. The
inconveniences which ensue, where the body and soul be made particular
subjects to several professions. That who so will execute any thing well,
must of force be fully resolved of the excellency of his own subject. Out of
what kind of writers the exercising master may store himself with cunning.
That the first grounds would be laid by the cunningest workman. That private
discretion in any executor is of more efficacy then his skill.
I Have already spoken of the parties, which are to be exercised, and what they
are to observe: now must I say somewhat of him, and to him, which is to direct
the exercise, and how he may procure sufficient knowledge, whereby to do it
exceeding well. And yet the trainers person is but a parcel of that person,
whom I do charge with the whole. For I do assign both the framing of the
mind, and the training of the body to one man's charge, whose sufficiency may
very well satisfy both, being so near companions in link, and not to be
uncoupled in learning. The causes why I meddle in this place with the training
master, or rather the training part of the common master, be these: first I
did promise in my method of exercises so to do: secondly the late discourse of
exercise will somewhat lighten this matter, and whatsoever shall be said here,
may easily be revived there, where I deal with the general master. Beside
this, exercise being so great a branch of education as the sole train of the
whole body, may well command such a particular labor, though in deed I
sever not the persons, where I join the properties. For in appointing several
executions, where the knowledge is united, and the success follows by the
continual comparing of the parts, how they both may, or how they both do
best proceed in their best way, how can that man judge well of the soul, whose
travel consists in the body alone? or how shall he perceive what is the
bodies best, which having the soul only committed to his care, posteth over
the body as to an other man's reckening? In these cases both fantsie works
affection, and affection ouerweyneth, either best liking where it fantsieth
most, or most following, where it affects best, as it does appear in
Divines, who punish the body, to have the soul better, and in Physicians, who
look a side at the soul, because the body is there best. Where by the way I
observe, the different effects which these two subjects, being severed in
charge, do offer unto their professors. For the health of the soul is the
Divines best, both for his honest delight, that it does so well, and for his
best ease, that himself faires so well. For an honest, virtuous, godly and
well disposed soul, does highly esteem and honorably think of the professor
of divinity, and teacher of his religion, because virtuous dealinges, godly
meditations, heauently thoughts, which the one imports, be the others
portion, and the best food, to a well affected mind: Whereupon in such a
healthy disposition of a well both informed and reformed soul, the Divine can
neither lack honor for his person, nor substance for his purse.

Now to the contrary the health of the body, which is the Physicians subject,
is generally his worst, though it be the end of his profession, which though
he be glad of his own good nature, as he is a man, or of his good conscience,
as he is a Christian, that the body does well, yet his chymny does not smoke
where no pacient smartes. For the healthful body commonly cares not for the
Physician, it is need that makes him sought. And as the Philosopher says, if
all men were freindes, then justice should not need, because no wrong would be
offered: so if all bodies were whole that no distemperature enforced: or if the
Divine were well and duetifully heard, that no intemperance distempered,
Physic should have small place: Now the contrary dealinges, because the divine
is not heard, and distemperature not avoided, do enforce Physic, for the
healing part of it, as the mother of the professors gain: where as the
preserving part neither will be kept by the one, neither enricheth the other.
In these two professions we do generally see, what the seuering of such near
neighbors does bring to pass, like two tenantes in one house belonging to
several lords. And yet the affections of the one so tuch the other, as they
cause sometimes, both the Divine to think of the body, for the better support
of the soul* and the Physician to think of the soul to help him in his cure
with comfort and courage. The seuering of those two, sometime show us very
pitiful conclusions, when the Divine diliuers the desperate sick soul, over
to the secular magistrate, and a forcible death by way of punishment: and the
Physician delivers the desperate sick body, to the Divines care, and a
forced end by extremity of disease. I dare not say that these professions
might join in one person, 1. De san tu.
and yet Galene examining the force which a good or ill soul has to imprint
the like affections in the body, would not have the Physicia^ to tarry for the
Philosopher but to play the part himself. Where to much distraction is, and
subalterne professions be made several heads, there the professions make the
most of their subjects, and the subjects receive least good, though they
part from most. And several professing makes the several trades to swell
beyond proportion, every one seeking to make the most of his own, nay rather
vanting his own, as simply the highest, though it creep very low. And
therefore in this my train I couch both the parts under one masters care.
For while the body is committed to one, and the soul commended to an other,
it falls out most times, that the poor body is miserably neglected, while
nothing is cared for but only the soul, as it proves true in very zealous
Divines: and that the soul it self is but sillyly looked to, while the body
is in price, and to much borne with, as is generally seen: and that in this
conflicte the diligent scholar in great strength of soul, bears most what
about him, but a feeble, weak, and a sickish body. Wherefore to have the care
equally distributed which is due to both the parts, I make him but one, which
deals with both. For I find no such difficulty, but that either for the
cunning he may compass it: or for the travel he may bear it, having all
circunstances free by succession in hours. Moreover as the temperature of the
soul smells of the temperature of the body, so the soul being well
affected, will draw on the body to her bent. For will a modest and a moderate
soul but cause the body obey the rule of her temperance? or if the soul it
self be reclaymed from folly, does it not constrain the body forth with to
follow? So that it were to much to sunder them in charge, whose dispositions be
so joined, and the skill of such facility, as may easily be attained, and so
much the sooner, because it is the preserving part, which requires most care
in the party, and but small in the trainer, as the healinge part of Physic
requires most cunning in the professor, and some obedience in the patient.

I do make great account of the parties skill, that is to execute matters which
besides diligence require skill: for if he be skillful himself, it almost
needs not to give precept. If he be not, it altogether boots not. If he be
skillfull he will execute well, because he can help the thing, which he must
execute if particular occurrence pray aid at the sudden: if he want skill he
will lightly mangle that, which is well set down, if he be a medler. Wherefore
seeing I wish the executors cunning, and yet must be content to take him as I
find him: I will do my best both to instruct infirmity, and to content
cunning. I must therefore have him to think, that there be two properties
which he must take to be of most efficacy to make a cunning executor. The one
is to be ravished with the excellency and worthynes of the thing which he is
to execute. The other is, if he may very easily attain unto some singular
knowledge in so noble a subject, which both concur in this present execution.

The liking of the executors subject.
For granting the soul simply the prehemine^ce both in substance of being, and
in train to be bettered, can there be any other single subject, (which I say
in respect of a community directed by divine and human law, that is
compound, and the principal subject of any man's dealing,) can there be any
single subject I say of greater nobility, and more worthy to be in love with,
either by the party, that is to find it, or by him that is to frame it, then
healthfullnes of body? which so touches the soul as it shakes it withal, if
it self be not sownd?

What a treasure health is, they that have it do find, though they feel it
not till it fail, when want bewrayes what a jewel they have lost, and their
cost discouers how they mind the recovery. The end of our being here is to
serve God and our country, in obedience to persons, and perfourmance of duties:
If that may be done with health of body, it is effectual and pithie: if not,
the^ with sorrow we must shift the sooner, and let other succeed, with no more
assurance of life, then we had made us, without this healthful mystery: in
perpetual change to let the world see, that multitude does supply with number
the defect of a great deal better, but to sone decaying paucity.

To live and that long of whom is it not longed for, as Gods blessing if he
know God: as the benefit of nature, if he be but a natural man.

The state of our body, when we are in good health, so lively and lusty, so
comfortable and clear, so quick and chearie, in part and in hole, does it not
paint us, and point us the value of so preciouse a jewel, as health is to be
esteemed?

The pitiful groans, the lamentable shrikes, the loathsome looks, the image of
death, nay of a pyning death, yea in hope of recovery; the rufull heaviness, the
wringing hands, the wayling friends, all black before black, when health is
in despair, do they not cry and tell us, what a goodly thing health is,
themselves being so griefly?

So many monuments left by learned men, so much sumptuousnes of the mightiest
princes, so many inventions of the noblest wits bestowed upon exercises to
maintain this diamo^d, are they not sufficient to inflame the executour, being
a partaker him self, and a distributer to others, that the subject wherein he
deals is both massy, most worth, and most marvelous? let him think it to be
so, because he sees it is so, and upon that presumption proceed to his so
healthful, and so honorable an execution. In whom his own judgment is of
special force to further his good speed. For being well resolved in the
excellency of his own subject he will both himself execute the better, and
persuade other sooner to embrace that with zeal, which he professes with
judgment. If you will have me weep for you, says the Poet, then weep you
first: he shall hardly persuade an other to like of that, which is his own
choice, who shall himself not seem to set by it, where himself has set his
choice.

The knowledge wherewith, and how to deal therein is so much the easier, How
to become a skillful exercising master.
because it is so general, and so many ways to be won. I will not seem to
raise up the memory which can never dye, given to this train by all both old
and new histories: which praise those virtues and valiances, which they found,
but had never had matter to praise, nor virtues to find, if exercises had not
made the personages praiseworthy, whereby they did such things, and of so
great admiration, as had been impossible to any not so trained as they were.
What Philosopher describes the fairest form of the worthiest common weal,
either by pattern of one person, as allowing that state best, where one
styrres all: or by some greater multitude, as preferring that government, where
many make much stir: but he does always, when he deals with the youth, and
first trayning of that state, not only make mention, but a most special
matter of exercise for health?

Who is it in any language that handles the Paedagogicall argument, how to
bring up youth, but he is arrested there, where exercise is enfraunchised? As
for the Physicians, it is a principal parcel of their fairest patrimony,
because it is naturally subject, and so learnedly proved to be by Galene in his
book entitled Thrasybulus, to that part of their profession which seeks to
preserve health, and not to tarry till it come to ruin, with their gain to
repare it, though it still remain ruinous and rotten, which is so repared.
Therefore whenever the maintenance of health, is the inscription of the
book, this title of exercise has some evidence to show. Further in the
discourse of Exercises we find ech^ where the names of diet, of waking, of
sleeping, of moving, of resting, of distemperature, of temperature, of humors,
of elements, of places, of times, of parts of the body, of the uses thereof,
of frictions and chafings, of lassitude and weariness, and a number such,
which when the training master meets with among the Physicians, or natural
Philosophers, what else say they unto him, but that where ye find us before the
door, ye may be bold to come in? As for natural Philosophy the ground
mistress to Physik it must needs be the foundation to this whole train.
Hence the causes befet, which prove each thing either good or bad, either
noisome or needful to health. All natural problemataries, dipnosophistes,
symposiakes, antiquaries, warmaisters, and such as deal with any particular
occurence of exercise, if ye appose them well: you shall find them yours
freindes. This term Gymnastico, which emplyeth in name, and professes in
deed, the art of exercise, is the very seat, whereon the trainer must build.
And therefore all either whole books, or particular discourses in any writer
by the way, concerning this argument, do will him to rest there. In which
kind, for the professed argument of the whole book, I know not any comparable
to Hieronymus Mercurialis, a very learned Italian Physician now in our time,
which has taken great pains to sift out of all writers, what so ever
concerns the whole Gymnasticall and exercising argument, whose advice in this
question I have my self much used, where he did fit my purpose.

By these reasons I do see, and by some proof I have found, that the way to
be skillful in the preservative part of Physic and so consequently in
exercises, as the greatest member thereof, is very ready and direct, because it
is so plain, so large, and with all so pleasant: as it is also most honorable,
because it seeks to save us from that, which desires our spoil. And
therefore this execution requires a liberal courage, where the gain is not
great, but the disposition much praised. The repairers get the pence, the
preseruers reason fair. And as the effect commendes the knowledge: so being of
it self thus necessary for all, a student may with great credit travel in
the cunning, if it were for no more but to help his own health, and upon
better affection, or some gainful offer to empart it with other. For to help
himself he is bound in nature, and will do it in deed: to do good to all if
he may, he is bound by duty, and so sure he ought. But to help as many as he
may, and himself to, what nature can but love? what duty can but like?
chiefly where the thing which he must do, may be done with ease, and the good
which he shall do, shall gain him praise, besides the surplus of profit. Some
will say perhaps to train up children, what needs so much cunning: or in so
petie a matter what needs so much labor? Though I entreat of it here, where
it first begins, yet it stretches unto all, both ages and persons: neither
is the matter so mean, which is the readiest mean to so great a good, but if
it were mean, the meanest matter requires not the meanest master, to have it
well done: and the first groundworke would be laid by the best workman. For
who can better teach to read, then he which for skill can command the
language? And what had more need to be exactly done then that principle, which
either marreth the whole sequel, with insufficiency, or makes all sound,
being it self well laid? The thing you will grant to be of such efficacy,
such an excutor you despair of: such a man may be had, nay a number of such
may be had, if recompense be provided to answer such sufficiency. The common
not opinion but error is, he has cunning enough for such a small trifle. It is
not that small which he has, that can do the thing well, but your skill is
small, to think that any small skill, can do any thing well. He must know a
great deal more then he does, which must do that well, which he does: because
store is the deliverer of the best effects, need which shows all at once,
is but a sorry steward, and must put in band, that he has some credit, though
very small substance.

For the skill of the trayner I take it to be very evident, both whence it may
be had, and how plentiful a store house he has for his provision. Thence he
may have the general grounds, and causes of his cunning.

Discretion in the trayner.
But there is a third thing yet besides these two, which is proper to his own
person, which if he have not, his cunning is worth naught. For though he see
and embrace the worthiness of his subject, though he have gathered in his whole
harvest from out of all writers, yet if he want discretion how to apply it
according unto that, which is most fit to the very meanest not bowghes and
branches, but even the twigges and sprigges of the pe^^est circumstances, he is
no skillfull trayner: but so much the more dangerous, the more help of
learning he has, which will bolden him to much. Therefore of these two other
points, the one being thoroughly resolved on, the other perfitly obtained, and
all the contemplative reasons well understood, he must bend his wits to wey
the particularities, whereby both the general conclusions be brought to be
profitable, and his own judgment to be thought discrete. The want of this is
the cause of such a number of discoursers, which swarm each where, and both like
their own choice, and can say pretily well to the general position, which is
not denied to any toward youth, but they show themselves altogether lame in
the particular applying, which is a thing that attends only upon experience
and years. The having of it will provide us notable store of excellent
executours, to all their profits, upon whom they shall execute. Aristotle the
great philosopher in all his moral discourses tieth all those virtues which
make men's manners praiseworthie, and be subject to circumstances, to the rule of
foresight and discretion, whose commendation he places in skill of
speciallities to direct men's doings. Therefore it is no dishonor to the
trayner, to be reclaymed unto discretion, which has all those so many and so
manerly virtues to attend upon her train. Is not death commendable, and
ascribed to valiancie, when it is voluntary, for the common good, by reason of
the circumstance? and the saving of life is it not basely thought of, when it
had been better spent, considering the circumstance? Which circumstance is the
line to live by, the guide to all our doings, the tuchestone to try a
contemplative creature from an active courage.

In the course of training, a thousand difficulties not possible to be forseene
by the general direction, will offer themselves, and appose the master, and
at the sudden must be salued. What will the trainer do? run to his book? nay
to his brains. He must remember his rule, that indiuisibles and circunstances
be beyond the reach of art: and are committed to the Artificer whose
discretion must help, where art is to weak: though she give him great light,
by fitting this to that, when he has found wherefore. Art sets down the
exercise and all the known circunstances. The person bringes with it some
difficulty in execution, where is the succor? Art will not relent, she can
not make curtsie, her knees be groune stiff, and her iointes fast knit, and
yet curtsie there must be. The Artificer must make it, and assist his lady,
which if she had not had a man to be her mean, she her self would have done
all, and trusting to man whom she has made her mean, why should she be
deceived, and her clyentes be abused, where she commendes them of trust?
Children that come to school dwell not in one house, not in the same streate,
nay not in the same town, they cannot lightly come at one hour, they be not
of one age, nor fit for one exercise, and yet they must have some. The art
knows my child no more then my neighbors, but the trainer must, and stay
those uncertainties upon the arrest of discretion: being enstructed before hand
in the general skill though bound but of voluntary: as the like cause shall
lead the like case.

The rule is, no noisome savor near the newly exercised: how shall the poor
boy do, that is to go home thorough stinking streates, and filthy lanes.

The rule is, change apparel after sweat: what if he have none other? or not
there where he sweateth? Here must the trainers discretion show it self,
either to choose exercises that be not subject to any such extremities, or to
use them with the fewest. But I am to long, neither need I to doubt of men's
discretion, though I say thus much of it, which many have and more wish for, I
shall have occasion to supply the rest in the general teacher.

Thus have I run thorough the whole argument of exercises, and showed not
only what I think of them in general, but also what be the chief
particulars, and the circunstances belonging thereunto: and according to my
promise I have dealt with the training master, and ouertreated him to think
honorably of his profession, to gather knowledge where it is abundantly to be
got: and last of all to join discretion as a third companion to his own
admiration and sufficiency.

Chapter 36. That both young boys, and young maidens are to be put to learn.
Whether all boys be to be set to school. That to many learned be to
burdenous: to few to bare: wits well sorted civil, missorted seditious. That
all may learn to write and read without danger. The good of choice, and ill
of confusion. The children which are set to learn, having either rich or
poor freindes: what order and choice is to be used in admitting either of them
to learn. Of the time to choose.
NOw that the things be appointed, wherewith the mind must be first furnished,
to make it learned, and the body best exercised, to keep it healthful, we
are next to consider of those persons, which are to be instructed in this
furniture, and to be preserved by this exercise: which I take to be children of
both sorts, male and female, young boys and young maidens, which though I
admit here generally, without difference of sex, yet I restrain particularly
upon difference in cause, as herafter shall appear. But young maidens must
give me leave to speak of boys first: because naturally the male is more
worthy, and politikely he is more employed, and therefore that side claims
this learned education, as first framed for their use, and most properly
belonging to their kind: though of curtsie and kindness they be content to
lend their female in youth, the use of their train in part, upon whom in age
they bestow both themselves, and all the fruit of their whole train.

It might seem sufficient for the determining of this case, to say only thus
much: that they must needs be boys which are to be trained in this sort, as
I have declared, because the bringing up of young maidens in any kind of
learning, is but an accessory by the way. But for so much as there be many
conconsiderations in the persons, both of boys and maidens worthy the
deciding, I mean to entreat of them both somewhat largely: and as near as I
can, to resolve both my self and my reader in some points of controversy and
necessity, or rather in some points of apparent necessities, being out of all
controversy. For the male side, that doubt is long ago out of doubt, that they
be to be set to school, to qualify themselves, to learn how to be religious
and loving, how to govern and obey, how to fore cast and prevent, how to
defend and assail, and in short, how to perform that excellently by labor,
whereunto they are borne but rudely by nature. For the very excellency of
executions and effects where by we do so great things, as we vonder at our
selves in all histories and records of time, (which be but stages for people
to gase on, and one to marvel at an others doings) testifies and confirms
that it were great pity, that such towardness should be drowned in us for
lack of education, which never comes to proof, but where education is the
mean. That we can prove learned, the effect does show, but that not unless we
learn, the defect declares. That our bodies can do great things, healthful
strength is witness to it self: but where weakness is, what doings there
be, very want will pronounce. But now in the way of this so commended a
train, there be two great doubts which cross me. The first is, whether all
children be to be fet to school, one part be to great, or to small, besides
the eye sore it is mother to some evil by the very misfourming, whereupon
great distemperature must needs follow in time, and disquiet the whole body.
And in a body politic if the like proportion be not kept in all parts, the
like disturbance will crepe thorough out all parts. Some by to much will seek
to bite to sore, some by to little will be trod on to much: as both will
distemper: which if it fortune not to kill in the end, yet it will disquiet
where it greiues, and have forward the end. But though the pestering of number
do ouerlaie the most professions and parts of any common weal, and harm
there where it does so ouercharge, yet I will not meddle with any, but this of
learning and the learner, which I have chosen to be my peculiar subject. Whereof
I say thus, that to many learned be to burdenous, that to few be to bare, that
wits well sorted be most civil, that the same misplaced be most unquiet and
seditious.

To many learned.
To many burdens any state to far: for want of provision. For the rowmes which
are to be supplied by learning being within number, if they that are to supply
them, grow on beyound number, how can yt be but too great a burden for any
state to bear? To have so many gaping for preferment, as no goulfe has stoore
enough to suffice, and to let them rome helpeles, whom nothing else can help,
how can it be but that such shifters must needs shake the very strongest
pillar in that state where they live, and loyter without living? which needeles
superfluity fleeting without seat, what ill can it but breed? A dangerous
residence it is at hoome, still seeking shifts to live as they may, though
with enemitie to order, which need cannot see. A perilous searcher it is
abroode, to seek to fish in a troubled water, if any cause promote their
quarrel, because the clear is not for them, which they have sounded already.
Sure need is an imperious mistres to force conclusions, whether she build
upon fantsie and desire, which is a maniheaded need, even before need, and
most what without need: or upon mere lack and want in deed, which though it
have but one head, yet that one is exceeding strong, importunate, and furiouse.
And she has at hand to salve her mischiefs, a ready and an ordinary excuse,
wherewith she will seem to crave pardon for all that is done by needy men, as
there unto enforced by her inevitable violence. A violent remeady, which does
not heal infections, but will allege cause, where to have mischiefs excused
and fore given.

Wherefore if these men's misdemeanour come of their own ill, which provision
cannot prevent, because in best provision ill will be ill, so far as it dare
show, where wealth works wantonness, it deserves correction and punishment. If
it come of necessity, for want of foresight in public government, to help
the common, from common blame, and to provide for the private: it would be
amended and not suffered to run, till the harm being received and felt,
cause the question be moved, whether such a mischief proceed from private
insolence, or public negligence. For as the private is to pay, if it do not
perform, when the public has provided: so the public must pardon, if for
insufficient foresight, the private prove dissolute, and lend the state a blow.
But for my number I need not to dwell any longer in to many, for troubling all
with to many words, seeing all wise men see, and all learned men say, that it
is most necessary to disburden a common weal of unnecessary number, and
multitude in general, which in some countries they compassed by brothelry, and
common stews, to let the young spring: in some by exposition and spoil of
enfantes, both contrary to nature, and contermaunded by religion: but according
to their policy and commanded by their countries. In particular disposing of
them that lived, they cast their account, and as the proportion of their states
did suffer: so did they allote them with choice, and constrained them to obey.
If such regard for multitude be to be had in any one branch of the common
weal, it is most needful in scholars. For they profess learning, that is
to say the soul of a state: and it is to perilous to have the soul of a state
to be troubled with their souls, that is necessary learning with unnecessary
learners, or the public body with their private, which is the common wealth
with their private want. For in all proportion, to much is to bad, and to much
out of all proportion, and to have to much even of the soul, is not the
soundest, where her offices be appointed and lymited in certain. Superfluity
and residence bring sickness to the body, and must not to much then infect the
soul sore, being in a simpathie with the body? Scholars by reason of their
conceit which learning inflameth, S. Paul.
as no mean authority says, become to imperial to rest upon a little: and by
their kind of life which is all way idle they prove to disdainefull to deal
with labor, unless need make them trot, or the Turkish captivity catch
them, the greatest foe that can fall upon idle people, where labor is looked
for, and they not used to it. Contentment in aspiring, which is hard to such
wits, and patience in pains which they never learned, be the two
cognisances, whereby to discern a civil wit, and fit to enjoy the benefit of
his country. Now of all ouerflush in number, is not that most dangerous, which
in conceit is lofty, and in life loytering, as the vnbestowed scoller by
profession is?

To few learned.
To few be to bare and naked: because necessities must be supplied, and that by
the fittest. For whereas the defect of the fit enforces supplement of the
lookers on, though not the most likely, but whosoever they be, without further
respect, then that they stand by, because need bides no choice where there is
no plurality, and yet biddes plurality make choice: there the insufficient
service of necessary services breeds much miscontentment, and more shaking to
any state. And that chiefly in such points, as the state embraseth, and the
feeble minister does nothing but deface. So that the defeat of the general
purpose must be most imputed to the bare defect of insufficient persons. For as
to many bringes surfettes, so to few breeds consumptions.

Wits well sorted.
Wits well sorted be most civil: This I say because to ato avoid excessive
number, choice is one principal help: for in admitting to uses only such as
be fit, and seem to be made for them, pares of the unfit, and lesseneth the
number, which yet would be looked unto, even at the very first. For even he
that is thought most unfit, and is so in deed, yet will grieve at repulse*
unless ye repel him by prevention, ear he come to the sense and judgment to
discern what a heavy thing a flat repulse is. Which miscontentment if it
range in a number, cannot be without danger to the common body. As to the
contrary such wits as be placed where the place needs them more then they
the place, do perform with sufficiency, and proceed with contentment of the
state that enstawled them. The chief signs of civility be quietness,
concord, agreement, fellowship and friendship, which likeness does lincke,
vnliknesse, undoes: fitness makes fast, unfitness does loose: propriety
bears up, improprietie pulls down: right matching makes, mismatching
marres. How then can civil society be preserved, where wits of unfit
humors for service, are in places of service, by appointment, either
unadvisedly made, or advisedly marred. Is there any picture so ill favored,
being compound of incompatible natures, as an execution is, being committed to
a contrary constitution? If fire be to inflame, and cause things burn, where
water should cool, and be mean to quench, is the place not in danger? If that
wit fall to preach, which were fitter for the plough, and he to clime a pulpit,
which is made to scale a wall, is not a good carter ill lost, and a good
soldier ill placed? If he will needs law it, which cares for no law, and
profess justice that professes no right, has not right an ill caruer, and
justice a worse master? If he will deal with physic whose brains can not
bear the infinite circumstances which belong thereunto, whether to maintain
health, or to restore it: does he any thing else, but seek to hasten death,
for helping the disease? to make way to murder, in steed of amendment? to be
a butchars prentice for a master in physike? And so is it in all kinds of
life, in all trades of living, where fitnes and right placing of wits does
work agreement and ease, unfitness and misplacing have the contrary companions,
disagreement and disease.

Again wits misplaced most unquiet and seditious: Wits misplaced.
as any thing else strayned against nature: light things prease upward, and
will ye force Fire down? Heavy things bear downward: and will ye have
Lead to leap up? An imperial wit for want of education and ability, being
placed in a mean calling will trouble the whole company, if he have not his
will, as wind in the stomach: and if he have his will, then shall ye see what
his natural did shoot at. He that bears a tankarde by meanness of degree,
and was borne for a cokhorse by sharpenes of wit, will keep a canuase at the
Conduites, till he be Master of his company. Such a sturring thing it is to
have wits misplaced, and their degrees mislotted by the iniquity of Fortune,
which the equity of nature did seem to mean unto them.

Plato in his wished common weal, and his defining of natural dignities,
appoints his degrees and honors, where nature deserves by ability and
worth, not where fortune freindeth by birth and boldness, though where both do
join singularity in nature, and success in fortune, there be some rare
jewel. Hereupon I conclude, that as it necessary to prevent to great a number
for the quantity thereof: so it is more then necessary, to provide in the
necessary number for the quality thereof. Wherein restraint it self will do
much good for the one, and choice in restraint will do more for the other. Sure
all children may not be set to schole, nay not though private circumstance say
yea. And therefore schools may not be set up for all, though great good will
find never so many founders, both for the place wherein to learn, and for the
number also which is for to learn: that the state may be served with
sufficiency enough, and not be pestered with more then enough. And yet by the
way for writing and reading so they rested there, what if every one had them,
for religion sake, and their necessary affairs? Besides that in the long time
of their whole youth, if they minded no more, these two were easily learned, at
their leisure times by extraordinary means, if the ordinary be dainty and no
school nigh. Every parish has a minister, if none else in the parish, which
can help writing and reading.

Of rich and poor children.
Some doubt may rise here between the rich and poor, whether all rich and
none poor, or but some in both may and ought to be set to learning. For all
in both that is decided already, No: because the whole question concerns
these two kinds, as the whole common weal stands upon these two kinds. If
all rich be excluded, ability will snuff, if all poor be restrained, the^
will towardness repine. If ability set out some rich by private purses for
private preferment: towardness will commend some poor to public provision
for public service: so that if neither public in the poor, nor private in
the rich do mar their own market, me think that were best, nay that will
be best, being ruled by their wits to conceive learning, and their
disposition to prove virtuous. But how may the public in the poor, and the
private in the rich, make their own market in the education of those whom
they prefer to learning? I will tell ye how. The rich not to have to much,
the poor not to lack to much, the one by overplus breadeth a loose and
dissolute brain: the other by under minus a base and servile conceit. For he
that never needs by supply of freindes, never strayneth his wits to be
friend to himself, but commonly proves retchelesse till the black ox tread
upon his toes, and need make him try what mettle he is made of. And he that
still needs for want of freindes being still in pinche holds that for his
heaven, which riddes him from need, and serves that Saint, which serves his
turn best, even Neptune in shipwreck. Whereby he makes the right of his
judgment become bond for wealth: and the sight of his wit blind for desire,
such slavery works want, unless Gods grace prove the stay, which is no line
to common direction, though it be our only hope, by way of refuge. Now then
if the wealthy parents of their private patrimony, and public patrones of
their supererogatorie wealth, will but drive to a mean in both these two
mains, neither shall wealth make the one to wanton, nor want make the other to
servile: neither the one to leap to fast, for fear he loose some time, nor
the other to have to fast, for fear he miss some living. Sure to provide for
poor scholars but a poor patche of a leave living, or but some mean half,
is more then half a maime, the desire to supply that which wants,
distracting the study more by many parts, then that petie help, which they
have can possibly further it: because the charge to maintain a scholar is
great, the time to prove well learned, long, and when ripeness is ready, there
would be stay to choose and time to take advice, where need turns the deaf
ear. The pattern of to prodigal wealth oftimes causes the toward student to
ouershoote kimselfe by corrupt imitation, as bravery and liberty be great
allurers, where study and stay pretend restraint. And therefore neither must
to much be butte to allurementes, nor to little a burdento judgment: the one
the mean to lewdness the other a maime to liberty. The middle sort of
parents which neither welter in to much wealth, nor wrestle with to much want,
seems fitteth of all, if the childrens capacity be aunswerable to their
parents state and quality: which must be the level for the fattest to fall
down to, and the leanest to leapeup to, to bring forth that student, which
must serve his country best. Religion and learning will frame them in
judgment, when wealth and ability have set them once on foot.

The choosing time.
For the choice of wits definitely, till they come to the time, or very near
to it, when they are themselves naturally and for ripeness of years to choose
their own kind of life, how so ever circunstance free, or bind their choice,
I cannot say much, though I do see what other have said in that behalf. A
quick wit will take soon, a staid memory will hold fast, a dull head may
prove somewhat, a mean wit offers fair, praise bewrays some courage, awe
some, in each kind there is likelihood, and yet error in each. For as there be
fair blossoms, so there be nipping frostes. And till the danger of revolt be
past, the quick must be held in hope, the dull without despair, the mean
the meetest, if the sequel do answer. I can limit no one thing, though I see
great shows, where there is such uncertain motion, both in soul and body, as
there is in children. The masters discretion in time and upon trial, may see
and say much, and in a number there will some leaders appear of themselves, as
some special dear in the whole heard. Where great appearance is, there one
may prophecy, and yet the lying spirit may sit in his lips. For God has
reserved his calling and discovering hours, as all other future euentes to his
own peculiar and private knowledge: probabilities be our guides, and our
conjectures be great, though not without exception. What kind of wit I like
best for my country, as most proper to be the instrument for learning, it
shall appear herafter. But for the first question of the two, it seems to me
very plain that all children be not be set to school, but only such as for
natural wits, and sufficient maintenance, either of their natural parents,
or civil patrones, shall be honestly and well supported in their study, till
the common weal minding to use their service, appoint their provision, not in
have for need, but at leisure with choice.

Chapter 37. The means to restrain the ouerflowing multitude of scholars. The
cause why every one desires to have his child learned, and yet must yield
over his own desire to the disposition of his country. That necessity and
choice be the best restrayners. That necessity restrayneth by lack and law.
Why it may be admitted, that all may write and read that can, but no further.
What is to be thought of the speaking and understanding of Latin, and in what
degree of learning that is. That considering our time and the state of religion
in our time, law must needs help this restraint: with the answer to such
objections as are made to the contrary. That in choice of wits, which must
deal with learning, that wit is fittest for our state, which answers best
the monarchy, and how such a wit is to be known. That choice is to help in
scholing, in admission into colleges, in proceeding to degrees, in preferring
to liuinges, where the right and wrong of all the four points be handled at
full.
IN the last title we have concluded, that there must be a restraint, and that
all may not pass on to learning, which throng thitherward, because of the
inconveniences, which may ensue, by want of preferment for such a multitude,
and by defeating other trades of their necessary trauellours. Our next labor
therefore must be, how to handle this restraint, that the tide ouerflow not the
common, with to great a spring of bookish people, if ye cry come who will, or
ring out all in. Every one desires to have his child learned: the reason is,
for that how hardly soever either fortune frown, or casualtie chastise, yet
learning has some strength to shore up the person, because it is incorporate
in the person, till the soul dislodge, neither lies it so open for mischaunce
to mangle, in any degree, as foreign and fortunes patrimony does. But though
every parent be thus affected toward his own child, as nature leads him to
wish his own best, yet for all that every parent must bear in memory that
he is more bound to his country, then to his child, as his child must renounce
him in countermatch with his country. And that country which claymeth this
prerogative of the father above the child, and of the child above the father,
as it maintained the father ear he was a father, and will maintain the child,
when he is without a father: so generally it provides for all, as it does
require a duty above all. And therefore parents in disposing of their
children may upon good warrant surrender their interest to the general
consideration of their common country, and think that it is not best to have
their children bookish, notwithstanding their own desire, be it never so
earnestly bent: if their country say either they shall serve in this trade,
without the book: or if she say I may not allow any more book men without my
to much trouble. I pray thee good pare^t have patience, and appoint some other
course for thy child, there be many good means to live by, besides the book,
and I will be thy childs friend, if thou will fit in some order for me. This
very consideration of the country, uttered with so mild a speech, spoken by
her that is able to perform it, may move the reasonable parent, to yealde to
her desire as best, as she can tell the headstrong in plain terms, that he
shall yield perforce, if he will not by entreatie. For private affection
though supported by reason of strength whatsoever, must either voluntarily
bend, or forcibly break, when the common good yields to the contrary side.

Seeing therefore the disposition of wits according to the proportion of each
state is resigned over to the country: and she says all may not be set to
schole, because each trade must be furnished, to perform all duties belonging
to all parts: it falls out in this case of restraint which bridles desire,
that two special grounds are to be considered, which strip away excessive
number, necessity and choice, the one perforce, the other by your leave.

Necessity.
As for necessity, when the parent is over charged with defect in circumstance,
though desire carry him on, it then restrains most, and lesseneth this number
when desire would increase it, and strains to the contrary. You would have
your child learned, but your purse will not streatch, your remedy is patience,
devise some other way, wherein your ability will serve. You are not able to
spare him from your elbow, for your need, and learning must have leisure: a
scholars book must be his only business, without foreign lettes, you may be
bold of your own: let booking alone, for such as can entend it, from being
called away by domestical affairs, and necessary business. For the scholars
name will not be a cypher-like subject, as he is termed of leisure, so must he
have it. And they that cannot spare their children so, must forebare their
scholing, Xenop. 1, (...).
by the old Persian ordinance, because leisure is the foregoer to liberal
profession: necessity compels and bastardeth the conceit, a venym to
learning, whom freedom should direct. You have no schole near you, and you
cannot pay for teaching further of, let your own trade content you: keep your
child at home. Your child is weak tymbred, let scholing alone, make play his
physician and health his middle end. Which way soever need drives you perforce,
that way must ye trot, if he will not amble, and bid Will think that well. He
that governs all sees what is your best, your self may be missled either by
ignorance in choice, or affection in blood In these and the like cases lack is
the leader, which way soever she straineth. Whereby if the restrained child
cannot get the skill to write and read: I lament that lack, because I have
allowed him so much before, upon some reasonable persuasion even for necessary
dealings. For these two points concern every man near, because they submit
themselves to every man's service: yea in his basest business and secretest
affairs. I dare not venture to allow so many the latin tungue nor any other
language, unless it be in cases, where their trades be known, and those
toungues be found to be necessary for them. For all the fear is, though it
be more then fear, where it still falls out so, least having such benefits
of schole, they will not be content with the state which is for them, but
because they have some petie smak of their book, they will think any state be
it never so high to be low enough for them. Which petie bookemen do not
consider, that both clounes in the country, and artificers in towns be
allowed latin in well governed states, which yet rest in their calling, without
pride or ambition, for that small knowledge, whereby they be better able to
furnish out their trades, without further aspiring. Neither measure they the
meaner qualities, as the things be in nature, but as themselves be in conceit:
neither can they consider that at this day it is not the toungue, but the
treasure of learning and knowledge, which is laid up in the toungue whereunto
they never came, which gives the toungue credit, and the speaker authority.
For want of this right judgment there ensues in them a miscontentment of
mind, not liking their own state, and a cumbersome conceit, still aspiring
higher, that disquieteth the whole state. Wherefore necessity is a good mean
to prevent this in many, which would if they could, now may not, because they
cannot.

Law.
The second point of necessity I do assign to law and ordinance upon
consideration to cut of this flocking multitude, which will needs to school.
Whereupon two great goods must needs ensue. Contentment of mind in the party
restrained, when he shall perceive public provision to be the check to his
fantsie: and timely preventing, care conceit take root, and think it self
wronged. Because it is much better to nip misorder in the very ground, that it
may not take hold, then when it is grown up, then to hacke it down. He that
never conceived great things may be held there with ease, but being once
entered in the way to mount, and then thrown backward, he will be in some
grief and seek how to return gaul, whence he received grief, if he chance
to prove peuish, as repulse in great hope is a perilous grater. Yet in both
these cases of necessary restraint, I could wish provision were had to some
singular wits, found worthy the auauncement: either by private patronage, or
public: and yet again if they pass on, and bewtifie some other trade: that
also is very good, seeing they serve their country, whersoeuer they be
loated, and in those also whom liberty of circunstance does set to school
poverty will appear, Two objections against restraint by law.
and towardness call for help: and yet the number will nevertheless prove
still with the most.

It is no objection to allege against such a lawful restraint, the ability
of good wits, and great learning in men, that either now be, or heretofore
have been, which we might have lackt if so strait a law had been then: or that
it were pity by law to hinder that excellency, which God commonly gives to
the poorer sort. To the first I answer, besides that, which even law to that
end will answer for it self. As in time to come we know not, who shall
serve the state, if the law be made strait, and yet we know well, that he
which defendes states will provide sufficient persons, by whom they shall be
served: so in time past or present, if these were not, or those had not been,
whom we now see or of who^ we have heard, God would have raised up other, whose
benefits in serving gouernmentes may not be restrained to any degree of men,
as they be men, but to the appointment of a civil society, which has
direction over men: as a thing which God does most cherish, both in respect of
this Church which is of number, and in regard of society it self, which is
the natural end of man's being here, and not to live alone. And I warrant you
whenever such an orderly restraint shall be put in practice that there will be as
good foresight had to have necessary functions served, as there will be regard
to draine away the unnecessary ouerflow. A thing not new faingled, but ever in
use, where the commonweals, had an eye to distribute their multitude to the
best and easiest proportion of their own state: which otherwise
improportionate would bread an aposteme. And therefore if the general
judgment appoint it so, it is best to yield. And private opinion in politic
cases will prove an error, if the general liking contrary it flat. I do not
now mean, where the general is blinded by common error, but where private
conceit can take no exception, saving that, which he bredeth from out of his
own brain. If the state of my country take order, that my child shall not go
to school, sure I will obey, and provide some other course, though I like
learning exceeding well, and be very far in love with it, besides the
affection to my child, because the squaring with the general, is to far out
of square for any particular. And I pray you may it not be, that for want of
such an ordinance we mist better wits, then those were, or are, which we
either had or have, though we think very well of both the sorts, whether now
living with us, or tofore parted from us? And does not negligence for want of
looking to, overthrow as gaie and gallant heads, as diligence by doing even
her very best, has ever brought to light? Advised and considerate planting is
like enough to receive very good increase, and euentes in such cases, by
authority and testimony of two the greatest orators in both the best
tongues, be but foolish masters, and febler arguments.

As for pytying the poor, it is no pity, not to wish a beggar to become a
prince, though ye allow him a penny, and pity his needful want. Is he
poor? provide for him, that he may live by trade, but let him not loyter. Is
he witty? why? be artificers fools? and do not all trades occupy wit?
sometimes to much, and thereby both strain their own heads to the worse, and
prove to subtle for a great deal their betters. Is he very likely to prove
singular in learning? I do not reject him, for whom I provide a public help
in common patronage. But he does not well to oppose his own particular,
against the public good, let his country think of him enough, and not he of
him self to much. If nobility and gentlemen would fall to diligence, and
recover the execution of learning, where were this objection? The greatest
assurers of it affirm, that learning was wont to be proper to nobility, and
that through their negligence it is left for a pray to the meaner sort, and a
booty to corruption, where the professors need offers wrongful violence
to the liberality of the thing. Do they not therein confess, where the right
of the thing lies and themselves to be usurpers, if they should enter upon
their own, whose the interest is, and whom in so many discourses of nobility,
they themselves blame so much for their so great negligence? They must needs
here yield without law to their own confession. But we see God has showed
himself marvelous munificent and beneficial this way to the poorer sort. I
grant, yet that proves not, but that he bestowed as great gifts of them which
showed not. And that as diligence in the one did show that they had, to the
glory of the giver, and their own praise: so negligence in the other, did
suppress that they had to their own shame, who neither honored the giver,
nor honested themselves, nor profited their country. So that here not the
gift, but the show is brought in allegation. And why not the greater talent hid
seeing it is no novelty? But the other show. No more then that they have. And
the other show not. No argument that they have not. Take order then, that they
show, which have and hide, and then make comparisons. Be great gifts tied to
the mean, or banished from the mighty? be there not as good wits in wealth,
though oftimes choked with dissolutenes and negligence, as there be in poverty
appearing thorough pains and diligence? Nay be there not as untoward
poorelinges, as there be wanton wealthlinges? I know yes, and when untowardness
and an ill inclynation hittes in a base condition, it proves more vile. So that
this thing turns about to my other conclusion, that neither poverty is to be
pitied more then the country, if pity must needs take place: neither riches
more to be esteemed then the common weal, if wealth must needs be wayed: but
that the value in wits must be heelde of most worth, which has her haue^
already appointed, where to harbor her self, in maintenance to study,
either by private help, if the parents be wealthy, or by public aid, if
poverty pray for it.

Certainly there is great reason (if even the term, great, be not to small,
when the thing is more then needful, and the time to prevent it, is almost
run to far) why order should be taken, to restrain the number, that will
needs to the book. For while the Church was an harbor for all men to ride
in, which knew any letter, there needed no restraint, the liuinges there were
infinite and capable of that number, the more drew that way, and found releife
that way, the better for that state, which encroached still on, and by clasping
all persons, would have graspid all liuinges. The state is now altered, that
book-maintenance maimed, the preferment that way has turned a new leaf. And
will ye let the fry increase, where the feeding fails? Will ye have the
multitude wax, where the maintenance waines? Sure I conceive of it thus, that
there is as great difference in ground, between the suffering all to book it in
these days, and the like liberty to the same number, in the ruff of the
papacy amongst us: as there is between the two religions, the one expelled and
the other retained, in the grounds of their kind. The expelled religion was
supported by multitude, and the more had interest, the more stood for it: the
retained must pitch the defense of her truth, in some paucity of choice: seeing
the liuinges are shred, which should serve the great number. So that our time,
of necessity must restrain: if not: what you breed and feed not, the
adversary part will allure by living, and arm by corrupting, against their
unwise country, which either bestowed them not at first, or despised them at
last. Where your thanks shall be lost, which brought up, and forsook, their
desert shall sink deep, which fed the forsaken. And is it not mere folly by
sufferance to increase your enemies force, which you might by ordinance
supplant at ease? it is the book, which bredes us enemies, and causes
corruption to creep, where cunning never came. The enemy state cared not so
much for many well learned, as for the multitude though unlearned, which backed
much bold ignorance, with a gaie surface of some small learning: our state
then must reject the multitude, and re^pare with the cunning. Our own time is
our surest touch, and our own trouble our rightest trial, if wisdom in time
do not prevent it, folly in trial will surely repent. It is to no purpose to
allege, when people see, that there is no preferment to be had for all
learners, that then the number will decay, and abate of it self without any
law: onelesse ye can work so, as no more may hope, though but one can hit: or
else, if ye can appoint us, how long the controversy for religion is like to
endure. For while hope is indifferent, each one will crowd: and while religion
is in brake, each one under hand, will furnish where he favors. The
adversary of our religion, as in deed he needed none, so dreamed he not of
any defense, while he was rockt in ease, and his state vnassailed by any
miscontentment: but now that he is skirmished with so much, and so sore gauled,
he is driven to study, and seeks by new coined distinctions to recover, that
credit and reputation which he lost by intruding: wherein as he deals more
cu^ningly with the person of his adversary, so he bewrays still the great
auantage, which his adversaries cause has won over his. For in disputing,
good Logicians know that it is an evident shift, to avoid manifest foil, when
the disputer in despair of his cause, is forced to bend against his
adversaries person. And therefore provision must be, to defend by a learned
paucitie, where the flocking number by reason of ingenerate wantes, will prove
but a scare crow, and by apparent defection does increase the embush, which
lies still in wait, to intercept our possession. Thus much of Necessity,
which stays the multitude of learners either by defect in circunstance, or by
law in ordinance, when the parties be let, either by lack that they can not,
or by law that they may not, lay claim to the book.

Now are we come to a larger compass, Choice.
where liberty gives leave to learn if he can, where foreign circumstances
be free, and no let for any to be learned but either his wit, if he be dull, or
his will, if he be stubburne. In this kind, choice is a great prince, which by
great reason and good advice, abbridgeth that which is to much, and culs out
the best. Which choice, as it begins at the entry of the elementarie schole,
so it proceeds on, till the last preferment be bestowed, which either the
state has in store for any person, or any person can deserve, for service in
the state. And therefore as it keeps in an ordinate course, so it may full
well be orderly handled, and by convenient degrees.

But because the choice is to be made by the wit, and the wit is to be applied
to the frame and state of the country, where it continues: What wit is
fittest for learning in a monarchy.
I will first seek out, what kind of wit is even from the infancy to be
thought most fit, to serve for this state in the learned kind. Which if it be
to stirring, troubles, if it be well stayed, setleth the country where it
lives, so far as it deals. And yet oftymes that wit makes least show at
the first, to be so pliable, which at the last does best agree with the
policy. And therefore it is then to be taken, when it begins first to show,
that it will prove such: wherefore precise rejecting of any wit, which is in
way to go onward, before due ripenes, as it is harmefull to the party
rejected, so it bewraieth some rashness in him that rejects: because the
variety is exceeding great, though the conjectures be as great, and the most
likelihood must needs lead, where certainty is denied. But to the wits:
wherein as lack and law do guide necessity so the quality of the wit,
conformable to the state directs choice.

There be three kinds of government most noted among monarchy, because one
prince bears the sway, by whose circumspection the common oligarchie: where
some few bear all the swinge: the democratie, where every one of the people
has his interest in the direction, and his voice in elections. Now all these
three be best maintained by those kinds of wit, which are most proper for that
kind of government, wherein they live. But because the government of our
country is a monarchy: I will in choice seek out that kind of wit, which
best agrees with the monarchy, neither will I touch the other two, unless I
fortune to trip upon then by chance. And for as much as I have made the young
child my first subject, I will continue therein still* because that which
begins to show it self near upon infancy, will so commonly continue,
though alteration creep in sometime. But lightly these wits alter not,
because the tokens be so fast and firm in nature, and tend to so certain and
so resolute a judgment.

A wit for learning in a monarchy.
That child therefore is like to prove in further years, the fittest subject
for learning in a monarchy, which in his tender age shows himself obedient
to scholeorders, and eitheir will not lightly offend, or if he do, will take
his punishment gently: without either much repyning, or great stomaking. In
behavior toward his companions he is gentle and courteous, not wrangling, not
quarelling, not complaining, but will put to his helping hand, and use all
persuasions, rather then to have either his master disquieted, or his fellows
punished. And therefore he either receives like courtesy again of his
scholefellowes: or who so shows him any discurtesie, must abide both challenge
and combat with all the rest.

If he have any excellent towardnes by nature, as commonly such wits have,
whereby he passes the residue in learning, it will show it self so orderly,
and with such modesty, as it shall soon appear, to have no loftines of
mind, no aspiring ambition, no odiouse comparisons joined withal.

At home he will be so obsequious to parents, so courteous among servants, so
dutiefull toward all, with whom he has to deal: as there will be contention,
who may praise him most behind his back, who may cherish him most before his
face: with prayer that he may go on, with fear of too hasty death, in so od a
towardnes of wit and demeanor. These things will not lighly make any evident
show, til the child be either in the grammar schole, by orderly ascent, and not
by two forewardly have, or upon his passage from the perfited elementarie,
because his years by that time, and his contynuance under government, will
somewhat discover his inclination. Before that time we pardon many things, and
use points of ambition and courage, to inflame the little ones onward, which we
cut of afterward, for making them to malapart, as in their apparel frise is
successor to silk. When of them selves without any either great fear, or
much hartening, they begin to make some muster and show of their learning to
this more then that, then is conjecture on foot to find, what they willbe
most likely to prove.

But now to examine these signs more nearely and narowly, which I noted to be
in the child that is like to prove so fit a subject for a monarchy, in matters
of learning: Is not obedience the best sacrifice, that he can offer up to his
prince and governor, being directed and ruled by his country laws? And in
the principles of government, is not his master his monarche? and the
scholelawes his country laws? whereunto if he submit himself both orderly in
perfourmance, and patiently in penance, does he not show a mind already
armed, not to start from his duty? and so much the more, because his obedience
to his master is more voluntary, then that to his prince, which is mere
necessary. For in persuasions of children, which the parents will give ear
to: in desire to change, where their wills be chekt: in multitude of teachers,
who thrive by such chaunges: all means be good, where there is such plenty,
to offer such parents as be tikelish, and such scholars as be shifting,
removing from masters and renouncing of obedience. The child has many
shadows to shift in upon any pretense, and as many baits, to win his
parents belief, and specially if he stand in fear of beating. Whereas
neither he, ne yet his parents, can forsake their prince, upon any color
without forfaiting more then a quarters scholehire. And therefore in so many
means to change, and some perhaps offered, because who will not very willingly
deal with such a wit, where his travel will make show, that child which
notwithstanding all these entisementes, will continue both on, and one, and
digest dyscurtesies, though his master sometime chance to prove churlish, is
the peculiar and proper wit, which I commend for obedience, and that is like
to prove both honestly learned,

But these be the maine as I conceive at the first blush: obedience to
superiors and superiority, freindlynesse and fellowship toward companions,
and equalles: substance to deserve well and win it, desire to avoid ill and
fly it. What duty either toward God or man, either in public or private
society, in any either hie or low kind of life is there, whereunto God has
not seemed in nature to have framed and fashioned this so toward a youth? and
therefore to have appointed him for the use of learning to be ruled by his
betters, and to rule his inferiors, nothing offensive nor unpleasant to any?
Many such wits there be, and at them must choice first begin. And as those be
the best, and first to be chosen, in whom there is so rare metal, so the
second or third after these be unworthy the refusal, in whom the same
qualities do appear, though not in the same, but in some meaner degree. For
whereas great ill is often in place, and proves the general foe to that which
would be better, there mean good, if it may have place, will be general
friend to prefer the better: as even this second mediocritie, if it may be
had, as choice will find it out, will prove very freindly to set forward all
good. Now these properties and signs appear in some, very soon, in some
very late, yea oftimes when they are least looked for: as either judgment in
years, or experience in dealinges do frame the parties.

The plat for the monarchical learner being always reseant in the chusers
head, concerning the property of his wit: and appearance toward proof:
the rest is to be bestowed upon the consideration of learning, and towardness
in children generally (whereof these wits be still both the first and best
fruits) where to stay, or how far to proceed in the ascent of learning.
Whether he be rich or poor, that makes no matter, and is already decided,
whether he be quick or slow, therein is somewhat, and requires good regard.

Wherefore when sufficient ability in circunstances bids open the school door,
School choice.
the admission and continuance be general, till upon some proof the master,
whom I make the first chuser of the finest, and the first clipper of the
refuse, begin to find and be able to discern, where ability is to go on
forward, and where natural weakness biddes remove by times. For if negligence
work weakness, that is an other disease, and requires an other medecin, to
heal it withal. Now when the master has spied the strength or infirmity in
nature, as by lightsomnesse or heaviness in learning, by easiness or
hardness in retaining, by comparing of contrary or the like wits, he shall
easily sound both, then as his delight will be to have the toward continue, so
must his desire be, how to procure the diuerting and removing of the duller and
less toward, to some other course, more agreeing with their natural, the^
learning is: wherein they are like to go forward very little, though their
fortune be to go to school very long: but here two considerations are to be
had: neither to soon to seek their diuerting, till some good ripeness in
time, though with some great pains to the teacher in the mean time, wish them
to be weined from booking: neither yet before their bodies be of strength to
abide the pains of some more laborious prenticeship. For it may so prove, that
those wits, which at the first were found to be exceeding hard and blunt, may
soften, and prove sharp in time and show a finer edge, though that be not to be
made a general caution, to cover dullardes with all. For the natural dullness
will disclose it self generally in all points, that concern memory and
conceit: that dullness which will once break out sharp, will show it self by
glaunces, as a clowdy day uses, which will prove fair, when all shrews have
dined. Wherefore peremptory judgment to soon, may prove perilous to some:
and again he that is fit for nothing else, for the tenderness of his body,
may abide in the school a little while longer, where though he do but little
good, yet he may be sure to take little harm.

Moreover if the parents ability be such, as he may, and his desire such, as
he will maintain his child at school, till he grow to some years, though he
grow to small learning, the master must have patience, and measure his pains
by the parents purse, where he knows there is plenty, and not by the childs
profit, which he sees will be small. Wherein yet he must impart his opinion
continually with the parent both for his duty sake, and for avoiding of
displeasure. But in the meaner sort the case alters, for that as a good
wit in a poor child, deserves direct punishment, if by negligence he for
slow the obtaining of learning, which is the patrimony to witty poverty: so
a dull wit in that degree would not be dalyed with all to long, but be
furthered to some trade, which is the fairest portion to the slow witted poor.
Now because the master to whose judgment I commend the choice, is no absolute
potentate in our common weal, to dispose of wits, and to sort men's
children, as he likes best, but in nature of a counselor, to join with the
parent, if he will be advised: therefore to have this thing perfectly
accomplished, I wish the parents and masters to be freindly acquainted, and
domestically familiar. And though some parents need no counsel, as some
masters can give but little, yet the wise parent will hear, and can judge: and
the skillful master can judge, and should be heard. Where neither of these be,
neither skill in the teacher to tell it, nor will in the parente to hear it,
and less affection to follow it, the poor child is wrung to the worse in the
mean while, and the parent receives small comfort in conclusion.

This course for the master to keep in judging of his scholar, and the parent
to follow in bestowing of his child, according to his wit, continues so long
as the child shall be either under maistership in schole, or tutorship in
college. During the which time, a great number may be very wisely and fitly
bestowed, unlearned trades sufficiently appointed, the proceeding in letters
reserved to them, to whom for wit and judgment they seem naturally vowed: and
finally the whole common weal in every branch well furnished with number, and
the number it self discharged of to much. Because this time under the masters
gouerme^t, is the time wherein youth is to be bestowed by foreign direction:
for afterward in a more dangerous age, and a more ieoperdouse time, they grow
on to their own choice, and these vnfitnesses in nature, or frailtes in
manners, being not foreseen to, may cause the friends forthinke it, and the
parties sore rue it. And though the master shall not allway have his counsel
followed in this case, yet if he do signify his opinion to the parent, his
duty is discharged, and that which I require is orderly performed. For if the
parent show himself unwilling to be directed that way, which the master shall
allow, upon great ground, and be blinded by affection, measuring his childs
wit to learning, by his doing of some errand, or by telling of some tale, or by
marking of some pretty toy, as such arguments there be used, which yet be no
arguments of a toward learner, but of a no foolish obseruer: in this case
though the master to his own gain draw on under his hand a desparate wit,
the fault is his that would not see, if he that saw did honestly tell it.
Whereby it still proves true, that pare^tes and masters should be familiarly
lynked in amity, and contynual conference, for their common care, and that the
one should have a good affiance of judgment in the thing, and of goodwill
toward himself, reposed in the other. Which will prove so, when the master
is chosen with judgment, and continued with conference, and not because my
neighbors children go to schole with you, you shall have mine to. A common
commendation among common coursiters, which post about still to survey all
schools, and never stay in one: and reap as much learning, as the rolling
stone does gather moss.

But concerning schools, and such particularities, as belong thereunto I will
then deal, when I shall take in hand the peculiar arguments, of schools and
schooling, both for the elementarie and the gramarian. Wherein we are no less
troubled with number and confusion in our petie kingdoms, then the very
common weal is molested with the same in greater years, and larger scope.

But because it were not orderly dealt, to rip the faults, and not to heal
them, I will post all these points over to their own treatises, in my
particular discourses hereafter, where I will presently help, whatsoever I
shall blame. The other means whereby choice lesseneth number, be admissions
into colleges, prefermentes to degrees, advancement unto livings, wherein the
common weal receives the greater blow, the nearer these things be to public
execution, and therefore the playner dealing to prevent mischief before it
infect, is the more praiseworthy.

Admission into colleges.
As concerning colleges I do not think the liuinges in them to be peculiar, or
of purposement to the poorer sort only, whose want that small help could
never suffice, though there be some prerogative reserved unto them, in
consideration of some great towardnes, which might otherwise be trod down, and
that way is held up: but that they be simply preferments for learning, and
auauncementes to virtue, as well in the wealthy for reward of well doing, as in
the poorer for necessary support. And therefore as I give admission scope to
choose of both the sorts, so I do restrain it to honest and civil towardnes.
For if favor and friendship not for these furnitures, but for private
respects, carry away elections though with some enterlarding of towardnes and
learning, and some few to give countenance to some equity of choice, and
theerby to maintain the credit of such places, surely the scholars and heads
which devised the slight, and conceived they were not seen, shall repent
without recovery, and find themselves bound, and their colleges bowelled,
when they shall feel themselves ouerruled by their own devise: because such as
come in so, will communicate the like with others, and never care for the
common, which were helped by the private. For where favor bringes in almost in
despite of order, there must favor be returned with marvelous disorder, and
yet I do not mislike favor, which helps desert, which otherwise might be
foiled, if favor friended not. But when the ground whereupon favor buildes is
not so commendable, founders be discouraged, common provision supplanted,
learning set over to loytering, bravery made enheritour to books. Stirringe
wits have their will for the time, and repentance at leisure. The fault
hereof comes from scholars themselves, which first make way to sinister
means, and afterward blame, the very mean which they used themselves. For
finding some ease at first in working their own will, either more cunningly to
hide some indirect dealing, or more subtly to supplant some contrary faction:
or in deed desiring rather by commandment to force, and so to seem
somebodie, then of duty to entreat, and so seem abject to honesty: they
stumble at the last upon the block of bondage, being bridled of their own
will, even when they are in ruff, by the self same means, which brought them
unto it, and thought so to staule them, as themselves would command where they
caused the speed. These fellows be like to Horaces horse, which to overcome
the stag, used man for his mean once, and his master always: neither refusing
the saddle on his ridg, to be rid on, nether the bit in his mouth, to be
bridled by. A brave victory so dearly bought, to the victours bondage, and
perpetual slavery. Whereas if learning and those conditions which I did lymit
to a civil wit in this state, were the end in elections, the unfit should be
set over to some other course, in convenient time: the fittest should be
chosen, the founders mind fulfilled: some perjury for non perfourmaunce of
statutes avoided: new patrones procured, religion auaunced, good students
encouraged, and favor upon extreme and importunate suit disfranchised: which
never will oppose it self to so honest considerations, so constantly kept:
neither ever does intrude, without some such sollicitours, as should be sorry
for it, and use no mean to have it, which oftimes use this mean, to do il by
warrant, as if they were forced to that, which in deed they meant before, and
sought favor but for a shadow to hide their devise. Now if you that are to
choose, yield so much to your selves, and your own conceit to bring your
devises to pass, though ye wring by the way, and your state in the end, why
should you not in good truth relent, and give place your selves being in
places, to your betters and bidders, which gaiue you the room, and yet would
have left all to you, if you would have left any place to reason: or have been
led by right, as ye leaned all to the wrong? you had your will by them, and
why not they have theirs of you? requital among equalles is of common
courtesy, recompense in inequalities is enforced of necessity.

If any metal be to massy, and way down the balance, or if any metallish
mean, where money will scale, do enter that fort, where is small resistance,
that is sold, which ought not, the enheritaunce of virtue: that is bought,
which should not, the liuelihood of learning: that is betrayed, which neither
should for fear, nor ought for freindship, the treasure of the state, and
provision of the country. And if there be need, which enforces such dealing,
yet deal, where it is due, and let need be remedyed, with her own provision,
not by dishonest intrusion. I do not blame any one, because my self know none,
and I think well of most, because I know some sincere. But some thing there is
that feeds the general complaint, and some conte^tious factions there be,
that bring catchers into colleges. For both these two inconveniences, worse
then mischeifes as our common law terms them, I have nothing to say more then
to renew the memory of two accidents, which happened to the Romain common
weal, and may be understood by scholars, Offic. 2.
that will mark and apply them. The first is, that in Tullie, when Pontius
the Samnite wished that he either had not been borne until, or but then borne,
when the Romans would have received gifts and rewards. Why? what if? I would
not have suffered them to have reigned one day longer, by selling their
liberty, they should have become bond. The fellow said much, and that state
felt more, when they sell to fingering.

The second is this, The main rot of the Roman empire.
not noted in any one, but observed by all, that mark and write of the
declining and ruin of the Romain Empire. The principal cause among many, to
raze that state, which did rise in the blood of other nations and fell in their
own, was, when their generals used the help of foreign and barbarous
fellows, late foes, new freindes, to overthrow the contrary factions in their
civil wars, both before and in their Emperors time, and let them both smell
and taste of the Romish wealth and fatness of Italy. Wherewith the horesons
being ravished, ever as they went home sent more of their countrymen to serve
in seditious or necessary defenses: till at the last their whole nations
ouerflew that flourishing town, and that fertile country. Whereby that great
abundance, that unspeakable wealth, those inestimable riches, which the
whether conquering or ravening Romans had gathered together in so many
hundred years, from so many several countries, in a very small time, became
a booty to that barbarous offall of all kind of people, which never had any,
till they became lords, both of the Romain substance and the soil of Italy.
A glass for those to gase on, which will rather stir to fall, then be still
to stand. If ye show a child an apple, he will cry for it, but if you make a
mightier then your self privy to your pleasures, if he be desirous to have,
and speed not, he will make you cry for it.

But now as favor founded not upon desert, but upon some fetch, is foe to all
choice, enforcing for the favorite, so free admissions into colleges, by but
mildely and honestly replying: upon favor may help it in sufficiency, and
lighten the book of some needless burden, which hurtes not only in the
admission, but also by sending abroad such broad dealers, which corrupt where
they go, and poison more incurably, because of their mean, which is mothered
upon learning, which the cunninger it is, the craftyer mean it is: and of the
more credit it is, the more conueiance it has to corrupt with good color,
though it be to bad, when it is bewrayed. If hope were cut of to speed by
disorder, such wits would straight way forte themselves to order, as they be
not the most blockheades, which offer violence to order: wherein I must needs
say somewhat in plain truth, and plausible to.

The abusing of great personages.
Those great personages, which be so tempted by the importunity of such petie
companions, as seek the^ for protection, to force good and godly statutes, are
little bound to the^. For what do they? Their own obscurity comes in no
danger, as being but underlings, neither much seen, nor a whit cared for,
though they cause the mischeife: but they force good, and well given
dispositions, excellent and noble natures, by false and colored informations,
to serve their own turns, and to beguile their great freindes: they bring
them in hatred of all those, which build upon the good zeal of virtuous
founders. Which thing reaches so far, and to so many, as either the
possibility to enjoy their benefit does, or the praise of their doing, to
procure the like: or the protection of posterity, which cannot but lament the
great misuse, and foull overthrow of their ancestors good and most godly
meaning. They cast all me^ in fear of them to be likewise forced in their best
interest, as a principle to tyranny, and make them be odious to all, whom they
would seem to honor above all. The worst kind of caterpillours, in
countenance fine and neat, in speech delicate and divine, in pretense holy
and heavenly, in meaning very furies, and devils: to themselves scraping
howsoever they cover: to nobility and countenance, whatsoever show they make,
the very seminary of most dangerous dishonor, and therefore worthy to be
thrust out, because they thirst so much. For if love and honor be the
treasures of nobility, the contrary mean howsoever it be colored deserves
coudgelling out, when it croutcheth most. It is no dishonor to nobility, not
to have their will, but it is their greatest disgrace to yeilde to that, by
unreasonable desire, which they ought not to will, and so make a divorce
between honesty and honor, which is unseemly, seeing honesty, how basely
soever some ruffians regard it, is the very mother to honor of greatest
moment, and in the best kind. That such honorable natures yield to such
importunate promoters, half against their will, because otherwise they cannot
be rid of them: their own and honorable contentment does oftimes prove, when
they have been answered truly and duetifully, by such either companies, or
particulars, as have preferred plain truth, before painted colors, whereby
noble dispositions do well declare to the world, how unwilling they be to force
order by favor, if they be enfourmed of the truth: which will always prove the
enfourmers warrant, and foil such fetchers, when it comes to the hearing. And
as the learned Quintilian says, Quintilian
that in a grammaria^ it is a virtue not to seem to know all: so says policy
that in the very highest, it is not good to do all, that authority and
interest in the extremity of right may do, with some warrant to it self,
though with small liking, where it goes. Mine antecedent is of mine own
profession, which bears blame of to much boldness, and has been thought to
presumptuous for knowledge, Palaemon*
as Rhemmius Palaemon one of our coat, was wount to brag, that learning began
to live, and should die with him: My consequent concerns my country, and
good will to nobility, which as in degree it can do most, so were it great
pity that it should be used, but to work the best. My challenge is to those
infamous means, which dishonor their honorable patrones, defeat honest men of
best education, disturb the state even while they live, poison the posterity
by their president, even when they are dead*

Now if choice had taken place in the beginning, such impudent wits had won
no place, and noble patrones had shaked of such suits. For as deep waters do
seem not to run because of their stillnesse: so true virtue and honest
learning will tarry their calling, and nor stir to soon, to set forth their
stuff, though they be the deepest and most worthy the place. I must crave
pardon: a well affected master speaks for all poor and toward scholars,
well nusled in learning, well given in living, and ill thwarted in liuinges, by
such visardes of counterfect countenaunces, which one may more then half
guess, what they will receive, when none sees but the offerer: which dare
themselves offer such dishonorable requests to those personages, at whose
countenaunces, they ought in conscience to tremble, if that impudency, which
first has rejected God secretly, and all goodness openly, had not tyrannised
them to much, so vilely to abuse, where they ought to honor. The consideration
of the good, the canuasing for the ill, has carried me from colleges, though
not from colleginers, where for necessary rooms there must be boursares, and
why not of the learned sort? Which the more toward they be, the more trusty
they will prove, and chiefly to the college, which auaunced them for value.
Never wonder if he do sacrifice to the purse, which was admitted either for it,
or by it. And yet there is some wrong, to fill private purses for entering, and
to punish the common, when they be entered. If they could use it so, as to still
it from those, which strayned it from them, when they were to enter, the
cunning were great, and the deceit not amiss, where craft is allowed to
deceive the deceiuer. But the common wrings, for the private wrong, and there
the injury is.

Preferme^t to degrees
Preferment to degrees in schole may, nay in deed ought to be a mighty
stripper of insufficiency, because that way, the whole country is made either
a lamentable spoil to bold ignorance, or a laudable soil to sober knowledge.
When a scholar is allowed by authority of the university, to profess that
quality, whereof he bears the title, and is sent abroad with the warrant of
his commencement, and want of his cunning, who made either favor and
friendship, either countenance or canuase, or some other slight the mean to
enstawle him, what must our common country then say, when she hears the
brag of the universities title sound in her ears, and finds not the benefit
of the university learning to serve her in need? She must needs think that
the unlearned and ignorant creature is free from blame, because he sought to
countenance himself, as the customarie led him: but she must needs think
her self not only not bound to the university, but shamefully abused, nay
most unnaturally offered to the spoil of ignorance and insufficiency by the
university, to whom committing her sight she is dealt with so blindly, in
whom reposing her trust, she is betrayed so untruly. For what is it to say in
common collection, when the university prefers any, to degree: but as if
she should protest thus much. Before God and my country, to whom I owe my
self and my service, whereof the one I cannot deceive, the other I ought not,
I do know this man, whom I now prefer to this degree, in this faculty, in the
sufficiency of ability, which his title pretends, not perfunctorilie taken
knowledge of, but thoroughly examined by me, to be well able to execute in the
common weal of my country, that quality in art and profession, which his
degree endoweth him with: and that my country may rest upon my credit in
security for his sufficiency: and betrust her self unto him upon my warrant,
which I do seal with the public acknowledging of him to be such a one, as his
title emporteth, being consideratly and advisedly bestowed upon him by me, as I
will answer almighty God in judgment, and my country in my conscience and
upon my credit. Now what if he be not such a one? where the^ is your
aduisednesse? where the^ is your credit? where the^ is then your conscience?
nay where the^ is your God whom ye called to witness? What if the university
knew before, that he neither was such a one, neither like ever to prove any
such? let him that weyeth this, if it be to light, reject it as counterfect.
Let the earnest professors of the truest religion in the universities at this
day call their consciences to counsel, and redress the defect, for their own
credit, and the good of their country. If it shall please the universities, to
prefer these considerations of country and conscience, before any private
persuasion (which if it were roundly repelled a while, would never be so
impudent, as so to intrude it self) the matter were ended, and despair that
way would leave rowme to learning: and send such fellows to those faculties,
which were fitter for them: and not suffer them under the titles of learning,
to supplant the learned, and forstaull away their liuinges: to the discouraging
of the right student in deed, and the defeating of the state. For if ye rip
the cause why they seek to set forth the^ selves, with such foreign
feathers, being unlikely to look on, in their own colors, if the eye might
behold that which the mind conceiueth, ye shall find that their desire to
gain under honorable titles, is the very ground whereupon they go: which
they seek by indirect ways, because they feel them selves to be of no direct
worth. But what fools be good scholars in deed, to lend such dawes their
dignities, under that borrowed habit, to rob them of pre-eminence, and to seem
to be eagles, where they be but bussardes? Nay do they not discredit the
university more? as if they there were either so simple, as they could not
descrie a calfe, or so easy to be entreated, as when they had discried it,
they would swear by persuasion, that the calfe were a camel? good my masters
make not all priests that stand upon the bridge as the Poope passes. For then
the cobbler as one consecrated, because his person was in compass, and his
shows with in hearing, will sure be a priest, and set nothing by his naule,
and as good as you and as fit for a benefice, as those that came to take orders
in deed, and deserved them in doing. Look to it betimes and lend not your
garments to set forth bastardt and bold suitors, for fear your selves be
excluded, when ye entend to sue, both your labor and your love being lost,
through your own folly.

To seem is not so much in weight as to be, but in pains it is much more. To
counterfeat virtue, and to avoid spying, requires a long labor, and daily
new devises: to be virtuous in deed, and learned in deed, craves labor at
the first, and lendes leisure in the end, borne out by it self, never needing
any vele. And therefore great warines must be used to discern and shake of the
counterfeat smaller consideration will soon find, and sooner content
sufficient stuff. Let deep dissembling and dubling hypocrisy leap the
ladder, and honest learning be beholder the while. In these points to have
worthiness preferred, and to have choice to seek, and save it, if a teacher
deal thus earnestly, as me think I do now, he may deserve pardon as I hope I
shall have, considering his end, to him self ward is delight, to his charge is
their profit: to his country is sound stuff sent from him. And can he be but
grieved to see the effect so disorderly defeated, whereunto with infinite toil,
with incomparable care, with incredible pains, he did so orderly proceed? I
take it very tolerable for any, that has charge of number and multitude to be
careful for their good, not only in private government, but also in public
protection, so far, as either the honesty of the cause, or the duty to
magistrate, will maintain his attempt. As truly in learning and learned
executio^s, me think it concerns all men to be very careful, because the
thing tucheth themselves so near in age, and theirs so much in youth.

For the third part which consists in auauncement to liuinges, Auauncement to
liuinges.
as it is commonly handled by the highest in state, and eldest in years, which
have best skill to judge, and least need to be misled: so it needs least
precept: because the miss there is mostwhat without amends, being made by
great warrant: and the hitting right is the blessed fortune of each kind of
state, when value is in place, whence there is no appeal, but pleasure in the
perfect: pity in imperfection: the common good eitheir carried to ruin by
intrusion of insufficiency, or strongly supported by sufficient stay. Repulse
here is a miserable stripp, that insufficiency should be fuffered to grow up
so high, and not be hewed down before. And some great injury is offered to
the bestowers of prefermentes, that they are made obiectes to the danger of
insufficie^t boldness, which ought to be cut of by sufficient modesty, who
prete^deth the claim to be her own of duty, and to whom the patrones, would
rediliest yield, if they could discern, and were not abused by the worthy
themselves, which lend the unworthy the worth of their countenance to deceive
the disposers, and to beguile their own selves. But blind bayard, if he have
any burden that is worth the taking down, and bestowing somwhere else, will be
far bolder the^ a better horse, and so far from shame, as he will not
shrink to offer himself to the richest sadle, being in deed no better then a
blind jade and seeking to occupy the stawle where Bucephalus the brave horse
of duty ought to stand. And in this case of preferrement, store is lightely
the greatest enemy to the best choice, because in number no condition will be
offered, which will not be admitted, though some do refuse. The preventing of
all or most of these inconveniences, I do take to be in the right sorting of
wits at the first, when learning shall be left to them alone, whom nature
does allow by evident signs, and such sent away to some other trades, as are
made to that end. Whereby the sorters are to have thanks in the end of both
the parties, which finding themselves fitted in the best kind of their
natural calling, must of necessity honor them, which used such foresight in
their first bestowing.

Thus much have I marked in clipping of, of that multitude which oppresses
learning with too too many, as too too many wheresoever they be, ouercharge the
soil in all professions. For the matter whereon to live justly and truly being
within compass, and the men which must live upon it, being still without end,
must not desire of maintenance specially if it be joined with a port, wring a
number to the wall, to get whereon to live? I need pinch no particular where
the general is so sore gauled. Mark but those professions and occupations,
which be most cloyed up with number, whether they be bookish or not, and way
the poorer sort, whereon at the last the pinching does light, though it pass
many hands before, if to great a multitude making to great a state do not
prove a shrew, then am I deceived: so that it were good there were stripping
used, and that be time in younger years. For youth being let go forward upon
hope, and chekt with despair while it rometh without purueyaunce, makes
marvelous a do before it will die. And if no miserable shift will serve at
home, very defection to the foe, and common enemy will send them abroad, to
seek for that, which in such a case they are sure to find. Wherefore as
countenance in the ouerflowing number, which finds place in a state does
infect extremely, by seeking out unlawful and corrosiue maintenance: so
roming in the vnbestowed offaull, which finds no place in a state, does
festure fellonly, by seeking to shake it, with most rebellious enterprises.

Chapter 38. That young maidens are to be set to learning, which is proved, by
the custom of our country, by our duty toward them, by their natural
abilities, and by the worthy effects of such as have been well trained. The
end whereunto their educatio^ serves, which is the cause why and how much they
learn. Which of them are to learn, when they are to begin to learn. What and
how much they may learn. Of whom and where they ought to be taught.
WHen I did appoint the persons, which were to receive the benefit of
education: The necessity of this title.
I did not exclude young maidens, and therefore seeing I made them one branch
of my division, I must of force say somewhat more of them. A thing perhaps which
some will think might well enough have been past over with silence, as not
belonging to my purpose, which profess the education of boys, and the
general train in that kind. But seeing I begin so low as the first
Elementarie, wherein we see that young maidens be ordinarily trained, how could
I seem not to see them, being so apparently taught?

And to prove that they are to be trained, I find four special reasons,
whereof any one, much more all may persuade any their most adversary, much more
me, which am for them with The proofs why they are to learn.
The first is the manner and custom of my country, which allowing them to
learn, will be loathe to be contraried by any of her countrymen. The second is
the duty, which we owe unto them, whereby we are charged in conscience, not
to leave them lame, in that which is for them. towardness, which God by nature
effects in that sex, when country does allow it, our duty does enforce it,
their aptness calls for it, their excellency commandes it: and dare private
conceit, once seem to withstand where so great, and so rare circunstances do
so earnestly commend.

But for the better understanding of these four reasons, I will examine every
of them, somewhat nearer, as inducers to the truth, ear I deal with the train.
For the first: If I should seem to enforce any novelty, The custom of our
ountrey.
I might seem ridiculous, and never se that thing take place, which I tender
so much: but considering, the custom of my country has delivered me of that
care, which has made the maidens train her own approved travel, what
absurdity am I in, to say that is true, which my country dare auow, and daily
does try? I set not young maidens to public grammar schools, a thing not used
in my country, I send them not to the universities, having no president
thereof in my country, I allow them learning with distinction in degrees, with
difference of their calling, with respect to their ends, wherefore they
learn, wherein my country confirms my opinion. We see young maidens be
taught to read and write, and can do both with praise: we hear them sing and
play: and both passing well, we know that they learn the best, and finest of
our learned languages, to the admiration of all men. For the daiely spoken
toungues and of best reputation in our time, who so shall deny that they may
not compare even with our kind in the best degree, they will claim no other
combat, then to talk with him in that very tongue, who shall seek to taint
them for it. These things our country does stand to, these qualities their
parents procure them, as either opportunity of circunstance will serve, or
their own power will extend unto, or their daughters towardness does offer
hope, to be preferred by, for singularity of endowment, either in marriage, or
some other mean. Nay do we not see in our country, some of that sex so
excellently well trained, and so rarely qualified, either for the toungues
themselves, or for the matter in the toungues: as they may be opposed by way of
comparison, if not preferred as beyond comparison, even to the best Roman or
Greekish parago^nes be they never so much praised: to the German or French
gentlewymen, by late writers so well liked: to the Italian ladies who dare write
themselves, and deserve fame for so doing? whose excellency is so geason, as
they be rather wonders to gaze at, then presidentes to follow. And is that to
be called in question, which we both daily see in many, and wonder at in some?
I dare be bold therefore to admit young maidens to learn, seeing my country
gives me leave, and her custom stands for me.

Duty.
For the second point. The duty which we owe them does straightly command us to
see them well brought up. For what be young maidens in respect of our sex? Are
they not the seminary of our succession? the natural frye, from whence we are
to choose our natural, next, and most necessary freindes? The very self same
creatures, which were made for our comfort, the only good to garnish our
alonenesse, the nearest companions in our weal or woe? the peculiar and
priuiest partakers in all our fortunes? borne for us to life, bound to us till
death? And can we in conscience but carefully think of them, which are so many
ways linked unto us? Is it either nothing, or but some small thing, to have
our childrens mothers well furnished in mind, well strengthened in body?
which desire by them to maintain our succession? or is it not their good to be
so well garnished, which good being defeated in them by our indiligence, of
whom they are to have it, does it not charge us with breach of duty, because
they have it not? They are committed and commended unto us, as pupilles unto
tutours, as bodies unto heads, nay as bodies unto souls: so that if we tender
not their education duetifully, they may urge that against us, if at any time
either by their own right, or by our default, they win the upper room and
make us stand bare head, or be bolder with us to.

They that write of the use of our bodies, do greatly blame such parents, as
suffer not their children to use the left hand, as well as the right, because
thereby they weaken their strength and the use of their limbs: and can we be
without blame, who seek not to strengthen that, which was once taken from us,
and yet taryeth with us, as a part of us still: knowing it to be the weaker? Or
is there any better mean to strengthen their mind, then that knowledge of
God, of religion, of civil, of domestical duties, which we have by our
train, and ought not to deny them, being comprised in books, and is to be
compassed in youth?

That some exercise of body ought to be used, some ordinary stirring ought to
be enjoined, some provision for private and peculiar trainers ought to be made:
not only the ladies of Lacedaemon will swear, but all the world will sooth,
if they do but wey, that it is to much to weaken our own selves by not
strengthening their side. That cunning poet for judgment in matter, and great
philosopher for secrecy in nature, our well known Virgill, saw in a goodly
horse that was offered unto Augustus Caesar an infirmity vnperceaued by either
looker on or any of his stable, which came as he said by some weakness in the
damme, and was confessed to be true. Galene and the whole family of Physicians
ripping up our infirmities, which be not to be avoided, places the seminary
and original, engraffed in nature, as our greatest and nearest foes. And
therefore to be prevented by the parents, thorough considerate train, the best
and fairest mean, to better weak nature: so that of duty they are to be
cared for. And what care in duty is greater, then this in train?

Natural Towardness.
Their natural towardness which was my third reason does most manifestly call
upon us, to see them well brought up. If nature have given them abilities to
prove excellent in their kind, and yet thereby in no point to let their most
laudable duties in marriage and match, but rather to bewtifie them, with most
singular ornaments, are not we to be condemned of extreme vnnaturallnes, if we
gay not that by discipline, which is given them by nature? That naturally they
are so richely endowed, all Philosophy is full, Proclus upon Platoes common
weal, and Theodorus Asinaeus upon the question, whether men and wymen have all
virtues common.
no Divinity denies. Plato and his Academikes say, that all virtues be
indifferent, nay all one in man and woman: saving that they be more strong and
more durable in men, weaker and more variable in wymen, Xeno and his Stoikes
though they esteem the ods between man and woman naturally to be as great as
the difference, between an heavenly and an earthly creature, which Plato did
not, making them both of one mould, yet they grant them equality and
samenesse in virtue, though they deliver the strength and constancy over unto
men, as properly belonging unto that side. Aristotle and his Peripatetikes
confessing them both to be of one kind, though to different uses in nature,
according to those differences in condition, appoints them differences in
virtue, and yet wherein they agree: alloateth them the same. When they have
concluded thus of their natural abilities, and so absolutely entitled them
unto all virtues, they rest not there, but proceed on further to their
education in this sort. That as naturally every one has some good assigned
him, whereunto he is to aspire, and not to cease until he have obtained it,
unless he will by his own negligence reject that benefit, which the
munificence of nature has liberally bestowed on him: so there is a certain
mean, whereby to win that perfitly, which nature of her self does wish us
franckly. This mean they call education, whereby the natural inclinations be
gently carried on, if they will courteously follow, or otherwise be hastened, if
they must needs be forced, until they ariue at that same best, which nature
bends unto with full sail, in those fairer, which follow the train
willingly, in those meaner, which must be bet unto it. And yet even there where
it is sorest labored, it works some effect unworthy of repentance, and is
better forced on in youth, then forgon in age: rather in children with fear,
then not in men with grief. Now as the inclinations be common to both the
kinds, so they divide the mean of education indifferently between both. Which
being thus, as both the truth tells the ignorant, and reading shows the
learned, we do well then perceive by natural men, and Philosophical reasons,
that young maidens deserve the train: because they have that treasure, which
belongs unto it, bestowed on them by nature, to be bettered in them by
nurture. Neither does religion contrary religious nature. For the Lord of
nature, which created that motion to continue the consequence of all living
creatures, by succession to the like, by education to the best, appointing
either kind the limittes of their duty, and requiring of either the
perfourmaunce thereof, allows all such ordinary and orderly means, as by his
direction in his word may bring them both from his appointment to their
perfourmance, from the first starting place, to the outmost gole: that is unto
that good, which he has assigned them, by such ways as he has willed them:
so that both by nature the most obedient servant, and by the Lord of nature
our most bountiful God, we have it in commandment not only to train up our
own sex, but also our female, seeing he has to require an account for
natural talentes of both the parties, us for directing them: them for
perfourmance of our direction.

The excellent effects of those women, Excellent effects.
which have been very well trained, do well declare, that they deserve the
best training: which reason was my last in order, but not my least in force, to
prove their more then common excellency. This is a point of such galancie, if
my purpose were to praise the^, as it is but to give precept, how to make them
praiseworthie, as I might sooner weary my self with reckening up of writers,
and calling worthy wymen to be witnesses in their own cause then worthily to
express their weight and worth, because I believe that to be most true, which
is cronicled of them. I will not meddle with any more writers to whom wymen are
most bound, for best speaking of them, and most spreading of their virtues,
then with one only man a single witness in person, but above all singularity
in proof: the learned and honest Plutarch, whose name emporteth a princis
treasure, whose writings witness an unwearied travel, whose plain truth was
never tainted. Would he so learned, so honest, so true, so stern, have become
such a trumpet for their fame, to triumph by, so have gratified that sex, whom
he stood not in awe of: so have beutified their doings, whom he might not have
meddled with, so have auaunced their honor, to hasard his own sex, by setting
them so hie, if he had not resolutely known the truth of his subject? he durst
be so bold with his own Emperor the good Traian, to fore his scholar, in his
epistle to him before his book of governing the common weal, as to say and
call his book to witness thereof, that if he went to govern, and overthrew the
state, he did it not by the authority of Plutarch, as disauowing his scholar,
if he departed from his lessons. And would that courage have been forced to
frame a false argument? or is so great a truth not to have so great a credit?
howsouer some of the lighter heads have lewdly belyed them, or vainly accused
them: yet the very best and grauest writers think worthily of them, and make
report of them with honor. Ariosto and Boccacio will beloth to be termed
light being so great doctors in their divinity, yet they be somewhat over
heavy to wymen, without any great weight as in general the Italian writers
be, which in the midst of their loving leuities still glaunce at their
lightness, and that so beyound all manhood, as they feel their own fault, and
despair of reconcilement, though they cry still for pardon. As those men know
well, which will rather meruell, that I have red those books, then mistrust my
report, which they know to be true. In all good and generally authorized
histories, and in many particular discourses, it is most evident, that not
only private and particular wymen, being very well trained, but also great
princesses and gallant troops of the same sex have showed fourth in them
selves marvelous effects of virtue and valor. And good reason why. For where
naturally they have to show, if educatio^ procure show, is it a thing to be
wondered at? Or is their singularity less in nature, because wymen be less
accustomed to show it, and not so commonly employed, as we men be? Yet
whenever they be, by their dealinges they show us that they have no dead
flesh nor any base mettle. Well, I will knit up this conclusion and burn day
light no longer, to prove that carefully, which all men may see clearly, and
there adversaries grieve at, because it confutes their folly, which upon some
private error of their own, to seem fautles in words, where they be
faithles in deeds, blame silly wymen as being the only cause why they went
awrie.

That young maidens can learn, nature does give them, and that they have
learned, our experience does teach us, with what care to themselves, them
selves can best witness, with what comfort to us, what foreign example can more
assure the world, then our diamond at home? our most dear sovereign lady and
princess, by nature a woman, by virtue a worthy, not one of the nine, but the
tenth above the nine, to persit in her person that absolute number, Philo
Iudaeus in his discourse of the ten commandments rips out the perfitnes of
that number.

Plutarch in his book of wymens virtues.


which is no fitter to comprehend all absolutnes in Arithmetike, then she is
known to contain al perfectio^s in nature, all degrees in valor, and to
become a president to those nine worthy men, as Apollo is accounted to the nine
famous wymen, she to virtues and virtuous men, he to muses, and learned wymen:
thereby to prove Plutarches conclusion true, that oppositions of virtues by way
of comparison is their chief commendation. Is Anacreon a good poet, what say
you to Sappho? Is Bacis a good prophet, what say you to Sibill? was Sesostris a
famous prince, what say you to Semiramis? was Seruius a noble king, what say
you to Tanaquill? was Brutus a stowt man, what say you to to Porcia? Thus
reasons Plutarch, and so do I, is it honorable for Apollo a man to have the
presidencie over nine wymen, the resemblers of learning? then more honorable it
is for our most worthy Princess, to have the presidencie over nine men, the
paragons of virtue: and yet to be so familiarly acquainted with the nine muses,
as they are in strife who may love her best, for being best learned? for whose
excellent knowledge and learning, we have most cause to rejoice, who taste of
the fruit: and posterity to praise, which shall maintain her memory: though
I wish their memory abridged, to have our taste enlarged: our proving
le^gthened, to have their praising shortened: to be glad that we have her, not
to grieve, that we had her: as that omnipote^t god, which gave her unto us, when
we had more need of such a prince, then she of such a people, will preserve
her for us, I do nothing dout, that we both may serve him, she as our careful
sovereign, to set forth his glory, we as her faithful subjects to submit our
selves to it.

If no story did tell it, if no state did allow it, if no example did confirm
it, that young maidens deserve the trayning, this our own myrour, the majesty
of her sex, does prove it in her own person, and commendes it to our reason.
We have besides her highness as vndershining stars, many singular ladies and
gentlewymen so skillful in all cunning, of the most laudable, and loueworthy
qualities of learning, as they may well be alleged for a president to praise,
not for a pattern to prove like by: though hope have a head, and nature be no
nigard, if education do her duty, and will seek to resemble even where
presidentes be passing, both hope to attain to, and possibility to seem to.
Wherefore by these profes, I take it to be very clear, that I am not far
ouershot, in admitting them to train, being so traineable by nature, and so
notable by effects.

But now having granted them the benefit and society of our education, we must
assign the end, wherefore their train shall serve, whereby we may apply it the
better. Our own train is without restraint for either matter or manner,
because our employment is so general in all things* The end of learning in
young maids.
theirs is within limit, and so must their train be. If a young maiden be to be
trained in respect of marriage, obedience to her head, and the qualities which
look that way, must needs be her best way: if in regard of necessity to
learn how to live, artificial train must furnish out her trade: if in
respect of ornament to beawtifie her birth, and to honor her place, rareties
in that kind and seemly for that kind do best beseem such: if for
government, not denied them by God, and devised them by men, the greatness of
their calling does call for great gifts, and general excellencies for
general occurrences. Wherefore having these different ends always in eye,
we may point them their train in different degrees. But some Timon will say,
what should wymen do with learning? Such a churlish carper will never pick out
the best, but be always ready to blame the worst. If all men used all points of
learning well, we had some reason to allege against wymen, but seeing misuse
is common to both the kinds, why blame we their infirmity, whence we free not
our selves? Some wymen abuse writing to that end, some reading to this, some
all that they learn any way, to some other ill some way. And I pray you
what do we? I do not excuse ill: but bar them from accusing, which be as bad
themselves: unless they will first condemn themselves, and so proceed in
their plea with more discretion after a repentant discovery. But they will not
deal thus, they will rather retire for shame, and prove to be nonsuite, then
confess themselves faulty, and blush for their blaming. Wherefore as the
community of virtues, argues the community of vices naturally in both: so
let us in that point enterchaunge forgiveness, and in hope of the virtues
direct to the best, not for fear of the vices, make an open gap for them.
Wherefore in directing of that train, which I do assign unto young maidens, I
will follow this method, and show which of them be to learn, and when, what
and how much, where and of whom.

As concerning those which are to be trained, Which and when.
and when they are to begin their train, this is my opinion. The same
restraint in cases of necessity, where they conveniently cannot, and the same
freedom in cases of liberty, when they commodiously may, being reserved to
parents in their daughters, which I allowed them in their sons, and the same
regard to the weakness and strength of their wits and bodies, the same care
for their womanly exercises, for help of their health, and strength of their
limbs, being remitted to their considerations, which I assigned them in their
sons, I do think the same time fit for both, not determinable by years, but
by ripeness of wit, to conceive without tiring, and strength of body to
travel without wearying. For though the girls seem commonly to have a
quicker ripening in wit, then boys have, for all that seeming, yet it is not
so. Their natural weakness which cannot hold long, delivers very soon, and
yet there be as prating boys, as there be prattling wenches. Besides, their
brains be not so much charged, neither with weight nor with multitude of
matters, as boys heads be, and therefore like empty caske they make the
greater noise. As those men which seem to be very quick witted by some sudden
pretty answer, or some sharp reply, be not always most burdened, neither
with lettes, nor learning, but out of small store, they offer us still the
floor, and hold most of the mother. Which sharpness of wit though it be
within them, as it bewraeth it self: yet it might dwell within them a great
while, without bewraying of it self, if study kept them still, or great
doings did dull them: as slight dealinges and imperious, do commonly maintain
that kind of courage. Boys have it always, but oftimes hide it, because their
stuff admits time: wenches have it always, and always bewray it, because
their timber abides no tarying. And seeing it is in both, it deserves care in
both, neither to timely to stir them, nor let them loyter to long. As for
bodies the maidens be more weak, most commonly even by nature, as of a moonish
influence, and all our whole kind is weak of the mother side, which when she
was first made, even then weakened the man's side. Therefore great regard must be
had to them, no less, nay rather more then to boys in that time. For in
process of time, if they be of worth themselves, they may so match, as the
parent may take more pleasure in his sons by law, the^ in his heirs by
nature. They are to be the principal pillars in the upholding of housholdes,
and so they are likely to prove, if they prove well in training. The dearest
comfort that man can have, if they incline to good: the nearest corrosiue if
they tread awry. And therefore charilie to be cared for, bearing a jewel of
such worth, in a vessel of such weakness. Thus much for there persons whom I
turn over to the parents ability for charge: to their own capacity for
conceit: in each degree some, from the lowest in menaltie, to the highest in
mistriship.

The time has tied it self to strength in both parts, for the body to
travel, for the soul to conceive. The exercises pray in no case to be forgot
as a preservative to the body, and a conserve for the soul.

For the matter what they shall learn, What.
thus I think, following the custom of my country, which in that that is
usual does lead me on boldly, and in that also which is most rare, does show
me my path, to be already trodden. So that I shall not need to err, if I mark
but my guide well. Where rare excellencies in some wymen, do but show us some
one or two parents good success, in their daughters learning, there is
neither president to be fetched, nor precept to be framed. For precepts be to
conduct the common, but these singularities be above the common, presidentes be
for hope, those pictures pass beyond al hope. And yet they serve for proof to
proceed by in way of argument, that wymen can learn if they will, and may
learn what they list, when they bend their wits to it. To learn to read is
very common, where conuenientnes does serve, and writing is not refused, where
opportunity will yield it.

Reading if for nothing else it were, Reading.
as for many things else it is, is very needful for religion, to read that
which they must know, and ought to perform, if they have not whom to hear, in
that matter which they read: or if their memory be not steadfast, by reading to
revive it. If they hear first and after read of the self same argument,
reading confirms their memory. Here I may not omit many and great
contentmentes, many and sound comfortes, many and manifoulde delites, which
those wymen that have skill and time to read, without hindering their
houswifery, do continually receive by reading of some comfortable and wise
discourses, penned either in form of history, or for direction to live by.

As for writing, Writing.
though it be discommended for some private cariages, wherein we men also, no
less then wymen, bear oftentimes blame, if that were a sufficient exception
why we should not learn to write, it has his commodity where it fills in
match, and helps to enrich the goodmans mercerie. Many good occasions are
oftentimes offered, where it were better for them to have the use of their pen,
for the good that comes by it, then to wish they had it, when the default is
felt: and for fear of evil, which cannot be avoided in some, to auert that
good, which may be commodious to many.

Music.
Music is much used, where it is to be had, to the parents delight, while the
daughters be young, more then to their own, which commonly proves true, when
the young wenches become young wives. For then lightly forgetting Music when
they learn to be mothers, they give it in manifest evidence, that in their
learning of it, they did more seek to please their parents, then to pleasure
them selves. But howsoever it is, seeing the thing is not rejected, if with the
learning of it once, it may be retained still (as by order it may) it is ill
let go, which is got with great pains, and bought with some cost. The
learning to sing and play by the book, a matter soon had, when Music is
first minded, which still preserve the cunning, though discontinuance disturb.
And seeing it is but little which they learn, and the time as little wherein
they learn, because they haste still on toward husbands, it were expedient,
that they learned perfitly, and that with the loss of their penny, they lost
not their pennieworth also, besides the loss of their time, which is the
greatest loss of all. I meddle not with nedles, nor yet with houswiferie,
though I think it, and know it, to be a principal commendation in a woman: to
be able to govern and direct her household, to look to her house and family,
to provide and keep necessaries, though the goodman pay, to know the force of
her kitchen, for sickness and health, in her self and her charge: because I
deal only with such things as be incident to their learning. Which seeing
the custom of my country does permit, I may not mislike, nay I may wish it
with warrant, the thing being good and well beseeming their sex. This is the
most, so far as I remember, which they commonly use in youth, and participate
with us in. If any parent do privately train up his children of either sex in
any other private santsie of his own, I cannot commend it, because I do not
know it, and if it fortune to die within his private walls, I cannot give it
life by public rehearsal. The common and most known is that, which I have
said.

The next point how much, How much
is a question of more inquiry, and therefore requires advised handling. To
appoint besides these things, which are already spoken of, how much further
any maid may proceed in matter of learning and train, is a matter of some
moment, and concerns no mean ones. And yet some petie lowlinges, do
sometimes seek to resemble, where they have small reason, and will needs
seem like, where their petieship cannot light, using show for a shadow, where
they have no fitter shift. And therefore in so doing, they pass beyond the
bounds both of their birth, and their best beseeming. Which then discovers a
very mere folly, when a mean parent traineth up his daughter hie in those
properties, which I shall straight way speak of, and she matcheth low, but
within her own compass. For in such a case those ouerraught qualities for the
toyousnesse thereof being misplaced in her, do cause the young woman rather to
be toyed withal, as by them giving sign of some idle conceit otherwise, then
to be thought very well of, as one wisely brought up. There is a comlynesse in
each kind, and a decentnesse in degree, which is best observed, when each one
prouides according to his power, without ouerreaching. If some odd property do
work preferrement beyond proportion, it commonly stays there, and who so
shootes at the like, in hope to hit, may sooner miss: because the ways to
miss be so many, and to hit is but one, and wounders which be but onse seen,
be no examples to resemble. Every maid may not hope to speed, as she would
wish, because some one has sped better then she could wish.

Where the question is how much a woman ought to learn, the answer may be,
so much as shall be needful. If that also come in doubt, the return may be,
either so much as her parents conceive of her in hope, if her parentage be
mean, or provide for her in state, if her birth bear a sail. For if the
parents be of calling, and in great account, and the daughters capable of some
singular qualities, many commendable effects may be wrought thereby, and the
young maidens being well trained are very soon commended to right honorable
matches, whom they may well beseem, and answer much better, their qualities
in state having good correspondence, with their matches of state, and their
wisedoms also putting to helping hand, for the procuring of their common good.
Not here to note, what fruit the common weal may reap, by such wits so
worthily advanced, besides their own private. If the parents be mean, and
the maidens in their training show forth at the very first some singular
rareness like to ensue, if they flourish but their natural, there hope may
grow great, that some great match may as well like of a young maiden
excellently qualified, as most do delight in brute or brutish things for some
strange quality, either in nature to embrase, or in art to marvel. And yet
this hope may fail. For neither have great personages always that judgment,
nor young maidens always that fortune, though the maidens remain the gainers,
for they have the qualities to comfort their mediocrity, and those great ones
want judgment to set forth their nobility.

This how much consists either in perfiting of those forenamed four, reading
well, writing fair, singing sweet, playing fine, beyond all cry and above all
comparison, that pure excellency in things but ordinary may cause
exaraordinarie liking: or else in skill of languages annexed to these four,
that more good gifts may work more wonder. For mean is a maime where
excellency is the marvel. To hope for hie marriages, is good meat, but not for
mowers, to have leisure to take delight in these gentlewomanly qualities, is no
work for who will: Nay to be a paragon among princes, to use such
singularities, for the singular good of the general state, and the wonder of
her person, were a wish in despair, were not true proof the just warrant,
that such a thing may be wished, because in our time we have found it, even
then, when we did wish it most, and in the end more marvelous, then at first
we durst have wished. The euentes in these wymen which we see in our days, to
have been brought up in learning, do rule this conclusion. That such personages
as be borne to be princes, or matches to great peers, or to furnish out such
trains, for some peculiar ornaments to their place and calling, are to
receive this kind of education in the highest degree, that is convenient for
their kind. But princely maidens above all; because occasion of their height
stands in need of such gifts, both to honor themselves, and to discharge
the duty, which the countries committed to their hands, do daily call for,
and besides what match is more honorable, then when desert for rare qualities,
does join it self, with highenesse in degree? I fear no workmanship in wymen
to give them Geometry and her sister sciences: to make them Mathematicalls,
though I mean them Music: nor yet bars to plead at, to leave them the
laws: nor vrinalls to look on, to lend them some Physic, though the skill of
herbs have been the study of nobility, by the Persian story, and much
commended in wymen: nor pulpittes to preach in, to utter their Divinity:
though by learning of some language, they can talk of the lining: and for
direction of their life, they must be afforded some, though not as preachers
and leaders: yet as honest perfourmers, and virtuous livers. Philosophy would
furnish their general discourses, if their leisure could entend it: but the
knowledge of some toungues, either of substance in respect of deeper learning,
or account for the present time may very well be wished them: and those
faculties also, which do belong to the furniture of speech, may be very well
allowed them, because toungues be most proper, where they do naturally arm. If
I should allow them the pencill to draw, as the pen to write, and thereby
entitle them to all my Elementarie principles, I might have reason for me. For
it neither requires any great labor to fraye young maidens from it, and it
would help their nedle, to beautify their works: and it is maintainable by
very good examples even of their own kind. Timarete the virtuous, daughter to
Mycon: Irene the courteous, Plin. lib. 35. cap. 11.
daughter to Cratinus: Aristarete the absolute, daughter to Nearchus: Lala the
eloquent, and ever maid of Cyzicus: Martia the courageous, daughter to Varro
the best learned and most loved of any Romain, and many mo besides, did so use
the pencill, as their fame therefore is so much the fairer, because the fact in
that sex is so seldom and rare.

And is not a young gentlewoman, think you, thorougly furnished, which can
read plainly and distinctly, write fair and swiftly, sing clear and
sweetly, play well and finely, understand and speak the learned languages, and
those toungues also which the time most embraseth, with some Logical help to
chop, and some Rhetoric to brave. Besides the matter which is gathered, while
these toungues be either learned, or looked on, as words must have seats, no
less then raiment bodies. Were it any argument of an unfurnished maiden,
besides these qualities to draw clean in good proportion, and with good
symmetrie? Now if she be an honest woman, and a good housewife to, were she not
worth the wishing, and worthy the shryning? and yet such there be, and such we
know. Or is it likely that her children shall be ear a whit the worse brought
up, if she be a Laelia, an Hortensia, or a Cornelia, which were so endued and
noted for so doing? Plut. (...).
It is written of Eurydice the Epirote, that after she began to have children,
she sought to have learning, to bring the^ up skilfully, whom she brought forth
naturally. Which thing she performed in deed, a most careful mother, and a
most skillful mistress. For which her well doing, she has won the reward,
to be enrowled among the most rare matrones.

Where and when.
Now there is nothing left to end this treatise of young maidens, but where and
under whom, they are to learn, which question will be sufficiently resolved,
upon consideration of the time how long they are to learn, which time is
commonly till they be about thirtene or fouretene years old, wherein as the
matter, which they must deal with all, cannot be very much in so little time,
so the perfitting thereof requires much travel, though their time be so little,
and there would be some show afterward, wherein their trayning did avail them.
They that may continue some long time at learning, thorough the state and
ability of their parents have also their time and place sutably appointed, by
the foresight of their parents. So that the time resting in private forecast,
I can not reduce it to general precept, but only thus far, that in
perfitnes it may show, how well it was employed.

The places.
The places wherein they learn be either public, if they go forth to the
Elementarie schole, or private if they be taught at home. The teacher either of
their own sex, or of ours.

For public places, because in that kind there is no public provision, but
such as the professors of their training do make of them selves, I can say
little, but leave them to that and to their parents circumspection, which both
in their being abroad, during their minority, and in bringing them up at home
after their minority, I know will be very diligent to have all things well.
For their teachers, their own sex were fittest in some respects, but ours
frame them best, and with good regard to some circumstances will bring them up
excellently well, specially if their parents be either of learning to judge,
or of authority to command, or of both, to do both, as experience has taught
us in those, which have proved so well. The greater borne Ladies and
gentlewymen, as they are to enjoy the benefit of this education most, so they
have best means to prosecute it best, being neither restrained in wealth, but
to have the best teachers, and greatest helps: neither abbridged in time, but
to ply all at full. And thus I take my leave of young maidens and gentlewymen,
to whom I wish as well, as I have said well of them.

Chapter 39. Of the traning up of young gentlemen. Of private and public
education, with their general goods and illes. That there is no better way for
gentlemen to be trained by in any respect then the common is being well
appointed. Of richmens children which be no gentlemen. Of nobility in
general. Of gentlemanlie exercises. What it is to be a nobleman, or a
gentleman. That infirmites in noble houses be not to be triumphed over. The
causes and grounds of nobility. Why so many desire to be gentlemen. That
gentlemen ought to profess learning and liberal sciences for many good and
honorable effects. Of traveling into foreign countries: with all the
branches allowance and dissallowance thereof: and that it were to be wished,
that gentlemen would profess, to make sciences liberal in use, which are
liberal in name. Of the trayning up of a young Prince.
IN the last title I did declare at large, how young maide^s in each degree were
to be auaunced in learning, which me thought was very incident to my purpose,
because they be counter-braunches to us in the kind of mortal and reasonable
creatures, and also for that in each degree of life, they be still our mates,
and sometime our mistresses, through the benefit of law, and honorablenes of
birth. Now considering they join allway with us in number and nearenes, and
sometime exceed us in dignity and calling: as they communicate with us in all
qualities, and all honors even up to the scepter, so why ought they not in any
wise but be made communicantes with us in education and train, to perform
that part well, which they are to play, for either equality with us, or
soueraintie above us? Here now ensues another title of marvelous importance,
for the kind of people, whereof I am to entreat: because their state is still
in the superlatiue, and the greatest executions be theirs by degree, though
sometime they leese them by their own default, and set them over to such, as
nature makes noble by ingenerate virtues. I mean the trayning up of young
gentlemen in every degree and to what so ever ascent, because even the crown
and kingdom is their height, though it come to the female, when their side
fails. For gentlemen will commonly be exempt from the common, as in title, so
also in train, refrayning the public, though they hold of the male, and
preferring the private, to be liker to maidens, whose education is most
private, because of their kind, and therefore not misliked: whereas young
gentlemen should be public, because of their use. And for not being such, they
bear some blame, as therein contrarying both all the best ordered commonweals, and all the most excellent and the learnedest writers, which bring up
even the best princes allway with great company.

But seeing they will be private, and I take upon me not to leap over any, which
light within my compass, and chiefly young gentlemen, whose ordinary greatness
is to govern our state, and to be public pillars for the prince to lean on,
and the people to stay by: their private choice commaundes me a private
consideration, which in young gentlewymen needed not any handling, because it
beseems them to be taught in in private: in gentlemen it needs, the case
being doutfull, whether private trayning be their best or no. And though this
argument succeed young maidens in order of method, I hope young gentlemen will
not be offended neither with me for the placing, seeing the other sex is in
possession of prerogative, nor with the^ for being so placed, Of private
education.
which have wone the best place.

This question for the bringing up of young gentlemen offers the deciding of
an other ordinary controversy, between public education and private, which
very name in nature is enemy to public, as enclosure is to common, and
swelling to much ouerlayeth the common, not only in education, where it both
corrupts by planting a to private habit, and is corrupted it self by a
degenerate form, but also in most things else. Yet do I not deny both
personal properties and private realities, which law does allow in private
possessions, even there, where friendship makes things to be most common by
participation. Private
I will therefore speak a little of this private train, before I pass to the
education of gentlemen. What do these two words import, private education?
Private is that, which has respect in all circumstances to some one of choice:
as public in all circumstances regards every one alike. Educatio^.
Education is the bringing up of one, not to live alone, but amongst others,
(because company is our natural cognisaunce) whereby he shall be best able to
execute those doings in life, which the state of his calling shall employ him
unto, whether public abroad, or private at home, according unto the direction
of his country whereunto he is borne, and owes his whole service. All the
functions here be public and regard every one, even where the things do seem
to be most private, because the maine direction remains in the public, and
the private must be squared, as it will best join with that: and yet we
restrain education to private, all whose circumstaunces be singular to one. As
if he that were brought up alone, should also ever live alone, as if one should
say, I will have you to deal with all, but never to see all: your end shall be
public your mean shall be private, that is to say, such a mean as has no
mind to bring you to that end, which you seem to pretend: Because naturally
private is sworn enemy to public in all euentes, as it does appear when
private gain undoes the common, though public still pretend friendship to
all that is private in distributive effects, as it is plainly seen when the
public care does help each private, and by cherishing the singular maintains
the general, whereas the private lets the public drown, so it self may
flete above. For in deed they march most what from several grounds to
several issues by most several and least suitable means, the one in nature a
rowmy palace full of most variety to content the mind, the other a close
prison, tedious to be tied to, where the sense is shakled: the one in her
kind, a liberty, a broad field, an open air, the other in the contrary
kind, a pinfold, a cage, a cloister: Neither do I take these terms to make a
fit division, where the end is still common and the abuse private. For how can
education be private? it abuses the name as it abuses the thing. If they will
say education is either good or ill, and use the natural name, the^ methinke
the disembling which is shadowed in the term private would soon appear:
though there can be no worse name then private, saving where the public does
appoint it, which in education it will not, thereby to foster her own foe:
though in possessions it do, to have subsidies to sustain, and paimentes to
maintain her great common charge.

And though in communities of kind which naturally is divided into spieces,
nature engraffe private differences for distinction sake, as reason in man to
part him from a beast, yet that difference remains one still, because there
is none better: which countenance of best cannot here be pretended, because in
education private is the worst. This private renting in sunder of persons, for
a pretended best education, which must pass on together after education is
very dangerous in all days, for for many private pushes, while every parent
can serve his own humor, be it never so distempered: by the secrecy of his
own house, not to be discovered: by the choice of his teacher, which will be
ready to follow, if he forgo not in folley: by the obedience of his child,
which must learn as he is led, or else be beaten for not learning: which must
obey as he is bid, or else lease his pare^t blessing. In public schools this
swaruing in affection from the public choice in no case can be. The master is
in eye, what he says is in ear: the doctrine is examined: the child is not
alone, and there must he learn that which is laid unto him in the hearing of
all and censure of all. Whatsoever inconveniences do grow in common schools,
(as where the dealers be men, how can there be but maimes?) yet the private is
much worse, and hatcheth more odd ills. Naturally it is not built upon unity,
brad by disunion, to seem to see more then the common man does, to seem to
prevent that by private wit, which the common does incur by unadvised folly:
to seem to gain more in secrecy, then the common gives in civility. By
cloistering from the common it will seem to keep a countenance far above
the common, even from the first cradle. Whereby it becomes the puffer up to
pride in the recluse, and the direction to disdain, by dreaming still of
bettership: the enemy to unity, between the unequal: the ouerwayning of ones
self, not compared with others, the disiointing of agreement, where the higher
contemns his inferior with skorne, and the lower does stomach his superior
with spite: the one gathering snuff, the other grudge.

This kind of train which sows the corn of dissension by difference, where
the harvest of consent is the harbor of common love, the indissoluble chain
of countriemens comfort, may very well be bettered, and much better be
forborne, because by the way it tempereth still the poison of a creeping
spite. And certainly the nature of the thing does tend this way, though
changing bytimes to better choice, or the common check, which will not be
controwled, do many and often times interrupt the course. And though the child
in process prove better, and show himself courteous, contrary to my note, and
the very nature of private education, thank natural goodness or experience
seen abroad, not the kind of education, which in her own sternnesse allows
no such courtesy, though the child see it in his parents, and find it in his
books. And sometimes also it makes him to shepish bashful, when he comes to
the light: as being unacquainted with resort: though generally he be somewhat to
childish bold, by noting nothing, but that which he breeds of himself in his
solitary train, where he is best himself, and has none to controwle him, no
not his master himself, but under confession, how so ever the title of
master do pretend authority and the name of scholar, make show of obedience
in private cloistring. I need not say all, but in this short manner, I seek
to give occasion for them to see all, which desire to sift more, both for the
matter of their learning, and the manner of their living.

Do ye know what it is for one to be acquainted with all children in his
childhood, which must live with them being men in his manhood? Is the common
bringing up being well appointed good for the common man, and not for him of
more height? and does not that deserve to be liked on in private, which is
thoroughly tried being showed forth in common, and sifted by the seeing? which
without any great alteration, for the matter of train will be very well
content to be pent up within private doors, though it mislike the cloistring,
in priuating the person. Sure that common which is well cast, must needs help
the private, as one of her parts and feed one child very well being a
general mother to all: but private be it never so well cast in the sternnesse
of his kind, still draws from the public. I count not that private which is
executed at home for a public use, in respect of the place, for so all doings
be private, but that which will be at home, as better so. And why? for the
private parties good. But it should seem generally that the question is not so
much for the manner of education, nor for the matter, wherein, but for the
place, where, as if that, which is good for all in common, should not be good
for some but in private. I must speak it under pardon. The effect commendes
the common: for that the common education in the midst of common mediocritie
brings up such wits to such excellency, as serve in all degrees, yea even
next to the highest, whereas private education in the midst of most wealth, if
it maintain it felfe with any more then bare mediocritie both of learning and
judgment, when it is at the highest, let him that has showed more, give charge
to the challenge. And yet some one young man's odnesse, though it be odd in
deed, overthrows not the question. And oftimes the report of that odnesse
which we see not in effect, but hear of in speech, falls out very lame, if
the reporters judgment be advisedly considered, though for the authority and
countenance of the man, skill give place to boldness, and silence to
civility: which otherwise would reply against it. There is no comparison
between the two kinds, set affection apart. If the private pupil chance to
come to speak, it falls out most-what dreamingly, because priuitie in train
is a punishment to the toungue: and in teaching of a language to exclude
companions of speech, is to seek to quench thrist, and yet to close the
mouth so, as no moisture can get in. If he come to write, it is lean, and
nothing but skin, and commonly bewrayes great pains in the master, which
brought forth even so much, being quite reft of all helping circunstance, to
ease his great labor, by his pupilles conference, with more company. Which is
but a small benefit to the child, that might have had much more if his course
had been changed. He can but utter that, which he hears, and he hears none
but one, which one though he know all, yet can utter but little, because what
one auditorie is two or three boys for a learned man to provoke him to
vtteraunce? If he traveled to utter, and one of judgment should stand behind
a covert to hear him, methinke he should hear a strange orator straining his
pipes, to persuade straung people, and the boy if he were alone, fast a
sleep, or if he had a fellow, playing under the bourd, with his hand or feet,
having one eye upon his talking master, and the other eye on his playing mate.
If the nine Muses and Apollo their president were painted upon the wall, he
might talk to them with out either laughing or lowering, they would serve him
for places of memory, or for hieroglyphicall partitions. If he that is taught
alone miss, as he must often, having either none, or very small company to
help his memory, which multitude serves for in common schools, where the
hearing of many confirms the sitter by, shall he run to his master? if he
do that boldly, it will breed contempt in the end: if he do it with fear, it
will dull him for not daring. And though it be very good for the child, not to
be afraid to ask counsel of his master in that, where he doubts, yet if he
find easy entertainment he will doubt still, rather then do his diligence,
not to have cause to doubt. If the private scholar prove cunninger afterward,
then I conceive he can be by private education, there was some foreign help
which auaunced him abroad, it was not his train within being tied to the
stake, which offers that violence to my assertion.

Why is private teaching so much used?
But what leads the private, and why is it so much used? there must needs be
some reason, which alieneth the particular parente from the public discipline,
which I do grant to very great ones, because the further they rise from the
multitude in number, and above them in degree, the more private they grow as in
person, so in train: and the prince himself being one and singular must
needs embrace the private discipline, wherein he shows great valor in his
person, if by private means, he mount above the public. And yet if even the
greatest, could have his train so cast, as he might have the company of a
good choice number, wherein to see all differences of wits, how to discern
of all, which must deal with all, were it any sacrilege?

But for the gentleman generally, which flies not so high, but fluttereth some
little above the ordinary common, why does he make his choice rather to be like
them above, which still grow priuater, then to like of them below, which can
grow no lower, and yet be supporters, to stay up the whole, and liker to
himself, then he is to the highest? To have his child learn better manners,
and more virtuous conditions? As bad at home as abroad, and brought into
schools, not bred there. To avoid confusion and multitude? His child shall
mark more, and so prove the wiser: the multitude of examples being the means
to discretion. Nay in a number, though he find some lewd, whom to fly, he
shall spy many toward, whom to follow: and withal in schools he shall
perceive that vice is punished, and virtue praised, which where it is not,
there is danger to good manners, but not in schools, where it is very
diligently observed, because in public view, necessity is the spur. To
keep him in health by biding at home for fear of infection abroad? Death is
within doors, and dainties at home have destroyed more children then danger
abroad. Does affection work stay, and can ye not part from your childs
presence? That is to fond. And any cause else admittes controwlement, saving
only state in princes children, and princelike personages, which are to far
above the common: by reason of great circunstance. And yet their circunstance
were better, if they saw the common, over whom they command, and with due
circumspectnesse could avoid all dangers, whereunto the greatest be commonly
subject, by great desires, not in themselves to have, but in others that hope,
which make the greatness of their gain their color against justice, where
they injury most. It is enough that is meant, though I say no more: besides
that by a Persian principle, the seldom seeing in princes, works admiration
the more, when they are to be seen.

Use common schools to the best, Send your private M. with your child to the
common school.
join a tutor to your child, let Quintilian be your guide, all things will
be well done, where such care is at hand, and that is much better done, which
is done before witness to encourage the child. Comparisons inspire virtues,
hearing spreads learning: one is none and if he do something at home, what
would he do with company? It is never settled, that wants an adversary, to
quicken the spirits, to stir courage, to find out affections.

For the masters value, which is content to be cloistered, I will say nothing,
entertainment makes digressions even to that, which we like not. But if it
would please the private parent, to send his son with his private master to
a common school, that might do all parties very much good. For the schole
being well ordered, and appointed for matter and manner to learn, where number
is pretended to cumber the master, and to mince his labor so, as each one can
have but some little, though his voice be like the Sun, which at one time with
one light shines upon all: yet the private scholar, by the help of his
private master in the common place has his full applying, and the whole
Sun, if no less will content him. The common master thereby willbe careful
to have the best: the private teacher will be curiouse to come but to the very
best: whereby both the private and public scholars shall be sure to receive the
best. And if the public master be chosen accordingly, as allowance will
allure even the principal best, private cunning will not disdain to be one
degree beneth, where he knows himself bettered. And thereby disagreement
between the two teachers willbe quite excluded which only might be the mean
to mar both my meaning and Qintilianes counsel. Sure my resolution is, which
if it win no liking abroad may return again homeward, and be welcome to
his master, that that which must be continued and exercised in public, the
residue of ones life, were best to be learned in public, from the beginning of
ones life. And if ye will needs be private, make your private public, and
draw as many to your private master, for your private sons sake, seeing you
are able to provide rowme, because that will prove to be best for your child,
as shall be able to keep some form of our multitude, that he may have one
company before him to follow and learn of, an other beneth to teach and vaunt
over, the third of his own standing, with whom to strive for praise of
forwardnes. Whereby it falls out still, that that private is best, which
consists of some chosen number for a private end: and that multitude best,
where choice restraines number, for the public service: for in deed the
common schools be as much ouercharged with too many, as any private is with to
few. Which how it may either be helped, or in that confusion be better handled,
I will hereafter in my private executions declare, seeing I have noted the
defect.

To knit up this question therefore of private and public education, I do take
public to be simply the better: as being more upon the stage, where faults be
more seen, and so sooner amended, as being the best mean both for virtue and
learning, which follow in such sort, as they be first planted. What virtue is
primate? wisdom to forsee, what is good for a desert? courage to defend,
where there is no assailant? temperance to be modest, where none is to chaleng?
Justice to do right, where none is to demand it? what learning is for
alonnesse? did it not come from collection in public dealinges, and ca^ it
show her force in private affairs, which seem afraid of the public? Compare
the best in both the kinds, there the ods will appear. If ye compare a private
scholar, of a very fine capacity, and worthy the open field, so well trained by
a dilligent and a discreat master as that train will yeald: with a blockhead
brought up under a public teacher, not of the best sort, or if in comparison
ye match a toward private teacher with a weak public master, ye say somewhat
to the persons but smallie to the thing, which in equality shows the
difference, in inequaltie deceiues the doubts, and then most, when to augment
his own liking, he will make the conference odd, to seem to auaunce error,
where the truth is against him. And to say all in one, the public pestring
with any reasonable consideration, though it be not the best, yet in good
sooth, it far exceeds the private alonenesse, though sometime a diligent
private teacher show some great effect of his maine endeavor.

But to the education of gentlemen and gentlemanly fellows. That the
circunsta^ce is one in gentlemen and common men's children.
What time shall I appoint them to begin to learn? Their wits be as the
common, their bodies oftimes worse. The same circunstance, the same
consideration for time must direct all degrees. What thing shall they learn? I
know none other, neither can I appoint better, then that which I did appoint
for all. The common and private concur herin. Neither shall the private
scholar go any faster on, nay perhaps not so fast, for all the help of his
whole master, then our boys shall, with the bare help, that is in number and
multitude, every boy being either a master for his fellow to learn by, or an
example to set him on, to better him if he be negligent, to be like him, if he
be diligent.

Only his, young gentlemen must have some choice of peculiar matter, still
appropriat unto them, because they be to govern under their prince in
principal places: those virtues and virtuous lessons must be still laid before
them, which do appertain to government, to direct others well, and belong to
obedience, to guide themselves wisely. For being in good place, and having good
to leese, it will prove their ill, by indiscreet attemptes to become prays to
distress. And yet for all this, the general matter of duty being commonly
taught, each one may apply the general to his own private, without drawing
any private argument into a school, for the priuitie not to be communicate but
with those of the same calling: considering the property of that argument
falls as often to the good of the common, whom virtue auaunceth, as the
gentlemen's credit, whom negligence abaseth. What exercises shall they have? The
very same. What masters? The same. What circunstance else? All one and the
same: but that for their place and time, their choice makes them private,
though nothing the better for want of good fellowship. And if they prove so
well trained, as the general plat for all infancy does promise, and so well
exercised, as the thing is well meant them, they shall have no cause, much to
complain of the public, nor any matter at all why to covet to be private. For
it is no mean stuff, which is provided even for the meanest to be stored with.

These things gentlemen have, and are much bound to God for them, which may
make them prove excellent, if they use them well: great ability to go thorough
withal, where the poorer must give over, ear he come to the end: great
leisure to use liberty, where the meaner must labor: all oportunities at
will, where the common is restrained: so that singularity in them if it be
missed, discommendes them, because they have such means and yet miss: if it
hit in the meaner, it makes their account more, because their mean was small,
but their diligence exceeding. Whereby negligence in gentlemen is ever more
blamed, because of great helps, which help nothing: diligence in the meaner
is always more praised, because of great wantes, which hinder nothing: and those
prefermentes, which by degree are due unto gentlemen, thorough their negligence
being by them forsaken, are bestowed upon the meaner, whose diligent endeavor
made mean to enjoy them.

Rich me^ no gentlemen.
As for rich men which being no gentlemen, but growing to wealth by what means
soever, will counterfeat gentlemen in the education of their children, as if
money made equality, and the purse were the preferrer, and no further regard:
which contemn the common from whence they came, which cloister up their youth,
as boding further state: they be in the same case for ability, though far
behind for gentilitie. But as they came from the common, so they might with
more commendacion, continue their children in that kind, which brought up the
parents and made them so wealthy, and not to impatronise themselves unto a
degree to far beyond the dounghill. For of all the means to make a
gentleman, it is the most vile, to be made for money. Because all other means
bear some sign of virtue, this only mean is to bad a mean, either to
match with great birth, or to mate great worth. For the most part it is
miserably scraped to the murdering of many a poor magot, while lively cheese
is lusty cheer, to spare expenses, that Jack may be a gentleman. If sparing
were the worst, though in the worst degree, that were not the worst, nay it
has show of wit: The rest which I tuch not, be so shameful and so known to
be such, and deserve so great hatred as nothing more. Besides the insolency of
the people, triumphing over them in their cups, by whom they buy their
drink: which shifts be shameful to the world and hateful to heaven: and too
too filthy to be honored upon earth with either arms by harold, or honor by
any. He that will read but Aristophanes his blind Plutus the God of richesse,
and mark the old fellows fashions shall see his humor naturally, as that
poet was not the worst resembler though he were not the best man.

For to become a gentleman is to bear the cognizance of virtue, whereto honor
is companion: the vilest diuises be the readiest means to become most wealthy,
and ought not to look honor in the face, because it ioynes not with justice,
which great wealth by the Greek verse, (...), is noted to refuse, and
commonly dare not name the mean right, whereby it grows great. And though
wit be pretended to have made their way, it is not denied but that wit may
serve even to the worst effects, and to wring many a thousand to make one a
gentleman. It is not wit, that carries the praise, but the matter, whereon,
and the manner how it is, or has been ill or well employed. Wit bestowed
upon the common good with wise demeanor, deserves well: the same holy given
to fill a private purse, by any mean, so it be secret: by any misdemeanour,
so it be not seen: deserves no prais for that which is seen, but is to be
suspected, for that which is not seen. These people by their general trades,
will make thousands poor: and for giving one penie to any one poor of those
many thousands will be counted charitable. They will give a scholar some petie
poor exhibition to seem to be religious, and under a sclender veale of
counterfeat liberality, hide the spoil of the ransaked poverty. And though
they do not profess the impouershing of purpose, yet their kind of dealing
does pierce as it passes: and a thousand pound gains bowelles twenty
thousand persons. Of these kind of folks I entend not to speak, because
their state is both casual, and belongs to the common: and their gentilitie
bastardise: and yet while I frame a gentleman, if any of them take the benefit
of my advice, gentle men must bear with me, if my precepts be usurped on,
where their state is intruded on.

My purpose is to employ my pains upon such as are gentlemen in deed, and in
right judgment of their vnbewitched country do serve in best place: neither
will I rip up what some write of nobility in general, whether by birth or by
disce^t: nor what other write of true nobility, as disclayming in that which
virtue auau^ceth not: nor what other write of learned nobility, as accounting
that simply the best, where virtue and learning do beawtifie the subject. One
might talk beyond enough, and write beyond measure, that would examine what
such a one says of nobility in greek, such a one in latin, such in other
several toungues, because the argument is so large, the use of nobility
streaching so far, and so brave a subject cannot choose but minister passing
brave discourses. There be so many virtues to commend it, all the brymmer in
sight the clearer their subject is: so many vices to assail it whose
disfiguring is foulest, where it falls in the face, and must needees be seen.

All these offered occasions, to enlarge and amplyfie this so honorable an
argument, I mean to forbear, and give only this note unto young gentlemen:
That if their calling had not been of very great worth in deed, as it is of
most show in place, it could never have wone so many learned works, it could
never have perced so many excellent wits, to rejoice with it in good, to
mourn with it in ill, and to make the meditation of nobility, to be matter
for the^ to marvel. And that therefore it does stand nobility upon, to
maintain that glory in their families with praise, which learned men in so
many languages, do charge them with in precept. My friend to be careful, that
I keep all well, and my self to be careless and consume all ill? an honest
friend and an honorable care. But what am I? my auncetours to auaunce my house
to honor, my self to spoil it, and bring it to decay? The auauncement
virtuous, the aduauncer commendable. But what am I? a gentleman in birth and
nothing else but bravery. A sorry show which shameth, where it shapeth. It is
value that gives name and note to nobility, it is virtue must endow it, or
vice will undo it. The more high the more heynouse, if it fortune to fail:
the more bruted the more brutish if it fatal under fame. Which seeing it is
so, as I wish the race well, so I wish their train were good, and if it were
possible even better then the common, but that cannot be. For the common well
appointed is simply the best, and even fittest for them, because they may have
it full, where the meaner have it maimed. Their sufficiency is so able to win
it with perfection, for leisure at will, for labor at ease, for want the
least, for wealth the most, in all things absolute, in nothing imperfect, if
they fail not themselves.

But because I mean briefly to run through this title of nobility, which
concerns the worthiest part of our state and country, whatsoever cauelling
the enemies of nobility pretend, whose good education must be applied according
unto their degrees and ends, to the commodity and honor of our state and
country: Before that I do meddle with their train, and show what is most for
them, and best liked in them, I will examine those points which by good
education be best got, and being once got do beawtifie them most, which two
considerations be not impertinent to my purpose, because I tender their
education, to have them prove best.

My first note in nature of method must needs be, The method of the discourse
that follows.
what it is to be a gentleman or a nobleman, and what force the terms of
nobility or gentry do infer to be in the persons, to whom they are proper.
Then what be the grounds and causes of gentry and nobility: both the
efficient which make them, and the final why they serve, wherein the rightnes
of their being consists, and why there is such thronging of all people that
way.

But ear I begine to deal with any of these points, Of gentlemanly exercise.
once for all I must recommend unto them exercise of the body, and chiefly
such as besides their health shall best serve their calling, and place in their
country. Whereof I have said, methinke, sufficiently before. And as those
qualities, which I have set out for the general train in their perfection
being best compassed by them, may very well beseem a gentlemanly mind: so
may the exercises without all exception: either to make an healthful body,
seeing our mould is all one: or to prepare them for service, wherein their use
is more. Is it not for a gentleman to use the chase and hunt? does their place
reprove them if they have skill to dance? Is the skill in sitting of an horse
no honor at home, no help abroad? Is the use of their weapon with choice, for
their calling, any blemish unto them? For all these and what else beside, there
is furniture for them, if they do but look back: and the rather for them,
because in deed those great exercises be most proper to such persons, and not
for the meaner. Wherefore I remit them to that place.

What is it to be a nobleman or a gentleman? and what force do those terms of
nobility and gentilitie infer to be in those persons, What is it to be a
nobleman or a gentleman?
whereunto they are proper? All the people which be in our country be either
gentlemen or of the commonalty. The common is divided into merchants and
manuaries generally, what partition sooner is the subdiuident. Merchandise
contains under it all those which live any way by buying or selling: Manuarie
those whose handyworke is their ware, and labor their living. Their
distinction is by wealth: for some of them be called rich men, which have
enough and more, some poor men, which have no more then enough: some beggars
which have less then enough. There be also three kinds in gentilitie, the
gentlemen, which be the cream of the common: the noblemen, which be the flower
of gentilitie, and the prince which is the primate and pearl of nobiltie.
Their difference is in authority, the prince most, the nobleman next, the
gentleman under both. And as in the baser degree, the beggar is beneth all for
want of both ability to do with, and virtue to deserve with: so the prince
being opposite to him, as the mere best, to the pure worst, is of most
ability to do good, and of most virtue to deserve best. The limiting of either
sort to their own lystes, will be wray either an usurping intruder upon
superiority, or a base degenerat to inferioritie, either being ravished with
the others dealinges, and neither deserving the degree that he is in. To be
virtuous or vicious to be rich or poor, be no peculiar badges to either fort,
but common to both, for both a gentleman, and a common man may be virtuous or
vicious, both of them may be either rich or poor: landed or vnlanded, which is
either the having or wanting of the most statarie substance: Examples need not
in familiar knowledge. And as the gentleman in any degree must have foreign
ability for the better executing of his lawful authority: so there be some
virtues which seem to be wedded properly to that side: As great wisdom in
great affairs: great valiancy in great attemptes: great justice in great
executions and all things excellent, in a great and excellent degree of
people. The same virtues but in a meaner degree in respect of the subject,
whereon they be employed: in respect of the persons, which are to employ: in
respect of circumstance, wherefore they are employed: and all things meaner be
reserved for the common: of whom I will speak no more now, because this title
is not for them, though they become the keepers of virtues and learning, when
nobility becomes degenerate. Hereby it is evident that the term of nobility
amongst us, is restrained to one order, which I named the flower of
gentilitie: and that the gentlemen be in degree next unto them. Whereof where
either begins, none can dout* which can call him a nobleman that is above a
knight. So that whosoever shall use the term of gentilitie, speaking of the
whole order opposite to the common, does use the ground whence all the rest
does spring because a ge^tlema^ in nature of his degree is before a nobleman,
though not in the height: as nobility employeth the flower of the gentlemen,
which name is taken of the primacie and excellency of the odds, and where it
is used in discourse it comprehends all above the common. When the Roman
speaks of the gentleman in general, nobility is his term, being in that
state opposite to the common, wherein they acknowledged no prince, when that
opposition was made. For generosus which is our common term signifies the
inward valor, not the outward note, and reaches to any active living creature
though without reason, wherein there does appear any praisworthy valiance or
courage in that kind more then ordinary, as in Alexanders horse and Porus his
dog. Therefore whether I vfe the term of nobility hereafter or of gentilitie,
the matter is all one, both the names signifying the whole order, though not of
one ground, nobility being the flower and gentilitie the root. The account
whereof how great it is, we may very well perceive by that opinion, which the
nobility it self has usually of it. For truth being the private protest of a
gentleman, honor, of a noble man, faith of a Prince, yet generally they do all
join in this. As they be true gentlemen. Such a reputacion has the name
reserved even from his original.

Now then nobility emplying the outward note of inward value, and gentilitie
signifying the inward value of the outward note, it is very easy to
determine, what it is to be a nobleman, in excellency of virtue showed, and
what it is to be a gentleman to have excellent virtue to show. Whereby it
appears that virtue is the ground to that whole race, by whether name so ever
ye call it, wisdom in policy, valiance in execution, justice in deciding,
modesty in demeanor. There shall not need any allegations of the contraries,
to grace out these virtues, which be well content with their own gains and
desire not to glister by comparison with vices, though different colors in
contarietie do commend, and things contrary be known in the same moment. For
if true nobility have virtue for her ground, he that knows vice, can tell
what it bringes forth. Whether nobility come by descent or desert it makes no
matter, he that gives the first fame to his family, or he that deserves such
honor, or he that enlarges his parentage by noble means, is the man whom I
mean. He that continues it in descent from his auncestrie by desert in his
own person has much to thank God for, and does well deserve double honor
among men, as bearing the true coat of right and best nobility, where desert
for virtue is quartered with descent in blood, seeing aunciencie of lineage, and
deriuation of nobility is in such credit among us and always has been.

Of infirmities in nobility by descent.
And as it is most honorable in deed thus to answer auncestry in all laudable
virtues, and noble qualities of a well affected mind: so the defect in
sufficiency where some of a noble succession have not the same success in
points of praise and worthiness, either naturally by simpleness, or
casually, by fortune; though it be to be moaned in respect of their place, yet
it is to be excused in respect of the person. Because the person is, as his
parents begat him, who had not at commandment the descent of their virtues,
which made them noble, as they had the begetting of a child to enherite their
lands. For if they had, their nobility had continued on the nobler side. But
virtues and worthiness be not tied to the person, they be Gods mere and
voluntary gifts to bestow there, whereas he entendes that nobility shall
either rise or continue, and not to bestow, where he means to abase, and bring
a lineage low. Wherefore to blame such wantes, and rail upon nobility as to
much degenerate, is to intrude upon providence. Where we cannot make our
selves, and may clearly see, that he which makes, has some mystery in hand,
where he setts such marks.

To exhort young men to those qualities, which do make noble and gentlemen, is
to have them so excellently qualified, as they may honest their country, and
honor themselves. To encourage noble young gentlemen to maintain the honor
of their houses, is to wish them to apply such virtues, as both make base
houses big in any degree, and tofore did make their families renowned in
theirs. If ability will attain, and idleness do neglecte, the ignominy is
theirs: if want of ability appear to be so great, as no endeavor can
prevail, God has set his seal and men must cease to muse, where the
infirmity is evident, and think that every beginning is to have an end.
Hereby I take it to be very plain both what the terms of noble and gentle do
mean, and what they infer to be in those parties to whom they are proper. For
as gentility argues a courteous, civil, well disposed, sociable constitution
of mind in a superior degree: so does nobility import all these, and much
more in an higher estate nothing bastarded by great authority. And do not
these singularities deserve help by good and virtuous education?

What be the grounds and causes of nobility, The causes and grounds of
nobility.
both the efficient which make it, and the final for whom it serves?
Concerning the efficient. Though the chief and sovereign Prince, of whom for
his education I will say somewhat herafter, be the best and fairest blossom of
nobility, yet I will not meddle any further with the mean to attain unto the
dignity of the crown, the^ that it is either come by, by conquest, which in
meaner people is called purchase, and hangs altogether of the conquerours
disposition: or else by descent, which in other conueyances continues the same
name, and in that highness continues the same laws, or alters with
consent. Neither will I speak of such, as the Prince upon some private
affection does extraordinarily prefer. Plutarch. Alexand. Hester lib. AElianus
(...). 2.
Alexander may auaunce Hephestio for great good liking, Assuerus Hester, for
great good love, Ptolome Galetes for secret virtue. And upon whom soever the
Prince does bestow any extraordinary preferment, it is to be thought that
there is in them some great singularity, wherewith their princes, which can
judge be so extraordinarily moved. Neither will I say any more then I have said
of nobility by descent, which enjoys the benefit of the predecessors
virtue, if it have no private stuff: but if it have, it does double and treble
the honor and praise of auncestrie.

But concerning other causes, that come by authority, which make noble and
gentlemen under their Prince, who be therefore auaunced by their Prince,
because they do assist him in necessary functions of his government, they be
either single or compound, and depend either holy of learning: or but only for
the grounds of their execution. Excellent wisdom which is the mean to
auaunce grave and politic counselors, is but a single cause of preferment:
likewise valiancie of courage which is the mean to make a noble and a warrious
captain is but a single cause of auauncement: but where wisdom for counsel,
does concur with valiancie of courage in the same man, the cause is compound
and the deserte doubled. The means of preferment, which depend upon learning
for the ground of their execution be either Martial for war and defense
abroad, or politic, for peace and tranquillity at home. For the man of war
will seem to hang most of his own courage and experience, which without any
learning or reading at all has oftimes brought forth excellent leaders, but
with those helps to, most rare and famous generalles, as the reason is great,
why he should prove an excellent man that way with the assistance of learning
which without all learning could attain unto so much. Plut. Sylla. Caesar.
Sylla the cruel in deed, though surnamed the fortunate of such, as he
favored, was a noble general without any learning. But Caesar which wondered at
him for it, as a thing scant possible to do any great matter without good
learning, himself with the help of learning, did far exceed him.

Such as use the pen most in helping for their part, the direction of
public government, or execute offices of either necessary service for the
state, or iusticiarie, for the common peace and quietness, without profession
of further learning, though they have their chief instrument of credit from
the book, yet they are not mere dettours to the book, because private
industry, considerate experience, and stayed aduisement seem to chalendge
some interest, in their praiseworthie dealing. The other which depend wholly
upon learning be most incident to my purpose, and best beseem the place, where
the question is, how gentlemen must be trained to have them learned.

The highest degree whereunto learned valor does prefer, A politic counselor.
is a wise counselor, whose learning is learned policy: not as policy is
commonly restrained, and opposed to plainness, but as we term it in learning
and philosophy, the general skill to judge either of all, or of most things
rightly, and to marshall them to their places, and strait them by circunstance,
as shall best beseem the present government, with least disturbaunce, and most
contentment to the settled state, of what sort soever the things be, divine or
human, public or private, professions of mind, or occupations of hand.
This man for religion is a Divine, and well able to judge of the generalities,
and application of Divinity, for government, a lawyer, as one that first
setts laws, and knows best how to have them kept: generally for all things,
he is simply the soundest, whether he be choosen of the Ecclesiastical or
Temporal, out of whatsoever degree, or whatsoever profession: so able as I
say, and so sufficient in all points. And though the particular professor
know more then he in every particular, which his leisure will not suffer him to
run thorough, like the particular student: yet of himself he will enquire so
consideratly, and so methodically of the particular professor, as he will
enter into the very depth of the knowledge, which the other has, and when he
has done so, handle it better, and more for the common good, then the private
professor can, for all his cunning in all his particular: Nay he will direct
him in the use, which informed him in the skill. Of all them that depend wholly
upon learning, I take this kind of man worthyest to be preferred, and most
worthily preferred for his learned judgment, the first and chief naturally in
divinity among divines though he do not preach: in law among lawyers though he
do not plead: and so throughout in all other things that require any public
direction.

Of the secondary and particular professions, the worthynes of the subject, The
divine.
and the authority of the argument prefers the divines. For they dealing
carefully with the charge of souls, the principal part of our composition,
and the fairest matter that is dealt in, beside the soul of a civil society
which is compounded of infinite particular souls: and being the miniters and
trumpettes of the almighty God, auancing virtue, and suppressing vice,
denouncing death and pronouncing life, which be both most sure, and that
everlastingly to ensue acaccording to demeanor: do well deserve to be honored
of men, with the simple benefit of their temporal estimation, as what they can
do, where they cannot do enough. For what reward for virtue is an olyue
branch, though it signify the rewarders good will, confessing the thing to be
far above any mortal reward? which estimation yet is not to be desired of
them, though it be deserved by them. For humility of mind in auauncing the
divine draws him still backward, as officious thankefullnes in the profited
hearer does worthily and well push him still on forward. And as the temporal
branch of the common weal being so many in number has distinction in
degrees, for the better method in government, which function does honor the
executours: so likewise with proportionate estimation for the parties
executours, the church consisting of many, and having charge over all has her
distincton in dignities and degrees to stay that state the bettter, which would
soon be shaken, if there were no such stay: the argument of religion being
used mostwhat contemplative, and in nature of opinion, and therefore a very
large field to bring forth matter of controversies, specially in young men,
whose natural is not stayed, though their resolution seem to be, and their
zeal carry them on, to the profit of their hearer, their own commendation,
and the honor of him, whose messengers they are. Howbeit in the middle of all
these contradictions, the particular execution to believe this, and to do that,
according to ones calling, which is but one in all, to believe truly, and to
do honestly, by that same one, does check the diversities of all difference in
saying. Which great difference in saying, and diversities in opinion, the
church may most thank the Grecian for, who joining with religion after divorce
with philosophy, was as bold to be factious in the one, as he had been in the
other, and could not rest in one, still divided into numbers, as it still
appears in the ecclesiastical history where factious heresies assail the
firm catholic. Neither does this difference in public degrees empaire that
opinion, that all be but ministers, and in that point equal any more, then that
both the prince and the plowman be one, in respect of their humanity, and
first creation. And yet the prince is a thought above him for all he be his
brother in respect of old Adam. The matter of both these two, the wise
counselor, and the grave divines honor is best proved to be in the worthynes
of their own persons, which is the true ensign of right nobility, because
both their places and lyuinges, in respect of their degree depart and die with
them (though their honorable memory remain after) and be not transported to
their heirs, as the inheritance of blood, but to their successors, as the
reward of virtue. If it so chance that the same person for worthynes be
successor both in place, and patrimony, it is most honorable to himself, and
most comfortable to his friends, and rejoiced at of all men.

The peace, The lawyer.
and quietness of civil society, by composing, and taking up of quarelles, and
by directing justice, makes the lawyer next, whose public honor dies also
with him: and declares the substance of his worthiness, though his private
name remain, and his children enjoy the benefit of his getting. As why may not
the divines to, enjoy that, which their parents have honestly saved, if they
have any surplus, whereon to save, for necessary relief of their necessary
charge in succession? Which among the Jews was of such countenance, as
Josephus, vaunteth himself of his nobility that way. And. But it were to
large a roming place, to run over the port that the churchmen have kept, not
among christians and Jews only.

The Physician is next, and his circumstaunce like, and so forth in learning,
The Physician.
where the preferment dying with the party, and transposed to other, not by
line in nature but by choice in valor, is the euidentest argument, that those
things be most worthiely termed the best matter of honor, which die with the
party, and yet make him live through honorable remembrance, though he have no
successor but the common weal, which is generally surest, because private
succession in blood is oftimes some blemish. And yet succession in state, is
not allway so steddie, but that the old house may have a very odd master.
These do I take to be the truest, and most worthy causes of nobility, lymited
not by wealth, but by worth, which accompany the party, and expire with his
breath. For sure that which one leaves behind him besides an honorable
remembrance of his own worthynes, cannot noble him while he has it, nor his,
when he leaves it, because it bettereth not the owner, but oftimes makes him
worse, though it be a necessary stay for that person which is of good worthynes
to show his worth the better. Therefore when wealth is made the way to
gentilitie: or if it be exceeding great, the gap to nobility, it is like to
some university men, which for favor or feasting lend their schole degrees to
doltes to intercept those liuinges by borrowed titles which them selves should
have for learning, and might have without let, if they hindered not them
selves. But both gentlemen and scholars be well enough served, for ouershooting
them selves so far: nobility being empaired in note, though increased in
number by such intruders, and learning empouerished in purses, though
replenished in putfurthes by such interceptours*

Yet it is no meruell if the base covet his best, Why so many desire to be
gentlemen.
as his perfection in nature, and his honor in opinion: no more then that the
ass does desire the lions skin, to be thought though but a while, very
terrible to behold. But counterfeat metal for all his best show will never be
so natural, as that is, which it does counterfeat: neither will natural
mettalles ever enterchaunge natures, though the finest be severed, and the
Alcumist do his best: And for all the lions skin, sure the ass is an ass as
his own ears will bewray him, if ye fortune to see them: or your ears will
discern him, if you fortune to hear him: he will bray so like a beast. I can
say no better, though this may seem bitter, where I see nobility betrayed to
donghillrie, and learning to doultrie. You gentlemen must bear with me, for I
wish you your own: you scholars must pardon me, I pity your abuse. Your apes
do you harm, and scratch you by the face, for all the friendship they find,
which if they found not, they might tarry apes still. Their suttletie
supplantes you, and your simplenes lettes them see, what fellows you are. Call
virtue to aid, and put slavery in pinfold, let learning lead you, and send
loselles to labor, more fit for the shouell then to shuffle up your cards.
Thus much for the causes which make nobility, whose leader is learning, and
honor is virtue, not to use more discourse to prove by particular, where the
matter is so plain, as either virtue will admit praise, or history bring
proof.

For the final cause it is most evident, that if some sufficiency this way be
the mean to nobility, the effect of such sufficiency does crown the man,
and accomplish the matter. But wherefore is all this? to show how necessary a
thing it is to have young gentlemen well brought up. For if these causes do make
the mean man noble, what will they do in him, whose honor is augmented with
perpetual increase, if with his nobility in blood he do join in match the
worthiness of his own person? Wherefore the necessity of the train appearing
to be so great, I will handle that as well as I can in general precept, for
this present place, as having to deal with such personages, whose wisdom is
their weight, learning their line, justice their balance, armor their honor,
and all virtues in all kinds their best furniture in all executions, and their
greatest ornaments in the eyes of all men, all this tending directly to the
common good.

The ge^tleme^s train.
As concerning the train it self, whereof I said somewhat before, I know none
better then the common well appointed, which the common man does learn for
necessity at first, and auauncement after: the greater personage ought to
learn for his credit, and honor, besides necessary uses. For which be
gentlemanly qualities, if these be not, to read, to write, to draw, to sing,
to play, to have language, to have learning, to have health, and actiuitie, nay
even to profess Divinity, Law, Physic, and any trade else commendable for
cunning? Which as gentlemen may get with most leisure, and best furniture, so
may they execute them without any corruption, where they need not to crave.
And be not sciences liberal in term, that way to be recovered from
illiberalitie in trade, and can those great liuinges be better employed, then
in sparing the pillage of the poor people? which are to sore gleaned: by the
needy and never contented professors? which making their end as to do good,
and their intent but to gain, do pluk the poor shrewdly, while they covet
that they have not, by a mean that they should not. Because though the
professors need do seek such a supply, yet the thing which they profess
protests the conrrarie: and prays for ability in the professor to deal
franckely himself in the freedom of his cunning, and not to strain her for
need. Does Divinity teach to scrape, or Law to scratche, or any other
learning, whose epithet is liberal? Divines do use it, lawyers do use it,
learned men do use it. But their profession is free and liberal, though the
execution be servile and corrupt, and cries for help of nobility to ransom
it from necessity, which has emprisoned it so, by the negligence of nobility
who think any thing far more seemly to bestow their time and wealth on, then
professions of learning. But if it would please toward young gentlemen to be so
well affected toward their natural country, or to suffer her to ouertreat
them so far, as to shoulder out corruption, by professing themselves, who
need not to be couetuous for want of any thing, which have all things at
will, how blessed were our state, nay how fortunate were even the gentlemen
them selves? They may spare number enough that way, besides such furniture, as
they do afford unto the court, to all martial and militare affairs to all
iusticiarie functions by reason of their multitude, which grows on daily to
far and to fast, and lessen the middle commoner to much: whose bigness is the
best mean, if Aristotle say true, as his reason seems great, for peace and
quietness in any public estate, to desire the rich gentlemen, which have most,
and the poor meany, which have least, to hold their hands, and put up their
weapons, when they would be seditious, as the two extremities in a public
body. If the courageous gentlemen took them selves to arms, and minded more
exercise: if the quieter took books, and fell unto learning, calling home to
them again by their laudable diligence all those faculties, which they have so
long delivered over, for prays to the poorer, thorough their to great
negligence, were not the return to be received with sacrifice? and would not
the other as well provide for them selves by other mades wherewith to live?
Whereby the honesty of that subject, wherein they should travel, would in the
mean while, deliver the honest gentlemen from such faults, as they be now
subject unto, while intending so good, they avoided so evil. This were better
then bravery, and more triumphant then traveling, to remain at home with
their prince, not to rome abroad with the pilgrim, to see far in other
countries, and be stark blind in their own.

For what is it to travel, Traveling beyond sea*
seeing that word has so suddenly crossed me? I will not here make any Epitome
of other men's travel; which have set down whole treaties against this
traveling in diverse languages: neither will I amplyfie the thing with any
earnest aggrauations, which though they may be true, and so may somewhat taint
the unadvised ttauellour, yet they be not worthy the rehearsal here. For what
reason earieth it, to find fault with the foreign, and to foster the fault at
home? or for particular misdeemener, to condemn some whole nations? or for
some error in some few to wish a general restraint? and by to sharp blaming to
bitterly to eager not the meanest wits: as commonly dawes be not most
desirous to travel. It is lightly the quintessence which will be a ranging.
Silence in things peradventure blameworthy, and friendly entertainment where
there is no sting, by courtesy will call, and by liking will win such
dispositions sooner to come to the lure where we would wish to have them, then
any either launsing, their wounds by to bitter speches, or aliening their
hearts by too much harping on one siring: chiefly considering that travel and
going abroad for knowledge in learning, and skill in language have for their
protection much antiquity, long time, and great number, though still chekt as
either needeles or harmfull: and oftimes countermaunded, not only by private
men's arguments, but by public constitutions, of the best commonweals, which
were very unwilling to have their people to wander.

But what is this traveling? I mean it not in merchants, whom necessity
for their own trade, and oftentimes need for our use, enforces to travel,
and tarry long from home. Neither yet in soldiers, whom peace at home sendes
abroad for skill, in foreign wars to learn how to fend at home, when peace
is displeased: which yet both have their own, and ouergreat inconveniences, to
the wringing of their country. For merchants by forcing their natural soil
beyond her proportion to some gainefull commodity very vtterable abroad do
breed gauls at home, and by bringing in also beyond proportion to serve
pleasure and feed fantsie, prove great vndoers to a great number, which can
neither temper their taste, nor refrain the fashion.

The soldier likewise, which is trained in hot blood abroad will hardly be
but troublesome in cold blood at home: unless he be such a one as followed the
wars for conscience to his country, and of judgment to learn skill, and not
upon bare courage, or hardines of nature, or sinisterly to supply some other
want. I mean not any of these, ne yet such travelers as Solon, to prevent a
mischief in mutabilitie of his country men's minds, whom he had tied to his
laws, not reuocable till his return, when acquaintauce for that time had wone
allowance for ever: neither as Pythagoras, or Plato were, who sought cunning
where it was, to bring it where is was not. For Platoes iourny into Sicile
proceeded not of his mind to travel, but up on hope to do some good on
Dionisius the tyrant, who did send for him by Diones mean. We need not to
travel in their kind for learning. We have in that kind thanks be to God for
the pen and print, as much at this day as any country needs to have: nay even
as full if we will follow it well, as any antiquity it self ever had. And
young gentlemen with that wealth, or their parents in that wealth, might
procure, and maintain so excellent masters and join unto them so choice
companions, and furnish them out with such libraries, being able to bear the
charge, as they might learn all the best far better at home in their
standing studies, then they ever shall in their stirring residence, yea though
the desire of learning were the cause of their travel. Which rule serves even
in the meaner personages, which love to look abroad, and allege learning
for their show, which might be better had at home, with their good diligence,
and confirms it self by sufficient persons, which never crossed the sea. Let
them favor their own fantsies never so much, and defend that stoutly, which
they have begone youthfully: yet the thing will prove in the end as I have
said. And if there be defect, we should devise, as those philosopher
trauellours did, to help it here at hoome in our own country, that we be not
allway borowers, where it is but of wantonness, because we are unwilling to
strain out our own, which of it self is able enough to breed, and needs
no more helps then the general study, if it be studied in deed, and not be
dalyed with for show, as I wish it were not, and not I alone. Here lies a
padde to be pitied though not to be published, they that may amend the thing
are in conscience to think of it. But what is travel, as it is to be
constrewed in this place, where it interrupteth train, and bringes it in
question, whether young gentlemen, while they use traveling, do use that, which
is best both for their country, and themselves. What is it to travel? It is
to see countries abroad, to mark their singularities, to learn their
languages, to return from thence better able to serve their own country here
with such fourniture, as they provided, and such wisdom, as they gathered by
observing things there-

Sure a good countenance to help traveling withal, and to hide her skars,
which in some may prove so in deed. But those some be not any general
patterns: in whom, some excellency in nature, and vertuousnesse in
disposition does turn that to profit and good, which the thing of it self
does assure to be dangerous: because it may prove to be both perilous and
pernicious in those and to those, which for heat are impetuous, for years to
foreward, for wealth to rachelesse: and proceeding from them may be contagious
to others, as cankers will creep, and the ill taches of every country do more
easily allure, and obtain quicker carriage to enlarge them selves, then the
good and virtuous do. But while they travel thus, as sure me think I see, it
is but of some error carried with the stream, which enwraps them so (onelesse
some miscontentment at home in busy and displeased humors, use the color of
language and learning, to absent themselves the better from that, against the
which they have conceived some stomach) what might they have gained at home in
the mean while? sounder learning, the same language, besides the love and
liking of their own country soil which breed them, and bears them: by
familiarity, and continuance at home increased, by discontinuance, and
strangeness mightily empared: while enamouring and liking of foreign wars
does cause lothing, and misliking of that they find at home. Whereby our
country receives a great blow, thorough alienation of their fantsies, by whom
she should be governed, which will rather deal in nothing, then not force in
the foreign.

What is the very natural end, of being borne a countryman of such a country?
To serve and save the country. What? with foreign fashions? they will not fit.
For every country setts down her own due by her own laws, and ordinances
appropriate to her self, and her private circunstance upon information given
by continuers at home, and careful countrymen.

The very division of laws, into natural, national, and civil emport a
distinction in applying, though the reason run thorough, and continue
generally one. That which is very excellent good abroad, and were to be wished
in our country upon circunstance which either will not admit it, or not but so
troublesomly, as will not quite the coast, nor agree with the state is and must
be forborne here, though it leave a miscontentment in the trauellours head,
who likes the thing most, and thinks light of the circunstance, which he says
will yield to it, though experience say no: and in some but petie toys do show
him, how leaning to the foreign has misfashioned our own home. I do not deny
but traveling is good, if it hap to hit right, but I think the same travel,
with mind to do good, as it always pretends, might help much more, being
bestowed well at home. He that rometh abroad has no such line to lead him, as
the taryer at home has, unless his conceit, years, and experience be of
better stay, then theirs is, which be causes of this question, and bring
traveling in doubt. For the ground of his vyage being private though taken to
the best, is vnfreindly to our common. It is like to an idle, lasie, young
gentlewoman, which has a very fair heir of her own, and for idleness,
because she will not look to it, comb it, pick it, wash it, makes it a cluster
of knottes, and a feltryd borough for white footed beasts: and therefore must
needs have an unnatural perug, to set forth her favor, where her own had
been best, if it had been best applied. Is not he worse then mad, that has an
excellent piece of ground, made for fertility, and suffers it to be
ouergrower with wedes, while he wandreth abroad, and beholdes with delight, the
good housbandes, and housbandrie in other men and other soiles? The president
of a copy makes a child resemble well, and a certain pitch to deal within a
man's own country in such a kind of life, to his and her auauncement, is the
surest, and soundest direction to any young gentleman: first to learn by, and
then to live by: and to level all that way without any foreign longing.

If he take pleasure in traveling, and no care in expending, both the expense
will bring repentance, when reason shall reclame, if ever she do, (as in some
desperate cases, fantsie is froward, and will bide no fronting:) and the
pleasure bringes some grief, when the gentleman which in youth so much pleased
himself, in his age shall not be able to pleasure his country, whom he cared
for so little, while he so counted of the foreign. Foreign matters fit us not,
and though our backs, yet not our brains, if we be not sick there. Foreign
things be for us in some cases, but we were better to call home one foreign
master to us, then they should cause us to be foreign scholars, to such a
forraging master, as a whole foreign country is, to learn so by traveling,
and not by teaching.

Our ladies at home can do all this, and that with commendacion of the very
traveled gentlemen: because it is not that, which they have seen, that makes
them of worth, but that which they have brought home in language and learning,
which they do find here at their return. Our lady mistress, whom I must
needs remember, when excellencies will have hearing, a woman, a gentlewoman, a
lady, a Princess, in the midst of many other businesses, in that infirmity
of sex, and sundry impedimentes to a free mind, such as learning requires,
can do all these things to the wonder of all hearers, which I say young
gentlemen may learn better at home, as her Majesty did, and compare
themselves with the best, when they have learned so much, as her Majesty has
by domestical discipline. It may be said that her Majesty is not to be used
for a president, which of a princely courage would not be overthrown with any
difficulty in learning that, which might auaunce her person beyond all praise,
and profit her state beyond expectation. But yet withal it may be said, why
may not young gentlemen, which can allege no let to the contrary, obtain so
much with more liberty, which her highenesse gat with so little? It is wealth
at will which eggs them on to wander, and it is the same, which causes them
continue in the same humor, though they hear it misliked. If they went abroad
as Ambassadors, that their Princes authority might make their entry to great
knowledge in greatest dealinges: or if they were excellent known learned men,
that all cunning would crepe to them, and honor them with intelligence, and
notes of importance: or if they went in the train of the one, or in the
tuition of the other, where authority and awe might enforce their benefit, and
save them from harm, I would not mislike it, to breed up such fellows, as
might follow them in service: but for any other of the particular ends, which
be better had at home, I cast of comparisons. Good, plain, and well meaning
young gentlemen in purse strong, in years weak, to travel at a venture in
places of danger to body, to life, to living, though our own country be also
subject to all the same perils, but not so far from succor and reskue,
Drive me to such a traunse, as I know not what to say. Commend them I cannot
because of my country: offend them I dare not, because of them selves, which
may by discretion in themselves, and wisdom of their freindes provide well
for themselves, as I do confess, though I fear nothing so much, as the
ouerliking of foreign, and so consequently some vnderliking at home, which
will never let them stay. Old laws in some countries enacted the contrary,
and silly Socrates in Plato being offered to be helped out of prison, as
unjustly condemned by the fury of the people, and persuasion of his
vnfreindes: would not go out of his country to save his own life, as resolved
to die by commandment of that law, thorough whose provision he had lived at
home so long. Divisions for religion, and quarrels of state may work that
which is not well for general quiet, by being hartned abroad with the sight,
and hearing of that, which some could be content to see, and hear at home.

Plato in his twelfth book of laws, Plato 12. de leg.
seems to rule the case of traveling, which moves this controversy. Where
he allows both the sending out of his countrymen, into foreign lands, and
the receiving of foreign people into his country. For to meddle neither with
foreign actions, nor foreign agentes might savor of disdain, and to suffer
good home orders to be corrupted by our foreign travelers, or their foreign
trafficquers might smell of small discretion. Wherefore both to build upon
discretion to prevent harm at home, and to banish disdain to be thought well
on adroad: he takes this order both for such as shall travel abroad into
foreign countries from his, and for such as shall repare, from foreign
countries unto his. For his own travelers he enacteth first. That none under
forty years in any case travel abroad. Then restraining still all private
occasions, for the which he will not dispense with his law, neither grant any
traveling at all: he allows the state in public to send abroad,
ambassadors, messagers, obseruers, for so I turn Plato his (...).

Such as are sent abroad to war for the country, though forth of the
country, he holds for no travelers, as being still of, and in the state: the
cause of their absence continuing their presence, and the place of their
abiding, not altering the nature of their being. And the like rekening he
makes of those solemn ambassadors, which they sent to communicate in
sacrifice with their neighbors, at Delphi, to Apollo, in Olympus, to Jupiter,
at Nemea to Hercules, in Isthmos to Neptune: where he appointed the pacificque,
and friendly Embassages to be furnished out of the most, the best, and brauest
citisens, which with their port, their presence, their magnificence, might
honest, and honor their country most: as to the contrary he requires in his
martial lieuetenant, which in the camp, and field shall represent the state
of his country, credit, estimation, honor, purchased before by virtue and
valor. His obseruer, whom he allows to go abroad to see fashions: he will
have not to be above threescore, nor under fifty years old, and such a one,
as shall be of good credit in his country, for great dealinges, both in war
and peace. For the occasion of his travel pretending to see the manners of men
abroad, to mark what is well and them that are good, which be most times
there, where the place is least likely: and not to be marred by that which is
ill, and them that are naught, which be there oftest, where good orders be
rifest: to correct his country laws by the better foreign: or to confirm
them by the worse: how can he judge of any of these things, which has not
dealt in great affairs, and showed himself there to be a man of judgment? or
how is he able to avoid the evil, and cleave to the good, whom years have
not stayed and given reason the rain, to bridle all desires, that might turn
him away? Such a man, of such a credit, of so many years, but no man younger
does Plato send abroad, to learn in foreign countries, and to see foreign
fashions, so many of those ten years between fifty and sixty, as shall
please him self best. But what must this trauellour do at his return? There
is a counsel appointed of the grauest divines for religion, of ten justices
for law, of the new and old overseers for education, whereof each one takes
with him one younger man, above thirty and under forty. This counsel has
commission to deal in matters of law, either to make new, or to mend the
old: to consider of education, and learning, what is good and quickneth, what
is ill and darckeneth. And what the elder men determine that the younger must
execute. If any of these young men behave himself not well, the elder that
brought him into the parliament, bears blame of the whole house: those that
behave themselves well, are made honorable presidentes to their country to
behold: as they are most dishonored if they prove worse then other. Where by
the way I note these three things. First the care religion, law, education.
How to train before law, how to rule by law, how to temper both train, and
law by divinity, and religion.

Before this counsel, the obseruer presents himself at his returning home,
and there declares, what he has either learned of them abroad, or devised by
their doings, for the help of his country laws, of his country education,
of his countries provision. And if he seemed neither better nor worse, neither
cunninger, nor ignoranter, at his return home, then he was at his departure
from home: he was commended for his good will, and no more was said to him. If
he seemed better and more skillful, he was not only honored by the present
parliament, while he lived, but by the whole country after his death. If he
seemed to return worse, he was commanded to use company, neither with young,
nor old, as one like to corrupt under color of wisdom. And if he obayed that
order, he might live still, howbeit but a private life. If he did not obey, he
was put to death. As he was also if he vere found to be busy headed, and
innouating any thing after the foreign concerning either law, living, or
education. Behold the pattern of a trauellour, rewarded for his well,
punished for his ill: neither ill requited, where he meant but well.

Then for reparers from foreign countries into his, whom he will have well
entertained in any case, he appoints four merchantes, whose mercates,
havens, and lodging, he assigns to be without the city but very near to it:
and certain officers to see, that they innouate nothing in the state, that they
do, and receive right, that they have all things necessary, but without
overplus.

religion, for philosophy, for learning sake, whom he wills the Divines, and
church treasurers, to entertain, to lodge, to care for, as the presidentes of
true hospitality for strangers. That when they shall have tarried some
convenient time, when they shall have seen, and heard, what they will desire
to see or hear: they may depart without either doing, or suffering any injury
or wrong. And that during their abode for any plea under fifty drammes, the
Divines shall be judges between them, and the other party: if it be above that
sum, that then the mayor of the city shall determine the matter.

Ambassadors, sent from foreign Princes, and states, upon public affairs.
Their entertainment he commends to the common purse, their lodging to some
general, some coronell, or some captain only. The care of them was committed
to the hie treasurer, and their host, where they lodged.

obseruers from some other place, as his country did send abroad before, above
fifty years old, pretending a desire to see some good thing among them, or to
say some good thing unto them. This kind of man he excludes from none, as
being comparable with the best, because of his person so advisedly choosen. Who
so was wise, wealthy, learned, valiant, might entertain, and entreat him. When
he minded to depart after he had seen, and observed all things at full, he
was sent away honorablely, with great presents, and rewards. Thus thinks
Plato both of comers in, and goers out of one country into another. But you
will say this was a devise of Plato in his laws, as other be in his common
weal. Yet it is a wisemans devise, that finds the harm, and would avoid it,
and in this our case is well worthy the weying. But as Plato need not to blush
for the devise, which is grounded upon incorruption, whereunto we say that
traveling is a foe: so if such a law were in very deed, politikly planted in
any common weal, as it is naturally engraffed in any honest wit: there would
be exception notwithstanding against it. In all this Platonicall provision, we
may easily observe, that his chief care is by traveling, either to amend the
country, or not to mar it: and that the foreign usually is a steppemother
to a strange country. Therefore as young gentlemen may travel, both for
their pleasure, to see foreign countries, and for their profit, to return
wise home: so their own country desires them, to mind that profit in deed,
and not to mar it with to much pleasure, which is the cause why that all ages
have misliked traveling, as the occasion of corruption in most, and think it
better forborne for hindering of so many, then to be allowed, for the good of
some few, which is hasarded at the first, and uncertain to prove well. The
reason of all this is, both for the foreign evil, which may corrupt, and for
the very good, which will not fit, be it never so fit their, from whence it is
fetched.

But to my purpose, and the training at home for home. I remit this traveling
abroad to their consideration, which use it, which I dare not quite mislike,
because I see very many honest people, which have traveled, and the argument
of misliking receives instance, that the thing may be well used, even because
some do misuse it, whereunto all other indifferences else be also subject. Nay I
dare scant but think well of it, because my Prince does allow it, thorough
whose license their traveling is warranted. I say but thus much generally
though some traveler do some good to his country, eue^ by the fruit of his
travel, and most in best places: that yet the statarie countrieman does a
great deal more. The reason why is this. The continual residenciarie at home
has his eye still bent upon some one thing: where he means to light, and
makes the direct and natural mean unto it: which though the travelers do
allege to be their mind to, yet their mean is not so fit, as that is, which
ordinarily, and orderly is made for the thing. Neither is this allegatio^
general. For we see the course which the most do use after their return, to
bewraie a passage for pleasure, rather then any sound, and advised enterprise.
And therefore I do wish the domestical train to be well traveled to better
us with our own, and that we did not so much try how foreign effects do make
us out of fashion, though they feed our fantsies, and that it would please
well disposed young gentlemen to sort them selves betimes to some kind of
learning to make them in deed liberal, their ability being thoroughly fensed,
against fear of corruption, to serve their country honorably that way which
does so honor them.

For as all will be lawyers, or in houses of law, and court, to some private
end: so what if some of choice became both divines, and physicianes, and so
forth in other learned sciences, as I said before? If there be any gentleman in
our country so qualified at this day in any kind of learning, is he not
therefore praised, esteemed, and honored of all others, and above all others
of his calling, and somewhat higher to which are: not comparably qualyfied?
Whence I gather this argument: That the worthynes of the thing is confessed by
the honor given unto it, and that such as desire honor ought to seek for
such worthiness, as enforces the assured confession of the best deserved
honor. And I pray you be not these faculties for their subject to be
reverenced, as they are? and for their effects to be esteemed of special
account? which have been allway the very grounds of the best, and most
beneficial nobility? I do not hold Tamerlane, or any barbarous, and bloody
invasions to be means to true nobility, which come for scourges: but such as
be pacifike most, and warlike but upon defense, if the country be assailed: or
to offend, if reueng be to be made, and former wrong to be awraked. Neither
take I wealth to be any worthy cause to renown the owner, unless it be both
got by laudable means, and likewise be employed upon commendable works:
neither any quality or gift, which beawtifieth the body unless virtue do
commend it, as serviceable to good use, neither yet any endewement of the
mind, but only such as keep residence in reason, having authority in hand,
Philo
and direction to rule, by the philosophers termed (...). Wherein those
qualities do claim a tenure, which I have assigned as foundations to honor,
and notes of nobility, worthy the esteeming, and of inestimable worth. Who
dare abase divinity for the thing it self? or who is so impudent, as not to
confess that profession honorable which has God himself to father, and
friend, our most loving, and merciful maker: the devil himself to enemy and
foe, our most subtle, and despitefull marrer, the doctrine of life, the danuter
of death? Some scruple there is now, which was not sometime when the allurement
was larger, the living fatter, and the countenance greater: but the matter is
now better, though the man be brought both to more baseness in opinion, and
bareness in provision, and will honor a good gentleman, which will seek
honor by it, and ought so to do. The time was when the great Caesar, Plut. in
Caes.
at his going forth from his house in his suit for the great pontificate said
to his mother, that she should either see her son at his return the great
bishop, or else no body. Such a step was that state to his whole preferment
after. Ad 1. Nicocleon.
Isocrates in his oration, where he frames a prince, joins priesthood with
the prince, as two things of like care, requiring like sufficiency in
persons, like skill in well handling, which two says he, every one thinks, he
can cunningly weild, but hardly any one can handle them well.

If gentlemen will not travel and profess physic, let them feel the price of
ignorance, and punish their carcasses besides the consumption of their cofers,
as all learning being refused by them has no other way to reueng her self,
then only to leave them to ignorance, which will still attend to flatter and
fawn there where small stuffing is, and that which is most miserable, because
themselves see it not, will cause them selves to be their own Gnatoes, a most
improper part, to be seen upon a stage, when the same person plaieth Thraso,
and answers himself, as if he were two. Were it not most honorable for them
to see these effects in their own persons? singular knowledge where study is
for knowledge and knowledge for no need? liberal execution, where desire to
do good, and good for gramercie be the true ends of most honor? where the
promises from heaven, the princes upon earth, the perpetual prayer, and
neuerdying praise of the profited people will remember, and requi^e that
honorable labor, so honestly employed, that fortunate reuenew so blessedly
bestowed, not for private pleasure, but for common profit?

Albeit there is one note here necessarily to be observed in young gentlemen
that it were a great deal better that they had no learning at all and knew
their own ignorance, then any little smattering, imperfect in his kind, and
fleeting in their heads. For their known ignorance does but harm them
selves, where other that be cunning may supply their rowmes: but their unripe
learning though pretty in the degree, and very like to have proved good, if it
had tarried the pulling, and hung the full harvest, does keep such a rumbling
in their heads, as it will not suffer them to rest, such a wonder it is to see
the quickesiluer. For the greatness of their place emboldeneth the rash
vnripenes of their study, in what degree so ever it be, whether not in
digesting that which they have read, or in not reading sufficiently, or in
choosing of absurdities to seem to be able to defend where their state makes
them spared, and meaner men's regard does procure them reverence, though their
rashness be seen, or in not resting upon any one thing, but desultorie over
all. A matter that may seem to be somewhat in schools, even amongst good
scholars: and very much in that state, where least learning is commonly best
liked, though best learning be most aduau^ced, when it ioynes with birth in
sowndnes, and admiration. As the contrary troubles all the world, with most
perverse opinions, beginning at the insufficient, though stout gentleman, and
so marching forward still among such, as make more account of the person whence
the ground comes, then of the reason which the thing carries. Wherefore to
conclude, I wish young gentlemen to be better then the common in the best kind
of learning, as their mean to come to it, is every way better. I wish them in
exercise, and the fruits thereof to be their defendours, because they are able
to bear out the charge, wherevnder the common of necessity must shrink: That
both those ways they may help their country in all needs, and themselves,
to all honor.

The prince and sovereign being the tippe of nobility: and growing in person
most private for train, The Princes train.
though in office most public for rule, does claim of me that private note,
which I promised before. The greatest prince in that he is a child, is, as
other children be, for soul sometimes fine, sometimes gross: for body,
sometimes strong, sometimes weak: of mould sometime fair, sometime mean: so
that for the time to begin to learn, and the matter which to learn, and all
other circumstances, wherein he communicates with his subjects, he is no
less subject, then his subjects be. For exercise to health, the same: to
honor, much above: as he is best able to bear it, where coast is the burden,
and honor the ease. We must take him as God sendes him, because we cannot
choose, as we could wish: as he must make the best of his people, though his
people be not the best. Our duty is to obey him, and to pray for him: his care
willbe to rule over us, and to provide for us, the most in safety the least in
peril. Which seeing we find it prove true in the female, why should we
mistrust to find it in the male? If the prince his natural constitution be but
feeble, and weak, yet good train as it helps forwardnes, so it strengthens
infirmity: and is some restraint even to the worst given, if it be well
applied, and against the liberty of high calling oppose the infamy of ill
doing. Which made even Nero stay the five first years of his government, and
to seem incomparable good. When the young princes elementarie is past, and
greater reading comes on, such matter must be pikt, as may plant humililie in
such height, and sufficiency in such need, that courtesy be the mean to
win, as ability to wonder. Continual dealing with foreign Embassadoures,
and conferring at home with his own counselors require both tongues to
speak with, and stuff to speak of.

And whereas he governs his state by his two arms, the Ecclesiasticke, to
keep, and clear religion, which is the maine pillar to voluntary obedience:
and the Politic, to preserve, and maintain the civil government, which does
bridle will, and enforces contentment: if he lack knowledge to handle both
his arms, or want good advice to assist them in their dealing, is he not more
then lame? and does not the help hereof consist in learning? Martial skill is
needful: But it would be to defend, because a sturring Prince still redye to
assail, is a plague to his people, and a punishment to him self, and in his
most gain, does but get that, which either he or his must one day loose
again, if the loss rest there, and pull not more with it. But religious skill
is far more massiue: because religion as it is most necessary for all, so to
a Prince it is more then most of all, who fearing no man, as above man's reach,
and commanding over all as under his commission, if he fear not God his very
next both auditour, and judge, in whose hand is his heart? and what a fear must
men be in for fear of most ill, when the Prince fears not him, who can do him
most good? Almighty God be thanked, who has at this day lent us such a
Princess, as in deed fears him, that we need not fear her which deserving
to be loved desires not to be feared. I wish this education to be liked of the
Prince, to pull the people onward, by example that they like of, though they
cannot aspire to: as I pray God long preserve her, whose good education does
teach us, what education can do, whereby neither this land shall ever repent,
that education of it self did so much good in her: and I have good cause to
rejoice that this may labor concerning education comes abroad in her time.

Chapter 40. Of the general place, and time of education. Public places,
Elementarie, Grammatical, Collegiate. Of bourding of children abroad from
their parents houses, and whether that be best. The use and commodity of a
large, and well situate training place. Observations to be kept in the general
time.
THese two circunstances for the general place, and the general time,
concern both the exercise of the body, and the training of the mind jointly,
because they both are to be put in execution in the same place, and at the same
time, though not at the same hours. For the particular times, and places I
will deal in mine other treatises, where I will accomodate the particular
circumstance to the particular argument. Private places, where every parent
has his children taught within his doares, have but small interest in this
place: because such a parent, as he may take or leave of the general train,
what it shall please him, his own liking being the measure to lead him: so
for exercise, or any other thing he is the appointer of his own circumstance,
and his house is his castle.

Public places be either elementarie, Division of public places. Collegiat.
grammatical, or collegiate. For the collegiate places, whether they be in the
universities, or without, they be lightly well situate, and for both the
trains resonably well builded, specially such as have a cloysture or galerie
for exercise in foul weather, and the open fields at hand for the fair. If
there be any fault in that kind, it may be set down, in hope sooner to have
it amended in new erections, when such founders shall be found: then to be
redressed in those which be erected already: because these buildinges be
restrained to the soil, where on they stand. Yet wish for the better may take
place, when the want is found, though the effect do follow a long while after,
if it ever do at all.

The elementarie places admit no great counsel, Elementarie.
because such as enter the young ones, do provide the rowmes of them selves, and
the little people be not as yet capable of any great exercise: so that there is
no more to be said herein but this, that the Elementarie teachers provide their
rowmes as large as they may, and that the pare^tes domestical care supply:
where the masters provision is not sufficient. For as the collegiate years
must direct themselves most, because they are after a certain degree set over
to their own government: so the elementarie, because of their weakness and
youth must be jointly helped between the master and the parent, this point for
the petie ones being altogether private, and upon private charge, as the other
collegiate is altogether public and upon public erection though always
proceeding from some private mean. But if any well disposed wealthy man for
the honor that he bears to the murdered infantes, (as all our erections
have some respect that way,) would begin some building even for the little
young ons, which were no increase to schools, but an help to the elementarie
degree, all they would pray for him, and he himself should be much bound to
the memory of the young infantes, which put him in remembrance of so virtuous
an act. And rich men which have much more then necessary enough, though none of
them think he have simply enough, would be stirred forward by all good and
earnest people, which favor the public weal, whose foundation is laid in
these petie infantes, to spend the supererogation of their wealth that way,
where it will do most good to other, and least harm to themselves.

Grammatical.
The places where the the toungues be taught, by order and art of grammar,
require more observation, because the years that be or at the least ought to
be employed that way be fittest, both for the fashioning of the body, and for
framing of the mind: most subject to the masters direction, and consist of a
compound care, public erection, which provides them places wherein to
learn: and private maintenance which furnishes out the rest. The scholars
either come daily from their fathers houses to school, or be bourded at their
charges somewhere very nigh to the school.

Of bourding abroad.
Where there rises a question whether it be better for the child to board
abroad with his master, or some where else: or to come from home daily to
school. If the place where the parents dwell, be near to the school, that
the nighnes of his masters house can be no great vantage: or but so sarre of,
as the very walk may be for the boys health: and the parent himself be
careful and wise withal, to be as good a furtherer in the training, as he is
a father to the being of his own chield: certainly the parents house is much
better, if for nothing else, yet because the parent may more easily at all
times entend the goodness of his own, being but one or few, then the master
can, at such extraordinary times as the bourding with him, does seem to beg
his diligence, being both tired before, and distracted among many. Further, all
the considerations which do persuade men rather to have their children taught
at home, then among the multitude abroad, for the bettering of their behavior,
do speak for their bourding at home, if the parents will consider the thing
well: Because the parent may both see to the entertainment of his child, when
he is from school, and withal examine, what good he does at school. For
undoubtedly the masters be wearied with traveling all the day, so that the
private help within their houses, can be but little, without both ouertyring the
master, and shortening his life, and the dulling of the child, if he still
pore upon his book. Times of recreation must be had, and are as requisite to
do things well any long time, as studying is necessary to do any thing well
at anytime. For can any man but think it a great deal more, then a sufficient
time for the master to teach, and the scholar to learn daily from six in the
morning till eleven, and from one in the afternoon till wellnigh six at night,
if these hours be well applied? nay if they were a great deal fewer? And may
not the residew be well enough bestowed upon solace and recreation in some
change to the more pleasant for either party? In the masters house, I grant
children may keep schoolehowers better, and be less subject to loytering and
trewantrie. The masters care in his general teaching may eye them nearer,
because they be in his so near tuition, and in place of his own children,
being committed unto his private care by their own parents and friends, he
may more easily dispense with their hours, if they fortune to mind many
elementarie points at one time: and sooner find out their inclination, then
in the general multitude. And if any particular preferment be incident to his
house, without the common wearying both of the scholar and master, some thing
may be done. There be also many private considerations, which some parents
follow in the displacing of their children from their own houses, which I
remit to their thoughts, as I reserve some to mine own. If the master do
entend only such scholars as he bourdeth, and have both in himself abililie
to perform, what is needful for the best train: and have such a convenient
number as will rise to some hight in the train, I know none better, so the
place where he dwells, and teaches do answer in conuenientnes, and
situation and some circumstances, else. But while he cares to have his
bourders learn, sure some slow paying parents will keep him lean, if he
look not well to it, and his gain will go backward, besides the continual
miscontentmentes. At home spoils, soilthes, twenty things, are nothing in the
parents heavenly eye, which self same be death abroad, where the parent has
another eye: and yet the things misliked not auoidable even at home. But what
if sickness, nay what if death come in deed, the^ all things be constrewed to
the worst, as if death did not know where the parent dwells. And though the
master do that which the civil law requires in deposing, and use not only
so much diligence to preserve, but much more then in his own, yet all that is
nothing. Wherefore as parents must beware of boording out for their own good:
so masters must be wary of admitting any for their own harm. And sure to
set down my resolution, me think it enough for the master to take upon him
the train alone, being so great both for exercise and learning, as I wish him
well considered, that can do both well. If parents dwell not near the
school, let some neighbors be hosts, which may and will entend it, and
deliver the master of the parents care, whom even they will favor more, if
they find profit by his schooling. They be distinct offices, to be a parent and
a master, and the difficulties in training do eager sore enough, though the
same man be troubled with no more. Boording, that is the undertaking of both a
fathers and a masters charge requires many circumstances of conuenientnes in
place, of provision for necessities, of trusty and diligent servants, and a
number more: besides indifferency in the parent to be armed against accidents,
where there is no evident default, and to content truly where there is great
desert: as the master is to give a great account of two several cures, a
personage for his teaching, and a vicarage for his boording. The masters
charge is great of it self, but this composition of a duble office is a
marvelous matter. If the master mind his boorders eitheer only or most, where
his charge is over more, where then is his duty? if not, what gain have those
boorders, by their masters private? If he teach but boorders let him look to
himself, for his charge will prove chargeable more ways then one: and those
that be best able to put forth to board, are always most strait in making all
audittes, and to amplify offenses before they be proved, without eitheir
conference or contentment. I wish parents therefore to be wary, ear they set
over their own person for more then the training: and the masters to be as
wary for fear of had I wist. But to the grammar schools. As the elementaries
of force must be near unto their parents because of their youth, and
therefore are not to be denied the middle of cities and towns: so I could wish
that grammar schools, were planted in the skirtes and suburbs of towns,
near to the fields, where partly by enclosure of some private ground, for
the closer exercises both in covert and open: partly for the benefit of the
open fields for exercises of more raunge, there might not be much want of
room, if there were any at all. To have a fair school house above with
freedom of air for the toungues, and an other beneth for other points of
learning, and perfiting or continuyng the Elementarie entrances, which will
hardly be kept, if they be posted over to private practicing at home: to have
the master and his family though of some great number conveniently well
lodged: to have a pretty close adjoining to the school walled round about, and
one quarter if no more covered above cloisture like, for the childrens exercise
in the rainie weather, as it will require a good mind and no mean purse: so
it needs neither the conference of a country, as Lacedemon did in Athenaeus,
and Plato, as Athens did in Pausanias, Suidas and Philostratus, as Corinth did
in Diogenes Laertius* nor yet the revenue of a Romain Emperor, whose
buildinges in this kind, were most sumptuous and magnificent, as Adrian the
Emperors Athenaeum, Hermaeum and Panathaenaicum at Tibur, and Neroes Thermae
at Rome, which in one building furnished out both learning and exercise as it
appears by the discriptions of their places called, Gymnasia, xysta, and
Palaestrae.

There is wealth enough in private possession, if there were will enough to
public education. And yet we have no great cause to complain for number of
schools and founders. For during the time of her Majesty's most fortunate
reign already, there has been mo schools erected, then all the rest be, that
were before her time in the whole Realm. My meaning is not to have so many,
but better appointed both for the masters entertainment, and the commodity of
the places. Small help will make most of our rooms serve, and small study
with great good will and honest salarie to maintain a sufficient man, will
make our teachers able both to enstructe well and to exercise better. The
places of learning and exercise, ought to be joint tenementes, and near
neigbours capable of number, which must be limited by the need of the
country, where the school stands, and the masters maintenance which way
it must rise. For if it rise by the number, better for him few and choice, so
they consider his pains accordingly. And sure experience has taught me, that
where the master is left to the uncertainty of his stipende to increase or
decrease with his diligence, that there he will do best, and the children
profit most, allway provided that he deal with no more, then he can bring up
under him self, and hasard not his own credit, nor his childrens profit upon
any absolute vnderteacher. Whose use is not, as we now practice it in schools,
where indeed vshers be masters of them selves, but to assist the master in
the easier points of his charge, which ought to have all under his own
teaching, for the chief points, and the same under the vshers, for more
usual and easy, as in the teaching of the Latin toungue, I will declare more
at large. Where the very practice will confirm my words, and prove them to be
true.

Again, it is half a wonder ever to bring forth a good scholar in the heart of
a great town: where there be change of schools, and many strange
circunstances to procure change, as it shall please the child. Who
notwithstanding he have his will followed in the change, yet seldom wins
very much by the change: though the second master oftimes make show of the
formers ground work, which is made but light of, because it keeps low.

If the masters stipend do rise by foundation, and standing payment, yet the
place may not be ouercharged with number: nor the master with care to provide
things needful any other ways then only by his trade. For what reason is it
to have a man's whole labor, and to allow him living scant sufficient for a
quarter? or what policy is it, to have him that should teach well, to be
enforced for need, to meddle with some trade, quite different from the school.
In this point the Pope, and Canon law wear merueilous freindly to masters,
and helped them still with some Ecclesiastical maintenance, as it appears
in Gregory's Decretales, and fifth title of the first book, De Magistris. And
the Gloss ripping further then the text, is yet more freindly. And our own
country also, in benefit of privilege, by the common law at this day, does
not frown upon us, and for certain immunities, lets us enjoy that
benefit, which the Canonist meant us. And the good Emperor Frederick did
further by his freindly and favorable constitution, which he caused to be
placed in the fourth book of Justinians new Codex, the thirtenth title, Ne
filius, pro patre, where the Gloss, making an anatomy of the Emperors
meaning, and desirous to do us good, helps us particularly and properly to.

Among many causes which make schools so insufficiently appointed, I know not
any, nay is there any? that so weakneth the profession as the very nakedness
of allowance does. The good that comes from and by schools is great and
infinite: the qualities required in the teacher many and resolute: the charges
which his freindes have been at in his bringing up much and heavy: and in the
way of preferment, will ye wish any of any worth to set down his staff at
some petie portion, which even they that praise it, would not be content to
have their own sit down with, though the founder follow his president, and
the time have been, when with the Church help some little would have served?
but the case now is quite altered. In these our days each man will enhaunce in
his own, without reason or remorse: but in professions of greatest need and
most account, they will yield no more allowance, then the ancient rent, where
all things be improued. Yet oftimes they meet with bookmen in some kinds,
which will bite them coursdly. But those bookmen be neither Elementarie
teachers, nor yet Grammarians. Our calling creepes low and has pain for
companion, still thrust to the wall, though still confessed good: Our comfort
perforce is in the general conclusion, Probitas laudatur and alget.
that those things be good things, which want no praising, though they go a
cold, for want of happing. For our school places, which I do know, the most
are either commodiously situate already, or being in the heart of towns might
easily be chopped for some field situation, far from disturbaunce, and near to
all necessaries. It were no small part of a great and good erection, even to
translate roumes to more convenient places, either by exchange or by new
purchase: and I do think that licenses to that end, will be more easily
granted then to build more schools. The inconveniences which I my self have
felt that way, both for mine own, and for my scholars health, and the
checking of that, which of long I have wished for: I mean some train in
exercise, do cause me so much to comme^d field room. Though I my self be not
the worst appointed within a city for room, thorough the great good will
toward the furtherance of learning, and the great cost, in the purchasing,
and apparelling the room to that use, done by the worshipful company of the
marchaunttailours in London. In whose school I have been both the first, and
only master sense the erection, and their have continued now twenty years.

If ye consider, what is to be done in these rooms which I require, ye shall
better judge what rooms will serve. In the school the toungues be taught, and
the Elementarie train continued at times thereunto appointed, for those, two
rooms will serve. An upper, with some convenient discharging the place from
noisome air, which the very children cause: and from to great noise if the
place be vawted under, or enclosed with other building and an other beneath
likewise appointed, to serve for what else is to be done. They that will have
their children learn all that I have assigned them upon good warrant of the
best writers, and most commendable custom, if their capacities be according,
may have their turn served so: and those that will not, need not, but the
opportunity of the place, and the commodity of such trainers, whereof a small
time will bring forth a great meany, will draw many on, and procure good
exhibitours to have the thing go forward. I could wish we had fewer schools,
so they were more sufficient, and that upon consideration of the most
convenient seats for the countries, and shires, there were many put together
to make some few good. Insufficiency by distraction dismembers, and weakens:
sufficiency by uniting strengthens, and does much good. To conclude I wish
the room commodious for situacion, which in training up of youth has been an
old care, as it appears by Xenophon in the schooling of Cyrus and the
Persian order: large to hold, and convenient to hold handsomely. For as
reading, and things of that motion do require small elbow room: so writing,
and her appendentes may not be straited. Music will cumber if it be
confounded. Where writing will be allowed, there drawing will not be driven out.
But exercise must have scope. And such kind of rooms, if the multitude be not
to big, or the way to school not to far for the infant, with some little
distinctions, and parting of places, will serve conveniently both for the
Elementarie, and the Grammarian, and so much the better.

For the time there is but little to be said at this time: The time.
because in the Elementarie and so onward, I mean by the grace of God to apply
all circunstances so near, and so precisely to school uses, as the master
shall be able straight way to execute: if he do but follow that which shall be set
before him, for matter wherein: for manner how: for time when to do each thing
best. For the general exercising time. These two grounds of Hippocrates, must
be still kept in remembrance, to use no exercise when ye be very hungry:
neither yet to eat before ye have used some exercise.

For the general learning times: to begin, the strength of body, and conceit
of mind were made the general means: to continue, perfectness, and use were
appointed the limittes: for the middle hours this I think, that it were not
good, to go to your book straight after ye rise, but to give some time to the
clearing of your body. As also study after meat, and fast before ye sleep
bears great blame for great harms to health, and to much shortning of life.
From seven of the cloak, though ye rise sooner, (as the lamb and the lark be
the prouerbiale leaders, when to rise and when to go to bead) till ten before
noone, and from two till almost five in the after noone, be the best and
fittest hours, and enough for children wherein to learn. The morening hours
will best serve for the memory and conceiving: the after noone for
repetitions, and stuff for memory to work on. The reasons be the freeness,
or fullness of the head. The other times before meat be for exercises, as has
been fully handled hertofore. The hours before learning, and after meat, are
to be bestowed, upon either neating of the body, or solacing of the mind,
without to much motion: wherein as I said before the greatest part, and the best
to be played consists usually in the trainers distretion, to apply things
according to the circunstances of person, place, and time. To conclude we must
be content with those places, which be already founded, and use those hours
which be already pointed to the best that we can, and yet prepare our selves
toward the better, when soever it shall please God to send them. And by
persuasion some masters may well enough bring wise parents to yield unto
this note, and to give it the trial. In the mean time some excellent man
having the commodity of a well situate house, and being able to command his
own circunstance, neither depending of other men's help, whereof he cannot
judge, and so that way leasing some authority in direction, may put many
excellent conclusions in trial.

Chapter 41. Of teachers and trainers in general, and that they be either
Elementarie, Grammatical, or Academicall. Of the Elementarie teachers
ability, and entertaiment. Of the Grammar masters ability and his
entertaiment. A mean to have both excellent teachers, and cunning professors
in all kinds of learning, by the division of colleges according to
professions: by sorting like years into the same roumes: by bettering the
students allowance and living: by providing and maintaining notable well
learned readers. That for bringing learning forward in his right and best
course, there would be seven ordinary ascending colleges for Toungues, for
Mathematikes, for Philosophy, for Teachers, for Physicians, for Lawyers, for
Divines, and that the general study of Law would be but one study: Every of
these points with his particular proofs, sufficient for a position. Of the
admission of teachers.
ALTHOUGH I divided the train of education into two parts, the one for
learning to enrich the mind: the other for exercise to enable the body: yet I
reserved the execution of both to one and the same master: because neither the
knowledge of both is so excessive great, but it may easily be come by: neither
the execution so troublesome, but that one man may see to it: neither do the
subjects by nature receive partition seeing the soul and body join so
freindly in lincke, and the one must needs serve the others turn: and he that
sees the necessity of both, can best discern what is best for both. As
concerning the trainers ability, whereby he is made sufficient to meddle with
exercises, I have already in my conceit sufficiently enstructed him, both for
the exercises themselves, and for the manner of handling them according to the
rules and considerations of Physic, and Gymnastick, besides some
aduertisements given peculiarly to his own person: wherein I dwelt the longer,
and dealt the larger, because I meant not to meddle with that argument any more
then once, and for that point so to satisfy the trainer, wheresoever he dwelt,
or of what ability soever he were, as if he listed he might rest upon my rules
being painfully gathered from the best in that kind. If he were desierous to
make further search, and had opportunity of time, and store of books: I gave
him some light where to bestow his study. Teachers. Elementarie. Grammatical.
Academicall.


Now am I to deal with the teaching master, or rather that property in the
common master, which concerns teaching: which is either Elementarie and
deals with the first principles: or Grammatical and enters to the toungues:
or Academicall, and becomes a reader, or tutour to youth in the university.

For the tutour because he is in the university, Academicall.
where his daily conversation among a number of students, and the opinion of
learning which the university has of him: will direct choice and assure
desire: I have nothing to say, but leave the parents to those helps, which
the place does promise.

For the Elementarie because good scholars will not abase themselves to it,
Elementarie.
it is left to the meanest, and therefore to the worst. For that the first
grounding would be handled by the best, and his reward would be greatest,
because both his pains and his judgment should be with the greatest. And it
would easily allure sufficient men to come down so low, if they might
perceive that reward would rise up. No man of judgment will contrary this
point, neither can any ignorant be blamed for the contrary: the one sees the
thing to be but low in order, the other knows the ground to be great in
laying, not only for the matter which the child does learn: which is very
small in show, though great for process: but also for the manner of handling his
wit, to harten him for afterward, which is of great moment.

Of the Elementary teachers entertainment.
But to say somewhat concerning the teachers reward, which is the encouragement
to good teaching, what reason is it, though still pretended, and sometimes
performed, to increase wages, as the child waxes in learning? Is it to cause
the master to take more pains, and upon such promise, to set his pupille more
forward? Nay surely that cannot be. The present payment would set that more
forward, then the hope in promise, because in such variety and inconstancy of
the parents minds, what assurance is there, that the child shall continue
with the same master: that he may receive greater allowance with less
pains, which took greater pains, with less allowance? Besides this if the
reward were good, he would have to gain more, which new and fresh repare of
scholars would bring, upon report ofthe furthering his old, and his diligent
travel. What reason caryeth it, when the labor is less, then to enlarge the
allowance? the latter master to reap the benefit of the formers labor,
because the child makes more show with him? why? It is the foundation well and
soundly laid, which makes all the upper building muster, with countenance, and
continuance. If I were to strike the stock, as I am but to give counsel, the
first pains truly taken, should in good truth be most liberally recompensed:
and less allowed still upward, as the pains diminish, and the ease
increases. Whereat no master has cause to repine, so he may have his
children well grounded in the Elementarie. Whose imperfection at this day does
marueilously trouble both masters and scholars, so that we can hardly do any
good, nay scantly tell how to place the too too raw boys in any certain
form, with hope to go forward orderly, the ground work of their entry being
so rotton underneath. Which weakness if the upper master do redress, when the
child comes under his hand, he cannot but deserve triple wages, both for his
own making, and for mending that, which the Elementarie either marred with
ignorance, or made not for haste, which is both the commonest, and the
corruptest kind of marring in my opinion. For the next masters wages, I do
conceive, that the number in ripeness under him, will requite the Elementarie
allowance, be it never so great. For the first master can deal but with a
few, the next with more, and so still upward, as reason grows on, and receives
without forcing. For the inequality of children, it were good a whole company
removed still together, and that there were no admission into schools, but
four times in the year quarterly, that the children of foresight might be
matched, and not hurled hand over head into one form as now we are foreced,
not by substance, but by similitude and conjecture at the sudden, which thing
the conference between the masters in a resolved plat will help wonderfully
well forward, when the one says this have I taught, and this can the child do:
the other knows this ye should teach, and this your child should do. Thus
much for the elementarie master, that he be sufficiently appointed in himself
for ability, and sufficiently provided for, by parents for maintenance. Now
whether one man, or more shall be able to perform all the elementarie points,
at diverse hours, or of force there must be more teachers, that shall be handled
in the elementarie it self hereafter. Once fore all good entertainment by way
of reward, will make very able men to lean this way, and one course of
training will breed, a marvelous number of sufficient trainers, whose
insufficiency may now be objected, that such cannot presently be had, though
in short time they may. And if there must be more executours, entertainment
will work that to, and conuenientnes of rowme will bring all together.

My greatest travel must be about the grammar master, Gra^mer masters.
as each parent ought to be very circumspect for his own private that way. For
he is to deal with those years, whereupon all the residew do build their
likelyhoode to prove well or ill. Wherein by reason of the natural agilitie of
the soul and body, being both unsettled, there is most stir, and least stay:
he perfiteth the Elementarie in course of learning: he offers hope or
despair of perfection to the tutor and university, in their proceeding
further. The Gra^mer masters entertainment and his su^fficiencie.
For whom in consideration of sufficient ability, and faithful travel I must
still pray for good entertainment, which will always procure most able persons.
For it is a great daunting to the best able man, and a great cutting of of his
diligent pains, when he shall find his whole days travel not able to
furnish him of necessary provision: to do good with the best, and to gain
with the basest, nay much less then the lowest, who may entend to shift, when
he must entend his charge: and enrich him self, nay hardly feed himself,
with a pure, and poor conscience. But ye will perhaps say what shall this man
be able to perform, for whom you are so careful, to have him so well
entertained? to whose charge the youth of our country is to be committed? If
there were no more said, even this last point were enough to crave enough, for
that charge is great: and if he do discharge it well, he must be well able to
do it, and ought to be very well requited for doing it so well. Besides his
manners and behavior, which require testimony and assurance: besides his skill
in exercising and trayning of the body, he must be able to teach the three
learned tou^gues, the latin, the greek, the hebrew, if the place require so
much, if not, so much as is required. Wherein assuredly a mediocritie in
knowledge, will prove to mean, to emplant, that in another which he has in
himself. For he that means to plant but some little well: must himself far
exceed any degree of mediocrite. He must be able to understand his writer, to
master false printes, unskillful dictionaries, simple conjectures of some
smattering writers concerning the matter of his train, and be so appointed ear
he begine to teach, as he may execute readyly, and not make his own
imperfection, to be a torture to his scooler, and a schooling to him self. For
it is an ill ground to grow up from ignorance by teaching, in that place,
where no ignorance of matter at least should be, at the very first: though time
and experience do polish out the manner. He must have the knowledge of all the
best grammers, to give notes by the way still, though he burden not the childs
memory of course, with any more then shall be set down. There are required in
him besides these, and further points of learning to, as I will note
hereafter, hardness to take pains: constancy to continue and not to shrink
from his trade: discretion to judge of circumstances: lightsomnes to delight in
the success of his labor: hartines to encourage a toward youth: regard to
think each child an Alexander: courteous lowlines in himself, as if he were
the meanest, thoug he were known to be the best. For the very least thing in
learning, will not be well done, but only by him, which knows the most, and
does that which he does with pleasure and ease, by reason of his former store.
These qualities deserve much, and in our scooles they be not generally found,
because the rewards for labor there be so base and simple, yet the most near
is best in choice, and many there be which would come near, if entertainment
were answerable. Let the parents, and founders provide for the one: and
certainly they shall find no default in the other. A mean to have excellent
teachers, and professors generally


There were a way in the nature of a seminary for excellent masters in my
conceit, if reward were abroad, and such an order might be had within the
university: which I must touch with license and for touching crave pardon, if
it be not well thought of, as I know it will seem strange at the first,
because of some difficulty in perfourming the devise. And yet there had never
been any alteration to the better, if the name of alteration had been the
object to repulse. This my note but by the way, though it presently parhapes
do make some men muse, yet hereafter upon better consideration, it may prove
very familiar to some good fantasies, and be exceeding well liked of, both by
my masters of the universities them selves, and by their masters abroad.
Whereby not only schoolemaisters, but all other professors also shall be made
excellently able to perform that in the common weal which she looks for at
their hands, when they come from the university. But by the way I protest
simply, that I do not tender this wish, as having any great cause to mislike
the current, The four particular means.
which the universities be now in: but granting things there to be well done
already, I offer no discourtesie in wishing that good to be a great deal
better. My conceit rests in these four points: what nay, what good were not
in great forwardnes to be done, if this thing were done? And may not the state
of the realm do this by authority, which gave authority to founders to do
the other, with reservation of prerogative to alter upon cause? or is not this
question as worthy the debating to mend the universities, and to plant sownd
learning: as to devise the taking away lands from colleges, and put the
students to pension, because they cannot use them without iarring among
themselves? Were there any way better to cut away all the misliking, wherewith
the universities be now charged, and to bring in a new face of things both
rarer and fayrer?

In the first erection of schools and colleges, private zeal enflamed good
founders: in altering to the better, public consideration may cause a
commoner good, and yet keep the good founders meaning, who would very gladly
embrace any auauncement to the better in any their buildinges. The nature of
time is upon sting of necessity, to enfourme what were best: and the duty of
policy is, advisedly to consider, how to bring that about which time does
advertise. And if time do his duty to tell, can policy avoid blame in
sparing to try? And why should not public consideration be as careful to
think of altering to fortify the state now, as private zeal was hot then to
strengthen that which was then in liking?

But I will open these four interrogations better, that the considerations
which lead me, may win others unto me, or at the least let them fee, that it
is no mere novelty which moves me thus far.

Of the division of colleges.
Touching the division of colleges by professions and faculties, I alleege no
president from other nations, though I could do diverse, beginning even at
Lycaeum, Stoa, Academia themselves, and so downward, and in other nations east
and southeast ascending upward, where students cloystured them selves
together, as their choice in learning lay: but private examples in their
applying to our country may be controuled by general exception. The college of
toungues.
If there were one college, where nothing should be professed, but languages
only, (as there be some people which will proceed no further) to serve the
realm abroad, and studies in the university, in that point excellently and
absolutely, were it not convenient? nay were it not most profitable? That
being the end of their profession, and nothing dealt withal there but that,
would not sufficiency be discried by witness of a number? and would not daily
conference and continual applying in the same thing procure sufficiency?
Whereas now every one dealing with every thing confusedly none can assuredly
say, thus much can such a one do in any one thing, but either upon conjecture
which oftentimes deceives even him that affirms: or else upon courtesy which
as often beguiles even him that believes. These reasons hold not in this point
for toungues only: but in all other distributions, where the like matter, and
the like men be likewise to be matched. For where all exercises, all
conferences, all both private, and public colloquies, be of the same argument,
because the soil brings forth no other stuff, there must needs follow
great perfection. When toungues, and learning be so severed, it will soon
appear, what ods there is between one that can but speak, and him that can do
more, whereas now some few finish words, will bear away the glory from
knowledge, without consideration, that the gate is without the town as
dismantling bewraies, though it be the entry into it.

If an other college were for the Mathematical sciences I dare say it were
good, The college for the mathematikes
I will not say it were best, for that some good wits, and in some things
not unseen, not knowing the force of these faculties because they never
thought them worthey their study as being without preferment, and within
contempt, do use to abase them, and to mock at mathematical heads, because
in deed the study thereof requires attentiuenes, and such a mind, as will
not be soon carried to any public show, before his full ripenes, but will rest
in solitary conte^plation, till he find himself flidge. Now this their
meditation if they be students in deed: or the shadow of meditation, if they
be but counterfettes, do these men play with all, and mock such mathematical
heads, to solace themselves with.

Wherein they have some reason to mock at mathematical heads, as they do
term them, though they should have greater reason, why to cherish, and make
much of the matheticall sciences, if they will not discredit Socrates his
authority, and wisdom in Plato, Plato 7. de rep.
which in the same book auaunceth these sciences above the moon, whence some
learned men fetch his opinion, and force his judgment, as the wisest master
against such as allow of correction inschooles: which they would seem to
banishe, till their own rod beat them. The very end of that book is the
course that is to be kept in learning in the perfitest kind, which begins
at the mathematikes, and it deals more with the necessity of them, then with
the whole argument besides: as it is no novelty to hear that Plato esteemed
of them, who forbad any to enter his Academie, which was not a Geometrician,
whereunder he contained the other, but specially her sister Arithmetike.

For the men which profess these sciences, and give cause to their
discountenaunce, they be either mere ignorant, and maintain their credit with
the use of some terms, propositions, and particularities which be in
ordinary courses that way, and never came nigh the kernel: or having some
knowledge in them in deeede, rather employe their time, and knowledge about
the degenerate, and sophistical parts of them, applied by vain heads to
mere collusions though they promise great consequences: then to the true use,
and auauncement of art. Howbeit in the mean time, though the one disgrace them
with contempt, and the other make them contemptible, by both their leaves I do
think thus of them: but what a poor thing is my thought? yet some thing it is
where it shall be believed. In time all learning may be brought into one toungue,
and that natural to the inhabitant, so that schooling for tou^gues, may prove
nedeles, as once they were not needed: but it can never fall out, that arts
and sciences in their right nature, shall be but most necessary for any common
weal, that is not given over unto to to much barbarousnes. We do attribute to
much to toungues, which do mind them more then we do matter chiefly in a
monarchy: and esteem it more honorable to speak finely, then to reason
wisely: where words be but praised for the time, and wisdom winnes at length.
For while the Athenian, and Roman popular gouernementes did yeald so much
unto eloquence, as one man's persuasion might make the whole assembly to sway
with him, it was no meruell if the thing were in price, which commanded: if
words were of weight, which did ravish: if force of sentence were in credit,
which ruled the fantsie, and bridled the hearer. Then was the toungue imperial
because it dealt with the people: now must it obey, because it deals with a
prince, and be servant unto learned matter, acknowledging it to be her liege,
and mistress. All those great observations of eloquence, are either half
drowned* for want of a democratie: or half douted of for discredit of
divinity: which following the substance of matter, commends unto us the like
in all studies.

For the credit of these mathematical sciences, I must needs use one
authority of great, and well deserved countenance among us, and so much the
rather, because his judgment is so often, and so plausibly vouched by the
curteouse master Askam in his book, which I wish he had not himself, neither
any other for him entitled the scoolemaister, because myself dealing in that
argument must needs sometime dissent to far from him, with some hasard of
mine own ceedit, seeing his is hallowed. The worthy, and well learned
gentleman Sir John Cheek, Sir John Cheek.
in the midst of all his great learning, his rare eloquence his sownd
judgment, his grave modesty, feared the blame of a mathematical head so
little in himself, and thought the profession to be so far from any such
taint, being soundly and sadly studied by others, as he bewraid his great
affection toward them most evidently in this his doing. Being himself provost
of the kings college in Cambridge, in the time of his most honored prince, and
his best hoped pupil, the good king Edward, brother to our gracious sovereign
Queen Elizabeth, he sent down from the court one master Bukley sometime
fellow of the said college, and very well studied in the mathematicalls to
read Arithmeticke, and Geometry to the youth of the college: and for the
better encouraging of them to that study gave them a number of Euclides of his
own coast. Master Bukley had drawn the rules of Arithmeticke into verses,
and gave the copies abroad to his hearers. My self am to honor the memory of
that learned knight, being partaker my self of his liberal distribution of
those Euclides, with whom he joined Xenophon, which book he wished, and caused
to be red in the same house, and gave them to the students, to encourage them
as well to the greek toungue, as he did to the mathematikes. He did I take it
as much for the students in S. John's colldege, whose pupil he had once been,
as he did for us of the kings college whose provost he then was. Can he then
mislike the mathematical sciences, which will seem to honor Sir John Cheek,
and reverence his judgment? can he but think the opinion to proceed from
wisdom, which counts Socrates the wisest master? Nay how dare he take upon
him to be a master, not of art, but of arts (for so is the name,) which has
not studied them, ear he proceeded? Are not the proceeders to read in any of
those sciences publickely, by the vice chauncelours appointment, after they
have commenced? and do they not promise, and profess the things, whey they
seek to procure the titles? And with what face dare ignorance open her mouth,
or but utter some sound of words, where she has professed the weight of
matter? So that the very university her self does highly esteem of them if
she could entreat her people to esteem of their mothers judgment. These
sciences bewray them selves in many professions and trades which bear not the
titles of learning, whereby it is well seen, that they are no prating, but
profitable grounds: not gay to the show, but good to be showed, and such means
of use, as the use of our life were quite maimed without them. Then gather I,
if bare exeperience, and ordinary imitation do cause so great things to be
done by the mere shadow, and roat of these sciences, what would judicial
cunning do, being joined with so well affected experience? Neither is it any
objection of account to say, what should merchants, carpentars, masons,
shippmaisters, maryners, deuisours, architectes, and a number such do with
latin, and learning? do they not well enough without, to serve the turn in our
country? If they do well with out might they not do better with? And why may
not an English carpentar, and his companions speak that toungue to help their
country the more, being gotten in youth, ear they can be set to other labor,
which the Roman artificer did naturally use, seeing it is more commendable in
ours, where labor is the conqueror, then in the Romain where nature was
commendour? As if none should have Latin but those which were for further
degrees in learning.

The tounges be helps indifferent to all trades as well as to learning.
Neither is the speaking of Latin any necessary argument of deeper learning, as
the Mathematical sciences be the old rudimentes of young children, and the
certain directours to all those artificers, which without them go by roate,
and with them might show cunning. I may not at this time prosecute this
position, as to fremd for this place: but after my Elementarie and toungue
school, I mean to search it to the very bottom, with the whole profession of
those faculties, if God send me life, and health. For the while this shall
suffice that commonweals against such mockmathematicalles, without whose
help they could not live, nor have houses to hide their heads, though they
thank not their founders.

The college for Philosophy.
If Philosophy with her three kinds had the third college, were it think you
improper? Then the natural might afterward proceed to Physic, whom she
fitteth: the Politic to Law, whom she groundeth: the moral to Divinity,
whom she helps in discourse. Which three professions Divinity, Law, Physic
should every one be endowed with their particular colleges, Physician thus
learned, it were nothing to much, considering his absoluteness is learning,
and his ignorance butcherie, if he do but mark his own master Galene in his
book of the best profession. Gal. (...).
For the Divine to tarry time, and to have the handmaiden sciences to attend
upon Lawyers best note in the best judgments is contentment, not to covet to
much, and for that desire not to strive to gain to much: not beyond the
extremity of law, but far on this side the extremity of right. And can
digesting time be but commodious in this case, and contempt of toys care he
enter into them, be but mother to contentment? Time to bread sufficiency, and
sufficiency to bring sound judgment, cut of all matter of blame, and leave
all matter to praise. But in this distribution where is Logic and Rethoricke,
some will say? Where is Grammar then will I say? A directour to language. And
so Logic, for her demonstratiue part, plaieth the Grammar to the
Mathematicalles, and natural Philosophy: for her probability to moral, and
politic, and such other as depend not upon necessity of matter. Rhetoric
for purity without passion does join with the writer in any kind, for
persuasion with passion, with the speaker in all kinds, and yet both the
speaker deals sometime quietly, The necessity of the college for toungues.
and the plain writer waxes very hoate.

Of these colleges, that which is for toungues is so necessary as scant any
thing more. For the toungues being receites for matter, without the perfect
understanding of them, what hope is there to understand matter? and seeing
words be names of things applied and given according to their properties, how
can things be properly understood by us, which use the ministry and service
of words to know them by, onelesse the force of speech be thoroughly known?
And do you not think that every profession has need to have a title of the
signification of words, as well as the civil lawyer? I do see in writers, and
I do hear in speakers great defectes in the mistaking of meaninges: and
evident errors thorough insufficiency herin. And as toungues cannot be better
perfitted, then straight after their entry by the grammar school: so they
must be more perfitted, then they can be there. And what if some will never
proceed any further, but rest in those pleasant kind of writers, which
delight most in gaing of their language, as poets, histories, discourses, and
such, as will be counted general men?

As for the Mathematicalles, The necessity of the Mathematical college.
they had the place before the toungues were taught, which though they be now
some necessary helps, because we use foreign language for conueaunce of
knowledge: yet they push us one degree further of from knowledge. That the
Mathematicalles had the place, and were proposed still to children, he that
has read any thing in Philosophy cannot be ignorant. Plato is full of it, and
terms them commonly the childrens entrance, but chiefly in the seventh book
of his common weal. So is his scholar though long after his death Philo the
Jew (whom even his countrieman Josephus, a man somewhat parciall in praising
other, yet calls a singular man for eloquence and wisdom, speaking of his
embassage to Caius the Emperor) but specially in that treatise, which he
makes of the foretraine, for so I turn Platoes (...), and Philoes (...).
Philo. (...).
There he deuiseth, as he is a perpetual allegoriser, Sara to be the image of
Divinity, and Agar the figure of all other handmaiden sciences, wherein he
wishes a young man to deal very long, or he venture upon Sara, which will not
be fertile but in late, and ripe years. He construeth both in that place, and
in Moses his life also, those words of the bringing up of Moses in all the
doctrine of the Egyptians, to be meant in the Mathematicalles, which was the
train of that time, and the brood of that soil, or there about. And to say
the truth let any man mark the course of all ancient learning, and he shall
find, that it could not be possibly otherwise, but that the Mathematical was
their rudiment, though no history, no describer of common weal, no setter
forth of Philosophers life, no Philosopher himself had told it us? Is not
Aristotle's first book of all in course of his teaching, his Organum, which
contains his whole Logic? and in his proofs for the piking out of his
syllogismes does he not bewraie, wherein he was brough up? I use Aristotle alone
for example, because our students be best acquainted with him: whom yet they
cannot understand without these helps, as one Brauardine espied well, though
not he alone, who took the pains to gather out of Euclide two books
purposely for the understanding of Aristotle. Can his books of Demonstration,
the Analytica prosteriora be understood without this help? His whole treatise
of Motion wheresoever, commonly fetched from the very form of the thing moved:
His confutation of others by the nature of Motion, and site: His Mathematical
discriptions in many places: His natural Theoremes echwhere can they be
conceived, much less understood by any ignorant in this point? Wherein
Aristotle shows us his own education, to whom he commends the like, if we
like of him, whose liking will not fall, though fools oftimes shake it. It
were to infinite to use proofs in so general, and so known a case, which the
whole antiquity still allowed of, and the famous Athenian common weal used
even then, when she had the great brood of the most excellent persons, for her
ordinary train to her youth as Socrates still alleges in Plato: or rather
Plato fathering the speech upon Socrates says so himself. Aristippus after
his shipwrake found releife thorough that train, and encoraged his companions
upon sight of Geometrical figures in the sand. He that will judge of these
sciences in genenerall, what degree they have in the course of learning, and
wherein they be profitable to all other studies whatsoever, let him read but
either Proclus his four books upon Euclides first in Greek, or because the
greek is ill, and corruptly printed: Io. Barocius, a young gentleman of Venice
which has turned them into Latin, and corrected the copy. Though many have
dealt in the argument they be but secondarie to Proclus. For he handles every
question that either makes for them, or against them chiefly in his first
book. It were to much for me to stand upon enumeration of testimonies in this
place, that the ancient schooling did begin at the Mathematical after the
first Eleme^tarie, while they minded sound learning in deed, and sequestered
their thoughts from other dealinges in the world. He that marketh but the
ordinary metaphores in the eloquentest Greek writers of that time, whence we
prescribe, shall easily bewray, where in the ancient discipline traveled. To
allege the Romain for learning is to allege nothing, whose cunning Virgile
describes to lie in government, 6. AEneid.
and conquestes, remitting other faculties to other people. For till the
foreign learning in latter years, was translated into their toungue, of
themselves they had little. Rhetoric, poetry, history, civil law, and some
petie treatises of Philosophy, and Physic were the Romans learning. Some
one, or two as Gallus, and Figulus were noted for the Mathematicalles, as many
years after them Julius Firmicus, and some architecture Mathematicke in
Vitruuius But their own stories can tell, what an afterdeale in the wynning of
Syracusae Archimedes by those faculties put Marcellus their general unto,
which yet was as careful to have saved Archimedes, if the rashness of a rude
soldiar had not prevented his proclamation: as Demetrius (...) was to save
Protogenes at Rhodes. After the state was brought to a monarchy, the Greeks
ouerlaid their learning, as it appears, from Dionysius of Halycarnassus, and
Strabo, which were in Augustus Caesar's time, down still in a number of most
notable Grecians, which served that state continually both for training up
their young Emperors, and for all other kind of learning: so that the
authority of the Mathematical must be fetched from the Greeks, though they
themselves borrowed the matter of other nations, and were founders only to
language, method, and those faculties, The necessity of the college for
Philosophy.
which serve for the direction of language.

For Philosophy to have the third place it will be easily obtained, though
there be some pretended doubt in the order of the parts for the training. We
use to set young ones to the moral and politic first, and reason against
Aristotle's conclusion, that a young stripling is a fit hearer of moral
Philosophy. But Aristotle himself being well brought up in the
Mathematicalles places natural Philosophy next unto them, as very
intelligible unto very young heads, by reason of their necessary consequence,
and Theoreticall consideration. Whereas the other parts being subject to
particular circunstance in life are to be reserved for elder years. For not
only the Philosophical resolution, but also the very religious was in the
best, and eldest time to cause youth abide long in study, and to forbear
public show, till it were very late. To make Logic, and Rhetoric serve to
those uses, and in those places, where I appointed them, was no absurdity. For
Rhetoric, there will be small contradiction, though declamations, and such
exercises seem to make some further claim. Pythagoras his five years
silence, has a meaning that ye hear sufficiently, ear ye speak boldly. And
Socrates that great master in Plato calls Logic the ridge, or top of the
Mathematicalles, as then to succeed, when they were gotten: and good reason,
why, because their method in teaching, and order in proving did bring forth
Logic. As he that will make Plato the example to Aristotle's precepts shall
easily perceive.

Divinity, Law and Physic to have their own colleges, for their full
exercises, The necessity of three colleges peculiar for Divinity, Law,
Physic.
and better learning, then now thus to have their stude^tes scattered, it is a
thing that implies no great repugnaunce with any reason, and is not without
president. As for the Law, if the whole study were made one and whatsoever
appertains to that profession, for either Ecclesiastical, or Temporal use
were reduced into one body, had our country any cause to complain? or but
great cause to be very glad? whereas now three several professio^s in law,
bewraye a three headed state, one English and French, an other, Romish
Imperial, the third Romish ecclesiastical, where mere English were simply
our best. I shall not need to say any more herein, but only give occasion to
those which can judge, and help it, to think of the position: the distraction
of temporal, civil, and Canon law being in many points very offensive to
our country.

Some difficulty there will be to win a college for such

There is no diuerting to any profession till the student depart Philosophy,
The seventh college for training masters, and the necessity thereof.
thence he that will go to Divinity, to Law, to Physic, may, yet with great
choice, to have the fittest according to the subject. He that will to the
school is then to divert. In whom I require so much learning to do so much
good, as none of the other three, (honor always reserved to the worthiness of
the subject which they profess,) can challenge to himself more: either for
pains which is great: or for profit which is sure: or for help to the
professions: which have their passage so much the pleasaunter, the forwarder
students be sent unto them, and the better subjects be made to obey them: as
the scholing train is the trak to obedience. And why should not these men have
both this sufficiency in learning, and such room to rest in, thence to be
chosen and set forth for the common service? be either children, or schools so
small a portion of our multitude? or is the framing of young minds, and the
training of their bodies so mean a point of cunning? be schoolemaisters in
this Realm such a paucitie, as they are not even in good sadness to be
soundly thought on? If the chancell have a minister, the belfray has a
master: and where youth is, as it is eachwhere, there must be trainers, or
there will be worse. He that will not allow of this careful provision for such
a seminary of masters, is most unworthy either to have had a good master him
self, or herafter to have a good one for his. Why should not teachers be well
provided for, to continue their whole life in the school, as Divines, Lawyers,
Physicians do in their several professions? Thereby judgment, cunning, and
discretion will grow in them: and masters would prove old men, and such as
Xenophon sets over children in the schooling of Cyrus. Whereas now, the
school being used but for a shift, afterward to pass thence to the other
professions, though it send out very sufficient men to them, it self remains
too too naked, considering the necessity of the thing. I conclude therefore
that this trade requires a particular college, for these four causes. First
for the subject being the mean to make or mar the whole

1.
These seven colleges being so set up, and bearing the names of the things
which they profess, for Toungues, for Mathematickes, for Philosophy, for
Train, for Physic, for Law, for Divinity were there any great absurdity
committed either in the thing if it were so, or in me for wishing it so? If it
had been thus appointed at the first, as it might, if the whole building had
been made at once, which is scant possible where things grow by degrees, and
buildinges by patches: it would have been liked very well, and the Universities
in their commencementes, and public acts would have commended their policy,
and wisdom, which first did appoint it. And may not that be now touched
without blame, which if it had been then done, had deserved great honor, and
when soever it shall be done will deserve everlasting memory? and may now be
well done, seeing we have all things needful for the well doing ready: And why
should it seem strange to wish such an alteration, seeing greater chaunges
have been both wished, and wrought within this our time? Sad, and lingering
thoughts, which measure commonweals as buildinges grounded upon some rock of
marble, find many, and sober difficulties: resolute minds make no bones:
there is stuff enough, the places be ready, the lands be neither to be begd,
ne yet to be purchased, they be got, and given already: they may be easily
brought into order, seeing our time is the time of reformation. Before my wish
be condemned, I desire my reader to consider it well, The second mean, to
sort like years into ye same rooms.
and mark if it may take place, and whether it may not with great facility.

For sorting like years into one room, which was my second interrogatorie, it
is no new device, nor mine: All good commonweals not fained by fantsie, but
being in deed such, have used it both for likeness of education in like years,
and for trying out where most excellency lodged, to bestow prefermentes upon
apparent desert, besides that it is most fit, and emulation to the better does
best beseem like years. The greek poet says, that God draws allway the
like to the like, and therefore men may well follow the president.

For uniting of colleges, The third mean to better the students maintenance.
enlarging of the united, and bettering students liuinges, I dare say none of
them will be against me, which for a better living will chaung his college.
Neither will he think it any great loss to leave his old poor place, for a
fatter rowme, which for such a one will abandon the university and all. Sure
the livings in colleges be now to to lean, and of necessity force good
wits to fly ear they be well feathered. More sufficiency of living will
yeald more convenient time and furniture to study, which two be the only
means to procure more sufficiency in learning, more ripenes in judgment,
more stay in manners. The necessity of students may thus be supplied of their
own, and they not forced by accepting of exhibition at some hands to admit
some bondage under hand. Restraint will rid needelesse number: sufficient
liuinges will maintain, and make the needful number sufficiently well
learned. I need not stay any longer here. For methinke all those good
students join with me in this form of the university, whom want, and
barenes of living will not suffer to tarry long enough there, and better it
were for our country to have some smaller meanie well trained, and sufficiently
provided, then a loose number, and an unlearned multitude. And there were two
questions more worthy the resolution, then all Johannes Picus the earl of
Mirandula his nine hundred propounded at Rome: the one whether it were agreeable
to the nature of learning being liberal in condition to be elemosinarie in
maintenance: the other whether it were for a common weal to have the conceit
bound to respects, because of private exhibition, which ought to direct
simply, without respect, saving to the state alone. For sure where learning
grows up by props, it leaseth her property: where the stock of it self will
bear up the bows, there it must be best, if choice be made leader, and fit
wits bestowed on books. My three foreign points for the furtheraunce of
learning be, choice for wits, time for furniture, maintenance for direction:
what shall be peculiar to the party, himself must tender, as therein being
detter to God, and his country. Diligence to apply his wit, continuance to
store his time, discretion to set forth his maintenance, are required at his
hands.

The fourth mean for readers.
For readers of years, of sufficiency, of continuance, methinke I durst enter
into some combat that it were beyond all cry profitable, and necessary, to
have whom to follow, and of whom to learn how to direct our studies, for
years ancient fathers: for sufficiency most able to enstruct: for
continuance cunning to discern persons, and circumstaunces: for advise
skillfull to rule rash heads, which run on to fast, being armed with some
private opinion of their own petie learning. What was Plato to the Academikes?
Aristotle to the Peripatetikes? Xeno to the Stoiks? Epicure to the Epecurians?
Aristippus to the Anicerian and Cyrenaike? and other such fathers to the
famulies of their professions, but readers? It is a meruell to think on, how
long those fellows continued in in their profession as Diogenes Laertius does
note. It should seem that Plato taught above fifty years, reckening the time
that he left Speusippus his deputy during his travel into Egypt and that
way: whereby both himself proved an excellent master, and his hearers proved
most excellent scholars. They that have been acquainted with cunning readers
any where will subscribe to this I know.

Private study tied to one book led by one brain: not always the best (as
what counselor in commonly worse to ones self, then himself?) so proceeding
as the first impression leads, be it what it can be, cannot compare for
judicial learning with the benefit of hearing one, nay of repeating to one
upon interrogatories after reading, to try his judgment, his keeping, and
remembrance: which one has red, and digested all the best books, or at the
least all the best books in that kind, whereof he makes profession: which
has a judgment settled and resolute by the help of all those good brains:
which has dealte with thousands of the pregnantest wits, whom experience
has taught stay, whom the common weal by sufferance commendes as sufficient.
He that is not acquainted with such an excellent reader or teacher (for both
the names import one thing) and that with repetition, but pleases himself
with his own private study, as he takes more pains undoubtedly, so gets
he less gain I dare assure him, having in one lecture the benefit of his
readers universal study, and that so fitted to his hand, as he may straight
way use it, without further thinking on: whereas when he has beaten his own
brains privately about a little, for want of time to digest, being to forward to
put forth, he utters that which he must either amend upon better advice, or
quite revoke when he finds he is over shot. Wherefore such readers, or rather
such nurses to study, must needs be maintained with great allowance, to make
their heaven there, where ye mean to use them. Whose service, for the benefit
that comes from them will save their whole hier in very books, which the
student shall not so much need, when his reader is his library: neither must
they be souls, as we term them, though of great reading, neither is it
enough to have read much, but they must be of great government withal, which
are to bring up such a fry of gouerners. And therefore that great sufficiency
does still call for great recompense to be tied to a stake for it all ones life
time.

But now I pray you by this wish of mine be the universities in common sense
any whit endammaged? That this wish is most profitable to the university, and
hurthfull no not to any particular.
if they were, so the harm were but some little and the good exceeding great,
the damage might be consumed by the greatness of the good. I find not any
harm offered them, they lease no lands students be not put to pensions, they
that be thought fit, find better and fuller maintenance, better mean is made
to prove learned, by such excellent readers, which the cunninger they be, the
more affable they be, and thereby the fitter to satisfy any students dout in
that which they profess. And where young men may stay until they be singular,
and have good means to make them singular, is not the thing to be wished, and
he that wishes it, not to be thought to wish the university harm, where it
is universally helped? If this transposing of houses to this use were
commanded by authority, and by some help of the wealthy patrones for the
common good sake, were happily accomplished, the university should lease
nothing, though they break up for a time, and the students gave place, to
masons, and carpenters, nay though the whole reuenew of all the colleges were
for that time bestowed upon the alteration. And yet all that trouble should not
need, if the first were first begu^e, and so particularly in order, neither
should any student now well placed complain of the change if he would set
himself to any certain profession. This is but my conceit which the effect
will confirm, and wise considerations will find, that it carries a good
ground: besides that it is all ready in very near possibility, without any
great charge, and with very great good, as also certainetie, and greatness of
annuitie would straight way raise up readers, and afterward continue them. How
good, and how easy a thing this were, the attempt by so many particular
readers would show, which being themselves excellently well learned in those
arguments, that I do appoint to colleges, and professing them in convenient
houses of their own, would undoubtedly draw as many into their private
hostelles, as there be now students in public colleges. All this my wish
offers greater difficulty, in the manner, how to work it: then dout of
profit, in the thing, if we had it. Howbeit harder things have been easily
accomplished, but any more profitable was never compassed: neither does it
repent me to wish that, which I would rejoice to see. If the hindering lie in
cost, it is somewhat, and yet but small, considering what is ready: if in good
will: that is all, and yet but ill, considering what it hinders. For no
learning is so well got, where her helping means be severed, as where all be
united, which those colleges would cause* a thing neither of nouelty, as of an
old ground and elsewhere practiced: neither iniuriouse, to any offering profit
to all. I do find my self so armed in the point, as if there were any hope in
the thing to be effected, I could answer any objection of difficulty, which
might arise against it, either from without the university, or from within,
either for any community, or for any private, that it would be best for all,
neither any breach of good now well laid, nor any hindrau^ce to any, which
finds himself at ease, as the present is now appointed. But will ye have
every one rise through all these degrees of learning, ear he become a
professor? yea surely I. but who moves the question? either he that cannot
judge, who is therefore to be pardoned: or he that would be doing, who is
therefore to be blamed: or he that does not way it, which would be desired to
do: or he whom need hasteneth, whose case is to be pitied. And yet of all
these four, only he, that desires to show him self ripe in his own, though
raw in other men's opinion, will contrary the conclusion: for ignorance, will
yield upon better instruction: just consideration, will relent after waing: good
wits oppressed with want, and yet waing the truth, will wish for more wealth
to tarry their full time, and the carriage of their cunning: but the hasty
heads, to whom any delaie is present death, which will be doing, ear they can
do well, but in their own conceits they will stand against it, and scrape all
defenses, though while they do scrape, they descrie them selves to be extreme
ignorant. For if sufficiency be the only mean to perfect the professor, and
to profit the public, insufficiency overthrows both. And as he that means
to turn before, may lymit his ascent: so he that will be perfect in the end and
last profession ought at the least to have the contemplative knowledge of all
that goes before, though he practice but at pleasure. The general gain
thereby is this that while the students youth is wedded to honest, and learned
meditation, the heat of that stirring age is cooled which might harm in
public, and set all on fire: ripe judgment is got, to stay, not to stir:
and all ambitiouse passions meruellously daunted through resolutenes of
judgment. It is no reason, where see ye the like? but it is a great reason,
the like is worth seeing, and who so comes near, is still better liked, then
he that dowteth of it. The want of trial, is some shift for a time, but the
trial that has been, may lead us to the like, and procure good allowance. And
sure till the young professors be made to tarry longer, and study sounder,
neither shall learning have credit, nor our country be but sick. It is not my
complaint, though I join with the complainantes. If ye mean to take learning
before you, you will never move the question. It is not he that has, and
knows, which moves the question, but he that knows not and should. What
should a divine do with the mathematikes? why was Moises trained in all the
Egyptians learning? Nay in one reason for all, why will ye condemn in
divinity, or execute in law, the sciences which ye know not, but find the
name condemned? and I pray you with what warrant? what if that be not the name?
or what if the thing be not such? a condemnation without evidence where the
judge presumes, and knows not the skill, which he says is naught. The
Physician should have all, and if he have not, he is most to be blamed, because
the parents of his profession durst not profess without them, and make them
under means. To be short I wish they had them, which mislike that they have
not, and gave ignorance the reign. For if they had them, we should hear no
speech, but praise and proof, admiration and honor.

But to turn to my byace again which was the mother, and matter to my wish,
this college for teachers, might prove an excellent nurserie for good
schoolemaisters, and upon good testimony being known to so many before, which
would upon their own knowledge assure him, whom they would send abroad. In the
mean time till this come to pass, the best that we can have, is best worthy
the having, and if we provide well for good teachers, that provision will
provide us good teachers.

There remains now one consideration in the admitting not of these, The
admission of teachers.
whom I admit without any exception, for all sufficiency in religion, in
learning, in discretion, in behavior: but of such as we daily use, and must
use, till circumstances be bettered which are in compass of many exceptions.
The admitter or chuser considering what the place requires must exact that
cunning, which the place called for: the party himself must bring testimony
of his own behavior, if he be altogether unknown: and the admission would be
lymited to such a school in such a degree of learning, as he is found to be
fit for. For many upon admission and license to teach in general, ouerreach to
far, and mar to much, being insufficient at randon, though serving well for
certain by way of restraint. Thus much for the trainer, which I know will
better my pattern if preferment better him: with whom I shall have occasion to
deal again in my grammar school: where I will note unto him what my opinion
is in the particularities of teaching.

Chapter 42. How long the child is to continue in the elementarie ear he pass
to the toungues, and grammar. The incurable infirmities which posting have
works in the whole course of study. How necessary a thing sufficient time
is for a scholar.
Hasty preasing onward is the greatest enemy, which any thing can have whose
best is to ripe at leisure. For if ripenes be the virtue, before it is green,
after it is rotten: and yet the excess is the less harm: because it may
join, and be compounded with the virtue, and be called rotten ripe: and at the
least be cast away, without any more loss, then of the thing it self, as it
appears in fruits. The defect to pluck before ripenes, breeds ill in the
party which tastes thereof, and causes the thing after a bite or two to be
cast away to: unless it be in longing wymen, whose diste^perate delight upon a
cause not common, does give us to judge, that too timely taking, is but for
some disordered humors. This plucking before ripenes in my position tends to
this end. I have appointed in my elementarie train reading, writing, drawing,
singing, playing: now if either all these be vnperfitly gotten, where all be
attempted, or some, where some: when the child is removed to the grammar
school, what an error is committed? The things being not perfect, to serve the
consequence, either die quite if they be not seuearly called on: or come
forward with pain, where the furtherance is in fear. How many small infantes
have we set to grammar, which can scarecely read? how many to learn latin,
which never wrate letter? And yet though some little one could do much better
then all his fellows, it were no harm for him to be captain a good while in
his elementarie school, rather then to be a mean soldier in a captain
school. The displeasoures be beyond all proportion pernicious* beyond all
multitude many, which this posting pulles after it. And if moning could amend
them, I would not only moan them, that they be so many, but also mourn for
them, that they be so helpeles. It is a world to see the weakness of children,
and the fondnes of friends in that behalf. It is to much, that may be
understood, where so much is said: the fault is general, and the only cause,
which both makes children loath to learn, and the masters seem to be
tormenters in their teaching. For the master hasting on to the effect of his
profession, and the scholar drawing back, as not able to bear the burden:
there rises a conflict in the master, with passion, if it conquer him:
against passion if he conquer it. If the master be very sharp witted in
delivering, and the boy slowheaded in receiving, then the passion will lightly
conquer. Which it cannot do, where wisdom and consideration in the master
be armed aforehand with patience, or where experience, and wearines of
extremity have wrought a calmenes. And as in the master passion breeds heat,
so in the child infirmity breeds fear, and so much the more, if he find
his master somewhat to fierce. Whereupon neither the one nor the other can do
much good at all, and all through this hasty imperfection being the matter of
heat in the one, and of fear in the other. Whereof if the boy were not in
danger how peart would he be, and what a pleasure would the master take in
such a perfect perteling? but when the child is so weak, as both he himself
feels it in his learning, and the master finds it in his teaching, tell the
parent so he will not believe it. So blind is affection in the parent which
cannot see: and in stoore of teachers, he shall find some* which will
undertake, and condemn the misliker. Whereby change feeds his humor for the
time, and repentance his folly long after, when the default proves incurable,
and the first master is admitted among the prophets. Such a thing it is to
prevent illes in time, and when warning is given not to mock the intelligence,
nor to blame the watchman.

If the imperfections which come more of haste then of ignorance from the
Elementary school would take up their Inn there, and raunge no further, the
moan were not so much because there were some mean to redress: but now as
one billow drives on an other: so have beginning there makes the other
successions in learning trowle on too too headlong. Be young children set to
soon to their Grammar only? be none sent to the University, which when they
come thence some years after, might well with good gain return to the
Grammar school again? I will not say that they were not ready when they
went, but peradventure they were ready, and forgot that they were so. Do not
some good honest wits in the midst of their study find the festering of
haste, and wish though in vain that they had been more advised in their
passage? and if they recover that which they miss and wish for, do they not
find the learned conclusion true: that such things be extreme painful to
seded memories, which were very pleasant passages to the youngest boys? He
that begins his Grammar in any language* when he is a Graduate, may perhaps
wish for some way without Grammar, and covet a Compendium. The Universities can
best judge of the infirmities in our Grammar schools, when they find the want
in those yonglinges, whom they have from us, but not sent by us: we our selves
see them, but we cannot salve them. Private affection ouerrules all reason:
strangeness between the parent and master cuttes of conference in the
removing: and in some places multitude of schools marres the whole market:
where store is the sore, and opportunity to alter an allurement to the worse.
So that by degrees the Elementarie feebleth the Grammarian: and the Grammarian
transporteth his weakness from his schoolemaister to his University tutour.
Such a matter it is to stay have at the first, which distempereth till the
last. I would not have the Universities, but to think freindly of me, because
though I find fault, I seek it not: neither blase I it with discredit to
them, but wish it healed with the profit of my country, as I well know the
most, and best of them there do.

Does not want of sufficient time (I mean not for taking degrees, because that
time may be complete from the proceeders first ariuall into the University)
but for want of age and years: and therwithall for the want of that, which
years do bring, oftimes send abroad youths, whose degrees deserve place, but
their depth deserves none? That prentice is to hastily out of his years, which
being at one and twenty free from his master, is ear four and twenty free
from his thrift both reft of goodness, and left goodlesse. If men abroad had
not a sensible judgment in years, that young ware cannot be but green, how
sprooting fair so ever it does show: youth might deceive them with titles, as
it deceiues it self with opinions. Years without stuff may beguile before
trial: years with stuff will abide the stamp: Stuff without years is
wounderous for a while, but it is subject to quick withering, and to fade of
wonder. Neither stuff nor years, is extreme pitiful, and the very ground of
my complaint, because neither few years can provide great stuff, yea to the
best wit: nor many years to any wit, without great study, which is a
death there, where the defecte is great. How fortuneth it then, that either
freindes be so foolish, or students so unstayed, to haste so with so much
waste? The causes be: impacience, which can abide no tarying, where a restless
conceit is full frawght: liberty, to live as he lists, because he lists
not to live as he should: bravery, to seem to be some body, and to carry a
countenance: hope of preferment, to desire dignities before ability to
discharge. In the mean while: the common weal becomes private: the general
weapeth, while the particular wins: and yet the winning is no soundness,
but show. What notable men have dealt with, and against the forestaulling of
sound time in professions? Among many if only Viues the learned Spaniard, were
called to be witness, he would crave pardon for his own person, as not able
to come for the gout, but he would substitute for his deputy his whole
twenty books of disciplines, wherein he entreats, how they come to spoil,
and how they may be recovered. Lack of time not only in his opinion, but also
in whose not? bringes lack of learning, which is a sore lack, where it ought
not to be lacking. The cankar that consumes all, and causes all this evil is
haste, an unadvised, rash, hedlong counselor, and then most pernicious when
it has either some appearance in reason that the child is ripe: or the hartning
of some master, which either is disposed to follow where he sees replying
past cure: or that cannot discern colors, because he is that in his degree,
which the child is in his: both unripe: the one to teach, the other to remove.

But what if hope of exhibition make an University man strain? and either
persuade ability, or promise to supply, where ability wantes? Nay what if
exhibitours of some little, seek recompense to soon, and half force some
poor scholar to toil with imperfection?

When the unripe boy finds any such mean to go to the University, the
master shall never know, till he be booted, if he do know then: for fear of
stopping his journey by contrary counsel: that is by reason to stay him,
which runs to his own harm.

Time of it self, as it is the noblest circunstance wherewith we have to deal:
so it has a breadth in it self capeable of to much, to little, and enough.

To much time is seldom found fault with justly, though some time pretended,
because it is seldom tarried for in this kind wherewith I deal.

To little time is that whereon I complain, and so much the more harmefull,
because have to attain unto the desired end makes it seem no fault till the
blow be given.

Time enough is that mean which perfiteth all, the Elementarie in his kind,
the Grammarian in his, the Graduate in his, and so profits the common weal
by perfiting all: the prerogative to thought: the mother to truth: the
tuchestone to ripeness: the enemy to error: man's only stay, and help to
advice.

For the Grammarians time, though it be not within this argument, as many other
things which the affinity drew in, yet thus much may I say. That his
perfitnesse has a pitche, and his years yeilde his good, as it shall appear
in his own place, whose time must needs be limited, because he is so placed
after the Elementarie, and before the University, as the well appointing of
his time shall disapoint neither of them. For the times, and years of study
before degrees in the University, Plato himself in his exquisite republike
cannot, nor does not appoint them better then they be there already, if the
Grammar, and Elementarie haste marred not, and made them that come to soon
seek also to proceed to soon, yet even so fulfilling statutes, which appoint
the continuing years, though smallie for their benefit, which are not
appointed in years, and less then not appointed in substance. The distances
between degrees orderly employed, and the middle learninges being carried before
them, as it is imported by their styles: might work in the most very
reasonable knowledge, for method and ground in habit, though not for
particulars, which be always endless, still without art, though most within
experience, for their most needful number. Now if that help of readers, which
I wished for, were put in execution, me think, the world should see, a
marvelous number of excellent professors in every degree. I am to long in
talking of to little: but the times hanging one upon another have led me thus
onward: wherefore it is now time for me to determine that time, which I do take
to be enough for the Elementarie. When the child can read so readily, and
roundly, as the lenght of his lesson shall nothing trouble him for his reading:
when he can write so fair and so fast, as no kind of exercise shall be tedious
unto him for the writing: when his pen or pencill shall delight him with
brag: when his Music both for voice, and hand is so far forward, as a
little voluntary will both maintain, and increase it: all which things the
second master must have an eye unto: then has the Elementarie had time
enough. If the parent account not of all, yet perfitnesse in his choice must be
his chief account. The childs ordinary exercises, will continue his writing,
and reading, himself will always be drawing, because it deliteth his eye, and
busieth not his brain. But for Music, the master and the parents delight
must further it. For that in those years, children be Musical rather for
other then for them selves. Once in, this is a certain ground, and most
infallible, that in tarying long, and perfiting well, there is no loss of
time, specially seeing those qualities even alone, be a pretty furniture of
household if they be well gotten. The hasting on to fast to see the fruit too
soon, when circunstances persuade tarying is to win an hour in the morning,
and to lease the day after. Thus much concerning the Elementarie time,
determinable not by years, but by sufficiency. If years could be limittes to
knowledge, as they be very good leaders, the rule were more certain: but where
wit goes not by years, nor learning without, sufficiency is the surest
bounder, to set out, wherein enough is. Howbeit in the Elementarie, and so forth
I will limit the time somewhat nearer, with all the considerations, both for
variety of the matters which are to be learned, and the men which are to
teach, and such things as seem not so proper to be set down here.

Chapter 43. How to cut of most inconveniences wherewith schools and scholars,
masters and parents be in our schooling now most troubled. Whereof there be
two meeanes, uniformity in teaching and publishing of school orders. That
uniformity in teaching has for companions dispatch is learning, and sparing
of expenses. Of the abbridging of the number of books. Of courtesy and
correction. Of school faults. Of friendlinesse between parents and masters.
A Great learned man in our days thought so much of the troublesome and
toilsome life, P. Melancthon.
which we teachers lead, as he wrate a pretty book of the miseries of
masters. We are to thank him for his good will: but when any kind of life be
it high, be it low, is not troubled with his proportion to our portion, we will
yield to misery. Our life is very painful in deed, and what if beyond
comparison painful? Much a do we have, and what if none more? Yet sure many as
much, though they deal not with so many, and more more miserable, because they
better not so many. But I will neither rip up those things, which seem most
restless in us, though the argument offer spreding: neither will I meddle with
any other trade, no less troublesome then teaching, by comparing to seem to
lessen: because comparisons in miseries be uncomfortable to both, though some
ease to either. To what purpose should I show, why the master blames this, the
parent that, the child nothing more then the rod, though he will not but
deserve it? Such a disease we have to repine at the pain, and not to way the
offense, which deserves the pain. Why beat ye him says one? Why offended he
says none? so hard a thing it is to find defense for right, so easy a thing
it is to find qualifying for wrong. Therefore to omit these unpleasant
rippinges, I will deal with the remedies how to cut of the most of those,
which he calls miseries, I term inconveniences, wherewith the trade of
teaching at this day seems to have a great conflict. Which counsel though it
be first laid for the youngest scholars, yet may it well be translated further,
and beseem both the biggest, and best, in any learned course.

uniformity in teaching, which draws after it, dispatch in learning, and
sparing of expenses about to great a number of books.

public school laws, set down, and seen, which bring with them for
companions agreement of parents and teachers, continuance of scholars,
conference to amend, comfort to freindes, and commodity to the common country.

Uniformity in teaching.
For uniformity in teaching how many gauls that will heal, wherewith schools
be now greiued, it will then best appear, when it shall be showed, what good it
will work, and how necessary a thing it is, to have all schools reduced unto
it. That there is to much variety in teaching, and therefore to much ill
teaching (because in the midst of many bypathes, there is but one right way)
he were senseles, that sees not: if he either have taught, or have been taught
himself. Which whence it springs, diversities of judgment bewraie, that men
have gotten by better, or worse training up in youth: by less or more travel
in study: by longer or shorter continuance at their book: by liking or
misliking some trade in teaching: by accommodating themselves to the parents
choice: and many ways more, which either bread variety, or else be bred by
variety. But of all varieties there is none vayner, then when ignorance
swears that that is an aphorism, the contrary whereof sound knowledge has
set down for a sure oracle. Now in this confusion of varieties what hinderance
has youth? what discredit receive schools? what inequalities be the
Universities molested with? what toil is it to Tutours? how small riddaunce to
readers? when diversities of groundworke do hinder their building, and the
scholars weakness discrieth his master? And yet oftimes the weak master
bringes up a strong scholar, by some accident not ordinary, and the cunninger
man by some ordinary let makes small show of his great labor. Do not the
learners also themselves commonly when they come to years and miss that
commodity, which there masters could not give them, being very weak
themselves, then blame their fortune and feel the want of foresight? For if
variety had been wipte away by uniformity, even the weakest master might
have done very well if he had had but a mean head to follow direction being
set down to his hand.

This point is so plain as many of the best learned, and of the best teachers
also oftimes complain of it, and wish the redress, though they still draw
back, and spare their own pains for any thing they publish: perhaps not
having the opportunity and leisure which so great an enterprise craves:
perhaps being induced by hope that some other will start up, and publish the
amendment. Whereby all the youth of this whole Realm shall seem to have been
brought up in one school, and under one master, both for the matter and
manner of train, though they differ in their own invention which is private
and several to every one by nature, though general and one to every one by
art. Which thing must needs turn to the profit of the learner, whose straying
shall be straited, that he cannot go amiss: to the ease of the teacher whose
labor shall be lightened, by the easiness of his curraunt: to the honor of the
country, which thereby shall have great store of sufficient stuff: and the
immortal renown of that careful Prince which procured such a good. Which
benefit say I must proceed from some uniform kind of teaching set down by
authority, that one way to supply all wantes, and no one to disdain, where
obedience is enjoined. And whereas difference in judgment works variety:
consent in knowledge will plant uniformity. Which consent, as it must be
enforced by authority, so must it proceed from some likeness of ability in
teachers, namely in that thing whereof they are teachers: though both in
executing the same, and for some other qualities they may differ much.

Now the only way to work this likeness or rather samenesse in ability,
where otherwise the odds is so odd, were to set down in some certain plat,
the best that may seem to be, if that which is best in deed may not be had,
as why not? both what and how to teach, with all the particular circunstances,
so far forth as they ordinarily do fall within common compass, and may best
be seem the best ordered schools, which both the mean teacher may well
attain unto, and the cunning master may rest content with, and so they both
in that point prove equal, while the meaner mounting vpword with feathers made
for him, and the cu^ninger coming downward at the show of the lure, they both
meet in the midde way, and flying forward like freindes, pay their price with
their pastime, and mend their fair with their pray, no dishonor offered him,
whom mo qualities do commend: and a great help to him that cannot swim
without. In whom diligence borne up, will work no less wonder, nay may
fortune more, then greater learning in the other, whom either over weyning may
make insolent, or loytring negligent. And sure as I may be deceived herein, so
have I some reason very favorable to my seeming, that it were more fitting for
the common profit, to provide a certain direction to help the mean teacher,
which will continue in the trade without either any or very late changing of
his course, and so a long time do much good, then to leave it at randon to the
liberty of the more learned, who commonly use teaching, but to shift with for
a time, and be but pilgrims in the profession, still minding to remove to some
other kind of life, either of more ease, which allureth soon, or of more
gain which enforces sore. So that in the mean time the scholars cannot
profit much, while the masters deal like strangers, which entending one day
to return to their country, as nature calls homeward, though profit bid
tarry, cannot have that zealous care, which the natural countrieman, and
continual trauellour of nature has, and of duty shows. And though
conscience cause some odd honest man to work well, and discharge his duty
in that rolling residence: yet neither be privileges general, nor laws
leuelled after some few, and that foolish fellow, was fretished for cold, which
followed the fond swallow, that flew out to timely, and to far before her
fellows. An order must be general to the liking of the better, who should
always wish it, and the leading of the weaker, who shall always need it.

If when this order for matter and manner of teaching shall be set down, the
executor prove negligent, and prolong the effect, or else quite defeat it, by
ill handling of that, which was well meant, the surueiors and patrones of
schools must ouerlooke such teachers, of themselves if they can, if not, they
may call for the assistaunce of learning, which for cunning can, and of
courtesy will seek to further such a thing. Our precepts be general, the
particular must perform, and amend his own accident. I have but slightly
noted the surface of uniformity in teaching, and the disioynting of skill by
misordered variety, and yet who is so blind as he may not thereby discern,
that the one strips away the euilles which the other bringes in, and thereby
cuttes of many encombraunces from schools?

Now uniformity in teaching once obtained, Dispatch in learning.
does not dispatch in learning incontinently follow? which consists in choice
of the best and fittest authors at the first, and continuance in the same: in
the best exercises and most proper to the childs ascent in learning: and
generally in the masters orderly proceeding, and method in teaching: whereby
the child shall not learn any thing, which he must or ought to forget, upon
his masters better advise: nor leave any needful thing unlearned till his
master grow to better advise. The master himself shall not need to change
his course, as he changes his skill, now coursing on to fast by to much
rashness: now retiring to late by to louse repentance: finally neither the
master nor the scholar shall busy themselves to long about a little, and never
the better, nor have to fast on, and nener a whit the further. The best course
being hit on at the first, as appointment may procure it, one thing helps an
other forward naturally, without forcing: that which is first taught makes way
for that which must follow next, and continual use will let nothing be forgot,
which is once well got, and the rising up by degrees in learning will succeed
in proportion, with out loss of time or let of labor, either by lingering to
long, or by posting to fast, which cannot now possibly be brought about, while
things be left to the teachers discretion, whereof, as the most be not always
the best, so even the very best cannot always hit those things, which in deed
are best, while the customarie education is held for a sanctuary: alteration
to the better is esteemed an heresy: allowance is measured by private liking:
unthankfulness is made harbor to desert: and the very books which we use be
not appropriate to our use. I touch no mo stoppes then may easily be removed,
if authority take the matter in hand. Private lettes must have private
lessons, and personal circumstance shall have rowme to plead in, at an other
time.

These enormities then show them selves, when children do change both schools
and masters: where alteration hinders beyond all cry, the new master
either thinking it some discredit to himself to begin where the old left, or
misliking the choice which the former has made, or in deed by dispraysing him
to seek to grace himself: or the order of his school not admitting the
succession, as in deed they be all diverse. Sometimes the boy being
ungrounded, by his masters ignorance if he could not, by his negligence if he
did not the thing which he could, will not bend to be bettered, but must keep
the same countenance which he himself conceiueth of himself. And this
commonly falls out so, when the parents be peuish, and think their child
disgraced if he be once set backward (for so the term is) whereas in very
deed he is bid but to look back, to see that which he never saw, and ought
to have seen very substantially. Which disorder proceeding from the parents
ouerruleth us all, causing great weakness and much mismatching in the fourmes
of our schools: so that we either cannot, or may not find fault even to amend
it, whereas the order being one, and planted by authority, though the child
use to change often, yet his profiting is soon perceived: and the parents
also will be well contented, when they suspect no partiality by private passion,
and see indifferency in public provision. Such be the fruits which variety
bringes forth, perilous in great affairs, still gathering strength by train
in those petie principles: whereas to the contrary uniformity is full of
contentment. Nothing continues one in our schools but the common grammar set
forth by authority, which confirms mine opinion both by policy in the
first setting out, and by profit in the long continuing, wherein we all agree
perforce as in a case of higher countenance, and already ruled. Which book
whether it may stand still with some amendment, or of necessity must be cast
some other way, for better method, it shall then be seen when comparisons come
in season, that the alteration may show, whether there were cause to change,
or some injury offered to change without cause. For both that book, and all
the like, which serve for direction and method must be fashioned to the matter
which they seem to direct by rule and precept, being not of themselves, but
made to serve others. This we have by it, that uniformity out of al
controversy is best, but whether it self be best, that is yet in controversy.

For sparing of expenses, Sparing of expenses.
the second commodity which uniformity bringes with her, this is my opinion:
while it is left to the teachers liberty to make his own choice, both for the
book which he will teach and the order how, between the variety of
judgments, and inequality of learning in teachers, which by order must be
made one, by consent never will, the parents purses are pretily pulled, and
poor men very sore pinched both with change of books, the master often
repealing his former choice: and also with number, while every book is
commended to the buyer, which either makes a fair show to be profitable: or
otherwise is solicited to the sale, as in our days necessity must sell,
where such an ouerflush of books grows chargeable to the printer. For the old
periode is returned, that Iuuenall found in his time, learned and unlearned
must needs write, he is marde that comes lag. Nay ordinarily some few leaves
be occupied in the best chosen, and biggest book, besides the often leasing and
much spoiling of them sachels and all, to their gains it may be said that sell
them, though to the parents loss that buy them, and those of the meaner sort,
whose children maintain schools most, and swarm thickest in all places and
professions, which thing might be far better used, if the best only were
bought, and with the loss of his kookes the child lost no more. All which
inconveniences may easily be remeadied, and with small ado. For whatsoever is
needful to be used in schools, may be very well comprised in a small
compass, and have all his helps with him being gathered into some one pretty
volume compounded of the marrow of many: neither will the charge be great, the
ware being small, and our profession is not to perfect, but to enter. Neither
yet hereby is any injury done to good writers, whose books may very well
tarry for the ripenes of the reader, and that place which is dew to them, in
the ordinary ascent of learning and study, being no intruders into rowmes to
mean for them, and content to take that place whereunto they are marshalled by
their value, and degree: to their praise which made them, when the student can
judge: to the students profit, when he can understand: and the fast retaining
of them, when order maintanes memory.

In our grammar schools we profess the toungues nay rather the entrance of
toungues. Every profession that is penned in any toungue ministers to her
student those words that be proper to her own subject. Which words be then
best gotten when they follow the matter, as they will do most willingly in the
peculiar study of the same profession. If a grammarian therefore be entered to
write, speak, and understand pretily in some well chosen argument best to
follow for aptnes each way, though he neither know all, nor most words in any
toungue, which is reserved to further study: yet our schools be discharged of
their dewtie, in doing but so much. They that assign grammar masters wherein
to travel, appoint them histories, and poets, though they make some choice of
men, and some distinction of matter in regard of virtuous manners and pureness of
style. In our schools what time will serve us to run over all these? nay to
deal but with some few of them thoroughly? how then? Is not some little well
picked, and printed alone the praise of our profession and the parents case?
And be not the maine books to be consigned over to the right place in their
own calling? Some veins be rapt, and will needs prove poets, leave them the
art of poetry, and the whole books and arguments of poets. Some wlll
commend to memory, and posterity such acts and monumemes, as be worthy the
remembrance: Let them have the rules, whereby the penning of histories is
directed to write thereby with order: and the matter of histories to furnish
out their style. If men of more study and greater learning have leisure and
list to read, they may use histories for pleasure, as being but an after
meats study: neither tyring the brain, nor tediouse any way: as they be not
generally to build on for judgment: because ignorance of their circumstances
make some difficulty in applying, and great danger in proving. They may also
run over poets, when they are disposed to laugh, and to behold what bravery
enthousiame inspireth. For when the poets write sadly and soberly, without
counterfeating though they write in verse, yet they be no poets in that kind
of their writing: but where they cover a truth with a fabulous veele, and
resemble with alteration. We are therefore to cull out some of the best, and
fittest for our introductorie, and to send away the rest to their own place,
in the peculiar professions, and that not in poets and histories alone, but
also in all other books whatsoever, which be at this day admitted into our
schools. The poets words be very good, and most significant, as it
appears by Platoes whole penning, whose eloquence is thought fit for
saints, if any heavenly creature had a longing to speak greek. And in the
latin they have the same grace, in his judgment, De oratore.
which best understood what words were best, as being himself the best, and
eloquentest orator, speaking of them in that book, wherein he both shows
his eloquence most, and uses the personages of the most eloquent orators, to
deliver his mind. The quantity of syllabes is to be learned of them, to avoid
mistiming, as the wise writer Horace points the poet therefore first to frame
the tender mouth of the young learner.

Moreover some very excellent places most eloquently, and forcibly penned for
the polishing of good manners, and inducement unto virtue may be picked out of
some of them, and none more then Horace. We may therefore either use them, with
that choice: or help the point our selves if we think it good, and can pen a
verse that may deserve remembrance. Such an help did Apollinarius offer unto
his time, as Sozomenus, and Socrates the scholar, report in their
ecclesiastical histories. For Julian the renegate spiting at the great
learning of Basil, Gregory, Apollinarie, and many more, which lived in that
time, which time was such a breeder of learned men, as in Christian matters and
religion we read none like, by decree excluded the christian men's Children
from the use of profane learning wherein the christian divines were so cunning
as they stopped both his, and his favorites mouths with their own learning,
they passed them all so far. Then Apollinarius conueighed into verses of all
sorts, after the imitation of all the best profane poets divine and holy
arguments gathered out of scripture whereby he met with Iulianes edict, and
furnished out his own profession, with matter and argument of their own. Now
in misliking of profane arguments some such help may be had and appropriate to
our youth. But there must be heed taken, that we plant not any poetical fury
in the childs habit. For that rapt inclination is to ranging of it self,
though it be not helped forward, where it is, and would not in any case be
forced where it is not. For other writers, number and choice of words,
smoothnes and propriety of composition with the honesty of the argument must
be most regarded. Quintilianes rule is very true and the very best, and always
to be observed, in choosing of writers for children to learn, to pick out such
as will feed the wit with fairest stuff, and fine the toungue with nearest
speech. So that neither slight, and improper matters, though eloquently set
forth, neither weighty and wise being rudely delivered be to be offered to
children, but where the honesty and familiarity of the argument is honored
and apparelled with the finesse and fitnes of speech. Which thing if it be
looked unto in planting uniformity, and pointing out fit books, besides many
and infinite commodities which will grow thereby to the whole realm, assuredly
the multitude of many needelesse volumes, will be diminished and cut of. So
that uniformity in schooling may seem very profitable seeing it will supplant
so great defectes, as the likelihood gives, and plant the redress, which in
nature it imports: besides that which the common weal does gain by
acquainting young wits even from their cradeles, both to embrace and apply
orderly vniformnes, which in things subject to sense is delitefull to behold:
in comprehensions of the mind is comfortable to think on: in executions and
effects is the stay whereon we stand, and the steddiest recourse to correct
errors by. I am led by these reasons and many the like, to think that either
nothing in deed, or very little in show, can justly be alleged to the contrary
but that such an order must needs be very profitable, to give schools a
purgatio^ to void them of some great inconveniences: as I take the thing also
to be very compassable, if authority shall like of it, without which any
opinion is but showed, and dies without effect.

I entend my self by the grace of God to bestow some pains therein, if I may
perceive any hope to encourage my travel. If any other will deal I am ready
to stay, and behold his success: if none other will, then must I be borne
with, which in so necessary a case do offer to my country all my duetifull
service. Wherein if any upon some repining humor shall seem to stomach me,
because being one perhaps meaner then he is himself, I do thus boldly auaunce
my doings to the stage, and view of my country: yet till he step forth and
show us his cunning he has no wrong offered him, if another do speak while he
will be silent. And whosoever shall deal in general arguments, must be content
to put up those general pinches, which repining people do use then most, when
they are best used, and esteem it some benefit, when doing well he hears
ill: and think that he has gotten a great victory if he please the best, and
profit the most, as he may profit all and yet displease many: either through
ignorance because they cannot discern: or through willfulnes being wedded to
prejudice: or else through disdain because it spiteth some, to see other above
spite. A disease proper to basest dispositions, and of meanest desert, to pinch
the heel where they prick at the head.

But such as mean to do well, how souer their power perform, so the height
of their argument ouertop not their power to far, and discover great want of
discretion in meddling with a matter to much surmounting their ability, they
may comfort and encourage themselves with that meaning, if their doing do
answer it in any reasonable proportion, and think it a thing, (as it is in
deed) naturally, and daily accompanying all potentates either in person, or
property, and therefore no disgrace to any meaner creature to wrestle with
repyning and sour spirits even very then, when they work them most good,
which are readyest to repine. If the doings be massiue they will bear a
knock: if they be but slender, and will straight way bruise, beware the
warranting. As in this my labor I dare warrant nothing, but the warines of
good will, which even ill will shall see: if it have any sight to see that is
right, as commonly that way it is stark blind, and so much the more
incurablely, by cause the blindness comes either of unwillingness to see, or of
an infected sight, that will misconsture and deprave the object. I crave the
gentle and friendly construction of such as be learned, or that love learning,
and yet I need not crave it, by cause learning that is sound in deed and
needs no bolstering, and all her lovers and favorers, be very liberal of
friendly constructio^, and nothing partial to speak the best, eue^ where it
is not craved. I must pray, if prayer will procure it, the gentle and curteouse
toleration of such, as shall mislike. For as I will not willingly do that,
which may deserve misliking: so if I once know wherein, I will satisfy
thoroughly. And therefore in one word, I must pray my loving countriemen, and
friendly readers, this to think of me, that either I shall hit, as my hope is,
and then they shall enjoy it: or if I miss, I will amend, and my self shall
not repent it.

School orders public.
The second remedy to help school inconveniences was to set down the school
ordinances between the master, and his scholars in a public place, where
they may easily be seen and red: and to leave as little uncertain or untouched,
which the parent ought to know, and whereupon misliking may arise, as is
possible. For if at the first entry the parent condescend, to those orders,
which he sees, so that he cannot afterward plead eitheir ignorance, or
disallowing, he is not to take offense, if his child be forced unto them, when
he will not follow, according to that form, which he himself did confirm by
his own consent. And yet when all is done the gloss will wring the text.
Wherefore the manner of teaching, the ascent in fourmes, the times of admission,
the prevention to have fourmes equal, the books for learning, and all those
things, which be incident unto that uniformity, whereof I spoke, being already
known to be ratified by authority, as I trust it shall be: or if not, yet the
same order in the same degrees being set down, which the master privately
according to his own skill entendes to keep: it shall be very good to take away
matter of jar between the parents and the master, in the same table
publicly to be seen, and showed to the parents, when they bring their child
first to school, besides all that, which I have generally touched to set down
also in plain and flat terms, what hours he will hours, though the school
hours must still be certain: and discretion must be the determiner. Again
what occasions he will

But he must chiefly touch what punishment he will use, Of courtesy and
correction.
and how much, for every kind of fault, that shall seem punishable by the
rod. For the rod may no more be spared in schools, then the sword may in the
Princes hand. By the rod I mean correction, and awe: if that scepter be
thought to fearful for boys, which our time devised not, but received it from
auncientie, I will not strive with any man for it, so he leave us some mean
which in a multitude may work obedience. For the private, what soever
parents say, my lady birchely will be a gest at home, or else parents shall
not have their wills. And if in men great misses deserve and receive great
punishment, sure children may not escape in some quality of punishment, which
in quantity of unhappiness will match some men. And if parents were as
careful to examine the causes of beating, as they are nothing curious to be
offended without cause for beating, themselves might gain a great deal more
to their childrens good: and their children lease nothing, by their parents
assurance. But commonly in such cases rashness has her recompense, the error
being then spied, when the harm is incurable, and repentance without redress.
Term it as ye list, beat not you say for learning but for lewdness. Sure to
beat him for learning which is willing enough to learn, when his wit will
not serve, were more then frantike: and under the name of not learning to hide
and shroud all faults and offenses, were more then foolish: and what would
that child be without beating, which with it can hardly be reclaimed? in whom
only lewdness is the let, and capacity is at will? The end of our shooles
is learning: if it fail by negligence, punish negligence: if by other
voluntary default, punish the default. Spare learning: so that still the
refuge must be to the masters discretion: both for manners, and for learning,
whom I would wish to set down as much in certainty as he can, at the
beginning, and to leave as little as he may to the childs report, who will
always lean and sway to much to his own side, and bear away the bell, even
against the best master, chiefly if his mother be either his counselor, or
his attorney: or the father unconstant, and without judgment.

The master therefore must have in his table a catalogue of school faults,
beginning at the commandementes, for swearing, for disobedience, for lying, for
false witness, for picking, and so thorough out: then to the meaner heresies,
trewantry, absence, tardies, and so forth. Such a thing Xenophon seems to
mean in rekening up the faults, 1. (...).
which the Persian used to punish, though he limit not the penalty, what, nor
how much. Which in all these I wish our master to set down with the number of
stripes also, immutable though not many. Wherein the master is to take good
heed, that the fault may be confessed, if it may be, without force, and the
boy convicted by verdit of his fellows, and that very evidently. For
otherwise children will wrangle amain, and affection at home has credulity
beyond cry, which makes the boy dare, what reason dare not. If any of their
fellows be appointed monitours, (as such helps of Lieutenauncie must be had,
where the master cannot always be present himself) and take them napping,
they will pretend spite, or some private displeasure in most manifest knauerie.
And if ye correct, as your Lieutenant must have credit, if you mean to keep
state, that must go home to prove beating without cause. If the master
differ execution, that delaie will enstruct them to devise some starting
hole, and that also if it be not heard in school will be heard at home.

To tell tales out of school, is now as commonly used to the worst, as in the
old world it was high treason to do it at all. There be as many pretty
stratagemes and devises, which boys will use to save themselves, and as
pleasant to hear as any apopthegme in either Plutarch, AElianus, or Erasmus.
The master therefore must be very circumspecte, and leave no show, or
countenance of impunitie deserved, where desert biddes pay. It were some loss
of time in learning, to spend any in beating, if it did not seem a gain that
sounds toward good, and seeks amendment of manners. It is passing hard,
to reclaim a boy, in whom long impunitie has graffed a careless security,
or rather some deep insolency: and yet freindes will have it so, and beating
may not be for discouraging the boy, though repentance be in rearward. It is
also not good after any correction to let children grate somewhat to long of
their late grief, for fear of to great stomaking, unless the parents be
wise and steadfast, with whom if a cunning, and a discrete master join, that
child is most fortunate which has such parents, and that scholar most happy
which has light on such a master. But certainly it is most true, let
plausibilitie in speech use all her excusing and blanching colors that she
can, that the round master, which can use the rod discretely, though he
displease some, which think all punishment indiscreet, if it tuch their own,
does perform his duty best, and still shall bring up the best scholars: As
no master of any stuff shall do but well, where the parents like that at
home, which the master does at school: and if they do mislike any thing, will
rather impart their grief and displeasure with the master privately, to amend
it, then moan their child openly, to mar that way more then they shall make
any way. The same faults must be faults at home, which be faults at school,
and receive the like reward in both the places, to work the childs good by
both means, correction as the cause shall offer, commendacion as need shall
require.

They that write most for gentleness in train reserve place for the rod, and
we that use the term of severity recommend courtesy to the masters
discretion. Here is the odds: they will seem to be courteous in terms, and
yet the force of the matter makes them confess the need of the rod: we use
sharp terms, and yet yeilde to courtesy more, then even the very patrones of
courtesy do, for all their curifauour.

Wherein we have more reason to harp on the harder stringe for the truth of the
matter, then they to touch but the softer, so to please the person: seeing they
conspire with us in the last conclusion, that both correction and courtesy be
referred to discretion. Courtesy goes before, and ought to guide the
discourse, when reason is obeyed which is very seldom: but the corruptnesse in
nature, the penalties in law, courage to inflame, desire to entice, and so
many euilles assailing one good do enforce me to build my discourse upon fear,
and leave courtesy to consideration: as the bare one reason of reason obeyed, a
thing still wished, but seldom well willed, does cause some courteous conceit,
not much acquainted with the kind of government, upon some plausible liking,
to make courtesy the outside, and keep canuase for the lyning: but ever still
for the last staff to make discretion the refuge. Wherein we agree, though I
privately chide him, and say why dissemble ye? Under hand he answers me, I
lend the world some words, but I will witness with you, I do not speak
against discrete correction, but against hastiness, and cruelty. Sir I know,
none, that will either set correction or courtesy at to much liberty, but with
distinction, upon whom they be both to be exercised: neither yet any, that will
praise cruelty: and all those, that write of this argument, whether
Philosophers or others allow of punishment, though they differ in the kind.

7. De rep. Plato.
And it is said in the best common weal, not that no punishment is to be used,
but that such an excellent natural wit, as is made out of the finest mould
would not be enforced, because in deed it needs not: neither will I offer
fear, where I find such a one: neither but in such a common weal shall I
find such a one. And yet in our corrupt states we light sometime upon one,
that were worthy to be a dweller in a far better. And I will rather venture
upon the note of a sharp master to make a boy learn that, which may
afterward do him service, yea though he be unwilling for the time, and very
negligent: then that he shall lack the thing, which may do him service, when
age comes on, because I would not make him learn, for the vain shadow of a
courteous master. It is slavish says Socrates to be bet. It is slavish then
to deserve beating says the same Socrates. If Socrates his free nature be not
found, sure Socrates his slavish courage must be cudgelled, even by Socrates
his own confession. For neither is punishment denied for slaves, neither
courtesy for free natures. This by the way, neither Socrates nor Plato be so
directly careful in that place, for a good master in this kind, as the place
required, though they point the learner. And in deed where they had Censores to
ouersee the general train, both for one age and other, there needed no great
precept this way. If parents might not do this, neither children attempt
that, then were masters disburdened: If all things were set in stay by
public provision, private care were then mightily discharged. But Socrates
finds a good scholar which in natural relation infers a good master. And
yet Philippe of Macedonie, had a thousand considerations in his person, more
then that he was Alexanders father, and it is not enough to name the man,
onelesse ye do note the cause why with all, and in what respect ye name him. A
wise master, which must be a special caveat in provision, will help all,
either by preventing that faults be not committed, or by well using, when
soever they fall out, and without exception must have both correction and
courtesy, committed unto him beyond any appeal. 1. (...).
Xenophon makes Cyrus be beaten of his master, even where he makes him the
pattern of the best Prince, 1. Ad Quintum Frat. (...).
as Tullie says, and minds not the truth of the story, but the perfitnesse
of his devise, being him self very mild as it appears still in his journey
from Assyria after the death of Cyrus the younger. For a soul there could not
be one less servile then he, which was pictured out beyond exception: for
impunitie, there could not be more hope, then in a Prince enheritour, and that
is more, set forth for a pattern to Princes. And yet this Princes child in the
absoluteness of devise, was beaten by his devise, which could not devise any
good train exempt from beating being yet the second ornament of Socrates his
school.

The case was thus, and a matter of the Persian learning. A long boy had a
short coat, and a short boy had a long one: The long boy took away the
short boys coat, and gave him his: both were fit: But yet there arose a
question about it. Cyrus was made judge, as justice was the Persian grammar. He
gave sentence, that either should have that which fitted him. His master bette
him for his sentence: because the question was not of fitness, but of right,
wherein each should have his own. His not learning, and error by ignorance,
was the fault, wherefore he was punished. And who soever shall mark the thing
well, shall find, that not learning, where there is wit to learn, builds
upon idleness, unwilling to take pains, upon presumption that he shall carry
it away free, and in the end, upon contempt of them, from whom he learned to
contemn, where he should have reverenced. Slight considerations make no
artificial anatomies, and therefore will smart, because they spy not the
subtilities of creeping diseases. It is easy for negligence in scholars, to
pretend cruelty in masters, where favor beyond rhyme, lendes credit beyond
reason. But in such choice of masters where cruelty may easily be avoided,
nay in such help by Magistrate, where it may be suppressed: and in such wealth
of parents which may change where they like not, if I should here a young
gentleman say he was driven from school, he should not drive me from mine
opinion, but that there was folly in the parents, and he had his will to much
followed, if his parents had the training of him, or that his guardian gave to
much to his own gain, and to little to his wards good, if he were not
himself some hard head besides, and set light by learning, as a booty but for
beggars. For gentleness and courtesy toward children, I do think it more
needful then beating, and ever to be wished, because it implies a good
nature in the child, which is any parents comfort, any masters delight. And is
the nurse to liberal wits, the masters encouragement, the childs ease, the
parents contentment, the bannishment of bondage, the triumph over torture, and
an allurement to many good attemptes in all kind of schools.

But where be these wits, which will not deserve, and that very much? and
where much deserving is, who is so shamles as to deny correction, which by
example does good, and helps not the party offender alone. Give me mean
dispositions to deserve, they shall never complain of much beating: but of
none I dare not say, because insolent rechelessenes will grow on in the very
best, and best given natures, where impunitie profers pardon, ear the fault be
committed. My self have had thousands under my hand, whom I never bet,
neither they ever much needed: but if the rod had not been in sight, and
assured them of punishment if they had swarued to much, they would have
deserved: And yet I found that I had done better in the next to the best, to
have used more correction, and less courtesy, after carelessenesse had gotten
head. Wherefore I must needs say, that in any multitude the rod must needs
rule: and in the least paucitie it must be seen, how soever it sound. Neither
needs a good boy to be afraid, seeing his fellow offender beaten, any more
then an honest man, though he stand by the gallows, at the execution of a
fellon. This point for punishment must the master set down roundly, and so as
he means in deed to deal, because the pretense is generally, not so much
for beating, as for to sore beating, which being in sight, the conclusion is
soon made, and he that will prevent that sore, may see that set down, which
is thought sufficient. Whereunto if the parent submit himself in consent, and
his child in obedience the bargain is thorough, if not there is no harm done.

If the school rest upon the master alone, thus must he do if he mean to do
well, and to continue freindship where he means to do good. If it be some free
foundation, the founders must join with the master, if they mean that the
fruit of their cost shall be commodious to their country. Leave nothing to had I
wist where ye may answer ye wist it. When any extraordinary fault breaks
out, as Solon said of parricide, that he thought there was none such in nature,
conference with the parent, and evident proof before punishment, will satisfy
all parties. And ever the master must have a fatherly affection, even to the
vnhappyest boy, and think the school to be a place of amendment, and
therefore subject to misses.

The masters years, and alonenesse.
For the masters years, I leave that to the admitters, as I do his alonenesse.
Sufficiency of living will make marriage most fit, where affection to their own,
works fatherlynesse to others: and insufficiency of living will make a sole
man remove sooner, because his carriage is small. Most years should be most fit
to govern, both for constantnesse to be an ancker for leuitie to ride at,
which is naturally in youth: and for discretion and learning, which years
should bring with them. But because there be errors I leave this to
discretion. The admitters to schools have a great charge, and ought to prove
as curious as the very best Godfathers, whose charge yet is far greater, then
the account of it is made, among common persons. These things do I take to be
very necessary means, to help many displeasures wherewith schooling is
anoyed, and to plant pleasure in their place. And yet when all is done the
poor teacher must be subject to as much, as the sun is, to shine over all,
and yet see much more then he can amend: as the divine is, which for all his
preaching, cannot have his auditorie perfect: as the Prince is, who neither for
reward nor penalty can have general obedience. The teachers life is painful,
and therefore would be pityed: it is evidently profitable, and therefore would be
cherished: it wrastles with vnthankfullnesse above all measure, and therefore
would be comforted, with all encouragement One displeased parent will do more
harm upon a head, if he take a pyrre at some toy, never conferring with any,
but with his own cholere: then a thousand of the thankfullest will ever do
good, though it be never so well deserved. Such small recompense has so great
pains, the very acquaintance dying when the child departes, though with
confessed deserte, and manifest profit: Such extreme dealing will fury
enforce, where there is no fault, but that conceit surmiseth, unwilling to
examine the truth of the cause, and lother to reclame, as unwilling to be seen
so ouershot by affection. This very point whereby parents hurt themselves in
deed, and hinder their own, though they discourage teachers, would be looked
unto by some public ordinance, that both the masters might be driven to do
well, if the fault rest in them: and the parents to deal well, if the blame
rest there: considering the public is harmed, where the private is vncharmed,
to end it in meter as my president is.

But in the beginning of this argument I did protest against Philip
Melanchthons miseries, and therefore I will go no further, seeing what calling
is it, which has not his cumbat against such discurtesies? The proverb were
untrue, if man should not be as well a wolf to man, as he is termed a God.
and did not more harm, in unkindness, then good in courtesy: so maruelosly
fraught with ill and good both, as Pliny, cannot judge whether nature be to a
man, a better mother, or a bitterer stepdame. But patience must comfort where
extremity discourageth: and a resolute mind is a rempare to it self, upon
whom as Horace says, though the whole world should fall, it might well crush
him perforce, but not quash him for fear.

Chapter. 44. That Conference between those which have interest in children:
Certainetie of direction in places where children use most: and Constancy in
well keeping that, which is certainly appointed, be the most profitable
circumstances both for virtuous manering and cunning schooling.
OF all the means which policy and consideration have devised to further the
good training up of children, either to have them well learned, or vertueously
manered, I see none co^parable to these three points: conference between those
persons, which have interest in children, to see them well brought up:
certainetie in those things, wherein children are to travel, for their good
bringing up: constancy in perfourming that, which by conference between the
persons is set certain in the things: that there be either no change at all
after a sound limitation: or at least very little, save where discretion in
execution, is to yeald unto circumstaunce. Therefore I entend to utter some part
of mine opinion concerning these three things conference to breed the best:
certainetie to plant the best: constancy to continue the best: and first of
conference. Which I find to be of four cooplementes: parents and neighbors:
teachers and neighbors: parents and tachers: teachers and teachers: whereof
every one offers much matter for the furthering of both learning and good
manners in children. Under the name of neighbors I comprehend all foreign
persons, whom either commendable dewtie by country law: or honest care of
common courtesy does give charge unto, to help the bettering of children, and
to fraie them from evil.

Now if parents in points of counsel use to confer with such, Conference
between parents and neighbors.
they may learn by some others experience: how to deal in their own. And as
this point is naturally provided to assist infirmity, which craves help of
others, where it stands in dout: so there is a natural iniunction whereby all
men are charged to bestow their good and faithful counsel, where it is
required, doing thereby great good to the parties, and no harm to themselves,
unless it be to be rekened a harm, to gain the opinion of wisdom, the
estimation of honesty, and the note of humanity, and a well given
disposition. This consideration rests most in the party mouer, which is to
receive advise, when himself shall require it. The next is an evident sign of
an excellent inclination, which of it self will do good, even because the
thing is good, though he be not conferred with. For if such persons will
confer with parents, when they spy any thing that is not well in their
children is it not honorable in them to deal so honestly? is it not wisdom in
parents to constrew it most friendly? is it not happy for those children
which have such careful foreign helpers abroad, such considerate natural
hearers at home? A simple meaning in both the parties, the neighbor to tell
friendly, the parent to take kindly, and to excute wisely will do marvelous
much good. And what is this else but to love thy neighbor as thy self, when
thou mindest his child good, as thou do thine own? And what is it else but
to think of thy neighbor, as thou would be thought on thy self, when thou
beleeuest him in thine, as thou would be believed in his? A true president
of natural humanity, a religious pattern of honest neighborhood, which in
no other thing can declare more good will, in no other thing can do one more
good, then in respect to his children, whether ye consider the childrens
persons, or the thing which is wished them. For in deed what be children in
respect of their persons? be they not the effects of Gods perfourmaunce in
blessing? of his commandment in increase? be they not the assurance of a
state which shall continue by succession, and not die in one brood? be they not
the parents natural purtracte? their comfort in hope, their care in
provision? for whom they get all, for whom they fear naught? And can he which
desires the good of this so great a blessing from heaven, so great a stay for
the country, so great a comfort to parents, devise how to pleasure them more
in any other thing? for to wish children to be honest, virtuous, and well
learned, is to wish that to prove perfitly good, which stands in a mammering,
to prove good or bad. And can this so great a good wish but proceed from a
passing honest disposition, and most worthy the embrasing? Nay most happy is
that state, where youth has such a stay, in such liberty, as it is, not to
help unless one list. Hereupon I conclude that conference between parents
and others, whether by way of asking counsel, or by aduertisemente to check
faults, is very profitable for the weal of the little ones.

This conference may fall between the neighbor and the teacher. Conference
between teachers and neighbors.
Wherein the teacher must be very wary because he has to deal with the
informer forcredit: with his scholar for amendment: with the parent for liking.
When the parent deals with his own child, either of his own knowledge, or
by credited report, his doom is death or life, the child has no appeal, but
either must amend, or feel the like smart. At the teachers dealing, upon any
advertisement, there may and will be taken many pretty exceptio^s. Why did you
believe? why should he meddle? why dealt you in this sort? And whatsoever
quarrel miscontentment can devise, being incensed with fury: or some extreme
heat, as angry nature is an eager monster. And in deed some overthwart
conceit may move the complainant, whatsoever the pretense be. Again some wise
man, may light upon so convenient a master., as he may prove a better mean to
redress, then the parent will be, in whom blind nature will neither see the
childs fault, nor the friends says. But how soever it be, the master must
be wary, where his commission is not absolute. But in the wise handling of
this civil conference the child shall gain much toward his well doing,
when wheresoever he shall be, or whatsoever he shall do, he shall both find it
true, and feel it so, that either his parent or his master, or both together
see him, if any other body see him.

Conferee between parents and teachers.
The next conference is between parents and masters, whereof though I have
said much, yet can I never say to much, the point is so needful: because
their friendly and faithful communicating works perpetual obedience in the
child, contempt of evil, and desire to do well: seeing both they travel to
make one good. There is nothing so great an enemy to this so great a good as
credulity is in parents, not able to withstand the childs eloquence, when
shed of tears, and some childish passion do plead against punishment for
assured misdemeanour. But though for the time such parents seem to win,
because they have their will: yet in the conclusion, they want their will, when
they wish it were not so. Before change either of place, to proceed onward to
further learning: or of masters, when the old is misliked, and a new sought
for, then this conference is a marvelous help. For in change of place, it
growndes upon knowledge, and grows by advice: in change of masters, it is
mistress to warines not to lease by the change. For can the new master
understand and judge of the childs fault in so small a time, as the old
master may amend it if he be conferred with? You are offended with the former
master, have ye conferred with him? have ye opened unto him your own grief,
your childs defect, his own default? are ye resolved that the fault is in the
master? may not your son forge? or may he not halt, to procure alteration
upon some private peuishnes? Cyrus as Zenophon writes surprised the king of
Armenia being tributarie to the Median but minding to revolt, (...). 3.
when the Assyrians army should enter into Media. And yet though he found him
in manifest blame, he left him his state, as the best steward for the Medians
use, considering the party pardoned is bound by defect, he that shall be
chosen, will thank his own merit, not the chusers munisicence. Such
consideration had Cyrus, and such conference with him, whom he knew to be a
foe, before he surprised him, and yet found the fruit of his considerate
conference and his determination upon his conference, to be exceeding good and
gainefull for himself after, and his friends for the time. A number of ills
be avoided, and a number of goods obtained by this same conference between
parents and masters. If the master be wise and advisedly chosen though he
chance to miss, he knows to amend: if he neither be such a one, nor so
consideratly chosen, yet conference will discover him, and show hope her
listes, and what she may trust to. But not to dwell any longer in this point,
wherein elsewhere I have not been parciall, I must needs say thus much of it
at once for all, that no one mean either public or private makes so much for
the good bringing up of children, Conference between teachers.
as this conference does.

The last conference I appoint to be between those of the same professions,
whereby the general train is generally furthered. For whersoeuer any subject
is to be dealt in by many, is not the dealers conference the mean to perfect
dealing? and to have that subject absolutely well done, which it self is
subject to so many doers? Is either the patient any worse if the Physicians
confer, or their faculty baser by their being together? is not the case
still clearer, where there is conference in law? is not the church the purer
were conference is in proof? and does not the contrary in all do much harm
in all? And do ye think that conference among teachers would not do much good
in the train? or is the thing either for moment so mean, or for number so
naked, as it may not seem worthy to be considered upon? Or can there any one,
or but some few, be he or they never so cunning, discern so exactly, as a
number can in common conference? do not common companies which profess no
learning, both allow it, and prove it, and find it to be profitable? where it
is used among teachers for the common good, it profits generally by sending
abroad some common direction. In places where many schools be within small
compass, it is very needful to work present good, and to help one another,
where all may have enough to bestow their labor on.

But this conference, and that not in teachers alone must be builded upon the
honest care of the public good, without respect of private gain: without
sting of emulation: without gaul of disdain: which be and have been great
enemies to conference: great hinderers to good schooling: nay extreme ruiners
in cases above schooling, and yet for the footing of that, which must after
prove fairest, good schooling is no small onset. I need not to rip up the
position to them, that be learned, which know what a mischeife the miss of
conference is, where it ought to be of force, and is shouldered out by
distempered fancy. He that can judge, knows the force of this argument,
which follows where many illes seek to choke one good, which themselves were
displaced, if that good took place: that good must needs be a great one, and
worthy the wishing, that it may procure passage. Of conference I must needs
say this, that it is the cognizance of humanity, and that of the best
humanity, being used for the best causes that concern humanity, and all
human society. I dare enter no deeper in this so great good: but certainly
in matters of learning there would be more conference, even of very
conscience. And if that honest desire might bring down great heart, the
honorable effect would bring up great good, in all trades beyond cry, in our
train beyond credit. In matters of engrosing, and monopoleis, in matters of
forestauling and intercepting there is dealing by conference among the dealers,
which we all cry out of, because it makes us cry, in our purses. And yet we
are slow to try that in the good, which proves so strong in the ill, and was
first pointed for good. I use no authorities to prove in these cases, where
reason her self is in place, and stands not in need of alleging of names,
because she may well spare her own retinew, where her host himself does
tender his own service.

Certainty
The next point after conference is the chief and best offspring of all wise
conferences, certainetie in direction, which in all things commendes it self,
but in bringing up of children it does surpass commendation both for their
manners and their learning. This same so much praised certainetie concerns
the limiting of things, what to do and what to learn, how to do and how to
learn, where, when, and so forth to do that, which fineth the behavior, and
to learn that which aduaunceth knowledge. For children being of themselves
mere ignorant must have certainetie to direct them: and trainers being not
daily to devise, are at once to set down certain, both what themselves will
require at the childrens hand for the general order: and what the children
must look for at their hands for general perfourmance. This certainetie must
specially be set sure, and no less soundly kept, in schools for learning, in
private houses for behavior, in churches for religion, because those three
places, Certainetie in schools.
be the greatest aboades, that children have.

Concerning certainetie in school points, and the benefit thereof, I have
dealt very largely in the last title: so that I shall not need to use any more
spreading in that point, saving only that I do continue in the same opinion:
as the thing it self continues in it self most assurance of best success,
when the child knows his certainetie in all limitable circumstances, whether
he be at school himself to provide that must be done: or if he be not there,
yet to know in abscence, what is done there of course. So that where ignorance
of orders cannot be pretended, there good orders must needs be observed, which
ordenarily bring forth a well ordered effect. The best and most heavenly
things be both most certain, and most constantly certain, and the wisest men
the certainest to build on, in the midst of our vncertaineties. So that
certainetie must needs be a great level, which procures such liking in those
things where it lights. In schooling it assures the parents, what is
promised there, and how like to be performed, by sight of the method and
orders set down: it directs the children as by a trodden path, how to come
thither, as their journey lies: it disburdeneth the masters head, when that
is in writing, which he was in waying, and when experience by often trying has
made the habitable to march on of itself without any reuewing; whereunto
mutabilitie is every day endaungered. Certainetie in private houses.


The second point of certainetie enters into families and private houses,
which in part I then touched, when I wished the parents so to deal at home,
as there might be a conformity between school and home. This point will
prevent two great inconveniences even at the first, besides the generale
sequel of good discipline at home. For neither shall schools have cause to
complain of private corruption from home, that it infecteth them, when nothing
is at home done or seen, but that which is seemly: neither shall the schools
lightly send any misdemeanour home, when the child is assured to be sharply
chekt, for his ill doing, if it appear within doares. This is that point which
all writers that deal with the oeconomie of householdes, and policy of
states do so much respect, because the fine blossoms of well trained families,
do assure us of the swetest flowers in training up of states, for that the
buddes of private discipline be the beauties of policy. I shall not need to
say, what a good state that family is in, where all things be most certainly
set, and most constantly kept, which do belong to the good example of the
heads, the good following of the feet, the good discipline of the whole
house. Though some not so resolute wits, or gredier humors will neither
harken to this rule, nether keep it in their own, because the distemperature
is both blind, and deaf, where the mind is distempered, and violently given
over either to extreme desire of gain, or to some other infirmity which
cannot stoup to staid order: yet those families which keep it, find the
profitablenesse of it. There children so well ordered by certaineties at home:
when to rise: when to go to bed: when and how to pray evening and morning: when
and how to visit their parents ear they go to bed, after they rise, ear they
go abroad, when they return home, at tables about meat, at meeting in duty
with officious and decent speches of course, well framed, and deulie called
for, cannot but prove very orderly and good. He that in his infancy is thus
brought up, will make his own proof his fairest president, and what household
knows not this is extreme far of from any good president. Obedience
toward the prince and laws is assuredly grounded, when private houses be so
well ordered: small preaching will serve there, where private training settes
things so forward. Being therefore so great a good, it is much to be thought
on, and more to be called for.

Now can certainty being so great a bewtifier both to publik schools,
Certainty in Churches.
and private houses, be but very necessary to enter the Church with children
upon holydaies? to have all the young ones of the Parish, by order of the
Parish set in some one place of the Church? with some good over looking, that
they be all there, and none suffered to raunge abroad about the streates, upon
any pretense? that they may be in eye of parents and parishioners? that they
may be attentive to the Divine service, and be time learn to reverence that,
whereby they must after live? I do but set down the consideration, which they
will execute, who shall allow of it, and devise it best, upon sight of the
circunstance. How other men will think hereof I know not, but sure me think,
both publikly and privately, that certainty in direction where it may be well
compassed, is a merueilous profitable kind of regiment, and best beseeming
children, about whose bettering my travel is employed. In the very executing
it shows present pleasure, and afterward many singular profits: and is in
very deed the right mean to direct in uncertainties, as a stayed yearde to
measure flexible stuff. Bladders and bullrushes help swimming: the nurses
hand the infantes going: the teachers line the scholars writing, the Musicians
tune, his learners timing: what to do? by following certainty at first to
direct liberty at last. And he that is acquainted with certainty of
discipline in his young years will think himself in exile, if he find it
not in age, and by plain comparisons, will reclaim misorders, which he likes
not, to such orders as he sees not. Who so marks and moanes the variety in
schooling, the disorder in families, the dissoluteness in Church, will think
I say somewhat.

The third part of my division was constancy. Constancy.
For what avails it to confer about the best, and to set it in certain,
where mutabilitie of minds upon every infirmity either of judgment, or other
circunstance, is seeking to retire, and to leave that rouling, which was so
well rewled. In this point of constancy there be but two considerations to be
had, the one of knowledge in the thing, the other of discretion in the use. For
he that is resolved in the goodness and pith of the thing, will never revolt,
but like a valiant general building upon his own knowledge, is certain to
conquer, what difficulty so ever would seem to dasle his eyes, or to dash
his conceit. It is weak ignorance that yeildes still, as being never well
settled: it is pusillanimitie that faintes still, not believing where he sees
not. Assured knowledge will resemble the great Emperor of all, which is still
the same and never changes, which set a law, that yet remains in force even
from the first, among all his best and most obedient things. The suns course
is certain, and constantly kept. The moon has her moving without alteration,
and that so certain, as how many years be their eclypses foretold? A good
thing such as wise conference is most like to bring forth, would be certainly
known, and being so known would be constantly kept. The fairest bud will
bring forth no fruit, if it fall in the prime, but being well fostered by
seasonable weather, it will surely prove well. The greatest things have a
feeble footing, though their perfitnesse be strong, but if their mean be not
constant, that first feebleness will never recover that last strength. I meddle
not with change of states, nor yet with any branches, whose particular change,
quite alters the surface, of any best settled state, but with the training of
children, and the change therein: which being once certain would in no case be
altered before the state it self upon some general change do command
alteration, whereunto all our schooling must be still applied, to plant that in
young ones, which must please in old ones. As now our teaching consists in
toungues, if some other thing one day seem fitter for the state, that fitter
must be fitted, and fetched in with processio^. But yet in changes this rule
would be kept, to alter by degrees, and not to rush down at once. Howbeit the
nature of men is such, as they will sooner gather a number of illes at once to
corrupt: then pare any one ill by little and little with mind to amend.

Concerning discretion: there is a circunstance to be observed in things,
which is committed always to the executours person, and has respect to his
judgment, which I call no change, because in the first setting down that was
also settled, as a most certain point to rule accide^tarie uncertainties, which
be no changes, because they were foreseen. Such a supply has justice in
positive laws by equity in consideration, as a good chancellor to soften to
hard constructions. That is one reason why the monarchy is held for the best
kind of government, because the rigor and severity of law, is qualified by
the princess mercy, without breche of law, which left that prerogative to
the princess person. The co^spiracie which Brutus his own children made
against their father for the return of Tarquinius even that cruel Prince,
leanes upon this ground, as Dionysius of Halicarnassus, Liuie, and others do
note. So that discretion to alter upon cause in some uncertain circunstance,
nay to alter circunstance upon some certain cause, is no enemy to certainty.
When things are grown to extremities then change proves needful to reduce
again to the principle. For at the first planting, every thing is either
perfitest, as in the matter of creation: or the best ground for perfitnesse to
build on, as in truth of religion: though posterity for a time upon cause may
increase, but to much putting to burdeneth to much, and in the end procures
most violent shaking of, both in religious and politic usurpations.

But this argument is to high for a school position, wherefore I will knit up
in few words: that as conference is most needful, so certainty is most
sure, and constancy the best keeper: that it is no change, which discretion
uses in doing but her duty: but that alters the maine. Which in matters
engraffed in general conceits would work alteration by slow degrees, if
foresight might rule: but in extremities of palpable abuse it hurleth down
headlong, yea though he smart for the time whom the change does most help. But
in our school points the case falls lighter, where whatsoever matter shall be
offered to the first education, conference will help it, certainty will stay
it, constancy will assure it. Thus much concerning the general positions
wherein if I have either not handled, or not sufficiently handled any particular
point, it is reserved to the particular treatise hereafter, where it will be
bestowed a great deal better, considering the present execution must follow
the particular.

Chapter 45. The peroration, wherein the sum of the whole kooke is
recapitulated and proofs used, that this enterprise was first to be begone by
Positions, and that these be the most proper to this purpose. A request
concerning the well taking of that which is so well meant.
THvs bold have I been, with you (my good and courteous countriemen) and
troubled your time with a number of words of what force I know not, to what
end I know. For my end is, to show mine opinion how the great variety in
teaching, which is now generally used, may be reduced to some vniformnesse,
and the cause why I have used so long a preface, as this whole book, is, for
that such as deal in the like arguments do likewise determine before, what
they think concerning such general accidents, which are to be rid out of the
way at once, and not always to be left running about to trouble the house,
when more important matters shall come to handling. Wherein I have uttered my
conceit, liking well of that which we have, though oftimes I wish for that
which we have not, as much better in mine opinion, then that which we have, and
so much the rather to be wished, because the way to win it is of it self so
plain and ready. I have uttered my sentence for these points thus, wherein if
my cunning have deceived me, my good will must warrant me: and I have uttered
it in plain words, which kind of utterance in this teaching kind, as it is
best to be understood, so it lets every one see, that if I have missed, they
may well moan me, which meaning all so much good have unhappily missed in so
good a purpose. Upon the stearnesse of resolute and reasonable persuasions, I
might have set down my Positions aphorismelike, and left both the commenting,
and the commending of them to trial and time: but neither deserve I so much
credit, as that my bare word may stand for a warrant: neither thought I it good
with preciseness to aliene, where I might win with discourse. Whereupon I
have written in every one of those arguments enough I think for any reader,
whom reason will content: to much I fear for so evident a matter, as these
Positions be, not affailable, I suppose, by any substantial contradiction. For
I have grounded them upon reading, and some reasonable experience: I have
applied them to the use, and custom of my country, no where enforcing her to
any foreign, or strange devise. Moreover I have conferred them with common
sense wherein long teaching has not left me quite senseless. And besides
these, some reason does lead me very probable to my self, in mine own
collection, what to others I know not, to whom I have delivered it, but I must
rest upon their judgment. Hereof I am certain that my country is already
very well acquainted with them, because I did but mark where upon particular
need, she her self has made her own choice, and by embrasing much to
satisfy her own use, has recommended the residue unto my care, to be brought
by direction under some form of statarie discipline. Now then can I but
think that my countrymen will join with me in consent, with whom my country
does communicate such favor? Seeing her favor is for their furtheraunce, and
my labor is to bring them to that, which she does most allow.

And what conclusion have I set down wherein they may not very well agree with
me, The examining of all the contents of this book.
either for the first impression which set me on work, or for the proof,
which confirms the impression? My first meaning was to procure a general
good, so far as my ability would reach, I do not say that such a conceit,
deserves no discourtesie for the very motion, how soever the effect do
answer in rate: but this I may well think, that my countrymen ought of
common courtesy to countenance an affection so well qualified, till the event
either shrine it with praise, or shoulder it with repulse. I do not herein take
upon me dictatorlike to pronounce peremptorily, but in way of counsel, as one
of that robe, to show that, which long teaching has taught me to say, by
reading somewhat, and observing more. And I must pray my good countrymen so to
construe my meaning, for being these many years by some my freindes provoked
to publish something, and never hitherto daring to venture upon the print, I
might seem to have let the rain of all modesty run to lowse, if at my first
onset I should seem like a Caesar to offerre to make laws. Howbeit in very
deed my years growing downward, and some mine observations seeming to some
folks to crave some vtteraunce, upon show to do some good: I thought rather to
hasard my self in hope of some men's favor, then to bury my conceit with most
men's wonder. But before I do pass to mine Elementarie, which I mean to
publish next after this book, I must for mine own contentation examine what I
have done in this, to see whether I have hit right, or written any thing that

If I had had to do with either Romain, or Grecian, in their own language,
where these things be familiarly known, I would not have tarried in them any
long while, but dealing with my countrymen in my country toungue, in an
argument not so familiar to my country, and yet desiring to become familiar
unto her: I thought it good rather to say more then enough, to leave some
chippinges: then by saying to little, to cause a new cruste, where none should
be: and to refer the rest of my suppressed meaning to my learneddest reader,
to whose use as I needed not to write, so in deed I do not, though I wish him
well, and pray the like again. They that frame happy men, absolute orators,
perfect wisdom, paragonne Princes, faultelesse states, as they have their
subject at commandment, which they breed in the commentary of their own
brains: so their circu^sta^ces being without error, where their maine is
without match, need very few words, as being in danger of very few faults.
But I deal with a subject, which is subject to all uncertainties: with
circunstances, which are checked with many objections, lying open, to much
disturbance, cauilled at by every occasion: where one silly error, is of
strength enough, to overthrow a man's whole labor. I thought it good therefore
to declare at large, what my meaning was, to satisfy thereby even the meanest
understandings, that way to procure mine opinion the freer passage; when it
should pass by none, which understood it not. I could not but begin with them,
because herafter I shall have so many occasions to make mention of them, to
direct the train by them, to refer my self unto them, which if they had
not been handled here, they might and would have troubled me there. Besides
this, I would gladly (if I could obtain so much at their hands) that all my
countrymen did think, as I do in these same points, that by their consent my
good speed might go on, with the readier and rounder current, so that I cannot
conceive, but that I was both to begin my treatise at Positions, as the
primitive in such discourses, and to dwell long in them, to satisfy my most
readers.

Now whether these be the chief grounds in preparatiue

But how have I dealt in them. For the time to begin I have good of either
part. For the continuing time in every degree of study, I have limited it by
sufficiency and perfitnesse of habit, before the stude^t remove. For the
ending time, the bounder of it is ability to serve the common country, and
the private student in every particular calling. In this distinction and
sorting of time, I think I have so dealt, as no reason will gairsaye

The best being set down, without evident despair to come by it, or manifest
novelty to disgrace it, why should it not be sought for by them, which are
willing to have it, and know the means how? It is no novelty for some to
tower above the clouds though other in the same flight do but flutter about
the ground, and yet with commendation. For where the whole is good, and
partible by degrees, every ascent has his praise, though the prerogative be
his that mounteth highest. And therefore my plat is to satisfy those which
will meddle with the most, and yet so left at liberty, as it may serve who so
shall mislike, I will match him with melancholy, with fleame, with reumes,
with catarres, and all needelesse residences, to see how they will musle him.
The limitation of certaineties in masters for their security, and parents
for their assurance, if it be well wayed is worth the wishing. For the places
nature fantastical for giving them ability to learn: custom for putting
them to it: policy for placing them where to use it* in all ages in all
degrees, in all countries, both at home and abroad. Innovation it is not, for I
read it, I see it, I find it, it is not my devise. I put the case, that it
were one of my wishes, that wymen might learn, if they did not. Assuredly the
proof that we see, the profit that we feel, the comfort that we have, the
care that we have not, the happiness we enjoy, the mishap we avoid, the
religion we live by and like, the superstition we fly from and hate, the
clemency we find, the cruelitie we fear, by the mere benefit of our learned
princess, whom God has so rarely endewed and endowed, give me leave to wish
that sex most success in learning, and her majesty's person all success in
living: all the residew, all the best, and her highness alone all above the
best: as wish can aspire, where nothing else can come. In general I do not
remember any thing, that I have dealt in, but it may be very well digested by
any stomach, if it be not to far distempered.

My wishes perhaps may seem sometimes to be novelties, Novelties perhaps, as
all amendementes be to the thing that needs redress, but not fantastical,
as having their seat in the clouds. If no man did ever wish, then were I
alone. If my wish were impossible though it made show of very great profit,
impossibility in deed, would desire profit in wish to be content with
repulse: but where the thing is both profitable, and possible to, why should
not profitable possibility have rowme, if wishing may procure it? I wish
commodious situation and rowmh in places for learning and exercise. Our
country has it not echwhere, nay scant any where as yet. Even by wishing that
it had, I grant that it has not: but I would not have wished it, if the mean
had been hard: and the motion naturally goes before the effect. I wish that
the colleges in the universities were divided by professions: I wish grave and
learned readers: I wish repetition to the same readers, yea even for the best
graduate, that is yet an hearer. I wish neither heresy nor harm, ne yet any
thing, but that may very well be wrought, and deserves endless wishing till it
be brought to an end. I wish restraint to stop ouerflush, and such other
things whereto I dare stand, and assuredly believe, that I wish my country
very great good, as I hope many will be partakers with me in wish, to be
partakers of the good. But some will say what need you to meddle with so much,
or so high matters your self creeping so low? Sir, I did profess in the
beginning under each title to deal in the general argument, for all my
professing the elementarie example. And by the way I do think, that I may
deserve some more equity in construction, because I do entend to my great
pains to help my wish forward, and to travel for the helping, and healthing
of all students. Wherefore I conclude thus, that seeing my dealing in those
positions was occasioned of so good a ground, and has so passed through them,
as I hope it may abide the tuch* I must crave of my good and curteouse
countriemen to lay up allouance in hope, and misliking in pardon, till the
event dischardge both, and make me bound to all, and some benefited by me.

FINIS.
To the courteous reader.
It is no new thing, to hear of errors in printing, be the print never so
good. Wherefore for distinctions either misplaced, or quite left out, and such
other faults, as will not clearelie lame the sense, I must desire my good
reader to help me and the print either with his pen, or with acknowledging the
sense without the pen. But because these few ouersightes do seem to alter my
meaning and to maime the argument, I have therefore noted them my self to have
them the better observed.

Facie 9. force her to it. for to that. 51. suppected in some copies. for
supported. 94. brought forth by word. for that byword. 101. and
lear-countrieman. for learned. 127. where one stirs all. for steares all.
162. chiefly to the college. for that college. 192. what virtue is primate.
for private. 221. in marg. Ad 1. Necocleon. for Ad Nicoclem. 222. whether not
in digesting. for in not. 227. the parents heavenly eye. for homely in some
copies 229. some great number. for some good. 230. the fifthe title of the
first book. for fifth book. 236. to strike the stock. for the stroke. 256.
help of the wealthy patrones. the out. 258. and gave ignorance the reign.
for give. 275. without which any opinion. for an.

