SCOTLANDS WELCOME. A SERMON PREACHED at Needham in the County of Suff. on
Tuesday, April. 5.

1603.

Upon PRO. 11. 10. In the prosperity of the Righteous the Citte rejoices: and
when the wicked perish, there is joy. By MILES MOSS, Pastor of the Church of
God in Combs, and Doctor of Divinity.

With some notes and allegations then omitted by reason of the time, and the
capacity of the audience.

LONDON, Printed by Melchisedech Bradwood for Thomas Man. 1603.

TO THE RIGHT honorable Lord, JOHN, Earl of Mar.
THere are two things discoursed of in this Treatise, which are of special
consequence to this earthly life of man: the one is Prosperity; the other is
Righteousness. The first depends upon Goods outward and bodily: the other
upon the Goodness and virtues of the mind. Where these concur, there is the
liueliest pattern which this nether world affoordeth, of true Felicity: and
these two, like children of one father, doesweetly embrace and kiss one
another. 1. Prosperity furthereth Righteousness: for, a man that is no way
streightened or disturbed, is the more free and comfortable to the service of
God. And Righteousness furthereth Prosperity: for They which seek Psalm. 34.
10.
the Lord, shall want nothing that is good. 2. Again, Prosperity beautifieth
Righteousness: for a straight and right-vp tree, the taller it grows, the
more comely it is. And Righteousness beautifieth Prosperity: for Pleasure is
not comely for a fool: no, Nemesis Pro. 19. 10.
disdaineth the growing up of the unworthy. 3. Thirdly, Prosperity perfecteth
Righteousness: for how shall he minister justice, that bears no office? or
show mercy, that wants ability? or give comfort, that is himself
distressed? And Righteousness perfecteth Prosperity: for What shall it profit
Matthew. 16. 26.
a man, though he should win the whole world, if he lose his own soul? 4.
Lastly, there is no true Prosperity without Righteousness: for, to live in
sin, is with the Paganes To sit in darkness, yea in the region and shadow
Matthew. 4. 16.
of death. And where Righteousness is, there is true Prosperity: for Godliness
has the promise of the life 1. Tim. 4. 8.
present, and of that which is to come.

Both of these (through Gods special mercy) do accompany your Lordship.
Prosperous you are in your noble descent, your large revenues, your love in
your country, your success in affairs, and your special favor with your
Prince and ours. Righteous you are: not as free from sin and infirmities, (so
I should both flatter and blaspheme) but as redeemed from sin by Christ with
his blood, and justified by the same Christ in his resurrection, and washed by
the Spirit of Christ in the lauer of regeneration. To all which, your holy life
and sincere love to the Gospel, give abundant testimony.

Let it not therefore seem strange unto your Honor, if I (who long ago beheld
and observed your holiness and religion) do thus congratulate unto you the
continuance and daily increase of honor and reputation: for this my text
teaches me To rejoice in the Prosperity of the righteous.

It pleased your L. not only to know me in Norwich almost twenty years ago,
and to be there an Auditor of my Ministry; but also of your bounty often to
call me to your table, and sometimes of your humility to visit my lodging. If
now you vouchsafe to acknowledge me in London after so many years labors, and
almost all my spirits spent in the service of the Church: I shall have much
more cause to rejoice in your Prosperity, who in this your height, give me in
my declining and languishing time some reputation with the Righteous.

The God of heaven and earth grant grace unto your Honor, so to employ this
Prosperity of yours to the furthering, countenancing and perfecting of
Righteousness: as your Righteousness may further, beautify and perfect your
Prosperity here and in the heavens, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

April. 13. 1603. Your L. in all Christian duty, M. MOSS.

A SERMON PREACHED at Needham in the County of Suffolk, on Tuesday, April. 5.
1603.
The Text.
Pro. 11. 10. In the prosperity of the righteous, the city rejoices: and
when the wicked perish, there is joy.

THe book whereof this Prolegomen^.
sentence is a member, may be called A fardel or beadroule of Proverbs. Now
Proverbs are among us, vulgar and triuiall sentences, which antiquity raised
up, custom has continued, and experience has confirmed for truth. The
learned call Proverbs, Parables, Adages, or Apophthegmes, Plutarch. Apoph.
Site dicta, Witty, pretty and wel-worded sayings: or Trem. in Pro. 1. 1.
Grave and short contrived sentences. And such sayings or sentences the
Hebrews call La^at, in Proverb.
Maschal, quod est, Dominari: because they domineer and glitter with a special
Illyrricus. Clauis. Script. Prouerbium.
excellency in speech, as stars in the sky, or diamonds in a crown of
gold. So, Proverbs are lumina or ationis: they put a grace, and beauty upon
speaking. The Graecians call them (...): and so the Septuaginta entitle this
book: (...): that is, sentences as common in use, as is the high way to all
passengers. A Proverb is Basil. in princip. Proverb. tom. 1.
Verbumiuxta viam, (says Basile:) A sentence common by every ways side. The
Latins call them Proverbs, in the same sense, in which the Graecians term
them Parables: because Hieron. in Proverb. 1.
They are hidden and dark and Hilarious in Psalm. 127.
yield not their sense according to the sound of their words: but in them
Origin. Prolog. in Cant. Cantic. tom. 1.
One thing is spoken, and an other thing is intended. And this is true in the
most of humane, yea and in very many of these Divine Proverbs. Now such
usual, such beautiful, such significant sentences, as custom has made
common, and experience has confirmed for truths: are those which are
collected and compiled together in this treatise. Therefore should we be
earnestly provoked often to read, carefully to learn, and highly to esteem
this book of the Proverbs.

They are called Salomons Proverbs. So the text it self witnesses Pro. 1. 1.
in the title of the book: and so all Origin prol. in Cant. Cantic. Theodoret.
praef. in Cantica. Epiphan. de mensuris and ponderibus. Athanas. orat. 2.
contra Arrianos. August. de ciuit. Dei. lib. 17. cap. 20.
antiquity has received them without controversy. And yet it is manifest that
all the Proverbs in this book were not Salomons. For the 30. chapter contains
Pro. 30. 1.
The words of Agur, the son of Iaketh. But the whole book takes his title
and denomination from the greater and more principal part: as do also many
other things both in civil and natural knowledge. Neither are they called
Salomons Proverbs, because it is certain that he himself with his own pen
compiled this book. For R. Mose (...).
some ascribe the penning of it to the Prophet Esaie: and Talm^i in Baua
bathira. Cap. 1.
some others to king Hezechiah. But the likeliest opinion is theirs, who
conceive that Tremel. in Pro^. 1. 1.
the beginning of the book was written by Solomon himself, unto the 10.
chapter: the residue were Liranus. M^rcer in Pro. 1. 1.
collected at diverse times by several persons, partly from his mouth, and
partly from his writings, unto the 25. chapter: and from thence forward Pro.
25. 1.
by the servants of Hezechias: as the title of the chapter (being a part of the
Canonical text) does plainly avouch. But whosoever were the writer of this
book, or the collector of these sentences; it is manifest that Solomon
himself was the author of them: from his fountain they sprang, and from his
words or writings they were deduced. So the wise and holy Author commends
also unto us, the worthiness of this book.

As touching the contents of this book: some think that Gregor. Nissenus in
Cant.
the doctrine thereof is directed only (or specially) unto the younger sort,
Hieron ad Paulum and Eustochium. Comment. in Ecclesiast.
because he often calls him his son, to whom he makes his speech. But who
knows not, that it well enough becomes the ancientest man, both to be, and
to be called The son of wisdom? And besides, he that studiously conuerseth
in this book, shall find euere where in it, able instruction for the ancient.
There be others that refer the argument of this book almost wholly unto
manners. They say that Theodores. Praefat. in Cant. Canticorum.
it contains profitable doctrine of manners; and that it is Basil. in princ.
Prou. 1.
An instructor of manners, and a corrector of corrupt affections: And Saint
Augustine says August in ficculo. ex Pron.
Liber prouerbiorum ad mores pios informandos pene totus valebit: Almost all
the whole book of the proverbs tends to the composing of godly manners. Now,
truth it is, that very many sentences in this treatise do concern manners,
and outward carriage to men: but not all, nor almost all. For diverse there are
tending to the fear of God, to the love of God, to faith in God, to patience
under the hand of God, to a religious worshipping of God: all which can hardly
be said to be doctrines of manners, unless you mean that they concern our
mannerly and holy carriage of our selves outwardly and inwardly toward the
majesty of God. Therefore may this book be called A Christian Quodlibet: for
it has Proverbs almost of every argument: or A Synopsis Theologiae: for The
english Praeface to the Proverbs.
the sum and effect of the whole Scriptures is here set forth in brief
sentences. It is an hiue fraught with sweet honey gathered from all kind o^
flowers. It is a rich Apothecaries shop, in which are all kind of delicates
for pleasure, and of confections for diseases. For in it are precepts and
aduertisements: some concerning God, and some concerning men: some belonging to
the church, some to the common wealth: some to private, some to public
callings: some to the wise, some to the ignorant: some to the old, some to the
young. In a word it is Eusebius. Hist. Eccles. lib. 4. cap. 21.
a book in the judgment of Ireneus and all the company of the ancients, full
of worthy and excellent wisdom, necessary for all men, of all estates and
degrees whatsoever. So that, the notable matter contained therein, is a third
argument to stir us up to diligent reading and meditation thereof.

This Pro. 11. 10.
sentence Pro. 11. 10. is one of them which concerns men, and the manners of
men, and their affection and estimation which they carry, on the one side to
godly and religious, on the other side to wicked The scope of the text:
and profane persons. The honor and reputation of an honest man, is such, and
so great, as that every one reioiceth at his prosperity and preferment. So
says the former part of the Text: In the prosperity of the righteous the city
reioiceth. But a vilde The (...) parts of the text.
and bad man is so loathsome and despicable: that every man is glad to see him
abased. So says the latter part: But When the wicked perish, there is joy.
These are the two points of doctrine contained in this Scripture.

THE FIRST PART. TEXT. In the prosperity of the Righteous the city reioiceth.
TO the end that we may the 1 The exposition or interpretation of the words.
more soundly and evidently derive Doctrine and Exhortation from this sentence:
it is requisite, that first we duly examine the sense and interpretation of the
words.

In the prosperity.] The name of Prosperity is of the common sort, applied to
wealth and riches. Vulgar men hold no man prosperous, but him that flows
with worldly abundance. But the word comprehends more largely, all things
which tend to the profit and comfort of a man's outward estate. As, Health,
Peace, Liberty, Credit, Friends, Long life, cheerfulness of heart, good
success in business: but especially in this place, Dignity, Honor, Office,
and Praeferment: all these are comprehended under the name of Prosperity. So
largely is it taken else where in this book, Prou. 1. 32.
The prosperity of fools destroieth them: that is, ease, security, abundance
and pleasure, do so lull men on sleep in their folly; as they never think of
seeking after wisdom, and so at last come to destruction. Again, in that
place of the Psalm Psa. 118. 25.
O Lord save now, O Lord now send Prosperity: David prays not only for the
wealth of the church, no nor for that especially, as for the greatest or only
happiness. For wealth many times hinders the Church, by Math. 13. 22.
choking the word and making it unprofitable. Whereof one of the Fathers
pronounced, G. Nazianz. epist. 50.
Calamitatem prosperitate meliorem esse: That calamity was better then
prosperity. But in those words of the Psalm, he prays also for the peace of
the Church, for the liberty of the Church, for the increase of the Church, for
the good success of the Churches affairs, for the continuance of the Church,
for the beauty and honor of the Church, and such like: and all them he
comprehends under the name of Prosperity. So in this place: In the
prosperity] that is, in the health, peace, welfare, comfort, credit, success,
but specially in the dignity and preferment of a righteous man, the city
reioiceth. Therefore some of the Latin Interpreters, translate it here
Vatablus Mercer. Foelicitas est bonum ex omni^us bonis compositum. Plato.
Philosoph. definit.
In foelicitate instorum: In the felicity of the righteous. (Now all good
things must concur to the constitution of Felicity.) The Septuaginta, (...):
and most of the Latins following them, Chald. paraphrast. ^nterp. Hierommus.
Pelican. La^ater. Tremellius. Castalio.
In bonis instorum: In the goods of the righteous. Not meaning only thereby
their goods and chattels, (as we speak at the common law,) that is, their
riches and moueables: but generally any good thing which betideth an honest
man. In the good things: that is, in any good thing which befalls a virtuous
or religious man, those which are virtuous and religious will exult and
rejoice. So much for the name of Prosperity.

Of the Righteous.] A righteous man is not here taken for one perfectly
righteous, or that has no unrighteousness in him. For in that sense Romans 3.
10.
There is none righteous, no not one. Iam. 3. 2.
In many things we sin all. No: August. Bonifacio. epist. 50.
Iustus and iustificans non est nisi Deus: to speak exactly and properly,
There is none that is just himself, or is a Iustifier of others but only God.
But they are every where in Scripture called Righteous men, which Calvin. in
Psalm. 5. 13.
breathe after righteousness: which Musculus in Genesis 6. 9.
are studious of righteousness: which Cyrill. lib. 3. tom. 3. in Esai, 33.
practice the works of righteousness: which Bernhard. epist. 107.
love God the fountain of righteousness: in a word August. de perfectione
iustitiae. tom. 7.
Qui perfectioni iustitiae plurimum accessit: Which has attained to some good
measure of perfection in righteousness. So Calvin. Harmonia Luc. 1. 6.
they are righteous men which frame their lives according to the commandments
of the law of God. In this sense is it that 2. Pet. 2. 7.
Lot is called a righteous man: and yet he is tainted with Genesis 19. 35.
adultery, and incest. Job was Job. 1. 1.
an upright and just man: yet he brake forth Job. 3. 1.
into terms of impatience. Zacharias and Elisabet Luc. 1. 6. 20.
were both just before God: yet the man was s^itten with dumbness for his
infidility. And so all are righteous men before God, that love him and keep
his commandments: God accepting their good endeavors in Christ, and imputing
unto them for perfection, the perfect Righteousness of Christ: for Basil. lib.
de poenit. tom. 1.
Nos ex iustitiae participatione iusti sumus: We are not otherwise exactly just
before God, then by the participation of the exact justice and obedience of the
Lord Jesus Christ. Of such righteous men, Solomon speaks here: and says,
that in the welfare of one who walks religiously to God, and honestly toward
men, others that behold it are glad and rejoice. So much for the title of a
righteous man.

The city.] The name of a city comprehends here a double Rhetorical Trope.
1. For first, the city it self is taken for the people and inhabitants of the
city: as it is also else where in the scriptures. When tidings came to Shiloh,
that Hophni and Phinehas were slain, and the ark of God was taken of the
Philistims, 1. Sam. 4. 13.
all the city (that is, all the people of the city) cried out. Again: Psalm.
46. 4.
There is a river whose streams shall make glad the city of God: that is, the
people or inhabitants of the city of God. 2. Secondly, the city is here
specified by name for the whole body of the country. For Solomon intends to
say, that all men, town and country rejoice in an honest man's preferment. When
the Psalmist says, Psalm. 127. 1.
Except the Lord keep the city, the keeper watches in vain. There he
speaks Marl. in Psalm. 127. 1.
de reipublicae statu and politia: of the state and policy of the common
wealth: and the name of a city is taken Illiric. clauis Script. Ciuitas.
Pro omni robore regiminis: for the whole strength of government in a state or
kingdom. So here: when Solomon says, The city reioiceth: he means that
the whole body of the people is glad. But he specifieth the City by name;
first, because cities are the special parts of a country, and commonly
contain under their jurisdiction the neighbor villages. Secondly, because
Cities are the seats of great men and great offices: so as if a good man be
preferred to dignity, they do soonest epsy it, yea and soonest feel the
benefit of it, and therefore have the first and chiefest cause to rejoice
therein. Thirdly, Cities are the ciuillest and fullest of knowledge, and
therefore do not only best discern who is a Righteous man: but also are
easiliest moved to rejoice in his Prosperity. So, The City rejoices: that
is, every man is well pleased with it.

Provided always, that this City and country be such an one as is it self a
lover of Righteousness: such a City as Jerusalem was, and such a people as
the kingdom of Israel was in the best times of Solomon: to the examplar
whereof he has special respect in this and diverse other of the Proverbs. For
if it be not such a Citte or people, they will hardly rejoice in the
prosperity of the Righteous. It must not be such a City as Sodom was, where
Genesis 13. 13.
The men were wicked, and exceeding sinners before the Lord. For there, they
Genesis 19. 9.
disdained that Lot should advise them, much more that he should be exalted
among them. Neither must it be such a City as the young man in the Comoedie
describes Athens in that time: Plaut. mercato (...).
Vbi mores deteriores increbescunt indies:

Vbique amici qui infideles sunt, nequeas pernoscere:

Vbique eripiatur animo tuo quod placeat maxim.

That is: Where the people grow daily worse and worse: where a man cannot know
his friend and his foe asunder: nor hold his own with quietness. For in such
a City there is little care to prefer the best, and little joy in their
preferment. But in a city or country well framed, well governed, well
affected to religion and honesty: In such a city there is much joy at the
Prosperity of the Righteous.

Hitherto the meaning and exposition 2 Examples* this doctrine
of the words. Now, the doctrine it self which the words import, is a truth
warranted by all experience: and whereof both holy writ and humane histories
yield infinite examples. But I must be contented with one or two of either
sort, in stead of many that might be alleged. When David's gonernment was
disturbed by Absaloms treason, and the king fled out of Jerusalem for fear
it should be sacked or fired, 2. Sam. 15. 30.
all the people that was with him, had every man his head covered, and wept as
they went. So sorry they were for David's affliction. But when Absalom was
slain, and his father was to return again with honor: then happy was he
that could show greatest forwardness in his conduction: yea, 2. Sam. 19. 41.
the men of Israel chode and brauled with the men of Judah for preventing them
secretly in the kings restitution. So ioifull they were in his new recovered
prosperity. Again. When Adoniah contrary to David's mind and promise, aspired
to the kingdom of Israel: then Zadok, and Nathan, and Benaiah, and Shimei, and
Rei, and the men of might 1. Reg. 1. 8.
as they were excluded, so no doubt they hong their heads and sorrowed. But
when Solomon was crowned at his fathers appointment, then not only those good
men 1. Reg. 1. 38. 40.
accompanied him, but also All the people came up after him, pipingand
reioicing with great joy, so that the earth rang with the sound of them.
Solomon was a prince of incredible hope: and the land reioiced unspeakably at
his coronation. In humane histories the example is most famous of Numa
Pompilius, the successor to Romulus in his kingdom. Because he was held a
devout and religious man (though indeed the old fables make him but Arnobius
cont. gentes lib. 5.
a beguiler of the Gods, and all his devotions were but devises Tertul. Apoi
cap. 25.
of curious superstitions, as Tertullian speaks:) yea and besides his
religion, for that he was Pistarch. Numa.
naturally disposed to all virtuous manners, and discipline, and pains taking,
and study of wisdom: therefore after long dissension between the Romans and
the Sabines about the election of a king, he was named of the one side, and
received of the other side with general approbation: The Senate and people
going forth to meet him, the women applauding him with their acclamations, and
also reioicing, tanquam non rex vrbi, sed regnum obtigisse^ (says Plutarch,)
as if they had that day gained not a new king, but an other kingdom to their
city. But why roue I so long and so far from home? who remembers not the
joy and thanksgiving of the good servants of God in our days, for the
preserving of some Christians (though not many) from that blody massacre in
France: for the delivery of Rochel from the Spaniard: for the relief of Geneua
from the Sauoian: and infinite such examples to long to repeat? One president
there is tending directly to this purpose, which my duty to God and men will
not suffer me to omit. Seneca says: Sen. debeueficiis.
Gratum hominem beneficium semper delectat, ingratum semel. If we English men
be truly thankful, we will remember this benefit and mercy of God for ever.
Our late Sovereign Lady Queen Elisabeth was so worthy an instrument unto us
of such special benefits, as we were not only bound to be infinitely
thankful unto her while she lived: but also we are still bound to keep an
honorable remembrance of her and her government for ever: Pro. 10. 7.
The memorial of the just shall be blessed. Remember we now to her eternal
fame what joy all the cities, yea the whole realm of England showed at her
first entry upon that high Prosperity, the scepter and diadem of the kingdom
which joy arose from the hope and liking of her Righteousness. Her father
(King Henry the Eight) had made some entrance to the Gospel, and wounded
deeply the heary scalpe of Antichrist: and master Fox records it to
posterity, For. Act. and Mon. infine. H. 8.
that if he had lived, his purpose was wholly to have purged the Church from
idolatry. Her mother the Lady Ann^ Bulleine, was a woman Hollins^ed in Ann. 28.
H. 8.
very religious, and virtuous, and full of good works. According to the
godliness of the Parents was the godly education of the child: for she was
trained up in the knowledge of tongues, and sciences, and (that which was
especial) in the doctrine of the Gospel. Answerable to her education was her
profession and religion, even from her youth: keeping godly Preachers about
her, and suffering for the truth in the days of Queen Mary. So that in the
opinion of all that saw and knew her, she had the estimation of a wise,
learned, virtuous, and religious Princess. Here of it came to pass, that
upon her sisters decease, she was proclaimed successor to the crown, not only
Calvin. epist. and resp. p. 214.
summo consensu omnium ordinum, with a full consent of all estates (as Peter
Martyr wrote to Master Calvin, upon the report of the Ambassadors that came to
Tigure out of England:) but also this consent was witnessed M. Fox. Act. and
Mon. ^nis. Reg. Elisab.
with such shouting, such casting up of caps, such ringing of belles, such
kindling of bonfires, such discharging of ordinance, and other points of
solemnity: as witnessed their hearty joy for her coming to the crown; and
exemplified notably this sentence of Solomon: In the prosperity of the
righteous the city reioiceth.

Now we may not hold it strange, 3 Reasons of this doctrine.
to see this so often and usually fall out in practice: for there are many
reasons inducing thereunto. 1. As first, where good men prosper, there commonly
good causes, they thrive and prosper also: the glory of God is advanced, the
law of God is observed, the kingdom of God is enlarged. When Hezekiah came to
the crown of Judah, 2. Reg. 18. 4.
He took away the high places, and brake the images, and cut down the groves,
and spoiled the brazen serpent: that is, He rooted out all idolatrous and
superstitious worship. And the Ecclesiastical Histories every where make
relation, how when the holy Emperors Constantine, Theodosius, Justinian and
the rest of the same stamp sat in the throne of government, then the true
religion of Christ was authorized and dilated. Now, when others shall see that
by the favor, office, or ability of good men, God is honored, righteousness
is practiced, Christ is enterteined: if they have any love of God or goodness
in themselves, they can not but rejoice at a good man's prosperity. 2.
Secondly, the advancement of the Righteous is a public benefit: for they know
right well, that Plato. Non nobis solum nati.
they are not borne only for themselves: and that Romans 12. 10.
brotherly love is required of them: and that Arist. topic.
a good thing, the commoner it is, the better it is. And therefore they strive
to live, not wholly to their own private profit and pleasure, but to the
common use and benefit of others. When Solomon was newly invested in the
kingdom of Israel, and the Lord offered to give whatsoever he would ask: 1.
Reg. 3. 9.
he asked not for himself long life, nor riches, nor avenge on his enemies
(which notwithstanding were things of great consequence to his own estate:)
but he asked an understanding heart, which might enable him to govern with
peace and righteousness, to the public good of the people of God. Genesis 47. 14.
Joseph being raised to authority in Egypt, made not the peoples want a prey
to gorge himself withal: but he applied himself to feed the Commons in the
famine, and to enlarge the revenues and soueraintie of the crown. The Apostles
in their office and function sought not their own praise, nor ease, nor
wealth: but the joining of others to Christ. 2. Cor. 12. 14.
Non vestra, sed vos: I seek not yours but you, says S. Paul to the
Corinthians. In a word: Menander.
(...): An honess man is helpefull at every turn. Now therefore, when men
shall feel by experience, that the advancement of honest persons, is as the
setting up of a common light for every man to walk by: or as the digging of a
common well, at which every man may draw water: have they not great, and just
and daily cause to rejoice in such men's Prosperity? 3. Thirdly, when good men
flourish, the wicked are cut off. 1. Reg. 15. 12. 13.
Asa took away the Sodomites out of the land: yea, he put down Maacha his
mother also from her estate, because she had made an idol in a grove. Now the
destruction of the evil, being a Apoc. 19. 17
rich banquet, yea a Isai. 34. 6.
sweet sacrifice to God: it can not be but a joy and gladness of heart to the
children of God. 4. Lastly, when Righteous men are preferred, then others that
love Righteousness grow up, by and under them: as when the Sun rises, the
flowers open themselves. Ester 8.
Mordecaes exaltation by Ahashuerosh, wrought the preservation of the Jews
from a common slaughter. And the coming of our late Q. Elisabeth to the
crown, was the releasing of the Protestants out of prison, and the recalling
home of learned men from beyond the seas, and the confirming of poor
Christians in religion. So that (to conclude this point) when it shall be wayed
and considered, that by the rising up of godly and religious men, God is
honored, the common good is furthered, the wicked are abased, and those that
fear God are comforted: unless a man be composed with Heraclytus only to
behold what is amiss, that he may do nothing but weep; or have put upon him
the person of Envy herself, Vixque tenet lachrymas, quia nil lachrymabile
cernit. Ovid. Metam. 2.
which weepeth for grief when others have no grief to weep for: he can not
but confess that there is every way great cause, why in the prosperity of the
Righteous, the City should rejoice.

Thus then examples do teach us 4 The use of this doctrine.
that always it has been so: and manifold reasons do prove that it ought
to be so. Now let us labor to draw home the benefit of this doctrine nearer to
our selves by use and application. And let us consider what we can add to our
holy knowledge or practice by this: that there is, yea, and that there ought to
be Joy in the Prosperity of the Righteous.

1. First it teaches us to be well assured, that the Righteous, that is, men
which fear God and walk uprightly, have due right and interest in
Prosperity: that is, in the helps, comforts, and dignities of this life. For
else, how could any good citizen of a well affected city, rejoice with a good
conscience to behold his Prosperity? Indeed if we will speak exactly and
properly, the outward blessings of this world belong solely and only of right
to the children of God. For Heb. 1. 2.
Christ is made the heir of all things: and therefore no man can have interest
in any thing: who is not a Coheire and Fellow heir with Christ. Insomuch that
when any branch of Prosperity betideth a Righteous man, there befalls
nothing to him but his due. Tertul. de resurrect. carnis.
Beneficus enim debet: The good God of his promise owes it unto him.
Lactantius.
Bonis quod benefit, debetur: We owe a good man all the good that we do to
him. But when a wicked man enioieth health, or liberty, or riches, or credit,
or preferment, or any outward benefit: he is but an usurper of it, and an
intruder into it, and shall answer for the unjust possession of it in the day
of judgment. And therefore if commonwealths and churches were so conscionably
and religiously careful as they ought to be in bestowing their dignities and
offices upon those to whom only by right they belong and appertain, then
should none atteine unto them, but such as gave testimony of their
Righteousness beforemen. And if the Persian monarch could say, that Cyrus:
Plutarch. Apoph.
No man was worthy to be a magistrate, qui non sit melior subditis, which did
not in good parts excel his subjects: then in a Christian government, no man
should be admitted to exceed the common sort in credit and authority, who
showed not himself more then a common person, in honesty and religion: yea,
if Christian families were duly reformed and conformed according to the will of
God, then that child or servant in the house, should be most countenanced and
best preferred, who approved himself best to be the child of God, and the
servant of the Lord great Master of the world. And this is an observation of
much use unto diverse sorts of men. 1. For first, it prescribes a rule to
those, that have power in their hands to raise up others to Prosperity.
Namely, that Psalm. 101. 6.
their eyes should be (with David) unto the faithful of the land, to honor
those with dignity, whom God has most honored with grace: that so right
going to the owners, all men of wisdom might rejoice. And if among the nations
of old, those proved the great and mighty men of the world, Justin hist. lib.
1.
quos ad fastigium honoris non ambitio popularis, sed spectata inter bonos
moderatio prouehebat; Who raised not themselves by popular ambition, but by
their approved moderation: then in these latter times, Christian Princes and
Nobles, should have special care to advance them to preferment, not which
aspire unto it by popularitie, or flattery, or briberie; but which show
themselves worthy of it by their godliness and virtue.

2. Secondly, this detecteth the hypocrisy of the Friars and Monks in
Popery, who when they assume their orders, reject their patrimony: as if
wealth and religion, Prosperity and Righteousness could not stand together.
Much like are they to Aristippus, who in his travel commanded his followers to
cast away their treasure, -- Horat. lib. 2. sat. 3.
Quod tardius irent,
Propter onus segnes:
As if their patrimony hindered their passage to heaven. But to these a man
may say, as Plato said to Diogenes: They despise the pride of the world alio
fastu maiori, with a greater pride of their own hearts: supposing merit in
the work, and affecting the applause of men. Therefore is that saying of
Augustine notable against them August. epist. 34.
Vtilius terrena opulentia tenetur humiliter, quam superbe relinquitur. Earthly
abundance is better held with humility, then relinquished of arrogance. For a
lowly man may do much good with his riches: but a proud man is never the
nearer to heaven for his poverty. But let those slow bellied Cretians go.

3. There be some, who of very tenderness of conscience, and for fear to
displease God, dare not raise up their outward estate, no not when means are
put into their hands; nor assume any office, no not when they are lawfully
called thereunto: as supposing, that because their chief aim is to grow
Spiritual men, therefore temporal Prosperity does not belong unto them. Now
these men must remember that 1. Tim 4. 8.
Godliness has the promises of the life present: and that Deuteronomy. 28. 1.
all outward felicity is prefixed for a reward to the keeping of Gods
commandments. It holds not for a rule in the church, which Plato imagined to
hold in the common wealth: Plato de leg. lib. 5.
Diuites vehementer, and bonos fieri impossible est: it is impossible to be
very rich and very virtuous. No: the examples of Abraham, and Lot, and Job, and
David, and a thousand others are pregnant instances to the contrary. And our
savior Christ does not say, It is the prosperity of the world: but it is
Matthew. 13. 22.
the care of this world that choketh the word. Theoph. in Luc. 8. 14.
Non enim diuitiae nocent, sed sollicitudines earum: Riches are not the things
that hurt aman of themselves, but the immoderate and mistrustfull care taken
about them. It is a notable exhortation which the Psalmist makes: Psalm. 62. 10.
If riches increase, set not your hearts upon them. He says not, Refuse them,
or reject them: but set not your hearts upon them. That is: August. in Psalm. 61.
Noli ibi te figere; make not them thy rest: or, Basil. in Psalm. 61.
Nolite illis vestram mentem submittere; subject not your thoughts and
affections unto them. Chrysostom. in Johan.
Use riches as thy servant, not as thy master: possess them, and be not
possessed of them: so may thou glorify God much, and exceedingly benefit the
Church by thy abundance.

4. This also serves to reform the corrupt judgment of those, who if they
see a religious gentleman to enlarge his revenues by purchase, or a zealous
painful Minister to thrive and grow rich, or an honest minded Commoner to
attain some office or preferment: by and by their friends fear their falling
away from the Gospel; and their enemies the exclaim: See: here is their
religion, here is the depth of their devotion, etc. I warrant you these men
that make so great profession, are as hungry of wealth, and as thirsty after
preferment, as are the prophanest persons in the country. Nay, stay there* not
so hungry, nor so thirsty by a great deal. For a worldly man makes these
things his God, and Ephesians. 5. 5. Coloss. 3. 5.
commits idolatry with them, bestowing upon them the chief love, and joy
and confidence of his heart: whereas a godly man knows that he must 1. Cor.
7. 31.
use this world, as though he used it not; and that he must Matthew. 6. 33.
first seek the kingdom of God and the righteousness thereof; and takes
these outward things as they are ministered unto him. Again a worldly man
hungreth and thirsts so deeply after worldly things, as he will not stick
to attain them perfas and nefas, by any unlawful means whatsoever: by
stealth, robbery, oppression, extortion, usury, bribery, flattery, perjury,
cousenage, and what not? Whereas a godly man fears to touch such pitch, and
holds only that gained, which is lawfully gotten: and accounting 1. Tim. 6.
6.
godliness great gain, is contented with that he has. So there is a great
difference between a godly and ungodly man's course in the pursuit of worldly
prosperity. But if God offer these things by lawful means, they despise them
not, nor they cast them not away: as did Hieronimus ad Paulinum epist. 13.
Crates the Thebane, because non putauit seposse and vertutes and diuitias
simul possidere: as if Righteousness and prosperity, wealth and godliness
could not stand together. No: they reject them not, no more then Abraham or Lot
cast away their cattle, or silver, or gold, or servants, or tents; in which
Genesis 13. 2, 5, 9.
notwithstanding they so abounded as the land could not bear them to dwell
together: nor, no more then Genesis 41. 40.
Joseph refused his preferment in Egypt, or Psalm. 78. 70.
David to be called from a shepherd unto the kingdom and throne of Israel.
And indeed why should they? For Ambros. lib. ^n Luc. 18.
Diuitiae vt impedimenta sunt reprobis, ita bonis sunt adiument a virtutis:
Riches to bad men are lets and hindrances; but to good men they are furtherers
to virtue. Therefore they receive them as things good in themselves, and given
of the good God, and labor to imploie them to good use: yea and knowing their
interest in them by Christ, they rejoice in them as in their lawful
inheritance: yea, lastly, other men knowing how due they are to the godly, how
worthy they are of them, and how profitably they will bestow them, they also
(as Solomon here speaks) rejoice in the prosperity of the righteous. So,
let that be the first note.

2. Secondly, this Scripture may teach us what a profitable and comfortable
thing it is, to be a virtuous and religious man. Every honest person will love
him, and like him, and wish him well, and joy in his prosperity. And no
marvel: for, a good man is the image of God, who is most lovely in himself,
and most to be beloved of us. One of the Heathen could say, that there was
Cicer. de not. deorum. lib. 1.
Nihil amabilius virtute: Nothing more amiable or lovely than virtue. Another,
that Plato de leg. lib. 4.
All the gold which is above the earth and under the earth, deserves not to
be compared with virtue. Another, that Plutarch. de cupiditate diuitiarum. tom.
2.
all the beauty of Riches are but Phalarae, and bullae, ac puerilia
spectacula: Vain shows and childish delights, unworthy to be compared with
virtue. Another, that whereas the best things else in the world do want their
ornaments; gold and silver, their refiner; and precious stones, their polisher:
Seneca lib. 9. epist. 67.
Virtus nullo honest ^mento eget: Virtue needs no thing to adorn it. Ipsa
and magnum sui decus est, and corpus suum consecrat: She herself is her own
glorious beauty, and honors the body which she inhabiteth. Now, if the
heathen men spoke thus of their moral virtues, which carried but a shadow of
goodness, and were in truth but splendida peccata, beautiful sins (as
Saint Augustine called them:) then Christians which have the light of the
word, to reveal unto them the true nature and dignity of Spiritual graces,
can not but account a virtuous and religious man very beautiful and
honorable: and so of mere love rejoice in his Prosperity. Therefore may an
honest man be well resembled to a Light. Saint Paul says Phil. 2. 15.
the Philippians did shine as lights in the world. And John Baptist Ioh. 1. 7.
is called A light. And Theophilact. in Ioh. 1.
We may call eueryone of the Saints A light: though not lucem illam, Ioh. 1. 9.
That light, which lighteneth every man that comes into the world: But petty
Lights they are, and rightly so accounted. For even as the Lights because they
are glittering and comfortable, therefore every man is pleased to have them set
up: so Righteous men, because they are beautiful and lovely, therefore every
honest man is pleased to behold them lifted up, and advanced to preferment. Our
Savior Christ resembles his Spouse unto a thick Cant. 3. 6.
pillar of smoke perfumed with myrrh and incense, and with all the spices of
the merchant. These sweet perfumes are the graces of Gods spirit, wherewith the
members of Christ are poudered and embalmed. And therefore even as Plutarch. de
virtute and ^itio.
aromata gratum odorem etiam lacernis and centonibus conciliant; Sweet odours
make the most vile and stinking things sauorte: so the gifts of regeneration
and sanctification lighting upon a man defiled by nature and corrupted by his
former sins, do notwithstanding make him smell sweet, and seem beautiful
in the nostrels and eyes of all that are near unto him. And even as every man
draws near to him, and delights in his company, that carries sweet odours
about him: so wheresoever a man lives, that is endued with the graces of God,
every wise man will like his fellowship, and draw near unto him in affection;
and of love and liking rejoice in his Prosperity.

Hereby therefore all men should be provoked: that as they covet Prosperity,
so they should strive unto Righteousness. Which if they labored for, then
they should not only the sooner (...) outward blessings, (for they do belong
to those Psalm. 128. 1.
that (...) the (...) (...) (...) (...) his ways:) but (...) ^ed them, they
(...) (...) (...) with peace and comfort on (...) side: not being ^ed o^ (...)
of others for their Prospherity, but loved and honored of others for their
Righteousness. True it is, that when an evil man is exalted, the wise (...)
their heads aside, as loathing to behold so unseemly a sight: for Pro. 19. 10.
Pleasure is not comely for a fool. Yea, the best men of God have their
Nemesis, they Psalm. 37. 1* Psalm. 73. 3.
malign now and then the Prosperity of the wicked: neither can man's corruption
so contain it self, but that from emulation it grows unto envy. And in
this case most easily: Sophoc. (...).
(...), says Sophocles: E^y aims at him that has somewhat. Now how slippery
and perilous is that man's estate which falls into the envy and malignation of
others? Pro. 27. 4.
Anger is cruel, and wrath is raging: but who can stand before envy? Genesis 4.
5, 6.
Caines envy murdered Abell. 1. Sam. 18. 8, 9.
Saules envy pursued David. Dan. 6. 4.
The envy of the nobles cast Daniell to the lions. Matt. 27. 18.
The envy of the Jews nailed Christ to the cross. And o that, o that our
times had wanted examples of some, who for their good parts growing into favor
with God and men, were not able to support their estate against the bloody dint
of envy! Well: would thou fare better? would thou both prosper, and be safe
in thy Prosperity? Then to the desire of it, join the desire also of
Righteousness. For 1. Pet. 3. 13.
who is it, that will harm you, if ye follow that which is good? Fear God,
worship him zealously and aright, walk lowly, honestly, justly, and lovingly
toward men: this is the readiest way to secure thine estate. For if thou be a
Righteous man, the City will rejoice in thy prosperity. Sometimes God turns
it otherwise, for he will be tied to no rule: but that it is commonly so, this
Proverb of Solomon justifies in this place.

3. This sentence admonishes us of a special duty, of Brotherly love: which
each Christian man owes to another. Christians must be Inquisitors after their
neighbors religion, and Surueiers of their neighbors ways. Not as
busy-bodies, meddling with that which belongs not unto them: but as men,
imagining that they have their part in any Prosperity Homo sum: humani ni^ a me
alienum poto. Terent. Heau^. Act. 1. S^e. 1.
or adversity that betideth to their brethren. They must cast their eyes about
them and observe, who in that corner or country fears God, and loves
Righteousness: and then withal they must make surueie, how (...) a man
prospers in the world, and how he fares in his outward (...). And both these
must they do to the end: that when they find any child of God, that washes
his paths (...) butter, and whose rock pours (...) (...) uers of oil (as
Job. 29. 6.
Job speaks of (...) Prosperity:) then with him and (...) him they may
rejoice and be (...): And when they shall see an h^st man humbled and labourin^
(...) the cross, then with him and (...) (...) to mourn and lament. (...) how
shall we practice that precept of the Apostle: Romans 11. 15.
Rejoice with them that rejoice and mourn with them that mourn? Or how shall
we show our selves lively members of the same body, 1. Cor. 12. 26
if when one member suffers, we suffer not with it? and if when one of our
members is had in honor, we rejoice not with it? We read of Nehemiah (that holy
Reedifier of the holy city,) that howsoever himself were at ease, yea (...) in
office at court, ( Nehe. 1. 11. and 2. 1.
for he was the kings cup bearer) and so might have lived voluptuously to
himself alter the manner of our Sole-self-louing ^iers: yet his thoughts were
occupied about his brethren the Jews, and his city Jerusalem, and therefore
inquireth earnestly of them and their (...). And hearing of the affliction of
the people, and desolation of the city, he Nehe. 1. 4.
mourned, and wept, and fa^ed, and prayed: as if himself had been plunged in
the same calamity. And verily if the spirit of Nehemiah did breathe in our
breasts, we would not be so wholly given up to Self (...) ( Clemens Alex.
Strom. lib. 6.
the cause of all sin,) as we would altogether neglect what betideth our
brethren: but we would be ever inquiring what good men lived about us, and how
they fared? what Churches God had planted abroad, and how they thriued? how the
Churches of Christ flourished in France, Germany, Scotland, Denmark,
Sweeueland, and else where? And when we shall upon due inquisition or survey,
be given to understand, that God prospers any one good man particularly, or
any company of good men generally: then not to envy or malign them, as Ester.
6. 12.
Haman envied Mordecaies favor with the king, or as 1. Sam. 18. 8.
Saul maligned David's reputation with the people, or as some in our time have
belched out reproaches against the neighbor Churches and the worthy men that
lived in them: but we should rejoice with them, as affected with their good,
and ioifully wish the continuance and increase of their Prosperity. If we know
but one Gaius in a country, which is Romans 16. 23.
Paul's host and the host of the church, we should wish to him as Saint John
wishes to his Gaius: 3. Ioh. 2.
Beloved, I wish chiefly that thou prosperedst and faredst well. If we see
about us an upright minded man, which serves not the time nor professes
religion only for show; but fears God inwardly, and walks in the honesty
of his conscience: we should pray for him with the Psalmist: Psalm. 125. 4.
Do well (o Lord) to those that be good and true in their hearts. If we see
any Church striving to cast out Popery and to intertaine sincerity, we should
pray for it and the favorers of it: Psalm. 122. 6.
O pray for the peace of Jerusalem: let them prosper that love thee. And
certainly if we be true hearted Citizens of the holy city, new Jerusalem; we
will not only pray for it, and for all that do belong unto it: but also when
any good betideth it or them which they needed and we prayed for, we will be
ready to rejoice with them, and to praise God for them, according to this
sentence of Solomon: In the prosperity of the righteous the city reioiceth.

And here now is sit place and just occasion offered to stir us up, with
thankfulness to be joyful, and with ioifulnesse to be thankful unto God for
all those holy and gracious persons by whole rising up and Prosperity so much
good has been done in our time and country. Among all which we are bound in
the first place to perform high and honorable Obsequies to her, who while she
lived, (...) the first and highest place in the kingdom: I mean, The high and
might Princess, our late most renouned and sovereign Lady Q. Elisabeth: ^ram
in (...) (...). (...) ^88.
Mundi tot^ vna decus; The glory of the world, as master Beza called her: and
of whom that may be said as truly, as it was of Luther in his time:

Rome ruentis (...) maximus.

She was the very terror of that declining Popedom.

No honest man doubts (I trow) to number her with the Righteous, who planted
the word of Righteousness among us, and sustained the intolerable malice of
all Papists (enemies unto Righteousness) and governed by Righteous laws, and
ministered right to men: yea lastly, was an harbor to all distressed Christians
that fled hither from diverse places for Righteousness sake. I trust God has
heard the millions of holy prayers made for her while she lived, and has given
her a rich inheritance with the Righteous, and a large portion in that Christ,
whose Gospel by her means had so free passage in the land, and was glorified
by the conversion and salvation of so many thousands. But to the purpose. How
Prosperous this Queen was in all her ways, the Papists observe with grinding
their teeth: but we should applaud with clapping of hands. Far unlike was her
state to her sister Q. Marie: for of her M. Fox records, that Act. and Mon.
in fine. R. M.
nothing ever succeeded well which she took in hand. But of this we may avouch
that Prosperity of Job: Job. 29. 3.
Gods light shined upon her head, and Gods providence was upon her tabernacle.
4.
She was renowned at home and abroad. Every ear that heard her, blessed 11.
her; and every eye that saw her, gave testimony unto her. From her youth she
was reserved (as it were) to the Crown, by want of issue in her brother and
sister. All Queen Mary's days she was woonderfully preserved, even by the
means (as was thought) of that Philip of Spain, who afterward became her
deadly enemy. She that then was led homely, tanquamouis, as a sheep to the
prison; was not long after attended magnificently, as a princely Lioness to
the scepter: and when she was once settled in the throne, what Prosperity ever
betided a Prince, wherewith her cup did not abundantly ouerflow? Tertullian
describing the prayers which the old Christians of their loiall affections made
for their heathen Governors, (wherein they were far unlike to the Popes and
Papists of this time, which Bulla P ij. 5. Geneb. chron.
proscribe kingdoms, and discarge subjects of allegiance to their Sovereign
Princes, and Defense of English Catholics. cap. 5.
hold it lawful for the subject to take up arms against the king) says on
this wise in his Apology: Tertull. Apol. cap. 30.
We prate always for all Emperors, that God would bestow upon them a long
life, a peaceable government, a safe palace; strong armies, faithful
counsailours, obedient subjects, a quiet world, and whatsoever else any man,
yea Caesar himself can wish or desire. And is not this the Prosperity which by
our prayers (as by one special means) God gave and continued to Queen
Elisabeth? For first, she attained a long life, even within a year of that
which Psalm. 90. 10.
Moses in his age pitched for the ordinary time of man. She was with her
mother Genesis 18. 11.
Sara^. stricken in age; and yet with her father Abraham, Genesis 25. 8.
she died in a good age: and when she died, in despite of all the attempted
po^sonings, and stabbings, and rebellions of the Papists, her gray hairs went
down with peace unto the grave. Secondly, her Government was peaceable. (...)
was inclined to (...): all the forainers writing ^o (...)* o^ of her, termed
her Calvin. epist. G. (...). secret. and epist. ante Com. in Isai^m. Be^a.
(...)* ^n N^ Test.
(...) (...) Elisa^etham, The calm Qu^ of England. Her laws were (...) with
Peace, no man dar^g (...) l^ft up his hand against the (...) Justice of Peace
in the king^. Her people were prese^ued (...) P^ace. All her time, we were in
(...) blessed case whereof the Psalmist ^eaketh: there was Psalm. 144. 14.
no in^asion, (...) going out, no complaining in our si^ts. Thirdly, Her house
was always her castle: other castle of (...) (...) ^as never compelled to
(...) during all her reign. Into (...), though some (...) ^omtimes (...)
(...), D. P^.
(...) i^o her (...), Cap^ (...).
another into the ^obbey: ye^ even then and (...) Psalm. (...)* (...).
G^ was also her c^stle, and the (...) of her salua^. Fourthly, her arms were
strong (...) (...)* witness the manifold expeditions made in her time to
Ire^nd, to the low Countries, to Cales, to countries vncou^h and unknown: from
whence like S^. (...).
Ionathans bow, they never turned back; and like Saul's (...), they never
returned empty from the blood of the s^aine, and from the fat of the ^ighty.
F^tly, her Council was always deep, trusty, and judicious. The body whereof,
though the Papists accuse of Defense of English Catholics. cap. 8. page 177.
ignominious practices, plaguey injustice piracies, proditions, spiertes and
foul arts to ^osen the world round about us: yet we who could never judge of
their Counsel but by the effects, found always the consequences thereof to be
safety to her Majesty's person, peace to the realm, continuance to religion,
and help to the neighbor Churches round about us. Sixthly, her people were so
obedient, as they were ready to go whether soever she sent them, and ready to
disburse whatsoever sums her extraordinary charges caused her to demand. Her
Proclamations were as strong as enacted laws: and her Private letters as
forceable as Public proclamations. Seventhly, the world was so quiet in her
time, as England for 45. years never knew by feeling, what belonged to the
wars. And now her winding up was in so quiet a season, as not only her own
kingdoms were in a general peace; but all the countries of Christiandome, in
a calm unity and concord.

O quam te memorem, virgo?

Then to descend from her own personal Prosperity, and to speak of that
happiness which we enjoyed by her government: who knows not, that she was
(under God) our Moses, Exodus 12.
to deliver us out of the bondage and darkness of the Romish Egypt? Our Iud.
4.
Dehora, that brought down the Spanish Iabin? Our Iud. 14. etc.
Sampson, to avenge us again and again of the Popish Philistims? Our 2. Sam.
6.
David, to fetch home the Ark of God, even the Gospel from other countries;
and 1. Chro. 16.
to appoint Levites, even godly Pastors to do service about it? 1. Reg. 10. 27
Our Solomon, to give us silver as common as stones, and cedars as the wild
fig trees in the plain? Our Asa, 1. Reg. 15. 12.
to put down idols, roodlofts, crosses, crucifixes, altars, holy water, holy
wax, holy candle, and such like filthy trumperie? Our Iehu, 2. Reg. 10. 25.
to destroy Baals Prophets the Jesuits and Seminary Priests, and other Apoc.
1^. ^3.
frogs that come out of the mouth of the ^gon? Out 1. C^ (...) 27.
Hezekiah, to build up treasuries for gold, and silver, and precious stones,
and (...) odours; and armories for munition, and storehouses for wheat, wine
and ^ile; and stalles for beasts, and stables for horses: that is, every way to
strengthen the kingdom, with money, victuals and defense? Lastly, our ^.
Josiah, to restore the book of the Law and holy Scriptures; abolishing Romish
traditions, unwritten ^erisies, Popes decrees and d^cretals: and so one way and
other to lade us with all temporal and spiritual Prosperity? Now her
government proving so abundantly Prosperous to her, and to the land: have not
we great cause to rejoice, that ever God advanced her to so high an estate of
dignity?

And then by the way, have we not all (I beseech you) very great cause to
mourn for so heavy a loss betided to us all? Verily, if David would have the
daughters of Israel to weep for the death of Saul, because 2. Sam. 1. 24.
he clothed them in scarlet with pleasures, and hanged ornaments of gold upon
their appare^ then how are ye (o ye daughters of England) to mourn for the
death of Q. Elisabeth; who not only gave you these outward things in such
abundance, as our plain Ancesters, if they now rose from the dead, would
hardly acknowledge us to be their posterity: but gave us righteousness and
peace for clothing, and the way to heaven for pleasure, and the Gospel for a
most precious treasure, which all the Spanish Indians are not able to
counterpoise? But what do I (most noble Queen) preventing, nay with my
meannesse abasing the solemnities of thy royal funerals? Or why do I so
digress from my joyful Text, to tune doleful Elegies of sorrow? Or why do I
by weeping 2. S^. (...). 1, 2.
with David, provoke the people to turn the salvation of this present day into
mourning? Why rather go I not on to show how Gods mercy has mitigated the
depth of this sorrow, with a new occasion of joy? and calls us anew at this
time also, to rejoice in the prosperity of the Righteous?

We read in the holy Scripture, that when Josh. 1. 2.
Moses the servant of the Lord was dead, who brought Israel out of Egypt, God
raised up Ioshuah to carry them over Jorden, and to put them in possession of
the promised land of Canaan. Queen Elisabeth, that good servant of the Lord,
is dead, which brought the people of this land out of the bondage and
darkness of Popery: God is now raising up a Ioshuah, by whom we conceive
great hope to enjoy the perfect beauty and complements of the Gospel. Wherein
not to stand upon this, that he is a Man, and so of more power and courage to
all parts of government (for Ci^r. Tus^. quest. lib. 2.
of Vir comes Virtus (says Tullie:) Viri autem propria ma^me est fortitudo:
And fortitude is the virtue most proper to ama^*) neither yet to speak of
this, that he is no mere aliant unto us, but one descended of English blood,
longo de stemmate Regum, from the ancient line of the Kings and Queens of this
land, and so the liker to carry a natural affection to this nation: not (I
say) to stand on these things, there are three especial points which may
excite us to a consident expectation of much good to be done in our Church and
Commonwealth by his Majesty's gracious government.

1. One is, his holy and virtuous education, which the common Proverb calls,
An other nature. Eurip. Iphigenia in A^lide.
(...)
(...).
Learned education is a great furtherance to virtue; yea, it is Plutarch. de
Iiberis educandis.
Primum, medium, and vltimum caput (as Plutarch speaks:) as touching the
nether means, it is all in all, to the leading of a godly and virtuous life.
Therefore have we great hope, that the sweet liquor wherewith he was seasoned
in youth, will yield him an healthsome and sauourie relish all the days of his
life.

2. A second is, the experience of his peaceable and merciful government in
his own country. Neither has he showed himself a disturber of other
Princes, like the Spaniard that will have an oar in every man's boat, and
pretend a title to every crown. Neither has he been a plotter of bloody
stratagemes, like to that late horrible Massacre in France: neither have we
ever heard, that he has been covetous in exacting, or cruel in oppressing
his own country people, as was our Richard the third, of odious memory. But
he has (according to Salomons advice) established his throne Pro. 20. 28.
by mercy and truth: accounting Clemency (with Lactantius) Lactant. divine.
instit. lib. 6.
the next duty to Religion: and with Seneca, Senec. Octauia. Act. 2. See. 2.
Consulere patriae, to do good to his country, the special virtue belonging
to a sovereign Prince. So that his former practice in Scotland, gives great
hope of a merciful government unto this realm of England.

3. The last (but not the least) thing, is his Religion and Profession.
Religion has his name of Isidor. Etimol. lib. 8.
uniting and knitting our souls unto God: and therefore is the true fountain
of goodness, and bridle of evil. Joseph would not harm his brethren: for
Genesis 42. 18.
he feared God. But Abraham doubted hard measure at Gerar, Genesis 20. 11.
because The fear of God (as he thought) was not in the place. If this man
were a Papist, we could expect no thing but blood, and fire, and f^got: for
they are their sole arguments to maintain their religion. But thanked be God
he is a professed Protestant, a supporter of the Gospel, an enemy to Popery:
and therefore what cause is there to us of fear? nay what cause is there not
of joy in this his Majesty's new Prosperity? To descend from the king to his
nobles: among them diverse (of my knowledge) have been (and I hope still are)
very Religious. It was my hap through their honorable favor often to be
present with some of them, while they lay in the city of Norwich. There they
many times partaked my public Ministry, and I their private exercises. I saw
their carriage so grave, their speeches so seasonable, their prayers so devout,
their preaching and preacher so sincere and zealous: as ever since that time
(which is now about twenty years ago) I have carried a reverent remembrance,
and honorable estimation of them and their profession. Let me proceed yet one
degree further for the comforting of such as are wholly ignorant of that
country and people. The holy example of the King and his nobles, has
conformed unto it the body of that kingdom. Bishop I^el thirty years ago
Defense of the Apology. part. 1. cap. 5. diuis. 3.
marshalled Scotland with the foremost among the Protestant Churches. And master
Calvin above forty years ago, congratulated to master knoxe Calvin. Ep. Ioh.
Knoxo. page 241.
tam faelices laet osque progressus: so happy and ioifull success of the
Gospel in that Realm. Since those days, it has had many means of growth
and increase, not many of declining or falling back: so that we are to
conceive of the King, Nobles and People together, as of a beautiful Church,
and holy Spouse of Jesus Christ.

Hereupon therefore depends the maine occasion of our joy in our new kings
Prosperity: that first his Education, secondly his Government, thirdly his
Religion; do so abundantly promise unto us in this land the continuance of
our liberty and peace, but especially the enjoying of the Gospel, and a
delivery from the superstition and tyranny of Antichrist and Popery.

The Papists these twenty years and more have been continually calling, and
looking for A DA^: and this Day was, The death and dissolution of her majesty.
They were ever menacing of us, as Esau threatened his brother: Genesis 27. 41.
The days of mourning for my father, will come shortly: then will I slay my
brother Jacob. So whispered they longagoe, not obscurely: The days of mourning
for Queen Elisabeth, will come shortly: the Queen will not, and if we can, she
shall not live long: then (...) we pelt these prattling Protestants, up shall
our stakes go, off shall their heads go: Tertull. (...). pol. cap. 39.
Christianos ad leonem, to the fire with them, to the gallows, to the Clinke,
to the Lollards tower. I think they did nothing for the space of many years
but with the Duke Ann. 1588. in expedit. Hispanica.
of Medina, barrel up ropes to execute the Protestants. The common peace of
the land since the death of the Queen, and the general consent in this new
proclamation, may rightly be called in respect of the Papists hope and purpose,
A very miracle seen in our time. For full confidently did they expect, that so
soon as ever the breath was known to be out of the Queens belly, they
should have been ringing auke, and fiering of houses, and spoiling of goods,
and leuying of armies, and bringing in of sorraine power from beyond the seas:
yea cutting of our throats, and burying of us in the dust. Now what shall we
say, or what can we say (my good brethren) to these unexpected and comfortable
events? verily in general we may and must say with the Psalmist: ^.
This was the Lords doing, and it is marvelous in our eyes. For the defeating
of our enemies: let us Psalm. 124. 6.
Praise the Lord that has not given us a prey unto their teeth. For raising up
this Iehoshua unto us: let us say with the people of God, Psalm. 11^. (...).
Blessed be he that comes in the name of the Lord: that is, (...) (...). 118.
(...).
Acceptus, foelix, and gratiosus sit iste, quem dominus nob^ regem dedit:
Welcome, happy, and acceptable might he be, whom God has raised up to be King
over us. For the Papists, because like Esaues brood they have wished and
compassed Jacobs destruction: let them fear that prophecy of Obadiah, against
the Edomites: Obad. 1. 10.
For thy cruelty against thy brother Jacob shame shall cover thee, and thou
shall be cut off for ever. For our selves: let us on the one side like good
Citizens rejoice in the Prosperity of this religious Prince: and on the other
side, let us pray to God both to affect his heart with large purposes of our
common good, and to prepare our hearts to intertaine the good which his coming
to the Crown seems to promise unto us; lest we stand in our own light, by
our own unto wardnesse, and it be said of us as it is of the Isrealites in the
days of Iehoshaphat: 2. Chron. 20. 33.
The high places were not taken away (the king could not do the good that he
would have done in the land) for the people had not yet prepared their hearts
unto the God of their fathers.

4. There is yet a fourth Observation to be made from these words of Solomon:
In the prosperity of the Righteous the city reioiceth. For, it teaches us,
what account we are to make of those whose affections are moved with no joy to
see good men grow up, and Righteous men to Prosper upon earth. Verily it
argues that they are such as have evil will at Sion: and Matt. 20. 15.
Their eye being evil because God is good, it shows that they are an envious
and malicious generation. Either they are no Citizens, or no sound hearted
Citizens, to the city of God. For Envy hates that which it maligneth: (...).
Epigr. deliuore.
Sudat frigidus intuens quod odir. When Nehemiah reedified the walls of
Jerusalem, the true hearted and natural Jews joined with him, and Nehe. 2. 18.
strengthened their hands to good. But Nehe. 4. 1, 8.
Sanballat and Tobiah mocked them, and conspired together to hinder them. And
no marvel: for they were no Jews. The one was an Horonite, ^rem. in Neh. 2.
10.
that is, a Moabite, and the other was an Ammonite: both of which nations were
old professed enemies to the people of God. Again: when Paul came to Paphus,
Act. 13. 7. 8.
Sergius Paulus desired to hear the word of God. But Elimas withstood them,
and sought to turn away the Deputy from the faith. No marvel. For he was a
Jew and a Sorcerer: and therefore could neither bear the truth, nor the
holiness of Christian Religion. So has it always been in the world.
Ammonites and Moabites, Jews and Sorcerers, men of corrupt life and religion,
could never take pleasure in the building of Jerusalem, nor in the propagating
of the Gospel. Whereof it is that they have always maligned the rising up of
the Righteous, for fear that the work of God should prosper in their hands.

Here therefore learn we to judge of what sort and quality those are among
us, which grind their teeth, and hang their heads at this new day of Englands
Prosperity. Of which rank and company are the dingthrifts of the land: who
having wasted their own goods with riotous living, hoped now to have parted
other men's stakes in the time of civil dissension: Those also which raised not
themselves by their Righteousness, but climbed on high by symonie, by
briberie, by flattery; abusing the gracious time and special ministers of the
state, by corrupting and perverting inferior officers: Those again, which
assumed the Magistracy, not to do justice, but to gain reputation; and
entered the ministry, not to labor but to live at ease; not to feed the
slocke, but to feed upon the flock. These and diverse others fearing lest in
an alteratino their evil might come to light: as when a man remooueth his
house, many a thing is pulled out, that lay hid, while he was settled, in some
dark corner: they can not but in appearance only rejoice at this prosperity.
But to omit these and some others: there are now two especial sorts of
malcontents in the land, that sigh at the heart, though they smile with their
countenance at this common peace and joy in the kingdom. The Lord give his
Majesty grace prudently to discern them, and puissantly to suppress them, as
enemies to God, and chief hindrances to the Gospel.

1. The one sort are the Atheists, I mean the Mocke-gods of our time, which
make a scorn of all religion: and say with the Psalm. 53. 1.
Fool in their hearts, There is no God. Of such gross and senseless Atheists
I speak: not of such as the Papists make of the Protestants. For with them
Laurent. de la Bar. in Tertul. de resar. (...).
Erasmus is an Atheist, because I now he imitated Lucians style in deriding
their absurdities. With them Idem in Tert. contra Valent.
Calvin is an Atheist, because he makes God the author of all things. Not
being able (seely scholars) to distinguish, between the actition which is ever
Act. 17. 28.
of God, and the evil of the action, which is ever of man himself. Again,
they say of Genebrard. Chron. p. 1171.
Bukchennane that he was Atheus Poeta, a godless or Athetsticall Poet: because
(perhaps) he compiled David's Psalms in Poetical verses. Yea in their esteem,
all of us are little better then Atheists, because we acknowledge not every
several Saint, for a petie God in religion. As the Cicer. de not. Deorum. lib.
1.
Athenians condemned Protagoras for an Atheist, Arnob. contra Ge^es. lib. 8.
consulte potius quam profane disputantem: Who disputed rather advisedly (like
a Christian) than profanely (like an Atheist.) So Arnobius judges; and so I
do conceine him. For certainly his purpose was never to say, There was no God:
but that those were no gods which the Athenians worshipped: But of that by the
way. Such fat Atheists made the Gentiles of the Philosophers: and such
Atheists make the Papists of us: but of such I speak not in this place. The
Atheists which I intend are those, to whom Religion is nothing but Policy, and
the Scriptures are but Quaint devices: and Moses his leading of the people
through the red sea, was but his wisdom to find the channel, and to take the
time when the tide was out: and such like odious blasphemies. These persons no
man (I trow) can call Christians: and yet of themselves and their followers
they are reputed deeply wise and learned. Let us grant them therefore (if we
grant them any thing) to be Heathen Philosophers: but then the question is, of
what sort or sect they might take their denomination. Verily Epicures they are,
for they hunt after pleasure as after their chiefest good. Their Mote is like
to Sardanapalus Epitaph: Ede, lude, bibe, charum praesentibus exple
Deliciis animum: post mortem nulla voluptas.
Stoikes they are: for Plutarch. de repugnantijs Stoicorum.
though they love to dispute of Action and Practice, yet themselves covet to
sit in ease and quietness. Yea in Plato de republicadial. 5.
their affectation of Community, they are Academikes: for by their good wills
no man's wife should be proper to her husband. But with the Peripatetians to
enquire after Arist. Ethic.
felicity, or virtue; or to account the gifts of the mind, their most
excellent parts; or the seeking of common good, their greatest glory: these
are tunes that sound harsh in their ears, because they savor somewhat of
Righteousness, Prosperity, and pleasure, and ease, and abundance, are things
which they affect: but Virtue and Righteousness they affect not. These men
seeing now a change even in the Head; (for 1. Sam. 15. 17. 2. Chro. 20. 27
Princes are the heads of the people) and knowing that Arist. Physic. 5.
Mutation is an alteration in the same kind into more or less (as the great
Philosopher speaks;) and discerning by all likelihood, that our Religion
(through Gods infinite mercy) is not like to change to the less, but rather to
the greater: they fear lest that which they concealed before, should now be
discovered; and whereas they were noted in former time to have but little
Religion, now it will manifestly appear that they have none at all: therefore
do they but poorly and seelily (God knows) give some single tokens of
ioying in this our late Prosperity.

2. The second sort of Malecontented mates, are our mutinous and seditious
Papists; which never were, nor never will be true to Princes crowns. For they
hold it for a Maxim, that Ioh. de Parisiis de potest. Regia and Papali. cap. 5.
Papa est verus Dominus temporalium: The Pope is the right Lord of
Temporalities; so as he may take from any man, that which is his own. By which
conclusion, no Prince shall ever be sure in his throne, but at the beck and
good pleasure of the Pope of Rome. A notable seditious and rebellious doctrine.
Now these men which hang on this string, showed slender tokens of joy when
Queen Elisabeth came to the crown: but lesser a great deal now at this late
Proclamation. Some new devised Title which might have interessed the Spaniard
to our Dominions, would have pleased them a great deal better: or some
division among the Nobles and Commons of this land, would have wrought them
better advantage. For their practice was always to fish in troubled waters:
and to that end to raise up division between Prince and people. But that all
the estates of the land should conioine as one person, and set their faces all
to the right: is a thing which they never expected, much less did wish to have
betided. But of them enough at this time. I trust that the Kings Majesty who
now is, knowing how dangerous their doctrine is to the estate of Magistracy,
how they brought the late French King to his end, how many assaults and
attempts they made upon the kingdoms and person of the Queen his predecessor;
and lastly, how they have slandered his native realm of Scotland, auouching,
that the Defense of English Catholics. cap. 3. and 4.
Treacheries, treasons, murders and villainies practiced in that kingdom,
arose from the Protestants: will in his princely wisdom take them as they are,
and use them as they deserve: causing all the Saints of God to rejoice, if not
in their conversion which were of us to be wished, yet in their destruction
which themselves will procure. Of which destruction of them, and other wicked
persons, the latter pan of this Text ministers due occasion to entreat: but
time ^ing prevented me, it must be referred to further opportunity. The Lord of
heaven and earth, etc.


