A DEFENSE Of THE INNOCENCE OF THE THREE CEREMONIES OF THE CHVRCH OF ENGLAND.
viz. The Surplice, Cross after Baptism, and Kneeling at the receiving of the
blessed Sacrament.

Divided into two Parts: In the former whereof the General Arguments urged by
the Non-conformists; and, in the second Part, their Particular Accusations,
against these III. Ceremonies severally, are answered, and refuted.

1. COR. 11.16. If any man seem to be contentious, we have no such custom,
neither the Churches of God.

Published by Authority.

LONDON, Imprinted for William Barret. 1618.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, GEORGE MARQVIS OF BVCKINGHAM, Viscount Villiers, Baron
of Whaddon, Master of his Majesty's Horse, Knight of the most noble Order of
the Garter, Gentleman of his Majesty's Bedchamber, and of his most honorable
privy Council.
MY LO.
IT has been your happiness, to have had that highest Nobility, that can
befall unto the sons of men; I speak not now of Nasci, but of Renasci, through
Baptism, in this our most Orthodoxe, and flourishing Church: which alas! now
(by the same obligation, arising from the due respect of a child unto the
Mother) may seem to require your Lordships aid and assistance, especially
against two sorts of Adversaries, by whom she is (although in a different
degree) unworthily and unjustly impugned; the one whereof are the Papists, and
the other the Non-conformists. The Papists persecute her with all their engines
of hate, as if she were an execrable Apostate: notwithstanding they themselves,
(to instance but in two points) first, worship with divine honor, as the person
of the Son of God, that, which, in their opinion, may; but, in the judgment of
all other Churches, does remain still (according as Theodoret, 1200 years
since, in express words determined) in form, figure, and substance, Bread.
which necessarily infers an high degree, not only of a possible, but eue^ of
an infallible Idolatry. And secondly have they, of late, added twelve new
Articles of Belief unto our Christian Creed, with an opinion of equal
necessity: which kind of addition unto the Christian Faith does prove them
notoriously heretical, and liable unto the Apostles curse, Gal. 1.8.
who pronounces an Anathema upon either man or Angel, that shall coin any
new doctrine of that kind. Concern^ing the Nonconformist. He, although he does
owe his spiritual birth unto the Church, as well as his natural unto his
Parents; yet nevertheless does he defame his Mothers religious worship;
infringe her wholesome liberty; and contemn her just authority: thereby
occasioning that horrid Schism, which is made by Separatists, the dissected
Sects, and very Acephalists of this present age. Against the Papists I have
had many conflicts. Now, in this Treatise, my purpose is principally to contend
against the Non-conformists; which being finished, I thought my self bound to
deuote the same unto your Honor, in testimony of my due acknowledgment, for
your Lordshi^s, sing^lar favor, and respect toward me: and so much the rather
have I thus adventured, because the Treatise it self was first occasioned by
your Lordship. If therefore (Right Honorable) in that eminence of Favor, which
you have in the eyes of our most gracious Sovereign, you shall imitate his
Majesty's admirable wisdom and zeal, in the advancing of This, the true
daughter of that primitive Mother- Church, against whatsoever kind of
Adversaries; She shall make you twice-honorable, both in the eyes of God and
Man; by blessing you with her prayers, wishing unto you Good luck with your
Honor; Psalm. 45.5.
and happy prosperity for preserving of her Peace: Psalm. 12 2.6.
whereunto, according to my especial duty, I resound an answerable Echo;
beseeching God to prosper your Lordship, and to accomplish you, especially,
with all his spiritual blessings, in heavenly things; and to preserve you to
the glory of his saving Grace.

Your Honors, in all humble acknowledgement, Tho. Cestren.

An Epistle to the Non-conformists, to re^^ce them from their Superstitions,
and Scandals against the Church.
IF you (my brethren) or any others shall marvel, why I impute Superstition
unto you, I may think that either they know not you, or that you are not
rightly acquainted with your selves: because, as there is a Superstition
affirmative, by an Idolatrous Touching, tasting, and handling of things that
are held to be sacred; so is there likewise, which cannot be denied, a Negative
Superstition (condemned by the Apostle) which, in regard of things that were
falsely judged unholy and profane, did prohibit, saying, Col. 2.21.
Touch not, taste not, handle not. Wherein, notwithstanding, not the act of
Abstaining, but (observe I pray you) the erroneous opinion, in forbearing, and
forbidding such things, was the formal cause of Superstition. Whereunto, how
far you may be thought to symbolize, by your Negative opinions, concerning
these your prohibitio^s, Knele not, cross not, wear not, etc. this Treatise
does fully discuss and determine.

But you think it sufficient to have produced M. Calvin, B. Jewel, M. Bucer,
P. Martyr, Beza, Zanchy, Chemnitius, Danaeus, and other the best accomplished
Divines, as Advocates to plead your Cause. It is well; if you shall be as well
contented, that (according as Act. 25. v. 10.12.
Festus, knowing S. Paul to have appealed unto Caesar, did reasonably resolve,
saying, Unto Caesar shall thou go) I, likewise upon your allegations of such
reverend and judicious Authors, may challenge you to stand unto the Testimonies
of your own Witnesses: by whom you may easily understand, that the most of
your Negative Opinions are so many Superstitions.

We have received from you these Opinions concerning Ceremonies. 1. No
Ceremony, without special warrant from the word. 2. No appropriation of any
humane Ceremony unto Gods worship. 3. No signification mystical in any such.
4. No use of any such Ceremony, which has been once superstitiously abused.
5. No bodily gesture, in token of reverence, at the receiving of the Lords
Supper, is lawful.

Be you likewise pleased to take a view of the Testimonies of your own
Witnesses, condemning your former assertions. The first, thus: Danaeus Isag. de
Tradit. cap. 29.
The Sadduces did reject all manner of Traditions, which had not been delivered
by Moses; like as do the Anabaptists, and Libertines of these days: who are,
notwithstanding, confuted by the example of Christ, in his observing of the
feast of Tabernacles, which was ordained by Judas Machabaeus. But the Papists,
like the old Pharisees, are in another extreme. These other Testimonies
ensuing, are cited, and expressed in this Treatise, throughout.
Besides, to challenge a special prescription for all Ceremonies out of the
word, Calvin.
Is contrary to the wisdom of Christ: and Zanchy.
To Christian liberty.

The second, of Not appropriating, etc. thus: It infringeth Bucer, Zanc. and
others.
The liberty of the Church.

The third, against Mystical signification, thus: To deny Calvin.
Symbolicall Ceremonies, is a morositie: in so much that the D. Rainold.
Papists are to be reproved for their dumb, and non-significant Ceremonies.
But these, as Chemnis.
Significatiue, are lawful, although not as operative. yea B. Jewel, Zanchy,
Chemnis.
Significant are profitable for admonition, and for testification of our
duties. Finally, the denying of this power to the Church, is a Bucer.
Depriving her of her Christian liberty.

The fourth, of Abolishing of all Ceremonious use of things, that have been
once superstitiously abused, thus: P. Martyr, Beza.
The wickedness of man cannot so far pollute the good creatures of God. Why?
Bucer.
The abuse of such things does not cleave to the things themselves, but unto
the minds of them that do abuse them. What then? As it is superstition B. Jewel.
to place holiness, so it is to place unholiness in them. To conclude. This
doctrine is Calvin.
Contrary to the intention of Christ, and to the B. Jewel, P. Martyr.
Liberty of the Church of Christ.

The last, which is of Not using any bodily reverence at the holy Communion,
Thus, Calvin, B. Jewel, Zanchy, Zepper. P. Martyr.
Outward reverence is requisite in Communicants, both for the dignifying of
Christ's mysteries, and for the increase of our Christian devotion. In a word,
to deny the Church power, to choose her gesture of Reverence, is Bucer, P.
Martyr.
Contrary to the liberty allowed her by Christ. All these, with diverse other
authorities and reasons, are more expressly mentioned in the Treatise it self.

If you desire not to take up your ware by retaile, you may have it in a
generality. For, to instance but in one Ceremony, (be it the Surplice) the
Reformed Churches, although they used it not, yet did they so certainly
justify our practice thereof, that (as it is confessed) P. Martry loc. comm.
page 1086.
If we shall condemn these indifferent things, we shall condemn infinite
Churches, which are honored of us, as most commendable. Or thus: Bucer.
We shall condemn all Churches of impious boldness. Not to return upon you
the many Parlaments, and Conuocations, which (by the general consent of the
learned Divines, and the most wise and religious Governors in this kingdom)
have established these Rites.

Before I shut up this Epistle, let me acquaint you with some other of your
errors, which may chiefly require your second thoughts. I shall need but only to
point at the^.

(...) One is, your often alleging of Scriptures, Fathers, and other Authors;
and your open mistaking of their meanings, as will evidently appear.

The next, is, the many Repugnancies unto your selves, by such an extreme
difference between your Swearing, and Praying; your standing, and sitting;
your hands, and tongues; your heads, and your knees, etc. as if there were some
mile distance between you, and your selu^s. Not to mention your many
obiection^, which make against your own conclusions.

The third is, the extreme injury that you do unto the Church. But you pretend
peace; because, forsooth, you preach not against Conformity. As though there
were not a Preaching as well in the ear, as on the housetop; or not as well
an exemplarie, as there is an oratorie seducement: else could not Saint Paul
have said, Gal. 2.14.
concerning only the Exemplarie; Cogis eos Iudaizare.

And that which herein does double your offense, is, that your opposition is
grounded upon a sinister conceit, that our Church observes these Ceremonies in
an opinion of Holiness and Necessity: which is altogether contrary to her
own express protestation. Howbeit, if her meaning in this case were but
ambiguous, or doubtful, yet would wel-conditioned children take things from a
Parent with their right hands: but your deprauing of her professed and plain
doctrine, what can it else argue in you, then an earnest bent to contention,
against the general custom of the Church? not unlike unto the Accipencer,
which usually swimmeth against the stream.

The last, is, your notorious Scandals given unto them that are without, and
them that are within the Church; to the weak, and to the strong; yea and to
the Church of God it self, by breaking the hedge of peace, and opening a gap
for the wild B^re out of the Romish Forest to enter in, and ^oote out that
goodly vine; which many Paul's, the industrious Bishops, and P^stors have
plainted; and many Apollo's, the faithful Martyrs of Christ have watered with
their blood. And yet more specially that Scandal, which you commit against
your own selves; I mean, so many of you, as acknowledge the Innocence of our
Ceremonies fully cleared, and your own consciences sufficiently convinced, and
do notwithstanding resolve (I can scarce, for honor, mention so execrable a
resolution) to continue in opposition, only for fear of discrediting your
Ministry. which this Treatise proves to be altogether false, presumptuous,
partial, and pernicious.

Diverse other things might have been observed: but to conclude. Be you
exhorted (beloved brethren) if there be in you a due hatred of Superstition;
any joy in the Spirit of unity; any zeal of the success of the Gospel; or
any conscience of truth, embrace the peace of the Church: and the God of peace
replenish your hearts with all spiritual Graces, and preserve us to the glory
of his Saving Grace.

TO THE READER.
BE thou advertised (Christian Reader) that the Obiectors, in this Treatise,
are principally the Assembly of the Lincolnshire Ministers, in their book
called the Abridgement, etc. printed 1605. The other, in the Margent (who, for
the respect I have unto them, are but halfe-named) are the Ministers in the
Diocese of Chester: whose Reasons, of their Refusal of Subscription, (so many
as they could either borrow of others, or invent of themselves, I keep by me
in writing; and have as methodically, as I could, ranged them into order in
this Treatise. Good Reader, study the peace of the Church, and eschew all
differences, touching these matters, which are apparently, in their own
nature, Indifferent.

Page 37. lin. 4. Object. 1. etc. Dele, the whole line. Page 49. lin. 5. after,
judicious Divines, add, 4. Reasons. Page 61. Sect. 9 after, 5. Their own
practice, add, 6. Reasons. Page 100. lin. 3. for, Their, read, Our Answer.
Page 1^8. lin. 26. read. Maozim. Page 1^2. lin. vlt. in marg. dele 1. Pet.
2.8. page 294. lin. 30. r^ade (...).

THE CONTENTS OF THIS ENSVING TREATISE.
PART. 1.
It consists of Two parts: 1. A general Defense of the Ceremonies above
mentioned. 2. A particular Defense of each one severally.


CHAP. 1.
In the first Part the Non conformists use six Arguments against the foresaid
Ceremonies.

Their first general Argument is, because, Every Ceremony should have Special
warrant from Scripture, which (as they say) these have not. The Proposition of
this Argument they labor to prove by Scriptures. Their I. Text is Heb. 3.2. of
Christ's faithfulness in Gods house. Our Answer Sect. 3. etc. II. Text, 2. Sam.
7.7. God saying to David, Shall thou build me an house? Our Answer Sect. 6.
etc. III. Text, Ier. 7.22.23. I commanded not your fathers concerning
Sacrifices, etc. Our Answer, Sect. 8. etc. IV. Text, Esa. 1.11. Who required
these things at your hands? Our Answer, Sect. 11. V. Text, Ier. 7.31. God
saying. Which I comm^nded you not. Our Answer, Sect. 12.
Their second proof, for their Negative arguing from Scriptures, is from the
judgment of ancient Fathers. Our Answer, Sect. 13. etc. Their third proof is
from the Testimonies of Protestant Divines. Our Answer, Sect. 15. Our general
Confutation of their first Argument, in disputing Negatiuely from Scripture, in
the question of Ceremonies; by Reasons. Our I. Reason, from that place of 1.
Cor. 14. v. 40. Sect. 16. II. Reason, from Fathers. Sect. 17. III. Reason, from
the judgment of Protestant Divines. Sect. 18. IV. Reason, from the nature o^
Ceremonies; according to the Practices of other reformed Churches. Sect. 20. V.
Reason, from the Confession, and Practice of the Non-conformists themselves.
Sect. 21.
The Assumption of their Argument (namely that these our Ceremonies want due
warrant from Scripture) which the Non-conformists labor to prove. Our Answer,
Sect. 22. to the end of the Chap.
CHAP. 2.
Their second general Argument is, Because Ceremonies are parts of Gods
worship; which no man can lawfully ordain. Ergo, etc. The Proof first of
their Mayor. Their I. Proof from Scriptures; Esa. 29.13. Deuteronomy. Coloss. etc.
Our Answer, Sect. 3. and confutation of their interpretation of such
Scriptures. Sec. 4. II. Proof from the judgment of ancient Fathers. Our
Answer, Sect. 5. III. Proof from Protestant Authors. Our Answer, Sect. 6.
The proofs of their Assumption, to show that our Ceremonies are held as parts
of Gods worship. I. Proof, because they are impoted as parts of Gods worship.
Our Answer. Sect. 8. etc. II. Proof, Because imposed with an opinion of
holiness. Our Answer. Sect. 10. III. Proof; Because preferred before
preaching, and other necessary duties. Our Answer. Sect. 11. IIII. Proof;
Because the people conceive them to be necessary. Our Answer. Sect. 12. V.
Proof, Because the punishment is so severe against the Transgressors of them.
Our Answer. Sect. 13. VI. Proof; Because the censure against the
contrary-minded is to term them Schismatics. Our Answer. Sect. 14.
Our general confutation of this second general Argument of the
Non-conformists, concerning the essential parts of Gods worship: from the
plain and express Profession of our Church. Sect. 15.
CHAP. 3.
Their third general Argument against these Ceremonies is, because they are
made Significant. Their Proofs from 1. Scriptures. 2. Fathers. 3. Protestant
divines. 4. Reasons.
I. Proof from Scriptures of Mar. 7.8. Mat. 15. You have made the
Commandments of God of none effect, by the traditions of men Our Answer, Sect.
2. II. Proof, from Fathers. Our Answer, Sect. 3. III. Proof, from the
testimonies of Protestant Divines. Our Answer, Sect. 4. IV. Proof, from
Reasons. I. Reason; Because a Ceremony is a chief part of Gods worship. Our
Answer, Sect. 5. II. Because Gods own Ceremonies of the old law are not to be
used. Ergo, etc. Our Answer, Sect. 6. III. Because this opens a gap to other
Popish trash. Our Answer, Sect. 7.
The Non-conformists Assumptio^: and our Answer. Sect. 8. Our gene^al
Confutations of their third general Argument, concerning a Ceremony
significant. Our I. Confutation by Scriptures: II. Fathers: III. Reasons: IV.
The Non-conformists own Witnesses: V. By the practice of the Non-conformists
themselves: VI. Reason: to prove the lawfuln^sse of Significant Ceremonies. Our
I. Example out of Scripture, is of Abraham before the law. Genesis 24. II.
Examples under the law: first, in the ordination of Festival days, as the
Feast of lots, Est. 9. Sect. 9.10. Second, in the Feast of the Dedication, 1.
Machab. 2. Justified by Christ, Ioh. 10. Sect. 12. and 13. Next instance in the
Ceremonial instruments, both in the Altar of the Gileadites, Ios. 22. Sect.
15.16. and secondly in Salomons Altar. 1. King. 8. Sect. 17.18.19.20.21. and in
the Jewish Synagogues, Sect. 22. III. Examples in the time of the Apostles. As
first, the Feasts of Charity. Sect. 23.24.25.26.27. Second, the Holy Kiss.
Sect. 26.27. and third, Woman's covering of her head. Sect. 28.
Our second Confutation, by the universal custom of all Christian Churches,
as well Primitive as Successiue. Sect. 29. Our third confutation, from the
testimonies of the Non-conformists own Witnesses. Sect. 30. Our fourth
confutation is from the confessions and practice of the Non-conformists
themselves: by example in taking an Oath, Sect. 31. And in the observation of
the Lords day, and other Festiuals. Sect. 32. Our fifth confutation is from
Reason, taken from the nature of a Ceremony, that it must not be dumb. Sect.
33.34.
CHAP. 4.
The fourth general Argument of the Non-conformists, against these ceremonies,
is, Because they have bin abused in Popery: and, Therefore ought to be utterly
abolished. For proof of their Mayor, they allege the reproves used against
Ceremonies, either Heathenishly, Iewishly, or Heretically abused: which they
endeavor to euince, from 1. Authority of Scripture. 2. Of ancient Councels,
and Fathers.
Their I and II. Scriptures, Leuit. 18. etc. Our Answer, Sect. 2.3. III. Deuteronomy.
7. commanding the names of Heathenish superstition to be abandoned. Our Answer,
Sect. 4. IV. Dan. 1. Daniel would not be defiled with the Kings meat. Our
Answer, Sect. 5. V. The example ^f Hezechias, in demolishing of the Brazen
Serpent, 2. Reg. 18. Our Answer, Sect. 6. Their objections of the second kind,
concerning Heathenish Rites, is from Councels and Fathers. I. Instance in the
Council of Carthage, against Altars in Highwayes, abu^ed by Pagans. Our
Answer, Sect. 7. II. In the sam^ Council, against Relickes of idolatry. Our
Answer. Sect. 8. III. In the Council of Brac. concerning green bay-^e^ues.
Our Answer. Sect. 9. IIII. In the Council of Afro^k, against the Birth daze of
Marterse. Our Answer. Sect. 10. V. In Tertullian, forbidding to borrow any
thing of an Idol. Our Answer. Sect. 11. VI. Again in Tert. concerning washi^g
of hands, and laying aside Clokes. Our Answ. Se. 12. VII. in Miltiades,
concerning Fasting on Friday, Our Answer. Sect. 13 VIII. In Ambrose, about
offering Cakes. Our Answer. Se. 14. IX. In August, to leave the heathenish
toys, etc. Our Answer. Sect. 15.
Their second kind of Objections, concerning Jewish Rites. Their Instance in
the Council of Nice, concerning the Feast of Easter. Our Answer. Sect. 16.
Their third kind of Objections is concerning Heathenish Rites. I. Instance in
the Council of Gangris, about Fasting on the Lords day, abused by the
Manichees. Our answer. Sect. 17. II. Instance in the Council of Brac. about
Eating of flesh abused by the Pricilianists. Our Answer. Sect. 18. III.
Instance in Gregory, against Thrice dipping in Baptism. Our Answer. Sect. 19.
IIII. Instance in Leo, against the a^use in Conference with Heretics. Our
Answer. Sect. 20
Their general Assumption, to prove that our Ceremonies have been as ill as
Heathenishly abused by Papists. Our Answer. Sect. 21. Our general Confutation
of their general Argument; for the abolishing such things as have bin abused.
Our I. Proof, is from Scriptures. Sect. 23. II. Proof from Fathers. Sect. 24.
III From 4. Reasons. 1. From Inconueniency. Sect. 25. 2. From the absurdity of
the Non-conformists Rule. Sect. 26. 3. From other means of reforming abuses,
tha^ by abolishing the things Sect. 27. 4. From the difference between Pagans
and Papists. Sect. 28.
IV. From the Testimonies of their principal Witnesses. Sect. 29. V. From the
confessions, and Practices of the Non-conformists themselves. Sect. 30.

CHAP. 5.
The fifth general Argument of the Non-conformists, against the foresaid
Ceremonies, is taken from the Scandal which is pretended to be occasioned by
them. Our Answer. 1. By exposition, of the word Scandal. Sect. 1. 2 By
division of it into Active. Passive. Sect. 2.
Active Scandal subdivided. 1. In respect of the Parties Agent, Direct.
Indirect. Sect. 3.
2. In respect of the parties offended, Weak, Strong. Sect. 4.
3. In respect both of Persons and Cause, either Determined. Undetermined.
Sect. 5.
4. In respect of the effects Lapse into sin, or error. Hinderance from God.
Sect. 6.

The Passive Scandal divided in respect of the party offended matter of
offense. Sect. 7.
1. Subdiuision, concerning the party offended, either in respect Of his
judgment Or, of his affection. Sect. 8.
II. Subdiuision, in respect of the opinion of Indifferency. Necessity, Sect.
9.
The general Assumption of the Non-conformists, proouing our Ceremonies to be
Scandalous. I. Against superstitious Papists Our answer. Sect. 10. II. Against
Profane persons, Our answer. Sect. 11. III. Against weak brethren, Our answer.
Sect. 12. IV. Against uncomfortable Congregations. Sect. 13. V. Against
uncomfortable Ministers. Our answer. Sect. 14. VI. Against all sorts, by
appearance of evil, Our answ. Sect. 15
Our general Confutation of their former Assumption, concerning Scandal, by
proving the Non-conformists themselves guilty of the manifest Scandal, as both
in Active and Passive. Sect. 16. I. Active Scandal, by weakening some that
remain in the Church. Sect. 17. II. By driving some out of the Church as
Separatists, Sect. 18. III. Hindering some from the Church, as Papists. Sect.
19. IV. Against the Church it self: first Comparatively, by rather offending
their Mother, than their Brother. Sect. 21. By Contempt. Sect. 22.


CHAP. VI.
The sixth general Argument of the Non-conformists, against our Ceremonies, is
taken from Prejudice against the Liberty of Christians. Sect. 1.2.3. Our
distinction between Necessity of doctrine, and Necessity of obedience. Sect.
3. The first Proof of the Non-conformists is from Scriptures. I. Scripture. 1.
Cor. 7. forbid^ing to Cast a snare upon Christians. Our answer. Sect. 4. II.
Script. Gal. 5. Stand fast in the liberty etc. Our answer. Sect. 5.
Their second Proof from Reason. I. Reason, thus; Else, how shall not the
Popish Ceremonies be excusable? Our answer. Sect. 6. II. Reason; They are
imposed with an Opinion of binding men's consciences. Sect. 7.
Our particular Answers. I. Distinguishing between manner, and measure of
binding men's consciences. Sect. 7. II. Confuting the Non-conformists from their
own Witnesses. Sect. 8. III. She^ing that Ecclesiastical Laws have a kind of
force to bind men's consciences. Sect. 10. The Non-conformists Objection, from
Bowling. Our answ. Se. 11.
Our General Confutation of the foresaid sixth general Argument of the
Non-conformists, concerning the impeaching of Christian Liberty; and Proouing
our Church free from this error. I. Reason, from the acknowledgment of the
Non-conformists themselves. Sect^ 12. II. Reason from the profession of our
Church. Sect. 13. III. From the contrary: showing that the Non-conformists
opinion of Refusal is the very breach of Christian Liberty. Sect. 14.

To the end of the first part.
The second Part of our Defense by particular Answers to the particular
Accusations of the Non-conformists, against the III. Ceremonies of our Church,
viz. Surplice, Cross after Baptism, and Kneeling at the receiving of the B.
Communion.
CHAP. 1.
I. Of the Surplice: and our particular defense thereof, against their several
Accusations. The I. Accusation of the Non-c^nformists, against the Surplice, is
in respect of the distinction of Apparel. Our Answer. Sect. 1. II. Accusation,
in respect of the Office, whereunto the Surplice is applied, which is
Ecclesiastical. Our Answer, Sect. 2. III. Accusation is in respect of the
color, as not anciently used. Our Answer, Sect. 3. IV. Accusation, because it
is made Significant. Our Answer, Sect. 4. V. Accusation, because it has
resemblance with the Jewish attire. Our Answer, Sect. 5. VI. Accusation, both
in respect of the Resemblance, and of the Signification jointly together. Our
Answer. Sect. 6. VII. Accusation, from the pretended Author thereof, as being a
Pope. Our Answer, Sect. 7. VIII. Accusation, from the former abuse of it in
Popery. Our answer, Sect. 8. IX. Accusation, that the People account it Holy;
and others think it Scandalous, etc. Our answer, Sect. 9.
Our summarie Confutation of the Non-conformists, arguing against the Surplice.
CHAP. 2.
Our particular Defense of the second Ceremony, which is the Cross after
Baptism; against their several Accusations. Their Accusations. I. That It is
contrary to the second Commandment. Our answer, Sect. 1.2. II. That It
detracteth from the perfection of Baptism, in many respects: as, 1. Because it
is made a part of Baptism. Our answer, Sect. 3. 2. It is sometime used,
whilst the words of Baptism are in pronouncing. Our answer, Sect. 4. 3. It is
used after Baptism, which is worse. Our answer. Sect. 5. 4. It is called a
Token of our profession --. Our answer, Sect. 6. 5. It is said, that the child
is dedicated thereby, etc. Our answer, Sect. 7.
III. Accusation; that it is abused by Papists. Our answ. Sec. 8. IV. That This
crossing of the forehead, being allowed, many justify the Popish crossing of
their breasts. Our answer, Sect. 9. V. That The Author of it was the heretic
Valentinus. Our answer, Sect. 10.11. VI. That The Countenancer thereof was
Montanus an heretic. Our answer, Sect. 12. VII. The superstitious abuse of it
by ancient Fathers, whom they grossly imitate. Our answer, Sect. 13.
Our summarie Confutation of the Non-conformists; concerning the use of the
Cross after Baptism. Sect. 14.
CHAP. 3.
Our particular Defense of the third Ceremony of Kneeling at the receiving of
the holy Communion, against their several Accusations. Their first Accusation
is from the Example of Christ. Our answer, Sect. 2.3. Our Confutation of their
former Accusation: I. By Reasons, 1. From the words of the Evangelists. Sect.
4. 2. From the like action of Christ. Sect. 5.
II. By their own Witnesses. Sect. 6. III. By the practice of the
Non-conformists themselves. Sect. 7.
Our Determination of the point, concerning the first Accusation. Their second
Accusation, Because Kneeling is contrary to the intention of Christ. Their
Reasons; I. Because contrary to the nature of a banquet. Our answer. Sect. 9.
II. Contrary to the nature of a Table Gesture. Our answer, Sect 11. III.
Contrary to the due disposition of the Receiver, which should be in
Thankfulness, etc. Our answer, Sect. 12. IV. Because such Reverence becomes
not the meannesse of the Elements. Our answer, Sect. 13. V. Contrary to the
example of the Apostles. Our answer, Sect. 14.
Our summarie Confutation of the Non-conformists second Accusation: I. From
Reason. Sect. 15. II. From their own Witnesses. Sect. 16. III. From the
practice of the Non-conformists themselves, Sect. 17.
Their third Accusation, from the Example of the Primitive Church, which was
Standing, etc. Our answer. Sect. 18. Their IIII. Accusation, Because the
opinion of the people holds them necessary. And the like is the opinion of
the learned. Our Answer. Sect. 19.20. Their V. Accusation, that the first
invention thereof was Antichristian. Our Answer. Sect. 21. Their VI.
Accusation, that it has been Idolatrously abused. Our answer. Sect. 22. Their
VII. That it is still used as a part of Gods worship. Our answer. Sect. 23.
Their VIII. Accusation, that This gesture of kneeling is Idolatrous in it
self. Proved by Reasons: I. Because before a Creature. Our answer. Sect. 24.
II. Because a Relative worship. Our answer. Sect. 25. Their 1. Confirmation
thereof, Because this kind of worship was the work of Idolatry. Our answer.
Sect. 26. Their 2. Else why use we not the same in Baptism? Our answer. Sect.
27. Their 3. Else why condemn we Papists in the worshipping of Images? Our
answer. Sect. 28.


Our Confutations of the Non-conformists, and Justification of our Church
concerning Relative worship. Sect. 29. I. By Reasons; showing our difference
from the Relative worship of the Papists. 1. Difference, manifesting the Two
Romish opinions. Se. 30.31. and 32. 2. The Romish worship ( absolute) of an
Image. Sect. 33. And of the Sacrament, Sect. 34. Our contrary use, Sect. 35.
Illustrated by a similitude. Sect. 36.37.

Our second ground of Confutation is taken from the Non-conformists own
Witnesses, concerning the reverent receiving of this Sacrament. Sect. 38. Our
third Confutation of the Non-conformists, from the confession of Bellarmine,
concerning the Protestants opinion of Adoration. sect. 39. and 40. Our fourth
Confutation of the Non-conformists, is from the Non-conformists own Practices.
I. From their Intentionall reverence. Sect. 40. II. From their Bodily presence,
in communicating with us. sect. 41. IIII. From their bodily reverence, at the
receiving both of their Corporal food. Sect. 42. And Sacramental. Sect. 43.


PART. I. A DEFENSE OF THE INNOCENCE OF THE THREE CEREMONIES of the Church of
England; viz. Surplice, Cross after Baptism, and Kneeling at the receiving of
the B. Sacrament of the Lords Supper.
CHAP. I.
The Arguments, or rather Accusat^ons, which are brought by the
Non-conformists, against our Ceremonies, are either 1. General; which are made
jointly against them all: Or, 2. Particular, by more special exceptions unto
each one of them severally.


SECT. I. Our first defense of the Three Ceremonies is against their General
Arguments.
MY endeavor is, throughout this whole Treatise, to furnish my Reader, not
only with defensive weapons, by distinct and particular answers to all
objections; but with offensive also, by general co^futations of their
Arguments: both which I assume to perform (if God permit) with as just a
combination of brevity, and perspicuitie, as the nature of the cause shall
require. And now we put the matter unto trial.

SECT. II. The first general Argument made by the Non-conformists, against the
three Ceremonies of our Church.
Mayor. The Scripture in many places condemns not only that which is done
against the warrant and direction of the word, Abridg. Linc. part. 1. page 44.
but also that which is done besides it, specially in the matters of Gods
Service.

Minor. But these Ceremonies of Surplice, etc. are without all warrant of
Scripture, M. Hy:
either by express sentence, or pregna^^ consequence out of Law, or Gospel.
Ergo by this our negative argument from Scripture, they are to be accounted
unlawful.

Our Answer.
That we may not seem to affect any verbal skirmage or contention, we do
readily accept of your distinction of warrant from Scripture, the one by
express sentence, the other by pregnant consequence; yet so, that we still
observe the just latitude of the second member. This does extend it self not
only unto general Precepts and Rules; but also unto permissions, and the law
of common Equity contained in Scripture, for the justifying of our Ceremonies:
as will plainly, yea and confessedly appear in our Defense. Only we wish some
sufficient warrant from your selves, that you would stand unto this your own
distinction of a double warrant. But you, in exacting of us, by this your
Negative argument, a proof of our Ceremonies from particular prescript, (which
is the same with express sentence, or evidence) do so utterly overthrow the
second member, which is the warrant by due consequence; as if you had studied
to confute your selves in your first entrance into this dispute: which will
more fully appear in the proof of your Mayor Proposition.

SECT. III. The Non-conformists confirmation of the^r Negative Argument from
Scripture, is pretended to be justified by 1. Texts of Scriptures. 2. Judgment
of ancient Fathers. 3. Confessions of Protestant Divines.

Their first place of Scripture, for proof of their Negative Argument from
Scripture.

Heb. 3.2. Christ is said to be as faithful in the house of God, M. Page:
as Moses. But Moses prescribed the form of worship in every particular
Ceremony. Ergo we may not allow of any religious Ceremony without
commandment from Christ.

Our Answer.
We distinguish. Some points concerning Religion are Doctrinall, and some
merely Ceremonial. And we say, that all things which doctrinally belong to
salvation, whether appertaining to faith, or moral conversation of life, or
yet essential parts of Gods worship, are sufficiently revealed in Scripture:
but as for points merely Ceremonial (being not the body, but the garment of
Religion) they are left to the liberty of the Church. Know therefore, that
this Scripture speaks of Reals, and not of Rituals. Notwithstanding, if we
examine the cause, by due comparison of both, Christ will be found in both of
these to be as absolute as Moses for faithfulness in Gods house; yea and to
exceed him in perfectness, as much as his own glorious body, now ascended
into heaven, does excel that of Moses putrified long since in the earth.

SECT. IIII. I. Comparison between Christ and Moses, in real faithfulness.
First, Moses by his bodily Rites did but only prefigure man's redemption: but
Christ in his own body performed it in that [ Consummatum est,] by his
sacrifice on the Cross.

Secondly, Moses had a veil over his face, and delivered the Gospel only in
shadows and mysteries: but Christ revealed the blessed countenance of our
gracious God unto us by the light of the new Testament; expressly publishing our
reconciliation with God, by his own death.

Thirdly, Moses his office was principally to diuulge the Law delivered in
Thundering, Heb. 12.
and earthquakes, and a terrible voice, which made Moses himself to quake for
fear. But the Gospel of Christ was delivered with Hymmes and Songs of Angels,
and promises of saving Joy to all people: Luc. 2.
so that the difference between Moses and Christ is no less than Timor and
Amor; fear, and love.

Fourthly, Moses notwithstanding he brought to the people the promises of the
inheritance of but the earthly Canaan, yet he died in the mount, and was not
suffered to pass over Jordan: whereby was signified, that the law of
Commandments could never bring man to possess the heavenly Canaan. But Christ
being dead, to bring life to mankind, raised himself from death, ascended,
entered within the veil, and has taken possession of the Celestial Mansions;
that, where he is, there his faithful may be also. And thus, in all these
respects, Christ was in the house of God as much, yea and more perfect in
faithfulness then Moses.

SECT. V. II. Comparison between Christ and Moses, in Rituall and
Circumstantiall ordinances.
Come we to the Ceremonials. Moses indeed was faithful to deliver all the
laws of Ceremonies expressly and particularly unto the Israelites, who were
therefore schooled, and exercised with a multitude of Rites, lest they might
cast their eyes upon the ey-pleasing Ceremonies of the Gentiles, who compassed
them round about; and so be enticed to Idolatry: Yet all that mass of
Ceremonies is called by the Apostle A burden importable. But Christ, Act. 15
10.
howsoever he would have Ceremonies in the Church, yet as for number not many,
so (excepting the Sacraments, which were of his own institution) for use not of
absolute necessity; did therefore remove the law of Jewish Ceremonies, and
disburdened all Christians from the necessited use of them. And thus also was
Christ faithful as Moses. But why do we compare the servant of the house with
the Lord and Savior thereof? Heb. 3.


As for your objection, concerning Christ his fidelity in prescribing of all
particular ceremonies, which are not the formal parts of Gods worship, but
certain appurtenances thereunto; if (as you seem) you shall be as willing to
subscribe to the judgment of M. Calvin, as you are zealous, from his
judgment, to prescribe unto others, this question will be easily decided. For
that honorable witness has iudiciously observed, that although our Lord
Christ would have all things comprised in the sacred Oracles of Scripture,
which are necessary to salvation, whether they belong to the doctrine of faith,
or to the formal and essential parts of his worship: yet, concerning the
external form of government, Calvin. Inst. l. 4. c. 10 30.
and Rites of the Church, Quia in externa disciplina, and ceremonijs non
voluit, etc. because Christ (says he) would not prescribe singularly and
especially, concerning external discipline and Ceremonies, for that he foresaw
these things were to depend on the occasions and opportunities of times; nor
did he think one form to accord with all ages: hereupon must we have recourse
(says M. Calvin) unto the general Rules, that all things (whatsoever the
necessity of the Church shall require) may be tried by them. Finally he
delivered nothing expressly in these points, because these things are not of
necessity to salvation, but ought to be accommodated unto the edification of
the Church, according to the different disposition, and custom of times and
countries. So he, very iudiciously and prudently. Now this is a known case,
that the old Testament was delivered unto one only people of the world: but
the commission of the Gospel was, Go into all Nations, and preach. This nett
was to ouerspread the whole world: Matt. 28.19. Mar. 16.15.
therefore the Jews had a prescription of particular Rites, most fitly
agreeing to the polity of their Church and Commonweal; but the whole world of
people, which are as different almost in nature, as in Nations and languages,
were necessarily to have the most common rules of Ceremonies, with liberty of
applying them according to the conditions of each country, and the occasions
thereof, as they should best tend to their edification.

SECT. VI. The second place objected, for proof of their Negative Argument
from Scriptures.
2. Sam. 7.7. In all the places wherein I have walked with the children of
Israel, spoke I a word with any of the tribes of Israel, Abridg. Linc. quo
supra, and Hy. disp.
saying, Why build ye not me an house of Cedar? Therefore shall thou say unto
my servant David, thus says the Lord God of hosts, etc. This Scripture
shows, that no Ceremony may be invented by man for Gods worship, seeing that
David's intendment and purpose of building a Temple unto God is ^ere reproved
by God as unlawful: which was the cause that God did prohibit him by Nathan in
these words, verse 5. Go tell my servant David saying, Shall thou build an
house for me to dwell in, whereas I have not dwelt in any house? etc.


Our first Answer.
God did not condemn the intent and purpose of David, to build a Temple to the
Lord: for first David had consulted with the Prophet about it, and Nathan gave
him his Fiat, verse. 3. Go (says he to David) do all that is in thy heart, for
the Lord is with thee.

Secondly, the tenor of the prohibition was, verse. 5. Say to my servant David,
Shall thou build me an house? God never gave any such honorable and gracious
Title to any man, as to call him [ My seruant] in reproof of any transgression.

Thirdly, the reason rendered by Solomon, 1. Reg. 5.3.4.
why God prohibited David; and commanded Solomon to build him an house, was
because David was yet in wars, and Solomon had now rest on every side. The
restraint then was not in respect of any unlawfulness in the Actor, but for
the unseasonableness of the Act.

Lastly, what can be more forcible to convince these men of notable
precipitancie, in affirming that God condemned this holy purpose in David, than
that God did commend it himself? for so Solomon professed, saying, It was in
the heart of David my father to build an house for the name of the Lord God of
Israel: 1. Reg. 8.17.18.
and the Lord said unto David my father, Whereas it was in thy heart to build
an house to my name, thou did well that it was in thy heart. And can they
require either a better commendation than the Lords, or a plainer tenure
thereof than this [ thou did well?]

SECT. VII. Our second Answer.
Our former Answer was (as I may so say) by way of extortion, to draw from the
Non-conformists a confession of their error: but this second is by retortion,
returning against them the whole force of their own argument, from the same
example which they have objected. For if that this Act of David, without
special warrant, were commended by God, then all institutions of Ceremonies by
man, belonging to Gods Service, are not therefore to be condemned because they
want that express warrant which they pretend.

SECT. VIII. The third place objected by the Non-conformists, for proof of
their Negative Argument from Scripture.
M. Hy:
Ier. 7.22.23.31. For I spoke not to your fathers, nor command^d them in the
day that I brought them out of the land of Egypt concerning burnt offerings
and sacrifices: But this thing commanded I them, Obey my voice, and I will be
your God. Ergo Ceremonies which are besides the special warrant of Scripture,
are unlawful.


Our Answer.
In this proof you presume, that the offering of burnt sacrifices was without
warrant, and besides Gods Commandment, because God said in the first place, [
I command them not in the day, etc.] I answer: First, that God indeed did not
make any mention of Sacrifices in that very day, wherein he gave them the law
of Commandments: yet nevertheless he had commanded sacrifices long before the
delivery of the moral law in Sina.

SECT. IX. His Reply:
That cannot appear. M. Hy.


Our Answer.
Nay it cannot but appear to them that will open their eyes, and read the
story of Moses in Exodus. Exodus 3.18.
For there Moses and the Elders of Israel are commanded by God to go unto
Pharaoh, and tell him saying; The Lord God of the Hebrews has met with us,
and now let us go three daze journey into the wilderness, that we may
sacrifice to the Lord our God. And Chap. 8.8. Pharaoh said, Exodus 8.8.
He was willing to let them go to sacrifice unto the Lord. And more to the same
purpose is recorded Chap. 10.15. and 26. Therefore God had required Sacrifice,
before the promulgation of the moral law.

SECT. X. His second Reply:
But this was not so published before the law. M. Hy.


Our Answer.
It was published before the whole congregation of Israel, and so published,
that before the giving of the tables of Moses, the sacrifice of the Paschall
Lamb was prescribed unto all the families of Israel, God commanding thus,
Exodus 12.13.
Speak unto all the congregation of Israel saying, take every man a Lamb,
etc. Can you have a more public precept than that, which is spoken to All?
Neither is there in all this the least shadow of contradiction; for the former
exception against Sacrifice was not meant simply, as absolutely forbidding the
Sacrifices, which God himself had commanded: but comparatively only, as
preferring obedience before Sacrifices. And the argument of almighty God is
very exact and emphaticall, to wit, that forasmuch as in the solemn
publication of the Moral law of obedience there was no mention made of
Sacrifices, or burnt offerings; therefore to Obey the moral commandments is
far more acceptable with God then Oblations: Sacrifices being only as the
body, but sanctity as the very soul of Gods worship.

SECT. XI. Their fourth place objected, for proof of their Negative Argument
from Scriptures.
M. Hy.
Esaias 1.11. To what purpose is your sacrifice unto me, says the Lord? I am
full of your burnt offerings. And verse 12. Who required these things at your
hands?


Our Answer.
That is, who required them principally? or who required them solely, without
obedience to the law of godliness? The exception then is not against any
defect in the thing is self, which is the Sacrifice; nor against the Act,
which is sacrificing: but against the Actors, because they offered their
Sacrifices in hypocrisy, continuing in transgression and sin against God.
This is plain, for you know that the Leuiticall law of sacrificing was then in
force, insomuch that the people, in not sacrificing, had sinned, by neglect of
performing their due homage unto God: so then, their transgression in
sacrificing did only arise from their hypocrisy and irrepentance; in
consideration whereof it is said the God had respect unto Abel and his
offering, Genesis 4.4.5.
but unto Caine and his offering he had no regard. The difference then stood
not in the things sacrificed, as though Abel his corn were more precious in
Gods sight then Caines cattle: nor in the Act, it being the same in the^ both;
(for both did offer sacrifice unto God:) but the whole distance was in respect
of the Agents, to wit, in that Caine did offer in envy; and Abel in charity.
And to show, that the method of Gods respect begins at the person, and not
at the thing, it is said, God had respect unto Abel and his offering, verse 4.

SECT. XII. The fifth place by them objected, for proof of their Negative
Argument from Scripture.
Ier. 7.31. God complayneth saying, Abridg. Linc. implies, page 44.
They have built the places of Tophet, which is in the valley of the sons of
Hinnon, to burn their sons and daughters in the fire, which I commanded them
not, neither came it into my heart.


Our Answer.
From these words [ which I commanded not] you collect that the sin here
condemned was not against, but only besides the word of God; as if these words
[ Quae non mandaui illis facere] were not the same in full sense with, Quae
mandaui illis non facere: signifying, that God did utterly forbid them to do
this. And great reason, for they did no less then sacrifice their sons and
daughters unto Molech, Verse. 31 and more expressly.

1 Kin. 23.10.


which was the most execrable Idolatry that ever was committed under the
Sun, and therefore is called in the text, verse 30. The abomination of
Tophet. How can you then say that this sin was only not commanded? was it
not also expressly forbidden? as it is written, Leuit. 18.2.
Thou shall not offer thy children unto Molech?

When I first read this objection, I wondered, to understand that any of your
school (by telling us of some things unlawful, as besides the word of God;
and of some things unlawful, as against it) could so well symbolize (albeit
against your wills) in terms with Bellarmine, and some other Romish spirits,
who, to maintain their distinction of mortal and venial sin, tell us that
the mortal sin is [contra legem] against the law; but the venial sin is
only [praeter legem] besides the law. As though (sin being a transgression
of the law, and a contradiction unto Gods command) a man could imagine any
sin, which is not against the law: which were to conceive sin to be no
sin. Be you therefore so discreet, as to leave this art of subtlety unto
popish coyners, who have a faculty to stamp all their metals (although never
so base) with Caesar's image, intituling their own fancies the Oracles of God.
Our answers unto other allegations, which you object, concerning adding to
Scriptures, and will worship, Infra cap. sect. 2. and 3.4.^. etc.
are reserved to their proper places. We proceed now to your proof from
Fathers.

SECT. XIII. The second proof of the Non-conformists, for their Negative
arguing from Scriptures; from the judgment of ancient Fathers.
M. Hy. Bas. lib. de fide.
Basil calls it a defection from faith, to bring in any thing besides
Scripture.

Cyprian says, Whence comes this tradition? Cy. Epist. 74. ad Pomp. Amb de
voca. genesis lib. 2.
Not out of divine Scriptures.

Ambrose says, They that know not the sweetness of these waters (viz. of
Scriptures) do drink of the torrents of this world.

Augustine I. from that saying of Christ, Aug. Tom. 9. col. 478.
[I have many things to say, which you cannot carry, etc.] says; Who
therefore of us can tell what those things are, which he himself would not
reveal? Again, II. Away (says he) with men's writings, Idem Tom. 9. col.
1089. Idem Tom. 7. con. Donat. li 2. ca. 6. col. 365.
let the voice of God sound in our ears. III. Let us remove the deceitful
weights of men's balances. and admit of Gods balances. IIII. Who can deliver
unto us any specia^l prohibitions of these execrable superstitions, which are
used in the knots of earings, and serve not to the worship of God, but to the
service of devils? v. Is it lawful to sacrifice unto Neptune, Idem Tom. ^.
Epist. 73. Aug. ibid.
because we read not of any thing directly spoken against Neptune? Thus have
the ancient Fathers reasoned Negatiuely from Scriptures.

Our Answer.
You undertook to confute only Ceremonies of our Church, and such which were
only besides Scripture: yet this you now labor to effect by such Testimonies
of Fathers, whereby they condemn not Ceremonies, as being beside Scripture;
but only Dostrines of men, flatly contrary to the truth of Scripture. For
Basil, in the place alleged, confuteth not any matter of Ceremonies, but
condemns only heresies, and blasphemies against faith. Ambrose reprooueth
the profaneness of carnal worldlings, that contemned the comforts of holy
Scriptures. Cyprian handles only a doctrinall point, concerning Baptism, in
an opinion of the necessity thereof. Augustine in his first place refuteth
Heretics, who, in the name of Christ, imposed on Christians certain doctrines
as necessary, which Christ never revealed. In his 2. and 3. places the
Donatists, in a doctrine against plain Scriptures, concerning the Church. In
his fourth, the superstitious opinion of some, concerning a kind of witchcraft,
in knots of earings, which in the judgment of August. is condemned by this
Scripture, Have you no fellowship with devils. 1. Cor. 10.20.
And in his last place the horrible sin of Idolatry, in sacrificing to
Neptune: which Scripture every where condemns in her several execrations
against all worshipping of false Gods.

All these places of Fathers are taken a scriptura negante, that is, from
Scripture forbidding the unlawfulness of such things, which are directly
contrary to the will of God, revealed in Scripture; and not a scriptura negata,
that is, from the silence of Scripture, in matters called in question only
besides, and not against Scriptures. Whence no solid argument can be made
against things indifferent. There is yet one other Testimony, which makes a
better show for your Negative argument, in the question of Ceremonies.

SECT. XIIII. Their Objection out of Tertullian.
Tertullian de corona militis, cap. 2. to them that thought it lawful for men
to wear garlands on their heads, M. Hy.
because they are not forbidden by Scripture, answers, saying; That is
prohibited, which is not permitted.

Our Answer.
But how does this reprove our Ceremonies, which are permitted, and therefore
not prohibited? And what shall we say to these men who blush not to confute the
lawfulness of Ceremonies ordained by man (which are without special warrant
of Scriptures) from the judgment of Tertullian? who in the same book does
allege and profess many such Ceremonies, whereof he confesses saying; Harum
and aliarum, Tert. lib. citat.
si legem expostules Scripturarum, nullam habemus, etc. i. If you expostulate
with us, concerning the lawfulness of these, and such like Disciplines, we
confess that we have no Scripture for them.

SECT. XV. The third proof of the Non-conformists, for their Negative argument
from Scripture, by the pretended testimonies of Protestants.
And our best Divines do justify, against the Papists, Abridg Linc. page 44.
M. Hy.
the Argument which concludes negatiuely from the authority of the Scripture
in this Case. This kind of reasoning negatiuely from Scripture is called
indeed ridiculous by Bellarmine, and other Papists, but it is worthily
justified by our most Orthodoxall Divines: Amongst others D. Morton Apol. part.
2. cap. 49. page 166. proouing out of the Fathers that the Scriptures make
contra nouas omn^s inuentiones. And in his Appeal lib. 2. cap. 4. sect. 4. By
the sam^ Argument he condemns, from the testimony of Pope Julius, the use of
milk, in steed of wine, in the Sacrament of the Eucharist; as also the
wringing in of the grapes, and sopping in of the breed; even because these
Ceremonies are not found in the institution of Christ.

Our Answer.
The same Doctor (qui, me mihi prodis? ait) answers, that you could not do
him greater injury, nor your cause more prejudice, than so notoriously to
falsify his direct meaning, in both places. For in his Apol. arguing in
defense of the sufficiency of Scriptures, against the Romish Traditions, he
proves out of the Fathers, that All things necessary to salvation are
contained in Scripture, whether concerning doctrine of faith, or manners of
life: But as for matters merely Ceremonious (which in his judgment he holds
to be in their own nature indifferent, and not necessary to salvation) he
takes a precise exception against them; and excludes all objections concerning
such Rites, as being aliens from the matter handled in that place. Apol. part.
2. lib. 2. c 42. page 139.
For the exact state of the question there is set down concerning matter of
doctrine only: yet for all this our Nonconformist will needs not only level
at a wrong mark, but also shoot against me with my own bow, and make me
seem to dispute negatiuely from Scripture, touching points merely Ceremonial.

The Appeal does indeed mention Ceremonies, yet not all, but such only as
were invented and appointed to be essential parts of a Sacrament, as namely,
milk in stead of wine; sopping in of bread into the cup; and wringing in of
the grape. Now all these had in them a nature of doctrinals through an opinion
of a necessary use: For, sacramentum est verbum visibile; A Sacrament (as
Augustine says) is a visible word. Wherefore, to ordain new material
Elements in the Eucharist, as parts thereof, is, in a manner, to invent a new
Sacrament; which is a sacrilegious deprauation of the will of the Testator
Jesus: in which case a Ceremony besides the word, is flatly against the word;
and such were these. For concerning taking of bread, and eating; and afterward
of taking the cup, and drinking, Christ does prefine severally, [ Do this:]
where the use of milk, in stead of wine, and of sopping in the bread, and
eating it, without breaking, are flatly repugnant to the precept of Christ; and
consequently can have no affinity with our Ceremonies, which are only held as
circumstantiall Rites, and no way essential parts of any Sacrament, or
prescribed form of Gods worship. Which being so, the Dr. whom you allege, may
presume, that the man, who could be so audacious as to wrest this testimony, to
vpbraid and thwart the Author himself, distorting his words against his
expressed and professed meaning, will deal no less injuriously with far
more worthy Divines: and so indeed he does.

For he, with others of his opinion, M. Hy: and Abridg. Linc. page 44. etc.
has singled out a principal champion of our Church, (to wit Bishop Jewel)
for the countenancing of their Negative Argument from Scripture, in this case
of Ceremonies; Reply. art. 1. Diuis. 29. Defen: Apol.
who in the place by them quoted, confuting the superstition of Papists,
speaks not one word of any Rites, which in his own judgment were only
besides the warrant of Scripture, (as these men pretend,) but of such Romish
Ceremonies, which he judged to be flat contrary thereunto; to wit, the Popish
reservation of the Sacrament, (beyond the Sacramental use) for their public
procession; and their private Mass: which are directly against the Institution
of Christ, prescribing the true use of the Sacrament to consist both in [
Taking, Eating,] and communicating together; and this use he further binds by
obligation of that precept, [ Do this.] Which that reverend Bishop does so
fully express, as if he had indeauored, with one breath, to blow away the
superstition of Papists; and the opposition of Non-conformists: For thus he
adds (speaking of the negative manner of arguing;) This kind of proof is
thought to hold in Gods Commandments, (says he,) because his law is perfect.
And therefore he could not understand any abuse, which he thought not to be
contrary to Gods commandment.

The like measure does D. Whitak. receive at their hands, for his condemning
the Popish use of the Chrisme, as having no warrant by holy Scripture: not
considering, that he, in his controversy about the sufficiency of Scripture,
(as all other judicious Divines do) exempteth the question of Ceremonies, so
far forth as they are imposed or observed without mixture of a superstitious
opinion, annexed by the imposers, as the Papists both profess and ordain in
their Chrisme, by attributing thereunto a spiritual efficacy and power: which
the whole Catholic Church of Christ cannot by any Ecclesiastical ordinance
infuse into any natural thing or sign, howsoever religiously consecrated, or
decently invented.

But you will reply, that all Ceremonies of man's invention are contrary to the
Scripture. I answer by a brief distinction. Some Ceremonies are [ merae,]
merely Ceremonies; and some are [ mixtae,] mixed; they, that are merely
Ceremonies, need no special warrant from Scripture, because they are
sufficiently warranted by the general approbation of Gods word; which gives
a permission and liberty to all the Churches, to make their own choice of
Ceremonies, according to the rules of Order, and Decency. But the mixed
Ceremonies, whereunto the imposers, or the generalty of obseruers of them
annexe some superstitious and erroneous opinion, (whether it be of merit, or of
inherent holiness; efficacy, or real necessity) do in this case change the
nature, and become Doctrinall: and in this respect are condemned, as being not
only Besides the warrant, but plainly Against the precept of holy
Scriptures. Thus much concerning our answer.

SECT. XVI. Our general Confutation of the Non-conformists, showing that they
have failed in the maine ground of their General proposition, when in the
question of Ceremonies they disput^ negatiuelie from Scripture.
Our proofs arise from 1. Scripture. 2. Judgment of Fathers. 3. Consent of
Protestants. 4. Reasons.


The first proof is from Scriptures.
Saint Paul, 1. Cor. 14. Let all things be done decently, 1. Cor. 14 40. and v.
26.
and in order. And again; Let all things be done unto edifying. By virtue of
which permission, the Apostle does grant a general license and authority to
all Churches, to ordain any Ceremonies that may be fit for the better serving
of God. This one Scripture (not to trouble you with any other at this present)
is universally used by Fathers, and all Divines (although never so diverse in
their professions) for one and the same conclusion.

SECT. XVII. Our second proof is from Fathers; by the testimony of the
Non-conformists own witnesses.
Hereunto serves the confession of Zanchius, saying, Zanch. Tract. de sacra
Script. page 279.
Ecclesiasticarum Ceremoniarum, etc. Some Ecclesiastical Ceremonies were
universal, (that is) allowed and admitted always of all Churches, and
therefore called Catholic; as for example, the celebration of the feast of
Christ his Nativity, of Easter, Ascension, Pentecost, and the like. Wherefore
the argument, which the Non-conformists take from the testimonies of Fathers,
only in color and pretense, the same may we, in good conscience, and in truth
retort upon them.

For that practice, which the ancient Churches of Christ did always maintain,
may not be deemed to derogate from the authority of holy Writ: but the
Ceremonies here specified were universally practiced throughout all Christian
Churches, even as the Non-conformists themselves do well know, and sometimes
also acknowledge. Ergo, some Ceremonies, not particularly warranted by
Scripture, may be lawfully used in our Church. Concerning the judgment of
ancient Fathers, we shall be occasioned to give more instances throughout every
argument.

SECT. XVIII. Our third proof is from the general judgment of Protestant
Divines.
A common Adversary should be held as an indifferent witness between both
parties: and who is either more common, or more adverse than Bellarmine? Now
he, contending in nothing more earnestly than to prove an Insufficiency of the
written word, does commonly oppose against Protestants the use of such
Ceremonies, as were anciently observed, and have passed current under the name
of Apostolical Traditions; that are not once mentioned in Scripture: of which
kind is the observation of Easter, Pentecost, etc. Ergo (says he) the
Scriptures are not sufficient. But mark the answer of Protestants in this
case. Bellar. lib. 4. de verbo Dei. c. 3.. 2.
The Protestants grant (says Bellarmine) that the Apostles did ordain
certain Rites and orders, belonging to the Church, which are not set down in
Scripture. This he acknowledges of Protestant Divines in general.

SECT. XIX. The Non conformists answer.
M. Hy.
I do not believe Bellarmine herein.

Our Reply.
But you show no reason, why. Will you be content to believe Protestants
themselves; either those whom Bellarmine did impugn; or else those, Part. 2.
page 33. col. 2.
who did refute Bellarmine? Chemnitius does sufficiently clear this point, for
his own part, by distinguishing of Rites; and observing some to have been
Divine, by the institution of Christ, which he calls essential and
necessary: and some Apostolical, which (he says) we do observe: and some
Ecclesiastical, to wit, Qui non habent Scripturae mandatum, aut testimonium:
Which have no commandment or warrant in Scripture; which (says he) are not
altogether to be rejected.

You have heard the exact and most accurate judgment of M. Calvin, to wit,
Vid. supr^.
that Christ would not prescribe particularly concerning Ceremonies, what we
ought to follow, but would refer us to the directions of general Rules, etc.

Iunius was a judicious refuter of Bellarmine, unto whose objection, for
Traditions out of the Fathers, besides Scriptures, he answers, Contr. 1. l.
4. page 282.
and auoydeth the force of the argument, saying; Omnia haec ad ritus Ecclesiae
pertinent, etc. All these are only such things as belong unto the Rites of the
Church. And again (as determining the very cause) The Scriptures (says he)
contain in them all matters of doctrine belonging necessarily unto faith and
good life; but do set down only a general law concerning Rites and
Ceremonies, 1. Cor. 14. Let all things be done honestly, and in order.
Therefore the particular Rites, appertaining to the Church, because they be
ambulatory and mutable, might well be omitted by the Spirit of God, and
permitted to the conueniencies of the Church: for all men know, that there is
[longe dispar ratio,] a great difference between doctrines of faith and
manners; and the matters of Rites and Ceremonies. So he. But most exactly,
where the same Iunius makes this distinction; Page 292.
Some things are necessary in themselves, and by the authority of the
Scripture, such are the substantial doctrines belonging to faith, and
godliness of life. Some things are not necessary in themselves, but only by
authority of Scripture, such are those, which are recorded in Scriptures for
other causes, than for any use absolutely necessary. And some other things are
neither necessary in themselves, nor yet by authority of Scripture, such as
are matters rituall: Vid. supra.
whereof he had said before; They are not mentioned in Scripture, but omitted
by the Spirit of God.

And profound Zanchius, in his confutation of Romish errors, De sacra Script.
page 262. and 263.
and in the question of sufficiency of Scripture, has this distinction of
Ceremonies; Some (says he) are consenting unto Scriptures, some are dissenting
and repugnant, and some are neither consenting nor dissenting, but [adiaphora]
that is, indifferent. And he adds; These not having any foundation in the
word, Page 278.
may notwithstanding help for the furtherance of piety. The like answer is
made by Doctor Whittaker, Danaeus, and who not that ever entreated upon that
question, concerning the sufficiency of Scripture?

SECT. XX. Our fourth proof is from Reason, taken not only from the nature of
Ceremonies, (according to the common acknowledgement of all Divines:) but also
from the different practice of Reformed Churches.
You have said that our Ceremonies though they be not Against the word, yet
because they are Besides the word, are therefore unlawful. Whence I first
argue thus: Nothing can, in respect of God, be called unlawful, which is not
Against the word; because whatsoever is unlawful is a transgression of some
law revealed in his word: But that which is only Besides the word, is not a
transgression of the word. Therefore your assertion is frustrate.

2. Nothing that is [ Adiaphoron] and indifferent, can be pronounced simply
unlawful: But some Ceremonies of man's invention, without special warrant from
the Scriptures, are indifferent, by the judgment of Divines, of whatsoever
sort, or faction: Ergo, some such Ceremonies may be held lawful.

3. This may be proved from the differences of Ceremonies, in most Christian
Churches, M. Calvin having told us, Supr^.
that Christ would not prescribe particular Ceremonies to his Church, because
it is impossible, that the same Ceremonies should be convenient and agreeable
to all so different Nations, as are in the world. Epist. lib. 4 p. 818.
And Oecolampadius will have us know, that in the Churches of Basil, Bearne,
and Tigurie, there is magna concordia, etc. Great concord, notwithstanding the
variety and difference of their Ceremonies.

So likewise by P. Martyrs allowance, Quaeuis Ecclesia etc. Every Church may
abound in her own sense: and thereupon he concludes; Non vrgendum etc. That
no man may urge the very same Rites and Ceremonies upon all Churches. Lastly,
your Zepperus holds; Polit. Eccl. page 138. and page 142.143.
that The free observation of diverse Rites is no hinderance to the Church; nay
(says he) the variety of Ceremonies, in diverse Churches, is so far from
giving offense, that reason it self requires, that the liberty thereof
should not be restrained.

From this ground the reason is impregnable, that if in the Churches of Christ
there may be, yea and of necessity must be difference in human Ceremonies,
then Ceremonies of human institution are of themselves indefinite and
indifferent, and in that regard can have no special prescription from Divine
authority.

SECT. XXI. Our last proof is from the confession and practice of the
Non-conformists themselves.
The Lyncolneshire Opposites, and every Nonconformist require in all their
books and writings to have their Ceremonies so free, that every Parish may use
such Rites, as by the discretion of the choycest Parishioners may be held most
expedient: by virtue of which their conceipted freedom, it comes to pass
that Some Parishes will sit at the receiving of the Communion; and some stand:
Some will have Godfathers and Godmothers, and witnesses; and some will be
content only with the natural father: Some will admit of public Festiuals
and holydaies; and some of none. And all this variety they are persuaded may
be had in diverse Churches, without any variance at all. Which Circumstantiall
points are so far to be accounted Ceremonial, as they serve for a modification
of our actions and gestures in the worship of God. Hence I may argue. If all
these were of divine authority, then could they not be so diverse; for the law
of Gods word is to all Nations the same. But if they be of human institution,
then are they in that respect either unlawful, or lawful: if unlawful, then
ought you not to use the Ceremonies of man's ordinance; if lawful, then you
ought not to impugn them.

SECT. XXII. The Assumption of the Non-conformists, against our Ceremonies in
general.
But these Ceremonies have no warrant from the word of God, Abridg. Linc. and
M. Hy. supra.
being but humane Rites, ordained by man, etc.

Our first Answer, in defense of our Ceremonies.
In the ordaining of Ceremonies, two things come to be considered; the first is
in Thesi, and general position, that it be warranted by the word, whether it
be by precept, or else by permission: and so we might say that the ordinance of
Ceremonies may be called Divine. The second consideration is in respect of the
Hypothesis, and specification of the Ceremonies, as prescribing of this, or
that gesture, habit, place, or time, and the like points of circumstance
agreeable to the service of God: these, we say, (in respect of the permissiue
appointment of Ceremonies) are from God; but in respect of the specification,
and determination of some one sort of Ceremony, rather than another, they may
be called humane.

Again, that you may better discern of these terms, take into consultation
(if it please you) the advice of M. Calvin, who calls those constitutions of
the Church, Instit. lib. 4. c. 10.. 30.
which are founded in Scripture, [prorsus diuinae,] Altogether Divine: and he
takes an example from Kneeling in solemn prayer, which (says he) is so
Humane, that it is also Divine. It is Divine; but why? Even because it is a
part of that Decency, the care and observation whereof is commended unto us,
by the Apostle; Let all things be done decently, and in order: But humane, so
far as they are appropriated by men to some circumstance of person, time or
place; and so it is in this Scripture rather intimated than expressed. By which
rule we are likewise authorized to call some Ceremonies of our Church, in a
kind of generality, Divine, so far as they have any dependence upon that
general direction of Scripture, which commands that things be done in order,
Decency, and to edification: but humane, in respect of the application of such
rules, according to the discretion of the Church. Vrsinus, whom you often
produce for your choice witness, tells you to the same purpose, Catech. Tract.
de hominis gra^itud.
that Ecclesiastical Constitutions are good, so far as they do specially
assign that, which is generally rather intimated, than expressed in the word
of God. Can you say then, that all such acts are altogether Besides Scripture?

There is a second Rule of direction, in case of Ceremonies, which is, the
Equity of them, that are contained in Scriptures; according to the example of
Solomon, in building his new Altar for Sacrifice, besides that one Altar which
God himself had ordained; whereof one of your own fellowship confesses,
saying, that he did it out of the equity of Moses Law. M. Nic.
Notwithstanding, this equity was so void of prescription, that if this be
necessary, that act of Solomon might be judged to have wanted due warrant.

Thus much of the first general Argument, whereby they have concluded (against
Scripture, Fathers, judicious Divines, and all probable Reason) that all
Ceremonies, belonging to Gods service, which are invented of man, Besides the
evidence of Scripture, are unlawful.

CHAP II.
SECT. I. The second general Agument, made by the Non-conformists, against the
three Ceremonies of our Church, is; That they are held as properly parts of
Gods Worship.
The Mayor. All humane Ceremonies which are esteemed, Abridg. Linc. page 3^.

M. Hy. and the rest.


imposed, or observed, as parts of Divine worship, are unlawful.

The Assumption. But such are these; Surplice, Cross in B^ptisme, and kneeling
at the Communion. Therefore these are unlawful.

Our Answer.
DIstinction is by the Log^cians called a Wedge, because it is the only
means, in all Disputes, to dissolve the hardest Elenchs and knots of subtlety:
which if you would have applied in this controversy, then should you not have
needed our answer, to wit; if you had but discerned the proper and essential
parts of Gods worship, from the improper and accidental.

By the essential parts, we understand such Ceremonies, which are so
necessarily required to Gods service, as that the contrariety thereof must
needs displease him. And the improper and accidental parts, or rather
Appurtenances are such, which serve only as accessory complements, ordained
for the more convenient discharge of the necessary worship of God.

It was proper to God, as to create the body, and all the natur^ll limbs and
parts thereof, whereunto man has no power to add so much as an hair; so to
ordain the perfect form of his essential worship and service: but yet for
man to apply thereunto accessory Ceremonies, for Decorum, and Edification, may
no more be accounted a Derogation to Gods ordinance, concerning his own
worship, than it can be to his creation, to cloth and apparel the naked body
of man; which is indeed rather to be accounted a note of our greater estimation
thereof.

SECT. II.
The Non-conformists their proofs of the Mayor, from 1. Scriptures. 2.
Fathers. 3. Witnesses.


These Ceremonies imposed are not only not commanded as lawful, M. Hy.
but prohibited as sinful: For the Scriptures, Fathers, and Orthodox writers do
condemn as sinful, all wit-worship, or will worship whatsoever, proceeding out
of the forge of man's fancies. -- Whatsoever precepts of men in Gods worship,
either for matter, or manner, delivered and imposed by man, although they seem
never so good in their own sight.

Our Answer.
I doubt that we shall find you to bewray more will than wit; and more fancy
than sound reason, in your pretended proofs. Begin with Scriptures.

SECT. III. Their proofs from Scripture.
Abridg. Linc. page 44. in marg. and others.
Esaias 29.13. God says; In vain do they worship me, teaching for Precepts
Commandments of men. In Deuteronomy. 12.32. We are commanded neither to add, nor to
diminish: And Coloss. 2. The Apostle condemns (...), will worship.

Our Answer.
All these places of Scripture are merely Heteroclits, in respect of the point
in controversy. For first by the [ Precepts of men] in Esaias are signified such
humane ordinances, as were expressly contrary to the Commandment of God, as is
plain both by the description of their sin, Esaias 29. v. 9.
called a staggering drunkenness (signifying their Idolatrous conceits;) and
also by the denunciation of Gods judgments, by fearful destruction to come
upon Israel, by the hands of a multitude of Nations. Verse. 7.
Which kind of menaces were never published but for heinous and horrible
transgressions.

Secondly, the Adding and diminishing spoken of, Deuteronomy. 12.32.
does not mean addition of preservation, but addition of corruption: like as
the fraudulent Coyner of money does corrupt the Kings Coin, either by adding
baser metal unto it, or by clipping any silver from it, and in both kinds he
is a Traitor. How much more high treason must we judge it to be against the
Highest himself, when man shall adventure, either to make any Divine precept,
or promise, and set Gods stamp upon it? to make the speech to be Gods speech,
which is but the device of his own forge? or to diminish the estimation of
Gods precept, by accounting it but an invention of man? And the like may be
affirmed of the Sacraments, which are proper to that Divine person, who is the
Testator, it being no less sacrilege to corrupt the Sacraments, which are the
seals of Gods promises, than to deprave his will of Commandments.

SECT. IIII. A confutation of the Non-conformists interpretation of the
Scriptures, by their own witnesses.
Your most approved wit^esses make altogether against you. Isag. Tract. de
Doctrine. Christ. c. 25.
First Danaeus, obiecting against Papisticall Traditions the same places of
Esaias. saying, In vain do they worship me, teaching, etc. and Deuteronomy. 4.12.
Nothing must be added, etc. told you, that Ex superior^bus etc. He meant this
of the Traditions which he spoke of in the former Chapter; and whereof he had
said; [ Huiusmodi traditiones humanae etc.] Such humane Ceremonies, which are
added as necessary appendices, and parts of doctrine belonging to Christian
faith; or are delivered as [norma] the Rule of Gods worship, they do in effect
accuse the word of God to be lame and imperfect; which is plain blasphemy, as
Tertullian teaches in his book of Prescriptions against Heretics.

Z^nch upon those places.
Secondly, Zanchius has told you, that That place concerning will worship,
condemned by the Apostle, Col. 2.27. did point at certain Hypocrites of those
times, who did obtrude upon Christians Traditions of their own devising, in
pretense that they proceeded from God. And upon these words of the same
Apostle, Let no man deceive you in meat or in drink, etc. he presses it
against the Popes thunder-blasts of paper-shot saying that Seeing althings
necessary to salvation have been delivered unto his Church by Christ, therefore
may we contem^e the Popes execrations and Anathema's, whereby he pronounces
damnation upon them, that approve not his Traditions, as not holding them
necessary to salvation.

You see how many arrows you have drawn out of Gods quiver, the holy
Scripture; and by this time may perceive, what kind of mark-men you are; seeing
that the mark being to confute Ceremonies, which a^e only Besides, and not
Against the word or will of God, you have chosen such arrows, as are too
heavy for your bow: all of them being such Texts, which condemn heinous and
enormous sins, directly reproved by holy Scripture; and therefore musts needs
light far short of the Mark. For tell us (I pray you) in good conscience, are
our Ceremonies expressly condemned by Scripture, as was Idolatry in Esaias 29,
saying thereof, In vain do they worship me etc. or as the wicked corrupting of
the Law of God, Deuteronomy. 12. saying, Thou shall not add, etc. or as that
heretical doctrine against Christian liberty in meats, Col. 2? I think you
cannot be so persuaded, except you your selves can, by your authority, make
some new Scripture to prove it.

SECT. V. Their proofs from the Judgments of the Fathers.
The Fathers do reject Will worship as Idolatry; Augustine, Jerome, Cyprian,
Chrysostme, do all speak against new doctrines, M. Hy.
and humane Traditions.

Our Answer.
The Fathers do, indeed, reject Will Worship: wherein, as we do willingly
subscribe unto their judgment, so may we justly reprehend you, for your
wilful wresting of the Fathers sentences: Who, as they did condemn all such
doctrines, Traditions, yea, and (if you will) also Ceremonial Constitutions,
which are mingled with some false and corrupt opinion; so did they universally
justify, prescribe, and practice Traditions (such as ours are) which were
merely Ceremonial, as you well know by the Canons of their Councels, which
your selves do object, and your own hearts can tell you, that you oppose the
Fathers against us in this case, not as their ingenuous children, seeking to
follow their judgment; but as men aduersely and sinisterly affected, as if, in
confuting us, you meant to condemn them (if you could) by their own sayings.
As might have easily appeared by their Testimonies, if you would have insisted
upon particulars.

SECT. VI. Their last proof, from the Testimonies of Protestant Authors.
Abridg. Linc. page 37. M. Hy. M. Lang. and others.
That Ceremonies imposed as parts of Gods worship are unlawful, may appear by
the judgment of the most judicious Divines, who have all by this Reason
condemned the Ceremonies of Papists. Calvin Instit. lib. 4. cap. 10. Sect. 8.
Pet. Martyr, Chemnitius D. Mort: Apol. part. 1. cap. 89. and others.

Our Answer.
The true understanding of the two acceptions of this phrase [ Parts of Gods
Worship] might easily have rectified your judgments; for it is sometimes taken
in Authors more strictly and properly for that essential form and manner of
worship wherein there is placed an opinion of Justice, Sanctity, Efficacy, or
Divine necessity: and so we hold it sacrilegious for any Church to impose, or
to admit of any such Ceremony proceeding from humane institution. Sometimes
again the same phrase is taken more largely, for every circumstantiall Rite,
which serves for the more consonant and convenient discharge of that
essential worship of God: and thus we hold it a piece of Christian liberty,
belonging to the Church, to ordain Ceremonies, which may tend to Decency,
Order, and Edification, as has been already shown, and acknowledged. Herein
therefore does your inexcusable abuse of your Authors bewray it self, that
where they condemn only such Ceremonies, which are invented by men, and
brought into the Church by Papists and others, with an opinion of such
holiness, efficacy, and necessity, as whereby God is as properly worshipped,
as with the forms, which he himself has ordained; thereupon you urge and
enforce them to the confutation of only Circumstantiall and Accidental
Additaments, used without all such superstitious respect.

Come we now to the examination of your witnesses.

1. M. Calvin says indeed, that, Calv. loco citato. nu. 8.
All those Constitutions are wicked, in the observation whereof men place any
worship of God. Where, by [ Worship] he means not any circumstance either of
time, place, person, or gesture, which are required in the celebration of Gods
worship: but the inward virtue of worship, which consists in an opinion of
holiness, and justice, etc. As you might have learned from M. Calvin himself,
if you would have taken out his next lesson, where he condemns the Papists;
but why? Even because they do conclude, Calv. Ibid. Number. 15.
Ipsissimum Dei cultum in suis ritibus contineri: Gods worship it self
(meaning the very essentiality of the worship of God) to consist in their
Rites. And refuting it by the Scripture of Esaias 55. In vain do they worship
me, teaching, etc. expounds what he means by [ worship] saying that The
Papists [in ritibus suis iustitiam, quam Deo opponant, and qua se ante tribunal
sustineant, quaerunt] they seek that righteousness in their Ceremonies, which
they may oppose unto God, and wherewith they may uphold themselves, when they
shall be called to answer before his Tribunal. Surely there is no Protestant,
who will not call every such figment of man's brain, a very Idol, wherewith
Gods worship is impiously profaned.

Exam. part. 2. page 93. col. a and b.
2. Chemnitius also, in the place alleged, speaking of the reservation of the
Sacrament of the Lords Supper, shows that Antiquity used a Reservation,
as-well as the Papists, but yet with a great difference: For, Tridentini
docent, etc. The Doctors of the Council of Trent teach this Reservation to be
a custom necessary, and altogether to be retained: but the ancient Fathers,
who had great reasons, in regard of those times, to observe that custom, yet
did they not hold it necessary. So that he likewise condemns that which is
made an essential part of worship.

Loc. Com. page 770.
3. Peter Martyr speaking of Ceremonies (although he verifieth your phrase of
speech,. 3. saying, that Divine worship does not depend upon the will of man,
but on the counsel and will of God) yet does he cross, and as it were
control your meaning of the word [ worship] you understanding thereby any
Ceremonies, which may serve for a complementall performance of that Divine
worship, although it be not held as necessary hereunto: But he says expressly,
Ibid.
Licet Ecclesiae etc. The Church has power to prescribe and make
Constitutions, concerning the place, time, and manner of receiving the
Sacrament of the Lords Supper, whether at morning or at night; whether standing
or sitting. By this, you see that he condemns not the institution of the
Accessarie and Accidental parts of Gods worship, but plainly approves of
them.

Your last witness answers for himself, that He in that place, confuting
the superstition of the Church of Rome, does not simply condemn all her
Ceremonies, but Farraginem, tarbam, onus Ceremoniarum; to wit, the immoderate
multitude, and intolerable burden of her ceremonies in Feasts, and Fasts, in
Gestures, etc. And you ( M. H.) I trow, in reproving a man for a surfer, or
drunkenness, do not thereby mean to deprive him absolutely of his meat and
drink.

SECT. VII. Our general Confutation of their former general Propoposition;
especially from their own witnesses.
The authority, which the Church does challenge, or appointing circumstantiall
and accidental parts of Gods worship, is from the liberty which she has
granted unto her in magna Charta, to wit, the book of holy Scriptures, which
expressly has given unto her authority to constitute such Rites, as belong to
Decency, Order, and Edification, as has been already proved. But because the
Non-conformists are so frequent in alleging of witnesses, I shall desire, them
to consult with two such, whom they have especially, and namely appropriated
unto themselves in this whole controversy; who (I make no question) will
answer their objection.

We begin with Vrsinus, who has catechized them well, where first bringing
in the objection, viz. Quae ad gloriam Dei etc. ^y those things which are done
to the glory of God, God is worshipped: Catech. ^ract. de hominis gratit. page
739.
B^t the Constitutions of the Church are done to the glory of God; ergo, God is
wors^ipped by the ordinances of man: He thus answers and resolves, that
Those things which are done to the glory of God, to wit [per se] of
themselves, that is, such as are commanded by himself, to the end that by them
we may express our obedience unto him, those acts are the worship of God: But
not those which accidentally do serve to the glory of God, that is, to the
performance of those things which are commanded of God. And a little after to
this other objection, viz. Whatsoever is done of faith, and pleases God, that
is a worship of (...). He answers, Cultus Dei etc. The worship of God does
please God otherwise than do those [Adiaphora] or things indifferent: For that,
which is the worship of God, does so please God, that the contrary thereof
cannot please him; and therefore cannot be done in faith: but things that are
indifferent, are so approved of God, that the contrary unto them are not
condemned.

What can be more plain, to show, that when those Divines speak against
worship of God devised by man, they use the word in a strict acception and
sense, as signifying the proper worship of God, being therefore properly
Divine, because ordained of God? And so we confess unto you, that our
Ceremonies are no part of Gods worship. But the word [ worship] being used in a
large signification, as noting all circumstances, which may confer, and
appertain to the setting out of the foresaid Divine worship: in this sense
only we say, that Ceremonies may be held to be parts of Gods worship, yet
accessarie and accidental only, but not essential; and Adherents rather than
Inherents.

The second witness is Zanchie; who distinguishes those parts of Gods
worship, De Redemp. page 421.
wherein the substance of Gods worship does consist, as namely, participation
of Sacraments, oblations of Sacrifices etc. from these things which he calls
[ Annexa cultui,] that is, Annexed thereunto; such as are vessels, vestiments,
time, and the like circumstances. Which is a point of learning so generally
disgested of all that are conversant in the course of divine studies, that I
marvel how such points should seem to be so raw to some of the
Non-conformists in this case, as that they can no way relish them. Thus much
of the Proposition.

SECT. VIII. The Assumption of the Non-conformists, against these Ceremonies in
general.
Object. 1. taken from a pretended error of the people.
This our Argument is strong against all these Ceremonies in question, seeing
they are all known to be esteemed, imposed, Abridg. Lincoln p. 39. M. Hy. and
M. Lang.
and observed, as parts of Gods worship.

Our Answer.
If you can prove these our Ceremonies to be imposed or observed by our Church,
as proper, essential, and necessary parts of Gods worship and Religion; we
must then necessarily yield unto you the whole cause: and hereafter subscribe
unto your Non-subscriptions.

SECT. IX. The Reasons of the Non-conformists, to prove that our Ceremonies are
imposed by our Church, as real parts of Gods Worship.
Their first Reason.
The use of these Ceremonies is divine Worship, because the same with the
Jewish, wherewith God was honored: M. Lang. ^ M. Nic.
Because of the same kind: For whatsoever is of the same use, is of the same
kind, in respect of worship, although it may be diverse in the Adiunct of true
and false; according as it is appointed, and not appointed of God. As for
example, Leviticall Vestiments will not be denied but to have been parts of
the external worship of God, as well as other Rites among them. For what
definition of wors^ip can be given, which may not be predicated of these Rites?
For to be instituted of God (if any shall so answer) does not vary the common
nature of worship, but distinguishes it into true or false.

Our Answer.
This is a piece of learning, which (I think) never saw print, to wit, that
the Institution of God does not alter the common nature of worship; because
Gods Institution does distinguish necessary worship from the indifferent, and
the Essential from the Accidental. For, before the Leuiticall Law, the
offering of any colored sheep, spotted, or unspotted, was indifferent; but
after that the commandment of God had prescribed, that the Lamb, which was to
be sacrificed unto him, should be without spot, then this Ceremony of an
unspotted Lamb, became necessary and essential in Gods worship. And so we
might say of the rest of the Ceremonies under the Leuiticall Priesthood.
Therefore the commandment of God does not distinguish only between True and
False; but sometime between Necessary and Indifferent, Essential and
Accidental, Divine and Humane: that, being only Necessary, Essential, and
Divine, without which the worship of God cannot be lawfully performed.

SECT. X. Their second Reason.
That which is imposed to breed an opinion of holiness, is appointed and
ordained part of Gods worship: M. Hy. These. 7. and others.
But these Ceremonies are therefore imposed; For Eccl. polit. page 61.
M. Hooker tells us out of Ecclus 45. that they could not mention the holy
garments, but with effectual signification of most singular reverence and
love: giving us thereby an ample acknowledgement, that reverence is to be
yielded, and holiness afforded, to our ministerial garments.

Secondly, They may challenge this respect of Reverence and Holiness, being
the Constitution of the sacred Synod, which (as is alleged) is the Church of
Christ representative.

Thirdly, seeing that Cross and Surplesse are set apart from Civil uses, and
appropriated to the acts of Religion in Gods service.

Fourthly, because they may claim a Religious reverence and honor; which was
the cause that Christ rebuked the Pharisees for washing of their hands, Math.
15. because they feigned an holiness in their own invention.

Our Answer.
Although I had not been acquainted with your disposition, yet might I by this
one Reason have taken a proportionable scantling thereof, to know, that your
objections have not proceeded so much from the precipitance of a misguided
zeal, as from a perverse and sinister purpose of Calumniation; else would you
not have dealt, in the first place, so unjustly with M. Hooker, by imputing
unto his testimony alleged such a superstitious opinion of Holiness, as
though he had meant any operative Holiness (either by infusion, or inhesion)
and not only that which is significatiue: even as his own words do directly
import.

Nor secondly would you, with such a salt scurrility, have twitted our Church
in her Convocation, for assuming the Title of Sacred Synod unto her, as being
the Representative body thereof; seeing the Apostle S. Paul in all his
Superscriptions to the several Churches of Romans, Corinthians, Galathians,
and others, does instile their Congregations, Saints by calling. Nay, but you
your selves are sufficiently bent to call your Brethren in Non conformity, too
peculiarly, Holy Professors.

As for the third point, concerning appropriation of any thing to Gods Service,
you could not have judged it to be a necessary argument of essential
holiness; especially having confessed, that the Pulpit-cloth may, without any
superstition, be continually fastened to the Pulpit: and the Communion-cup
reserved only for Sacramental use, and not employed at all in any civil or
ordinary service. Even as the Church and place of Gods s^ruice it self is not
less lawfully a Ceremony, because it is assigned only unto holy worship.

Lastly your Objection of the Pharisaicall Tradition of washing of hands before
meat, is altogether impertinent; considering that Christ did not reprove their
act of washing, but their intention and opinion, in attributing a legal and
operative Sanctity and holiness to that their own invention, which was indeed
a superstition, and the very Leaven of the Pharisees: from whence there issued a
Religious reuereuerence far exceeding that respect, which we shall hereafter
prove to be lawfully attributed unto our Ceremonies.

SECT. XI. Their third Reason.
These Ceremonies imposed, are, for their use and practice, preferred before
necessary duties, M. Hy. These. ^.
and principal parts of Gods worship; as to wear a Surplice, or Preach not;
use the sign of the Cross, or Baptize not; practice other Ceremonies, or else
you shall not exercise any other ordinance of God.

Our Answer.
This is but dull sophstry; for who sees not that this is not a preferring of
wearing a Surplice before preaching (as you fondly imagine;) but to prefer an
orderly and discreet Preacher, before one that is factious and exorbitant? If
the Lord Chancellor, having appointed a commission for his Majesty's service,
and designing a place most convenient for that purpose; afterward
understanding some one or other of the Commissioners to be so peremptorily
selfe-willed, as to refuse to sit with the rest of the Commissioners, in the
place appointed; shall exempt that party, and put him out of the Commission,
placing another in his stead: should it not argue want of common reason, to
infer hereupon, that the said Lord Chancellor had hereby preferred the
circumstance of a place before his Majesty's service?

SECT. XII. Their fourth Reason,
They are known to be imposed as parts of Gods worship, Abridg. Lin^ page 39
etc. and M. Hy. These. 7.
for many people in all parts of the Land are known to be of this mind, that
the Sacraments are not rightly and sufficiently administered, or received
without them.

Our Answer.
This your Argument, if it be rightly examined, will not prove so strong, as
strange: For to conclude thus; Many people within the state of this Kingdom do
hold these Ceremonies to be necessary parts of Gods worship: Ergo, they are
imposed and observed as necessary parts of Gods worship: may by as good, or
rather better reason, be retorted upon your selves, thus: Most people in the
Land hold them not to be necessary parts of Gods worship; Ergo, they are not
imposed as essential and necessary parts thereof.

Secondly, you ought to have made a difference between the judgment of the
Governors in imposing, and the opinion (if yet there be any such) of some
people in observing of them, as necessary: For this your Reason can make no
better Logic, then if one would conclude that Usury (the State not punishing
the taking of ten in the 100) justifiable by the Law of God; because some
people make the like collection. But to collect what is the mind of
Governors, from the fancy of some inferiors, is but to tell us, that if the
leg do halt, the lamenesse thereof must be said to be in the brain.

And (because you do commonly object the multitude of people) tell us, in good
sadness, of what sect you suppose this people to be, that hold the necessity
of these things? Are they Popish? But these have not so great a conceit of our
Ceremonies, as they are known to be administered in our Church. Or are they of
your own disciplining, who by your calumniations are taught to think, that
the Church has imposed these Ceremonies in an opinion of necessity, so as to
make them Essential parts of Gods worship? Then must we tell you, that the
seducement of the Scholar, is the sin of the Master. Or lastly, are they
some of the people, who are otherwise conformable? Then doubtless these, if
yet there be any such, will not be found to be many, as you suppose; but the
same people may be thought to fall into that misconceit, not so much by the
imposition of the Church upon you, as by your vehement opposition against the
Church, whereby some such simple people are brought to believe that your
imputation (although most calumnious) is true; to wit, that these Ceremonies
are imposed as necessary parts of Gods worship. But forbear you this slander,
and those people will soon relinquish their error.

SECT. XII. Their fifth Reason.
The omission of them (even without the case of scandal and contempt) is more
sharply punished, Abridg. Linc. page 39. and M. Hy. These. 25.
then any other sins committed against the Law of God, as perjury, or
adultery.

Our Answer.
What therefore? Ergo (for this is your mark) they are preferred before the
precepts of God, and made parts of Gods Worship. This consequence is not
necessary; for it falls out herein, as usually it does, in the like case, in
all weal-publiks, where we see more exact and grievous prosecution of Justice
against a pilferer than against a swearer; against a false Coyner of money,
than a manslayer; Not that hereby Christian Commonwealths do profess that
the other Sins are, in their own nature, less heinous; or that they do not
professedly prefer Gods glory before all other respects: But because stealth
of men's goods, and adulterating or corrupting of Coin do more immediately work
the ruin of the common peace; therefore the commonwealth (as every sensible
thing naturally does affect) is bent immediately to seek the preservation of
it self, that so it may be more able to establish those things which concern
the glory of God, by repressing of more heinous crimes, whether by temporal
punishment, or else by the spiritual censures of the Church. And so it
sometimes falls out in the proceeding of the Church it self, which seeks
by these censures to preserve her own peace and integrity against those who
do unjustly defame her.

Furthermore, suffer me to deal plainly, and to tell you, that your
Parenthesis, which complains, that you are so grievously punished, for only
omission of those Ceremonies (even without the case of scandal and contempt)
is no better then an open slander against the Church of God: for you cannot
instance in any one Minister that has been so grievously punished for the
bare omission of a Rite, without his persisting opinionatiuely, refractarily,
and that publicly, in flat contradiction against the Church. If that the
practisioners in the Law should obstinately refuse to wear the ordinary Gown
of a Counselor, or party-colored habit of a Sergeant, would the grave
Judges of the Land pass it slightly over, as a bare omission, and not rather
justly punish it as an intolerable contempt?

SECT. XIIII.
The contrary-minded, albeit never so peaceable, learned, or godly minded,
Abridg. Lincol. page 39.
if they shall declare their contrary judgment, are accounted Puritans and
Schismatickes, and by Canon, if they shall offend, censured as excommunicate.

Our Answer.
Although perhaps you have reason to wish the release of some, yet ought you
specially to consider your own deserts, and know that Schism, which is the
dividing of affections, takes beginning from the difference of opinions,
albeit in points of less moment; and then reckon the multitude of Separatists,
who have had their first principles of opposition against our Church, out of
your School of contradiction, by your vile aspersion of no less a crime then
Idolatry it self: And after judge, whether there be not some cause to call
your opinion Schismatic, as still nourishing the cause of a cursed Schism,
although not always effectuating the same.

In the next place, observe with us the daily convulsions increasing in the
members of the Church; whilst as some, distracted in their affections, will
hold of Paul, and others of Apollos; some hear one kind of Ministers Preach,
to the despite of others; some will receive the Sacrament at the hands only of
conformable, and some, only of uncomfortable Ministers; to the great dishonor
of Christ, whose Word and Sacraments they have, in respect of the persons of
men.

Concerning the Censures of the Church, you cannot be ignorant, that it has
been the common discipline, in all Churches ancient, and lately reformed, to
impose and challenge of Ecclesiastical persons a subscription to the orders
constituted therein; ordeining that in the end such persons should be deposed
from their places, that shall factiously oppose thereunto, to the disturbance
of the peace of the Church. M. Beza, writing unto the French and Dutch Churches
here in England, for their direction in point of Discipline, delivers unto
them his 28. Article in these words: Hac ratione perlatis legibus etc. The
Constitutions being thus made, whosoever shall factiously repugne them, Epist.
24 page 149.
and will not suffer themselves to be reclaimed; much more they who shall
conspire together against Ministers, and Elders, they are worthy to be handled
as the public enemies of the Church. I do not speak this, to exasperate the
Churches censures against you, but to moderate your conceits and detractions
against the Church, who use to esteem of her, not as of a natural Mother, but
rather as of a cursed Step-dame. But why? Because forsooth, she will have an
uniformity of order amongst her children, and will not suffer her lawful
command to be factiously contemned.

SECT. XV. Our general Confutation of the Non conformists, against their
general Assumption; wherein they objected, that our Ceremonies are imposed to
be observed as the proper and essential parts of Gods worship.
Against their general Proposition, we have proved from their own witnesses,
to wit, Calvin, Chemnitius, Peter Martyr, Vrsinus, and Zanchius, that only
those Ceremonies are properly made parts of Gods worship, wherein the worship
of God is said essentially and absolutely to consist. Now we must confute their
general assumption, by the express profession of our Church, which teaches,
and publishes to the world, that she does not either impose, or observe any
Ceremonies, with any opinion of efficacy, holiness, or necessity, but only
for Decency, Order, Edification, and Conueniency.

It will become every child of the Church to hear his Mothers Apology for
her self, in this case: who tells us, Constit etc. Can. 75. Can. 30.
saying, 1. Our meaning is not to attribute any holiness, or special
worthiness to the said Garments. 2. We teach, that the Cross is not part of
the substance of the Sacrament: this Sign does neither add to Baptism, nor
detract from it. 3. These Ceremonies which we have retained upon just cause,
Common prayer book before the beginning of Service. Ibidem.
may be altered and changed; and therefore may not be esteemed equal with Gods
Law. 4. In these our doings we condemn not other Nations, or prescribe any
thing, but to our own people only: for we think it meet that every Country
should use such Ceremonies, as they shall think best to the setting forth of
Gods honor and glory, and to the reducing of the people to a more perfect and
godly living, without error or superstition. Can any Christian require a more
Orthodoxe profession concerning Ceremonies, than this is? whereby it is made
evident, that our Church retains these her Ceremonies for Decency, without
opinion of Holiness; for Order, without making them of the Substance of Gods
service; with a Christian liberty, as thinking them Alterable and Changeable,
without opinion of Necessity; And lastly, in an Unity of Christian
Brotherhood, with other reformed Churches abroad. And therefore may most
justly challenge uniformity within her self.

This profession of our Church is so manifest unto her most earnest Opposites,
Abridg. Linc. page 53. and p. 55.
that the whole Assembly of Non-conformists in Lincolne-shire acknowledge it:
who do notwithstanding (to our wonderment at their boldness) parallel our
Church with the Romish; which nevertheless they confess to be justly
condemned by M. Jewel, and other Divines, Ibid. page 43.
for the opinion of Necessity and Holiness which they put in their Ceremonies.
And indeed very justly; for although sometimes Bellarmine, and some other
Papists seem to disclaim the Necessity of Ceremonies, and the placing of
Holiness in them, otherwise than as they are Signs of holy things, yet ought
we rather yield credit unto their more public practice and profession:
Bellarmine telling us, that their Ceremonies have power [ex opere operato] to
cure diseases, Bell. lib. 1. de effect Sacr. c. 1. and lib. 2. cap. 30. art. 30.
drive away devils, purge venial sins, etc. All which effects do imply an
efficacious and necessary holiness.

Seeing therefore it is plain, that we attribute no other Holiness unto our
Rites, than that which is common to all such like Ceremonies; namely, to be
Significatiue and Alterable (whereas the Papists to ascribe unto theirs an
holiness Operative and Necessary) with what conscience do men fashion their
quils, to impute that guilt of Superstition to our Church, which she has, and
does, both by her doctrine and practice, condemn in the Romish sect?

Hitherto of their second Argument.

CHAP. III.
The third general Agument, brought by the Non-conformists, against the three
Ceremonies of our Church; only because they are Significant.

SECT. I.
Abridg. Linc.
Mayor Prop. All Humane Ceremonies, being appropriated to Gods service, if they
be ordained to teach any spiritual duty by their mystical signification, are
unlawful.

Assump. But such are these three, namely, the Surplice, Cross in Baptism,
and kneeling at the receiving the holy Communion. Ergo, they are unlawful.

1. Our Answer to their Mayor Proposition.
THIS point of Mystical signification, yea or only of signification by
Ceremonies, in the opinion of almost all the Non-conformists, pierces so
deeply into the bowels of this cause, that it gives it a deadly wound,
notwithstanding all our means and manner of defense: which contrarily we judge
either to be so dull and blunt, that it cannot make the least impression to
hurt our cause; or, whatsoever sharpness is in it, it must needs offend our
Opposites, if that either Reason, or examples of Scripture, or the continual
custom of the Church of God; yea or the semblable practice of the
Non-conformists themselves may be thought worthy to be called a just defense.
In the interim we attend to hear their proofs.

SECT. II.
Their proofs, pretended to be taken from 1. Scriptures. 2. Fathers. 3.
Testimonies of judicious Divines.


In Marc. 7.8. Our Savior does reprove the Pharisees for laying aside the
commandments of God, Abridg. Lincol. and M. Hy. do often repeat this.
and holding the Traditions of men, as the washing of pots and cups: and v. 9.
You reject the comma^dements of God, that you may keep your own Traditions:
for v. 10. Moses said, Honor thy father and Mother etc. and v. 11. You say,
that if a man shall say to father or mother, Corban, that is to say; it is a
gift, etc. And, every plant that my Father planteth not shall be rooted out.
And, as Math. 15.15. Thus have you made the commandments of God of none effect
by your Traditions.

Our Answer.
The first Text, Mar. 7.8. mentioning washing of cups, Mar. 7.8.
points indeed at a Mystical Ceremony of Humane invention, which is there
condemned: but how? Not because of the signification of a spiritual duty, but
for the Pharisaicall leaven of corrupt doctrine taught hereby; for there was in
it two ounces of leaven at the least: the first was in attributing a legal
purification to such their Washings, thinking thereby to be cleansed from
bodily pollutions, through the touching of the bodies of the dead, and such
like; even as well as by the washings, which God himself had appointed, to the
same end. Their second error was in their imputing of a spiritual virtue, and
efficacy unto them, of cleansing their souls from sin, as is manifest by the
reproof which Christ used against those Ceremonies, saying; That which is
without, and enters into man, cannot defile a man, V. 28.
but that which is within and comes out of the man, that defiles a man.
Therefore this their washing was not condemned, as a mere Ceremony, but for
the mixture of a false doctrine, teaching an efficacy and virtue of
purification, which it had not.

Concerning the second Text, the case stands thus. The Pharisees by their
(...), that is, second Traditions, taught their Disciples a strange piece of
Catechism, called Corban, Mar. 7.11.
to wit, The gift that shall be offered by me, shall profit thee: that is,
Every voluntary offering, that thou shall give to the Temple, or for the
benefit of the Priesthood, shall gain of God a blessing upon thee, albeit
thou should neglect thy parents, in withdrawing that Gift from their
relief, in their great necessity. For confutation of this error, Christ
opposes the commandment, saying: Moses said unto you, that is, (as S. Matthew
has it) God (namely by Moses) said, Marc. 7.10.11. Math. 15.4.
Thou shall honor thy Father, etc. But you say, Corban, etc. So that this
Tradition of the Pharisees is a flat contradiction unto the express Law of
God: And therefore so utterly unfit to confute the use of Ceremonies, which are
not as directly condemned by Gods Word, that we may think your minds were
busied upon some other objects, when you made this objection. We have heard all
your objections against addition of Ceremonies in the state of the Old
Testament, and find that the further you seek to depart from the Pharisees,
who did add superfluous Ceremonies, the more you win fellowship with the
Sadduces, who abandon all additions of new Ceremonies under the same estate.

SECT. III. Their second proof from S. Augustine.
Abridg. Linc.
Augustine de doctr. Christ. lib. 3. cap. 15. does argue against significant
Ceremonies.

Our Answer.
S. Augustine speaks of Phrases of Scripture, which, when they make for piety
and charity, he would not have expounded figuratively: but when any sentences
do seem to command any thing that is Facinerous, heinous, and wicked, then
(says he) must we understand them as being figuratively spoken. As for
example, that saying of Christ, Ioh. 6.53.
Except you eat the flesh of the Son of man etc. which for the same cause
must needs receive a figurative interpretation. But how shall this concern the
matter of Ceremonies, to prove them unlawful, because they are significant? By
this inference it shall not be lawful for us to use any phrase of speech,
whether figurative or proper, because Omnis oration est oris ratio: every speech
of a reasonable man (except he will needs be as sounding brass and a tinkling
cymbal) is significant. There is (I confess) in S Augustine elsewhere these
sayings: Signa, quae ad res diuinas pertinent, Sacramenta appellantur. Aug.
If hereby you shall collect that S. Augustine will admit of no Signs of holy
duties, which are not Sacraments, then shall you bewray your small acquaintance
you have had with the language of S. Augustine, with whom nothing is more
frequent or familiar, than to call all Signs of any holy thing Sacraments: And
so by your consequence you shall have as many Sacraments, as there are parts
and parcels of parables and similitudes.

To conclude, whosoever shall but unclasp any one volume of S. Augustine, he
shall find a manifest mention and approbation of some one or other Significant
Ceremony, which was not of Divine Ordinance. This your alleging one only
Father, who notwithstanding makes against you, does openly tell us that you
can conceive small confidence, that Antiquity did ever patronize your cause.

SECT. IIII. Their third Proof; from the Testimonies of Protestant Divines.
Abridg. Linc.
M. Calvin, in Leuit. 4.22. Zepperus, pol. Eccles. page 50. Jewel, Beza, do all
condemn Ceremonies invented by man, which are of mystical signification.

Our Answer.
You err, for want of a distinction of terms: for the word [ mystical
signification] has two acceptions; the one Sacramental, by signification of
grace conferred by God: the other is only Moral, by signification of man's
spiritual duty and obedience toward God. The Ceremonies, which we defend, are
only mystical-morall: but the signification of Ceremonies, which M. Calvin
reproves, is only that Mystical, which is properly Sacramental; as is
evident in the place alleged, where he speaks of Sacraments, [Quibus annexa
est promissio gratiae] Whereunto God has annexed a promise of grace. And
again; Testantur de gratia Dei.

Zeppperus speaks not a word of any mystical signification at all.

B. Jewel insisteth only in the Sacramental, and has not one word touching
the moral; nor any Protestant author that I have read ( Beza only excepted)
has spoken absolutely against Signs Symbolicall, and merely significant. Yet
Beza himself, I presume, will be found hereafter to allow them in some Cases.
This distinction as it is pertinent, so is it also of some importance, and
therefore ought to be diligently observed; as will better appear in our Answer
to their next objection.

SECT. V. Their fourth proof from Reason.
Their first Objection.
Symbolicall signification gives unto Ceremonies a chief part of Sacraments,
Abridg. Lincoln.
when they are appointed to teach us by their signification.

Our Answer.
Our Ceremonies are only moral signs, as has been said, signifying unto us
moral duties; to wit, the Surplice to betoken Sanctity of life; the Signing
the forehead with the Cross, Constancy in the faith of Christ; and Kneeling at
the Communion, our Humility in receiving such pledges of our Redemption by
Christ Jesus.

As for the Sacramental sign. Every Sacrament has two significations in in
it, the one is, Ad modum signi, to represent some spiritual thing: the second
is, Ad modum sigilli, to seal an assurance of some divine promise of Grace. So
that a Sacramental sign (being, as Sacramental, so likewise (...) a Seal of
Gods promises, as the Apostle calls Circumcision) is always founded upon the
express covenant of God: Romans 4.
therefore none but the Author of the covenant may institute or appoint any
such sign. For whosoever shall undertake to add a seal unto the will and
covenant of any Testator amongst men, is forthwith held Falsarius, and thereby
made obnoxious to the law, and liable to the grievous judgments of man: How
much more damnable an Act were it for any to affixe any sign, properly
Sacramental, unto the Testament of our Lord Jesus? which whosoever shall
atttempt to do, becomes guilty of sacrilegious deprauation of the blessed
Mysteries of Salvation.

Now, then for further clearing of this point, we may thus distinguish of
Mystical and spiritual signs in Gods Church: some are merely significant, by
resembling spiritual things; and some are not only significant, but also
obsignant, namely sealing and exhibiting unto us the Truth of Gods promise.
Therefore these Mystical signs, which we call Sacramental, differ from the
mystical signs moral, both as the Sacramental are Significant, by special
representation; and as they are obsignant by ratifying and applying of Gods
covenant of Grace unto us: as the Aspersion of the water in Baptism is a sign
of Remission of sin conferred upon the person baptized; and therefore is it
proper to God, who only gives the thing, to ordain such a sign. But the
moral sign does not represent any Collation of grace given by God unto man,
but only notifieth a duty of man in some moral virtue which he owes unto
God.

Your own witness Zanchius has something to this purpose, De redempt. page
422.
saying; What are Sacraments but Images, wherein is revealed and represented
unto us the grace of God in Christ Jesus, by the remission of sin, and life
everlasting; whereby there is offered to the minds of receivers Christ with all
the benefits of the Eternal covenant made unto us in Christ? In which respect
these Sacraments are rightly called the Signs and Seals of the Covenant of
Grace.

These points thus standing, I could not but wonder at the former Thesis, as at
a strange Paradox, that makes signification to be the chief point of a
Sacrament: which if we did maintain, then Bellarmine might have some color
to insult upon Protestants by this objection, Bellar. lib. 1. De. Euch. c. 11.
secundo omissa.
viz. If Sacraments be only signs, then the Crucifix is a better sign, to
signify the death of Christ, than the Sacrament. This is his consequence. Will
our Non-conformists now allow him this Assumption, by accounting a sign to be
a chief part of our Sacraments? Nay, should they not rather inueigh against
the impudency of such Romish Proctors, who usually impute unto Protestants
doctrines of their own devising? For Calvin, whom the Papists in this Answer
do especially impugn, has told them (I think I may say an hundred times,)
that we account not our Sacraments mere signs, to represent the graces of
God; but that they are also seals, to present and exhibit the truth of Gods
promises of Grace, and to apply them to the hearts of faithful Receivers.

Let me add further, for the satisfaction of the more ingenuous, and the
conviction of such as will be perverse, (who tell us that Signification is a
principal part of a Sacrament) that then all the moral signs used in the
Leuiticall worship, as namely Bells, Lauars, Lights, Candlesticks, and other
Ceremonial instruments even unto the very Snuffers of the Tabernacle, should
(things taking their denomination from the principal parts) be properly deemed
Sacraments. And the like I may say of abstinence from Hogs flesh; from
touching of the corpse of the Dead; from Linsey-woolsey apparel; and an
hundredth such others, whereby diverse moralities are signified; but no
Sacrament employed. In a word, the very soul of a sign, to make it a
Sacrament, is Annexa a Deo promissio gratiae, Bellar. lib. 1. de matrim. ca. 2.
as the Jesuit himself does acknowledge.

SECT. VI. Their second Objection, from Reason.
If the Ceremonies that God himself ordained, Abridg. Lincol. page 33.
to teach his Church by their moral signification, may not be now used; much
less may any of those, which man has devised.

Our Answer.
I answer first, that the use of some (I understand this word in a large
acception) Jewish Rite without any Jewish opinion, is not damnable: For how
many Christians under Prester John, are circumcised at this day? yet not
Sacramentally, that is, in opinion either of the necessity of it; or else
Typically, as signifying that the Messiah is to come in the flesh; but only
Customarily; and, as it were Nationally, for distinction from other people: Or
as the Greek Churches anciently used the celebration of Easter, according to
the time of the Jewish Passover, although with a difference both of Sign and
Signification. But more of Jewish Rites hereafter.

Secondly, it is far more safe for Christians to invent new Ceremonies of
moral signification, that to use those old, which had been appointed by Gods
ordinance: not but that the ordinance of God is infinitely to be preferred
before man's; but both because God, who ordained those Jewish Ceremonies for a
time, ordained also that they should be abolished in time; as also lest that
their use might engender an opinion of the necessity of them, eue^ because they
had been once commanded by God; and consequently might inthrall the minds of
men, and constrain them to a necessary observation of the whole Leviticall
Law: for so the Apostle reasons against certain false Apostles, Gal. 1.
who by their superstitious urging of those Jewish Ceremonies sought to bring
in again the ancient bondage of all Jewish Rites.

SECT. VII. Their third Objection from Reason.
Abridg. Lincol. page 34.
This will open a gappe unto Images, Oil, Spittle, and all Popish Ceremonies;
all which Bellarmine commends as fit to put men in remembrance; as when the
Priest did sprinkle the people with holy water, saying, Remember thy Baptism.
And thus defend they their Images, even for remembrance.

Our Answer.
What is this you say? That therefore there will be a gap opened, 1. to All
others. 2. to the Popish. 3. and for example, to these Ceremonies now
specified. So many particulars, and so many errors. For first, to argue from
the use of some few, to an admittance of all other Ceremonies to like kind,
which are in the Church of Rome almost innumerable; is a consequence far more
lavish then this: viz. Some wise men may be of his Majesty's Privy Counsel,
therefore All wise men of the Kingdom ought to have place in that Honorable
Senate.

Secondly, Then all Pop^sh etc. say you. This consequence I take to be both
unreasonable and unconscionable. It is first as unreasonable, as it would be
for a Patient, who, having had of his Physician the Receipts of some Apothecary
Drugs, should thereupon presume that it is safe and wholesome for him, to taste
of every box in the Apothecary's shop. For it is well known, that as there
are some good customs in the Church of Rome, so are there many bad.

Next, the word Popish is here taken of you in the strictest sense, not simply
for the Ceremonies themselves, but for the mixture of abuses that are in them,
by the superstition of that Church. And therefore to conclude from the lawful
use of Ceremonies in our Church, to an appropriation of the Romish abuse of
them, gave me just cause to call your Consequence unconscionable; for as much
as your own hearts can tell you, that our Church is not so earnest to
entertain the use of any one Ceremony, formerly observed in the Church of
Rome, as it is zealous to abhor her superstition in all her abuses: some of
them being Brutish and Senseless, some Childish and ridiculous, some
Heathenish and Idolatrous; whereby such their Ceremonies respectively are become
to be most properly Popish.

Thirdly, you argue, that if these, viz. Surplice, Cross, Kneeling at the
receiving of the Communion be justly used, then there is a just cause that
these, to wit, Oil, Spittle, Images and the Priests sprinkling of water, may
likewise be had in use, because all are equally for Remembrance.

We confess that Spittle was used by our Savior Christ, in the healing of the
Dumb; and Oil, by the Apostles, in curing of many other diseases; yet both
miraculously: but to imitate the work of a Miracle, without the Miraculous
power, is but an Apish (...): for to hold such a miraculous Ceremony, after the
virtue be gone, is but to preserve a Carcass, because it had been once
possessed of a soul.

We come to your other Instances in the use of Images, and that which they call
Holy Water, to the end that you may the better discern your own injurious and
odious comparison. For first, the true use of Images with us is only for
Historical commemoration; but in the Popish Church it is for a superstitious
adoration, by kneeling unto them, praying by them, and by determinating a kind
of religious worship in them; and therefore only in regard of such their
superstition, is to be called Popish.

The second, which is their sprinkling of water upon the people, for
remembrance of their Baptism, if it were applied only for to make them often
mindful and careful to keep their Vow of Christianity, made once unto God in
Baptism, it might be called a Moral Ceremony, and Christian: But that
sprinkling of water, as it is used in the Romish Church, not only as
significatiue, but also as operative, with an opinion that it has power, both
of purging venial sins, and of driving away devils, is in that regard also
Popish and execrable. For what is this else but to take upon her to constitute
a new Sacrament, seeing that a Sacrament is a sign of representing, and of
exhibiting and conferring of a spiritual Grace? She therefore, who has made
the profession of the definite number of but Seven Sacraments, an Article of
Faith, has by this new invention of Holy Water made up Eight.

I may not pretermit a Witness, who has made you an answer long since, unto
this Objection, which notwithstanding you regest again, as if this Cole-woort
had never been sod before. The Author is Peter Martyr: Neque mihi dixeris etc.
Epist. ad Hoop. page 1087.
Neither may you say unto me (says Peter Martyr, speaking of the use of the
Surplice) there shall be now a gap open for all abuses; to water sprinkled by
the Priests, Incense, and infinite such other abuses: because your Adversaries
will answer you, that there must a mean be kept, that the Church of God be not
burdened with these kind of things, and that no worship or efficacy of
Religion be placed in them, as we see there is in that water-sprinkling and
Incense etc. So he. And do you not furthermore see, by happy experience, that
Open gappe of many Ceremonis, whereof you spoke, to be now through the wisdom
and providence of our Church, quite shut up, seeing that she is contented to
admit of so few, and no more?

Lastly, you can with as little reason diuest a Church Christian of her liberty
and power of ordaining of significant Ceremonies, because it is possible that
she may abuse that power, by instituting unfit, superstitious, and burdensome
Rites; as it were to seek to deprive a Civil Magistrate of all power of
Nomotheticall authority, in making of laws, because there is a possibility he
may abuse them. Thus much in answer to your General Proposition.

SECT. VIII. The Assumption of the Non-conformists.
But these Ceremonies in question are ordained by the will of men, to teach
some spiritual duty, Abridg. Lincol page 35.
by their mystical signification: for thus the book of Common Prayer speaks
of them, that they are neither dumb nor dark, but apt to stir up the dull
mind of man to the remembrance of this duty to God, by some special
signification.

Our Answer.
Will you still oppugn Ceremonious signs, which are mystically significant,
even because they are significant? is a man's speech less reasonable, because
it has sense? or is it therefore ill, for that the signification thereof is
good? Yet this is, in effect, your exception against our Ceremonies. We
therefore remit you to your own witnesses, with whom you may contend; some
whereof will be found to condemn the Papists, for using of Dumb Ceremonies,
without significations; and dark, beyond men's capacities: some to admit of
Symbolicall Ceremonies, as incitements to the better performance of spiritual
good things: and some also to approve of signs and remembrances of spiritual
Duties.

But if you would be loath to wrestle with so learned Divines, then we send
you to expostulate with your own selves, who confess in the end that you are
not altogether destitute of some such like Symbolicall significations. Finally,
I shall not need, in this place, to set before you those Mystical Ceremonies,
which are to be exemplified from diverse Instances in Patriarchs before the
Law; holy men under the Law; Apostles in the New Testament; after them in the
state of primitive Antiquity; And lastly, in the whole current of succeeding
times.

SECT. IX. Our general Confutation of the general Argument of the
Non-conformists; by proouing the lawfulness of Ceremonies, which are of moral
Signification,
yB 1. Scriptures. 2. Fathers. 3. Reason. 4. Witnesses of the Non-conformists
themselves. 5. Their own practice.


Our proof by Scriptures.
Of Examples, taken from Scriptures, some are before the Law, some in the time
of the Law, and some after the Law, in and about the time of the Apostles.

Examples of significant Ceremonies before the Law, in Abraham.
Abraham commanded his servant (that he might have security of his
faithfulness, Genesis 24.
in a business of importance, to wit, for the providing of a match for his
son) to lay his hand under his thigh; and swear unto him, etc. What one
point is there, in their general proposition, which is not fully satisfied by
this Example?

Your first point is, that our Ceremonies are humane. So here, the laying of
his hand under Abraham's thigh, was humane; if by [ Humane] you understand that
which a godly man deuiseth, by his own reasonable Judgment: For Abraham
appointed the foresaid Ceremony without any special revelation from God, so
far as by Scripture is revealed unto us.

The second point is, that the Ceremony is appointed unto Divine service. So
here likewise; for there is not a more Divine Service, then upon just occasion
the due and lawful swearing by God. This is a worship which God does
appropriate to himself? Deuteronomy. 6.13.
Thou shall [(...)] worship the Lord thy God; how? and swear by his name.

The last point is, the Ordaining of the Ceremony, to teach any spiritual
duty, by mystical signification. And what more spiritual duty can you
require, than is the confidence in Christ the Messiah, who is the foundation
and life of all Divine Mysteries? which, by the judgment of all ancient
Fathers, and (for ought that ever I could learn) of all their children, the
Orthodox Divines of the Church after them, is this, viz. That Christ the
Messiah and Savior of mankind was to issue out of the thigh and loins of
Abraham; according as God had promised unto him, saying, Genesis 22.
In thy seed shall all the Nations of the earth be blessed. The Morality then
of the sign, to the servant, was this, that as he believed to have any life by
Christ, the Author of life, which was to descend from Abraham, by Isaac and his
seed; so he would be faithful unto him. So that this oath was unto his servant
a sign, as of his faith to God, so of faithfulness toward Abraham his Master.

SECT. X. Our second proof, to confirm the lawfulness of a sign of moral
signification, is from the Examples of the old Testament under the Law.
The Objection of the Non-conformists.
In the time of the Law, when God saw it good to teach his Church by
significant Ceremonies, none might be brought or received into the worship of
God, but such only as the Lord himself did institute. This reason is used
against the Popish Ceremonies by M. Calvin, Iunius, Lubbertus, and others.

Our Answer.
And this Reason is good against the Popish abuse of Ceremonies, which is to
be discerned from our use of such, in these two points; first in their
significations, whereby that Church does commonly teach some new doctrine, not
warranted by Scriptures: secondly in their application, by her superstitious
opinion of necessity and holiness; whereby they are made essential parts of
Gods worship: as by your witnesses will be manifestly shown. In the mean time
we pursue this point by our several examples.

SECT. XI. Our first kind of Examples is, by instancing in the Ordination of
Festival days.
1. Instance in Mordecai and Ester.
Although God had assigned diverse solemn Feast-dayes, for his more frequent
worship, Ester 9.
yet did Mordecai appoint the Feast, called by the Hebrews the Feast of Pur,
that is, of Lottes, for a continual and thankful remembrance of their
general deliverance from that cruel Massacre, whereunto the heathen had then
allotted and designed them. And accordingly our State and Church has ordained
a set Feast Day, which we may likewise, after the Greek, call the feast of Pur
(even by the same word retained in our English, V. Nouemb. 1605.
Fire) wherein we celebrate the remembrance of Gods merciful and miraculous
preservation of us, from that Fyery and Hellish Powder Plot, machinated by the
sons of Belial, for the consuming of our most religious and gracious
Sovereign, together with the whole state of the Kingdom.

SECT. XII. 2. Instance, in the Feast of Dedication, by Judas Machabaeus, 1.
Machab. 2.59.
1. Match. 2.59.
There was appointed an anniuersary Feast of the dedication of the Altar,
ordained by Judas Machabaeus: And this Feast (as your own witness Danaeus
confesses) seems to be approved by our Lord Jesus, Isag. Tract. De doctr.
Christ. c. 29. p. 345.

Ioh. 10.12.


in that he did grace it with his own blessed presence. Now all solemn
Feasts, of this kind, are of a Ceremonial nature; and, in as much as they have
their institution from man, may rightly be called Humane: nevertheless, so
far as they serve to magnify God, for some special mercy; as else to
excite man unto a thankful commemoration of the singular favors, which he
has received at the hands of God; in these respects they are truly called
Divine. Hence therefore (you see) it is good cause, why they ought to be called
significant.

So then you have, by these Examples, as it were, the Anatomy of your
proposition through every joint, viz. 1. A Ceremony of humane invention, by
Judas Machabaeus. 2. Appropriated unto Gods service, in a solemn Feast. 3.
Ordained to teach a spiritual Duty of thankfulness. 4. Significant, for
benefits or blessings received. And all these (as you see) stand justifiable by
Analogy, from the example alleged.

SECT. XIII. Their first Reply.
The Church may appoint holy days in certain cases: Cartwright in the rest of
his 2. Reply, page 191.192.
but it is one thing to restrain part of the day; and another to restrain the
whole day.

Our Answer.
If any man shall require of you some evidence, to prove that Christ has so
cantled out his Churches high Commission for Ecclesiastical causes, as to
afford it a power to appoint one half of an Holy Day, and to deny unto it
liberty of ordaining the other half; I suppose you would always remain
indebted for an answer. For did not God use to have as well his Evening, as
his Morning sacrifice? and shall it now be lawful to serve God only by
halfes? howsoever, even this half, which you have have granted, does
sufficiently establish the whole matter in question: for if the Church, in this
case, have power to ordain a Ceremony, which does implie a signification of
the duty of a thankful remembrance, how should any Ceremonies be only
therefore held unlawful, because they are significant?

SECT. XIIII. Their second Reply.
Howbeit the example out of Ester 9. of the two days, Cartwr. ibid.
which the Jews instituted in the remembrance of their deliverance, is no
sufficient warrant for these feasts in question. For first, as in other cases,
so in this case of days, the estate of Christians under the Gospel ought not
to be so Ceremonius, as was theirs under the Law. Secondly, that which was done
there, was done by a ^peciall direction of the Church of God, either through
the Ministry of the Prophets, which they had, or by some other extraordinary
means, which is not to be followed of us.

Our Answer.
First, unto the first part of your Reply, we say, that if an institution of a
new Ceremony were lawful under the estate of the Old Testament, when the
people of God were so pressed with Rites, that the Apostle called them an
importable Yoke, Act. 15.10.
then doubl^sse the addition of one or two Ceremonies, in the state of the
Gospel, may not so rigidly be judged unlawful.

Your second Assumption (which we may rather call a Presumption) is; that you
imagine some special Direction, from the spirit of God unto them, without any
certificate revealed to your selves for proof thereof. Whereunto I only say,
as Saint Hierom speaks of the like imagination; Hierom.
Eadem facilitate reijcitur, qua obijcitur.

SECT. XV. Our second kind of Examples is from the like ordaining of
Ceremonious Instruments, belonging unto the worship of God, by 4. Instances.
1. Instance is in the Altar, Josh. 22.
We read that the Gileadites, which were of the children of Israel, Josh. 22.
did build an Altar on the other side of Jordan, in testimony of their joint
faith and profession with their brethren, in the one and only Religion of God.
This example is pregnant, and has much exercised and troubled your wits, but
to what effect, we shall best judge by your Answer.

SECT. XVI. The Non-conformists Answer.
The Altar that stood on Iordans bank was not of Ecclesiastical, but Civil
use: the tribes thems^lues confess, M. Nic. M. Page M. Lang. and others.
that they had grievously sinned if that they had determined an Altar unto the
same use that the Lord God set up one before. It was a memorial, that they
were one people with their brethren, entitled to, and estated in the
privileges of the Lord with them: but it was no mystical sign of Christ and
his Grace.

Our Reply.
The point then in question is, whether it were not especially for a spiritual
use, whereof we cannot better be resolved than by the whole current and maine
scope of the Story; which does apparently euince, that it was for a religious
mystical signification, albeit not of Christ and his graces, yet of spiritual
blessings and moral duties: So though it were not erected for the same use,
whereunto the Altar, that God appointed, was appropriated, yet was it ordained
for a representation thereof. Let us consult with the Text it self, to the end
that we may answer your Mayor Proposition, even in terminis.

Your Dispute is of humane Ceremonies; and this was so humane, that it was
ordained by man, without any special warrant from God. And this is very
plain, because these Gileadites, when they were to satisfy their brethren
(who at the first judged the building of this Altar to be a detestable, and an
abominable transgr^ssion against God) did not reply, that God had commanded
them so to do, but answered very ingenuously, saying, We have done this, etc.
Ver. 24.
And again (imputing it to their own proper motion) Therefore said we, Let us
build us, etc. whence it is evidently apparent, Ver. 26.
that this act proceeded merely from their own reason, without any particular
direction from God.

Secondly, your proposition requires, that the Ceremonies be appointed to Gods
service: and so was this Altar, although not to sacrifice thereon; yet (as the
Text speaks) for A pattern of the Altar of the Lord, upon which Gods people
did sacrifice. As we account the Cross in Baptism not to be the very Cross
of Christ, (whereupon he offered that great sacrifice of Man's redemption) but
only a kind of resemblance thereof. Now, an Altar of sacrifice being one of
the supreme instruments of Gods immediate worship; that other, which was a
resemblance thereof, doublesse, cannot be said to have been only of a civil
use.

Thirdly, your proposition mentions Ceremonies of mystical signification, to
teach any spiritual duty; Even as again we say, that the Cross in Baptism
is used in the way of protestation of Christian courage, in the spiritual
conflict against the whole world of Infidels. Here also, I think, this very
Text does sufficiently warrant such mystical signification: for seeing all
actions borrow their form and essence from the end, whereunto they are
intended, and that these Gileadites, in this act of consent in unity of
Religion, did not so much intend to make known their interest in the temporal
inheritance, as in the spiritual privileges of Gods chosen people: This does
necessarily argue, that this Altar was not set up so much for any civil use,
as for a mystical resembla^ce: which is manifest in the Story, where the use
of this Altar is expressed thus; The Altar is called Ed (that is, witness) for
it shall be a witness between us, Ver. vlt.
that the Lord is God. Therefore the end was, that thereby they having relation
to the other Altar of God, might protest and publish their joint faith and
service, with all other Israelites, to the only true God. And as this end did
concern themselves, so there was yet another end that did respect their
posterity; and in this regard they made the Altar Prolepticall, for to prevent
an objection, that might afterward arise between these Gileadites, and their
brethren on the other side of Jordan, namely, to this effect: What have you to
do do with the God of Israel? You have no part with the Lord: And so might have
made them cease from serving the Lord; Therefore (say the Gileadites) have we
built this Altar. You see then, that the Altar being a Pattern of the Altar of
the Lord, was a Religious Instrument; and of the Altar of sacrificing, a
Religious Act; and that to testify both for them and their posterity a
public consent in the true Religion and worship of God, which was a most
religious end; And also this, to auow the profession of their Religion, which
makes it a moral sign, of a religious signification. How therefore can any
be so dimme-sighted, as not to discern any other thing herein, except only a
Civil use?

The matter standing thus, we may guess with what indignation and displeasure
you would have entertained this answer, by inueighing against that their Humane
invention, as the daughter of blind Devotion, in themselves, and mother of
Idolatry to their posterity; and by charging them, concerning that Altar, and
crying aloud, Down with it, Down with it even to the ground; not departing
thence, until with your outcries you had seen it demolished before your
face. But contrarily their brethren, the Governors of Gods people, even such
as were most zealous for God, to preserve his Religion, in all integrity, they
were otherwise minded: Ver. 30.
For, When Phineas the Priest, and the Princes of the Congregation, and Heads
of thousands of Israel which were with him, heard the word which the children
of Reuben, and children of God, and the children of Manasses had spoken, it
pleased them: And furthermore, when they returned into the Land of Canaan, to
the children of Israel, and brought them word, it is said, that they pleased
the children of Israel, and they blessed God; and did not intend to go up in
battle against them.

Take you therefore, I pray you, the hearts of Brethren, and be like-minded, as
were these devout children of God; be desirous to enjoy the peace of the
Church, in the truth of Religion, and not, ^t the sight of every Ceremonious
appurtenance, to start aside; occasioning hereby not only dissension amongst
them, who are your Brethren, in all the essential parts of Religion; but also
Contumacie against your Mother the Church, which begot you in Christ, and
brought you to the interest which you have in the covenant of Grace.

SECT. XVII. Our second Instance, concerning Ceremonious Instruments belonging
to Gods worship, may be in Solomon his Altar, 1. King. 8.64.
Solomon built a Brazen Altar, and set it beside the Altar of the Lord, 1. Reg.
8.64.
offering thereon burnt offerings, because the Brazen Altar which was before
the Lord, was not sufficient to receive the burnt offerings. Here we see first,
only Salomons appointment, for building this Altar; arguing an Humane
invention: secondly, a new Altar, never comm^nded by God, is a new Ceremony;
thirdly, this Altar, as all others, having necessary relation to Sacrifice,
does concern that kind of worship, which most chiefly and properly belongs
unto God: and fourthly, sacrificing and offering, being the manifestation of
that homage and thankfulness, which is properly due to Divine Majesty,
cannot but signify man's spiritual duty. So now, this example contradicting
your Proposition, from point to point, may give you, at least, some probable
satisfaction.

SECT. XVIII. Their Answer.
This Act of Solomon was by extraordinary inspiration, M. Nic.
and therefore may not be called Humane.

Our Reply.
Here you pretend (which you can never prove) that Solomon did this by
extraordinary inspiration; besides, the very Text yields the reason which moved
Solomon hereunto, to wit, because the first Altar that had been made by Gods
appointment, sufficed not to receive all offerings: which proves that this Act
may rightly be called Humane, as being undertaken by the light of Reason,
without any special direction from God; as also many religious Acts of men may
be said to be both Divine and Humane: Divine, as proceeding from general
grounds of Gods revealed will, and concluding for some religious end: and
Humane, as issuing from the discourse of man's reason and judgment,
accommodating general rules and principles for the inferring of conclusions,
and ordering of particular actions. Therefore this Answer wanting weight, you
must seek for a better.

SECT. XIX. Their second Reply.
M. Nic.
Solomon did this out of the Equity of Moses law it self, as Iunius shows.
Contr. 3. l. 4. c. 17.
Our Reply.
This second Answer, first, ouerthwarts the former: for if Solomon did collect
the lawfulness of this Act, by reasoning from the Equity thereof, not
particularly expressed, but generally employed in the Law of God; then came it
not by extraordinary inspiration. And secondly, this Answer does yield unto us
an Answer against all your own objections: because hereby you plainly
confess, than an Humane collection, deduced from the equity of Gods Law,
(consisting in the application of general doctrines and documents, unto some
singular and individual acts) is lawful in it self: from whence it does
follow, that our Ceremonies, instituted to signify spiritual duties, have as
good equity by the Word, as this Altar of Solomon could have. Wherefore the
rule of equity, which you mention, will (as it ought) bear a great sway in
this case of Ceremonies, if we may borrow our equity, either from the general
Permissions, or particular Examples of the new Testament.

SECT. XX. Their third Answer.
M. Nic.
God by his visible descending approved of the work of the Temple, and did
authorize him. Which David's words, 1. Chron. 28.19. may seem to confirm.

Our Reply.
I would you had leisure to look more directly upon the Text alleged, where
we do not find that God approved the Temple of Solomon, by any visible
appearance, until the Sacrifice was ended; whereas this second Altar was
ordained by Solomon, before any sacrifice was begun on the former. Whereupon
(if we shall take your Answer for true) it must needs follow, that God approved
of the Altar, before that he did approve of it. Secondly, the words of David,
which (you say) do seem to confirm the point, are these: All this the Lord
made me understand in writing by his hand upon me, Ver. 19.
even all the works of this Pattern. The Pattern, which God approved, is
here called, This Pattern; meaning expressly that Altar, which was mentioned in
the former verse, namely, the Altar of Incense, being that first Altar
appointed by God himself. But this Altar, whereof we dispute, was a second
Altar invented by Solomon, and never so much as thought upon by his father
David. Therefore the form, revealed purposely for the erecting of one Altar
alone, could not be assumed by Solomon, for a direction, and Pattern of a
second.

SECT. XXI. Their fourth Answer.
And this was no Addition of a diverse kind. M. Nic.


Our Reply.
As though that could not be called an Additament, when the thing added is of
the same kind with the principal: if this be your meaning, then may you as
well say, that a commandment unto every Communicant to drink twice, in
receiving the cup of the holy Sacrament, may not be judged an Addition to the
first Institution (which is to drink thereof but once) because, forsooth, the
second cup is of the same kind.

This your so unconstant and vnconsonant kind of Answering does evidently
show, that this example does busy you not a little. And no marvel, for God
having commanded that there should be but one solemn Altar of Sacrifice,
amongst his people (signifying thereby, that there is but one God, even that
God of Israel;) yet notwithstanding, Solomon (when he saw that one Altar could
not receive all the sacrifices) did adventure to build a second Altar. Surely
here had been matter enough for any spirit of contradiction (if then there had
been any such) to have challenged even Solomon to his face, and to have
reproved him for daring, without express and peculiar dispensation from God,
to erect another Altar, besides the Altar of the Lord. Whereas such as are of a
more temperate and moderate spirit, would rather interpret, that Solomon, for
the furtherance of Gods worship, did add this Altar, after a most lawful
manner: And thereupon would collect, as a necessary consequence, that Additions
to Gods commandment (if they be used not as perfections of the ordinances of
God, but as expedient means, for the better accomplishment of his public
service) cannot derogate or detract any whit from the will or wisdom of God.

SECT. XXII. Our third Instance, concerning Ceremonious Instruments belonging
to Gods service, is in the Synagogues, which were erected by the Jews, for
Gods public worship.
In all the Provinces of the Jews, certain places were appointed, called
Synagogues, Sigon Repub. Heb. l. 2. page 58. and 86.
for the Reading and Preaching of Gods word; In which respect it was, that the
Jews came to Christ, and commended unto his mercy a Roman Centurion, a
Proselyte, saying; Luc. 7.5.
He is worthy thou should do this thing for him, for he loves our Nation,
and has built us a Synagogue. Will you ask to what end this Instance is
alleged? only that hereby you may understand your own error, in holding
that All Ceremonious Additions, without special warrant from Scripture, are
unlawful: Whereas, these places of Gods service were allowed, albeit there is
not throughout all the old Testament so much as any mention, concerning the
building of Synagogues.

I might have insisted upon that direction which Iethro, through his own
judgment and prudence, gave unto Moses himself, for the altering of the
former frame of Government, in Judicial proceedings, by appointing of new
orders of Captains over thousands, over hundreds, and over tens. For albeit
this example be in a diverse Sphere, and not belonging to Divine worship; yet
seeing the same God was as exact in his prescription of Statutes, for the
Political government, as he was of Ordinances, and Ceremonies in the
Ecclesiastical; and that the same authority of God was equally predominant in
them both: this may induce us to think, that man's invention, employed for the
better preservation of Gods will and worship, may not always be censured as a
thing unlawful in it self.

SECT. XXIII. Our Third general proof is from the Examples of the Apostles.
It is time for us to depart from Jerusalem, wherein we have had ample proof,
for mystical Ceremonies of Humane Invention; Now let us draw near to the
City of Antioch, where the faithful did first receive their Surnames of
Christians; that we may likewise try, what ground we may find in
Christianity, for the proof of our former Conclusion.

The Apostolical Examples are Three. First the Feasts of Charity.
Jude v. 12.
There were certain Christian Feasts, called Agapae, ordained and used by the
Apostles, without any prescription from Christ.

SECT. XXIIII. Their first Answer.
M. Nic.
If they were Apostolical, then were they of Divine Institution.

Our Reply.
If you take [ Diuine] for Godly, as opposite to profane and wicked, your
Position is true: but if you understand [ Diuine] as in opposition unto all
Constitutions, which are not commanded of God, then could you not have uttered
a more unlearned Position, than to say, that all Apostolical Ordinances were
of Divine institution. For the Divines of all times have distinguished of
Constitutions and Traditions; Divine, Apostolical, and Ecclesiastical:
accounting such Divine, as were ordained for perpetual use in the Church; and
esteeming such Apostolical, as were appointed by the Apostles, with a liberty
to alter and change them upon just occasions (such as these Agapae were;) and
those to be Ecclesiastical, which the Church of God, after the Apostles times,
in whatsoever age or Countries, did, or shall appoint upon like occasions;
which are likewise subject to alteration, according to the different condition
of times and places. Which distinctions pass so current, that when we come to
the particular Examination of our Ceremonies, you shall then find them to have
the approbation of your own Witnesses.

SECT. XXV. Their second Answer.
These Agapae were abrogated by the Apostles themselves. Idem.


Our Reply.
If they were indeed justly abrogated afterward, then may you not say that
they were of Divine Institution. Thus your second Answer confuteth your former;
so slipperie is the foundation whereon you stand. Secondly, they being once
instituted of the Apostles, were abrogated by the Apostles. Ergo, there is in
the Church a power both to institute, and also to abrogate such kind of
Ceremonies, according to the conueniences or disconuenices of the Church.

SECT. XXVI. Their third Answer.
Idem.
But these were not of mystical signification, nor yet merely of
Ecclesiastical use.

Our Reply.
Should not the Use be properly called Ecclesiastical, which was ordained to
be practiced in the solemn feasts of Religion; and appropriated to accompany
the celebration of the holy Communion; and also of a mystical, and spiritual
signification; it being instituted both for signification, and preservation of
Christian Love?

Concerning these Loue-feasts, the ancient Histories do credibly inform us,
that they were at first used in Sacris conuentibus, sometime before, and
sometime after the receiving of the Eucharist. And this the Apostle shows. 1.
Cor. 11. Where we find so great an abuse of them, 1. Cor. 11.
that by the profaneness of some, the Feasts of Love were turned into Banquets
of intolerable pride and dispite: whereupon the Apostle, indeed, reprooueth
the abuse, but does not remove and abrogate the right use of them; for we find
that these Feasts were continued long after the Apostles, yea, in some places,
until the time of Chrysostom, and the Council of Gangris, in which there is
an Anathema denounced upon them, Conc. Gangr.
Qui noluerint communicare huiusmodi vacationibus.

SECT. XXVI. Our second Apostolical Example is, in Osculo pacis.
The Apostles times, together with their Loue-feasts, had their Loue-kisse,
Romans 16.16. 1. Cor. 16.20.
called Osculum pacis; that which S. Paul does so often commend unto all
professed Christians. 1 Thessalonians. 5.26 So also 1. Pet. 5.14. etc.


Their Answer.
This was not of mystical signification, but a natural indicant sign of
Peace and Reconciliation, as is embracing, M. Nic.
or shaking of hands.

Our Answer.
Let us take with us the light of Antiquity, Justin Martyr.

Origin.


for our better direction in this point. Justin Martyr, and Origin say hereof,
Precibus finitis, mutuo nos inuicem osculo salutamus. Tertullian calls it,
Signaculum orationis, Tert.
the seal of Prayer. The words of precation, therein used, being, Pax tecum,
Peace be unto thee. Cyrill terms it, Cyril.
Signaculum Reconcilationis, quo in sacris vtimur. i. The sign of
reconciliation, used in Divine Service. And Clemens Alex. says of it; Quod
oportebat esse mysticum, Clemens Alex.
id Sanctum vocabat Apostolus. i. That which should be mystical, the Apostle
calls holy. Which saying is used by the same Clemens, to the reproof of such
as did abuse it; because that which is holy, must be used after an holy manner,
and not to wantonness and lasciuiousnes, as was the fashion of some.

Is there now any point, in your general Proposition, which is not
particularized in this Holy Kiss? First, the institution (so far as it was
not commanded by Christ) was humane: Secondly, the property of it, Significant:
Thirdly, the use was in Sacris, to wit, in the time of holy and public
worship: Fourthly, the end was signification of Christian love. So that, in
this Instance, you have a full contradiction to your first Proposition.

As for your conceit of Embracing and shaking hands, whereby ye would shake off
all mystical signification, and make that holy kiss to be nothing else than a
natural Civil salutation; it is but your proper fancy, seeing the mystical
object, in this outward Rite, was immediately that mutual charity, which
Christians possessed; not simply amongst themselves, but grounded primarily
upon the relation to the atonement, which we have by Christ, wherein
consists all Christian Peace. These premises do argue that the Author of
this Answer was not so spiritual, as Civil, or rather uncivil, in making
such an homely interpretation of this Apostolical Rite, which had so singular
an Epithet, as holy; so blessed an object, as Peace; which were never applied
in Scripture to any action or gesture of only civil use.

SECT. XXVIII. Our third Example is the Apostles Ceremony, concerning the
covering of the head, at Divine Service. 1. Cor. 11.
1. Cor. 11.
Likewise the Apostle is urgent about an other Ceremony, of Having the man
uncovered, and the woman covered in the Church; and this also is significant,
and that mystically, of Spiritual things and duties: for the man, being
uncovered, signifies thereby his immediate subjection to the ordinance of
Christ, who has constituted him to be head over the woman; and the woman being
covered, does thereby express subjection to her husband. Cent. 3. Col. 14.
Ver. 9. and 10. To which purpose Tert. describes the fashion thereof to have
been this, viz. Quantum crines soluti capere possint; by having their hair
loose: Which is further expressly noted by Clemens Alex. saying, Clem. Alex.
Vt non tantum mulieres velamine caput tegerent, sed ^^dem in frontem promisso
vultum obumbrarent. That the women (says he) might not only hide their heads,
with a cover, but also shadow their faces, by the hanging down of their hair.
And not only so, but the Apostle requires yet another cover besides that of
the hair, saying of the uncovered head. (v. 5) It is all one as to be shaven:
so then this must needs be a mystical sign of moral duty; which is here
specified to be of the Christian subjection that women owe, in Christ, unto
their husbands. Now here you may not say, that this ordinance of the Apostle,
touching covering in the Church, was no way of humane, but altogether of Divine
Institution; for then might you challenge that women, at this day, in the time
of Divine worship, should have their hair still hang down, to cover their
faces.

This point is of some moment, and may not slightly be passed over. Wherefore,
that you may be satisfied, not so much from my collections, as from the
confession of those witnesses on whom you most rely, I have thought it fit to
produce such as have more particularly pointed out this Text, as namely,
Calvin, Chemnitius, P. Martyr, and Zanchius. From these I would first learn,
whether this Ceremony of covering the head of the woman, and uncovering of the
man, were not mystical and Symbolicall, that is; significant of some good
thing, or no? M. Calvin, and some others call them expressly Symbola, or Signs.
Secondly, I would ask what thing it is, which is hereby signified; and whether
it were not some Christian duty? And upon due search it appears, that the
things, signified by this Ceremony, are two; The first, in respect of the man
and woman mutually between themselves; and the next, of man unto God.
Concerning the reciprocal duties between man and woman, these witnesses
affirm that the Cover, on the head of the woman, did betoken her subjection to
the man; and the uncovering of the man's head did signify the Sovereignty that
man has over the woman. But this you interpret to hold only in a Civil
respect: If so, then would it suffice to justify the Ring in marriage; yet
look into the second point, which is, the relation it had unto God, and there
you may perceive something more. For, as Calvin; In eminentia viri super vxorem
Dei gloria elucet, C^l. in 1. Cor. 11.
propter dominium, quod habet: That is, In the superiority that man has over
the woman, the glory of God is manifested, by the dominion which he has. Also
the Apostle, in respect of this soueraignety, says; P. Marty^ on the same
place. p. 151.
The man is the glory of God. Likewise P. Martyr; Imago dei, vt omnibus
praeest, sita est in dominatu. Now what Symbol can be more choice, than that a
man by his outward gesture should, in a sort, represent both the authority
that God does hold over his creatures; and also that superiority which he has
given him over his wife? Again, Martyr ibid. page 149.
the Apostle, in this comparison, makes Christ the head of the man, even as
God (in respect of the humane nature) is the head of Christ. And Chemnitius,
treating of such Rites, calls them Incitamenta, and retinacula pietatis. i.
The incitements unto piety and godliness: Exam. part 1. page 75. ^.
that is (as his allusion to the Apostles rule seems to import) they make for
edification.

Zanchius likewise notes Two ends of the cover on the woman's head; De Sacra.
Scrip. p. 273.
one is of honesty and decency, that so the external worship of God, in
hearing of his word and participating of his Sacraments may be performed in
more seemly manner: The second, that by this Ceremony: [Vnusquisque moneatur
officij sui,] every man may be admonished of his own duty; the man of his
dominion over the woman, and the woman of her subjection unto the man: [Haec
sunt vtilia ad cultum internum,] These, says he, are profitable for inward
worship. Than the which I do not see, what any Divine could have spoken more
directly for our purpose.

Our third demand is, whether these Ceremonies, of covering and uncovering,
were not instituted to be observed in Gods public worship? For howsoever this
Custom might sometime alter in Civil assemblies, and much more in private
consort betwixt man and wife; yet nevertheless the Apostle does most strictly
challenge it, in the public service of God: for, Martyr quo sup p. 50.6.
Every man (says the Apostle) praying or prophesying, etc. And for better
demonstration he does in a manner call the Angels to witness, exacting that
Ceremony [propter Angelos,] in regard of the Angels. For as the Angels are
appointed to be ministering spirits every where, for the good of the Elect, even
so are they in very special wise attendant at public Assemblies, for Gods
worship. As for the Custom it self, Chrysostom uses this excellent Simile,
for the illustration thereof. Chrysostom.
When (says he) the King sits in his public Chair of Estate, and there
resort unto him Dukes, Counts, Tribunes, etc. and none of these present
themselves before the King without their robes of honor, according unto their
degrees: so God being present in his royal majesty, [in sacro coetu] in the
holy assembly; men and women coming thither ought to be adorned with such
ensigns, as may best declare their state and condition. Therefore may not that
man, who has received from God a diadem of honor and prerogative over his
wife, at that time cast away his ornament, and take upon him some servile
habit. Whereby you see, that this Symbol was then as well applied unto all holy
worship, as now our gesture of kneeling is, at the participation of the Lords
Supper.

Fourthly, we desire to know, whether this matter were not a thing indifferent;
and thereupon (albeit Apostolical, yet) subject to alteration, according to
the necessity of occasions? This we may best understand from the first
original thereof. The Apostle (says Master Calvin) took it from the common
custom of men in their times; Calvin.
which custom in many countries was otherwise; yea anciently every where [viri
comati erant:] that is, men had long hair. Chem. Exam. par. 1. p. 75
Chemnitius says, to the same purpose, that Christian liberty did moderate
the Apostles Rites, to make them in their kind indifferent, etc. -- which
according to the diverse natures of times, places, and persons might be
appointed, changed, or abrogated. -- for in the days of the Apostle this
custom, of the women's cover, was a sign of subjection; and of the man
uncovered, a token of dominion and government: but now in our times the fashion
is quite contrary; for in these days the uncovering of the head is a note of
subjection, and the covering is a testimony of authority.

Lastly, it is worthy our Inquiry, to learn, how far other Churches may be
directed by this example of the Apostles Ceremonies, for the authorizing of
their Constitutions in like cases? Herein P. Martyr is bold, and says: The
Church of God is an Assembly of the faithful, Loc. Theol. Tract. de Tradit p.
720.
governed by the word of God in all such things, as belong to man's salvation
(meaning, things absolutely necessary to the worship of God, as has been
amply proved:) But touching such things as appertain unto Discipline, it is
lawful for the Church to make Laws, Canons, and Constitutions; so does the
Apostle teach, that women must pray with their heads covered, and men
bare-headed. -- So does the Church ordain in what place, at what time, and
[quomodo] after what manner, whether standing, or sitting, men must
communicate. Com. in. 1. Cor. 11. v. 16. 1. Cor. 11. v. 11
And M. Calvin, observing the Apostle's reproof of persons contentious in
Ceremonial points (which is, v. 16. If any man seem to be contentious, we
have no such Custom, nor yet the Church of God) when he met with some that
did, out of the same spirit of contention, resist the Constitutions of that
Church of Geneua, he makes a general application thereof, against all such
turbulent and factious spirits; Qui bonos and vtiles ritus nulla necessitate
convellunt. i. Who unnecessarily do oppugn the profitable Rites of the Chucch.

Here I need not. make any recapitulation of these several points, the
indifferent Reader may easily find in the confession of the forenamed
witnesses; 1. That these are things indifferent. 2. That they were prescribed
as fit for those times. 3. That consequently they were to be dutifully
observed. 4. That they were Symbolicall, and had in them significations of
moral duties. 5. That they were applied to Divine worship. 6. and lastly, That
the same authority does still remain in the Church, to ordain the like
Significant Ceremonies, whenever there shall be just occasion thereunto. Thus
much of the Apostles time. We descend lower.

SECT. XXIX. Our second Proof, for Confutation of their last general
Argument, and for our Confirmation of the Moral use of Ceremonies, is from the
universal Custom of the Church of Christ, as well Primitive as Successiue.
Concerning all these times, whosoever is conversant in the Ecclesiastical
Histories, or in the writings of Fathers of former ages, may make good this our
Assertion, to wit, That the Church has liberty to ordain Rites and Ceremonies
of Mystical signification, thereby to represent spiritual duties, and that
properly, in the public service of God: And also may prove, so far forth as
by light of Story can appear, that ever since the Apostles days it has been
the constant and consonant doctrine of the Church, held by all the most
Orthodoxe Fathers, and glorious Martyrs of Christ, who watered the Church with
their blood; whereby it became so blessedly fruitful, in the procreation of an
innumerable offspring of faithful Christians in all succeeding ages; amongst
whom we, that do now profess the Gospel of salvation, have (by the mercy of
God) our interest in the covenant of Grace; and consequently in the assured
hope of our eternal inheritance: Yea, and (that which, as I think, should
astonish the heart of any adversary, in this point of Church-liberty in making
Ceremonies) has ever been so vndebatably held for an uncontrollable truth,
throughout the whole process of times, that no one man (as I suppose) either
Orthodoxe or Heretical, has ever till of late, been heard either to have
written, or so much as spoken against the General of it.

I shall not need to seek evidence out of Stories, in this behalf; the
Non-conformists themselves are not ignorant hereof, who (besides many other
Instances) do, as often as they see occasion, again, and again, repeat the
custom universally used in the Churches throughout the world, to wit, of
Standing in the time of public prayers, in all the Lords days between
Easter and Pentecost; whereby the primitive Fathers did signify their faith of
Christ his Resurrection. If this were a Divine Ceremony why do you not observe
it? But if it were Humane, and yet had, as you know, a Mystical signification
of some spiritual duty; by representing both the remembrance of Christ's
Resurrection, and also the protestation of their Christian faith therein (which
Sign likewise was appropriated unto the public worship of God in the act of
holy prayer) then can you not but acknowledge in this one Ceremony, that
Antiquity does plead for our whole defense; nor can you gainsay, but that
herein the judgment of our Church [ Quoad thesin,] in general (for we do not
hereby justify every Ceremony, which was held either of diverse Fathers, or
Churches, in several times, but that which was universal) must needs convince
you of Novelty in this kind. Lastly, Zanchie does witness, concerning the
observation of our Festiuals of Easter, Pentecost, etc. that they have since
the time of the Apostles continued to this day; this then is another Catholic
Ceremony of Moral signification.

SECT. XXX. Our Third Proof (for Confutation of their last Generll Argument,
and for our Confirmation of the lawfulness of Ceremonies, which are of Moral
signification) is from the testimonies of their own Witnesses.
M. Calvin is always worthy of the first place, Calv. opust. page 344.
among the innumerable company of late Divines, and he says; [ Ne quis nos
calumnietur etc.] Lest any man slander us, by judging us [nimis esse morosos]
to be too peeuishly precise, as though we would take away all liberty in
external things, here I do testify unto my godly Readers, that I contend not
about Ceremonies, which concern only Decency and Order; (or else [Si Symbola
sint] if they be signs and incitements unto that reverence, which we should
perform unto God:) for our dispute is against those works, which some do, as
properly belonging unto God, and wherewith they think that God is truly
worshipped. Thus M. Calvin (as you see) in the last part of this sentence
disalloweth only such Ceremonies of Humane Invention, which men make to be
essential parts of Gods worship. And in the former part thereof, he does allow
of Symbolicall Ceremonies; so far as they may be Signs, and Incitements to the
more due performance of Gods worship. Even as in another place, answering a
Question conceived about Ceremonies, he says, Calv. Instit. li. 4. cap. 10.
Ergone inquies, nihil Ceremoniale rudi^ribus dabitur, ad invandam eorum
imperitiam? Will you then say (says he) shall nothing that is Ceremonial be
permitted to the ruder sort, for the help of their ignorance? Here a
Nonconformist would have made a peremptory answer, they shall have allowed
them to Ceremony at all, Calv. Ibid.
which is of symbolicall signification. But M. Calvin, more iudiciously, and
discreetly; Id ego non dico, tantum contendo, vt modus adhibeatur, qui Christum
illustret, non obscuret: I say not so (says he) only I contend, that a mean
may be kept, which may manifest Christ, and not darken and obscure him. And,
for exemplification of this mean, he propounds the institution of Christ
for our imitation, whose Sacramental Ceremonies, are both Pa^ce, Few; and
minime laboriosae, very easy.

The same witness likewise, elsewhere, does allow a private use of Pictures
[cum rerum gestarum notatione] which are set forth with the narration of
Story, [quae vsum in docendo, and monendo aliquem habent] which have (says
he) some use in teaching and admonishing the Reader. Yet Pictures, you know,
have no other property then signification. Chem. exam. part. 4. Tract. de Imag.
page 13. Zepper. Legum Mosaie l. 4. c. 7. p. 312
And, Luther (says Chemnitius) held Images, which did represent the Histories
of Acts done, as things indifferent, which might be had both for ornament, and
for remembrance without superstition, according to the rule of Scripture. Which
kind of Pictures, (as Zepperus holds them, from the decree of the Council of
Franckford) may be kept in the Church without impiety, to the same purpose,
namely [ad refricandam rerum praeteritarum memoriam.] which notwithstanding
does no whit advantage the Romish superstition, in their manner of Adoration.

Iunius likewise, speaking of the Festival days of Pentecost, anciently
celebrated in the Christian Churches, Contr. lib. 4. page 183.
answers, that they did serve, Ad iustam quandam etc. For the due
commemoration of that special benefit of God, which happened to the Church as
upon that day. And is not this also Symbolicall? And this Symboll of Feasts was
formerly witnessed by Danaeus, in the feast day of the Dedication of the Altar.

Furthermore Chemnitius [Apud vetustissimos quidem and puriores Scriptores
legimus, etc.] says, Exam. part. 1. p. 32. col. 2.
We read in the most ancient and purer Writers, that their Rites did signify
something, and admonished men of the doctrine of the Sacrament, comprehended in
the word of God. -- But wheresoever there is in these ancient Writers any
mention that by Exorcisme, or Exsufflation the evil spirit is driven out of
the party Baptized; and likewise that by unction, and imposition of the hands
of a Bishop (after Baptism) the holy Spirit is given; These things which the
Fathers understood to be done significatiuely, (That is, by way of
signification) were afterward perverted by others, and held as [operatiue] in
an opinion of efficacy and power for such effects. In these words Chemnitius
approves of the Fathers significant Ceremonies, and condemns the Popish
superstition of more then significant.

Now, although these Testimonies may suffice to confute and condemn the
general Argument of the Non-conformists, against Significant Ceremonies, yet
when as in our answer to the particular exceptions against our foresaid
Ceremonies of white garments, and Cross in Baptism, we shall prove in these
Ceremonies, from the direct acknowledgment of P. Martyr, Chemnitius, B. Jewel,
and Zanchius, an approbation of their Moral signification of Purity of life,
and constancy in the faith, respectively; I hope our Opposites will abate
something of their Contradictions against our Rites, at least in respect of
signification: whereof yet more remains to be said in our last proof. In the
interim we approach to that which follows in the next place.

SECT. XXXI. Our fourth Proof, for the Confutation of the last general
Argument of the Non-conformists, against our Ceremonies, and for the
Confirmation of Moral signification in such Rites; is, as from the confession
of witnesses, so especially from the Practice of the Non-conformists themselves.
Our first Instance is in the form of an Oath.
After much sailing in this Sea of dispute, having thus far passed through
the Maine, I now direct my course home-ward, to the Narrow Seas of our
Non-conformists, by instancing in such particular Ceremonies, wherein either
our Opposites are found to be ordinary Actors; or else their Witnesses are
become Approvers of some Symbolicall Ceremonies.

Deuteronomy. 6.13.
God commanding in his Law, saying, Thou shall worship the Lord thy God, and
swear by his Name, shows sufficiently how sacred a thing an Oath is, which
is an immediate Invocation of God; and how it is appropriated unto the honor
of God, which God himself does challenge as a part, or, at least, proper
cognizance of his supreme worship.

Now, the outward form of an Oath, as it is enjoined by Law, and assumed and
practiced by the Non-conformists themselves, is this; to lay their hand upon
the book of God, and to kiss it, swearing by the Contents thereof, that is, by
the way of stipulation, pledging and pawning all the promises of salvation in
Christ (which are recorded in that book) upon that truth which they do
profess to perform in Swearing. Then, their kissing and handling of that
book is the visible Sign, that the taking of an Oath is the worship of God in
it self; whereby we adore the Author of that book of blessedness. And
lastly, the end of all this is a vow, to aver the truth of their own
conscience, unto man. In all which you have, 1. The handling and kissing of the
book, a Ceremony of man's Institution. 2. The end, to express our faith
toward God, and truth to man, which are of Moral signification. 3. The manner,
by an Invocation of God, in calling him to witness, and so appropriating it to
Gods worship; which is fully as much, as this cause can challenge at our hands.

If any should be so scrupulous as to doubt of the lawfulness of this kind
of Oath, he may take his warrant from the example of Abraham, in that
Ceremonial form of Swearing, See above, Sect. 9.
which he prescribed unto his servant, before the Jewish and Leviticall Law of
Ceremonies was enacted by God.

SECT. XXXII. Our second Instance is in the Observation of the Lords day.
You may (if it please you) consider the three Ceremonial points of our
Saboth, by a threefold figure. The first was to signify a Rest from Sin,
which is a Spiritual Saboth. The second to note the Resurrection of Christ,
for which cause the day of the Jewish Saboth was changed into the day of Christ
his Resurrection; whence it has the denomination to be called, Apoc. 1.
The Lords Day. The third is the everlasting Saboth, whereof the Apostle
speaks, saying, H^b 4.9.
There remains, [Sabatismus] a time of Saboth, or Rest, for the people of
God. What Christian man is there, religiously affected toward God as he ought,
who in the celebration of the Lords Day, does not call to remembrance the
Resurrection of Christ upon that day? and also why may lie not in his religious
discretion, from the Analogy between this our bodily Saboth here on earth,
and that Rest in heaven, entertain a contemplation of the everlasting Saboth,
and rest of Blessedness, thus prefigured in the Temporal; and accordingly
make to himself, for his better edification, a double Mystical use of the
Lords Day?

Zanch. de Redempt. lib. 1. Tract. de Temp. col. 703.
To which purpose Zanchius says of our Churches, the places of Gods worship,
Sicut Tabernaculum Templumque Salomonis typi fuerunt corporis Christi, sic
nostra te^pla typi sunt and vmbra coelestis templi, vbi coelestes spiritus
animique fidelium collecti laudant Deum, sicut nos hic in terrenis hisce
templis colimus. -- Debentque haec terrena ad illud coeleste animos nostros
subleuare: Vsus hic contemnendus non est, quia vtilia haec sunt. That is, As
the Tabernacle and Temple of Solomon were types of the body of Christ, so our
Temples are types and shadows of the celestial Temple, where the heavenly
spirits and souls of the faithful are assembled, for the praising of God,
even as we, being gathered together in these earthly temples do magnify him,
and therefore these our earthly temples ought to raise up our minds to the
contemplation of the celestial. Which use is profitable and not to be
contemned. Thus much Zanchius. Wherefore, if you will allow such kind of
Ceremonial significations, you consent with us; if you reject them, then you
do dissent from all ancient and primitive Christians.

Yet many of you are not so far fallen out with Symbolicall Ceremonies, and
the universal practice of Antiquity, but that you do willingly observe the
Ceremonial Festiuals of Ester, and Pentecost, etc. now celebrated in our
Churches; as likewise the days, not so much fatals, as natals of the Apostles.
Now, in the solemnization of these Anniuersaries, you cannot but reflect on the
remembrance of some spiritual things, as these, (to wit,) the power of Christ
his Resurrection; the donation of the gifts of the holy Ghost, made in visible
signs of fiery tongues; the glorious Ascension of our euer-blessed Savior
into heaven; together with the admirable constancy of the Apostles, in
suffering for the profession of the holy faith; hereby admonishing us to
imitate their Example of Constancy and faithfulness unto death, that with
them we may obtain the same glorious Crown of everlasting life.

SECT. XXXIII. Our fifth and last Proof, for the Confutation of the General
argument of the Non-conformists, by Reason.
We cannot want Reasons to prove, that our Ceremonies may be significant,
which our Common Prayer book does signify so to be; and is therefore
condemned by the Non-conformists.

Their Opposition to our Communion-Booke.
Abridg. Lincol. M. Nic. M. Lang M. Hy. and others.
The Communion Book says of these Ceremonies, that they are neither dark, nor
dumb, but significant: which is unlawful.

SECT. XXXIIII. Our Confutation of the Non-conformists by Reason, confirming
the lawfulness of Moral signification, from the Confession of their own
Witnesses.
Because the Non-conformists have pleaded thus absolutely against Significant
Ceremonies by the same Reason (if that may be called Reason, which fights
against it self) we are to show, that no Ceremony can be properly so called,
if it be altogether destitute of signification: for to require Ceremonies
without all signification, is all one as to imagine day without light; or fire
without heat. For were it not so, M. Calvin had no reason to inueigh so much
against the Papists, because that many of their Ceremonies are non-significant.
Furthermore (says M. Calvin) is not this fault worthy our inueighing against?
Call. Inst. l. 4. c. 10. number. 15.
[ non intellectas Ceremonias ostentant etc.] They make a pompous show of
Ceremonies that are not understood, as if it were some stage-like dumb show,
or else some magical incatation. -- For some Ceremonies in Popery are
separated from doctrine; that they may hold the people with signs void of all
signification. Thus Calvin.

Loc. Com. ^lass. 2. c. 4. page 198.
The same exception does P. Martyr take against some Romish Ceremonies, even
because Their significations are often unknown, not only to the beholders,
but to the Actors themselves: who being asked of the meaning of diverse (of
their Rites) either say nothing, or if they answer any thing, they contradict
one another; which is a certain argument that there is no truth in them.

Now, amongst other Rites of this nature, we may rank that of their Priests
muttering of the words of consecration in secret, Confer. p. 499.
which Doctor Raynolds does justly condemn, as being Against the practice of
Churches, of Fathers, Apostles, and of Christ himself. But they say (says
Doctor Rainolds) of this dumb show, which crept into the Church, that it was
ordained by the holy Mother Church, lest those words so holy and so sacred
should come into contempt. And can there be a better Example of a Dumb
Ceremony; or more just reason of casting it out, then because it is dumb?

In brief; all these Considerations, Proofs, and Examples above mentioned,
drawn from the religious persons of the old Testament, both before and under
the Law; from the Apostles in the new; from the universal practice of all
Churches, that are within the horizon of Ecclesiastical Record; from the
testimonies of their own Witnesses; from the practice of the Non-conformists
themselves; and lastly from the necessary consequence of Reason, may
sufficiently free our Ceremonies from any guilt (as they term it) of
superstition: as though they were therefore superstitious, even because they
are significant.

CHAP. IIII.
The fourth general Argument, urged by the Non-conformists against the
foresaid Ceremonies, is taken from a pretense, that they have been abused to
Popish Superstition.

SECT. I. Their Argument.
Mayor. No Ceremonies which have been notoriously known to have been of old,
Partly Abridg. Linc. page 17. M. Hitch. M. Hi. and the rest.
and still to be abused to Idolatry and Superstition (especially if there be
now no use of them in Gods Church) can be lawful, but must be abolished,
whether they have been the Ceremonies of Pagans, Jews, or Heretics.

Assumption. But these Ceremonies have been Idolatrously polluted by Papists,
namely the Surplice, Cross in Baptism, and the gesture of kneeling at the
Sacrament. Ergo, they ought to be removed and abolished.

Our Answer.
IF you require that Ceremonies, so abused, be abolished, (as if there were no
other Cure for such sores, but only abcision and cutting off the members by
the joint) then we deny your Mayor: But if you understand such things, as in
their own nature are not ill, but indifferent; or by excepting things
necessary, you mean an absolute, and not a convenient necessity, we deny your
Assumption. And now that you see your marks, look to your aim; and first
prove (if you can) your Proposition, then afterward your Assumption: for
otherwise you can conclude against our Ceremonies just nothing at all.

SECT. II. The Proofs, used by the Non-conformists against such Ceremonies,
which have been Superstitiously abused.
Their Proofs are from Examples of the abolishing of Ceremonies, that have
been either Heathenishly, Iewishly, or Heretically abused.

Their first Objection, concerning heathenish Ceremonies, by diverse Instances
in Scriptures.
This may appear by God^ word forbidding all prouocations unto spiritual
fornication: Abridg. Linc p. 17.
and commanding us to separate our selves from Idolaters, and to ^e as unlike
them as may be, especially in their religious observations, and Ceremonies, and
Instruments of Idolatry; that so we show our utmost detestation of them: and
to cast out the very memory of them, and to cast away even such things as had a
good original (if they be not still necessary and command^d of God) when once
they are known to be defiled by Idolatry, or abused by it: according ^s for
example sake, God commands Leuit. ^8. not to be like the Heathen, etc. And
Leuit. 19.28. etc.

Our Answer.
In this place of Scripture are forbid three kind of things which were in use
among the Heathen: Leu^t. 18^ etc.
the first was the sin of Incest; the second, the fashion of Rounding their
heads, and cutting their flesh for the dead; the third, their sowing of their
grounds with diverse seeds, and letting their beasts of diverse kinds to
engender together. Now we know that Incest was forbidden, as being a sin
against the moral Law of God: and Rounding of the head, and cutting of the
flesh for the dead, was prohibited as being against the Law of Grace; and for
that it did demonstrate inordinate sorrow for the Departed, as of men void of
all hope of the resurrection of bodies, or immortality of the souls of men.
Lastly the commixtion of diverse kinds of seeds, and of diverse kinds of beasts
was forbid, not for any natural viciousness in the things themselves, or in
the use that the heathen had of them; but because, in the prohibiting of these
kind of Mixtures, he propounded unto his people a Type of abstinence from
irreligious Mixtures, as well corporal, as spiritual: that they should not
dare to defile their bodies with bestialitie; or yet, by joining in marriage
with people of diverse religions, and that they should not pollute their souls,
by consenting unto the worship of any strange God.

See now your manifold fallacies, by laboring, first, to conclude the
unlawfulness of our Ceremonies, which are things in their own nature
indifferent, from the condemnation of an Heathenish sin against nature.
Secondly, to oppugn Ceremonies, ordained to a good end, to wit, the
representation of Christian virtues, from the example of a wicked custom; that
plainly demonstrateth mere Infidelity. Thirdly, by condemning Ceremonies of
godly signification, as namely Purity, constancy, humility, from the example
of Ceremonies that signify nothing but either bodily, or else spiritual
adultery, which is Idolatry. Which kind of consequences are merely
extrauagants, wandering and gadding from the matter in question.

SECT. III. Their second Instance from Scripture.
Such things as had good originals and beginnings amongst the Heathen, were
notwithstanding prohibited by the Jews, Abridg. Linc. ibid.
as for example the erecting of any titulary Pillars by the way, Leuitie. 26.1.
Ergo, etc.

Our Answer.
Had these Titulary pillars of the Heathen, Leuit. 26.1.
(which were set up at limits of their grounds) a good original and beginning
trow you? It is an ill gloss that corrupts the Text; the words are these:
Thou shall not erect a pillar, nor shall thou set up any polished stone in your
land (which was the fashion of the Heathen,) that you may bow unto them. Whence
Master Calvin collecteth; Calvin upon that place.
Sequitur, non aliam statuam hic damnari, nisi quae ad Deum repraesentandum
erigitur. i. No statue was here condemned (says he) but that which was erected
to represent God. It was not therefore the erection of Pillars that was
forbidden, Genesis 28.18.
for then the Patriark Jacob would never have erected (as we read) a Pillar,
for a religious monument: but the thing prohibited was, the Heathenish end and
purpose in erecting it. Therefore you might as well say, that the theeuish
taking of a man's goods, as that this Heathenish manner of building those
Pillars, had a good original, and beginning.

SECT. IIII. Their third Instance from Scripture.
Deuteronomy. 7. and Exodus 23. God commands to destroy the statues and groves of
Idolatry, and to extinguish their names. Abridg. Linc. page 17. and 18.
And that we cannot be thought to have sincerely repented of the Idolatry or
superstition on, except we cast away with detestation, Abridg ibid. in marg.
all the instruments and mo^uments of it. See Calvin in his Sermons upon Deuteronomy.

Their Answer.
See Calvin, say you: whom I have seen upon these places of Scripture, and
upon the full sight thereof am justly moved to call upon you, as you have done
upon your Reader, saying, See Calvin; and then surely you shall see a foul
error in your Collection from Calvin: who is so far from speaking any thing
for your advantage, that in his Exposition of these places he does flatly
confute you. For in these Scriptures, Exo. 23. and Exo. 34. Deu. 7. and 12.
Numer: 23. where we read of nothing but of Destroying of all the Images,
Groves, Altars; and rooting out the very names of the Heathenish gods; although
indeed he does infer that [ omnia insignia Idololatriae] that is, all the
monuments or tokens of Idolatry, were to be abolished by the Jews: yet, where
the question is, whether Christians be precisely bound to do the like; he so
distinguishes between the commandments of the Decalogue, and these
Appendices, as he does between the Law Moral, and the Politic or Judicial:
notifying unto us, that the Moral precepts do oblige all men unto the end of
the world (as being enacted against all formal Idol^trie;) but these politic
precepts of Destroying of Altars, Groves, etc. which are materials only,
Differ (says he) from the other, Ca^^in Comment. in ^. p^ae^^pt Tit.
Appendices pol^ti^^ ^ecundi p^aecepti, e^ ^xod. 23. Deuteronomy. 12. etc, p. 286,
(namely from the Commandments of the two tables,) so, as to bind only the
Jews during the time of their Paedagogie; but not the Church Christian to the
end of the world. And therefore coming to the point concerning Churches, the
places of Gods worship, he resolves saying; Neque nobis religio est, templa
retinere, quae polluta fuerunt Idolis, and acco^modare in meliorem vsum;
quianos non obstringit, quod propter consequentiam, vt loquu^tur, legi additum
est. That is; We may lawfully use the Temples or Churches, which have bin
defiled and abused with Idols, and apply them to a better use; because that
does not bind us which was added to the (meaning the moral) Law only by
consequence (thereby meaning the peculiar occasions of those times.) The sum
whereof (says he) does tend thus far, namely to show in what dete^^ation G^d
held all manner of Idolatry, and therefore would have them to a^ol^sh the very
names of such things as had ever be^n^ dedicated unto Idols.

But you will say, Shall we then have no regard of other superstitious
circumstances? Calvin seems to prevent this Objection, saying* Fat^or quidem,
Calv. Ibid.
etc. Indeed I confess, that all such things are to be removed, which may
seem to nourish Idolatry, so that (observe I pray you this moderation) we our
selves, in urging too vehemently things which are in their own nature
indifferent, be not too superstitious. Meaning, that the urging a prohibition
and an abolishment of them is that negative superstition, whereof you have been
already found guilty, in oppugning our Rites as superstitious, only because
they are Significant: As though any thing could be judged therefore
Superstitious, because it carriet^ with it a true, Orthodoxe, and Christian
signification.

SECT. V. Their fourth Instance from Scripture.
Daniel would not defile himself, with eating of the Kings meats. Linc.
Abridg. quo supr.
Dan. 1.18.

Our Answer.
Seire est per causas scire; The only solid knowledge of any thing is the
understanding of the true causes thereof. First therefore, Daniel did not
abstain from these meats of the King, because they were the Kings; for Then
(says M. Calvin upon this place) should he have shown himself very
inconstant, Calvin in Dan. 1.18.
when afterward he took a liberty to himself to eat thereof. Why then, will
you say, did he abstain? Read but M. Calvin his Comment, and it will resolve
you, that Daniel was now in an exile from Gods worship, and that the King sent
unto him all his Kingly services and delicates, to the end that thereby he might
alie^^te him from the love of his own Country, and the Religion of his God:
Therefore Daniel, lest he might be ensnared with these allurements of riot,
did abstain from all that dainty fare.

If you further demand; why Daniel called the Kings diet a pollution, or
abomination unto him, listen again, for your satisfaction, Calvin upon the
same place.
to the said Author. Non fuit quidem etc. It was not in it self abominable,
for it was free for Daniel to eat or drink; but it is called an abomination
for the consequence thereof. Thus M. Calvin. Where, by Consequences, he
means; lest Daniel, by such dainties, as by the devils baits, might receive
his spiritual bane, by forgetting the holy Covenant, Religion, and the worship
of the only God. Nothing can be more plain, to prove, that by these words [
Being polluted with the Kings meates] is not meant any pollution Ceremonial,
as if the meats had been Idolatrous; but only Moral, or occasional, as
being baits and allurements to draw him to an irreligious forgetfulness of
holy duties. Seeing therefore this reason does not argue ad idem; it will
become you to take some other Testimonies, whereby you may make good your first
assertion.

SECT. VI. Their fifth Instance from Scripture, in the Example of Hezekias.
2. King. 18. Hezekias his zeal, in breaking down the Brazen Serpent, which
God himself had ordained for a figure of Christ, Abridg. Linc. and other^.
is commended in Scripture; for that it being polluted with abominable
Idolatry he brake it in pieces.


Our Answer.
This noble fact of that religious King is in indeed commended in Scripture;
and therefore ought to be honorable among all devout and religious worshippers
of God unto the ends of the world. We grant that God had wrought by the
Serpent a miraculous safety to his people, by delivering them from the stings
of fiery Serpents; and that for this very cause it was, as some think, long
after reserved in some part of the Temple, for the remembrance of so great a
benefit; even as the Pot of Manna, and Aarons Rod were kept in the Arc, to
the like end. But when the Israelites began to defile it, by offering Incense
unto it, then did Ezekias demolish it; and that for four special respects.

The first was, because there was now Flagrans delictum, that is, that Idolatry
was notorious, and in the heat. Secondly, it was general and public.
Thirdly, it was done within the compass of that place, and among that people;
which were otherwise the professed worshippers of God. Fourthly, the Act it
self was offering Incense unto a creature; the most gross and palpable kind
of Idolatry that can be: for whereas bowing, and kneeling may carry some show
of pretense in them, because the same gestures are used sometimes civilly,
without any just exception against them: yet Sacrificing is an external act,
so properly and essentially belonging unto God, that every eye which beholds
such Acts, must needs judge them Idolatrous. Lastly, the case was now
desperate, and (without utter extirpation thereof) past all hope of reducing
that figure to the former use and end, which was a co^m^moration of Gods mercy,
in their miraculous deli^^rance.

It is by the way a point very obseruable, that Ezekias did not destroy the
Idols, which Solomon suffe^ed to be s^t up, in favor of his strange wives that
were of Heathenish religion; placing in one Temple Astaroth, which was the god
of the Zidonians; In an other Molech, the Idol of the Ammonites; 2 King. 11.
and 23.
In a third Chames, the god of the Moabites: The reason whereof was, because in
the days of Ezekias they were neglected, no man adoring them: yet afterward,
when they occasioned Idolatry, the good King Josias did break them down, 2.
King. 23.13.

2 King 18.3. 2 King 22.2.


which Ezekias in his time had spared: notwithstanding is the same Ezekias
commended by God, as walking in the steps of David, as well as Josias.

Besides, Zanchius thought not this act of Ezekias to be (...), or an
universal remedy for all Abuses of Ceremonies, when he said of some
indifferent Rites that had been abused; Z^nch. de Redemp. in 4. ^raec^p. pa.
678.
Tolli ea prorsus possunt, and saepe etiam debent: They may, and sometimes they
ought to be utterly abolished [Sicut Ezekias,] even as did Ezekias.
Intimating, that the example of Ezekias is to hold but sometimes only, that
is, in case of necessity; for of some Ceremonies that have been abused, he
said only [ Tolli possunt] they may be removed: which is a word of
indifferency, and signifies that they may be also not removed.

But if that proceeding of Ezekias, concerning those Israelites, against
Heathenish Idolatry, shall be still urged upon our Magistrates, in respect of
the Popish Ceremonies, wherewith they may seem to symbolize, although but in
an outward appearance only; then are you to be informed of the manifest
disparities in this comparison.

First, that Idolatry of the Jews being done both publicly and generally, and
also within the bowels of the same Church (for the Serpent was then kept at
Jerusalem) called for an Ezekias to remove it. But that which is done of
Papists, is in a Church separated from us; or if you will suppose any to be
Idolatrous among us, yet is that neither general nor public, but so secret,
that it is done by you know not whom; unless you mean certain men molded in
your own fancies, and only imagined to have committed such Idolatry.

The second distance may be this; that the case of reformation of the Idolatry
committed under the government of Ezekias, became desperate, and therefore
required an answerable remedy; which, as then the case stood, could be no
other, then to abolish the figure without delay. But within the Kingdoms of
our Ezekias this disease would be found curable, without any such extremity,
especially in this our most truly reformed Church, wherein we draw the sweet
breath of the pure truth of God: If you will allow that to be called a Reformed
Church, which does most lively express the face and full body of her primitive
Mother Church.

I spare to insist upon the grossness of that outward fact, which was,
Offering Incense; lest the weakness of some Reader may suspect, that when I
would excuse the Papists, a Tanto, I would free them a Toto crimine, by these
comparisons.

SECT. VII. The second Objection, for the abolishing of Ceremonies Heathenishly
abused, from the Testimonies of Councels, and Fathers; by diverse Instances.
Their first Instance.
Abridg. Linc. page 17.
In the first Council at Carthage it was decreed, that such Altars as werei^
the Country and Highways, in memory of the Martyrs, should be abolished,
although they were pretended to be set up by revelations and visions.

Our Answer.
He that in causes of weight will look upon books only with other men's eyes,
may peradventure forfeite his own, by mistaking and mis-reporting the meaning
of the Authors. Certainly, this Council, in the place alleged, Canon 15.
does not forbid absolutely the building of Altars, for the memory of Martyrs,
in the Highways, as you affirm: but only in such ways, and places, In
quibus nullum corpus aut reliquiae Martyrum conditae probantur; wherein there
was neither body, nor relikes of Martyrs known to be kept; notwithstanding
(say they) [ insomnia and inanes reuelationes] the Dreams, and vain
revelations of some to the contrary. Again, they that forbad the setting up of
Altars in Highways, where neither the bodies nor relics of any Martyrs were
reserved, did thereby authorize them, where such kind of Relics were extant.
Even as our Church, in forbidding exercises of Religion in private
Conuenticles, cannot be said thereby to prohibit religious Assemblies in the
houses of God.

SECT. VIII. Their second Instance from the former Council.
And the same Council decreed, Abridg. Linc. page 18.
Can. 15. that solemn request should be made to the Emperor, that all
Relics and Monuments of Idolatry might be utterly destroyed.

Our Answer.
Namely, all such Statues, and Altars, which were immediate Instruments of
Idolatry, and then brought into public abuse; even as our most godly and
gracious Ezekias, and other his Majesty's most religious Predecessors have
done.

SECT. IX. Their third Instance, concerning Pagan Ceremonies, from Councels.
In the second Council of Brac. Can. 73. Christians are forbidden to deck
their houses with Bay leaves, and green boughs, Abridg. Lincol.
because the Pagans did use to do so: and that they should not rest from their
labors those days the Pagans did. and that they should not keep the first
day of every month as they did.

Our Answer.
The Canon forbids Christians to use the wicked observations of the Kalends
(namely Festival days dedicated to the Heathenish gods) and to rest from
labors the days wherein the Gentiles used to do; to wit, in the days of the
celebration of their Kalends, which they performed in all lasciviousness: and
likewise to deck their houses with laurel, and green boughs, that is, at
the same time with the Pagans; as if therein they joined together in observing
and solemnizing their Paganish pastimes and worship. And of this prohibition
they gave this reason in the same Canon; Omnis haec obseruatio Paganismi est:
All this kind of custom does hold of Paganism; because the outward practice
of Heathenish Rites, performed jointly with the Pagans themselves, could not
but imply a consent in Paganism. Observe, I pray you, what I have said, [
performed jointly,] to wit, at the same times, after the same vndistinct
manner, and in the same Commonwealth.

The Canon then, altough it were necessary for them, yet how shall it concern
our Church, whose practice of Ceremonies is sufficiently known, even unto the
Papists themselves, to differ as much from theirs; both in respect of place,
persons, time, yea, and of opinion concerning our Ceremonies, as does the
annual course of the Sun, from the monthly motion of the Moon: as may partly
appear from that which has been said already; and will be made more evident
in the sequel of this discourse.

SECT. X. Their fourth Instance, concerning Paganish Ceremonies, from Councels.
Abridg. Linc. page 19.
The Council of Affricke, Can. 27. ordained that Christians should not
celebrate the Feasts of the birth-daies of Martyrs, because that was the manner
of the Heathen.

Our Answer.
Conc. Afric. tempore Bonifacij and Celestini, can. 27
The words of the Canon are these: We are to make request to the Emperor, that
these Feasts, which are held in many places, against the Laws of God, drawn
from the errors of the Gentiles (so that Christians even now are compelled to
celebrate them) may be prohibited, especially seeing that they are not afraid
to commit such things, even upon the birth-dayes of Martyrs, and that also in
sacred places. The very repetition of this Canon may be a sufficient
Confutation of your Objection; whereby it is evident, that the fathers of that
Council do no more prohibit the Feasts of the Which Tertul. de corona
militis, does mention.
birth-dayes of Martyrs, than they do the holy places of Christian worship.
But the things they condemn are heathenish profanations, contrary to the Law
of God, which notwithstanding were at that time frequently used as well in the
sacred places of Gods public service, as upon the Festival days of holy
Marty^.

SECT. XI. Their fifth Instance, concerning Pagan^sh Ceremonies, from Tertullian.
Tertullian is large and vehement in the point. Abridg. Linc. p. 19.

Tert de Coro^milit.


We may give nothing, says he to the service of an Idol; neither may we borrow
any thing from the service of an Idol. If it be against religion to sit at
table in an Idols temple, what is it then to be seen in the habit of an Idol?
And again, No habit or apparel is esteemed lawful among us, that has been
dedicated and appointed to so unlawful an act. Thou that art a Christian must
hate these things, the Authors and Inuentors of which thou can not but hate.

Our Answer.
Tertullian indeed is so large and vehement in this point, that there is less
need either for you to be vehement, in urging this Objection, or for us to be
large in refutation thereof; seeing that his own words does afford you a
plain answer, where he says that he speaks of habits, that were then
dedicated and appointed unto the service of Idols. But what Governor in our
Church does command you to go to the Masse-Pries^s, and to take his breaden
Idol, and to add Reverence unto it? or who urges you to put on the very same
Romish Surplice, now used at their Mass? Furthermore, (that we may give unto
our Opposites their due right,) we shall hereafter show, that the comparison
between Papists and Pagans is not altogether so equal, when we come to scanne
this very point.

SECT. XII. Their sixth Instance from Fathers, concerning the abolishing of
Heathen^sh Ceremonies.
Linc. ibid. Tert. li. de orat.
In another place Tert. affirms, that Christians might not wash their hands,
or lay aside their cloakes before prayer, nor sit upon their beds after prayer,
because the Hea^hen used so to do.

Our Answer.
Tertullian does not condemn any of these Ceremonies, merely for the
resemblance sake, which they had with Pagans in such Acts, but for the
superstitious opinion, wherewith they were infected; by attributing both an
efficacy of Sanctification, and consequently a necessity of Observation unto
them. Let us advise with Tertullian in these points, for he will show first,
concerning washing, that the Christians (whom he condemns, who were the
Hemerobaptists; or as some think, the Catharists of those days) had this
opinion in washing, that although their lives were never so beastly or bloody,
yet they might be cleansed by the only Ceremonious washing of their hands:
therefore Tert. confuteth them, saying, Quae ratio est etc. Tert.
What reason is there for you to think that you may speak unto God with
washed hands, having had sordid and filthy minds? -- The spiritual cleansings,
which are necessary, are from murder, witchchraft, and from Idolatry; which
you have conceived in your minds, but finished and executed with your hands. I
tell you, although Israel should wash her body in every member and part
thereof, yet verily do her hands remain unclean and polluted with the blood
of the Prophets: And therefore this Ceremony is but vain. So Tertullian.

We come to the second point, of doffing their cloakes before prayer, which
they, according to the rudiments of the Pagans, observed with an opinion of
necessity; as if otherwise their prayer could not prevail, for the obtaining
any blessing at the hands of God: For so says that Father, Positis penulis,
etc. Tert.
You laying aside your cloakes at the time of praying, as do the Heathen
before the worshipping of their Idols. Quod si fieri oportet, etc. but if this
ought to be done (that is, it were necessary) surely the Apostles, instructing
us concerning the habit of praying, would have comprehended this point among
the rest.

As for the third Ceremony of sitting upon beds as the Gentiles did, you have
no reason to rest upon it, because Tertullian condemns not the act, but the
heathenish opinion of the necessity thereof; as appears by his confutation
of it, saying, Alioqui nusquam erit adora^dum, Tert.
nisi vbi fuerit lectus: imo contra scripturam fecerit, si quis in Cathedra
sederit. i. Otherwise (says he) we ought not to pray but sitting upon a bed,
and he should be thought to do against Scripture, should sit in a Chair. All
which do evidently argue, their superstitious opinion of necessity.

There follows one clause of Tertullian, in the same place, concerning
setting at prayer, which I may not conceal from you, who have brought up your
scholars to pray sitting: This I will but only allege, and leave the
application to your better consideration. Siquidem irreuerens est assidere sub
conspectu, Tert.
contraque conspectum eius, quem maxim reuerearis and venereris, quanto magis
sub aspectu dei viui, Angelo adhuc orationis astante, factum illud
irreligiosissimu^ est, nisi improbramus Deo, quod nos oratione fatigeuerit?
Seeing that it is indeed an vnreuerent thing, to sit down in the sight of him
(meaning a mortal Prince) whom thou do most honor and reverence, how much
more irreligious a thing is it, to do the like (namely in prayer) in the
presence of the living God; the Angel (meaning, as I take it, the Minister) of
Prayer standing by, except that we would vpbraid God, that he has tired us
with overmuch praying?

Account now your gains, by your testimonies out of Tertullian, and you shall
perceive it will never pay your score: for what comparison can there be made
between vestments, appointed primarily to Gods service, and Habits dedicated
to devils? or between Ceremonies of Heathenish superstition, by opinion of
efficacy and necessity; and ours, which are ordained and imposed with an
opinion only, of indifferency and inconueniencie? Understand then that it is
no small error, in confuting of error, to divide the soul from the body;
that is, an Act, from that opinion which Actors do attribute unto it. If we
shall but ad hereunto the reverent esteem, which you know Tertullian had of
many Ceremonies, which you will not allow; it would enforce you to seek some
other Patron for your Cause then Tertullian, and so you do.

SECT. XIII. Their seventh instance from Fathers, concerning Paganish
Ceremonies abused.
Meltiades Bishop of Rome decreed that no Christian should fast on the Lords
day, or on the Friday, Abridg. Lincol. from Caranza. Anno 311.
because it was the known custom of the Pagans to fast on those days.

Our Answer.
The reason that is rendered by the said Meltiades is, because the Pagans did on
those days Sacrum Ieiunium celebrare etc. celebrate those Fasts, to the honor
of their gods and goddesses. And a second reason you may have from Ignatius,
who says, that if Christians should have fasted upon the Lords day, Ign^t.
(which was the day of Christ his Resurrection) that had been tanquam Christum
occidere, as it were to murder Christ; by mourning still for his death in sad
sorrow, whose Resurrection they ought to solemnize with all tokens of Christian
joy. And lastly, if on Friday they had kept their public Fast, jointly with
the Heathen, among whom they dwelt, then they should not have been
distinguished from the Pagans in the cause of Fasting, or bin known whether
they did it Paganishly, or Christianly, that is; whether unto the honor of the
Idols, or of the Son of God, in remembrance of the bitterness of his Passion
for us. For if a man should see any Celebritie of worship, performed both by
Pagans and Christians jointly together, in one manner of Rites, in the same
Country, and at the same time, and place; would he not think this to be an
ugly confusion? Therefore this Case is as different from ours, in respect of
Papists, as between confusion and separation. You must seek out some more
pertinent matter than this.

SECT. XIIII. Their eight Instance, concerning Paganish Ceremonies.
Abridg. Linc.
Ambrose taught Monica the mother of Augustine to leave bringing in of wine and
cakes to the Church, as she was w^nt to do, because she might not lawfully give
such a show of conformity with the Gentiles.

Our Answer.
Epiphanius records a kind of Sect called Collyridiani, which had their names
of collyris, a Cake; because they offered such kind of cakes in way of
Sacrifice, laying them upon a table-cloth, and participating thereof
themselves, in the name of the blessed Virgin Mary, the mother of our Lord.
Which custom was first brought in by certain women of Arabia, in imitation of
the Heathenish custom, condemned by the Prophet Jeremy, of such as did offer
cakes, Ierem. 7.18.
unto the Moon, as unto the Queen of Heaven. And this manner of worship the
same Father does condemn, as a kind of translated Id^latry, as it were from
one Queen unto another.

Now Ambrose in his time remembering this Idolatrous custom, and understanding
that men, and especially women did resort unto the Sepulcher of Martyrs,
carrying with them bottles of wine, and little baskets of bread, and bunnes to
offer unto the memory of the Saints; he did, by his Episcopal jurisdiction,
forbid that custom, and withdrew from it, together with others, Monica, in
that age, the best mother of the best child, Saint Augustine. This is the sum
of the Story, which you object against all religious Ceremonies, which may
have any semblance with Popish Rites. But whether this were fitly objected by
you, you (as it seems) took no great regard. For indeed the case is
maruellously disproportionable, whether we consider the Act, the Actors, or
else the office of Acting any such Heathenish Rites.

First, the Act was Sacrifizing and offering up of cakes, which is an Act so
properly belonging unto the Divine Majesty, that whereas Bowing the body, and
falling on the knees, (as has been partly signified already) are lawfully
given in dutiful reverence unto Parents by children, and unto Princes by
subjects: yet the very outward Act of Sacrifizing cannot be done to any man,
Saint, or Angel, without a visible Profession of Idolatry. Secondly, the
A^tors, who either among the Heathen sacrificed unto the Moon; or among
Heretics sacrifized unto the holy Virgin, were especially women; a Sex (even
in the state of integrity) most subject to seducement, when they fall to have
any private parle, and communication with that subtle Tempter. And (which is
the third point) we know that the very office of Preaching, much more that of
Sacrifizing, is flatly denied to that Sex. So that I may justly call this your
Comparison frivolous; did it not better deserve to be termed calumnious, first,
inasmuch as you endeavor to control the Ceremonies appointed by the
deliberate advice of the religious Governors of our Church, and to confute
them, by obiecting Ceremonies devised by private persons, in their clanculary
meetings, according to their rude fancies.

Secondly, to oppose unto Ceremonies, which are celebrated by men, (the
destinate Ministers of Christ, set apart, as you your selves are, for such a
divine ministratio^; the practice of women, who are, even by reason of the
frailty of their Sex, interdicted by Scripture to intermeddle in such kind of
service. Thirdly, to compare Ceremonies of outward gesture, which may be
lawfully applied otherwise than immediately unto God, with Ceremonies of
Sacrifizing, which cannot, even so much as in the outward Act be performed, but
directly to God, without the guilt of Idolatry. And fourthly to condemn Rites
of false and Idolatrous inventions, by matching them with Ceremonies of godly
and Christian significations; what could you else mean by all this, but as it
were to suborne a fellon to condemn an innocent?

SECT. XV. Their ninth instance, concerning Paganish Ceremonies.
Abridg Linc. page 19. Aug. tom. 10 Sermon. 6. de verbis Dom. page 33.
Augustine himself also, prescribing a direction how to win the Pagans, has
these words: If you ask how the Pagans may be won; how they may be
enlightened; how they may be called to salvation? Let us leave all their
solemnities, and forsake their toys.

Our Answer.
We might easily have understood the meaning of Saint Augustine, by Saint
Augustine himself, if you had not broke off his speech at the midst: for his
words immediately following, Aug. in the place forecited.
are these; -- Vt si non consentiant veritati nostrae, erubescant paucitati
suae. i. That if they consent not to that truth professed by us, they may be
ashamed (meaning the fewness of their followers) of their own paucity. Whereby
he instructs the Christians, not to converse together with Pagans in any of
their Heathenish Rites. Even as our Church does likewise forbid her people to
assemble together with Papists in their superstitious solemnities; and not that
only, but does also (what would you have more?) condemn and punish those that
shall partake with them in such fooleries.

I should furthermore ask you, why you skipped over that last clause of Saint
Augustine, Vt si non etc. whereby you have made your selves like to that man,
Qui toto deuorato boue, defecit in cauda. Hitherto we have heard of your
Instances, in excepting against the Ceremonies of Pagans.

SECT. XVI. Their second kind of Objection, for the removing of Ceremonies that
have been abused, is in obiecting Jewish Rites.
Their first Instance.
In the Council of Nice it was decreed, Abridg. Linc. page 18. Eusebius. de vita
constable. l. 3. c 17.
that Christians might not keep the Feast of Easter at the time, nor in the
manner as the Jews did. Let us (say they) in nothing agree with that
detestable root of the Jews.

Our Answer.
First, you cannot be ignorant, how that there was a time, when it was lawful
for some Christians to keep the Feast of Easter the very same day, wherein it
was celebrated of the Jews. For your Author, whom you allege, Eusebius. hist.
Eccl. l. 5. c. 22.
does fully relate that All the Churches in Asia according to their old
custom, did celebrate the Feast of Easter the 14. of the Moon, which was the
very day, wherein the Jews were commanded to solemnize their Passover. Then
he brings in that famous Bishop Polycrates; mentioning Polycarpus, Thraseus,
Sagarus, all Bishops and holy Martyrs; besides Papyrius, Melito, and seven
other Bishops of his own kindred, who by ancient Tradition, did all observe
the Jews festival day of Easter.

Secondly, afterward it was decreed by the Council of Nice, that Easter
should be celebrated (as you have truly alleged) differently from the custom
of the Jews, but yet you have omitted the causes there specified by Eusebius:
whereof one was the hatred of the Christians against the Jews, who had defiled
their hands with the blood of the Son of God, and remained still inthralled in
the blindness and madness of their error. Another reason was, because of the
insolent insultation that the Jews then made upon the Christians, as though
that Christians could not have kept any observation of that feast [sine ipsorum
disciplinae subsidio:] without the help of their discipline. A third reason
there mentioned, is, that by uniformity of this one custom, they might bring
the Christian Churches unto unity, which by diversity of opinions, concerning
the time of the observation of the same feast, had been distracted into
contrary factions.

These were the principal Reasons which moved the Fathers of that Council, to
alter the Jewish Feast of Easter, and to translate it unto our Lords day; not
absolutely (as you pretend) for the avoiding of all resemblance that it had
with the Jewish custom (for then must they have condemned all the godly
Bishops, and holy Martyrs of Asia, who observed the same time of Easter with
the Jews) but because of the after-obstinacie and insolency of the Jews,
vpbraiding the Christians for imitating of them upon an opinion of necessity;
and also for the reducing of Christian Churches, agreeing in one faith, unto an
unity of one affection.

You see then that the comparing (as commonly you have done) the practice of
Churches in admitting, or rejecting of Jewish, or Heathenish customs, without
their special Reasons, is no better discretion, than if you would argue some
men to be wiser than others, by comparing their bodies together, without any
regard of their reasonable souls. Otherwise you might have easily perceived,
that neither we can have like cause of hatred against Papists, (who are
professed Christians) as they had against the obstinate Jews, the murderers
of the Lord of glory; nor yet the Papists the like cause of insultation against
our Church, for imitation of them; seeing that she holds none of their Rites,
without a professed difference, of opinion and with a detestation of their
superstition.

SECT. XVII. Their third kind of Objection is by instancing in Ceremonies
abolished, because of the abuses of Heretics.
Their first Instance.
The Council of Gangris, Abridg. Lin^* page 18.
Can. 18. Anno 324. ordained that none should fast on the Lords day, because
the Manichees had taken up that day to fast on.

Our Answer.
And they had just cause so to ordain; but so had not you to conceal the
cause, which is delivered by Leo Bishop of Rome, in these words; Leo Epist. 93.
ad Tunbund,
The Manichees denying that Christ was borne in the true nature of man, observe
the Lords day in pensive fasting, which the Resurrection of Christ has
consecrated unto us to be cel^brated with joy: which custom of fasting they
deuote unto the Son, that they may altogether dissent from us in the unity of
faith. Thus much being premised, concerning the opinion of the Manichees; let
us now come unto the decree of the Council: Conc. Gangr. ca. 18.
If any shall fast on the Lords day [propter continentiam, quae putatur, aut
contumaciam] for that which is held (namely by the Maniches) a continency, or a
contumacie, and contempt (to wit, of the Christian profession, in celebrating
the faith of the resurrection of Christ) [ Anathema sit] let him be accursed.

But can you (that would make this Argument against us) aver that any of our
Ceremonies have in them any signification of contempt to any one Article of
Christian profession? Does not every one of them rather manifest and
demonstrate some special duty of Christianity? Those that are right Doctors
indeed do imitate good Nurces, Cic.
who first chew and masticate the morsels in their own mouths, before that
they put them into the mouths of their Infants. But you collect the Decrees of
Councels at all peradventure, without ever examining the reasons thereof, and
so deliver them to your disciples to swallow down whole. And therefore no
marvel if that many of your flock, whom you feed with such unprepared diet,
do swell so extremely with the windy crudities of their own conceits.

SECT. XVIII. Their second Instance, concerning the Ceremoni^s of Heretics.
Abridg. Linc. page 19.
The Council of Brac. 1. Can. 32. decreed that none of the Clergy should
forbear to eat flesh, that they might show themselves to differ from the
Priscilianists.

Our Answer.
From a Fast you invite us to a Feast, but it seems you know no cause why:
for these Priscilianists were in the heresy of the Maniches, who thought that
Flesh had not the beginning and creation thereof from God, but from the Author
of evil; Baron. Anno 5^7. number. 21. out of the Epist. of Pope Vigiliu^. Conc.
Ancyr. can. 14.
and upon that opinion abstained from it, Execrationis animo potius quam
deuotionis; that is, Rather upon an intent of detestation of flesh, than upon
any true devotion. As therefore it was ordained in the Council of Ancyra, that
the Clergymen in abstaining sometimes from the eating of flesh, should
notwithstanding [nam visum est eas attingere] touch it; thereby to manifest
their Orthodoxe judgments; namely, that they had not this creature of God in
any execration: so in the forenamed Council of Brac. it was decreed, that
Ecclesiastical persons, although sometimes they would refuse to eat flesh,
yet should they [ Praegustare olera cocta cum carnibus] that is, Taste of herbs
sod together with flesh; To what end? [ Pro amputanda suspicione Priscilianae
haereseos] To cut off the suspicion of the Priscilian heresy: As in the same
Decree is fully expressed.

If now you can show us the like cause of removing our Ceremonies, then may you
challenge of us the like effect. But tell us, what think you? Do Papists
jointly consort with us in the same Acts; either of wearing Surplices; or of
ministering of Baptism; or of communicating with us, without any opinion of
adoring the Sacraments; as in those days the Priscilianists did join at the
same Ordinaries and Banquets with the Catholics? First therefore you should
have shown your just cause of suspicion, and then might you boldly have framed
your Indightment.

SECT. XIX. Their third Instance, concerning the Abuse of Ceremonies by
Heretics.
Abridg. Linc. page 19.
Gregory, as we find him cited, alleges and approves a Decree of the
Council of Toledo, which forbad the Ceremony of thrice dipping in Baptism,
because it was the custom of the Heretics.

Our Answer.
If you had taken the pains to have read Gregory your selves, and had not
been content to take this up on trust, and at the second hand, of those who do
allege him, although partly truly, yet but only in part; he would have taught
you a lesson worth your remembrance, which is this; In eadem fide nihil officit
sanctae Ecclesiae consuetudo diuersa: That is, The diversity of customs (or
Ceremonies) used in the unity of the same faith, cannot prejudice the holy
Church. And therefore you are to know that other reformed Churches, whom you
would make adversaries to our Ceremonies, have no more cause to condemn us,
then we have to condemn them for diversity of Rites.

And concerning the Ceremonies objected, he shows, that it is a thing
indifferent in it self, whether the Church use thrice, or but only once
dipping: secondly, concerning the cause of this Indifferency; Q^omodo in
tribus mersionibus personarum vnitas, and in vna potest divinitatis
singularitas designari: He notes that whether it be thrice or once, both of
them are signs of mystical signification; the thrice dipping betokning the
Trinity of Persons, and the once, the unity of one essential Deity: thereby
allowing of these kind of spiritual significations, in such Ceremonies.

Thirdly, the cause why S. Gregory would have Thrice dipping changed into
once, was by reason of certain Heretics, who made an heretical construction
of the first custom of the Thrice-dipping; Dum mersiones numerantes,
divinitatem dividentes, etc. That is, upon the Thrice-dipping (as 1. in the
name of the Father, 2. in the name of the Son, 3. in the name of the Holy
Ghost) they divided the Deity into three Gods. Yea, and that there was once in
Spain such a necessity to change the same Rite, the forenamed Council of
Toledo sets down in this manner. Propterea quod quidam Sacerdotes simplam,
Conc. Tol^t.
quidam trinam mersionem faciunt, a nonnullis schisma esse conspicitur, and
fidei vnitas scindi videtur: nam dum parts diuersae in baptizandis aliquo
contrario modo agunt, alij alios non baptizatos esse contendunt. Certainly, if
ever any could have shown the like necessity against any of our Ceremonies,
then our most wise and religious Pilots of this Ship of Christ, that abandoned
all the heresies in Popedom, would never have entertained these other Rites.
But they were well persuaded that these our Ceremonies could not, by their
only moral significations, engender or harbor any heretical opinion.

SECT. XX. Their last Instance from Antiquity, concerning Ceremonies abused by
Heretics.
Leo advises all Christians to shun the vip^rous conferen^e of Heretics,
and that in nothing they would be like unto them, Abridg. Linc, page 20.
who in name only are Christians.

Our Answer.
You will still be like your selves, in alleging sentences of Fathers, without
due consideration of their senses. Leo Sermon. 18. de pass. Dom.
The words of Leo stand thus: Take you heed (beloved) of the craft of Satan,
who does not only seek to entrap you by ca^nall concupiscence, but does also
sow Tares together among the seeds of faith, to the end that whom he cannot
corrupt by evil deeds, them he may subvert by wicked errors. Fly you
therefore the arguments of humane Doctrine, and shun the viperous conference of
Heretics; have you nothing to do with them, who being Adversaries to the
faith, are Christians only in name. Which words [ Have you nothing to do with
them] you take, as spoken absolutely against all kind of Conformity with
such, and thereupon you except against al^ likeness in Ceremonies; whereas Leo
only gives a caution but to eschew doctrinall Conference: for the error,
which is the Viper, lay then couched in their doctrine, which was a mix^ure of
truth and falsehood, as it were, of Tares and Wheat together.

Otherwise, if you will have us to take it more generally, then shall it not be
lawful for you to confer with Papists, for their conversion; or to converse
with them so much as in buying of an horse; yea, or to commune with them at the
same table? As for our semblance with Papists in Ceremonies, it is not by joint
conversation and mixture with them, in the same worship, but accompanied with a
professed Separation from them, as in worship, so also in intention and
opinion. There is not then, in Leo, any thing which may more condemn us for
wearing the same colored Surplice in our Churches, than you, for using in your
houses and same kind of gown with them that are Christians only in name, that
is (as I may say) Christians Anti-christians. This therefore is no due manner
of commerce, to deliver your ware at your own price, without either weight or
measure.

Hitherto have we discussed your Arguments used for proof of your Mayor
Proposition, and displaied your manifold errors in all your inferences, which
have been grounded only upon a calumnious and odious comparison of our
Ceremonies with those that were Jewish Haereticall, or Heathenish: In all which
you have shown your selves as unskillful as the Painter, who sought to
proportion an horse by the pourtraict of an Elephant. Thus much in answer to
your Mayor Proposition.

SECT. XXI. The general Assumption of the N^n confo^mists, to prove our
Ceremonies to have been as ill as Heathenishly abused by the Papists.
But these Ceremonies of Surplice, Abridg. Linc. and other^.
etc. have been Idolatrously abused by Papists. Ergo, they ought to be
abolished.

Our Answer.
These Ceremonies (say you) have been Idolatrously abused. Where you must
understand by the word [ These] such Ceremonies which are either generally; or
else indiuidually and numerally the same. If you take take it in the
Generality, then cannot you justify any one of your own Ceremonies belonging
either to Order, or Decency. For what Act is there of gesture, or any
Circumstance of worship, which has not been some-way abused by Pagans,
Heretics, or some other superstitious Worshippers?

Secondly, If by [ these Ceremonies abused, etc.] you mean Ceremonies
indiuidually the same, then is your Assumption untrue; because that (which may
likewise be said of the rest) the Surplice, which is at this day worn by any
one of our Ministers, is not in number the very same, which had been dedicated
unto any Idolatrous service, either of Pagans, or Papists.

Notwithstanding, to suppose these our Ceremonies to be the very same, that
have been formally abused; yet would it trouble your wits, to prove that
therefore they must be necess^rily abolished: except you could euince, that
they were as well the same in form, as they are in matter. For learning
teaches us, that only form gives the being unto every thing, as natural to
natural, whereby a stone is a stone, and not wood; and Artificial unto
Artificial, whereby a Gown is a Gown, and not a Cloak; so the Ceremonial
form does give a distinct property to each Ceremonial matter. Where, by
form, (as for example in the Surplice,) we understand not the fashion of
habit, for it is Artificial, but the habitude, or application of a Ceremony,
according to the intention and opinion of them, that either impose or practice
it. Which opinion, or intent, if it be superstitious, the Ceremony takes a
denomination from thence, and cannot be denied to be superstitious. This
distinction is made sensible in the diverse use of Churches, the destinate
places of public worship; which, in Popery, were applied unto an Idolatrous
service, by their Mass: but the same Churches, being by us sanctified unto the
sincere worship of God, are as truly not the same in the Ceremonial form; as
in the Artificial fabrique and fashion they are the same.

If these kind of distinctions had illuminated your judgments, then would you
not so vrgently have gainsaid the use of these our Ceremonies, practiced among
our selves, because they had been sometimes abused by others. Thus much in
answer to your whole Agument, taken from Abuses.

SECT. XXII. Our general Confutation of the general Argument of the Non
conformists for the Abolishing of all Ceremonies, that have been once
superstitiously abused.
First, we will lay d^wne the profession of the Church of England in this Case.

Our Church in abolishing of some Romish Ceremonies, and in retaining others,
has been pleased to express her own meaning therein, and tells us first,
that she has abated of the Popish Excess and mul^itude, Com. book before
the Calender.
the burden whereof was intolerable. Thus of the number. Secondly, concerning
the kind of our Rites, she adds, saying. If any think much, that any of the
old Ceremonies do remain, and would have all devised anew; th^n such,
granting some Ceremon^es convenient to be had, surely (where the old may be
well used,) there they cannot reasonably reprove them, only for their age;
whereby they ought rather to have reverence to them, if they will declare
themselves to be more studious of unity and concord, than of innouations and
newfanglednesse. For as those be taken away, which were most abused; so those
that remain were retained, for discipline and order, which upon just causes
may be altered and changed.

The sum of all is this; It was the wisdom of the Church to remove all
Rites, the intolerable abuse whereof could not be avoided, without the utter
remoouing and abolishing of them. As for others, we see that she has
otherwise determined, and we now come to justify her precept and practice.

SECT. XXIII. Our Proofs, that some Ceremonies, which have been formerly
abused, are not therefore necessarily to be abolished, if they may be reduced
to their indifferent use.
These are taken from 1. Scriptures. 2. Fathers. 3. Reasons. 4. The
Non-conformists own witnesses. 5. The acknowledgements, and practices of the
Non-conformists themselves.


Our first Proof is from Scripture, by the general Equity of Gods Law.
Judge. 6.
Gedeon was commanded by God to take out of the high places wood, (which had
been Idolatrously abused in their groves,) and (notwithstanding such
Heathenish abuse) to apply it to the worship of the true God, in burning it
for the sacrificing of their Holocausts. Here, you will say, that this was not
any invention of man; but even the express commandment of God: It is true;
yet seeing that the actions of men receive their directions from the
commandments of God, what reason can any allege, why this special act of God
should not (as your selves have confessed) infer a Pattern of Equity for all
such Ordinances, as men in like case, shall appoint, concerning the service of
God? even as well as that of Joshua, Ios. 6.19.
whereby he commanded that the silver and gold, and vessels of brass, and of
Iron should be brought into the Treasury of the house of the Lord,

And furthermore, although the commandment of God was perempto^y, charging the
Governors of Israel, to subvert all the places of H^athen^sh worship, to
destroy their altars, break down their images, burn their g^oues, demolish
their Idols, and to root out the very name of those places: yet
notwithstanding afterward, in the time of the Judges was Gedeon permitted to
offer of his own accord a sacrifice under an oak. Aug.
Whereupon Saint Augustine is noted to observe, That the custom of Gods
people, whereby they offered sacrifice even without the Tabernacle, (if only
to the true God, and not unto strange Gods) was so far approved by God
himself, that he was said to be [exaudiens offerentes;] which I may interpret,
to yield unto the prayers of them, who did offer sacrifices. Which example we
have propounded, although not as every way imitable, yet to prove that to do
things in their own nature not impious, for the furtherance of Gods worship,
is not so culpable as some would enforce.

SECT. XXIIII. Our second Proof is from the judgment of ancient Fathers.
The Fathers did not always abolish such Ceremonies, as had been formerly
abused, for they (as your selves know) did for a long time continue the Jewish
Ceremony of Ester, observed by the godly Bishops and Martyrs of the Churches of
Asia, albeit, not Iewishly, that is, to the same end, whereunto the Jews did
celebrate it. Yea, and the Ceremony of Circumcision was, for many years,
continued in the succession of many Christian Bishops of Jerusalem; although
not Sacramentally, after the profession of the Jews, thereby to signify that
Christ the promised seed was to come in the flesh, (which was a Ceremony
Prophetical) but Historically, to show their descent from the loins of their
grand Patriarch Abraham, the first father of Circumcision.

So likewise, the Testimonies, which your selves have alleged and objected out
of the Fathers, show, that they did not evermore purge the former Abuses of
Ceremonies, by privation, in remoouing the things themselves; but sometimes
only by translation. As for example* The Council of Nice changed the Jewish
Easter into the Lords day; Conc. Nicen.
And the Council of Gangris, abolishing the Fasts, Conc. G^ng.
which some used vnchristianlie on the Lords day, Can. 18. did in the 19.
denounce an Anathema and curse against them, who should condemn other Fasts
appointed by the Church. Many such like changes are found in antiquity,
concerning Fasts, Feasts, Habits, and other like adjuncts of holy worship.
Which do altogether disable the validity of your Position, that would
extinguish all Ceremonies, which have at any time been superstitiously used,
either after any Jewish, Heretical, or Heathenish opinion.

Lastly, you have been so frequent, urgent, and instant in alleging the
Testimonies of ancient Doctors, for the abolishing of all things which have
been formerly abused, that a man would think you profess your selves to be
children of those grave Fathers, and to yield your selves to be governed by
their prudent directions. But it is well known to as many as have seen the
faces of the aforesaid Fathers, either in the general Histories of the Church,
or in their own books, that all of them did both maintain and practice the
use of mystical Ceremonies. Will you therefore admit of their judgments? why
then do you reject such kind of Ceremonies? will you not allow them? why do you
then object such witnesses, whose universal consent you can so easily
contemn? Nay but to refuse (as you often do) to be tried by the Testimonies
of such Fathers, whose patronage in the very same cause you have so
peremptorily challenged, must needs bewray in you preuarication, rather than
confidence, in this manner of proof.

SECT. XXV. Our third Proof, for Confutation of their Tenent, is from Reasons:
And our first Reason is from an Inconvenience.
There was never almost any truth so divine, or Ceremony so sacred, which the
filthy mouths, and sordid fingers of some heretics, have not wickedly
polluted. Thus diverse of them have not forborne to pervert, to their Heretical
senses, both the Sacraments of our Lord Jesus, being unto us the two seals of
the Covenant of Grace. As first, concerning Baptism, some Heretics have erred
in the matter, Baptizing with fire; so did the Seleuci: some in the form, In
nomine igno^i Patris, as did the Marcitae; some in the persons baptized, by
Baptizing the dead, as did the Cataphryges; some by Rebaptizing, as do the
Anabaptists.

Secondly, concerning the Eucharist likewise, the Cathari would not admit, for
the matter, Bread, as thinking this Creaturue was from an evil beginning. The
Aquarij would not allow of Wine. But, of all other, the Papists have most
profaned this holy Sacrament, by their manifold Sacrilege, as well through
their irreligious opinions, as by their Idolatrous Adorations. We are not
ignorant that you do except against some things which being abused by man,
were not commanded by God: notwithstanding these instances may serve to teach
us, that seeing the best things, and of most holy use have been subject unto
heretical abuses of godless men; it will be almost impossible for us to find
any Ceremony which shall be altogether without exception; And to be forbidden
to use any Ceremony, would bring no small prejudice to our Christian liberty.

SECT. XXVI. Our second Reason is taken from the absurdity of the
Non-conformists Rule of reforming Abuses only by Abrogation; and of curing
Contraries by Contraries.
Whereas the Non-conformists say, that Contraries are to be cured by
contraries; M. Cartwr.
as if there were no way to purge Superstition, but by the extirpation of all
Monuments and Remembrances thereof: I would wish them to consider whether to
argue (as they have done) from the abuse of a thing, to the necessary
abolishing of the use thereof, be not as great an abuse of true Logic, as a
Scholar in any reasoning can possibly commit? Because, according to the right
Topique place (concerning Use and Abuse) the Axiom stands rather thus?
Whatsoever is subject to abuse, the same may be turned to a right use. And the
reason is good, because Vsus Instrumenti est per se, abusus vero est per
accidens. Nothing can be excepted from this Rule, but only sins and
defects, which are not things abused, but merely Abuses themselves.

In the causes Levitically-Legal, a Woman polluted and defiled with an
uncleanness, Leuit. 12.
might be purged from her issue of blood: And a man that had a running issue in
his flesh, might be cleansed. Leuit. 15.
Seeing therefore these Legal pollutions had their cleansings; how then is it,
that you assume so conclusiuely, that A Ceremony being once superstitiously
defiled cannot afterward be made clean?

Secondly, in Moral causes, (for there may be an Analogy between the
Leuiticall pollutions and cleansings, and the Moral abuses, and their
reformations) a woman that has committed folly, although she cannot recover
her Virginity, yet upon her repentance, she may repair her honesty: Again,
the person that is as sacrilegious as Dionysius, may be restitution and alms,
become as truly Gods Almoner, as Zacheus. May it be thus in persons, and
cannot the like alteration be had of Abuses in actions, which otherwise in
themselves are indifferent?

Thirdly, in natural and artificial Objects, both Art and Nature seem to
exclaim against your Consequences: For as the Orator speaks, Solemn e mundo
tollere videtur, qui vsum propter abusum tollit; He seems to pull the Sun
out of the firmament, that takes away the use of each thing, for the abuse
thereof. For we may see, there is a kind of sin which may be called Demon
meridianus; a devil that danceth at noonday; whereby is meant that the
glorious light of the Sun is notably abused by some most impudent
Transgressors, for the acting of their sins in pomp and iollitie: And is not
the universality of creatures said, (...), to groan and travel, in birth, as
desirous to be delivered? Romans 8.22.
Surely, from the tyranny of men's Abuses.

In brief, to profess to reform abuses only by utter abolishing of the
things abused, is as much as to teach the Surgeon to profess no cure of
men's diseased limbs, but only Abscision: The Barber no Art but shauing to the
quick, and even flaying away the skin: The Magistrates no Rule of punishing,
but according to Draco his Laws (Sanguine scriptas) only by death.

SECT. XXVII. Our third Proof from Reason, is, by showing other means for
reforming the abuses of things, than by abolishing the things themselves.
The means which are to be used, in reforming of things abused, are three;
Abrogation, Translation and Correction: Our Non-conformists allow, and practice
only the first kind, urging and pressing the necessity of Abrogation,
Abolition, and utter extirpation of Ceremonies, which have once been
superstitiously abused.

But our Church, in her singular wisdom, as she has most religiously dealt
with the number of superfluous and Idolatrous Rites in the Romish Church; which
she has abandoned; so has she discreetlie ordered those Ceremonies, which she
thought good to retain, by removing only the abuses and superstitions, and
reforming them, either by Translation or else by Correction. I will give an
Instance in either of them.

First, the Cross, about the celebration of Baptism, which was used of the
Papists before the act of Baptizing, in a superstitious opinion, for a kind of
Adiuration: for the avoiding whereof, our Church has translated the sign of
the Cross, to have place after the Sacramental act, as attending the
Sacrament, and making up the retinue of ornaments about it. As therefore M.
Calvin, (speaking of the change of the Saboth day of the creation, into the day
of Christ's Resurrection, and, as I may so say, recreation of mankind) says,
Calvi^.
Dies Sabbati non sublatus, sed translatus est: that It is not quite removed,
but translated: So may we deal, in alteration of Ceremonies, as has been
already exemplified in the diverse customs of ancient Churches. And judge, I
pray you, Sect. 24.
whether our Churches alteration of a Ceremony, from a false and
superstitious, into a true and religious signification, be not an excellent
kind of Translation.

Secondly, although Translation be a kind of Correction, yet seeing that
every Correction is not a Translation, we proceed to speak concerning that
kind of reformation of Ceremonies, so abused, which is by Correction; whereof
Chemnitius has considered right well, speaking of Ceremonies, which have
degenerated from their truly wholesome use; [Tales vel corrigendi vel mutandi,
Exam. part. 2 page 34 col. 1.
vel exemplo Aenei serpentis prorsus tollendi sunt] Such Ceremonies (says he)
are either to be corrected, or altered, or else according to the example of the
Brazen Serpent, they are to be quite taken away.

To which purpose Zanchius requires them that retain The feast days which
had been superstitiously polluted [vt ea superstitionibus defaecata
sanctificentur] that is, De Redemp. in 4. praecept. page ^78.
That they being purged from the lees of superstition, may be sanctified;
namely, to an holy use. So that even as, where the snuff of Torches or
Candles does grow so big and so black that it hinders the light, we do not
therefore take away the light, but rather do cleanse, or cut off the snuff it
self: In like manner, such has been the wisdom of our Church, and State in
this Land, in reforming of the Popish Abuses in our Ceremonies, that she has
purged the superstitious doctrines; which is, their opinion of Efficacious
holiness, and Idolatrous ^pplication of Divine honor: but yet has she
preserved the light of Moral significations, which are Sanctity in the
Minister, Constancy in every Christian baptized into the faith of Christ; and
Humility in all faithful Communicants, at the receiving of the sacred
Mysteries of Christ's death.

SECT. XXVIII. Our fourth Proof from Reason, against their last General
Argument; especially in their Assumption; wherein they argued from the
extirpation of the Ceremonies of Pagans, for the abolishing of the Ceremonies
of Papists.
We owe a right even unto our enemies, and therefore must acknowledge, that it
is a like error to affirm, that there ought to be the same difference of
Religion in case of Ceremonies, between Protestants and Papists, which should
be between Papists and Pagans; as it is to require the same distance between
England and Calecute, which is between Rome and England: especially
considering that the gods of the Gentiles were all devils. For among the
innumerable Altars that were used of the Heathen, we read not of any one that
had any truth of Religion in it, but only that one at Athens, which had this
inscription upon it, Act. 17.23.
To the unknown God. Which notwithstanding was, alas! but a glympse of true
light; for still God was unto them but as unknown. As for the Papist, his
Creed is the same with ours, in believing the Only omnipotent God Maker of
heaven and earth: unto whom he commends his prayers, although sometimes
Recto, sometimes but Obliquo modo; and together with us he professes the Lord
Jesus, and believes to have propitiation in his Blood. So that the furniture
of Habites and Vestiments, which that Church used, being primarily consecrated
to that supr^eme end, to wit, the worship of God in Jesus Christ, may not be
esteemed of equal abomination with the Habits of Paynims, which were
dedicated unto devils.

Besides, there are between Us and the Papists, certain other Communia
principia, Common Principles of Religion, whereupon we use to ground our
Christian conclusions, to wit, Holy Scriptures, Ecclesiastical Stories,
Writings of ancient Fathers, together with common Axioms received of all
Christian Schools, by reason whereof we can confute their errors, and more
easily reform the Abuses of their Ceremonies by Correction: But between Us
and Pagans, the case is far different: For in that their Ceremonies are
properly and immediately directed to false gods, we have none, or but very few
common axioms whereby to reduce them from their Heathenish and Idolatrous
opinions: whence it is, that the superstition of their Ceremonies is best
refuted, by only removing them.

SECT. XXIX. The fourth general ground of Confutation of their former
Argument, is, from the testimonies of their principal witnesses.
You your selves in this question have objected M. Calvin, P. Martyr, and
Zepperus, as if they had abandoned all use of Romish Ceremonies; with as an
extreme a detestation, as they do the very Heathenish: whereas, Call. Opusc.
Tract. de vitand. superstit. page 78.
if you would have consulted with M. Calvin, in a place professedly assigned
for the Avoiding of Romish superstition, he would have taught you that there is
a maine difference between Turks and Papists; Because [Multa habemus etc.]
There are many points common (says he) between us and Papists, especially
this, that we have both our Denominations from Christ etc. And after he
infers, that Although there be many Ceremonies among the Papists, which we
may not observe, yet (says he) [Nequis me adeo austerum esse, vel praecisi
rigoris etc.] lest any man may think me to be so rigorously precise, that I
would forbid a Christian [ne se Papistis vlla in Ceremonia aut obseruatione
acco^modet] that is, to apply himself in any Ceremony unto the Papists; Be it
known, that it is not my purpose to condemn any thing which is not directly
evil in it self.

Now who knows not, that the thing which is made Evil only through Abuse,
cannot be said any way to be evil in it self? And we have heard already of
his allowance of material Churches, howsoever they were once polluted with
Romish superstition: Mosaic. expl. l. 4. c. 7. page 318.
whereof Zepperus confesses, saying; The Popish Temples, what were they, but
the Receptacles of all Idolatry, which did bellow out nothing but mere
abominations? yet from hence it does not follow, that the Churches of
Protestants must therefore be destroyed, and new ones built in their steads:
because those Temples were not the immediate instruments of Idolatry, as the
Altars were, which could not but serve immediately unto their God Mauzim, even
to the execrable sacrifice of the Mass. And although we read in the
Ecclesiastical Story of Ruffinus, Ruff. l. 2. c. 4.
of the destruction of an Heathenish Temple by convert Christians; and of
Constantine his Edict for the demolishing of the Temples of the Gentiles and
Heretics: Eusebius. lib. 3. de vita Constable. c. 1. and 3. ^useb. lib. 5. hist.
Eccl. c. 16
the like of the Edict of Theodosius the elder; that is no more than we may say
of some Churches and Temples, which stand in remote places, instituted by
Papists for the use of Pilgrims and Passengers, whereof there is no convenient
use. In this Author, you may observe a distinction between things immediately,
(as Altars,) and mediatly (as Temples) dedicated to Idolatry; and that
Zepperus excluding the latter, yet allows of the first, although the Temples
so polluted with Idolatry, be now materially and indiuidually the same, which
are used by Protestants in the sincere and holy worship of God.

P. Martyr is plentiful in this point; P. Martyr Ep. ad Hoope^^ p. 1087.
first putting in a Caveat, which will be for the direction of your
consciences, if you will hearken unto him; and if you will not, yet then also
will it make for your correction. Cauendum est profecto etc. We must in any
case take heed (says he) lest that we do press the Church with too much
servitude, as to think that we may use nothing which has been Popish. Surely,
the ancient Fathers took the Temples of Idols and converted them into holy
houses of God, wherein Christ our Savior should be worshipped; and the
Revenues which had been consecrated unto the gods of the Gentiles, for the
maintenance of their Vestall Virgins, that they took for the support of the
Ministers of the Church; albeit such things had served not only to the honor
of Antichrist, bu^ of the devils themselves. Yea, and also the very verses of
the Poets, which were dedicated unto the Muses, and diverse gods, or for the
use of Comedies, or serving in the Theater, for pacifying of their gods; such
did Ecclesiastical Writers (the holy Fathers) use, so far as they found them
fit, good, and true; and were thereunto directed by the example of the Apostle,
who did not disdain to cite Menander, Aratus, and Epimenides, and to set down
the same words, which were otherwise profane, and to apply them to Gods
worship: Except perhaps you shall deem that the words in holy Writ do serve so
much unto Gods worship, as do the visible words of the holy Sacraments.
Furthermore, who does not know, that wine was consecrated unto Bacchus; Bread
to Ceres; Water to Neptune; Olives to Minerua; Letters to Mercury; Songs to
the Muses, or to Apollo? All which, notwithstanding we doubt not to apply as
well in Sacred, as in Civil uses, albeit they had been dedicated unto the
very Devils. So he. Whereby, as we see, he puts in a caveat against all
fierce and calumnious Disputers, who infer from every former abuse of
Surplice, a necessary abolishing of all use thereof.

SECT. XXX. Our fifth and last ground of Confutation of their general Argument,
against our Ceremonies, in respect of their former Abuses, is taken from the
Confession and Practse of the Non-conformists themselves.
The first, and fairest objects which offer themselves unto our eyes, among the
Ceremonies in Romish worship, and their Churches, Chalices, Vestiments, Bells,
and if you will, also their round Wafer-cake; all which have been Idolatrously
abused by Papists. Their Churches were most superstitiously dedicated after the
manner of charming; their Chalices, and Table-clothes, were no less immediate
Instruments of their Idolatrous Mass, than were their Altars; their Bells were
baptized, with an opinion of infused Holiness and virtue to drive away Devils.
Durandus, and Durantus, Durand. in Rational. Dura^t. de Ritibus.
two Masters of the Ceremonies in the Romish Church, do derive many
superstitious Significations from these, and almost all other Instruments of
Romish service, even unto the very Knots of the Bel-ropes.

The Case thus standing, must we now by the Conclusion of our Non-conformists,
stand chargeable to turn our Temples into Barnes or Hay-lofts (which I wish
were not practiced by some that will seem to make most conscience against a
Ceremony,) Silver Chalices into wooden cups; Bells into Gunnes, and Bel-ropes
into halters, etc? Nay, even your selves are not so far fallen out with
Popish Ceremonies, but that you can be contented to except out of your Position
such as may be of necessary use. Yea, and one who is held as a principal,
Linc. general Rule.
and (as it were) Super-intendent among you, does more fully express your
opinion than others, thus: Many of our Churches were builded by Papists, and
dedicated to the honor of Saints, and service of some Idol, yet these being in
the first foundation, M Hy. p. 22.
( which I take to have been in Constantines time) intended for the true
worship of God, and having both then and now a needful use among us, may be
retained. I think that Gregory did well, who said unto Augustine the Monk
being then in England, that for the Pagan and Idol Churches, he should only
purge them, and not pull them down -- yea, and Popish vestments may serve, for
substance of the stuff, to make window Cushions, or a Pulpit-Cloth; Provided
always, that there be no Cross nor Crucifix upon it. The like may be said of
Bells, Fonts, Tables, Flago^s, Pulpits, all which having some profitable use in
the Church of God, may by the warr^nt of Gods word be retained, although in
Popery they have been abused. Thus far this Non conformist.

Mark now, I pray you, from whence, and whither you are come. Your first
Conclusions were for the extirpation of all Ceremonies formerly abused to
Idolatry, (whether Jewish, Heathenish or Popish;) and that (as you affirm)
necessarily and absolutely to the quite abolishing not only of the things
themselves, but even the Monuments and names, yea, and the very shadows and
resemblances of them, that at length all memory of them may be swallowed up of
oblivion: and these your assertions you pretended to be grounded upon
Scriptures, Councels, Fathers, and Testimonies of Protestant Divines. Thus in
your former Conclusions.

But contrarily now, in your Confessions and practices, you yield unto us the
use of Shadows, of names, and of things themselves, which have been once
defiled by Idolatrous pollutio^. 1. Shadows, for you forbear not to deck
your houses with Bay-leaues, notwithstanding you held this an execrable
Ceremony among the Pagans. Nor do you alter the situation of your Churches,
and Chancels toward the East, albeit that Ceremony has been Heathenishly
abused to the adoration of the Sun. And do you not ordinarily as well in your
vulgar English, as in Latin, call some of the days of the week by names
anciently appropriated unto the seven Planets; or to the Heathen So, according
to the Saxon language, Weedon, sig. Mercury, Thor. Jupiter, F^ya, Venus.
gods? viz. Dies Saturni, etc. Saturday, Sun-day, Moon-day? Besides, you do
religiously and Christianly celebrate monthly Communions, to the remembrance of
Christ; notwithstanding that the Pagans had their monthly festiuals in the
beginning of their Calends. And finally, if you will needs stand upon names,
you may not lawfully so much ^s name the word Ceremony, (if as some hold) the
same word [ Ceremonie] have been borrowed by the Romish Pagans from their
goddess Ceres. Nor can you be said to abstain from all appearance of Iew^sh
observations, whilst with us you Christianly celebrate the feast of Pentecost,
which the Israelites did observe Iewishly: or else by having the tables of the
commandments, written upon the pillars of the Churches, which the Jews did
write upon the Posts of their houses.

But what do we talking of names, and shadows? you are furthermore contented
in some things to retain their materials, and to change only the fashions:
for you allow that Popish vestment^ be changed into Cushions for the Churches
us, and Copes into Pulpit-clothes. And you agree that some other things, as
Bells, Fonts, Tables, and Churches themselves (although never so filthily
polluted) may both in form and in matter contiue the same. Is there not then
an huge (...) between your former Conclusions, and these after Confessions?

We come now to examine your Reason of allowing any of the former Ceremonies,
although they have been Idolatrously abused. You allege that you only allow
them, because they are profitable and necessary. But what? absolutely
necessary? This you cannot affirm, because the primitive Church (as you well
know) of a long time kept not their worship in Temples, but in Cryptis, even in
private houses and deserts. Nor used they seats or Cushions, for in the time of
persecution they were contented to use their Stations, which shows that their
common gesture was standing. Again, there was a time, when the Ministers were
golden, and their Chalices but wooden; and indeed the Church under persecution
did forbear to put on any ornaments of vestures: and then Baptism was not in
Fonts, but in Rivers and Fountains. Nor were people assembled to the public
Service of God by the sound of Bells, but of men's voices. All which accidental
supplies do plainly show, that the Profit of these things, which you your
selves think worthy to be continued, is of no absolute necessity.

Lastly, you may enquire of the Church of Geneua, why she imposes the
Wafer-cake to be observed of her Ministers and people, albeit she is not
ignorant, that the round Wafer among the Papists had the signification of the
pence, for which Christ was sold by Judas? and became (after their Romish
consecration) not only Idolatrous, but the very Idol it self?

Upon these Premises, I make bold to argue thus, If your imagined necessity,
which is in truth but a conueniencie, be of power to take away the Idolatrous
pollution of Temples, Bells, Tables, Chalices, even (as it is said) By the
warrant of the word of God, which requires Decency, Order, and Edification in
his service: then doubtl^sse the Decency, Order, and Edification it self,
which are to be discerned in our Ceremonies, may be thought much more able to
purge and purify the Ceremonies, which have been changed from their Popish use.

But of the Profit and conueniencie of our Ceremonies we shall have occasion to
speak more particularly, when we shall come to the confutation of your
particular Accusations. I have no delight to wade any longer in this lake of
Abuses, and therefore leaving these our Confutations to the consideration of
our ingenuous Reader, I pass from this fourth general Argument of the
Non-conformists against our Ceremonies, unto the Argument following.

CHAP. V.
SECT. I. The fifth general Argument of the Non-conformists, against the
aforesaid Ceremonies, taken from the Scandal, which they impute unto them.
Mayor. Then especially does a Ceremony become in use unlawful, Linc. page 45.
when it cannot be used without scandal and offense: for the holy Ghost
speaking of indifferent things, strictly charge to take heed, that we neither
put an occasion to fall, or lay a stumbling block before a brother. Romans
14.13. nor make him weak, ver. 21. nor give him cause to speak or think ill
of us, ver. 16. nor grieve him thereby, ver. 15. -- The Reason is given,
because it tends to the destruction of him, ver. 20. And that all Ceremonies
become unlawful, in the case of scandal, is the judgment of Divines.

Assumption. But these Ceremonies of Surplice, Cross in Baptism, Kneeling at
the receiving of the Communion are Scandalous. Ergo they ought to he removed.

Our first Answer to their Mayor, by exposition of the word, Scandal.
SOme understand by the word [ Scandall] every kind of grieuing or angring of
any Brother: but if this were true, then might Christ be said to have
Scandalized Peter, whom he did much perplexe and grieve, when after Peter's
third denial of him, Ioh. 15.16.
he asked him, saying, Simon, love thou me? But this grieuance being not ad
ruinam, but ad correctionem, for instruction, not for destruction, cannot be
properly called a Scandal.

Again, the Apostle is exact in forbidding every Christian to do that, Romans 14.
wherewith any Brother may be offended, scandalized or weakened: from which
diversity of words, some do extract different senses, as that [ offendiculum]
Offense must signify that act of one man, whereby another is hindered in the
course of faith and godliness, so that he go backe-ward from his profession.
And secondly, by [ scandalum] scandall] they understand such an hinderance,
which makes a man fall either into dangerous errors in doctrine, or else some
sinful act of conversation. Thirdly, by [ weakenesse] they interpret such an
hinderance, whereby a Christian is made only more slow, and remiss in the
profession and course of Christianity. Which three phrases are notwithstanding
expounded more pertinently by others, to be set down thus severally, not by
way of distinction, but for exaggeration of the sin of wilful offense
against Christians, in provoking of them unto any damnable error or sin, by
any sensible external means. And in this last sense do we proceed to discuss
this Argument concerning scandal.

SECT. II. Our second Answer is by distinction of the kinds of scandal.
I. Division.
That distinction of scandal will best fit our purpose, whereby it is usually
divided into these two members, the one is called Active, the other Passive.

SECT. III. Our I. Subdiuision of Active Scandal, is in respect of the party
Agent direct. indirect.

The Active is in respect of the party Agent, who by an Act which he does,
shall willingly provoke another to any evil. And this kind admits many
Subdiuisions: First, than an Active Scandal is either directly evil, or only
indirectly. The direct manner of scandal is, when the Act is evil in it
self. Thus the Act of David's murder was scandalous. 2. Sam. 12.24
And this kind of scandal is no way excusable, being evil ratione obiecti,
which is properly sin.

The Indirect scandal, is seen in Acts which are in their own nature good,
or at least not evil: but yet because either in respect of time, or place, or
of some other Circumstance, the act does occasionally fall out to be
scandalous, as did the eating of things offered unto Idols, Act. 15.
which was therefore forbidden: being a sin either more or less, according to
the diverse affections of the Offender. For this indirect scandal may happen
to be after two sorts, sometime without the intention of the Agent, who has no
meaning to give any such offense: of which kind we may reckon the fact of Saint
Peter, when he did so partially apply himself unto the Jews, to the scandal
of the Gentiles. And this we call the less sin. The other manner of indirect
scandal, is that which sometimes proceeds from the wicked intent in the
Scandalizer; and such was the sin of many Heretics, Gal. 2.11.
who would use Fasts, and other Ceremonies of devotion and austerity, to draw
disciples after them, and to seduce men from the truth of Christ. Thus much in
respect of the party Agent.

SECT. IIII. Our 2. Subdiuision of Active scandal, in respect of persons
offended, either weak. strong.

The second Subdiuision hereof is in respect of the persons that are offended;
for it is either perfectorum hominum, of men thoroughly grounded; or pusillorum,
of weak, and more simple. Concerning the Perfect, the Stumbling block is on
their part that gave scandal, albeit the parties that are offended, are not
thereby scandalized, that is, not so offended, as to stumble and fall. And thus
it may be said, Mar^. 16.
that Peter did scandalize Christ himself, when wishing Christ to favor
himself, and not to die, he received that answer from Christ, -- Satan thou
art a scandal unto me. For albeit this motion proceeded from a good and most
friendly intent in Saint Peter, who was the speaker (for it was only that
Christ should favor himself, for the preservation of his life,) yet did
Christ discern therein a wicked purpose of the suggester the devil: for the
which cause Christ called Peter, Satan: because in Peter's seeking to hinder the
death of Christ, Satan sought to hinder man's redemption. But Christ preferring
man's salvation before his own life, taught us by his own example to deal
with all such scandals or blocks, which are temptations to hinder us in our
course of Christianity, even as a man would do with a block that lies in his
way, that is, to Cast it behind him: for so said Christ in his answer; Get thee
behind me Satan. As for the [ Pusilli] and weak ones, our Savior speaks in
their behalf, saying; He that offends one of these little ones that
believes in me, Math. 18.
it were better etc. Thus much in respect of the Parties.

SECT. V. Our 3. Subsidiuision of Active Scandal, in respect both of persons
and cause, either Determined, Undetermined.

A third subdiuision is both in respect of the cause, and of the persons in
cases of indifferency: For sometime this case is determined by the Church, and
sometimes it happens not to be publicly defined. When such a matter is once
fully concluded by the Church, whether in part, or in whole, so that it does
not evidently appear to be against the Word of God, so far forth it greatly
concerns all such persons to conform themselves thereunto, according to the
doctrine of S. Paul, in a question of Ceremony; If any seem to be contentious,
1. Cor. 11.16.
we have no such custom, nor the Church of God. For indeed, all men are bound
in conscience to preserve above all things the regard of the general peace of
Gods Church, before the grieuance of any sort or sect of men. Which the Apostle
also does expressly teach, saying; Give offense to no man, neither to the Jew,
nor to the Gentle, 1* Cor. 10.13.
nor (which the Apostle adds in a further speciality) to the Church of God:
Because such a Scandal is so much the more heinous than others, by how much
more pernicious a thing it is to the endangering of the health of the whole
body, than to weaken or lame any one limb or member thereof.

But if the case be either not at all, or but only in part determined by the
Church, then is there a charitable consideration to be had of other men's
consciences, who are not persuaded of the lawful use of indifferent things.
Then the general rule is, that so far as a man may use indifferent things
(without offense of others) he need not to forbear them. Eat (says the
Apostle) making no question for conscience sake. 1. Cor. 10.25.
Why? Because God has given man a liberty to use such things, or not to use
them. And the Apostles reason is this, -- For the earth is the Lords. But in
case of offense against others, the Rule is, [ Not to eate] namely in the
behalf of another man's conscience.

This was the cause that the Council of the Apostles, giving liberty to use
such meats, as had been formerly accounted unclean, did notwithstanding make
a restraint from eating of Strangled and Blood, and things offered unto Idols:
Act. 15.
lest thereby they might give offense to the Jewish Proselites newly called to
the faith. And for the same cause, the Apostle in great circumspection did
circumcise Timothy, to avoid the Scandal of the Jewish new Conuerts, and
lately called to the faith of Christ: but at another time would not circumcise
Titus, Gal. 2.3.
lest he might give way to false Apostles, who defended an absolute necessity
of Circumcision; to the prejudice of the liberty of the Gospel. Thus much in
respect of both Cause and Parties.

SECT. VI. Our 4. Subdiuision of Active Scandal, in respect of consequences,
and effects, in occasioning A lapse into sin, or error. Hinderance from
Grace.

The fourth and last Subdiuision is in respect of the Consequences, and the
effects of Scandal, whether it be an Hinderance of their salvation, who are
already members of the Church, by provoking them with such Scandalous examples,
either to use indifferent things against their consciences; and occasion them
to relapse from the faith, as has been said: or else if it be an hinderance of
them who are yet aliens from the covenant of grace, to set a Scandal and
block against them. Which latter point of Scandalizing, S. Paul does condemn,
saying, Give no offense neither to the Jew, 1. Cor. 10.32.
nor to the Grecian. Whereupon, Calv. Ibid.
The Apostle (says M. Calvin) names Jews and Gentiles, teaching us, that we
are debtors unto all sorts of men, even to those that are Aliens, that we may
gain them to the faith. Thus much of Active Scandal.

SECT. VII. Of the second general member of Scandal, which is called Passive:
and the division thereof is in respect of the Party offended. Matter of offense.

The second general member of Scandal is called Passive, when the offense is
not given by any fault of the Speaker, or Doer, but rather taken by the
sinister apprehension of the Hearer, or Interpreter, concerning some thing that
is either good, or at least not evil in it self. Which Passive offense is
distinguished, either in respect of the party offended, or else in respect of
the nature of that matter, wherein the offense does consist.

SECT. VIII. Our 1. Subdiuision of the Passive Scandal, is, concerning the
fault of the party offended, either by defect in Judgment. Affection.

The fault of the party offended may proceed from a double defect: one is the
corruption of his judgment, yet through a wilful and an affected ignorance:
such as was the Scandal taken by the Capernaites, through their carnal
construction of that speech of our Savior, saying; Ioh. 6.
Except you eat the flesh of the Son of man etc. Whereat some were so
greatly offended, that they refused to hear Christ any more: and for the which
some Disciples also did apostatate from him. This I may call an affected
ignorance, because they did not ingenously seek to be satisfied by any Reason;
but only in a mere stupiditie, Verse 52.
or rather obstinate incredulity asked, How shall he give us his flesh to eat?
For notwithstanding they were answered by Christ himself, that the speech was
not to be taken carnally or literally, but spiritually; yet had they not the
patience to endure the speech of Christ: For which cause he suffered them
(wretched men that they were!) to Depart from him. Thus much of the Scandal
proceeding from the judgment of the Party.

The second defect proceeds directly from the poison of a carnal affection;
whether of pride (as in such as took offense at the poverty of Christ:) or in
envy, which is called oculus nequam: 1. Pet. 2.8.
as in him that took offense at Christ's bounty, unto whom it was said: Math.
20.15.
Is thy eye evil because mine is good? Or lastly in malice; which is called,
Scandalum Pharisaeorum, who took offense both at the miracles of Christ,
imputing them to the Prince of the Devils: and at his doctrine, conce^ning whom
Christ, (as permitting malicious men, if they needs will, to fall, sinck, and
perish in their sins) says in that place; Let them alone, they are blind
Leaders of the blind, Mat. 15.14:
and both shall fall into the Ditch. And the truth is, that whosoever they be
that are Scandalized, through their own malice or wilfulness, Non tam pati
dici possunt, quam facere Scandalum, that is, They may be said more properly to
do, than to suffer scandal. Thus much of the Scandal passive, as it
respects the disposition of the party scandalized.

SECT. IX. Our 2. Subdiuision of Scandal Passive, in respect of the opinion of
Indifferency. Necessity,

The second respect, considerable in a Scandal of this kind, does r^gard the
nature of the cause, whereabout it does arise; which is sometimes about a
matter indifferent. Now in such a case, questionless, much indulgence should
be used toward weak persons, whose infirmity proceeds only from simple
ignorance: Nor should we, (where the case stands thus) provoke any by our
example to use any thing (although otherwise indifferent) against their
consciences; because this is called a Destroying of thy brother. 1. Cor. 14.20.
Which indulgence notwithstanding is to be allowed only till such time, as the
doctrine, concerning the indifferency of using or not using the thing in
question has been sufficiently declared: after which time, if any
presumptuously persevere, and will not be instructed, the condign penalty which
shall be thenceforth inflicted, cannot be called Scandalum, since that this
does always presuppose a mere weakness, for want of due means of knowledge.

But if the event and consequence of the Scandal be not only an offense of
private men's consciences, but also an overthrow of some general and necessary
doctrine of the Church, which tends to edification and salvation, then ought
we to maintain the Tenet of S. Augustine; Aug.
Praestat vt scandalum admittatur quam vt veritas amittatur: meaning, that it
is better the persons of some men should take offense by our Preaching and
doctrine, then that the truth of God should suffer any prejudice through our
regardlesse silence. And for our better warrant in so doing, S. Paul has given
us manifest documents from his own examples, one, in not circumcising of
Titus, Gal. 2.
and the other, in withstanding of Peter.

Thus much of the Divisions and Subdiuisions of Scandal; which being duly
considered, will expedite all difficulties that you can object in the question
of Scandal: for out of these you may collect the true and full sense of the
Scriptures, which you have alleged in your first Objection from holy Writ; as
will better appear in our Answers and Confutations. In the mean time, leaving
your Proposition as granted, according to our former limitations, we put you to
the trial of your Assumption.

SECT. X. The General Assumption of the Non-conformists, against our
Ceremonies, because of Scandal. Their Pretenses of Scandal, occasioned by our
Ceremonies, are manifold, to wit; in respect of 1 Superstitious Papists. 2
Profane ^^rsons. 3 Weak brethr^n. 4 Their whole Congregations. 5 Their own
uncomfortable Ministers. 6 All sorts in general; at least by appearance of
evil.

Their first Objection of Scandal, by our Ceremonies, is in respect of
superstitious Papists.
The Papists will be hardened, Abridg. Linc. page 49.
to see us borrow our Ceremonies from their Religion.

Our Answer.
We answer that our Rites, which have been purged from Popish superstition,
are no more the Ceremonies of Papists, then our Churches are theirs (wherein
notwithstanding your selves do willing Pray, and Preach) being now converted
from the service of the Romish Idol unto the sincere worship of God. And
therefore Papists, by our reformation of things which they have abused, have as
little cause to insult and boast to see our Ceremonies now purged from their
former superstition, as they should do to see some of their Brothellers
converted by us unto honesty and holiness of life.

SCET. XI. Their second Objection of Scandal by our Ceremonies, is in respect
of profane persons.
Abridg Linc. Ibid.
The profane will draw Arguments from hence, to contemn all Religions.

Our Answer.
From whence, I beseech you? From the seemly apparrelling of Religion; or
rather from the stripping her naked of her lawful and accustomed attire? Nay,
and you may easily conjecture whether the profane are more likely to draw
arguments, for their neglect, or contempt of Religion and Piety, rather from a
decent uniformity in lawful Rites; than from an horride disparity in them,
through your daily dissentions. He that doubts hereof, may as well question,
whether the Saw, or the Citharen makes the better Music.

SECT. XII. Their third Objection of Scandal, by our Ceremonies, is in respect
of the weak Brethren.
These cannot but be a scandal to the weak brethren, and to the wicked:
Abridg. Linc. page 49.
to the weak brethren, by being drawn thereunto against their conscience, or
else doubtingly.

Our Answer.
You have heard our answer touching the wicked; now hear a little concerning
the weak. These whom Christ would not have to be scandalized, he does point
them out to be pusilli, Math. 18.
little ones: meaning such as are newly wained from the world, and called to
feed on the Manna of the word. And such babes in Christ were those Proselites,
whom Saint Paul did so much tender in matter of Scandal, until they should
become more ripe and strong in the knowledge of the mysteries of faith.

Now would we feign understand, who be these weaklings, whom you so much
respect in this Case. Are they not for the most part such, whom you have most
diligently catechized, and whom you therefore judge to have more understanding
in the mysteries of Christ, and knowledge in the revealed will of God, than
others? If then these, whom you think to be more exactly seen in all
essential parts of Christian learning, must, concerning points of things
indifferent, be counted weak, then do you greatly wrong your own judgments,
by whose examples they are made weak. Nay even you selves (my brethren) are
become these weake-ones, in not being able to digest these Ceremonies, which,
by the confession of all Divines, are in their own nature indifferent; though
you would hardly take it well, that any should rank you in the number of weak
ones. Yet if you be not such, why do you make this a Reason, to move the
Church to respect, and free you from all scandal occasioned by Ceremonies? or
if you be indeed weak persons, why exercise you your strength in nothing more,
than in opposing the wisdom of the whole Church, by your most scandalous
contradictions? We are persuaded, that strength of knowledge could not take any
offense at matters of Indifferency: And therefore, that the guilt of your
weakness should cause you to seek direction from them, unto whom you owe your
obedience.

SECT. XIII. Their fourth Objection of scandal, by our Ceremonies, is in
respect of their uncomfortable Congregations, and Parish^s.
But especially are these Ceremonies d^ngerous, when they shall be brought in
upon Congregations, Abridg. Linc. page 84.
which have once refused them; then by no reason can they be called indifferent.

Our Answer.
Your meaning is known, to wit, that by Congregations refusing them, you
understand particular Parishes, whereof your selves are Rectors, or Lecturers;
never conside^ing, that the great Congregation, which is the whole Church of
England in her representative body of Synod, have all (by that authority
whereunto you are otherwise bound to obey) prescribed unto particular Parishes
and Congregations, the use of these Ceremonies: he therefore that shall ascribe
more power to particular Congregations for the refusing, than to the great
assembly of the whole kingdom in imposing a determinate use of things
indifferent, may by the same with justify any by-lawes devised by honest men
in particular Parishes, with refusal and contradiction of Parliament Laws and
Statutes, enacted by the whole kingdom, and ratified by his Majesty's Royal
assent.

But seeing you are more in love with the Laws of a Parochial assembly, than
of a National Synod, I would know (for it is material) by whose Suffrages and
voices you would have Ceremonies approved or condemned in your Congregations,
whether by men, or by women? If by men, of what condition must they be? whether
of Gentry, or Yeomanrie, or, etc. Think not that I am idle in these
Interrogatories, seeing that they tend to bring you to the sight of your error:
which is, indeed, intolerable; for what is this else but to prefer sheep
before their Pastors? that is, ignorance before knowledge, in the policy of
government of the Church: not to speak of the unreasonableness of your manner
of reasonning, which is a minore ad magis affirmative; whereby you give us
occasion to inuert your own Argument against you, thus; If a small
Congregation may have power to determine of the indifferency, and co^ueniencie
of Ceremonies, then the constitution and ordinance of a greater Congregation,
and that also by lawful authority predominant (such as every National Synod
is) ought much more to have power to the same effect. Howsoever, when the
refusal of your Congregation is rightly examined, it will be found, that
before any voice, or Suffrage is propounded for receiving or rejecting any of
your Laws, the Minister in the Parish will first in the Pulpit give the
definitive sentence: Whence it will consequently follow, that each of your
Congregations must, in effect, conclude from but one voice. Thus far of the
weak.

SECT. XIIII. Their first Objection of scandal, against our Ceremonies, in
respect of the uncomfortable Ministe^s themselves.
And as there is danger in the use of these Ceremonies in all Congregations,
Abridg. Linc page 50.
so especially if they shall be brought back again into those, where they
have been long out of use; and received by such Ministers, as are known to
have refused them heretofore. For where he should provide by all good means,
that his Ministry be not desspised, by this means he shall give evident
occasion unto his people to blame his Ministry, and to call into question the
truth of all his Doctrine.

Our Answer.
If you shall as duly discern, as I shall truly discover the manifold crimes,
which you seem to bewray in this one supposition, I suppose that you will be
ashamed to have published such (I shall say no more then I mean to prove) a
false, presumptuous, irreligious, partial, and pernicious a pretense as this
is.

First, I have adventured to call it false, and I think upon good ground,
because most of you have once at your Ordination into the Priesthood, and many
of you also the second time at your Institution into your Benefices, subscribed
unto the lawfulness of these Ceremonies here in question; which now upon a
pretense of strictness of conscience, you do so vrgently and vehemently
oppugn. Consider therefore the Case, wherein you now stand, namely (for it is
my charge to lay this matter home to your consciences) that you now object the
fear of discrediting your Ministry, (if after the publishing of your contrary
opinion you should conform) as the Rule of your consciences, for persisting in
Nonconformity, although it be to the disturbance of the peace of the Church:
And notwithstanding make it no Rule of your conscience, for practice of
conformity and continuance of the peace of the Church, to fear the
discrediting your Ministry, by gainsaying your former subscriptions. Which
does plainly argue the falsenesse of your pretense, as if it were a less
matter of discredit to contradict the writings of your hands, than the words of
your mouths. But what talk you of discredit in such a cause as this, wherein
judicious men must needs account your reformation to be rather a redemption of
a former scandal, than an introduction of a new? Thus much in showing your
pretense to be false.

The same objection of discrediting your Ministry, was likewise called
presumptuous, because heerby you seem to arrogate to your selves a prerogative
proper to the Apostles; who, because they were the immediate and infallible
organs and instruments of the holy Ghost, and first Ambassadors of Christ, for
the publishing of the Gospel of salvation thorowout the world, might (if
peradventure they had erred in any thing) say of themselves, as one of them
did; If we be found false witnesses, 1. Cor. 15.
then is your faith in vain: even because all the fabric of the Church of
the faithful is built upon the foundation of the Apostles, And accordingly the
same Apostle, speaking to the same purpose, says of himself, If I build
again that which I destroyed, I make my self a preuaricator: meaning, Gal.
2.18.
that he thereby should ruinate whatsoever Christian doctrine he had formerly
built. But we alas, poor Battes that we are, why should we presume that the
credit or discredit of the Ministry of the Gospel should rely or depend upon
us? have we seen Christ in the flesh? or came the word of the Ministry from
us, that we should assume to your selves the Apostolical privileges of not
erring in any thing? Nay, but let us rather propound unto our selves the
example of that ingenuitie, which was most visible in Saint Augustine, whose
Retractations of his own errors wrought him no small credit throughout the
Churches of Christ, and accordingly stronger ratification of his more
constantly professed truths.

And furthermore, why may we not, in the third place, call your former pretense
(as we have done) irreligious? for you must needs know, that the persisting in
an error, for the preservation of your own credit, although it be taken at
the best, can be no less a crime than (which was condemned by the Apostle) The
doing of evil that good may come thereof. Romans 3.
Let us therefore (I pray you) leave this Antichristian piece of policy to
that Church, which in her Council of Trent (as it is to be seen in the
Oration, Orat. i^ Conc. Trident.
which Gaspar had in the same Council) did maintain her sacrilegious custom
of administering the Eucharist to the people only in one kind; principally by
this pretense, Ne errasse videretur, that is, lest that she may seem to have
erred. This we hold to be irreligious.

Fourthly, there is as good reason to judge your former position partial,
because if the credit of the Ministry must prevail in this case, then ought
you rather to yield unto Conformity, for the credit of the Church; than, for
your own credit sake, to refuse it: seeing that the estimation of some few
parties, as members, must necessarily give place to the whole body.

The last Epithet remains, naming your former objection Pernicious; whereunto
I think my self licenced by that saying of the Apostle; Woe is me, if I
preach not the Gospel. By which words, Saint Paul in his own person denounces
a Woe unto every Minister of the Gospel, 1. Cor. 9.16.
that shall put himself unto silence.

But you are ready to regest, that the cause of silencing is not in your
selves, but in the Bishops that suspend and deprive you; and therefore that
they, and not you, become liable to that curse. Know you well what you say; or
are you desirous to delude your own souls? for the case stands thus: Titus
the Bishop does deprive Titius, a factious and schismatic Minister, that he
may place Sempronious, a peaceable and discreet man in his stead. In this
proceeding, the intendment of Titus is not absolutely to deprive Titius, as he
is a Minister, but as he was factious, yet so only respectively; that Titius
being deprived, he may constitute Sempronius: For the charge of a Bishop is not
determinate, to appoint this Minister; but indefinite, to ordain a Minister:
so that the course of Gods Plough is still preserved and continued. But as for
Titius, who will rather be silenced then conform, it is evident, that the
cause of his silencing being his own refractarinesse, which is only personal
and proper to himself, and yet has no faculty in himself to appoint or
admit of a Successor: why therefore may not he be said to have as properly
caused the suspe^sion from his Ministry, as the Steward in the Gospel, by his
injustice did cause the loss of his office, or Agar, Sarahs made, may be said
by her contempt and contumely, to have put her self out of service. It is
only the Justice of the cause that makes a Martyr: and doubles (which is a
matter, that I earnestly desire you to consider) the censure of the Apostles
Woe being so dreadful: I ought not to esteem any thing a just cause, why I
should wilfully incur the censure of Silencing my self from preaching, for
the which I ought not as willingly to adventure my life.

Which Doctrine ought to seem so much the more necessary unto you, for that
your own Witnesses, and such as have been the principal Authors of
vnconformitie, M. Beza, and M. Cartwright, Beza.
do notwithstanding in the point of Surplice, determine accordingly: Rest of
hi^ Replic. p. 266
They laying the waring of the Surplice in one balance, (which we may call,
non prohiberi;) and the duty of Preaching in another balance of Praecipi,
whereof the Apostle said, 1. Cor 9.16.
that, Necessity is laid upon me, to Preach the Gospel: so that the wearing of
the Surplice being not to be reckoned in the number of things per se impia,
wicked in themselves; and Preaching being an office imposed as necessary, upon
danger of that fearful Woe, have both of them wisely resolved, that the
balance of the necessity of the performance of our charge, in feeding the
flock of Christ, does far preponderate and exceed in weight the other
balance of all inconveniences, which otherwise may happen in wearing a
Surplice.

To this purpose I would exhort you, to cast your eyes upon Saint Peter, in
whom Christ would have every Minister to behold his own face; unto whom he
said again, Ioh. vlt.
and again, Simon, love thou me? feed my sheep: charging, in that one
person, every Preacher of the Gospel, that upon all loves, which they owe unto
Christ, they would lose no opportunity of feeding his flock. Which speech of
love ought to make a greater impression in our hearts, than that other direful
denunciation of Woe.

SECT. XV. Their last Objection, is from a pretended Appearance of Evil.
Abridg. Linc. ibid.
1 Thessalonians. 5.22. The Apostle among other his exhortations, admonishes the
Thessalonians to abstain from all appearance of evil: meaning thereby all such
Doctrines, which have in them any color of error; such as these Ceremonies
have because of their former abuses by Romish Papists.

Our Answer.
The Apostle speaks of the opinions of private men, which others might have
just occasion to suspect, even because they were private, and peradventure had
some aliance with the known errors of corrupt Teachers. But the doctrine of
our Church, concerning Ceremonies, is public, and manifested to the
consciences of all men, to be most Orthodoxe and sound; purged from all the
Leaven of that Romish superstition, which attributes an efficacious sanctity
to the characters of man's inventions: So that minds not possessed with
sinister jealousy, may easily see that integrity in our Church, in respect of
the spiritual purity, which Caesar wished to find in his wife, in respect of
the corporal, that is, To be void, as of fault, so also of suspicion of fault.

Contrariwise, your manner of opposition unto the Church, by Nonconformity, is
not only a show and appearance of evil; but even an apparent and public
evil it self, being a disobedience without ground, to that Ordinance which
God has placed over you; to the distracting of men's minds, by drawing some
into Schism; as will appear in our Confutation following.

SECT. XVI. Our general Confutation of their last general Assumption, by
proving the Non-conformists guilty of many Scandals.
This point can need no great dispute, if you shall but call to mind the first
distinction of Active, and Passive scandal; the Active being a giving of
offense, by provoking others unto evil; whether directly, by some evil Act;
or indirectly, by an Act indifferent in it self: In both which the fault is to
be imputed to the Agent. But the Passive scandal is a being provoked to evil,
only by taking offense at some Act, either good, or at least not evil in it
self: and the fault arising from thence is proper to the party offended. And
now let us try, whether this your withstanding of the Orders and Ordinances of
the Church, does not necessarily infer upon you a manifold guilt of both
these kind of scandals against others?

SECT. XVII. The diverse Scandals, occasioned by the Non-conformists, may be
redu^ed unto 4. heads:
1 By weakening some that remain in the Church. 2 By driving some out of the
Church. 3 In hindering others from the Church. 4 By an high contempt against
the Church it self.


The first Scandal, occasioned by the Non conformists, is in weakening some
that are yet in the Church.
Your Active scandal works apparently both against [ Pusillos] the weak;
and also against [ Perfectos] the stronger sort of Christians. We begin with
the weak persons; whereof some beholding your vehement opposition against the
Church, stand amazed thereat, as Vulgar men use to do, when, looking earnestly
upon the eclipse of the Moon, they presently dream of some change, and
alteration of the season; but whether it will be for better, or for worse, they
cannot prognosticate. So these Weaklings, hearing of such differences among the
Ministers of the Word, (although in matters of less moment) do wonder what may
be the event thereof, and thereupon become more remiss in the profession of
Religion; whilst, by your detracting from the Ordinances of the Church, many
take occasion soon to negl^ct the outward worship of God; whereupon their
inward zeal and devotion soon cools, and in the end vanishes away.

SECT. XVIII. Their second kind of scandal is by driving some out of the
Church.
The parties, which are driven out of the Church are (a word full of horror!)
the Separatists, (that is, true Pharisees, both in name, and pride of
selfe-conceite) who having been once catechized by you, that our Ceremonies are
to be refused and abolished, as being Idolatrous; have therefore, at the sight
of your opposition, as men that behold an Earth quake, waxen giddy in their
brains, knowing only from whence, but not whither to fly. For, upon the
reason of your Refusal of our Ceremonies, they hold it as reasonable to refuse
you; thinking it necess^ry to have no communion with them, who join the^s^lues
in a worship which is in any degree polluted with Ceremonies that are Romishly
Idolatrous. Therefore they fly; But whence? as Cain did; Genesis 4.
From the presence of God in his Church. And whither will they then? Even to
A^sterdam to seek out a Religion they know not what; as likewise Cain did,
into the Land of Nod, (which signifies a place of giddiness and vexation,)
where, even as Cain built new houses, they frame new Religions, which made to
day, they (as little children use to do with the Puppet-works of their own
hands) cast, and break down the next day following. Now if you shall ask
these Deformists, why they break out into Separation? may they not call the
Non-conformists the first occasion thereof, think you? Thus of the Weak, whom
your Example has driven out of the Church.

SECT. XIX. Their third Scandal is by barring and hindering some from ^^ming
into ^u^ C^u^ch.
How many Papists are they, who (I wish that daily experience could not speak
in this case) being exhorted to embrace the Evangelical truth, present^y
oppose as a bar, your divisions and oppositions against our Church; being
utterly vnperswad^ble to enter into a Church, where all ancient Rites are
professedly rejected? And this scandal is not new, for Bishop Jewel observed
in his time, that Papists were scandalized by such as then could not abide the
sign of the Cross: Unto whom, that reverend Father answered, in the name of
the most and best Divines; yea, and of the Church of England it self; Thanking
God, B. Jewel. See beneath, part, 2. chap. 2 sect. 14.
that the Protestants both could abide the sign of the Cross, yea, and did
also willingly and joyfully take up their cross, for the glorious name of
Christ. But you oppose.

SECT. XX. Their Reply.
Abridg. Linc. page 48.
We are not, for winning of the Papists to offend our Brethren.

Our Answer.
Although I presume you will not deny every Papist (I mean especially such an
one, which is misled by simple ignorance) all interest of Brotherhood in
Christianity; yet because you understand by them, whom you may not offend, such
Professors who join with you in a nearer propriety, Tert.
and (that I may speak with Tertullian) consanguinity of doctrine; give me but
leave to demand of you who they are, whom you, in an opposition against
Papists, do single out for your Brethren? Whether such as do conform
themselves to the Ordinances of the Church; or only them that persist in
Vnconformitie; or both? You cannot mean the Conformable; for these are not
offended at the use of our Ceremonies, but rather at your refusal of them. And
you may not appropriate the title of Brethren only to Uncomfortable persons,
to alienate from your fellowship all the Conformable; with whom,
notwithstanding your different opinion in Ceremonies, you do so religiously
consent in all sacred acts, and essential offices of Christian Brotherhood.
But if lastly, the word, Brethren, must imply both sorts, then ought you, as it
becomes the children of one Church, to forbear to offend such Brethren,
which are more obsequious and dutiful to their Mother; rather than those, that
are refractarie and disobedient. But will you hear the truth in a few words?
Upon due examination it will appear, that you your selves (who teach and
practice Nonconformity) are those Brethren, whom you are so loath should be
offended: or rather who, by your resistance against Ecclesiastical Orders, do
occasion an intolerable Scandal and Offense within the Church.

SECT. XXI. Their fourth and greatest Scandal, is against the Church it self,
especially in two kinds.
The first is Comparatiue.
In your Objections you showed that your care is to avoid the offense of
persons of your own disposition, whom you call your Brethren; and yet do you
neglect the observance that you owe unto the Church. Can there be a plainer
note of a distorted affection in any man, than to ward a blow, for the defense
of a Brother; not caring, or regarding, that the same stroke must needs light
upon the head of his own Mother? I shall desire you that we may plead this
point according to the strict Law of good conscience; for so the inquitie of
your practice will more plainly appear.

Thus then. If my Brother be unjustly offended, his Scandal, in respect of me,
is only Passive, that is, taken and not given: so that the whole fault of
Scandal, in this case, is to be imputed unto the sinister apprehension of my
Brother. But if my Mother the Church be offended by me, in that wherein I owe
obedience unto her, the Scandal on my part is fully Active, and the whole
fault is in my self; because hereby I, as much as lies in me, do hinder her
fruitfulness and happy success, in begetting and breeding many children unto
God. But you will say, that where some few private persons are like to be
offended, there the Church ought, in constituting of her Ceremonies, to have
respect of those few; albeit the same Orders and Ceremonies, which are in their
own nature indifferent, should be generally affected and desired of the most
part. You are herein not a little deceived, as may be observed in the Council
of the Apostles, which imposed upon the Gentiles an Abstinence from eating of
meats, Act. 15.
from strangled, and blood: To the end that they might avoid the Scandal of
the greater number of Jewish Proselytes, who were like to be offended at their
eating of such meats, which had been formerly forbidden by the express
commandment of God: yet the Apostles did not in the same Council labor to
prevent the offense, which might have risen from a conceit of some few
Gentiles, then Conuerts to the faith; who peradventure might think that
Christian liberty (which is a freedom, to eat of any sort of meats) was not
a little impeached by that Apostolical Canon of Abstinence.

Secondly, it is necessary that a different respect be had between those
weak ones, which are such before, and those that are weak after the orthodoxe
and lawful meaning of the Church, wherein we live, be fully published, and
made known. And by this observation your common objection is easily assoyled,
which is taken from the Apostle his doctrine, prohibiting Christians for a time
to Abstain from eating of ce^taine meats, Romans 14.
for fear of offense to the Weak. For he enjoined that Abstinence, in the
case of Scandal of private men, before the doctrine of the Church had been
sufficiently proclaimed, concerning the liberty which Christians have to eat
of All meats: But after that the same doctrine of Indifferency, in eating of
meats, was made public by the Church, then to have sought by Abstaining; and
not eating, to avoid the offense of some, to the prejudice of Christian
liberty, and to the Scandal of the Church, had been no less an iniquity,
than if a man, for the preservation of some sick members, should occasion the
destruction of the whole body.

This is no new point of doctrine, but that which you might have learned long
since from P. Martyr, one of your own principal Witnesses; Loc com. class. 2.
c. 4. p. 201.
Imo neque semper in ipsis medijs rebus etc. Yet we may not always (says he)
yield unto the weak in things indifferent, but only until they be more
perfectly taught: but when once they have understood, and yet still stand in
doubts [Infirmitas eorum non est ferenda,] we may not pamper their weakness.
So he. What then may we think of your weak ones, whom, notwithstanding the
manifestation of the truth of the doctrine of our Church in these things, you
make strong in nothing so much, as in oppugning the doctrine and peace thereof?

SECT. XXII. Their second kind of Scandal against the Church, by contempt.
Your first Scandal was comparatiue, in resolving rather to offend the Church,
whereby you are constituted Ministers, and wherein you have both your esse, and
been esse, in Christianity, than to offend some few parts and members thereof.
But the Scandal, which we now speak of, may seem to be absolute, by a direct
contempt of the Church.

SECT. XXIII. Their Answer to the Objection of Contempt.
Nonconformity proceeding from the fear of not sinning against God, M. Nic.
is neither Contempt nor Scandal: and therefore may be allowed favor in the
eyes of the Law.

Our Reply.
The eyes of mortal Judges can find no windows, through which they may
possibly look into your consciences, to discern of what color your Fear is;
whether it be truly for offense against the Law of God, seeing that the
Lawmakers themselves, who were no other than the whole State of this Kingdom,
as well Civil as Ecclesi^sticall persons, then religiously addicted to purge
the Church of England from all Popish superstition, could discern no such
unlawfulness in those Ceremonies, as you fancy to your selves: Or else
whether it be popular, for fear of displeasing of private persons; especially
in Parishes where your maintenance does arise from the voluntary contribution
of the people, who seek to tie the tongues of their Teachers to their
pursstrings: which must open and shut according to their quarterly fancies.

Howsoever; if every pretense of Gods fear might challenge favor, for
transgressing of man's Law, whereunto God himself exacteth obedience, even
under the obligation of conscience; then should such Papists, who contemn both
the Laws, and Magistracy of this Kingdom, put in their Plea for the
obtaining of favor upon the pretense of conscience: as might likewise the
Anabaptist, who holds it a matter of conscience to acknowledge no civil
obedience. And that indeed in your vnconformity there is a full an appearance of
contempt of lawful Authority, as may justly deny unto you that favor, which
you so earnestly contend for, we shall make evident in our answer to your next
Argument, concerning Christian liberty; whereunto we proceed.

CHAP. VI.
SECT. I. The Sixth general Argument, made by the Non-conformists, against the
three Ceremonies aforesaid; upon pretense that they are against the Liberty of
the Church.
Mayor. That which d^priueth m^n of Christian liberty is unlawful. M. Hy.


Assumption. But the imposition of these Ceremonies of Surplice, etc. does
deprive us of Christian liberty. Ergo, they are unlawful.

Our Answer.
WE do so willingly grant your Mayor, that we account it a kind of spiritual
fellonie to deprive the subjects of Christ his Kingdom of that liberty, which
our Lord Christ has purchased unto all the faithful professors of the Gospel.
But we deny your Assumption.

SECT. II. The Non-conformists general Assumption, concerning our Ceremonies.
M. Hy.
But the imposition of these three Ceremonies, viz. Surplice, Cross in the
administration of Baptism, and Kneeling at the receiving of the Eucharist, do
deprive us of Christian liberty.

Our Answer.
The sin of impeaching the liberty of Christians, being so heinous a crime,
you stand either chargeable to prove this Assumption, or else compellable to
confess it to be no better than a false and impious Slander against the
Church. Proceed therefore to your Proofs.

SECT. III. Their Proofs.
It is our Christi^n liberty to use Ceremonies appointed by man, Ibid.
as things indifferent: but these Ceremonies are imposed as nec^ssarie.
Therefore do they deprive us of our Christian liberty,

Our Answer, by distinction; showing the state of the Question.
The Non-conformists themselves will acknowledge, that our question, in this
dispute, is not concerning that Christian liberty, which the Apostle
mentions, Romans 6.
Romans 6. whereby we are freed from the rigor of the moral Law, pronouncing a
curse upon all them that persist not in all the Commandments of God, to do
them: nor of the liberty from the Jewish bondage of the Leuiticall Law, which
the Apostles call an importable Yoke. Act. 15.
But the subject matter of this our Controversy is a liberty from the
necessary observation of such things, which are in their own nature
indifferent, as is employed by the Obiector himself.

This being the state of our Question, our Reader shall need no more, for the
resolution thereof, than to know, first what it is not; and secondly what it
is, that may be said to deprive a Christian of that liberty, which Christ by
his Testament has bequeathed unto his Church: both which he may easily learn,
by distinguishing between two kinds of necessities, which are incident unto
humane precepts and ordinances, in the case of indifferency. The one is the
necessity of obedience to the commandment: the other is the necessity of
Doctrine. The first necessity of obedience unto h^mane precepts, in things
lawful and indifferent, are so far from preiudicing our Christian liberty,
that Christ himself has established this necessity in his Church, charging
Christian Subjects to obey their Rulers: Children their Parents: servants their
Masters. Romans 13. 1. P^t. 2 13. Ephesians. 6.1.7.
Therefore necessity of obedience cannot properly contradict our Christian
liberty. I have said, properly, and in it self; albeit accidentally, (in
respect of the multitude of impositions, which may be impossible to be kept)
our Christian liberty may be extremly wronged: but this being only
accidentally, ought rather to be called a deprauation of Christian liberty,
than a deprivation thereof. Thus much of the necessity of obedience.

We return to the Doctrinall necessity, which is as often as a man shall
attribute unto an humane constitution any of those properties which are
essential unto Divine Ordinances. These properties are principally three; 1.
immediately to bind the consciences of men: 2. to be a necessary means to
salvation: and 3. to hold it altogether unalterable by any authority of man:
all which points do infer a Doctrine of Divine necessity; and therefore are
not these (that I may so say) the Images or superscriptions of Caesar; but
Characters of an authority properly belonging unto God: and consequently all
such kind of Prescriptions, which contain in them any opinion of Doctrinall
necessity, whenever they shall be ordained by men, although they concern
only the outward Ceremonies of Gods worship, yet must we judge them no better
than mere presumptions and preuarications against the Sovereignty of God
himself.

This Doctrine Saint Peter learned, Act. 10.11.12^
in the case of indifferency of meats, by that heavenly vision of the great
sheet, wherein were all manner of beasts, and birds: which was interpreted by
the Divine oracle that said unto Peter, the things which God has purified,
pollute thou not. ver. 15.
If therefore, when God has signed any doctrine with a mark of Indifferency,
to use, or not to use; man shall come and stamp upon it his own mark of
necessity, teaching it to be unclean, that it may not in any case be used by
man, this is a plain heresy; whereinto notwithstanding diverse false and
fantastical spirits plunged themselves, who taught, concerning such meats as
were represented in that sheet, (albeit, that heavenly voice had said to
Peter, Kill and eat) Touch not, taste not, Colos. ^.21.
handle not. This explication thus premised, you may proceed, and show (if you
can) that any of the foresaid properties of necessity are imposed by our
Church, as you have pretended.

SECT. IIII. The pretended proofs of the Non-conformists are taken from 1.
Scriptures. 2. Reasons.

Their first Objection from Scriptures.
The first place.
The Apostle says, 1. Cor. 7.35. This I speak to your profit, Abridg. Linc.
page 34.
not that I might cast a snare upon you. Showing, that the imposition of
necessity upon things indifferent is a very snare of men's Consciences.

Our Answer.
When the Apostle had said, 1, Cor. 7.8. ver, 32.33.
that It is good for man not to marry; and again, The unmarried cares for
things belonging to the Lord, 1. Cor. 7 8. Ver. 32.33.
but the married for the things of this world: lest that he might seem thereby
to infer a general necessity of not marrying, he preoccupateth, saying;
This I speak not to ensnare you, meaning, that his intent was not to entangle
men's consciences in an opinion of necessity of single life, Ver. 35.
because God himself gave a liberty of marrying. For in such a case, to
inioyne a necessity, is indeed man's snare, whereby the Papists (by their Laws
of vows unto men burning in lusts) Stringunt, imo strangulant, do even stifle
many thousand souls.

The case of necessity standing thus, I marvel how you could apply the
snare, mentioned by the Apostle, unto our Doctrine of Ceremonies, without some
twitch of your own consciences; seeing that you never heard this point of
necessity taught in our Church. Examine her Articles, reuiew her Rubricks,
search her Canons, and Constitutions, and try whether (I mean in Churches,
wherein there are the like prescriptions,) either the want of a Surplice, or
forbearing the use of the Sign of the Cross, or the not kneeling at the
receiving of the holy Communion, do make men transgressors of Gods Law; or
deprave the truth of Gods worship; or deprive the worshippers of grace and
salvation. Nay, but (which does make your Calumniation most apparent) she has
plainly professed the contrary, both in judging her own Ceremonies Alterable,
and in not condemning the different Ceremonies of other reformed Churches, as
hereafter will plainly appear.

SECT. V. Their second place of Scripture.
This is a special part of the liberty, which Christ has purchased for us by
his death, Abridg. Li^c. page 34. Gal. 5.1. and Cor. 2.20.
and which all Christians are bound to stand for. Gal. 5.1. Stand fast (says
the Apostle) unto the liberty, unto which Christ has made us free, and be not
entangled with the yoke of bondage. Showing, that the service, which we are
now to do unto God, is not mystical, Ceremonial, and carnal, as it was then;
but plain, and spiritual.

Our Answer.
The Assembly of Non-conformists, who made this Objection from that Text of the
Apostle, Gal. 5.1, did, as it may seem, never consult with the Context; Gal.
5.1.
both because they expound this Scripture, as spoken of all mystical
Ceremonies, which the Apostle delivers only of Jewish Rites: as also for
that they understand those words to be spoken merely of Ceremonies, (as if
they had been unlawful in themselves) which the Apostle speaks mixtly, as
implying thereby that doctrine of necessity, which false Apostles had
attributed unto them; namely, an opinion of necessity, whereby the whole
Gospel of Christ, concerning justification by remission of sins, was
consequently overthrown; according as the Apostle concludes, saying; Stand in
the Liberty, wherewith Christ has made you free, etc. And again, Ver. 2.
Behold, I Paul say, that if you be circumcised, Christ can profit you nothing.
Why? but only because Circumcision, being the Seal of the Covenant of the
Moral Law, does exact of every one, that holds Circumcision necessary to
salvation, an absolute performance of every minim and jot of the same Law:
therefore it follows, whosoever will be justified by the Law, becomes a Debtor
to the whole Law; and consequently Christ is become of none effect unto you.

Next concerning Justification by the Law of the old Testament (whereof
Circumcision was the Seal,) the Apostle teaches that the difference of the
Old and the New Testament, in respect of Justification, is as much as between
Agar the servant, Gal. 4.
ingendring unto bondage; and Sarah the Mistress and freewoman, that brings
forth the heir of promise: so that whosoever will be heir of salvation, must
first become a noble Sarasin, and not remain a base Agaren, that is, he must
be such an one as seeks perfect justification by the Gospel, which works
obedience in love, and not by the exact and strict Righteousness of the Law,
which drives men into a slavish obedience through an hellish fear.

This your own Witnesses could not but understand, and know, that that [
Yoake] condemned in this Scripture does not signify the use, or yet so much as
the mystical signification of Circumcision, because the Apostle Saint Paul
himself did circumcise Timothy: but by it, is understood that opinion of the
necessity of this Ceremony to salvation, which the false apostles had taught
among the Galatians; which is so undoubtedly there condemned, that M. Calvin
sticks not to call them Insulsos Interpretes, Ca^u. Comment. upon this place.
Absurd, or unsavory Interpreters, who teach that the Apostle in this Epistle
contendeth only for the Liberty of Circumcision, in regard of the use; and
not rather against the necessity of that use, for the obtaining of
Justification and salvation thereby. Which necessity howsoever it may be found
in Popish doctrine of Mystical Rites, yet shall you as soon prove Rome to be
England, as find the Popish superstition in our English profession, concerning
the use of Ceremonies.

Thirdly, in your objection, you unsoundly and vnsauorily confound these two
terms, Mystical and Carnal, as though every Mystical Ceremony, were
consequently Carnal. Know you not that the Sacraments of the new Testament are
the most Mystical Ceremonies of all others? nevertheless, none, but an
unchristian, or rather Antichristian spirit would call them Carnal: For albeit
the Jewish Ceremonies deserved that name, because they signified first and
primarily, outward and carnal promises, (as the cleansings of the flesh, and
the enioyments of earthly blessings; but remission of sins, and heavenly
blessedness they shadowed only remotely, and under a second veil) yet the
Sacraments of the Gospel are immediate Signs and Seals of the spiritual
things themselves, such as are remission of sins, redemption from death,
devil, and hell, and a full interest in the promises of an eternal
inheritance. So likewise it sauoreth of the flesh, and not of the Spirit, to
call our Ceremonies, to wit, Surplice, Sign of the Cross, and Kneeling,
Carnal; except you can find any Carnality in Sanctity, Constancy in the
faith of Christ, or in religious Humility, which are the immediate, and Moral
significations that these three Ceremonies do represent.

SECT. VI. Their second Objection is taken from Reason.
Their first Reason.
If these Ceremonies do not take away our Christian liberty, Abridg. Lin^. page
34.
and insuare the consciences of men, by their imposition; how shall not the
Popish Ceremonies be excusable and free from accusation in this behalf?

Our Answer, from their own Witnesses.
To question How, in this case, must needs be a note of inexcusable ignorance:
for what more impardonable ignorance can there be, than not to read that which
our Church has set down in capital letters, wherein she avouches her own
integrity, professing to use but a few Ceremonies, and those also without
opinion of Necessity: and not this only, but furthermore does often condemn
the Church of Rome, for infringing of Christian liberty, by her Ceremonial
constitutions, both in respect of the nature, and number of her Rites. First, I
say, in regard of their Nature, by attributing unto them such an opinion of
Necessity, which takes away all Indifferency, which is done as well by
holding and exercising them as necessary means of attaining unto eternal
life; as also by placing in them the chiefest and most essential part of Gods
worship.

Secondly, in respect of their number and multitude, which is become
importable. These two exceptions against the Church of Rome, which we have
only pointed at, are particularly and largely acknowledged and set down by
that golden quill of M. Calvin, throughout his fourth book of Institutions,
Call. Inst l. 4. ca. 10. number. 1.
cap. 10. where he inueigheth against (as he calls it) [ Barbarum imperium]
the Barbarous Thraldom of Popish Ceremonies: But why? Even because (if we
respect the nature of them) they affirm (says he) their Laws to be
spiritual, and properly belonging unto the soul, and necessary for eternal
life, whereby the Kingdom of Christ is invaded, and Christian liberty of men's
consciences is altogether overthrown: seeing that they seek justification and
salvation in their own observations, wherein they place [Ipsis simum Dei
cultum, Calu. ibid. Number. 9.
vt ita loquar, in ipsis contineri:] the sum of all Religion and piety
(meaning the essential worship of God,) and subject the true worship of God to
their own comments and devices, unto the observation whereof they do bind the
consciences of men [praecisa necessitate] by a strict necessity. So he.

Wherein there is nothing spoken, which the examples of Romish doctrine does
not confirm; whereby they Pharisaically make void the precepts of God, by the
Traditions of men, which was condemned by Christ; and that so expressly, that M.
Calvin durst again assume, saying; Vicerint sane, si quouis modo ab hac
Christi accusatione purgare se poterant, that is, Ibid. number. 10.
We are ready to yield them the victory, if by any means they shall be able
to free themselves from this accusation of Christ: but what excuse can they
make, seeing that first it is held with them a wickedness, infinitely more
heinous, to omit their auricular confession, once within the year; than to
have lived impiously all the year long: secondly, to infect their tongues with
the least taste of any flesh upon one Friday; than to have defiled their bodies
with filthy and fleshly fornications from day to day: thirdly, to put their
hands to work on any day, that is dedicated to their own devised Saints; than
to have exercised their whole bodies in all facinorous and mischievous acts:
fourthly, for a Priest to match himself in marriage with one wife; than to
wallow in a thousand adulteries: fifthly, to break their vow of pilgrimage;
than to falsify their faith in their promises: sixthly, not to be somewhat
superfluous in bestowing excessive costs, for the prodigious and unprofitable
gawdines of their Churches; than to be wanting in contribution to the relief
of the poor in their extreme necessities: seventhly, to pass by an Image,
without reverence to it; than to revile all sorts of men with all contumely and
reproach: eighthly, to omit the muttering with themselves in their Mattens some
certain hours, many words without understanding; than never to conceive a
lawful prayer with their understanding. So M. Calvin. And what is it, if this
be not to prefer the Traditions of men, before the commandments of God?

Furthermore, concerning the matter of Popish Ceremonies, he adds as
follows; As very many of their Ceremonies cannot easily, Calu. ibid. Number. 2.
so all of them, if they be congested together, cannot possibly be observed, so
huge is the heap of them: how therefore shall not the minds of men be extremly
scortched with anxietie and terror by this difficulty; yea, impossibility of
keeping such ordinances, wherewith their consciences are by them so fettered?
Ibid. ^um. 11. and 13.
He proceeds, Such and so infinite is the multitude of these Ceremonies, that
we may truly say, that they have brought a Iudaisme into the Church of God.
For if Augustine could complain in his days, that the Church of God was so
pressed with the burden of Ceremonies, that the state of the Jews might seem
to be more tolerable; What complaints would that holy man have made, if he had
lived in our times, to see the servitude which we behold at this day, seeing
that the Ceremonies are now ten-fold more for number, and every jot of them is
more strictly and rigourously exacted by an hundredfold?

Here, here is matter for your pens to work upon, and to inueigh against this
so outrageous a tyranny of Antichrist, by your many Vae's: and not to take
part with Pharisees, in complaining against the true Disciples of Christ, for
the use of Three guiltless Ceremonies (as it were, for only plucking of the
Ears of Corn) and coupling together things, which are as different in nature,
as in number from the Romish Rites: For as there is no great multitude in the
number of Three, so in these our Three, none of us did ever place any
essential worship of God; or power of Justification; or religious piety and
sanctification; or do, in our estimation, prefer them before; yea, or do so
much as equal them with any Ordinance of God; or finally yield unto them any
other use than a religious Decorum, and godly signification. Now then, for any
to complain (as one of you have done) that The burdens laid upon you by our
Church are more grievous than your forefathers were able to bear; M. Hy.
These. 19.
is but an argument that he can hardly point out his Father, that does not know
his own Mother: for if he acknowledged himself a true child of our Church,
he would not cast such a slander of oppressing Gods worshippers with Burdens,
which I am sure his Fathers have, and now the most learned and discreet among
his Brethren do bear with better consciences, than he can forbear them. Thus
much of their first Reason.

SECT. VII. Their second Reason, why these Ceremonies prejudice our Christian
liberty, is taken from a pretense, that they are imposed with an opinion of
binding men's consciences.
We have nothing, as yet, to settle our doubtful consciences upon, but these
two points, which are also in some doubt, M. Nic.
that Magistrates authority binds conscience; and that the Rites imposed are
indifferent. But our Divines teach us, that Humane Laws do not bind men's
consciences; and that men do not incur the guilt of eternal damnation, but
only by violating the Laws of God.

Our Answer.
If you had understood those your Divines aright, you would have distinguished
between the manner, and measure of binding of conscience; where, by [ manner]
is meant the authority of Binding; and by [ measure] the limits of this
obligation of conscience. Let us begin with the Manner, which is the authority
of immediately binding the conscience of man, so; as to make his transgression
damnable before God: which authority proceeds only from him, who can first
prohibit the internal acts of man's mind, as being able to discern the
thoughts of man's heart, 1. Cor. 4.5.
as it is written, It is the Lord that shall manifest the secrets of the hearts
of men. And who, knowing man's thoughts, can secondly judge according to man's
conscience? To wit, God only, concerning whom Saint Paul says, Romans 2.2.
Their conscience bearing them witness, and their thoughts accusing or
excusing in that day, when God shall judge secrets of men. And thirdly who,
judging men's thoughts, can accordingly render punishment, or reward
everlastingly; an act likewise proper to God, Iac. 4.12.
as S. James teaches: There is one Lawgiuer, who is able to destroy and save.
But the Laws of men are said to bind men's consciences, not immediately, but as
it were reflectiuely, by way of consequence, that is, by virtue of the
Supremacy of God, that commands obedience to the just laws of men.

All this seems to be grounded upon that Apostolical doctrine that says;
Romans 13.1.
Let every soul be subject to the higher powers, for the powers that are, are
ordained of God. Where we first observe, that Magistracy is Gods Ordinance,
ver. 5.
whereof he further says, It is necessary that you be subject; whereby there
is imposed upon subjects that necessity of obedience, whereof we spoke; which
notwithstanding no way derogateth from the liberty of doctrine. Thirdly, the
same Apostle makes this necessity fast by a bond of conscience, saying, that
We must be obedient for conscience sake. How? as if the obligation of
conscience, in obeying man, were immediately tied unto man? No, but unto God:
and therefore that obedience unto Magistrates is there expressed, because that
Magistracy is (...), the Ordinance of God. And lastly, concerning Gods
punishment, he adds, They that resist shall receive condemnation; ver. 2.
thereby imputing a guilt of damnation upon all wilful and contemptuous
disobedience.

We may not therefore confound the distinct Courts and Jurisdictions, one
whereof is Gods, and the other is Man's; The first being spiritual and
invisible; the second only civil and sensible: But rather ought we to
acknowledge the Act of binding men's consciences, which is spiritual and
invisible, to be properly belonging unto Forum coeli, God judging according to
the inward transgression of man's heart; but not unto forum soli, wherein man
has power, as to punish, so to judge directly only the outward Acts of men.
It is God therefore, and not man, that properly and directly binds the
conscience of Man.

SECT. VIII. Our second Answer, is by confuting the Non-conformists own
Objection, from their own Witnesses.
Our Divines (say you) teach, that Humane Laws bind not the consciences of
men. Where by [ Our Diuines] you understand such Doctors of our Church, who
condemn your Nonconformity: as though all other Divines, whom you usually
produce in favor of your cause, were contrarily-minded: Among whom, one
catechizing you in the duty of obedience unto the Political laws of men,
tells you, that Such politic precepts of Magistrates, and other Governors
(meaning of Parents, Vrsinus Cat. Tract. de Tradit. p. 735.
and Masters) do bind the consciences of men; that is, (says he) we must
necessarily perform them, neither can they be neglected without offense unto
God: we are bound to observe them, even without the cause of scandal, as for
example; To carry Arms is not a worship of God in it self, but it is made a
worship of God accidentally, when the Magistrate shall command us to carry
Arms, because that obedience due to the Magistrate is the worship of God.

Another to the same purpose instructs you, that The conscience of a
Christian, Musculus loc. com. Tract. de Magistra. page 618.
knowing that Magistracy is the Ordinance of God, does willingly yield
obedience. This cause (says he) moves godly men to obey the Laws of
Magistrates, even then, when they have power to deceive them, and to
transgress without punishment: and this is the difference between the godly
and wicked; the one obeys for fear of punishment, the other does it in
conscience. A third will reveal his judgment, in the Section following.

SECT. IX. Our third point, in answering, is to show that Ecclesiastical Laws
have no less force in the case of Conscience, than have the Politic.
Your former Witnesses, although they attribute to the Politic Laws a power
of binding men's consciences, yet do they deny the same to the Ordinances which
are of Ecclesiastical cognizance: Loc. Com. Tract. de Tradit. page 771.
Among others, P. Martyr affirms; Ecclesiastica non obstringunt conscientias,
si remoueatur contemptus and scandalum, ne aut tumore animi, and de industria
constituta rescindamus, aut turbemus communem pacem Ecclesiae. -- At praeceptis
ciuilibus iubemur parere, non tantum propter tram, sed etiam propter
conscientiam, nec alienam, sed nostram. So he. whereof Vrsinus indeuoureth to
give us a reason, saying; Vrsinus in the place above cited.
Nam violatione legum Ecclesiasticarum sine scandalo non violatur prima tabula
decalogi, cui seruire debent; at violatione legum politicarum etiam extra
scandalum violatur secunda tabula, quia vel reipub. aliquid detrahitur, and
societas politica laeditur, vel aliqua laedendi occasio praebetur.

But can this reason satisfy any reasonable man, think you? as though that
divine authority, which, in the behalf of obedience unto politic
Magistrates, says unto subjects, Let every soul be subject to the higher
powers; and to servants, Romans 13.
Obey them that are your bodily masters; and to children, Obey your parents in
the Lord: Ephesians. 6.
the same does not likewise charge and command people, concerning their
spiritual parents and Governors, saying, Obey them that are set over you, for
they watch, as those who must give account for your souls. Now, Heb. 13.13.
the commandment of obeying, proceeding equally, in both, from the same divine
authority; it must needs follow, that the obligation and bonds of Obeying, in
both, is of equal necessity, to charge us as well to preserve the peace of
the Church, as of the commonwealth.

For is there not in the Church a Society? and is not also a breach of the
uniform concord and peace of the same Society, an insufferable injury and
mischief; as whereby Aliquid Reip. Christianae detrahitur, and ipsa Societas
Ecclesiastica laeditur? etc. And therefore how shall not this be a violation of
the second table, as well as the like transgression against laws politic?
But I need not use much arguing, to confute the former opinion. 1. because the
opinion it self is not common: 2. because it can have no place in our Church,
wherein our gracious Sovereign Lord and King has set his Royal stamp upon
our Constitutions and Ceremonies, by his Majesty's politic authority. And
lastly, because the light of Scripture is evidently against it; especially in
diverse Apos^olicall Constitutions, whereof some were Ceremonial, and yet
challenged obedience in their times. Thus much of the manner of obliging man's
conscience. We proceed to the measure.

SECT. X. Our fourth point, in answering, is to express how far humane Laws
do bind men's consciences; and whether all just Laws do not bind them against
Scandal and contempt of authority, as the measure of Obedience.
It is not only the uniform judgment of the Authors above mentioned, but
also the universal consent of all divines that write of this argument, that al
persons are bound in conscience to perform obedience as well to Governors
Ecclesiastical, as unto Civil, so far as to avoid all Scandal and contempt
against their lawful precepts and Ordinances: so that to suppose an Adversary
in this case, were but to fight with a shadow. This therefore being but a
measure of the bond of Conscience, I proceed to inquire wherein the
transgression of conscience, by Scandal and contempt, concerning matters
indifferent, does principally consist.

SECT. XI. The Objection of the Non-conformists.
If a bare omission of a Rite were a contempt, then all that use bowling, which
the Law disalloweth, and do not wear Caps, M. Nic.
and such habi^s, as the Statutes inioyne, should be contemners.

Our Answers.
This point, concerning the measure of that obligation of conscience, in the
question of due obedience, requires a more exact and accurate discussion,
because this Case is variously disputed off in the Schools.

Some take their measure from the will of the Lawgiuer: conceiving, that the
conscience of the Subject is then bound to obedience, whenever the lawful
Governor does impose any Law, with an intention, that men should make
conscience of his command.

Some fetch the measure of Obligation from the weight and necessity of the
matter that is imposed; which although sometimes it be light in it self, yet
by reason of some circumstance may become weighty and necessary enough, to
challenge performance.

Other-some take their line and measure both from the ponderousness of the
matter, and also from the will and intention of the Lawgiver and Commander,
whenever he purposes to prescribe any thing under that bond of conscience,
which God exacteth, in charging men to obey those that are in authority. Which
purpose of the Lawgiver some use to discern by the tenure of the Law and
Statute; if it be delivered in such terms, which may seem deeply to charge
men to perform their obedience.

But some collect the same intention of the Lawgiver from the punishment,
which by the same Law shall be inflicted upon persons offending: which if it
be but pecuniarie, and of smaller value, then they judge men's conscience, in
such a case, bound only to the payment of that mulct whenever it is exacted.

By this last consideration, you may perceive that your former objection from
Bowls, wants a Byas to bring it to the mark. For the Statute Laws, which
prescribe pecuniarie punishments against Bowling, lest it should hinder more
warlike exercises, (as shooting) appoints wearing of Caps, for the
maintenance of some private Tradesmen, etc. they, holding the mulct of money
to be a compensation for the offenses, are satisfied thereby; and do not
account these commissions, or omissions, to be contempts, which can little
advantage you, but does rather strongly condemn you. For the omissions of a
professed Nonconformist proceed from an opinion, that he ought to disobey in
this case; and therefore is, in the censure of the Church, a professed
contemner: upon whom the Laws of the land have therefore imposed not a
pecuniarie mulct, but a flat deprivation of his Benefice, and Ministerial
function. In case that the punishment enjoined be very grievous: as for
example; imprisonment, banishment, loss of office and estate, deprivation,
degradation, or such like extremities, these are held to be sufficient tokens,
that the intention of the Magistrate, in giving of his Law, was to exact of his
subjects obedience, by virtue of that Law of God, and to charge them with
dutiful subjection in all lawful commands.

And thus you your selves appear guilty of a kind of Contempt, not for some
few omissions of these Ceremonies, which are not liable to so great censures,
but for your continual refusal, whereupon no less than deprivation does
ensue. For although the greatest contempt be, Nolle obedire Superiori; yet are
there other properties of disobedience, which do necessarily infer an high
degree of contempt, as namely, when any seeks, by many acts, to express in
himself, and to engender in others a viler estimation, either of the person
that does lawfully command, or of the thing that is accordingly commanded, than
they do deserve: in which case we may reckon any outward Act, whereby it shall
be known, that the doer must needs either incur the displeasure of his
Governor; or else, so much as in him lies, disturb the peace of the Church.

In all this, that has been delivered, I take not upon me to speak so
definitiuely, as to prejudice the judgment of Others, but to show what seems
unto me most probable: much less, to confute the opinion of them, that think,
that the transgression of some penal Statutes of less moment does not make
the conscience of the Actor guilty of sin; but that (if it be without
Scandal, or Contempt) it may have compensation, by the penalty which shall be
imposed.

Which doctrine, the Romish School it self will acknowledge, first in Laws,
which are pure poenales, whereof the Jesuit Vasquez confesses: That they, by
the tenure of writing, neither forbid, nor command; Vasquez Ies. Io 2.1. Tho^.
Tom. 2. disp. 159. cap. 2. page 100.
but only set down a punishment, either against them that shall do, or else
against them that shall omit to do according to this form. He that shall
commit this, or that, let him have this or that punishment: and therefore these
kind of Laws bind men (not unto guilt of sin, but) only unto the penalty:
-- as for example, in that Law against him that shall break prison, he is
chargeable only to undergo the punishment. This holds in other acts, which
are not expressly forbid in other Laws. N^uarr. Manuale. c. 23. page 655.
So he. Secondly Navarre, Felinus, and some others, go further, holding that
Penal Laws do not bind beyond the intention of the Lawmakers.

All which notwithstanding, there is no place of refuge or defense, for your
manner of opposition, seeing that the intention of the Lawmakers, in ordaining
of our Ceremonies, proceeded from the zeal of Conformity; the punishment
imposed is, in the end, deprivation, or degradation; and your own guilt, by
your continual refusal, can be, in the eyes of the Governors, no better than
contempt. Which most of your selves might more easily discern, if you would
but acknowledge (which the pens, and tongues of all men do confess) that there
is the same obligation of conscience, by the Law of God, concerning your
obedience to the lawful orders of the Church, established by the King and
whole Estate; as there can be of your own wives, children, or servants unto
your selves. In all which kind of relations a bare omission may proceed from
men of awful affections, such as, if they knew that their Superiors should
understand of their errors, and be greatly displeased thereat, would readily
recall themselves: whereas the other omission, which is done by wilful
opposition, must necessarily argue a contemner of the Commander, and infer a
destruction of the Law and Command.

SECT. XII. Our general confutation of the Non-conformists former general
Argument, which was taken from the pretense of Christian Liberty.
Our Reasons, to prove our Church free from impairing Christian Liberty, by
her prescriptions, are taken from 1. The acknowledgement of the Non-conformists
own Witnesses. 2. The public profession of the Church, in this behalf. 3.
The contrary practice of the Non-conformists; whereby Christian Liberty is
indeed superstitiously infringed.


Our first Confutation, from the acknowledgement of their own Witnesses.
That the Doctrinall opinion, concerning Ceremonies, is the only proper cause
of depriving Christians of that Liberty in question, which Christ commended to
his Church, in respect of things indifferent, is a point of learning commonly
professed by your own Witnesses: amongst whom Danaeus, expressing the diverse
properties of the opinion of necessity, whereby Christian Liberty is
dissolved, reduces them into these four. 1. opinion of placing in humane
Ceremonies a Law of necessity to salvation: 2. a necessity of sanctity: 3. of
merit: Isag. Tract. de Doctr. Eccle. Exam. part 2. page 43.
4. to make them necessary parts of Gods worship. Chemnisius compriseth all in
two words; Opinio necessitatis tollit libertatem: The opinion of n^cessity does
deprive the Church of Liberty. Master Calvin explaineth the point to the full,
showing that it is not the necessity of obedience to man's commandment; but an
opinion of the necessity of the commandment of man, Inst. l. 4. c 10.5.4
especially number. 1.
that annulleth our liberty. A man (says Calvin) is commanded to abstain
from meats, 1. Cor. 10.28. where albeit God commands him to abstain in
things indifferent, in respect of Scandal; yet does not man thereby lose the
liberty of conscience, because his own conscience has respect unto God, (viz.
by believing that the meat is in nature indifferent, and may in due time be
lawfully eaten) but his abstinence has respect unto the Conscience of another,
that he be not offended, who thinks such eating unlawful. And throughout the
whole Treatise he shows, that To make such Traditions necessary to eternal
life, and to place in them the justice of remission of sins, and the sum of
all religion and piety, is to invade the Kingdom of Christ, by whom we have
liberty of conscience, in things indifferent.

All which does evidently show, that Christian liberty does not consist in the
use, or dis-use of things indifferent; but in an opinion of the necessity of
using, or not using them. Which point may be yet furthermore most plainly
demonstrated, thus. In the case of Scandal, where, by the doctrine of the
Apostle, I am bound in conscience to abstain from eating certain meats, for
fear of offending a weak Christian; my conscience notwithstanding is free, in
regard of my opinion, to believe that the meat, which I abstain from, may be
eaten, or not eaten in due time, and place.

SECT. XIII. Our second Reason of Confutation, from the profession of our
Church.
Hearken, I pray you, unto the public profession of our Church, whereby,
albeit she challenge a necessary obedience to her command, yet does she not
command or teach any use of these Cereremonies, in any opinion of necessity
thereof, but says plainly; These Ceremonies are retained for Discipline and
Order, Comm^nion book before the Service.
which upon just causes may be altered and changed; and are not to be esteemed
equal with Gods Law. What then needs this loud clamor, or rather lewd
slander, which some blush not to cast upon her, imputing unto her no less a
crime, than the bereauing them of their Christian Liberty? by whom
notwithstanding they themselves do at this day enjoy all the spiritual
freedom, and happy interest that they have in Christ.

SECT. XIIII. Our last Proof, (or rather Reproof) against the
Non-conformists, showing that they by their manner of refusing these
Ceremonies, have superstitiously withstood that Christian liberty, which they
would seem to defend.
Christian liberty (as has been already proved and acknowledged) is properly
impeached by a Doctrinall necessity; namely, by teaching men to believe some
thing to be necessary in it self, which Christ by the power of his new
Testament has left to his Church, as free and indifferent. Which kind of
doctrine our Church condemns, as false and superstitious. And this
Superstition is twofold; the one is affirmative, the other negative.
Affirmative superstition is to affirm the use of any thing, that is
indifferent, to be of absolute necessity; as without which the faith of
Christianity, or the true worship of God, cannot possibly consist. See above
sect. 4.
Of which kind we have had many examples in Popery.

The negative superstition is to deny the lawful use of any thing, which
Christ has left free: with which kind of superstition, not only Papists, but
also many ancient Heretics have been dangerously infected; the Marcionites
teaching that it is not lawful for any man to marry; the Discalceati, to
wear shoes; the Tatiani, to eat flesh; the Seueriani, to drink wine. And
that there is a Negative Superstition, it is evident, by an heresy that had
taken root in the very infancy of the Church, teaching concerning meats, and
other indifferent things, and saying, Col. 2.21.
Eat not, touch not, handle not.

Now your Negative superstition, in opposing against those Ceremonies, does
bewray it self by your doctrinall opinion, saying (for example) Wear not a
linen Surplice; and that by two degrees. The first is an opinion of the
unholiness and pollution in it, because (as you say) it has been abused by
the Papists in their Idolatrous Mass. See above chap. 4. See after, part. 2.
chapter 1. sect. 8.
This opinion I judge to be notoriously superstitious; and so it seems to be
acknowledged by M. Jewel, who (speaking of the Surplice) does iudicially
account it to be an equal error, Jewel Defen. Apol. part. 3. page 325.
To commend any apparel as holy; and to condemn it, as unholy: the Papists
are in the first extremity, and you in the other. Which Negative superstition
is flatly condemned by that saying of Saint Paul; 1. Cor. 8.4. Beza upon this
place.
An Idol is nothing, that is, (as M. Beza confesses) It has no power to
unhallow any thing that was offered unto it; Which is apparent by the
conclusion of the same Apostle, where (excepting the case of Scandal, as it
then stood) he did teach, that men might eat of the Idolothytes, or meats
sacrificed to Idols, making no question, for conscience sak^.

The second degree of your Negative Superstition, is seen in your other
opinion, which you allege for refusing of it; even because it is prescribed
unto you, in Gods worship, in a necessity of obedience. Which is a plain
overthrow of Christian liberty, by taking away from the Church that authority
of ordaining Ceremonies, and prescribing obedience thereunto; which, by the
practice of the Universal Church of Christ, from the days of the Apostles,
unto these latter times, was never questioned by any Orthodoxe; yea, or
Heretic, excepting only the Acephalists: and is, at this day, condemned by
M. Calvin, and all other Divines of sound judgment.

But we were to prove this kind of Negative opposition unto Ceremonies to be
superstitious, and to bring in with it a doctrine of servitude upon the Church,
by the confession of their own Witnesses. If this were not a Superstition, M.
Calvin could not have warned Christian Churches, as he has done, to take heed,
lest in opposing of Ceremonies, they be not too superstitious. See above, cap.
4. sect. 29.
Nor could P. Martyr have concluded, that To think that that (speaking of the
Surplice) which has been used in Popery, may not be used of us, is to
oppress the Church with too much servitude. This, I thought fit in this place
only to point at, that my Reader may discern, that our Church is not so
Superstitious, in her prescribing of Ceremonies, as the Non-conformists are
superstitious, in opposing against them; as will furthermore appear in full
view, by our Answer to your particular Accusations against the Surplice, and
the rest, whereunto we instantly descend.

PART. II. A PARTICVLAR DEFENSE OF THE INNOCENCE of the Three Ceremonies, viz.
Surplice, Cross after Baptism, and Kneeling at the receiving of the holy
Communion: in opposition to All the Particular Accusations made by the
Non-conformists against them.
CHAP. I. I. Of the Surplice.
SECT. I. The first Accusation of the Non conformists, is in respect of the
distinction of Habit.
Cartw. in the rest of his 2. Reply p. 249. and Abridg. Linc. p. 54.
In appointing any several apparel unto Ministers, there is some injury done
unto them: For Bucer professes, that in all the Churches where he had been
Teacher, he took order that no special apparel might be prescribed for the
Ministers to wear.

Our Answer.
ALTHOUGH, as in Women, the best ornament is (as S. Peter teaches) their holy
conversation of life, and meekness of spirit, 1. Pet. 3.
in the hidden man of their hearts; yet the fashion of a long gown is to be
thought requisite for the distinction of sex: So albeit the Ministers ought to
be chiefly discerned from others by the excellency of the outward virtues of
Gravity, Soberness, Tit. 1.
Charity, Patience etc. (which S. Paul commends as the best characters of
their conversation) notwithstanding the difference of outward garments cannot
but be held convenient, for the distinguishing of them from Laics, in the
discharge of their function, especially in the days of peace, and (which the
primitive times of the Church did not enjoy) full liberty of their Ministry,
even by that Rule of Decency: which seeing M. Beza himself allowed, for
distinguishing of the orders of Citizens, Epist. 12. page 106.
and of (meaning the Ministerial) functions in a Civil course; we may with as
good reason require in the office of Preaching, administering the Sacraments,
and other Ecclesiastical duties.

For if it be convenient to distinguish Ministers of the Word and Sacraments
from Tradesmen and Mechanical persons, in respect of their spiritual
functions: then doubtless ought they especially to be distinguished at that
time, when they are to discharge and execute their functions. To defend the
contrary, would make no better congruitie, than if one should affirm, that a
Judge ought to be discerned from others, by his Scarlet, or Purple Robes,
whilst he is walking in the Street and Market, but not when he is sitting on
the Bench. But remember (I pray you) that in the days of Antiquity, Tert. de
pallio.
Christian Proselytes did distinguish themselves from Roman Pagans, by casting
away their Gowns, and wearing of Cloakes, albeit they were twitted by the
profane Heathen for so doing, with the taunt of (...). You therefore do not a
little injury to our Church, by exclaiming against her, and terming this to be
an injury unto Ministers, to be distinguished in outward habit from persons
of different callings. But it is no strange thing to hear froward children
crying out against their Mothers, only because, forsooth, they may not have
their wills, especially for wearing of what fashion of apparel, and when they
list.

As for your terming it, A taking of order, that no Minister should wear
distinct apparel; God is the God of order.
we answer, that Order (as Gods cognizance) is made discernable and visible by
Distinction, and not by confusion. But you object against us the testimony of
M. Bucer. I cannot well perceive with what confidence you could begin with
this Author, with whom (I am sure) you would be loath to conclude and make an
end. For that reverend Divine, although he would not admit the distinction of
apparel, in the German Churches, for causes best known unto himself; and
wished them also removed out of our English: yet was that rather in a desire,
to procure quiet unto some scrupulous persons, than that he held either
Distinction of Ministerial apparel, or this kind of distinction, by the use
of a Surplice, to be unlawful in it self. Velimus, nolimus etc. For, Whether
we will or no (says M. Bucer) we must confess, M. Bucer. tract. de ^acris
vestibus, page 709.
that distinction of apparel is, among men that are well conditioned, a cause
of giving unto Magistrates singular reverence. [Quid iam obstet?] And what may
hinder, that there be not the like distinction in the Ministry of Religion?
How do you now like the judgment of Bucer, who, the more judicious he is, the
more powerful he ought to be in satisfying of the most Objections that you use
against the Surplice, which he has done very exactly, as we shall have often
occasion to demonstrate. But concerning the point now in question, it would be
expense of time to use more words, in answering an Objection, whereof the
custom, almost of all Christendom; the ordinary practice even of you the
Non-conformists; yea, and (Distinction being the mother of Decency) common
sense it self, may be an ampl^ confutation? Thus much of the lawfulness^ of
Distinct apparel, in respect of the person.

SECT. II. Their second Accusation, against the Surplice, is in respect of the
Office, whereunto it is applied.
The Ministeri^ll habit ought to be free, M. Hy. and others.
and not appropriated unto Gods worship, but such as may be well used in Civil
and common use.

Our Answer.
May it be held a Decorum (as I have said) in Judges, to be discerned from
others, whilst they are in the place of Judicature, by both the color, and
fashion of their Attire, and must it now be accounted a matter of mockery in
Ministers, to have apparel appropriated unto their Administrations? Shall we
hear, concerning married parties, of wedding garments; and yet shall we not
endure to see any worshipping apparel on the persons that attend upon Gods
service? But I need not to instruct you, in this point, who are able to teach
others by your own examples, as namely, in Holy Days, Churches,
Communion-cups, Table-couering^, Pulpit-cloathes, and other like Ornaments and
Instruments belonging to holy worship: which you your selves do apply
particularly unto the solemn service of God.

Now if the Appropriation of Vestments unto Tables, and Pulpits etc. which are
but inanimata instrumenta, be justifiable in Churches; doubtless the proper
and peculiar application of a Vesture unto the Minister, a living Organ in Gods
service, and a person divinely called to that sacred function, consecrated to
the same worship, cannot be justly condemned. Thus much of Vesture in general;
which will be further confirmed in the Sections following. See above sect. 2.
I will only put you in remembrance of the last saying of M. Bucer, If
distinct apparel may be used of Magistrates, Why not of Ministers?

SECT. III. Their third Accusation, against the Surplice, is in respect of the
color, and matter.
M. Hy.
White linen, for Ministerial apparel, was not anciently used in the
Primitive Church. M. Hooker will not maintain out of Hierome, and Chrysostom
(which were about 400. years after the birth of Christ) that any such Attire
was several to this purpose, that is, for sacred use, and divine service.

Our Answer.
Yet M. Hooker holds the distinct use of Ministerial Apparel, mentioned by
Chrysostom and Jerome, to be probable. And what marvel though he would not
stand upon it, especially against you, who use as easily to reject the
Testimonies of Fathers, as you can hardly object them? For it must be
confessed, in the matter that we have in hand, concerning White Vestments, that
they did anciently belong unto Ministers, in the time of their Functions,
Zepper. de polit. Ecl. l. 1. cap. 14. quoting Chry^o. Hom. 83. in Mat. and
Hier. ^^. con. Pelag.
even by the Testimonies of Hierome and Chrysostom: except you will take
exceptions against your own Witnesses; amongst whom Zepperus has these words.
Chrysostom, speaking of the Ministers, says; This is your dignity, your
stay, your Crown, not that you walk through the Church in white vestments,
etc. And Hierome speaking of the Ecclesiastical order, which in the
administration of the sacrifices, went in white vestures, etc. P. Martyr also,
P. Martyr. Epist. p. ^0^7. Zanch. de Redempt. p. 486.
and Zanchie do accordingly understand these Fathers.

Yea, and if M. Cartwright had not apprehended the same sense, he would never
have made so silly, and indeed senseless an answer unto this point, as he
does, saying of this white Attire, Cartwr. quo sup^a.
that it was indeed their Holy Days apparel; which they used indifferently
the same days, as well without, as within the place and time of Divine
Service. Which exception I take to be no better than a betraying of his whole
cause. For if it be lawful for a Minister to use a distinct habit, in respect
of an Holy Day, then may he as lawfully distinguish himself from others, in
respect of an Holy Act, such as is his sacred ministration and function,
according to the practice (for the iudement of Antiquity is hereby clearly
discerned) of ancient Christians, who not long after the days of the Apostles
were wont (as it is acknowledged by your own Witnesses) at the time of their
Baptism, Martyr ^pist. page 1087. Za^ch. in ^phe 5. Idem de Redemp. page 489.
to attire themselves in white: whence came our Dominica in albis; wherein [
veteres Episcopi] the ancient Bishops, when they went about to administer the
Holy Supper, did put on white apparel. Why then may we not conclude with the
same Zanchie, [de vest super pellicea] that is, concerning the wearing of the
Surplice, Ibid. page 486.
at the time of the celebration of the Lords Supper? To wit; As we read not
(says he) that either Christ, or his Apostles ordained any thing concerning
the use of any peculiar apparel, in the administration of this Sacrament; so
do we not read that they did forbid any such vestments: therefore it is free
for us to use, or not to use them.

You are willing to hear M. Bucer, when he shewth his dislike of the Surplices
then used, as inconvenient, but pass him over, when he excuses them, as not
to be necessarily abolished. And, concerning the fashion and color of the
Surplice in the Ministry, he denies that there is any such cause of
exception, Either in the matter, color, or fashion thereof: And further
adds; Quodsi Ecclesia aliqua, Bucer. Tract. de Sacri^ vestibus.
etc. If any Church, with the pure consent of her members, had this custom, so
to come to the Lords Supper, (according to the ancient manner of children at
their Baptism) as to use a white garment; should any man affirm, that there
is no liberty permitted to the Church, to ordain such a Ceremony? Surely we
must say, that then shall it not be lawful for the Church to appoint any thing
without express warrant from Scripture; and so shall we condemn all Churches
[Impiae audaciae] of wicked sauciness: for all Churches use, in the
celebration of the Lords Supper, to observe time, and place, and gesture of
body; or else deny that Christ has freed us from the abuse of his good
Creatures.

SECT. IIII. Their fourth Accusation, against the Surplice, is in respect of
the Signification.
Abridg Linc. page 35.
The Defenders of the Surplice, do make it a Ceremony significant.

Our Answer.
Vide, supra, part 1. cap. 3. throughout.
We have already proved, [ in thesi,] that Ceremonies may be used, which are
Significant; and that so much the rather, because Significant, For the present,
we are to deal only [ in Hypothesi,] to show, that the Surplice is not
therefore unlawful, because it is used as a Sign of some moral
signification. Wherein you may be abundantly satisfied by the exact judgment
of your own Witnesses; amongst others, P. Martyr, in his Epistle unto Bishop
Hooper, concerning this very point, resolves as follows. Besides, the
defenders of this Ceremony, P. Martyr Epist. page 1088.
(says he) may pretend some just and honest signification; for the Ministers
of God are called Angels, and Angels (as once Mal. 3.2.) appeared always in
white Vestments: and how shall we deprive the Church of the liberty, that she
may not signify some thing by her actions and Rites; so that she do not place
(meaning, any essential and necessary parts of Gods worship) the worship of
God therein? But you will say, that the Ministers should rather be Angels, than
signify themselves to be such. I say, (says the same Martyr) you might have
made the like answer unto Saint Paul, when he ordained, that the woman should
have her head covered in the Church; urging, to that purpose, only the
signification of subjection: because any of the Church of Corinth might have
readily replied, saying, The woman should indeed be subject unto her husband,
and not signify her self so to be. But the Apostle saw that this is
profitable for us, that we do not only live justly, but that also we be put
in mind of our duties. Thus far P. Martyr.

Yea, and your Zepperus, concerning the point of signification, by white
vesture, does excuse the ancient Church, in the days of Chrysostom and
Jerome, to wit; Zepper. polit. lib 1 ca 14. page 159.
We read nothing (says he) of the Histrionicall and superstitious habits
(meaning of Papists) in the monuments of purer antiquity; except only of the
white vesture, whereof Chrysostom and Jerome make mention, [qua vsi sunt, sine
superstitione, in signum and commonefactionem honestatis vitae;] which they
used (says he) without any superstition, in a sign, and for an admonishment
unto them of an honest life.

Zanchius quo supra.
Zanchius is of the same judgment, touching a moral signification by the
Surplice, comparing vestments [de lino, and lana;] and granting, that whether
the vesture be made of white linen, or of woollen, both are indifferent,
determines saying, that white will better become the Minister of the
Sacraments [propter significationem] for signification, because it is
[Symbolum] a sign of innocence and sanctity: whereupon it is, that in the
Apocalypse white robes are said to be given unto the Saints. Apoc. 7.9.
So he.

I may not pretermit M. Bucer, who allows of distinct Apparel in the
Ministerial function; Bucer. de sacris vestib. page 707.
Et eo magis, etc. And so much the more (says he) if that these Attires be
deputed unto some holy signification and admonition: which we may perceive in
the signification of the woman's veil, 1. Cor. 11. And to this end the Holy
Ghost did make special mention of the white. Attire of Angels.

SECT. V. Their fifth Accusation, against the Surplice, is in respect of the
resemblance it has to the Jewish Vestment.
M. Nic. and M. Hy.
Our Divines condemn the Massing garments, because they are Jewish and
Aaronicall.

Our Answer.
It is true; they do indeed condemn the use of those Jewish garments, as they
are some what Iewishly used by the Papists, who make themselves therein little
better than Jews Apes, through their imitation of the Aaronicall pomp,
almost, as well in the number, as in the fashion of their Ministerial
garments; and that also from a Jewish ground, even because they were once
ordained by God in the Leuiticall Law: adding furthermore thereunto an opinion
(I say not of Legal, which was Jewish, but) of a spiritual sanctity, which
is now merely Popish; and was anciently a Pharisaicall superstition, condemned
by Christ. Mat. 7.
In which respect D. Raynolds did justly reprove the Popish Ceremonies,
Rainold. Confer.
but yet no otherwise than he does linen clothes, and couerings of Altars, and
Festiu^ll d^yes, (namely) as they are superstitiously abused by Papists.

As for our Church, she is most justifiable in her choice, by the judgment of
S. Hierome, Zanch. de R^d^mpt. p. 699.
which Zanchius does approve; and which the Non-conformists themselves may no
more dislike, than they do the observation of the Feasts (which are
Apostolically ancient,) to wit, Easter, and Pentecost. For Hierom having
objected unto him that Scripture of S. Paul, Gal. 4. Gal. 4. Hier.
[ You observe tim^s and days,] answers; Non eadem conscientia obseruamus,
qua Iudaei: We do not observe such times with the same conscience (or opinion)
wherewith the Jews did solemnize them. And, indeed, the opinion and confidence
of the Ordeiner^ and Obseruers is the very soul of any Ceremonial practice.

As therefore, in natural constitutions, the only vegetative faculty and
soul gives the distinct denomination to plants; the sensible unto beasts, and
Animals; and the reasonable soul unto men, to distinguish each one in their
several kinds: so likewise, in such artificial and arbitrary Institutions as
these, the different opinions which Iew^s, Papists, and Protestants have of
their Ceremonies, may discern their uses and Appellations, in terming them
either Jewish, Popish, or Orthodoxe, respectively. 1. Jewish, because of an
opinion of the necessity of them, by conceiving them to be of divine
Institution, or else of the end, whether it be for praefiguration of the
Messiah to come, or otherwise accounting them the essential parts of Gods
worship, without which the worship it self cannot please God. 2. Popish, by a
(...), or a superstitious affectation, to imitate them in Pomp, and in
multitude, even because they were once Aaronicall; and also by placing
sanctity and holiness in them. But 3. Orthodoxe and true, by (as our Church
professes) a convenient Decency, and Significant resemblance, so far forth as
they are profitable for Order and Edification.

P. Martyr Epist to B. Hooper. page 1083.
In brief, your present objection was long since answered and satisfied by some
of your own Witnesses, one saying, that under the Priesthood of A^ron there
were Sacraments, sealing up the promises of Christ to come, all which are
abrogated by the coming of Christ: and there were other actions, which were
not to be accounted Sacraments, but which made for decency and order, and for
some other commodious use; which being agreeable to the light of reason, and
also profitable (I think) may be recalled, and observed by us. For who knows
no that Tithes, which now serve for the Ministry, were had of the Jewish
Priests? We our selves have some things, which are borrowed from the Law of
Moses, even from the beginning of the Church: for we have certain feasts. Must
therefore all things be abolished, that have in them any parts of the Old Law?
So he. Yea, B^cer. quo supra.
and M. Bucer does fully ratify the same truth, showing that Garments are not
to be called Aaronicall, or Antichristian, but in respect of an Aaronicall or
Antichristian opinion had of them, whereof we are to speak in the VII. Section
following.

SECT. VI. Their sixth Accusation, against the Surplice, is both in respect of
the Resemblance, and of the Signification, jointly.
Also would not garments of mystical signification, M. Nic.
appropriated unto holy, and solemn worship, be Jewish in special, and not in
common manner only, if the most high should acknowledge them?

Our Answer.
No. The Ceremonies, which God should now authorize under the New Testament,
would not be Jewish, but Christian, because the Ceremonies must be defined,
and denominated, according to the Covenant and Testament, whereof they are
Appendixes, Adjuncts, and Seals. As for example, the element of Bread was
commanded in the Old Testament to be used in Jewish worship, L^uit. 2.6.
(to wit, the Shewbread,) in which respect it was properly Jewish: the same
element of Bread is now after Consecration appropriated to a Sacramental use,
in the Lords Supper; and made a Seal of the New Testament; and thus it is
become properly Christian.

That old Rule, Distingue tempora, ought to have place in this Question: for
the Jewish Signs and figures, that were of Christ to come, were, even in the
time, when the Law of Moses was in force, moritura, that is, mortal, and about
to die: afterward, at the time of Christ his coming, upon that his [
consummatum est,] or complement of man's redemption on the Cross, they were
made mortua that is, dead. But at length, after the full publication of the
Gospel, they became mortifera, that is, deadly and damnable to all that should
use them after, with a Jewish opinion, by expecting still the coming of the
Messiah in the flesh, to the ouer-throw of our Christian faith. This we speak
of Sacramental Ceremonies: as for such as were fundamentally moral and
natural, they could not infer any such prejudice to the profession of
Christianity, except only an opinion of necessity.

SECT. VII. Their seventh Accusation, against the Surplice, is from the
pretended Author thereof.
M Hi. and M. Hy.
The Surplice was first invented by Antichrist. Ergo, we may not allow of it.
Stephen, Pope of Rome, (Anno 256.) did first appropriate the Surplice unto Gods
worship, according to Platina, in vita Steph.

Our Answer.
In this Objection, we find three Assertions; 1. that the Surplice was invented
by Antichrist: 2. that Pope Stephen did appropriate it unto Gods service: and
3. that (by consequence from them both) the Surplice can have no lawful use.

To the first we answer, that the Surplice was in old and gray headed use long
before the Roman Antichrist was borne: for the Inuentor, whosoever he was,
could not be younger than Pope Stephen, who (as you said) was the first
Appropriator thereof. But he lived Anno 256. when as The Antichrist did not put
out so much as either of his horns, for the space of more than 400. years
after. You may therefore lawfully subscribe to your own witness, P. Martyr.
Epist. p. 1087.
who says that The diversities of apparel were not first invented by the
Pope.

Secondly, concerning the Appropriation of the Surplice by Pope Stephen, unto
Ecclesiastical use; it is well known, that this Stephen was no Antichristian
Pope, but (as Platina, whom you allege, writes) a godly Bishop, Platina in
vita Steph.
who, by his life and doctrine, converted many Gentiles to the faith of Christ,
and sealed the same faith with his own blood, by holy Martyrdom, being
beheaded under the Emperor Decian. So that the Act of this Pope must rather
fortify our cause, for as much as this Stephen was a true follower of the
Proto-martyr Stephen; and the Religion which he professed, was almost as
different, from the now Romish Superstition, as those times of Pope Stephen
were distant from these days, wherein now Pope Paul the fifth possesses the
Papal seat.

Lastly, concerning your Consequence, suppose you (if you please) that some bad
and Antichristian Pope had been the first Inuentor of this Ceremony; yet is
your consequence but lame. For, P. Martyr vbi supr^.
I cannot be persuaded (says P. Martyr, writing of the use of the Surplice in
our English Church) that the impiety of the Pope is so great, that whatsoever
he touches must thereupon be so defiled, that afterward it may not be of any
use, to them that are good and godly. M. Bucer is somewhat large in this point,
but yet so pregnant and pertinent, that we may not omit him. Bucer. tract. de
sacris ves^.
I dare not say (says he) that these Vestments (speaking of the Surplice) are
so polluted by Antichrist, that they are not to be permitted unto any Church,
that has knowledge of the liberty of all things; For the Scripture does every
where proclaim, that every creature of God is good, unto those that are good;
that is, unto the true believers in Christ. -- I say good, not only in respect
of the natural effects, as bread is good to feed; but in respect of the
diverse significations; and admonitions by them. The property of a Rite, or
Ceremony (as it is Aaronicall, or Antichristian) does not inhere unto any
creature of God, or Vestment, or shape, or color; but in the mind and
profession of men, that abuse those good creatures of God unto impious and
godless significations: for it cannot be called an Antichristian Ceremony,
except some Antichristian Religion and communion be professed thereby etc.

I return to the point of Appropriation, to let you understand, that if your
exception be not so much against the Appropriator, although a Pope, as against
the Appropriation it self, whereby such Ceremonies are deputed particularly
unto holy use, then are you to consider, whether it may be thought agreeable to
the law of good Decorum, to see the Pulpit-cloth used in the stead of a flag,
in a May Game; or the Communion-cup carried abroad, for common use to serve at
an Alehouse; or to behold so much as a Ministers gown hanging on the back of
a Tinkar, or Car-man. Now if that you perceive a deformity in the common use
of such things, that have been so exercised in Gods Service, then the
Appropriation of such things to public worship is not therefore a just matter
of Indecencie.

SECT. VIII. Their eight Accusation, against the Surplice, is from the former
Abuse thereof.
Abridg. Linc. page 28.
The Surplice is notoriously known to have been abused by Papists to
superstition and Idolatry. Durand calls it the Armor of God, wherewith the
Priest is harnessed. Their Missals say, that thereby the Priest is defended
from the temptations of the wicked spirits; without which, neither water, nor
bells, nor ought else can be hallowed. This is also used in their abominable
Mass; which they make so peculiar to their Religion, as that they pull it off
them, whom they do degrade. Ergo, it ought be removed.

Our Answer.
We have already discovered your great Abuse of Logic, in this Consequence;
whereby, See above part. 1. chapter 4.
from the Abuses of things, you infer the necessary extirpation of the
things themselves. For the present, we are only to repel this your particular
exception against the Surplice. To this purpose, we must first enquire, wherein
you will have the pretended Abuse to consist. Surely, this cannot be imputed to
the matter of the Surplice, for that is natural; nor to the fashion, for that
is only artificial; nor to the color, for that is merely accidental. We
must therefore seek out the pretended Popish abuse in the Surplice, as it is
Ceremonial.

In the Ceremonial observation of the Surplice, by the Romish Church, we can
conceive but two points, that may be considerable: the first is their
Dedication of it; the second is the opinion that they conceive thereof. The
consideration of the Romish practice is concerning the Dedication of the
Surplice unto an Idolatrous service. This cannot be a sufficient cause of an
utter abolishing of all the use thereof: 1. Cor. 8.
for the Apostle teaches, concerning the Idolothyta, that is, meats
sacrificed unto Idols, (which notwithstanding he commends to the use of
Christians) that they are so to be used, being first sanctified by their
prayers and thanksgiving, albeit they were indiuidually the same things, that
had been Idolatrously polluted.

It will not avail you to reply; that this alteration and change of Idolatrous
meats was for a Civil, and not for any Religious use: Because the Apostle, 1.
Cor. 8.4. Beza.

See above part. 1. chap. 6. sect. 14.


in the same place, saying, Idolum nihil est, An Idol is nothing in the world,
signifies (as M. Beza has well commented) that The Idol had no power, or
virtue either to pollute or sanctify that which was offered unto it. How then
can that, being but a [ nihil] have force to pollute the religious use thereof?
Which were to make something of nothing. But if we shall admit of your own
assertion, to think that the same things, which have been Idolatrously abused,
may not afterward be applied unto any religious purpose: yet what can this
infer against the Surplices, now worn in our Church, which are not
indiuidually, or numerally the same, that have been Dedicated to Romish worship?

The next point remains, concerning the opinion and intention of the Papists,
in the use of their Surplices, wherein only consists the formal cause of
Abuse; which if it may be found in the use of our Surplices, then must we
necessarily confess our Surplices to be as truly the same, in their
superstitious abuse; as, in respect of matter and substance, we are sure they
cannot be judged the same.

The conceit and opinion, that Papists have in this Ceremony, is to judge it
partly significatiue, as a sign of a moral duty; partly operative, as having
in it an efficacy of holiness to defend us from temptations; or else to
hallow certain other things, as has been shown. If you mean to impugn the
Significatiue property, then we say that the Papists opinion is herein
justifiable, as we have already proved, not only in our general confutation
of your judgment in that behalf; See above part. 1. chapter 3. etc.
but in our particular Answer, concerning the Surplice, even by the Testimonies
of your own Witnesses. But if you condemn the opinion of operative power in
the Surplice, then our Answer is, that our Surplices are not Popish, seeing
that we ascribe no such efficacy unto them.

To conclude therefore, for as much as the opinion and intent of the
worshippers, is the only character and form, to discern and distinguish a
religious worship, from that which is superstitious; the doctrine of our
Church, concerning all such Ceremonies, being so sincere, and justifiable, and
the opinion of the Church of Rome in consecrating of her Rites so idolatrous:
it must needs be an injury, and indeed an impiety, to call their Popish, and
our English Surplices, so precisely the same.

We appeal again unto M. Bucer, for the decision of this point: he supposing
our Vestments to be the same, that were abused in Popery, does notwithstanding
resolve thereof, saying; Quicquid de abusu harum vestium dicitur, id non in
vestibus, sed impuris haerere animis. Bu^er. Tract. de sacris vest. in fine.
See him mo^e copiously sect. 7.
That is, Whatsoever can be objected, concerning the Abuse of these vestures,
that cannot be said to cleave unto the vestures themselves, but to the unclean
minds of those that do abuse them.

SECT. IX. Their ninth Accusation, against the Surplice, is from the effects
thereof; both by begetting an opinion of holiness; and also by working a
Scandal in the Church.
First, Abridg. Linc. page 40.
the Surplice is esteemed of many people within the Land as an holy thing, so
that they receive not the Sacrament from them that use it not: and unto others
it is scandalous.

Our Answer.
Our Reader, I suppose, will not easily digest Coleworts twice sod, nor
require a repetition of an Answer unto Objections already obi^cted. See above,
Part. 1. chap. 2. sect. 12.
Therefore referring him to our general Confutation of this Argument, taken
from these effects; I say, touching this your supposed (if not feigned opinion
of, I know not what) people, that no particular error, ought to prevail
against a common truth, especially where the sin of the peoples ignorance
must condemn the negligence of the Teachers, by whom they might, and ought to
have been better instructed.

And if this Answer seem unto you to want weight, yet hearken unto the
Testimonies of such grand Divines, whom you use to produce for your Witnesses,
in the question of Ceremonies. P. Martyr counsels you, in this very case, P.
Martyr. Epist. to Bish. Hooper, page 1088.
saying; If they that are weak have occasion of offense hereby, let them be
admonished, that these things are ind^fferent; and let them be taught in your
Sermons, not to think that the worship of God consists in these things. This
was the resolution of that learned man, concerning the Surplice, judging the
use thereof indifferent; notwithstanding all the imputations of Jewish, of
Popish, of Idolatrous, and of the Scandalous Abuses thereof.

I may not let pass the judgment of M. Calvin, who hearing into what trouble
Bishop Hooper was fallen, for refusing to wear such Ecclesiastical Vestments,
which had been formerly polluted with Popish superstition, says as follows.
Sicut eius, in recusanda unction, constantiam laudo, Calu Epist, 120, p, 245,
ita de pileo, and vest linea maluissem (vt illa etiam non probem) non vsque
adeo ipsum pugnare, idque nuper suadebam. In which words M. Calvin, howsoever
he does not simply approve of the Ceremonies, which had been abused to
Idolatry; yet makes he a difference between the Popish abuse in unction, and
the Surplice; commending the Bishops constancy, in rejecting the unction, and
condemning his contentiousnesse against the Surplice: which M. Calvin could not
have done, except he had accounted both the English use of the Surplice, a
matter indifferent; and also Bishop Hoopers refusal of it more scandalous,
that his conformity to the use thereof could have been. Whereunto P. Martyr
likewise labored to perswad that same holy Bishop, by many Arguments, See
^boue.
wh^reof some have been formerly alleged.

For how should it not be a matter of scandal, to impugn these kind of
habites with such vehemency, as if it were an impiety to use them? whereby
the liberty of Christians is not a little impeached, if you will believe your
own Witness. For M. Bucer says, Non dubito qu^n illa etc. I do not doubt but
that, Bucer. Tract. de sacris vest. page 708.
concerning Ceremonies of place, time, apparel, and other things, belonging
unto the outward decency, Christ has left a liberty unto his Church, to
appoint, and ordain such things, which every Church shall judge to be most
behoouefull, for the upholding and increasing of reverence toward holy things,
among the people of God. And again, Bucer. Ibid.
that Christ has delivered his Churches from all abuse of the creatures, that
had been formerly defiled. From Answers, we proceed to Confutations.

SECT. X. Our summarie Confutation of the Non-confo^mists Assumptions, and
Accusations against the use of the Surplice, by the Confessions of their own
Witnesses.
We have seriously and exactly examined all the Accusations, whereby the Wits
of the Non-conformists could in any color of probability impugn this
Ecclesiastical garment, viz. upon pretense of Indecencie, unlawful
Appropriation, Mystical Signification, Novelty, Antichristian Invention,
Jewish Imitation, Popish Superstition, and the like: and making up our
accounts, by the light of sound judgment, in our several proofs; and more
especially by the confessions of the best Witnesses, that the Non-conformists
can require, have found, (notwithstanding all their former exceptions) 1. that
there is a Decency in this kind of Apparel, for the distinguishing of the
Ministerial Function, from other Callings; 2. a Conueniencie, in appropriating
it unto an Ecclesiastical office in Gods worship, according to the ancient
custom both of Bishops, and inferior Ministers, in the administration of the
Sacraments; and also of persons baptized, when by Baptism they become holy
votaries unto Christ; 3. A commendable representation of Sanctity, by the
color of White, agreeable both to the example of Scripture, and practice of
Antiquity in the same kind; 4. A profitable use thereof, and without
superstition, to put Ministers in mind of their Moral duty; 5. and lastly,
That the fierce and factious opposition, to the use of the Surplice, does work
nothing but Schism, Scandal, and a great prejudice against the liberty of
Christian Churches. We, upon these considerations, stand confident, that every
Minister, who is not peruersly carried with the impetuousnesse of a peevish
affection, may hereafter be persuaded to leave this Vesture out of his
needless controversies, and contentions; and in his Ministerial Office and
Function to put it on.

CHAP. II. Our defense of the second Ceremony, which is the Sign of the
Cross, used after Baptism.
The Accusations, which use to be made against this Ceremony, by the
Non-conformists, are; that it is 1. Contrary to the second Commandment. 2.
Derogatory to the holy Sacrament of Baptism, in diverse respects. 3. Popishly
abused. 4. As ill, as Crossing of the breast, etc. 5. A Relic of superstition.
6. An invention of heretics. 7. Superstitious, even according to the
intention, wherein our Church professes to use it.


SECT. I. Their first Accusation, is, that the use of the Cross is contrary to
Gods Commandment.
Every making of an Image or similitude in religious use, which is not
commanded by God, is forbidden by the second Commandment. M. Gos. M. Nic. and
M. Lang.
But the sign of the Cross in Baptism is such a similitude. The Mayor
proved; because that the Commandment is expressly thus: Thou shall not make to
thy self any graven Image, or any similitude.

Our Answer.
WE say, that the Image or Similitude, forbidden in this Commandment, is an
Image or Similitude representative, that is to say, used for an outward
resemblance and description of the Godhead; wherewith the sign of the Cross
at Baptism has no affinity or similitude.

Their Reply.
The command^ment is with an absolute prohibition of man his making of any
Image, M. Gos.
or similitude in the service of God.

Our Answer.
In this you teach us a new piece of Cathechisme, never heard of before.

SECT. II. Their Reply.
M. Gos. Calvin. in Exo. 20.8.
So does M. Calvin interpret it: [I am tenendum est, duas esse mandati huius
parts; priore ve^at erigisculptile, aut vllam Similitudinem:] We must observe
that their are two parts of this commandment, in the first God forbids the
erection of any carved thing, or any similitude.

Our Answer.
So you say, M. Calvin does interpret this Commandment; but if you will give
any other man leave to interpret M. Calvin, he will readily tell you, that he,
by this part of the Commandment, excludes those Images and similitudes only,
which men erect for a kind of representation of the Godhead. This appears by
his own phrases, first; Negat igitur (hoc praeceptum) in toto mundo reperiri
veram Imaginem Dei. Calvin in the place alleged.
This Commandment (says he) denies, that there is to be found in all the
world any proper Image of God. Secondly, showing, that this precept was given
for the condemning of the worships, used among the Gentiles: Qui in forma
Creaturarum putabant Deum repraesentari: Who thought (says he) that God was to
be represented in the form of Creatures, Thirdly, he says; Affingere Deo
Imaginem per se impium est, quia hac coruptela adulteratur eius maiestas, and
fingitur sibis dissimilis. That is; It is an impiety to faigne an Image of
God. And yet again; Et sane nimis indigna est deformitas, Deum facere similem
Ligno vel lapidi: It is a vile deformity to make God like unto wood, or stone.

All which sentences condemn only the representative Similitude of God; and
not without good reason: for if the words of the Commandment should be taken
absolutely, as you enforce it, then away with all Art of Caruing, and painting
of any figures or similitudes: which opinion, in the judgment of M. Calvin, is
at the least foolish; for thus he says. Calui^ ibid.
Quod quidam stulte putarunt hic damnari sculpturas, and picturas quaslibet,
refutatione non indiget, etc. It seems therefore that this Obiector, in so
expounding of M. Calvin, had his eyes so fixed upon these words of the
Commandment only (to wit) Images and Similitudes, that he could not see the
works of God Commandment, that is, the Similitudes and Images themselves;
namely, of Cherubins, Lions, and other Creatures, Exodus 37, etc.
which God himself commanded to be represented in his Tabernacle (as
afterward he ordained the Brazen serpent to be erected in the wilderness;)
all which were appointed by God himself, Number. 21.8.
for Ornament, Decency, and Signification, respectively; but not either for
any personal representation of God, or else divine worship.

For there are two things, which are forbid by this Commandment, 1.
Representation of God by an Image, 2. Adoration of any Image. The first, by the
first part of this Commandment, [ Non facies, etc.] Thou shall not make to thy
self graven Image, Zanch. de Redem p. exp. of this commandment.
etc. The second, by the words following, [ Thou shall not bow down to it nor
worship, etc.] which point Zanchius, another of your Witnesscs, does express
at large.

SECT. III. Their second Accusation, against the Sign of the Cross, about the
administration of Baptism, is, that it detracteth from the perfection of the
Sacrament of Baptism; and that in diverse respects.
1. Respect is, because it is used as an Addition unto Baptism.
M. Gos.
The sign of the Cross is imposed as an addition to Baptism, and in the very
act of Baptism, the Minister says, [Wee receive this child into the
Congregation of Christ his Flock, etc.] which shows it to be used as a
substantial part of Gods worship.

Our Answer.
It is no tolerable disposition in a child, that will admit a suspicion
against his mother, contrary to both the manifest protestation of her meaning,
yea and also her express Construction of the very words that are here
objected. First she professes and protests, saying; The Church of England,
Constit. Can 30.
since the abol^shing of Popery, has ever held and taught, and teaches
still, that the sign of the Cross used in Baptism is no part of the
substance of that Sacrament: for when the Minister, dipping the infant in
water, or laying water upon the face of it, (as the manner also is) has
pronounced these words [I baptize thee in the name of the Father, and of the
Son, and of the Holy Ghost] The Infant is fully Baptized; so as the sign of
the Cross, being afterward used, does neither add any thing to the virtue or
perfection of Baptism; nor, being omitted, does detract any thing from the
effect and substance of it.

And, indeed, the Tenure of the words themselves can admit no other
interpretation, which the Minister, in preparing to make the sign of the
Cross, utters in this manner; [ We receive this child into Christ his Flock;]
evidently signifying, that the child, now baptized, is by Baptism already
incorporated into the mystical body of Christ, which is his Church; and
therefore is pronounced by the Priest, not in fieri, but in facto esse, (as the
School speaks) to be publicly Received into it; and to be acknowledged as a
visible member thereof: for this whole clause is fully distinct from the words
following, [And do sign him with the sign of the Cross, in token that
hereafter he shall not be ashamed to fight manfully, etc.]

Mark here, I pray you, that the sign is called a [ Token that hereafter he
shall not be ashamed.] Consider with your selves, whether any could interpret
that, which is called a Token of a duty to be practiced afterward, to be a
sign of Baptism it self, which was already actually performed; except either
his mind had been preoccupated with notable prejudice, or else his affection
perverted with some extreme lust of Contradiction.

SECT. IIII. Their second Reason, to make the sign of the Cross derogatorie
from Baptism.
It is usually made, whilst that the words of Institution, are in pronouncing.
Abridg. Linc. page 41.
Ergo, etc.

Our Answer.
This is no more, in effect, than for us to say; Some ignorant ones (if yet
there are any such) have transgressed the Ordinances of the Church, by using
the Sign (as you imagine) contrary to our acknowledged direction, and
profession thereof: and the Non-conformists do as willingly transgress the
same Ordinances, by not using them at all. If therefore the former sort of
Ministers (as indeed they must needs be) are reprooueable; the Non-conformists
cannot be altogether excusable.

But yet, that we may suppose that some such preposterous Ministers may be
found, it would be, notwithstanding, your parts, either to reform them, if
they be tractable; or, if refractary, then to inform the Church against them:
so might both you have less cause to be offended by them, and we by you.

SECT. V. Their third Reason, to make the sign of the Cross, derogatorie to
Baptism.
The same may excuse the Papists who use it before Baptizing, as we do after;
Abridg. Linc. page 41.
nay it is worse after Baptism then before, because it is nearer the error of
them, that held Episcopal Confirmation to be a perfection of Baptism.

Our Answer.
The Fathers indeed used the Cross, immediately before Baptism, as the
Centurists have proved out of Origin, Cyprian, and Tertullian: Cent. 3. page
125 number. 10. Basil. lib. de Spirit. ca. 27. Arnob. in Psa. 85.

Aug. in Psa. 68.


whereof we read also in Basil; where he places this amongst the Apostolical
Traditions. They might have added Arnobius, and Augustine. Accordingly there
was brought in Exorcisme, and Insufflation, now practiced by the Papists (yet
in a far different strain from the Custom of these holy Fathers, as namely)
to drive away Devils, not only out of the bodies, but even out of the souls
of Infants. Bellar. l. 2. de effectu Sacra. ca. 30.. Nota 3. and ca 31.. 2.
Proposit.
The which power they likewise ascribe to the sign of the Cross, as it is a
Sacramental Ceremony. But our Church, to the end that she might remove this
point of Superstition, has wisely ordained, that the sign of the Cross
should be used after that Baptism is fully ended: yet notwithstanding is she
here calumniously traduced by you, as worse then the Popish. Lingua quo vadis?
what shall we call this malady, whereby our Church, if she Symbolize with
Papists but so much as in a Surplice, is accounted Popish, and Antichristian?
and if contrarily she alter that use of the sign of the Cross, to the end
that she may cross and control the Superstition of Papists, yet even then
also is she censured to be, yea, worse then Papisticall? How fitly do such
Obiectors exemplify those way ward and intractable Children, mentioned in the
Gospel, whom neither weeping nor piping could please, or still?

As for your Reason, taken from the superstitious opinion of Romists,
concerning Confirmation, it is not worthy the repeating. For our Church
teaches not that Confirmation is a perfecting, or confirming of Baptism, but
only of the parties baptized; by calling them to a personal profession of the
faith, which their Godfathers and Godmothers (as it were their Guardians) did
in their Infancy promise should be by them performed.

To conclude; our Church, placing the use of the Sign of the Cross after the
end of Baptism, to remove the superstitious opinion, which the Papists had
thereof, in their abuse of this Sign immediately before Baptism; you may now
(if it please you) compare this alteration and your objection, concerning
Confirmation, in (as you call it) nearenesse of error: and then let that man
among you dispute, whether an error in Baptism, be not nearer unto the
Corrupting of the Sacrament of Baptism, then to the Corrupting of the doctrine
of Confirmation, which is out of Baptism, who doubts whether a wound, in the
head, or in the heel, may more nearely endanger the health of the brain.

SECT. ^I. Their fourth Reason, why the Sign of the Cross in Baptism may be
said to derogate from the perfection thereof.
Yea but it is said to be a Token of the profession, which the child must make
in the spiritual combat, Abridg. Linc. page 41. M. Gos.
Ergo; (this being a proper end of Baptism) is used as a part of Gods worship
in Baptism.

Our Answer.
This Argument is as loose and lanke, as the former; for Baptism is in it
self a Token and Sign of a Covenant and stipulation between man and God: but
this sign of the Cross, appointed by man, is only a Token of protestation
between particular men, the members of the Church of Christ (which is the
Congregation of Christians then assembled) and the Church it self.

Besides, Baptism is a sign of Regeneration, that is, Gratiae collatae, of
Grace conferred by the Spirit of God: but the Cross in the forehead is only
a sign of man's constant profession of Christianity, which he ought to have
amongst them that are the enemies of the doctrine of the Cross of Christ;
which are two distinct and far different ends.

Thirdly, I could not but marvel, that you should therefore exclaim against
this Sign, because it is used as a Token of Christian profession, especially
if you were acquainted with your own learned Witnesses, who taught their
Readers, both to observe and approve: First, that the use of the Cross, in the
primitive Church, was (thus Chemnitius) a profession, Chemnitius vide infra
sect. 13. B. Jewel Ibid.
and commone faction of belief in Christ crucified: Secondly, that this kind
of Testification (thus M. Jewel) is not to be disallowed: Thirdly, that it was
used to the end, that Thereby the persons Baptized (thus P. Martyr) might
testify their faith. P. Mart. Ibid.
All which, and much more will appear, for the justification of this Token,
when we come to answer your seventh Accusation, where you shall hear Zanchie
affirm, Zanch. Ibid.
that this use of the Sign of the Cross, to testify that we are not ashamed
of Christ crucified, is not to be disliked.

SECT. VII. Their fifth and last Reason, why the Sign of the Cross may seem
to be made an essential part of the Sacrament; and consequently a derogation
from the perfection thereof.
Abridg. Linc. page 41. M. Gos. M. Hy.
But understand, that the last Canons do add, that by the Sign of the Cross,
the child is dedicated to the service of Christ; now some of these are the
proper ends of Baptism: Ergo, not to be ascribed unto man's additions.

Our Answer.
Although the word Dedication might be drawn by the generality of the
signification to an other sense than the Church did intend, because of the
doubtful ambiguity which is in it: yet you ought to consider, that some men's
Wits are given to judge of words by the sound, and not by the sense. But if you
will be in the number of those clean creatures, which do divide the hoof, and
chew the cud, you will easily distinguish, and discern, that there is a
twofold (we speak only of the Humane) Dedication; one Declaratiua, which is
by way of Protestation; the other Consecratiua, by Consecration.

This distinction may be enlightened by example. If a man, who is piously
devoted, does build an Oratory or Chapel for Gods worship, which he does
sequester by Vow and Promise, from the common use, and lastly assigns it unto
the service of God; this is called a Dedication, by Protestation. Afterward,
for a more solemn appropriation thereof to the worship of God, the Episcopal
Consecration is required, to the end that, by prayers and other religious
Rites, that place may be publicly Dedicated to the same service; this is
Dedication by Consecration.

And how much more may this distinction take place in the case now in question?
For, by the formal words of the institution of Christ, the child is Dedicated
unto God, by Consecration in Baptism, which is a Sacrament of Grace; but the
Dedication, which is signified by the Sign of the Cross, is not by any proper
Consecration unto God, or Token of grace received from God, by such a Sign
made: but only of a declaratiue Token of duty, which afterward the person
baptized ought to perform, concerning his constant and visible profession of
the Christian faith. The sum of all is, that the difference between the
Dedication by Baptism, and by this Sign, is no less than a Sacramental
Stipulation with God, and a Moral representation and protestation unto man.

SECT. VIII. Their third Accusation against the Sign of the Cross, is from
the Popish abuse thereof.
The Sign of the Cross is notoriously known to be abused to superstition and
Idolatry by Papists; Abridg. Linc. page 29.
for both Stapleton and Bellarmine make it the special Badge of their
Idolatrous religion, ascribing to it the miraculous effects of driving away
devils, expelling diseases, sanctifying the persons that are marked with it;
Coster. Ench. c. 13. fol. 42.6.
and that which they worship (cultu latriae,) which is the very same kind of
worship, which they give unto God.

Our Answer.
But our Church, using that Sign of the Cross with no such superstition,
either by using it as a special Badge of any Idolatrous Religion; or by
ascribing unto it any miraculous power of driving out devils; or of curing
Diseases; or by sanctifying persons, that are marked therewith; or yet by
offering the worship of Latria, yea or so much as Dulia unto it: And
contrariwise professing, that she has purged this Sign from all Popish
superstition and error; Constit. can. 30.
and to use it only as primitiuely it was used, that is, only as a Token,
whereby there is protestation made of a future constancy in the profession of
Christianity. You your selves could not but discern hereby as great a
difference between the Church of England, and the Church of Rome, as between
religous devotion, and blind superstition; light and darkness; God and Belial.

I pass over the maine Argument, taken from the former Abuses and Scandal,
which are said to be occasioned by this Sign; because I will not trouble my
Reader with needless repetitions of that Answer, See above, Part. 1. chap. 6.
which has more then once been given to this kind of Objection.

SECT. IX. Their fourth Accusation, against the use of the Sign of the Cross
about the time of Baptism, is from the consequent License of ordinary
Crossings of the body in other parts, and upon other occasions.
M. Row. and others.

Abridg. Linc. page 27.


If crossing upon the forehead be lawful, then that which is less ill is
lawful, viz. the crossing upon the breasts etc. which is the manner of the
Papists.

Our Answer.
I perceive, that if we had no other Advocates to plead our cause against the
Papists, than such Obiectors, then might the Papists presume of a victory; not
so much by their own strength, as by your imbecility. For it had been an
easy matter for you to have answered the Papists, by telling them that there
is a great difference between the manner of Protestants crossing the foreheads
of Infants, and the Papists crossing their Breasts etc. because even (if there
were no other odds) the practice of the Protestants is joined with an
interpretation of their meaning, shewi^g to what end the Cross is used; namely
in a Moral Token of Christian courage, that the child shall not be ashamed of
the Cross of Christ etc. which declaration, of the godly use and end thereof,
may be a sufficient instruction unto the people, to free them from that
superstition.

But the other kind of crossing the breast, practiced by Papists, without any
words of Interpretation to manifest their meaning (except it be to nourish
their superstitious confidence therein) may easily draw ignorant men into some
Idolatrous conceits. As it is a far greater safety and security for a
Trauellour, passing through any Desert, to read written on Statuae Mercuriales.
Marble Stones, or Pillars in a Highway (according to the custom of some
Countries) the direct path from City to City, than if he shall be left wholly
unto his own imagination, void and destitute of any direction. Otherwise, if
that the people were fully instructed in the right use of Crossing their
breasts, according to the primitive understanding thereof, to keep themselves
in a Christian moderation; this also could not be justly excepted against:
whereof we are to speak in the 13. Section.

SECT. X. Their fifth Accusation against the Cross, used in the time of
Baptism, is from the pretended Author thereof; whom they name to have been
Valentinus.
M. Hy. and M. Hi. Iren. li. 1. c. 1.
Irenaeus says, that the Heretic Valentinus was the man that first advanced
the Cross to any religious use.

Our Answer.
Sooner shall you be able to extract Lead out of a Marble-stone, than to draw
any such saying, yea or sense, out of Irenaeus. This Father, discovering the
heretical speculations of this grand Heretic Valentinus, among others,
reckons his opinion concerning that Cross, whereof he speaks; which some
times he called Stauros, Crux; and sometimes Horos, terminus, attributing
thereunto a double virtue, one Confirmatiua, that is, of confirming and
strengthening a Christian in his profession; the other Diuisiua, that is, of
dividing and separating him from the world. The first virtue Valentinus
gathered out of the words of Christ, He that takes not up his Cross and
follows me, Math. 10.38.
is not worthy of me: signifying, that the Cross does establish a Christian,
and join him unto Christ, in following him: The other diuisiue virtue he
collected out of that speech of Christ, He has his fan in his hand, and will
purge his floor, and gather his Wheat into his Garner, Math. 3.12.
but the Chafe will he consume in unquenchable fire; noting, what the nature
of persecution is, namely, to separate and distinguish the faithful Professor,
from the Hypocrite. In all this, here is not any mention, or meaning at all,
Vel ligni, vel signi Crucis; either of the Wood, or of the Sign of the Cross;
but only of the persecution of Christians, for the name of Christ; which
Christ himself called a Cross. This is most evident by the very place of
Irenaeus: For first, Christ's words, alleged by Valentinus, concern every
Christian man, to take up a Cross; but not that whereupon Christ did suffer,
for then the words of Christ should have stood thus; Except a man take up
[crucem meam] my Cross etc. Which were to make every true Christian a Simon of
Cyrene, who was compelled to take up Christ his Material Cross. Math. 27.^2.
But the words are these; Qui non tollit crucem suam: He that tak^th not up his
Cross; that is, his own Cross of suffering persecution for the name of
Christ, (whenever occasion shall require) cannot be accounted the disciple of
Christ.

This meaning of Valentinus is yet more manifest by the second virtue of that
same Cross, which he calls diuisiua, that is, a power of dividing; in which
respect Christ did call persecution [ Ventilabrum] a fan to winnow, and sever
the chafe from the wheat. Now Valentinus (says Irenaeus) Ventilabrum illud
crucem interpretatur; Does interpret that Fan to be the Cross, whereof he
spoke. Who then can be so silly, or senseless, as not to discern, at the
first sight, that this Fan does signify no other Cross than persecution?

SECT. XI. Their Reply.
There was some cause, M. Hy.
why Irenaeus did reprehend the Heretic Valentinus, whom he reproved, saying
(Talia enim etc. Such things the Valentinians speak, seeking to apply the good
speeches of Christ unto their own wicked Inventions.) Therefore the words of
Valentinus had some evil meaning concerning the Cross.

Our Answer.
The reproof, which Irenaeus uses against Valentinus, does more fully
convince you of an egregious abuse of your Author, because Iraeneus does
plainly justify the former sayings of Valentius, concerning the Cross of
persecution, calling them Been dicta, Good sayings, (and how shall they be
otherwise, being the very words of Christ himself?) but he condemns only
the application of those sentences, saying of the Valentinians, lib. 2. cap. 1.
[ Been dicta adaptare cupiunt hijs, quae male sunt ab ipsis inuenta] That they
did apply those good sayings unto their own wicked inventions, namely, to that
Pleroma, that is, (according to their own Interpretation) unto God, but yet
such a God, as those Heretics had molded in their own fantastical brains;
far differing from the infinite, and absolute nature of God. Wherefore, upon
due examination of the testimony out of Irenaeus, grounded upon the words of
Christ, you may, by your Objection, as well make Christ as Valentinus, the
first Inuentor of the Sign of the Cross.

SECT. XII. Their sixth Accusation, against the Sign of the Cross, is, because
(as is pretended) the Heretic Montanus was the first Countenancer thereof
among Christians.
That Montanus gave it first credit amongst Christians, the Centurists seem
to affirm, M. Hy. Cent. 3. cap. 10 nu. 57.

Tert. de coro. milit.


saying: Et quide^ Ceremonias mutuatas a Montanistis induxit Tertullianus, and
auxit, vt vnctionem externam, signum crucis, ^blationes pro defunctis, quas
consuetudines fatetur non esse institutas in sacra Scriptura.

Our Answer.
Not, that Montanus may be said to have been a more countenancer of the Cross,
than of threefold dipping in Baptism, which Tertullian (being then a
Montanist) did there mention, following Montanus in the observation of such
Rytes, Eusebius. Hist. lib. 5. c. 1.
which had been used of Orthodoxe Fathers, before ever Montanus was borne, who
lived about the year 173. But some of the Ceremonies, which together with the
Cross, are related in that place of Tertullian, were long before that
mentioned by Irenaeus, Justin Martyr, and Ignatius. There is nothing more easy
than defamation, by calling any child a Bastard; especially when it does not
certainly appear, who was the right Father thereof: yet what need such
jealousy in this Case, concerning the Father of this Sign? may it not be
sufficient for us to know infallibly, that the mother was an honest woman? for
such was that ancient Church of Christ, wherein the Sign of the Cross was
first used and practiced; as we are bound to prove, in the Section following.

SECT. XIII. Their seventh and last Accusation, against the Sign of the
Cross, is, because of the superstitiousnesse, which ancient Fathers are
pretended to have had therein.
The Canons profess to use and esteem of it as the Fathers of the Primitive
Church did; but sundry of them put holiness in it, Abridg Linc. p. 41.

M. Hy.


and wrote of it very superstitiously. Some telling us that it was a terror
against Devils, attributed a power thereunto of working miracles: afterward it
was used in Italy (in signum salutaris expeditionis) whence it took then the
name of (Cruciata expeditio) such as some record that Constantine, and
Theodosius had taken up before. What shall we say, but that the Cross has
been as superstitiously abused by the Fathers, as by the ranckest Papists,
saving that Papists have rancked it with Divine worship, and so bestowed more
honor upon it then ever the Fathers did afford it? but the Church of England,
Can. 30. does profess to maintain it in the same use which it had with the
ancient Fathers; therefore it must needs follow, that the Sign of the Cross
is superstitiously used.

Our Answer.
If I should note any man to be as rank a Traitor, as ever was Rebel in
Ireland, SAVING THAT he does acknowledge his due obedience unto the King, would
not any think, that I bewrayed thereby both malignancie, and folly? And how
does this differ (I pray you) from your censure of the Fathers, noting them to
have as much abused the Sign of the Cross; as the ranckest Papists, Saving
that they did not bestow divine worship on it? Howsoever the matter go, we must
judge the Fathers, by your Censure, to have been superstitious. But it would
have became the children of those ancient Fathers to have acknowledged that
Orthodoxe sense in their writings which Protestant Divines, of principal note,
and your own Witnesses have observed.

There was indeed often mention made among the ancient Fathers of the Sign of
the Cross, but Chemnitius wills you to mark what kind of Sign it was.
Exam. part. 4. Tract. de Imag. page 28. col^ 1.
In the Primitive times (says he) there was not any Image or figurature of the
face of man, having his arms spread out, and nailed to the Cross, but in the
days of Tertullian, and afterward the Christians did fashion a Transuerse
figure, as it were a Cross, and did Sign themselves: but this was not a sign
for worship or Adoration, [non enim tunc aliquid subsistens erat] for there was
not any thing really subsistent in that sign, but it was only [professio and
commonefactio,] a profession and remembrance that they should believe in Christ
Crucified, and put all their hope and confidence in him; Thus far Chemnitius,
to let us understand the integrity of Antiquity, in this point, because there
cannot be the like superstition in the Cross, as it is a sign Transient,
which there may be in it, as it is permanent.

Secondly, Zanchie, De Redemp. l. 1. de Imag. page 400.
distinguishing of the Histories concerning Images, some he calls true, and
some fabulous: and in the true, observes, that Things (Speaking of the Sign
of the Cross) were not then turned into superstition, which were tolerable
(says he) in those times, when as there was no such danger of Idolatry. After
he confesses that At the sign of the Cross, the Devil was repelled, yet not
by power or virtue of the Cross, but by faith in Christ crucified, even as
grace is conferred upon us by the Sacraments, not through the power of the
Sacraments, but by our faith in Christ crucified, whereby we receive those
Sacraments; but Papists attribute an efficacy unto it [ex opere operato] even
by the power of the sign. And lastly, speaking of the principal cause of the
Sign of the Cross in the forehead, adds, saying; [ praecipua causa, and ea
non reprobanda] the chief reason (which we may not disallow) was to testify
that they were not ashamed of Christ crucified. So he: whereby you see, he
freeth the ancient Fathers from the imputatio^ of Superstition, and approves
the reason of their Use of the Cross in Token that they should not be ashamed,
etc. Which reason our Church has expressly specified, as the only and
sufficient cause, why she has retained the Use of this Ceremony.

P. Martyr, Loc. com. page 222. So also Iew^ll page 372.
dissenteth not from the former Witnesses so much almost as in Syllables; and
afterward justifies the placing of the Cross in Banners, Coins, and Crowns
of Kings and Emperors, which (says he) was done without any Superstition, to
testify that they defended the Christian faith.

Zepperus, reckons many Ceremonies which had been anciently used in Baptism,
Pol. eccl l. 1. ca. 12. p. 119. and 223.
and among others the Sign of the Cross, and exorcisme, which he calls
superstitious; but yet confesses that they were used in those ancient Churches
[ nulla cum superstitione] without all superstition, being void of opinion of
worship, merit, or necessity, but in a good intent, thereby to gain more
reverence and admiration unto this divine Sacrament, and to exercise the
devotion of men's minds in the celebration thereof: until at the length they
grew to that height of impiety and superstition which is to be seen in the
Church of Rome at this day.

Probl. p. 176.
M. Perkins, although he acknowledges not any further Antiquity of the use of
the Cross in either Sacrament, beyond the 400, year after Christ yet does he
confess; first, that Crux transiens apud puriorem ecclesia^ communiter in vsu
fuit; non Crux permanens: The transient sign of the Cross was in common use
in the purer Church (meaning the sign done suddenly with the finger) but the
sign of the Cross in any metal not till 400. years after Christ. Secondly,
that for the first 300. years after Christ (which he calls the purer Church)
it was used as a sign of the external profession of Christian faith. Thirdly,
that miracles were done of God at the sign of the Cross, that had joined unto
it a manifest or at least a secret invocation of the name of Christ crucified:
so that the virtue was not to be imputed unto the sign of the Cross but unto
the faith of the worker and invocation of Christ. Much time would not suffice
to reckon up the Testimonies of Authors who have justified the ancient Churches
in the use of the Cross. Therefore because Bishop Jewel has discussed this
matter at large, I have reserved his Testimony for the next Section. Hitherto
of our several Answers unto your particular Accusations.

SECT. XIIII. Our Confutation of the Non-conformists Detractions, against the
use of the Sign of the Cross, by their own Witnesses.
I wish that this whole cause may be determined by him, unto whose judgment you
do often appeal, in the whole question of Ceremonies; and whose name we
acknowledge to be most worthily honorable in the Church of Christ.

Bishop Jewel therefore does express his judgment, as follows: The sign of
the Cross, I grant, Jewel art. 4. page 371. of the last Addition.
was had in great regard, and that the rather both for the public reproach,
and shame that by the common judgment of all the world was conceived against
it, and also for the most worthy price of our redemption, that was offered upon
it, (which he speaks of the practice of Christians, before the days of
Constantine; and then after the application of the example of the Emperor
Constantine, concerning other Princes, he adds) Even so Christian Princes, at
this day, use the same Cross in their Arms, and Banners, both in peace and in
war, in token that they fight under the Banner of Christ. Last of all, whereas
M. Harding says, Jewel Ib. page 372.
that the Professors of the Gospel cannot abide the sign of the Cross, Let
him understand, that it is not the Cross of Christ, or the sign thereof, that
we find fault withal, but the superstitious abuse of the Cross. God be
thanked, that they, whom M. Harding condemns, have been able not only to
abide the sign, but also to take up their cross, and to follow Christ, and to
rejoice and triumph in the same. Do you not now perceive what a large and sound
lecture this admirable Doctor in Gods Church has read unto you, and in how
many points your gainsaying of the use of this sign is confuted?

First, Bishop Jewel approves of the sign of the Cross, as it is made a
significant Token of Christian Constancy in Banners; which you will not abide
to have place in the Appendice unto the ministration of Baptism.

Secondly, he allows the ancient use of the same sign at the time of
Celebration of Baptism, notwithstanding the execrable abuse thereof in the
Romish Church; which you urge as a necessary Cause, to have it utterly
abolished.

Thirdly, you commonly allege, and that not without some ostentation, a
multitude of Divines, as (albeit in Titles, rather then in truth) Adversaries
to these and all such kind of Ceremonies: Notwithstanding he brings in the
Consent of holy men and Martyrs (that is, Witnesses of the faith of Christ,)
who undergoing the moral Cross (which is persecution, even unto Martyrdom it
self) were also witnesses of the lawfulness of this Ceremonial sign of the
Cross: so that you can have small Cause to account your suffering for
Contradicting this Ceremonial Cross, the moral Cross of Christ.

Fourthly, the same godly Bishop notes these Martyrs to have admitted of this
sign of the Cross (that I may so say) iam flagrante delicto: even when the
abuse of Popish superstition and Idolatry was at the height, and when in
detestation thereof, they yielded up their dearest lives unto Christ, which
notwithstanding in your Conceits cannot be used without superstition, even now,
when superstition is banished.

Wherefore the Argument (wherewith I will conclude this part of Confutation)
stands strongly against you thus. Seeing that the use of the Cross was (as
has been confessed by your best witnesses) void of superstition in purer
Antiquity, the same (notwithstanding the former abuse by Papists) may be
practiced in our Orthodoxe Churches with like sincerity. The reason is evident,
because there is the same possibility of reforming of an abuse that there is
of correcting an error. As therefore our Church has by the mercy and grace of
God, purged her self from the erroneous opinion of Popery, and now defends
the Primitive Catholic truth, concerning the sign of the Cross; so may she
as well be thought to have abandoned the superstitious practice of Popery, and
to have reduced this sign unto her primitiuely lawful use: whereof M. Bucer
said (even in the first time of the reformation of religion, Bucer. in Censur.
ordinat. Eccles. cap. 12.
when as yet the sign of the Cross was Idolatrously abused by Papists) that
it might have, among the truely-professed, a Christian use: Hoc signum, etc.
This sign (says he) not only because it is most ancient, but also for that
it is plain, and for a present admonishing us of the Cross of Christ, is
neither indecent, nor unprofitable. Whereunto might be added the consonant
judgments of Chemnisius, P. Martyr, Zanchy, and others: but I hasten to the
third Ceremony.

CHAP. III. Our particular defense of the Innocence of the Third Ceremony,
which is the gesture of Kneeling, at the receiving of the holy Communion.
SECT. I.
THE Non-conformists enlarge themselves, in this Argument; seeking to oppugn
it by all the vehemence, and violence of affection that they can: but, when
their Exceptions, and Accusations shall be thoroughly discussed, they will
perceive (I hope) that they have not been more hot in their Zeal, then cold in
their Reasons; whereunto I now proceed, according to my former method, both
Answering, and Confuting their Accusations, against this Gesture of Kneeling.

SECT. II. The first Accusation, used by the Non-conformists, against the
Gesture of Kneeling, at the receiving of the B. Sacrament, is from the example
of Christ and his Apostles.
M. Hy. M. Hi.
That which is contrary both to the example of Christ, in the first Institution,
and also to the example of the Apostles, and primitive Church successively; and
that which is against the intention of Christ, being in it self Idolatrous,
must needs be abolished, as unlawful. But such is the Gesture of Kneeling, in
the receiving of the Eucharist. Ergo, it is to be changed.

Our Answer.
Here are, almost, tot media, quot verba: and therefore you are to be entreated
to resolve your confused Prosyllogisme into several parts, for our more plain
and expedite course, in this our dispute. Begin at the first point, by
examples.

SECT. III. Their first Instance in the Example of Christ.
We are to imitate Christ and his Apostles; Abridg. Linc. p. 56. and p. 57.
but Christ did minister it sitting at Table. And is it not wicked (says one)
not to imitate his doings, of whom it is said, that he did all things well?

Our Answer.
Christ, doubtless, did all things well: but you do not well, by abusing the
example of Christ, to prove a necessity of the imitation thereof. This I make
bold to affirm, and I hope not without good grounds. First, by Reason.

SECT. IIII. Our first Reason; for Confutation of the Non-conformists former
Assertion.
When we come to enquire the strict manner of Christ his Gesture; out of the
Evangelists, Math 26.20.
we hear S. Matthew saying, (...); and S. Mark, (...); that is, (as Calvin
and Beza render it) discumbentibus illis: Mark. 14.18.
It is not of (...), or, (...).
(...), or (...), that is, Sitting; but (...), which may be as well, Lying
down: and the Evangelist S. John, concerning Christ says, (...), Ioh. 13.12.
that is; He fell down, or (if you will) laid himself down, as the same
Evangelist (using the first word, says concerning S. John himself) (...),
Ioh. 13.23. Bar. Tom. 1. page 198. and page 200. he brings for the most part
things cited out of a book called, Liber Rituaalis.
[ recumbens in sinu] lying upon Christ his breast. Baronius by these phrases
is induced to think, verisimile esse, Christum, and Apostolos lectis
discubuisse; which phrases of speech Interpreters have diversely rendered, not
according to the very propriety of words of the Evangelists, but according to
their different conceits, about his Gesture, which we may not deny to have been
a kind of Sitting. But yet when we shall ask more precisely the continued
manner of the Sitting, whether upright, or rather somewhat leaning; or what the
express form of his Gesture was, it is left by the holy Evangelists in such
an uncertainty, that we may justly collect from thence, that Christ intended
not to make his gesture to be an exact pattern of necessary imitation to be
continued in his Church.

SECT. V. Our second Reason of confuting the Non-conformists.
This may be taken a paribus, that is, from diverse other like circumstances of
Christ his practice, wherein the Non-conformists neither do, nor can challenge
any right of imitation. This case will be evident, if we shall consult with the
Evangelical Story, concerning Christ his first institution of the Sacrament:
where we observe related unto us both the Example and Precept of Christ; the
Example is shown in his preparation for this Communion; his Precept is
specified in the act of Administration. Concerning his Example of preparation,
these diverse circumstances appear, the first is of the Persons, who were
Twelve; or, if you will, but Eleven disciples: the second, in respect of the
Sex, only Men: the third is of Place, in a private House: the fourth of Time,
it was in the Night: the fifth of Gesture, which we acknowledge to have been a
kind of Sitting: Not to insist upon the nature of the Bread, nor the mixture
of water with Wine, or the like.

Now if the example of the first Institution, in these circumstantiall points,
be for perpetual, and necessary imitation; then farewell, from this Communion,
all women, by reason of their sex; and also men, above eleven or twelve,
because of their number; and let us use it rather in private houses, than in
public Temples, because of the circumstance of place, which was a chamber;
and concerning the time, not in the morning, but only in the night. Is not
this then a singular aduersenesse, in these men, so to impugn the ordinance of
our Church, by exacting sitting, which is but one only circumstance of the
first institution of this Sacrament, that they do consequently condemn
themselves, as Preuaricators in almost all the rest?

SECT. VI. Our second grand Confutation, of the Non-conformists, is by their
own Witnesses.
Your own Witnesses, to wit, M. Beza and Zanchius do willingly confess, Beza.
Zanch.
the one touching unleavened bread; the other concerning the mixture of water
with wine; that we are not bound to an imitation of Christ: And this they
conclude, but not without as just premises, and good reasons, as can be
required; See below, sect. 16.
which will appear in Answer to your second accusation.

SECT. VII. Our third grand Confutation of their first Exception, is from the
practice of the Non-conformists themselves.
It is true; Christ did administer this Sacrament in a kind of Sitting-gesture,
and in the same Gesture did the Apostles of Christ receive it. The maine
question is, whether the Church be bound to the strict imitation of all such
circumstances of the first administration? You challenge a precise observation
thereof; and we desire you to be satisfied from your own practice: for Christ
is found Sitting at one Table with his Disciples, unto whom he still Sitting
distributed the blessed Sacrament, as unto his Communicants; but you, in the
Administration of this Sacrament, departing from the Table of the Lord, walk
from person to person, and deliver these holy Rites unto them.

Say now (I pray you) is there any just resemblance between Sitting and
Walking; or is not the example of Christ as good a prescription, for Gesture,
unto Ministers how to distribute the Eucharist, as the example of the Apostles
can be unto Laics, how to receive it? Wherefore, the pressing of your first
exception was but the shooting an Arrow up directly into the Sky, without all
regard, that, in falling down, it must necessarily light upon your own heads.

SECT. VIII. Our determination of this first point, concerning the first
Accusation, from the Example of Christ.
That we may more accurately determine this whole doubt, consider, we pray you,
that the Acts of Christ, concerning the institution of this Sacrament, were of
two different sorts; some were only occasional, and accidental; and some
were truly Sacramental and Essential. I call them Occasional, which
accidentally fell out, by occasion of Christ his celebration of the Passover;
which, being the Sacrament of the Jews, was at the same time to expire and
die; at what time the Eucharist, the Sacrament of the new Testament, was to
take life and breath. Now then, the circumstances of the Passover occasioned
Christ to institute this Sacrament of the Lords Supper, only with his own
family; only with men; only in a private house; only in the night; as has
been said: Whereunto some do refer also the circumstances of the bread, that
it was Azyme and unleavened, as then, necessarily required in the celebration
of the Passover; and of the Cup, that it had a mixture of water in it, to
allay the spirit of the wine; according to the ordinary custom of that
Country.

But the Acts, that were essential, and necessarily to be performed, in this
Sacrament, are all under that express commandment of Christ, saying, Math. 26.
[ Do this etc.] beginning first at these words, Christ took bread, and when
he had blessed it, he brake etc. All which circumstances, delivered by Precept,
the Church is tied to observe.

Upon this occasion, it were no great difficulty, to show how the Church of
Rome, at this day, has degenerated from ancient Rome, by transgressing the
commandment of Christ, who said, Do this etc. and by doing contrarily, in
diverse weighty and obseruable points, and circumstances, there commanded by
Christ: as namely, first, Christ took bread, gave thanks, and blessed it;
Ergo, the consecration that Christ used was in prayer, and not in these four
words, This is my body. Secondly, Christ taking bread, brake it, and (as is
confessed) took diverse parts out of one loaf; and set not before them (as it
were so many breads) diverse wafers. Thirdly, Christ gave it unto them, saying,
etc. Ergo, they heard what he said; and his words were not uttered, or rather
muttered in an vnaudible voice. Fourthly, Christ commanded them, saying, [
Take] Ergo, he spoke unto them in a known tongue, and not in a language they
could not understand. Fifthly, Christ gave, saying, Take: Ergo, doubtless (for
the point is confessed from the light of Antiquity) so they took it, as he
gave it, namely, with their hands, and had it not put into their mouths.
Sixthly, Christ, that said to them all present [ Take] said also [ Eate] Ergo,
the use of the Sacrament, was propounded to be eaten, and not to be only gazed
upon; and persons present were Actors, and not Spectators only. Seventhly,
Christ likewise took the Cup, giving it unto them saying, Drink you all of
this: Ergo, the Communicants did equally participate of both the Elements, as
being the pledges of both the Body and blood of Christ; not dismembring the
Seal of the Covenant, nor defrauding the faithful of their complementall
right. Lastly, Christ expressed the special end of the Eucharist, Do it in
remembrance of me; which is, as S. Paul does interpret it, Showing the Lords
death: Ergo, it is improperly called a Sacrifice Propitiatory, 1. Cor. 11.26.
seeing that the death of Christ is thereby only Commemoratiuely shown, and
not operatiuely, and corporally executed herein.

Thus we find, that how many actions have been mentioned, concerning the
Institution of Christ, so many preuarications and transgressions have been
committed by the now Church of Rome, which the ancient mother Roman Church
would have condemned as sacrilegious, if they had been practiced by any Church
in her time. But you call upon us to consider your next Exception.

SECT. XI. The second Accusation, used by the Non-conformists, against
Kneeling, is from the Intention of Christ; by four pretenses.
Their first pretense is from the nature of a Banquet.
Christ ordained this for a banquet, whereat we are to act the part of the
Guests of Christ: Abridg. Linc. p. 61. and Dispute. M. L^rg.
in imitation to resemble our Coheirship with him in his Kingdom: now it
suteth not with a Coheire, or Guest, with Christ, to kneel at the Table; and
it is contrary to the Law of Nature, to Kneel at a Banque, twhich is a
Gesture of inferiority, and abasement: and we may not lose our fellowship with
Christ to sit thereat, whereby Christ would represent unto us our Banquet in
heaven.

Our Answer.
We acknowledge this Sacrament to be the most gracious Banquet, that ever was
ordained for the sons of men: But how? As a bodily Banquet, trow ye? No, for
if our Savior had meant to have furnished out a bodily Banquet, he would have
been more plentiful in other varieties, than in Bread and Wine. But it is a
mystical Banquet, for the replenishing of our souls spiritually with the body
and blood of Christ; which we feed upon, Non dente sed mente; non per fauces,
sed per fidem: that is, Rather with the mind, than with the mouth; as the
Fathers speak. And therefore you are not to require, or expect therein the very
form and fashion of an ordinary banquet, where it will become men to talk,
eat, and drink, to inuit, and pledge one another; and how then can you exact
of us the manner of Sitting?

And for any of you so to speak of familiarity, and holding it indecent for
adopted Coheires with Christ to kneel, as the receiving of this Sacrament; I
think it can hardly be heard, even of some of your own fellowship, without
some horror of mind. For seeing that the Right of our adoption is the same in
us, without the Sacrament, which it is in the receiving thereof; then, by your
Argument, it must be held an Indecorum in any Christian to be seen praying any
where unto Christ, the Son of God, upon his knees.

SECT. X. Their Reply.
It is one thing to be a Coheire, and another thing to act the person of a
Coheire; The Disputer.
at other times when we present our selves in supplication, then take we upon
us the persons of suitors, and so we humble our souls in prayer: but at this
Banquet we represent the persons of Coheires, as we shall be at the great
Supper in heaven, and now it is our office to give resemblance hereof.

Our Answer.
We have indeed such kind of Similitudes in Scripture, to shadow out unto us
the happy fellowship of the Communion of Saints in heaven; as the calling it a
great Supper, Luke 14.16.
wherein All things are prepared: namely, that either the infinite love of God
would, or the omnipotency of the same love could provide for the eternal
enioyment of the faithful in Christ Jesus; who talks furthermore of Sitting,
eating, and drinking, Luke 22.30.
in his Kingdom. But to tell us that this Supper of the Eucharist was
propounded, to be an express and proper Type and Similitude of the heavenly,
is more than, I think, any Ancient learning ever taught.

For the immediate mystical object of this Supper, is the body and blood of
Christ; the words of Christ pointing it out, This is my body, and This is the
new Testament in my blood: But how? Of his body and blood, as glorified in
heaven? No, but as Crucified and shed on the Cross: which is expressed
sufficiently by Christ; calling it blood shed for you. And the end of this
Sacrament is set down thus; In remembrance of me. Now Remembrance is not of
things to come, but only of things past, to wit, the work of Redemption by his
Passion, in his body and blood; whereof Saint Paul has made a plain Comment:
1. Cor. 11.26.
As often as you eat of this bread, and drink of this Cup, you show the Lords
death till he come. Which Comment was taken from the Analogy of the Sacrament
with the thing signified thereby; for the bread broken betokens his body
Crucified for us; the wine powered out, resembles his blood shed, and separated
from his body. Can you find in all these any one Type of the Celestial joy,
which is signified elsewhere, by the promise of eating and drinking in the
Kingdom of heaven?

Neither can it be to any purpose, to say that in giving us his body and blood,
in this Sacrament, we have bequeathed unto us all the benefits of his death,
and passion, and Consequently all the joys of immortality, which may be
prefigured by our eating and drinking at this Table: for Signs and Types are
resemblances of immediate objects, and not of objects remote, and consectarie:
as for example; Tit. 3.5.
Baptism is the Lauer of Regeneration, a Sacrament and Sign of our new Birth,
whereby we have entrance into the Kingdom of grace; and so consequently we
have interest in the Kingdom of glory, as Christ teaches; Ioh. 3.5.
Except a man be borne again by water and the Spirit, he cannot enter into the
Kingdom of heaven; signifying, contrarily, that the newborn, shall enter
into heaven: yet is not Baptism a Type of the celestial and triumphant estate
of Gods children, but of our new birth, by sanctification, in the Church
militant.

This will appear as clearly in the Sacrament, which we have in hand; for the
benefit of our redemption, by the body and blood of Christ, has many
dimensions, and every one of infinite extent. Look down into the profundity of
the bottomless pit, we are redeemed from death, devil, and the eternal
torments of hell: Secondly, look upon the Latitude, besides, and about us, in
which respect we are redeemed from the thraldom of sin; and both from the
moral world of wicked Reprobates, and the material world of this earth; the
one reserved for the fire of hell, never to be consumed; and the other to be
consumed with the fire of the last day. Lastly, look up to the altitude, and
height of our Redemption, and it reaches unto the everlasting joy and glory of
Gods Kingdom. All these, in every degree infinite, benefits are merited for
us, by the royal purchase of Christ, through his passion; yet the bread and
wine, are only the symbols and signs, representing unto us his body and
blood; but not those other consequents thereof: Except you will say, that we
have likewise herein Types of our deliverance from hell; and separation from
the world of earth, earthly and carnal men, and so forth. By all which, this
your so glosing and specious an Argument of a Type of Coheirship, proves to be
but an Image and Type of a selfe-pleasing conceit.

SECT. XI. Their second Pretense, to prove the intention of Christ.
That whereupon the Supper is placed is called a Table, 1. Cor. 10. The Dispute.
You cannot be partakers of the Table of the Lord and the table of devils: The
Communion book commands us to prepare our selves for the Lords Table; and
Christ notes this Table to be a resemblance of our heavenly society, telling
his disciples, saying; You shall eat and drink with me at my Table in my
Kingdom. Therefore must we still retain our prerogative of our Coheirship of
Sitting, because this is a Table Gesture, according to the Country wherein we
live.

Our Answer.
Your former fancy has taken that impression in your brains, that now
whatsoever you look upon, does seem unto you to be of the same color, and to
make for the manifestation of your former pretense. And therefore now the Table
of Christ must needs infer the like Table, wheresoever the Sacrament is
administered; and this Table must enforce a Table Gesture of Sitting; and this
Table Gesture must resemble the Coheirship of the faithful with Christ, in the
Kingdom of heaven: and all these you hold to be essential points of this
Supper. But if I might be suffered to pose you from point to point, according
to this our method, I think that you would not be so far in love with your
own conceit.

First [ A Table.] Christ had an artificial one; for so the Passover
required, and the place afforded: but let us suppose the woman driven into the
Desert (as it is in the Apocalypse) that is, Apoc. 12.
the Church, or any part thereof to be in distress, in a Wilderness, where no
Table can be had; do you think that the Grass, or ground (as it did in the
miraculous Banquet of the feeding of five thousand with five loaves and two
fishes) may not serve the turn? Math. 14.


Secondly, you exact that there be used at this one Table a sitting gesture for
all the Communicants: as though, without sitting, they could not be Partakers
of the Table of the Lord: But suppose (which happens yearly in many parishes
within this Kingdom) that a thousand, and sometimes two thousand Communicants
are assembled, Ioh. 6.9.
may not I (as Andrew said of the five loaves and two fishes, for the
satisfying of five thousand people) say of one Table, What is this for so many?
Can you prepare one Table, to contain thousands to sit one with another; for
resemblance of our joint communion in heaven? Or if not, will you have us
think that Christ does exact of his faithful a circumstance of Impossibility?
Be you rather persuaded, that if the bread and wine, being set on one Table,
shall be distributed to some thousands of people, although placed in Seats,
separated from the Table; yet is each one of them Partaker of the same Table of
the Lord. And this is not infringed, but established rather by the Text, which
you have alleged: 1. Cor. 10.
You cannot be partakers of the Table of the Lord, and of the table of devils.
For by the Table of devils, is meant every Altar, whereupon there was offered
any sacrifice unto Idols; where the Heathen people were made partakers of those
sacrifices, not by sitting at the Altars; but by receiving part of those
sacrifices, and Libamina, which were immolated, and offered upon such Altars.

As for your resemblance of Coheirship, and fellowship with Christ, in his
Kingdom, by thus sitting at one T^ble, in receiving of the holy Communion; I
have proved that it is but your private and pe^tinacious figment: And for
further evidence, we are to enter into consideration, what person it was that
Christ did sustain, at the celebration of his own Supper; was it of a Lord,
or else of a Servant? The Tenure of the first Institution runs thus: He
took bread, brake it, ^uk. 22.19. Math 26.
and gave it unto them. -- Likewise he took the cup, and gave it unto them.
These are Acts of Ministration, which he put upon his Apostles, and all other
Ministers of the Word and Sacraments, saying, [ Do this etc.] If any could
possibly doubt hereof, Christ himself would resolve them, who says a little
after, Luke 22.28.
I am among you as him that serves. And I trust that you dare not affirm,
that CHRIST, in his ministration of this Supper of Grace, was a Type and Figure
of himself, in the estate of his Coheirship, which is in his Kingdom; for so
shall you confound things infinitely distant, Ministration, and Dominion;
estate Militant, and Triumphant; Lord, and Servant; Earth and Heaven.

Let us therefore compose our minds unto a Christian moderation, and think,
that we are at this Feast, both Suitors in prayer, for remission of sins; and
Congratulators, by thanksgiving, for remission of our sins, and all the
Royal Benefits of his Death and Passion: And not to presume too much of such
familiarity with CHRIST, which seems to thrust out Humility from this
Banquet, and Type of Christ his humiliation: But be it sufficient contentment,
that we might be but as Ostiarij, Doorekeepers, in that Celestial Temple; and
not presume that, by virtue of our Coheirship, we must needs set our selves
upon the same Tribunal with Christ, Who is set at the right hand of God in the
heavenly places, Ephesians. 1.20.21.
far above all Principality, and Power, and Might, and Domination, and every
name that is named, not only in this world, but also in that which is to come.

SECT. XII. Their third Pretense, to prove the Intention of Christ, is from the
due disposition of the Receiver.
Abridg. Linc. p. 61.
The Disposition of heart, which is required of us, in our very Act of
receiving, is not so much humility, as assurance of faith and cheerfulness;
which is much better express^d and showed by the gesture of Sitting, than of
Kneeling.

Our Answer.
You will not think, I hope, that Humility does hinder the assurance of faith;
or that the difference of outward Gesture must needs set Christian virtues at
varia^ce; but you suppose that faith is more welcome to this Banquet than
Humility: and that therefore Faith must be attended with the gesture called
Sitting; but Humility must not be suffered to have her handmaid, called
Kneeling, to wait upon her. I marvel who made you Usher at this feast. But
let you these two Virtues alone, and they will walk hand in hand, as loving
Sisters, and both have their servants attending upon them, in the same actions.
To this end I propound unto you two Theological concords.

The first concord is between Faith and Humility, in that myrrour, which is
set forth by our Savior in the Gospel, concerning the great man that said
unto Christ; Lord, Math. 8.8.
I am not worthy that thou should come under my Roof: Thus does Humility
vnueile her self: but what said his Faith? Speak thou (to wit, Christ) the
word only, and my servant shall be whole. This was such an admirable assurance
of faith, in the estimation of Christ himself, that he said: Verily, I have
not s^und such faith, no not in Israel: and yet this Faith and Humility, in
this one act, kissed each other.

The second concord is to be seen between Humiliat^on and Thankfulness, even
in the Gesture of Kneeling, as it is often and plainly recorded in holy Writ:
for the Prophet David, in a Psalm of Thankfulness, does exhort the true
Worshippers thus: Psalm. 95.2.
Let us come before his presence with giving of thanks: How? By Sitting or
Standing? (So peradventure the presumption of some would say:) but the Prophet,
as it were by way of prevention, says: And worship, Ver. 6.
and fall down before the Lord our Maker. Will you see this acted? One man of
ten persons, that were cured of the Leprosy, Luke 17.15.16.
returning and glorifying God, fell down at Christ his feet, giving him
thanks.

And if you shall say, that this Thankfulness was not so well expressed, by
this gesture of Humility, which is Kneeling; then may you as well impute a
piece of Indecorum unto the twenty four Elders, more then was meet, Apoc. 11.7.
when, in their act of yielding glory and praise, they are said to use the same
gesture of kneeling: and accordingly, you might spy out a less seemelinesse in
the Angels, who are d^scribed by a kind of Analogy, and resemblance, to use
their Humiliation by Kneeling, Apoc. 7.11.
in worshipping and giving God thanks. You must seek out, for your own
reputation sake, some more tolerable reason than this, to prove your pretended
Intenti^n of Christ; or else confess that you intended nothing, but to wrangle
with the Church.

SECT. XIII. Their fourth pretense to prove the Intention of Christ, is from a
pretended meannesse of the Element.
Abridg. Linc. p. 67.
If our Savior had intended that the outward Elements should have been thus
reverenced, he would not have made choice of bread and wine, which are so
common and base.

Our Answer.
It seems then, by this Objection, that you fancy Ambrosia, Nectar, Manna,
or some such other Element of a more perfect nature, which may in your opinion,
deserve such a Reverence: Whereas the Sacraments of bread and wine are by you
esteemed but base. I cannot, for my part, but blush in your behalf, to hear
such Turkish and He^thenish language, proceed from any Professor of
Christianity. Have you not yet taken out S. Peter's lesson, Act. 10.15.
That which God has sanctified, let no man call common? If he could speak
thus much of ordinary meats, what an impiety must it be, to abase these
Elements, which are consecrated unto a Sacramental use, to be Seals of the
Covenant of grace; and are most fit, of all other creatures, to express our
union with Christ, and communion with all faithful Christians?

This I urge not, as persuaded that you can be so irreligiously minded, as your
words may import; but to let you understand that you have bin so far
transported with prejudice, as that when you spoke against due reverence, in
receiving this blessed Sacrament, you could not but speak irreuerently.

SECT. XIIII. Their fifth Pret^nce, to prove the Intention of Christ, against
Kneeling, is from the example of the Apostles.
It were great Hypocrisy in us to pretend greater Reverence and Devotion in
r^c^iuing of it, then was in the Apostles; Abri^^ Linc. p. 5^.
nay if it were fit for us, to use Kneeling, it was much more fit for the
Apostles, in ^egard of Christ his corporal pres^nce among them.

Our Answer.
This Consequence is a non sequitur, and that in diverse respects; first, in
respect of the purpose of Christ, who then made himself familiar with his
disciples, that he might the better instruct them, whilst he was yet in the
form of an ordinary man; in so much that at the time of the institution of
this Sacrament, he rose from Table, and would needs wash his disciples feet: to
what end? Ioh. 13.
I have given you an example (says Christ) that as I your Lord and master have
washed your feet, you also ought to wash one another feet: And further
professes himself to have been amongst them, not so much as one that sat at
Table, as one that was servant unto them. Luke 22.27.
But after his Ascension and glorification, the precept was laid upon All, that
All Knees should bow unto him: Phil. 2 10.
which gesture, if it ought to have been performed at the sight of his presence
in the flesh, then must they have been always Kneeling.

Secondly, in respect of the Apostles themselves, who were the first choice and
immediate Emba^sadours for Christ, and instruments of reconciliation of the
world, by means of that most Royal Embassage, which they received from
Christ, the King of glory; and not so only, but also who were endued with all
kind of graces of Gods Spirit, as well of gifts called gratu^ facientia, as
graetis data. But we, who are exceedingly inferior unto those golden vessels,
that were so excellently endued and sanctified, ought to think it our duty,
that the less we are in our selves, for gifts and graces, the more we should
contend to excel them (and true humility is void of hypocrisy) in
humiliation.

Thirdly, the Consequence of this your own Consequence, may teach you to
recant and revoke your Conclusion; seeing that it must follow, that forasmuch
as we have no example (as I remember) of any Apostle, that did, upon any
occasion, use the precise gesture of kneeling unto Christ; it must therefore
follow, by your learning, that we ought not to kneel in our ordinary prayers,
which we make unto Christ. (...)! For it is no less.

Finally, you may not impute this to ignorance, or arrogance in our Church; as
though she either knew not the Institution of Christ, as well as other
Churches; or that, knowing it, she thought her self wiser than the Apostles in
the alteration of their gesture: for things indifferent have their alterations
and Changes, as Ships have their diverse motions and turnings, according as
their Pilots, in their discretion, shall by variety of accidents, as it were
diversity of winds, be occasioned to turn or return them.

S^CT. XV. Our general Confutations of all the Non-conformists pretenses,
showing; That it was not the Intention of Christ to bind his Church to the
Gesture of Sitting, in receiving the Sacrament of the Lords Supper.
Our first Confutation.
Our former distinction between the Ceremonies, used by Christ, at the time of
the Institution of this Sacrament, whereof some were only accidental, (which
fell out by occasion of the Celebration of the Passover, and other
Circumstances of that time;) and some essential, which were such as were
comprised within the Lists of Christ his Precept of, Do this, etc. does fully
discharge as well us, in respect of the Ceremony of gesture, in ^itting; as it
does our Opposites, in respect of the Circumstances of time, place, number of
Persons, and of the Non-conformists manner of Administration, in the
Celebration of this Sacrament; as has been already euinced from such special
Evidence, See above Sect. 5. and Sect. 11.
which it will be sufficient in this place only to have pointed at.

SECT. XVI. Our second Confutation, concerning the Intention of Christ, from
their own Witnesses, acknowledging, that the Intention of Christ was not to
bind men unto an imitation, in the Circumstantiall points of the Sacrament.
Two Witnesses may be as good as two-score, for the Clearing of this point,
especially being in the judgment of the Non-conformists so judicious and
Orthodoxe. Zanch de Redempt: l. 1. de Cul^ De^ ^x^e p. 4^^.
Zanchie. These things only (says he) that Christ commanded at his last
Supper, b^long to the substance th^rof: for he gave two precepts, the one in
these words [hoc facite] D^ this: in saying [this] he comm^ndeth two things;
[pr^mum vt totum; secundum, ^t tant^m faciamus, quod ips^ f^cit:] so that
noth^ng must b^ added or diminish^d. The next pr^cept is in those words of
doing [In remembrance of me] says Christ, which, in respect of us that reciue
it, belongs to the essence of the sacrament. But if we shall alter any thing,
which is not commanded of God, or add that which is not essential, but only
accidental; and that not as necessary, but as indifferent, or decent, or for
order, or edification; it follows not that the worship instituted by Christ,
is any whit changed. As for example, Christ instituted this Sacrament in the
night; but the Apostles ex^rcised it afterward in the morning, shall this be
accounted a detracting from the institution of Christ? No, for Christ commanded
not that it should be celebrated in the night, but only that we should Do
[Quod, non quo tempore] What, and not in what time, he did it. The same may we
say of [Vinum dilutum] the mixture of wine with water, used in the Church in
the days of Justin Martyr, according as Christ (which is probable) did. Add
unto this, that the ancient Bishops, in the Administration of the Supper,
changed their vestures; which did not appertain to the altering of the Supper:
but that, which is either taken away from the institution, or added thereunto,
as necessary, that does corrupt the Lords Institution. Zanch. Ibid. page 49^.
The Apostles did not imitate Christ, in putting off their garments, and
washing of others feet, as Christ did, because this belonged not unto the
essence of the Sacrament. The essentialls are comprehended under those words of
Christ, [hoc facite, Do this] which he spoke concerning washing of feet.

Our second Witness is M. Beza, Beza. Epist. ^. p. 25.
who writing his resolution, concerning another question, viz. whether the
people might receive the Sacramental bread, from the hands of the Priest, with
their mouths only, and not with their hands? does determine as follows;
Christ commands us to take it, and the receiving with the mouth, is a kind of
taking; not but that it were better to receive it according to the first
example, both with hand and mouth: but that which is better, is not always
absolutely necessary. You will say that Christ commanded the other, in saying,
[Take] I grant it, but so, as to understand that [primaria intentio Christ^]
his primarie intendment was to preserve the form of the Sacrament, and not to
stand too strictly upon that, which is not absolutely necessary. Christ
commanded us to Baptize, signifying immersion; shall we therefore say that
Aspersion is no right Baptism? so then, [ipsa sumptio, non sumendi modus
praecise praescribitur,] but you will say, Ibid. page 7^.
we are commanded neither to add, nor detract any thing from the institution
of Christ; I grant it, but the question is who are to be said to add, or
detract, etc.

I cannot forget, that this aberration of Popery has been condemned by me, as
a transgression of the precept and practice of Christ, who, as he gave the
Sacrament into the hands of his Disciples, so did he also ordain, that it
should be observed; that being one of the Circumstances, whereof he commanded,
saying, [ Do this:] so that the contrary Doing of the Papists, in putting the
Sacrament into the mouths of the people, by judging them too profane, to touch
such Holy Mysteries with their hands; (as if a Christian man's lips were more
hallowed than his fingers) this I must still hold to be a notable piece of
Superstition. And although, with M. Beza, I acknowledge that it does not
detract from the substance of the Sacrament it self, yet does it derogate from
the precept of Christ his Institution thereof.

M. Beza does elsewhere discuss the nature of Circumstantiall and accidental
points in another instance. We may not contend (says he) about the bread,
whether it be unleavened or leauened, Be^a Epist. 11. p. 109.
albeit we think that common bread is more convenient unto the ordinance of
Christ; for why did Christ use Azymes, but only beca^se at that time there was
no other bread, to be had? How could these witnesses have spoken more
pertinently, or fully, to prove that it was not the Intention of Christ to
bind us more necessarily to an imitation of the gesture of Sitting, at the
Celebration of this Communion; then it does to other circumstances of time,
places, persons, sexes, and the like?

SECT. XVII. Our third Confutation of the Non-conformists, concerning the
intention of Christ, is taken from the Non-conformists themselves, by their
own confession of the liberty of Sitting.
Abridg. Linc. p. 57. quoting Bullinger.
You your selves multiply many Testimonies, telling us that M. Bullinger makes
it an indifferent thing, whether the Church receive it sitting, or coming to
the Table, but the most agreeable to the Institution (says he) is Sitting. Fox
Act. Mon. p, 19. Eusebius. Hist. Eccle. l. 7. c. 8.
And M. Fox, speaking of the Primitive Church, says, that the Communion was
administered, either sitting at Supper, or else standing after Supper: and in
Eusebius, Dionysius, Bishop of Alexandria, Anno 157. writes of the manner of
one, that stood at the Communion Table: also, Fulk. against the Rhem. Test.
fol. 286.
Doctor Fulke affirms out of Gregory Nazianzen, Anno 380. who says of the
Communion Table, that it was set that men might come round about: Lastly, Jewel
Defen. Apol. p. 237.
M. Jewel writes that in Basil, in his time, every man was bound to take the
Communion standing.

This, which you use, in your books, as an Objection against us, we make bold
to return, as an evident Conviction against your selves: because now you
cannot but see your feet in that stocks, which is called a Dilemma. For if that
we, as you have said, are bound to the gesture of Sitting, by the example of
Christ, how comes it to pass that you now allow of a bond of the Primitive
Church, for the gesture of standing? Can you so easily suffer standing to
shoulder sitting out of his due place? But if that you can so willingly admit
of standing, why were you already so instant in pressing upon us the necessity
of sitting? or are you now so vehement, in excluding all indifferency of
kneeling? Consider, I pray you, whether there be not the like Analogy,
between kneeling and sitting* as there can be between sitting and standing.
This Argument we have drawn, as was said, from your own Objection; and so are
you out-shot in your own Bow.

SECT. XVIII. Their third Accusation against the gesture of Kneeling, at the
receiving of the holy Communion, from the example of the Primitive Church.
The Primitive Churches, for sundry hundred years, Abridg. Linc. p. 58.
used to receive it standing; for Tert. (who lived Anno 180,) reports thus,
as the Custom of his time, and Tradition received from the Apostles, that it
was unlawful to Kneel upon the Lords day, or upon any other day between
Easter and Pentecost; and Anno 127. it was decreed in the Council of Nice,
that none might pray kneeling upon the Lords day; the reason is commended out
of the Canon Law; because on this day is celebrated the joyful remembrance of
the Lords resurrection.

Our Answer.
This Custom of the Primitive Church, in standing at the time of public
prayer, for the testifying of their faith in the Article of the Resurrection,
was then held most requisite, when as yet that Fundamental Article of
Christian faith was generally impugned, and gain said by some Jews; by diverse
Hereti^ks; and by all Pagans: which occasioned the Primitive Fathers, in those
ages, to ordain, that all Christians, for the better manifesting of every man's
profession herein, should use that public gesture of standing. But afterward,
when the faith of the resurrection had generally taken root in the hearts of
men, the^ this Ceremony of standing in prayer did, by little and little, vanish
in some places, together with the cause thereof.

First then, in this example of the Primitive Church, we see a gesture of
standing, as a Ceremony Ecclesiastical: Secondly, the end thereof, for a
joyful remembrance of the Lords Resurrection, which makes the Ceremony to be
significant: Thirdly, that this was applied to Gods public worship. These
considerations may serve for an ample Confutation of your former general
Positions, whereby you condemned our Three Ceremonies, to wit; Surplice, Cross,
and Kneeling, because, forsooth they are Ceremonies of human invention, of
mystical signification, and appropriated to the service of God. Now therefore,
if you allow of the foresaid practice of the Primitive Church, why have you
formerly impugned it? If you do not approve thereof, why do you now object it?
But more of this hereafter.

Our second Inference needs no dilatation, which is briefly this; that the
example of the Primitive Church, in changing the gesture of Sitting into
Standing, does demonstrate the liberty that the Church has, in altering and
changing all such kind of Rytes.

SECT. XIX. Their fourth Accusation, against the Gesture of Kneeling, at the
receiving of the Sacrament, is from the opinion of the necessity thereof; as
well by the learned, as by the unlearned.
1. Of the unlearned.
Many people in the Land think that this gesture of Kneeling is necessary.
Abridg. Linc. page 42.


Our Answer.
The error of the people, if there be any such, is to be imputed unto two
sorts of Ministers; the one kind are too idle, or too ignorant; that they
either cannot, or else care not to instruct their people, in these points: the
other sort are too busy, who falsely impose upon the Church an erroneous
opinion of the necessity of these Ceremonies, which she, in their own
knowledge, has always abhorred in the Romish Professors; and disclaimed and
renounced among her own. But, it may be, the principal error is the
jealousy of the Accusers, who use to suspect an error in many, in stead of a
few; or (for ought that I know) of any, that holds this gestures as
essential unto the Communion.

SECT. XX. Their taxation of the Learned.
Abridg. Linc. in the ^ame place.
Yea and the learned, as it is in the Communion book of King Edward the sixth,
say, that the use of kneeling is to avoid profanation.

Our Answer.
Are you then of opinion, either that Sacraments cannot be profaned; or that
the Church had not reason to prevent, or avoid, the profanation of this
Sacrament of the Eucharist? If that the Sacraments were not subject to
profanation, then should they not be Sacraments. For Gods most glorious Name is
subject to man's blasphemy; Man's holy life, to infamy; Godliness, to scorn;
Truth, to slander; and all sacred things, unto the profaneness of godless
men: otherwise, neither things could be said to be Sacred, nor godless men
profane.

As for the wisdom of our Church, in this case; she, perceiving the
blasphemous mouths of the Papists to vilify the Sacrament of our Lord Jesus,
administered in our Church, with the ignominious names of Bakers Bread, Vintners
Wine, profane Elements, Ale-cakes, and such like reproachful terms; did hold
it fit, that we, by our outward reverence in the manner of receiving of the
Eucharist, might testify our due estimation of such holy Rytes (which are
consecrated to so blessed an use, as is communion of the body and blood of
Christ,) and that thereby we might repel the stain and ignominy, which such
virulent and unhallowed tongues did cast upon them.

Be you contented, by the way, to be put in mind of your own ignorance, by
confounding an Accidental, and an E^sentiall necessity together; whereas you
ought to have distinguished them, and acknowledged, that as it is necessary for
the Pati^nt to take some receipts of physic, not as essential, as his daily
food; but accidental, because of his present infirmity: So may we say, that
the Gesture of Kneeling is not prescribed, as a necessary form of receiving
the Communion; for then should we condemn not only the present, but also the
primitive Churches; but yet as necessary for the reforming of the profane,
and irreligious behavior of many, in these wr^tched days wherein we live.

SECT. XXI. Their fifth Accusation, against the Gesture of Kneel^ng, at the
receiving of the Sacrament, is from the first Invention thereof; as being
Antichristian.
The use of Kneeling in receiving the Sacrament, Abridg. Linc. page 30.31.
grew first from the persuasion of the real presence, and Transubstantiation;
being never enjoined to any Church till Antichrist grew to the full height,
there being no action in all his service so Idolatrous as this. It was
appointed by Honorius the third, anno 1220.

Our Answer.
There are three things considerable, in our custom; the first is a gesture of
outward Adoration; the second is this kind of gesture, which is Kneeling; the
third is to know, whereunto the Adoration is directed. First therefore, that,
in the days of ancient Fathers, there was used an outward Adoration, at the
receiving of holy Sacraments, by bowing of the body, is so known a truth, that
the Non-conformists themselves will acknowledge it: otherwise I should have
alleged, to this purpose, Cyril of Jerusalem Catech. mystagog. 5. ad recens
baptizat^s, Cyril. Hieros. Ambrose. Greg. Naz. Aug. Chrysostom.
page 546. Ambrose lib. 3. desp. S. c. 12. Greg. Naz. de obit. Greg. August. in
Psalm. 98. Nemo carnem illam manducat, priusquam adorauerit; and Chrysostom. ad
Pop. Antioch. hom 61. Adora, and Communica.

Which Testimonies, although they do not all justify the Popish manner of
Adoration, whereby the Papists adore (in an opinion of Transubstantiation) the
Element of bread, as the very person of the Son of God; yet do they euince an
outward Humiliation of the body to God, and unto Christ, at the receiving of
these pledges, as from the hands of Christ: which the words of Cyril, in the
place above cited, do explain, who speaking of taking the Cup, says; (...).
Bowing thy self, after a manner of Adoration, Cyril Hier. Catech. mystagog. 5.
and worship saying, Amen. Here you have a gesture of Adoration, I say not to
the Cup; but, at the receiving of the Cup, unto Christ, by relation of a gift,
from a Giver: I say again unto Christ; for that Adoration was directed unto
him, unto whom the oration and prayer was due, in saying, Amen.

In the next place, after we have learned that there was a gesture of Adoration
used, we are to enquire concerning this gesture of Kneeling. Is not this a
gesture of Adoration, which is often both commended and commanded in holy
Scripture? If then the Adoration of Christ, in receiving of this gift be
lawful; Shall the more humble gesture make the act of Adoration less lawful?

The third point remains, which is to understand aright, whereunto, or to
whom this Adoration is to be directed, without danger of Idolatry. This is
taught us by our Liturgy; according herein, with the most ancient Liturgies of
the Primitive Church: Sursum corda, Lift up your hearts, to wit, unto the
Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, that gave his Son; and unto Christ himself,
the Lamb of God, that sits upon the Throne, that gave himself for our
redemption, by his body and blood.

Now, to come to the point, and, for the present, to grant that some wicked
Pope had invented Adoration, by Kneeling; yet are we notwithstanding
discreetly to distinguish of colors, lest that, for want of due
circumspection, we call Black white, and white black.

To this purpose, I shall expedite this doubt, by certain demands. I ask
then, first, whether every Inuenti^n is to be condemned, because the Author
thereof was some evil Pope? He that should affirm this, must cons^quently
deny the use of a Gunne; because the Inuentor thereof was a Friar: or the
wearing of a Coat, because the Tailor happily was a Thief.

Secondly, I ask, shall we condemn the gesture it self, because it is
Kneeling? To affirm this, were consequently to condemn, not so much the
Invention of man, as the Ordinance of God; who often requires in his worship
the act of Kneeling.

Thirdly, I ask, must we therefore refuse this gesture because it is for
Adoration? To affirm this, were consequently to disallow the ancient custom
of bowing the body, for that was a gesture of Adoration.

Fourthly, I ask, ought we to abhor this gesture of Kneeling, only as it
was applied by the Pope, for a Divine Adoration of the Host it self? This we
confess to be indeed, a Popish Invention, and as execrable an Idolatry as
Christendom has ever seen; and to condemn this only, is fully to justify
our Church, which does as much detest that abomination, as any Adversary of
that Romish Synagogue.

As for Honorius, whom you fancy to have been the first Inuentor of the
foresaid manner of Adoration by Kneeling, it is more then my books do teach
me; sure I am, that you will witness Zepperus says: Honorius decreuit,
Zepper. pol^^. l. ^. c. 1^. page 137.
vt cum eleu^tur h^^tia s^lutaris, qu^sque se reuerenter inclinet: Which words
[ to incline reuerenth] do notify unto us rather the bowing of the body, that
the bending of the knee: albeit I will not contend about the first Author of
this Adoration, whether Honorius, or Innocentius; for it is not material.

SECT. XXII. Their sixth Accusation, against the gesture of Kneeling, is taken
from the Popish Abuse thereof.
The gesture of kneeling in the act of receiving, is notorio^s^y known to have
been of old, Abridg. Linc. p. 30.
and to be still abused to Idolatry by Papists, by whom it is d^il^y used in
the wor^^ip of their breaden god: and that upon an I^^latrous intent, that the
bread is become God: yea and one of their strongest Arguments, to justify that
their Idolatrous, conceit of Transubstantiation, is, because else the Church
should commit Idolatry, in kneeling before the Elements.

Our Answer.
And it is as well known, that Protestants, in Kneeling at the receiving of
the consecrated Elements, do not ^buse them to Idolatry; but do as much hate
the Romish Moloch, to wit, that their breaden god, as does any Nonconformist:
knowing and professing that truth, which Theodoret a thousand two hundred
years since, published in express terms, saying; that Bread, after the words
of Consecration, does remain still bread, Dial. l. 2. c. 24.
both in form, in figure, and in substance. Whereby the infatuation of the
Romanists appears to be palpably gross; the rather because they can have no
color of evasion, as I have showed elsewhere.

SECT. XXIII. The seventh and last Accusation, used by the Non-conformists,
against the gesture of Kneeling, is a pretense of Idolatry.
This gesture is used as a part of Gods worship, Abridg Linc. page 4^.
because it is hel^ (...) a reli^ious A^^ration by all men.

Our Answer.
If you could demonstrate, that this gesture is either used as a proper part of
Gods worship, or else that it receives from us that Popish Adoration, which
you pretend; then might you with one breath justify your opposition against
the Church, and condemn her imposition of such Rytes upon you: but that, in
proof, this, as likewise the rest of our Ceremonies, are not maintained or
observed in our Church, as essential parts of worship, but only as
circumstantiall, and convenient adjuncts, and appendices; we have already
bestowed an whole Chapter. see above part 1. cha. 1.
And as for our manner of Kneeling, here questioned, we make no doubt to
vindicate it from all crime of Idolatry; yea, or the least suspicion thereof.

SECT. XXIIII. The first Reason of the Non-conformists to prove our manner of
Kneeling Idolatrous, because, before a Creature.
Abridg. Linc. p. 56.
To adore God in, or before any creature, without warrant of the word of God, is
Idolatry.

Our Answer.
This Position may not run current, without all exception; for to exclude, from
the act of the Adoration of God, or of Christ, all these Prepositions of by,
in, before, only in respect of the creatures; were consequently to forbid us
to pray by, or, with our tongues, the Instruments of Adoration: or, In the
Temple, the house of God, and the place of the solemn Adoration; or yet either
directly against us, Before the Table of this sacred Banquet, and Supper,
called the Lords Table; or else upwards Before the heavens above, toward the
Celestial seat and Sanctuary of God. Therefore except you will compel us to
Adore God, with our lips and eyes shut, you must admit of some limitation;
and, by some distinction, show, when, or how a man may adore, by, in or before
a creature, without Idolatry: whereof we are to say more in the Sections
following.

SECT. XXV. Their second Reason, to prove our foresaid Gesture of Kneeling
Idolatrous, because there is in it a Relative worship.
M. Nic.
Because all relative Adoration of God, before a creature, with respect unto it,
is Idolatry. But the reverence used in the receiving of the Sacrament, is a
relative adoration of Christ, with respect unto the Sacrament; for they say,
they do reverence to the Sacrament, which is Idolatrous.

Our Answer.
We expected that you would at least have endeavored to prove, in our manner of
Kneeling, a Popish kind of relative worship, which is (as in their C^ucifixe)
to fast^n our divine Adorat^on upon the Creature, that it may so, by a
representative relat^on, be conveyed unto the Creator; whereof we are to speak
in the Section following. But, in stead of worship, by representative relation
to Christ, you speak only of a Relation from God unto the Cr^ature, telling
us of a relative Adoration of Christ, with respect unto the Sacrament, which is
extremely different, as you may judge by your own Actions.

For do not you your selves allow a relative Reverence (and that justly) in
reading the word of God; a Reverence in praying unto God; a Reverence in
religious hallowing of the Lords day; a Reverence in entering into the solemn
place of Gods worship, which is the house of God? and have not all these a
relative respect between God and his Creatures? for the Scriptures, which are
but lines of Incke, are Creatures, yet such as are called holy Scriptures; and
are Signs expr^ssing unto us the Truth of God. The words of man's voice are
such Creatures, which by ancient learning are called (...); that is, the Signs
of things signified thereby; and being used in prayer unto God, do present our
Humility, thankfulness, and Adoration unto him. The Sabbath day is, as all
other days, a Creature of God, and yet is set apart, and appropriated by GOD
unto his Adoration; and commanded, in that regard, to be hallowed of us, which
is in a respect that we have from God unto it. The solemn place of Gods
worship, where-soeuer it be, is a Creature of God, and has reference unto
God, as an house to the owner thereof. Now shall these be used with a Religious
Reverence, and with a relative respect, and shall only the blessed Sacrament
of our Lord Jesus Christ be Celebrated without any such Reverence? Procul
hinc, procul este --.

But I know you cannot be so profanely-minded toward this Sacrament, because
you are not ignorant, that this is the whole Argument of that Chapter of S.
Paul, 1. Cor. 11. telling them of the visible Judgments of God upon many of
the Corinthians, 1. Cor. 11.
thus, Many of you are sick, and many are asleep, Ver 30.
(that is dead,) but why? [ ob hanc causam,] for this cause, says the Apostle,
to wit, because they came so profanely unto it, as if they had come to the
heathenish Bacchanals, or to their own Domestical Tables. For thus he says;
Have you not houses to eat and drink in? Ver. 22. Ver. 19.
but you come hither, not discerning the Lords body? As if he had said, do you
come so homely unto this spiritual Banquet, ordained for the refreshing and
replenishing of your souls, which you are to partake of, with hope of
remission of your sins, in this life; and of a blessedness both of your
bodies and souls, in the Resurrection of the just, through the virtue and
price of your redemption, by the death of Christ, in his body Crucified, and
blood shed for you?

SECT. XXVI. Their first Confirmation of the aforesaid pretended Idolatry, by
relative worship, in Kneeling.
Yea there hat^ been f^un^ in a^^ age^, the root of Idolatry (if not gross
Idolatry it self) to ^iue to the sign that show of outward Reverence and
A^oration, which is du^ to the thing signified, Ab^idg Linc. p. 6^.
and to the giver himself.

Our Answer.
What a sinister supposition is this? as though that the Reverence, due to
Christ, were given unto the Sacrament of Christ? this, we confess, were true
Idolatry.

You may not think much, if our Church do now sharpen her Censures and
Co^rections against you, who thus multiply your Calu^niations against her,
especially in this branding her with no less heinous a Crime than Idolatry,
which is (as being the most vile of all other) called in holy writ, not only
abominable, but also abomination it self. It will therefore concern you to
make good your godless aspersion, by some manner of reason; for this, which
you delivered in the last place, is rather a reproof of your supposed
guiltines, than any proof thereof.

S^CT. XXVII. Their second Confirmation of the pretended relative Idolatrous
worship.
Else why is it not used in Baptism, as well as at this Sacrament, Abridg.
Linc. p. 68.
exc^pt that, with the Idolatrous Papists, we will say that it is of greater
dignity th^n the Sacrament of Baptism?

Our Answer.
Nay rather seeing that you know the doctrine of the Church to esteem both the
Sacraments of equal dignity (for as much as they proceed from the same
authority of our Savior, and are ordained for the same end, even to be seals
of faith, concerning the promises of salvation unto us) Why do you make such an
odious objection; and not rather think that this Reverence is enjoined,
without any Papisticall intent? Cannot this satisfy you, but you will still
exclaim and say, Why is this reverence done at the receiving of the Eucharist,
except it be with the Idolatrous Papists? I tell you, this is done, not to
consent with the Idolatrous Papists, but absolutely to confute them, who cannot
but acknowledge, that our Sacrament of Baptism is a very perfect Baptism,
according both to the essential matter, and manner, which Christ himself
ordained. But as for our Sacrament of the Eucharist, See above.
they do (as has been shown) vilify it as common and ordinary bread and
wine. The difference then, as you see, is, not in an opinion, that the
Eucharist is of greater dignity than Baptism with us; but because it is of
less esteem among the Papists.

Notwithstanding be not offended with me, if that I cannot think any of you so
irreligious, as not to be willing to kneel reverently in holy prayer unto God,
in the time of the Celebration of Baptism; especially when prayer is used to
God, to bless his own ordinance in the behalf of the child. Which manner of
worship, is so far from Idolatry, that the very Infant baptized, if it could
speak, would say, that the Adoration, there, is not directed unto the Element
of the water, but unto God, for his grace upon the child.

S^CT. XXVIII. Their third Confutation of the pretended Idolatry, by Relative
wo^ship.
Or why do we not condemn the Papists, Abridg Linc. p. 66.
for Kneeling and praying before a Crucifixe? This Bellarmine does infer upon
the opinion of them that hold, that Christ, although he be not corporally
present, may be adored in the Sacrament; then, says he, it is not Idolatry to
Kneel before an Image. And indeed thus the Papists answer: We (say they) do
not worship unto the Image, but unto God that is represented thereby.

Our Answer.
There is, in the place alleged, Bell. l 2. de Euch c. 18.
objected against Protestants a Testimony out of Nazianzen; in the same place
P. Martyrs Answer to that Testimony is fully related; then follows the Reply
of Bellarmine, upon that Answer of P. Martyr; and now our Non-conformists bring
in their reference from Bellarmines Reply. So that this play consists
necessarily of four parts; Nazianzen the speaker, P. Martyr, the expounder,
Bellarmine the Replyer, and the Nonconformist, the Applyers of Bellarmins
conceit. It will not displease our Reader, to see each party Act his own part.

First, Nazianzens Testimony is this; Super Altar coli Christum: Christ is
Adored upon the Altar. Whence the Papists collect, that men must adore, with
divine worship, the Sacrament that is upon the Altar. Secondly, P. Martyr
Answers; Coli quidem Christum, sed coli in Symbolo, sicut in symbolo
significatur: That is, Christ is worshipped in the sign, is he is signified
thereby.

Thirdly, B^llarmine replyeth; Then (says he) may it be lawful to fall down
before the sign, and to Adore Christ there, although absent from thence; and
consequenly is it lawful to fall down, and worship the Eucharist, and Images
of Christ; neither is this Idolatry, as Protestants exclaim.

Fourthly, hence our Non-conformists follow Bellarmine, and borrow of that good
fellow his staff, to knock their fellow brethren: but leave P. Martyr, now
defending the common Cause of all Protestants; as if they had conspired, to
betray their own Adoration into the hands of a common Adversary.

But we must in part excuse them; because they dealt not thus in malice,
against his person; but in ignorance of his judgment: for P. Martyr,
discussing the same Argument elsewhere, does fully express his own meaning.
P. Mar. Loc Com. Class. 4. c. 10. p. 863.
Adoration (says he) consists in Invocation, confession, and giving of
thanks, all which are due unto God, and unto Christ, wheresoever they do
manifest themselves unto us; which is done three manner of ways; First, by the
inward thought of the heart moved by the Spirit of God, in our earnest
apprehension of God, and of Christ: then follows our Adoration of them, by
inuocating, Confession, and giving of thanks. Secondly, they declare
themselves sometimes by external words, as by holy Scriptures, and godly
Sermons. And thirdly, by outward signs, as in the Arc of the Covenant, and in
our Sacraments; yet so, that Adoration be not fixed upon the symbols, or
signs, but, in Spirit and in Truth, upon Christ sitting on the right hand of
God in Heaven. Notwithstanding, because the simple people, by reason of the
error of Transubstantiation, rooted in them, cannot so easily understand this,
I should think, that men should abstain from outward prostrating themselves
in kneeling, until they be better instructed. I confess that many do godlily
kneel, and Adore at the hearing of these words, [Et verbum caro factum est,]
where notwithstanding not the words, but the things are adored: even so the
signs in the Sacrament are not adored.

Wherein P. Martyr could have no other meaning, than, by a significatiue
relation, from the sign, to the thing signified. For a man, in Kneeling at the
Sacrament, should upon the sight thereof abstract his thoughts from the
sensible object, and lifting up both his eyes and his heart unto heaven, should
Adore, that is (as he says) invoke, confess, and give thanks unto God, and
unto Christ.

But how shall this Answer justify the Popish manner of worship; Kneeling
before, and to an Image; sometimes inuocating the Image it self, and fixing
their thoughts upon it; or at least using to Adore Christ, with it? as we shall
prove. Whereas, contrariwise, this our Adoration of Christ, arising from the
sight of the Sacrament, is no more, in the judgment of P. Martyr, than when at
the hearing of the sensible words of the Scripture, or of a godly Sermon, our
thoughts are not fixed upon the Elements of words and syllables, but by them
are elevated and drawn unto Invocation, and thanksgiving unto God. According
to this meaning, P. Martyr (you see) allows Kneeling, at the receiving of the
Sacrament, to a people instructed. Now if, after threescore years preaching,
our people have not been sufficiently instructed, the cause must be imputed
either to the ignorance, or negligence of their Teachers; except you will have
us think, that they are past instruction. Hitherto of our particular Answer.

SECT. XXIX. Our more general Confutation of the Non-conformists, proving both
that a Reverence is due, at the receiving of the blessed Sacrament; and that
the Reverence, by Kneeling, has not Affinity with Romish Idolatry, first, by
Reason, and the grounds thereof.
As differences of Colors are best discerned, when they are compared together;
so may we most easily distinguish the diverse opinions, both of our Protestants
from Papists, and of Papists, among themselves, concerning Relative, or
Respective worship, by only relating of their different objects; especially in
these terms, concerning Reverence. We shall therefore first discover the
error of Popery herein: and so will the truth of our Reverence be better
discerned.

SECT. XXX. Our first ground of Confutation is, by discovering of the Romish
superstition, in her manner of worship, whether Relative, or Absolute, or
jointly both.
The Relative manner of Worship, (as it is professed in the Church of Rome)
appears to be of two sorts, according to the two different opinions of her
professors.

SECT. XXXI. The first opinion of Romish Relative worship, and our difference
from it.
Some Romanists are produced, by Bell. to hold only this respect in their
worship, by an Image; namely, Bellar. l. 2 de Imag. Sanct. c. 20.
to fall down Before it, and By it, and In it, to honor the person that is
represented thereby: which opinion he attributes unto Alexander, Durand, and
A^pho^sus de Castro: unto whom Suarez the Jesuit adioyneth Hel^^t, Su^r. Tom.
1. in Thom. q^ae^t. 2^ dis^u. 54. ^ect. 3.
and Picus Mirandula. Amongst these, Durand may speak for the rest. This kind
of wo^ship of an Image (says ^e) is but improperly and abusiuely so called,
because, by the image, we have a remembrance of the person; which is worsh^pped
as well in the presence of the Im^ge, ^s if he were real^y present.

This opinion, among many other intolerable conceits of the Papists, about
their relative worship, seems most tolerable; and yet I may ask any
ingenuous man, whether he ever heard (I do not say our Church, but) any
^pproued Doctor therein, teach, that we do, or ought to Kneel before the
Sacrament; that By it, or In it, we may personally worship Christ, as if he
were re^lly present.

But you peradventure will ask me, what is then the respect, that we have to
Christ in this receiving? Have patience a while, until we shall come to this
point; and be not too hasty to urge us, to deliver all at once. It is a
dangerous thing for men to gallop in rough and rocky ways. B^ll^rm. Ceremoniae
^onsunt re^ indifferentes, sed sunt ^es vtiles, meritoriae, and pars quaed^m
cul^^us diuini. lib. 2. de effect^ac^am c. 31. ^^ct. Quint^* ^rop.


For the present, be content to know, that whereas the Papist does directly
prostrate himself to the Crucifix or Image, with an opinion of holiness and
efficacy in that object, to make his prayers more acceptable; and therefore
has some confidence In-it, and by-it, to be more easily heard of God: this
cannot but be exceedingly superstitious. But our Kneeling is not so directed,
that either In h^c obiecto, vel per illud, we may be more acceptable, but we
use it, tanquam obiectum a quo, that upon sight of this Sacrament, as a visible
Word, (even as at the hearing of the audible words of Gods book) our hearts
may be moved to a spiritual contemplation of God, and of Christ, unto whom we
pray. The Papists adoration is somewhat Inhaesiue in obiecto, or adhaesiue per
obiectum; but ours is, abstractiue, ab obiecto. Thus much of the first manner
of Relative Worship.

SECT. XXXII. The second Romish Opinion of Relative worship, and our difference
from it.
You have objected, against us, the Papists in general; and by name have
called in Bellarmine for your Proctor: We are desirous to hear him speak, and
deliver unto us that opinion, which he himself holds, and defends, as the
general doctrine of the Romish Church. And it stands thus. Images are to be
worshipped with the same honor, Bellar. lib. 2. de Imag sanc. cap. 22.
wherewith the person represented is honored, although improperly, and
accidentally. How like you this piece of learning? I know, you abhor it, and
our Church (you know) does as much detest it, as your selves.

Yet is this the man, forsooth, from whom you learned to compare the Romish
worship of a Crucifixe, with our worshipping of Christ, in receiving of the
Lords Sacrament. That therefore you may be confuted (as the School speaks)
even Interminis, I shall entreat your Proctor to express the meaning of his
former proposition, in their manner of worship of the Crucifixe; Even as (says
he) when the Preacher says unto the Crucifixe, [Tu redemisti nos] this is
spoken to the Crucifix, not as it is an Image, or as it is wood; but as it is
taken in stead of Christ himself: that is, they are spoken to Christ himself,
whom it does represent.

I return to the proposition, as it is delivered by Suarez, a principal
Jesuit. Suarez quo supra sect. 4.
The Image is and ought to be adored with the same worship, wherewith the
person signified is honored. Which he labors to prove by the Council of
Trent; where it is thus decreed: Conc. Trid. ^ess. 25.
By Images which we kiss, and before which we fall down [Christum adoramus,
-- and Sanctos veneramur] that is, We adore Christ, and reverence the Saints.
Whereupon the Jesuit makes this Comment: Per [adoramus] latria; and per
[veneramur] dulia significatur. By [adore] is signified [latria:] meaning the
worship, which, they say, is proper unto God (so they profess to adore Christ
in worshipping an Image:) and by [reuerence] is signified Dulia, which is that
worship wherewith they say, in worshipping of the Images of Saints, they honor
the Saints.

And consult both with Bellarmine and Suarez, and the whole School of
Jesuits, reporting unto us the doctrine of the Church of Rome at this day; and
they all conclude, that the Image of Christ or of God, is honored Eodem actu
latriae; with the same act of Latria, which they call Divine worship; Quamuis
modo quodam inferiori. Are not these excellent Chimists, who can extract a
Degree of worship Inferior to that which is Divine, from an Act of worship
which is properly Divine? Which if they could; yet how shall they make their
people so metaphysicall?

But what will you say to all this? do not your consciences tell you, that the
Religion of our Church has catechized you, from your infancy, to execrate and
condemn all such sacrilegious Relation of the Worship of signs, as this is;
wherein they profess in the very same act of Adoration (which they call
Latria, that is, a worship proper to the Divine Majesty) to adore both the
creature, and the Creator; yet (as they will make us believe) to the one modo
quodam inferiori, which is a Metaphysicall conceit, apprehending a difference
of manner in the Identitie of action, whereof their people (in whom Ignorance
is the Mother of Devotion) are no doubt very capable. For how can they, in an
act of Latria to an (according to the ancient acceptance of the word) Idol,
free themselves of all Idolatry? Thus much of the Romish manner of Relative
worship.

SECT. XXXIII. The Romish Decree and absolute manner of worship both of an
Image, and of the Sacrament. First concerning an Image.
Their profession herein is to worship the Image ( tanquam obiectum quod
colitur,) even that which they see, and kneel before; this Bellarmine
discovers in two propositions. The first; The Images of Christ and of the
Saints are to be worshipped not only improperly, Bellar. quo supra cap. 21.
by themselves, and not as they do represent any person, so that the Images
themselves terminate (I may render it, possess) that worship, as they are
considered in themselves, and not as they represent any person. And he adds
saying; If that Images were not to be worshipped, but only improperly; as
signs, before which; or, by which; or, in which the person represented is
honored: the^ may we deny (says he) that any are to be worshipped at al.

Now that you have heard your Proctor speak, and tell you that the Romish
Church allows a worship of Images without relation unto any person, whose
Images they be: You are chargeable to show that this superstition may be justly
imputed unto us. It is manifest that you cannot: for the worship, which you
call into question, is only relative; and this of Bellarmine is professedly
given to Images, and to signs, without any relation at all.

SECT. XXXIIII. The second absolute, and direct Romish worship of the
Sacrament, Idolatrously.
It is the Romish profession, to adore the Sacrament (namely the corporal
substance contained therein) as the very person of the Son of God, in the
proper substance of his bodily presence; which we judge Idolatrous, not only
by an Accidental possibility, but by an absolute infallibility.

For first, that the worshippers do adore the bread with divine honor, in
stead of Christ himself (which possibility the Doctors of the Romish Church do
confess) may happen to their Adoration of the Eucharist, by reason of many
possible accidents: as if he that consecrateth have not had a true Ordination;
or, See the Protestants Appeal lib. 2. c. 2. sect. 23.
in consecrating of the Sacrament, have not a right Intention; or, in uttering
the words of Consecration, fail in his syllabicall pronunciation; or, if the
forms of the Sacraments themselves, by unfit admixtion, or putrefaction, lose
their perfection. In all these (for every one of them is possible)
possibilities it may fall out that the Romish worshippers do adore with Divine
honor the element of bread, in stead of the Son of God: which what is it but,
at least, an Accidental Idolatry; but yet true Idolatry?

They have, in this case, no other color of evasion, than to tell us, that
when they kneel down to adore this Sacrament, they do it with an implicit
and inward conceit of the mind, saying; If Christ be present, then I adore
thee etc. But this is a most miserable shift, to make Adoration (which is the
highest honor, and homage, which man owes properly to God) unto an
Hypothetical belief [ if Christ be there.] The truth of God tells us, that
whosoever comes to God, He must believe that God is, that is, honor him with
a Divine faith, that he is wheresoever he is adored: But in Ifs and Ands, that
is, in fallibilities, there can be no Divine faith. Ergo, this Suppositiue
faith is merely supposititious; because it is impossible, that the Jealousy of
God should admit of a doctrine, or Religion, whereby it must necessarily happen
sometime, that the creature should be worshipped with honor, properly due unto
the Creator himself. This be spoken of the possibility.

How much more Idolatrous must they appear to be, when as, by necessary
consequences from Scripture, judgment of ancient Fathers, and the aduocation
of the perfectest Senses of man, it may be infallibly proved, that that which
they adore, as Christ himself, remains still in figure, form, and
substance, the same Bread, that it was before Consecration? This infers such
an infallibility of their Idolatry, that it is impossible, but the Popish
Adoration of this Sacrament must be Idolatrous. From which kind of Idolatry,
whether possible, or infallible, you will free us, before we conclude this
cause.

Hitherto have we shown what kind of worship, in receiving the Sacrament,
ours is not; namely, not Popish; whether you consider the Relative kind of
worship, by making the Sacrament an object of Adoration, In quo, or per quod:
or else the absolute manner of Adoration, by worshipping the Sacrament, tanquam
obiectum, quod adoratur. We are now to show, what is the object of our
Reverence, in receiving the Sacrament.

SECT. XXXV. The Relative Reverence, which is used in our Church, in respect of
the Sacrament, is without note of Idolatry.
First, if our Relation be made from the Sign to Christ, the thing signified;
then, is the Sacrament, obiectum a quo significatiue: the Sign moving us to
that [ Sursum corda] to lift up our minds, from the earthly object of Sense,
Bread etc. to the body of Christ, the spiritual object of faith, upon his
Tribunal Seat in Heaven. See above.
Wherein (as has been proved out of your own Witness) there can be no shadow
of any Idolatrous Adoration.

Or secondly, our relation may be taken from Christ, to the Sacrament, as
between a giver and his gift; and so, in Kneeling down, we take this holy
Sacrament, as the mystical pledge and seal of the body and blood of Christ,
the price of our Redemption, apprehended by faith. Whereas therefore the devout
Communicant is upon his Knees, praying to the blessed Trinity, to be made a
welcome partaker of so heavenly a Feast; and praising the supreme Deity for
these Royal tokens of his grace; this respect and relation, being a reverent
taking of this so inestimable a gift, as from the hands of Christ, according to
his own Ordinance, cannot come within the least suspicion of Idolatry.

SECT. XXXVI. This our former relation of Reverence, between a Giver and his
Gift, is illustrated by a Similitude.
We were ready to illustrate our former Reverence, by the comparison of
receiving a gift, from the hand of earthly Majesty; but we perceive that the
Non-conformists are ready to preoccupate.

SECT. XXXVII. The Non-conformists prevention, unto our Comparison.
Abridg. Linc. p. 67.
There is no proportion between the Civil reverence, given to a King, or to
the gift which we r^ceiue from him, and this religious reverence to these
bodily things; for there is far more danger of Idolatry here, then there.

Our Answer.
This objection notes only a danger of Idolatry: but this is to fear where
no fear is; for although there be not a Proportion of equality, between a
Civil and Religious reverence; yet is there a proportion of similitude, and
the one does singularly illustrate the other, in this case. For as a Civil
gift ought to be taken with a Civil reverence, from the hand of an earthly
Sovereign: so must a Spiritual gift, and the Instruments thereof, be received
with a Spiritual and Religious Reverence; as from the Majesty of Christ, who
instituted, and ordained it for us. And as the Civil reverence, used in
receiving the gift of the King, does not derogate from the dignity of the King,
but rather establish it; because the whole reverence redoundeth to the King: so
this our religious receiving of holy Rytes, does magnify the Author, but no
way deifie the gift. And doubtless, none can be so simple, as seeing any
Subject, reverently taking any grant, or especially gift, from the hand of an
earthly King, by the token of a Ring, or, if you will be a rush; as to imagine
that worship to be derogatiue to the Royalty, or Majesty of the King.

SECT. XXXVIII. Our second ground of Confutation is taken from the Testimonies
of their own Witnesses, requiring of Communicants Reverence, in receiving any
such Ordinances of God.
We are not ignorant, that many Protestant Authors are most frequent in
condemning the gesture of Kneeling, at the receiving of the holy Communion; but
how? as it is used Idolatrously of Papists, in a sacriligious opinion, that the
Element of bread, which they adore, is the very person of Christ: but not as it
may be used religiously, by Orthodoxe and godly professors. For better
demonstration whereof, it will be our office to produce their own choicest
Witnesses; all of the^ exacting of Co^municants an outward reverence; and some
allowing also of this kind of Reverence, which is by Kneeling.

First, M. Calvin, chalking out, as it were, the right line of true Decency,
says; Sed operaepretium est, etc. Instit. l. 4. c. 1^* p. 429.
It will be worth our labor, to define what is to be understood by that
decorum and Decency, which Paul commends. Indeed, the end of Decency is,
partly that whilst such Rites, which are used, may gain veneration or
reverence unto sacred things, we may be thereby helped and exercised unto
Devotion; partly that also modesty and gravity (which ought in all actions to
be especially regarded) may most shine in them. But that must we account to be
decency, which shall be so fit for the reverence of holy mysteries; as is meet
for the exercise of godliness, or else convenient for ornament; nor can this be
without profit, but will serve for the admonishing of men, with what modesty,
religiousnesse, and reverence they ought to handle holy things.

To this end we are forbid, by the Apostle, to mingle our profane drinkings
with the holy Supper of the Lord; that women come not without the couers of
their heads; and many other things we use, as namely, our praying upon our
Kn^es, with our heads bare; and we administer the Sacraments of the Lord not
sordidly, [sed cum aliqua dignitate,] but with a kind of Dignity. You that
have excepted against us, for Kneeling to avoid profanation, do you see how
instantly and vrgently M. Calvin requires an outward Reverence, in the
handling of such sacred Rites.

B. Jewel art. B. of Adoration p. 2^2. of the last edition.
Secondly, Bishop Jewel, falling upon the same subject, says; Neither do we
only adore Christ, as very God, but also reverence the Sacrament, and holy
mystery of Christ his body and blood, and, as Saint Ambrose teaches [Baptismum
Christ vbicunque est veneramur,] That is, we worship Baptism wheresoever it is
had; and according to the Council of Athanasius, [Dominica verba attente
audiant, and fideliter adorent,] Let men diligently hear, and faithfully
reverence the words of God. Briefly, we worship all other like things in such
religious wise unto Christ belonging; but these things we reverence as holy,
and as appointed, and commended by Christ: but we adore them not with any
divine honor, as Christ himself. Do you not now see a Reverence due unto the
Sacrament, without Adoration; that is to say, a Religion void of Idolatrous
superstition? namely, by Relation from the giver to the receiving of the gift.

Zanch. de Redemp. l 1. c 17. p 497.
Thirdly Zanchie, laboring likewise to remove two contrary Vices; as the deadly
enemies of Gods worship, the one is (...), that is, Contempt or neglect of due
worship; the second is (...), false and superstitious worship; to the end he
might establish that golden mean, called (...), which is the true sincere
worship of God: He, against the former Monster of Contempt of holy worship (out
of the Apostles doctrine, 1. Cor. 11. whereby were condemned the vnreuerent
comers to the Eucha^ist) collecteth, saying, The Sacraments are to be used
with outward Signs and Tokens of honor and reverence, Zanch. ibid.
not in reg^rd of themselves, but in respect of Christ, by whom they are
instituted: for God himself, when he forbad in his Law, the worship of any
Images of men's making, yet taught he that his own Images, to wit, his
Sacraments, the signs of heavenly things should not be handled without some
honor and reverence. For as the word of God, Ibid. p. 531. c 17. These. 10.
although it must not be adored, yet ought it to be handled, and hearkened unto
with Reverence: so are the Sacraments worthy of Reverence; which the Apostle
persuades unto, when he teaches that men must eat the Sacrament of the Lords
Supper [Digne] worthily. For although this worthiness consists in the mind
of a man, which is indewed with faith and Charity, yet may it be also referred
to an external Reverence, seeing that they among the Corinthians, that came
irreuerently unto the holy Supper, were grievously chastned of the Lord, as the
Apostle teaches in the same place.

Fourthly, M. Beza is alleged, Abridg. Linc. p 64.
as although commending both inward and outward adoration, when these fearful
Ceremonies are celebrated: yet that, for the avoiding of danger or else
suspicion of Idolatry, he held it dangerous to use the Gest^re of Kneeling in
the Act of receiving. It is true, and so it may be very requisite in those
places and times, whereof he spoke: and his exception is only that it might be
dangerous by some Consequence. But M. Beza says not that the gesture of
Kneeling, in the act of the receiving the Sacrament, is Idolatrous in it self;
No, but the flat contrary. Gen^culatio denique cum Symbola accipiuntur, Speciem
quidem habet piae and Christianae venerations, Beza Epist. 11. p. 109.
ac proinde olim potuit cum fructu vsurpari. Do you not observe that he
condemns not the gesture in it self, which (says he) might have been
profitably used in former times; namely, before that it was Idolatrously abused
in the Popish Chuch? Which Testimony as it cannot prejudice our Church which
is now so severed from Popery, even in this point of Adoration, that Papists
themselves do know and confess it; so does it justly condemn your
condemnation of the act of Kneeling, by judging it to be in it self directly
Idolatrous. If you shall persist to tell us, that Beza was of your Judgment,
then must you grant, that with the same breath, he defended a commendable
Idolatry; seeing that he judges the act of Kneeling to be in it self a
profitable gesture, even in the receiving of the Sacrament.

Fifthly, to the same purpose, and somewhat more expressly P. Martyr, P. Mart.
Loc. Com. Class 2. c 4. p. 203.
I do not contend (says he) that Ceremonies should be every where the same,
but yet we ought to provide, that they be not against the word of God; yea they
should as much as may be, be reduced unto edification and decency. Therefore
it is no matter of difference, whether we receive the Sacraments sitting, or
standing, or Kneeling, so that the Institution of Christ it self be preferred,
and occasion of superstition removed.

This his Position contains in it, these two suppositions, the first is, that
Kneeling at the receiving of the Communion is not an act of superstition it
self: Secondly, that it may possibly be used now without danger of
Superstition. And is not this also a plain contradiction unto your former
assertions? I make no quetion but all other the Authors, who have spoken
absolutely for outward Reverence, in the use of sacred Mysteries, would not
have been more vehement in condemning the Idolatry, and sacrilegious manner of
Kneeling of the Papists, then they would have been (at the least) equal and
indifferent, to admit of our custom of Kneeling, if that they had beheld the
decent integrity that is used therein. All this while we have kept aloof off;
we come at last to parley with the Non-conformists themselves.

SECT. XXXIX. Our third Confutation of the Non-conformists, and justification
of Our selves, is from the confession of Bellarmine, excusing Protestants from
the suspicion of Adoration; even because they hold the matter of the Sacrament
to remain Bread.
This our Justification, I confess, is against their will, for it issues out
of an objection, which the Non-conformists have made to accuse, and condemn
our Church.

The Non-conformists Objection.
And Bellarmine having said that we, Abridg. Linc. p. 31. quoting Bellar. l. 4.
d^ Euch. c. 29. art. 2.
(whom he calls Caluinists, and Sacramentaries) do not adore the Sacrament;
neither, says he, should any man marvel at that, seeing they do not believe
that Christ is really present, but that the b^ead in the Eucharist is indeed
nothing else but the bread that came out of the Oven.

Our Answer.
Do you not remember Joseph's Cloak, which his Mistress caught hold of, to draw
him to her lustful bed? who notwithstanding afterward, in a complaint unto
her husband, turned the same Cloak as a witness against Joseph, to convince
him of folly; notwithstanding it was, indeed, and in truth, a full
demonstration of her own filthiness, and dishonesty. And see you not how
wittily you do imitate that fact of Joseph's Mistress, by obiecting to the Church
of England the speech of Bellarmine, which in true construction may be a sound
and evident Argument for her justification: Seeing, that Bellarmine, so great
an Adversary, confessing that Protestants do not adore the bread, even because
they believe it to be bread; does consequently acknowledge, that they, by their
receiving of this Sacrament, cannot possibly be guilty of the Romish manner of
Adoration of the outward Elements. What needs therefore so great an outcry in
the ears of simple people, to the slander of the true Church of Christ, by
associating her, as afterward ye do, with the Synagogue of Antichrist, in an
Idolatrous reverence?

I always expected, that, as often as you take from the mouth of Bellarmine
such kind of speeches as this, obiecting that we think the Sacrament to be
nothing else but bread, that came out of the Oven; you should have shown your
selves zealous Aduocats for the common cause, by controlling the Jesuits
impudency: according as M. Jewel might have instructed you, in his Answer
against the like scoff of M. Harding, in vilifying of our Sacrament. Jewel
art. 4. of Adoration. p. 282.
Whereas M. Harding (says he) unjustly defameth us as reckoning the Sacraments
of Christ nothing else but Tokens, let him understand that we both think and
speak reverently of Christ his Sacraments, as knowing them to be the
Testimonies of Gods promises, and instruments of the holy Ghost: and as we make
not the Sacrament of Baptism bare water, notwithstanding the nature and
substance of water remains the same still; so we make not the Sacrament of
Christ his body and blood, bare bread and wine: for, as Saint Augustine says,
[Videndum est, non quid sint, sed quid significent] We must not regard so much
what they are, (namely in substance) as what they signify, to wit, according
to the new nature that they have of a Divine Sacrament.

SECT. XL. Our fourth Confutation of the Non-conformists, and Justification of
our selves, issues from the Non-conformists own Practice.
First, by their Intentionall Reverence.
You would account it an extreme injury, to be censured as contemners, or
profaners of these holy mysteries; or not to celebrate and receive them
reverently, with the truly religious affections of your hearts and minds:
which you profess will be the duty of every worthy Communicant, that shall
rightly discern in this Sacrament the Lords body. 1. Cor. 11.29.
This being granted (which without impiety cannot be denied) it ministers
unto us an Argument, whereby you may be confuted (as I suppose) without all
contradiction.

Fist, I may reason thus: That manner of Reverence, which it is lawful for a
Christian to conceive in his mind, the same is as lawful for him (the case of
Scandal excepted) to express in his outward gesture of body. But it is
lawful for a Christian to conceive such a Relative Reverence; as from the
sight of the Sacrament (being Obiectum aquo) to raise his thoughts to a
contemplation of the mystical and spiritual object of faith, signified
thereby: and upon the understanding of the mystical, even the body and blood
of Christ really (albeit not corporally) exhibited unto us in this Sacrament,
to receive these visible pledges of our redemption, by the death of Christ, (as
the Obiectum propter quod) with all holy and reverent devotion of heart and
mind. Therefore, it is lawful to perform a sensible and bodily reverence at
our outward receiving thereof.

The infallibility of this Consequence arises from the difference which is
between the inward, and outward Reverence: for the inward reverence is the
formal part and very soul of reverence, and far exceeds the bodily, which
is but only the material. Where therefore the material and bodily form of
Reverence is acounted Idolatrous, there the Intentionall and formal much more;
because the worship is in it self and Act indifferent, and so may become
either religious, or superstitious, by the use, or abuse thereof, according to
the intention and mind of the Agent: even as we may discern in this one word,
Aue, used in salutation; for many came to Christ, and said Aue; O hail Master,
and did honor him; the Jews also bowed to him, and said Aue; and dishonoed
him. The difference of these two consisted not in the out ward gesture, which
was the same (both sorts Saluters) but from the diverse Intentions, the one
kind performing their salutations in civility, but the other in mockery. Even
so the gesture of Kneeling is an act indifferent in it self, being used as well
of Children to their Parents, as of either religious persons to God; or
sacrilegious unto Idols: but the formal distinction of each one proceeds
from the mind and affection of the Actor; for that, which is in children
piety, and in subjects loyalty, the same is in the truly religious devotion,
and in the superstitious and sacrilegious Idolatry.

Upon these Premises we infer this conclusion; that if there be in you an
inward, relative reverence of soul, in the receiving of this blessed
Sacrament, from a respect had betwixt the Doner, God, and this holy Sacrament,
being so precious a pledge of our salvation: then can it not be unlawful, to
give some expression of this your religious intention, by the same visible
reverence, in one, or other outward gesture of the body; especially being to
participate of the Sacrament, the seal of man's redemption, both body and
soul. And indeed the bodily parts of man are nothing else but the Organs and
Instruments of the affections of his soul. If therefore that godly
Indignation, which the Publican had against his sins, Luke 18.
be shrewing (as it were) his own heart, commanded his hands to Knock on his
breast: 1. Tim. 2.
If Hope lifts up pure hands in prayer unto heaven, in confidence of Gods
promises: If holy Faith moved the woman's hand to pull Christ by the hemme of
his garment, Math. 9.
in belief to be healed by some virtue from him: If Charity stretched out the
Samaritans hand, Luke 10.
to Bynd up the wounds of the distressed man, that lay half dead by the way:
If Devotion toward God in Lydia, Act. 16.
charged her ears to give Attention to Gods word: If Contrition for sin powered
out of Peter's eyes bitter tears of repentance; shall not the virtue of
Humility, Math. 26.
have some power to make demonstration of it self, in an acknowledgement of so
undeserved mercy, as is to be partaker, by faith, of the body and blood of our
Lord Jesus, by some significant gesture of bowing the body at the receiving
thereof, answerable to the religious affection of your minds? Thus much of the
Intentionall Reverence.

SECT. XLI. The second Practice of the Non-conformists, for our justification,
is Bodily: And this is either Accidental, in respect of the Communicants; or
Proper, in the manner of communicating.
The Accidental is their Bodily presence, communicating with us in this
Sacrament, notwithstanding our manner of Reverence.
This shall be my Reason: Idolatry is set down, in the book of God, as a
necessary cause of Separation from all Idolatrous worshippers: for what
affinity is there between God and Belial? Which one cause, although it were
only, might justify our departure out of the Romish Babylon. To this purpose,
your Witness Zanchie gives this Thesis. Zanch. de redemp. p. 533.
Idololatriae crimine inuoluuntur, qui cum Idololatris, ipsorum Idololatrijs
communicant. Contrariwise; the material breaking of bread, that is, the
communicating in the blessed Sac^ament, is a principal note of Union in one
Faith and Religion, seeing that this Sacrament it self is a mystical sign of
the union of the faithful among themselves; from which it has received the
Appellation to be called the Communion. Notwithstanding, you have the grace to
abide in the womb of our Church, and to live in one Brotherhood with us, in a
public profession of one doctrine and worship of God, in Prayers and Psalms,
and in the Communion it self. And now deliberate with your selves (I beseech
you) whether you, by this your manner of calumniating, and traducing of the
Churches practice, to call it Idolatrous, have not been the Authors of Schism
to the Separatists, and Apostates of these times; unto whom you have given
their first bane (even this suspicion of Superstitious worship in our Church)
whereby their hearts are so poisoned, and their brains intoxicated, that now
no Antidote of your making, can be able to cure them.

Take therefore unto you the minds of discreet and Christian hearts, either
to be that you seem, or to seem to be that you are; as glorifiers of God with
us in our Church, so for our Church; that therefore you do not dishonor her
that is your Glory and your Crown, seeking (as she has done many worthy
Martyrs of Christ, and holy Saints) to breed and bring you up, in the sincere
faith of Christ, unto your assured hope of eternal glory. Thus much of our
justification, by your Accidental practice of consent, in Communion with us,
in this Sacrament.

SECT. XLII. The third Practice of the Non-conformists, is from their Bodily
Reverence, at the receiving of their food, both Corporal and Sacramental.
First of their Corporal.
You your selves are known to be so reverent in praying unto God, as that, in
saying grace before meat, you use to uncover your heads, and you do well: but
look now to the act, is it not an act of Reverence? Why else are you uncovered?
And is it not an act of Spiritual worship; wherefore else do you pray? And is
not the outward object, whereupon you look, meat, even the creature of God?
how else can you desire God to bless These his creatures? And is not this your
Adoration of God, relative and respective, arising between the Gift, and the
Giver? otherwise why should you have reference in prayer unto God, for his
blessing upon your meats? And lastly, will you say (for this Interrogatiue
must needs convince your consciences) that this your Adoration is according to
the Popish opinion, by a personal representation, in giving any part thereof
to the creature; by adoring either It, or In it, or By it? How then should you
justly condemn that Romish Church of Superstition? Nay do you not acknowledge,
that the respect, which you have from the meat to God, is as from the gift
unto the Giver; and that Gods gift is an object, propter quod; for which you
pray, and render praise unto him? And why then do you infame our Church, as if
she were Idolatrous, which teaches you, in these, and all other points of
Adoration, how to avoid all Idolatry? Surely he that cannot distinguish
between these two, to wit, Reverence to God, at the receiving of his
Sacrament; and reverence to God, in the Sacrament received, may, when he would
warm him at the fire, burn himself in the fire. Thus much of your practice
in Reverence, at receiving your corporal food.

SECT. XLIII. Our fifth Confutation of the Non-conformists, and justification of
our selves, is from the proper practice of the Non-conformists, in their
outward Reverence, at the receiving of this Sacrament.
You may remember the whole passages, and very paces, we have gone, that we
might persuade you to allow, and embrace our outward gesture of reverence, in
receiving of the blessed Sacrament: some taken from Reasons; from Confessions
of your own Witnesses; from your own Practices not only Intentionall, but
also Real; and this both Accidental and Proper: and this, as in an outward
and visible reverence, in receiving as well Corporal, as Sacramental food.
All these four having been manifested; it remains only that we prove the
last, concerning the bodily Reverence perfo^med by your selves, at the
receiving of the Sacrament it self.

I need not use many words; you receive this Sacrament with your heads
uncovered, and would (I think) hold it a prophanenes, not to give some outward
semblance of uncovering your heads at the receiving thereof. This being your
general practice, I do not see how you may justify your own heads, and
condemn your knees; by whatsoever pretense you can make. Will you say that
(kneeling, and uncovering being both practiced about the same act) the one
gesture can be more subject to Idolatry then the other? I appeal to your own
Witness, who co^demning the peoples adoration of Images, does jointly abandon
these three gestures; Genuflectionem, Zanch. de redemp. lib. 1. page 401.
Capitis apertionem and Corporis inclinationem: Kneeling on the knee,
uncovering of the head, and bowing of the body; where and whenever they are
applied unto a false adoration: as being contrary to the second commandment,
[ Thou shall not worship etc.]

Or will you hold it reasonable to say, as some are thought to answer, that
you, in the celebration of this Sacrament, beginning with prayer and
thanksgiving, were uncovered; and that now it is but continuata actio, a
continuing of the same gesture, at the administration and participation
thereof; either because of the public Psalms, then used in the Church, or
for that you are ex^rcised in a divine meditation, about the Analogy between
the elements of bread and wine, and the body and blood of Christ, signified
thereby; by as real an applying of the same body and blood of Christ to your
souls, for the nourishment thereof, as you have a real and substantial
incorporation of the bread and wine into your bodies; and that you are
presently ready to proceed in other prayers: so that, being uncovered, you
cannot be said, so much to put off, as to keep off your hats; nor to be made
kneel, but to be found kneeling, at the receiving of this Sacrament.

He that condemns, in his own conscience, an other man's direct uncovering of
the head, at the receiving of the holy Sacrament, as superstitious, being
himself uncovered; and shall notwithstanding excuse his own gesture, because
of the former pretense of a continued action, or spiritual meditation: This
man shall be but (as S. James calls him) a Paralogizer, Iam 1.
and deluder of his own soul: because no act is called goo^, nisi ex integra
causa, that is, when it is good in every part; but it is evil, ex quouis
defectu, that is, upon any one defect. Therefore the continuance of the same
gesture cannot ma^e that action good, wherein any part thereof, in respect of
the object, is condemnable in it self; because if the reverence at the
receiving be unlawful, I ought, in my behavior, as well to have declined that
which ought not; as to have practiced that which ought to have been performed;
especially where (for God is a jealous God) there could be the least jealousy
of Idolatry.

The nature of due reverence will more clearly appear, by a sight of the
contrary. If any Tenants, seeing their Lord riding, with his servants, some
before, and some behind, yet but meanly furnished for their attendance, should
be disposed to laugh and jest at them; and exercise the same scoff upon their
Lord approaching; would it be any tolerable satisfaction, to say (when they
should be called in question) that they did but only continue their laughing
and jesting?

Or will you hereupon suspect, that you have erred, in being uncovered, and
hereafter make amends with covering your heads? This would be but an hiddie,
and giddie retractation, by which you must needs contradict the custom (as I
suppose) of all the reformed Churches in Christendom: whereof one of your own
choicest Witnesses testifies, saying; Z^nch. de Redemp. lib. 1. page 531. These.
10.
De h^c membro inter omnes pios constat, reipsa enim h^c comprobant, cum ad
Sacramentorum participationem reuerenter, apertoque Capite accedunt; hac
ratione protestants, aquam illam Baptismi, panem and vinum Coenae non amplius
esse res profanas, sed sacras, per quas Christus seipsum, suamque gratiam
co^municat; eoque esse reuerentia dignas etc. It is a thing granted (says he)
of all godly men, and indeed testified and approved of them, by their coming
to the participation of the Sacraments, Reverently, with their heads uncovered,
protesting thereby that the water of Baptism, and the bread and wine in the
Lords Supper are no common, but sacred things; whereby Christ does communicate
himself and his graces unto us, and that therefore they are worthy of this
reverence. Even as (says he) the word preached, although it is not to be
adored, yet must it be reverently handled, is the word not of men, but of God:
and so likewise the Sacraments, in the administration of them, a^e worthy of
reverence, whereunto appertains the saying of the Apostle, commanding us to
eat and drink that cup (...), worthily; which worthiness and dignity, although
it does properly consist in the mind endued with faith an^ love, yet may we
not without cause refer it unto the external reverence, whereupon it was
that they, that came to the Lords Supper irreuerently, were severely chastned
by the hand of God. 1. Cor. 11. You see how exactly this your choice and
venerable Witness has pleaded for an external gesture of reverence, by
uncovering the head, at the receiving of such holy Rytes; which he makes to be
the same, in the case of worship, with the bowing of the knee.

You will peradventure reply; if the case stands so, concerning uncovering
our heads, why are we then condemned for irreuerence, and why is Kneeling
required? Shall I tell you? I can conceive but three reasons hereof: the first
is, because diverse of you are thought to be uncovered, not with any intention
to express your reverence, at the receiving of this Sacrament, because you
condemn those that perform any reverence by kneeling; therefore ye are urged
to kneel, that thereby you may manifest your unanimity of one judgment with
our Church. Secondly, the order of kneeling having been established by the
Church, and being (as has been proved) a Ceremony indifferent, it is lawfully
exacted, and ought to be performed by you, for expression of uniformity.
Lastly, because that women also (who because of their sex may not be uncovered)
might show the devotion of their souls, by their bodily representation of
kneeling; this gesture is required for an universality of Conformity.

To conclude, be you exhorted but to permit your internal reverence, to become
visible, by bodily gesture; or suffer your knees to be answerable to your
heads, in outward reverence: and then may we all join the hands of true
fellowship and godly union, in the participation of this holy Communion; and a
more acceptable Thanksgiving in the Eucharist unto the Trinity, in one
indivisible Unity, whereunto be ascribed all glory and praise for ever. Amen.

FINIS.

