THE POPES Funeral. Containing a plain, succinct, and pithy reply, to a
pretensed answer of a shameless and foolish Libell, entitled, The Forerunner
of Bells downfall. Which is nothing else indeed, (as the indifferent Reader
shall perceive by the due peruse thereof,) but an evident manifestation of his
own folly; ith the utter confusion of Popery, and all popish vassals
throughout the Christian world.

2. Reg. 9. V. 34. Visit yonder cursed woman, and bury her; for she is a Kings
daughter. Psalm. 58.10. The righteous shall rejoice, when he sees the vengeance
of the wicked, he shall wash his feet in the blood of the ungodly. LONDON
Printed by T. C. For William Welby, and are to be sold at his shop in Paul's
Churchyard, at the sign of the Grayhound. 1605.

To the most puissant, wise, virtuous, learned, judicious, and religious
Monarch, James, by Gods holy providence and eternal purpose, King of great
Britain, France, and Ireland, most constant defendor of the ancient,
Christian, Catholic and Apostolic Faith, and supreme governor within his
said Realms, Kingdoms, territories, and Dominions, next and immediately under
the King of heaven, over all persons, and over all causes, as well
Ecclesiastical as civil.
GReat is the deepenesse (most gracious Sovereign, Romans 11. Verse. 33. Job. 26.
V. 8. Job. 27. V. 11* Job. 38. V. 8.
) of the wisdom and knowledge of the everliving God; unsearchable are his
judgments, his ways past finding out. He binds the waters in his Clouds,
and the cloud is not broken under them. He so limiteth the floods, that they
neither do nor can ouerflowe. He shut up the Sea with doors, when it issued
forth as out of the womb. His decree stayed her proud waves, and appointed her
bounds whether she should come, but no farther. He does great, unsearchable,
and marvelous things without number. Job. 38. Verse. 11. Job. 5.9.
Yea, his mercies and favors toward my silly self, a most wretched
creature, and unworthy (for any desert in my self,) to tread upon the
ground; are so many, so great, and so wonderful, that I stand amazed at the
remembrance thereof: I might here recount many other rare and extraordinary
favors of God toward me.
being far unable with Pen and Ink to express the same. The rehearsal of
one, may suffice for the present: Being student at Rome in the English
College, not long before my arrival in this Kingdom, and on a time walking
abroad to take the air with many other of the same College, when we came
without one of the Posterne gates of the City, we espied certain Bufloes with
their Keeper at the Riuerside. Which spectacle, (as unpleasant to the eye, so
also most terrible to the heart, The Bufloes are as terrible beasts as the
Lions.
) my fellows and contrymen no sooner beheld, but they betook themselves
to their best speed. My self more bold therein then wise, would not amend my
pace, and so remained bird alone. Suddenly the furious, raging, and cruel
Bufloes brake from their keeper, and with great violence, rage, and fury came
upon me. My fellows standing a far off upon the top of an high mountain,
durst not for their lives approach, to afford me any comfort, help, aid, or
succor. They neither did, nor could expect any other thing, save only present
and most cruel death. Howbeit, (most gracious Sovereign,) the wild, cruel,
raging, and furious Bufloes, (a thing very strange, Many yet living, know ^his
to be most true.
rare, and wonderful, if a miracle, let the Reader judge,) did no hurt unto me
at all, but sported with me, as one child plays with another. After a
while, the furious Bufloes left me, and departed in peace from me. At the
last, my fellows beholding the departure of the Bufloes, and persuading
themselves that I was most cruelly slain, came with convenient speed to
visit my corpse. But finding me alive, and as liue-like as I was before, we al
returned to the College, with great joy and speed. The rector of the College
could no way be persuaded, but that I was very grievously wounded; albeit
neither my self felt any, neither could their eyes or wits discern any hurt
at all, A thing never heard or known before.
save only that my face was something bloody, by reason of the sudden fall I
got while I made have to have escaped from the imminent danger. For, it had
never bin known or heard among them; that ever any man, woman, or child
escaped with life, being once in that kind of danger; to wit, in the
courtesy of the furious Bufloes. Many gave their censures concerning the fact
and event. The general resolution was this, viz. That I might fight with
Bufloes in England, and have the upper hand. My self did deem it probable,
and this day me thinks, the same is brought to pass; though, (Gods name be
blessed for it,) in a far different sense and meaning, from that which either
they or my self did then imagine. I thought then to fight against the true
professors of Christ's Gospel, (who^ I deemed heretics and spiritual
Bufloes:) but God, (whose wisdom reaches from end to end, mightily, Sap.
8.1. Ephesians. 1. Verse. 4.11. Romans 9. Verse. 11.15.16. etc. Ephesians. 6. Verse. 12.
Act. 9. Verse. 1.2.3. etc.
and disposes all things sweetly,) ordained me in his eternal purpose, to a
far more honorable and sacred Warfare; viz. to encounter the traiterous
Jesuits and Iesuited popelings, and valiantly to fight the battle of Christ's
Church, against those most furious, brainlesse, and cruel Bufloes of men's
souls. When Saul breathing out slaughter against ye Saints of God, desired of
the high Priests, letters, by virtue whereof he might bring all to Jerusalem,
that professed the name of Christ Jesus: then our Lord himself appeared to
him, opened his eyes, and enlightened him with the knowledge of the truth.
Semblably, when my self was drowned in the depth of superstitious and
erroneous Popery, and therein so blinded, that I could not discern truth
from falsehood; it pleased the same God, so to open the eyes of mine heart and
soul, Let me die a most cruel death, if I shall not confound Popery by best
approved Popish Doctors, against any English Papist that shall have courage to
defend the same. Psalm. 118. verse 23.
that I forthwith beheld as clearly, as the Sunne-shining at noone day, late
vpstart Popery, far dissonant from the old Roman Religion, to be battered,
overthrown, and clean turned vp-side down; and that, even by the clear
evidence, plain verdict, and constant doctrine of the best learned Doctors,
and most renowned writers in the Church of Rome. Which metamorphosis and right
Christian alteration being wrought in my soul, I forthwith bewailed my former
days of ignorance, very joyfully embraced the truth in my heart, publicly
acknowledged Gods wonderful operation in me, and most humbly yielded and
submitted my self, to the mercy of most noble Queen Elizabeth. This was the
Lords doing, and it is wonderful in our eyes. I protest upon my salvation,
that I have at this hour a good testimony of a well settled conscience, and
unspeakable comfort in my soul, (God make me ever thankful for this and all
other his manifold mercies,) as I have also ever had, since I first renounced
from my heart, the late vpstart Romish Religion. For this now professed Romish
Religion, is not as the silly seduced Papists imagine,) the old Roman
Religion; but a new no Religion, patched like Mahomets Alcoran, and by little
and little crept into the Church; In the Survey of Popery.
as I have proved elsewhere at large. But the Papists being condemned in their
own consciences, dare not for their lives publish any direct and full answer,
either to my Motives, or to my Survey, or to any other of my books, written
against them and their p^t^^ed Hotch-potch Religion. Yet this last month of
February, one shameless and namelesse Jesuit, has published, not a direct
and full answer, but a Forerunner forsooth against me. In which Pamphlet,
The Papists cannot abide to hear their religion thus termed. But they must
vole^tes nole^tes endure it, till they answer all my books. Forerunner, page
15. Nascctur ridiculus mus.
he turns himself this way, that way, and every way, save only to the
mark at which he never aymeth. He perceives right well, that many of the
Popelings begin to stagger at their doctrine and Romish faith: because they
have been so long silent, and dare not answer my Books. For the procuring of
which mortal wound, he tells them of a most rare and sovereign medicine,
which the Jesuits have brought out of the new found world: viz. That my Books
were answered five year ago: and that the answer is suppressed hitherto for
special unknown causes, but must shortly come abroad. Hereof more at large,
in the proper place.

Now so it is, (most excellent King,) that the Forerunner would seem
desirous, though indeed he desires nothing less, to have a public dispute,
and so to fight the combat with me Viua voce; and therefore does he challenge
me, daring and redaring me to the same. Who if he knew how willingly and gladly
I am ready to cast him my Gauntlet, would doubtless use his words more
sparingly in this behalf. In regard hereof (most gracious and dread
Sovereign, O noble King for Christ's sake grant my request. The victory is
already gotten, none of them dare undertake the quarrel. Let me be hanged,
bowelled and quartred; yea, and and my corpse cast to the fowls of the air,
if the victory fall not on my side.
) I now prostrate upon my knees, do most humbly beseech your most excellent
Majesty, that it will please your Highness of your most Princely favor, to
grant your Royal license* and safe conduct for any English Jesuit, or
Iesuited Papist in the whole world, that shall have courage to appear for the
true performance of the challenge, in such manner as is in this reply
expressed. (Oh most gracious Sovereign,) I am joyful, when I remember this
future combat. I wish in my heart, that it may be effected with all
expedition, for I confidentlie persuade my self in our Lord Jesus, that his
Name shall thereby be glorified: your Majesty highly honored; the Papists
stricken dead; and all true hearted English subjects receive vnvnspeakeable
endless comfort. If it shall fall out otherwise, and that I shall not be found
even in your Majesty's judgment, to have the victory and upper hand; I will
be content to loose my life for my just reward, as one that has dishonored
your Majesty, and the cause. The Almighty bless your Majesty, with a long
and most happy reign upon earth, and with eternal glory in the world to
come, Amen,

From my study, this eighteenth of March, 1605. Your Majesty's most humble
subject, Tho. Bells.

How faults escaped in the first Book, may be corrected by the Reader.
THe Book for expedition sake, was committed to three several Printers, by
reason whereof the Pages could not be distinguished with numbers. Hence it
comes, that the Reader can not so easily find out the faults corrected, as he
may in some other Books. Howbeit, if he shall mark the Book and the
Chapters, and reckon the Pages from the Chapter, until he come to that page and
line in which the fault is named, he can not but have his desire in that
behalf.

How faults of the first Book escaped in the Printing, are to be corrected.
In the first Chapter, seventh page, and first line, the word (but) must be
added before the word (here.) Chap. 1. page 9. line 1. the word (world) must
be added before the word (well.) Chap. 2. P. 4. l. 23. the word (and) must be
taken away. Chap. 2. P. 4. l. 6. the word (were) must follow the word (and.)
Chap. 2. P. 5. l. 24 the word (they) must be added before the word (show.)
Chap. 2. P. 6. l. 14. the word (two) must be added for the word (three.) Chap.
2. p. 10. l. 20. the word (one) must go before the word (only.) Chap. 2. p
11. l. 5. the word (them) must be made (the) chap. 2. p. 11. l. 15. the word
(doltlesse) must be made (doltish.) Chap. 2. p. 13. l. 19. many words are
superfluous. Chap. 3. p. 2. l. 20. for nor, read not. Chap. 3. p. 4. l. 8. for
soul in the margent, read soil. chap. 4 p. 2. l. 10. for discourse, read
discovery.

In the Caveat, p. 1. l. 16. for Operaepertiu^, read Operaepretium. Ibid. p.
7. l. 20.

How faults escaped in the second Book, are to be corrected.
Chap. 2. p. 2. l. 12. for objection, read contradiction. Chap. 3. page four,
l. three and thirty, for so, read Saint. Chap. 3. p. 2.23. for his, read
the. chap. 7. in the 4. reason, for dialogue, read decalogue. Some other
faults there are, but the Reader may very easily discern them.

A Table, containing the principal contents of all the Chapters.
Chapters of the first book.
Chap. 1. Of the Method of the discourse, with the reason of the same. Chap.
2. Of the Libellers notorious untruths, lies, and slanders. Chap. 3. Of the
libellers foolish and arroga^t challenge. (of the name. Chap. 4. Of the Romish
hotch-potch Religion, with the reason.
Chapters of the second book.
Chap. 1. Of dissension among Papists. Chap. 2. Of the marriage of Priests.
Chap. 3. Of a terrible monster without both head and foot. Chap. 4. Of Card.
Bellermines opinion and doctrine. Chap. 5. Of the condign merit of works.
Chap. 6. Of S. Austens opinion, touching involuntarie motions. Chap. 7. Of Pope
Martins dispensation.
THE POPES Funeral.
The first Book of certain ridiculous, scandalous, slanderous, godless,
shameless, and senseless extravagants; uttered and made salable for a Souse,
by a most impudent, brasen-faced, brainelesse, and namelesse Libeller, in the
behalf of the whole rabble and most cursed crewe of English traitorous
Jesuits, and others their Iesuited and devoted vassals.
CHAP. I. Of the Method observed in this discourse, together with the reason
of the same.
THe abject and forlorn cursed crew of Jesuits, (who by the verdict,
judgment, All this and much more is verified of our Jesuits; as is proved at
large, in my Anatomy of Popish tyranny.
and testimony of the popish Secular Seminarie-priests, are notorious liars,
coozeners, thieves, traitors, and most wicked men upon earth,) feeling them
selves pricked, galled, and deeply goared, with the strong reasons, evident
proofs, irrefragable testimonies, and invincible demonstrations, laid open
before the eyes of my readers, throughout all my books; as most strong forts,
towers, and stony rocks, harder then any flint, environed on every side, with
well fortified bulwarks and rampires; especially, seeing and with inward sighs
and sobs perceiving their Pope and Popery to be turned vpside down, and with
deadly wounds to lie a bleeding: and all this to be verified by the constant
verdict and doom of their most famous, best learned, and best approved popish
writers, and thereupon bestirring themselves, this way, that way, and every
way, like madmen hopping and skipping in the Alps, They have been now more
then ten years, buzzing about the answer of my books; but none can be had.
and as vagarant persons upon the stony Rocks of mount Synai, seeking
passages, but finding none, have at the length called to mind and bethought
themselves, how they might cunningly, (though shamefully, falsely, and most
damnably,) dazel the eyes, and steal away the hearts of my readers; viz. to
propine unto them a cup of dangerous Letharge, (which pitifully annoyeth the
power sensitive, and almost utterly quenches right reason,) that so they should
neither be able to discern truth from falsehood, nor to behold the bright light
shining clearly before their faces. On the one side it grieved them above
measure, and vexed them at their very hearts, See Act. 19. V. 24. etc.
to hear continual outcries against them for the non-answering of my books.
On the other side, it wounded, galled, and deeply goared their consciences;
that they were not able to withstand or gainsay my strong reasons, evident
proofs, and invincible demonstrations. Being thus perplexed, and at their wits
end what to say or do; they resolved to publish a counterfeit and pretensed
answer, rather then none at all; so to stay in some sort at the least, the
outcryes and exclamations of the people against them. And to the end, their
couzonage and legierdemaine should not be espied, if that were a thing possible
to be done and effected: their scurrilous Libell, (which contains only five
Chapters in all,) is fraught with nothing else for the four first, but with
notorious lies, antichristian speeches, vain bragges, railing words, couzoning
tricks, ridiculous asseverations, most slanderous and false accusations. Yea,
of five parts, one only is reserved, for their pretensed answer to my book.
I say (of their pretensed answer,) because all the Jesuits, All the Jesuits
have laid their heads and wits together, for the pretensed answer to my book:
albeit they labor to father on it a namelesse Libeller.
or at the least the best of them, as well beyond the seas, as in this kingdom,
gave their best advise for the effecting thereof. Now if any man demand the
cause, why they bestir themselves so much, waste so much precious time, and
spend so many Chapters in things merely impertinent and plain by-matters: me
thinks I can not answer that question more fitly, then by relating their
own words in their scurrilous and shameless Libell* albeit by them intended
to an other purpose.

These are their express words: If he be such a sincere writer, as he
protests, and so consideratiue and respective in the penning of his books,
that no suspicion of misreporting, or corruption, can be justly fastened upon
him: then does it evidently follow, that we have great dissentions in matters
of Faith, This is a point of great importance, let it be well marked for
Christ's sake: it is able to persuade any man.
and that our Doctors be the bane of Catholic doctrine: and then no marvel,
if he make challenge upon challenge, and remain unanswered: when as not
only our enemies, but also those that we take for our friends, and rely upon,
stand in open field against us, and have as it were sworn our destruction.
Thus writes the Libeller: under which name I ever understand the Jesuits, and
all Iesuited persons, Chap. 5. Page 32. Page 34.
whose heads and wits concurred in devising the same. Again, a little after he
has these words: the matter, as he handles it, seems so odious, that some
no question condemn us highly upon his report: and my self was since the
coming forth of his book, assaulted with this very question, so markeable it
is in every man's eye. Lo, my Books gall the Papists, even by their own
confession.
Thus prateth the godless Libeller, even to his own shame and confusion,
though unwittingly. Out of whose words I note sundry very necessary and
memorable points, for the true comfort of the Christian Reader.



Fifthly, that many Papists begin to stagger, and to stand in doubt of the
popish Religion; and that by

Sixthly, that the libeller himself has been assaulted,

Seventhly, that the doctrine delivered in my better. Amen: the case is clear
and evident, even to every child. For they that have been buzzing about the
answering of my books these many years, Mark this well. It cannot be denied.
and confess freely withal, that the life of their Popery depends upon the
confutation of my books, and thereupon have assaid all means they could
devise; have no doubt made choice of those small parcels, with which they
thought themselves most able to deal. Wherein for all that, they have done
nothing else indeed; but only laid open to the view of the world, their
great malice and extreme folly. Which (if I be not deceived,) every
indifferent Reader will affirm with me, so soon as he has perused this my
brief and plain discourse; so brief and succinct, as none (I think,) will
deem it tedious; so sound and sincere, as none can justly and truly reprove
it; and so plain, facile, and perspicuous, as every child may understand the
same. For if I do not soundly, pithily, and effectually confute the Libeller;
yea, even turn him out of his skin, I will be content and well pleased, to
lose my life for my pains. And let the Reader thus persuade himself, bcause
evident reason conuinceth it to be so; that if the Jesuits and Iesuited Papists
are not able to make good against me, those silly snatches and pieces of my
books, The Jesuits and all other Iesuited Papists, are here goared to death.
whereof themselves have made the choice; that much less are they able to
confute my whole works. No, no, they do in effect confess so much, while
they dare neither answer any one book of all, nor yet any one Chapter wholly;
here and there, an odd piece or sentence. I protest unto the gentle Reader,
that I partly blush on their behalf.

Garnet, the provincial of the Jesuits in England, some years ago, was
co^sulted with, and his advise required, that some course might be taken for
the answering of my books: because their silence in that behalf, brought no
small detriment to their Religion. The Jesuits Cap of consideration.
The good father having on his Cappe of consideration, answered right gravely,
(though neither honestly, nor yet Clarkely,) that they should either not meddle
at all with that matter, or else deal rather against my person, then against
my Doctrine. This advise (as it seems,) has now taken place. For this
Libeller fights with might and maine against my person, but deals too too
niggardly with my Doctrine. In my counterblast.
I have elsewhere made mention of this Garnets Letter: where I made full
rehearsal thereof Ad verbum, and framed a direct answer to the same. The
great master Jesuit Robert Parsons, affirmed about three years ago, that
the confutation of my worthy works, In his detection.
(as he scornfully terms them,) was undertaken, and to be published, if it
should seem necessary. Now Sir, this most necessary confutation, which they
have been so many years buzzing about, is published to the world. Yet so
silly and so simple a thing, as I cannot tell what to make of it, or how to
name it.

The four first Chapters of this Libell, I would let pass without answer, if
two causes did not urge me thereunto; because they contain nothing but mere
by-matters, and impertinent stuff: First, for that the well affected Reader
may make good use thereof: especially, by help of my censure annexed to the
same. Secondly, because wise Solomon advises me, Prouer. 26. Verse: 5.
to answer a fool according to his foolishness, least he seem wise in his
own conceit. I therefore purpose in God, to reduce to certain distinct heads
and chapters, the notorious lies, vain brags, unchristian slanders, and false
accusations, which the Libeller has abruptly without all Eutaxia, dispersed in
every page of the aforesaid Chapters, so I think to enlarge his most filthy
and most scurrilous Libell, which else for the quantity might be an Almanac.
But by the power of God, I will handle the last Chapter cathauton, and ad
amussim, duly examining every sentence and period thereof to the very bottom,
so as no starting hole shall be left him, to be a sanctuary or refuge to hide
his face. The Libeller would seem desirous to grapple with me, but it
appears far otherwise by his dealing. For what man in the world, taking
upon him to answer my book, If my self were this day a Papist, this their
manner of dealing, would cause me to forsake them* renounce their Religion. And
me thinks, it should be able to work the same effect in others.
(the downefal of Popery,) would fly from the whole book, and from every
article; nay, from every main point, ground, and period thereof, as one afraid
once to touch the same, and only to snatch here and there a sentence, of the
least force to his witting? none doubtless. It is apparent to all the well,
all this notwithstanding, I have so mangled and maimed him with my darts, and
so wounded him with my bullets; that the scarres and marks will be seen upon
him, so long as he lives in this world. In his fifth and last Chapter, (though
he has dealt very sparingly in answering those few sentences, whereof he made
his choice,) I will God willing, so bicker, skirmish, and grapple with him; as I
shall neither leave him one whole bone in his skin, nor one tooth in his head,
nor yet one hair on his beard. That done, I will send him to his good
masters, as a cur-dogge that barketh apace, but cannot bite, and as a
beardlesse boy without hair on his face, void of all learning, wit, sense,
and reason; that so he may bring them news of his good fortune. What I do
here promise, I hope in God to perform the same in due season.

CHAP. II. Of the Libellers notorious untruths, or (to speak plain English)
of his flat lies.
THe first word of the title of his Libell, (the foreru^ner of Bells downfall,)
implies a flat lie. So forsooth to insinuate to his Readers, that a filthy and
huge fardell of lies, but small or no truth at all, can be expected from his
Pen. But how is this proved? Thus. Forerunner must perforce be understood,
either in respect of my person, or else in respect of my book. If in respect
of my person; it is both impertinent to the matter in hand, and is also a
manifest and flat lie in his way of proceeding. I prove it, because in his
judgment I had my downfall, when I renounced their late Romish Religion;
which I thank God for it, was many years ago. Chap. 4. Page 23.
Again, this Libeller of his great charity avouches desperately, that long
since a foul downfall brake the neck of my soul. God forgive me my sins,
and save the neck of his soul, if it be his holy will, I fear no such
causeless curses, Prou. 25. Verse. 2. Romans 10. Ve^se^ ^0.13 1. Ioh. 2. Verse.
1.2. Mat. 18.22. Luke 17.4.
but have a firm and steadfast hope of my salvation in CHRIST JESUS. If in
respect of my book, it is also a flat lie; because it is so far from being a
forerunner, that it is a plain aftercreeping, and does answer my book with
as much speed, as one may drive a Snaile to Rome. Thus much for his first lie.
Let us proceed.

2
Chap. 1. Page 1.2.3. Chap. 3. Page 45.1. The libeller Robert Parsons is made
of lying, as it will soon appear.
The Libeller pleases himself above measure, in calling me a turne-coate, and
a patched minister. This he repeateth again and again, in four several
Pages. My answer stands thus. First, I most willingly confess my self to
be a turne-coate, in a godly sense, and Christian meaning; that is to say, to
have turned from falshod to truth, from vice to virtue: from iniquity to
piety: and from sin to a Godly Christian life. He that disdaineth or
shameth to be a turne-coate in this sense, shall never see Gods face in his
Kingdom. Iac. 3.2. Iam. 3. V. 10.11.12. Romans 5. V. 12 Gen 6.5. Psalm. 143.2.
Psalm. 130.3. Job. 15 15.
For as holy writ teaches us every where, they that are the holiest of all,
sin many a time; and therefore must they either repent and turn their coat
of conversation, or else perish everlastingly. And as for mine own turning, my
self freely confessed it in the first book which I published: and to reproach
one for his sins and errors, which he humbly acknowledges; is not only
against sincere christianity, but also against all modest humanity. Neither
is it to the purpose, Mat. 23. Verse. 2.3.
or question in controversy between us. For it skilleth not what I am my
self, so the Doctrine be sound which I deliver. But the want of an honest
cause, and lack of good grounds, and reasons to defend your Popery, draws
you violently to these foolish and impertinent by matters.

Secondly, as Peter denied Christ three times, Mat. 26. V. 69 70.71.72.74. Act.
9.1. 1. Tim. 1. v. 13 14.15. 1. Ioh. 2. V. 1.2. Romans 4. V. 2.3.4. Romans 5.1.
Romans 6. Verse. 23. Tit. 3. V. 5.
of infirmity: and as Paul persecuted Christ's Church of ignorance: and they
both for all that, found mercy and favor with God for Christ's sake; so my
self I trust, and constantly believe, who erred ignorantly in my younger
years, (at which time I carefully sought the truth, but found it not,) have
attained remission of my sins according to mercy through faith in Christ
Jesus. S. Austin was a Manichee, after that being a Catholic Bishop, he
slipped into sundry errors. Petrus Martyr, Martinus Bucerus, reverend Cranmer,
grave Latimer, learned Ridley, and many others, were sometime Popish Priests;
and yet after that, most singular Preachers', and notable Champions of Christ's
holy Gospel. But of these ye Papists make no reckoning, albeit sundry of
them sealed their Doctrine with their blood, These Bishops sounded alarm
against the Pope.
and by the Papists burnt with fire and faggot for the same. Howbeit they cannot
for shame deny, that their famous Bishops, Boner of London, Tunstall of
Durham,and Gardener of Winchester, wrote sharply against the usurped and falsely
challenged authority of the Bishop of Rome. Who for all that were never
termed turne-coates, neither by your Popes, nor by any of your crew, the like I
might say of your famous Doctor and Proctor master Harding, and of many
others. But no man is a turn-coate with you and your cursed brood, that turns
from the Gospel to your

Thirdly, I affirm constantly, (though I glory not in that behalf) that I
neither am Parson, Vicar, or Curat, (though the shameless lying Libeller
charge me with ietting up and down like a cock of courage, Page. 11.
upon the dung-hil, and of mine own parish, The Jesuit is a most notorious
liar.
) neither did I ever to this day celebrate the holy Communion, (but the Popish
Mass too often,) neither ever was I authorized by the laws of our English
church to do it. Howbeit, I was authorized in time of need where I taught the
school, to read the common prayers of the Church. But all that I did in that
behalf, had an end within the term of one only year, which being true, (as
it is most true indeed, Prou. 14.5.
) I must needs tell our shameless Libeller, that he is a shameless and
impudent liar. Let him remember, Psalm. 5.5.
that a faithful witness will not lie, as also, that God will destroy them,
that speak lies. This for the second lie.

3
Our shameless lying Libeller tells his readers, Page 15. It is an answer
answereles.
that Bells books have long since received their answer: Marry Sir, he by and
by adds a merry jest by way of correction, in these express words: but the
answer has been hitherto suppressed upon just occasion: and in another
place, Page 18.
he tells us another like merry jest, (for he seems to be the Popes own
iester, that five Books are written against my Motives, and my Survey of
Popery: Lo, their answer may not behold the light.
and to give a grace to his tale, he adds, that this supposed answer was
finished five years ago, here is a most cozening legierdemain. Here the
Jesuits play their parts, and show themselves not only egregious liars and
most cursed deceivers, but also (as the priests write of them,) the most wicked
men that live upon the earth: it was not without great cause, Libr. 2. cap. 17.
that the learned Papists in France published a book against them, which they
named the Jesuits Catechism: in which book show at large, that the further a
Jesuit goes, the louder he lies. An other book, entitled, The Frank
discourse. Page 98.
the Frank discourse, affirms constantly, that the Jesuits never harbored
in their hearts any other project, but the subversion of States,
disauthorizing of Magistrates, and seducing of subjects from their allegiance.
The aforenamed Catechism, says in another place, Libr. 2. Cap. 17.
that the whole process of Jesuits is nothing else, but a particular cozening
of our private families, and a general villainy of all the countries, where
they inhabit. Behold here, the holy fraternity of our Jesuits: not I, but the
Papists affirm it to be so.

In his detection, published, Anno, 1602.


Now sir, that we may the better perceive the legierdemain of this cozening
companion, impudent Sycophant, and shameless Libeller, (who like a deceitful
Iugler, tucketh up his sleeves, lays open his hands before our eyes, and
makes a pretense of the plainest dealing that can be used,) we must call to
our remembrance, what a brother of his E. O, or the self same Robert Parsons
(if ye will) told us above three years ago: viz. that the confutation of my
Books was then undertaken, and to be published, if it should be thought
expedient. This is a matter of great importance, and therefore will I make
rehearsal of his own words. These are they, as they came from his own forge
and pen: To these former he speaks of two very famous writers, M. Doctor
Sutcliffe, and M. Willet,) I was once determined to have adoyned a reformed
brother of theirs, A most notorious lie* it is against the late Romish Church
not against the Catholic Church, God forbid.
one Thomas Bell, (native of Rascal in Yorkshire,) who since his last
illumination, has published certain books against the Catholic Church; and
vaunteth mightily, and with insolent words braueth all Seminaries. But I
altered my purpose, partly upon other considerations, but especially because
the confutation of his worthy works is already vndertake^, and to be published,
if it shall be thought necessary. Thus writes E. O, or Robert Parsons the
brazen faced Jesuit, whom we now know right well. The lying Jesuit Parsons, was
the penner of both.


Out of these words of these two Jesuits, (as they would seem, but both are
one only indeed, eue^ Robert Parsons,) a most notorious cozening trick is
offered to our considerations. For, the detector (mark well my words) tells
us: that the confutation of my books, when he published his Libel, If this
point be once well marked, it will bring both the Pope and his popelings to
their death.
was but undertaken by his fellows: that is to say, it was then concluded
amongst his brethren, that my Books should be answered. Now, the supposed
answer to my Books, being then at the most but in fieri, not in facto esse,
as the Schools term it: viz. being at that time but in hand, or in doing at
the most, and not done or finished indeed. Nay, it was but then resolved
amongst them, that some answer should be made unto my Books. And therefore
says Parsons the detector, that he was once determined to have said something
against my books, but hearing that his fellows were about the same matter, he
altered his purpose. Well, this detection was published, An. 1602.
but in the year 1602. let the time be remembered.

Now sir, the forerunner sings another song, and affirms desperately, but
to his utter shame and confusion: Ah poor papists, what a silly religion is
yours.
that forsooth my Books were answered five years ago. And least some should
object against him, that it seems otherwise, because no man can see them,
read them, or hear of them: he to prevent that objection, tells us that
the answer is suppressed, and upon just occasion stayed from the publication.
Because indeed there is no such answer in Rerum natura; or else which is
worse, when they had well viewed their said answer, it seemed so deformed, and
ill favored in their eyes, that they were ashamed to publish it. Let us put
together these two several assertions. Out of the forerunner we have it
affirmed for a truth, (such a truth ever understand, as is current amongst the
Jesuits,) that my books (my Motives, and Survey,) were answered five years
ago, that is to say, almost three whole years before the answer was begun.
For the answer was finished, says the forerunner, five years ago; viz. An.
1599. and the same answer was but undertaken in the year 1602. as the
detector tells us. These Jesuits their asseuerations, An. 1599. Judge. 15.4.
are much like to Sampsons Foxes; That is to say, their tails are tied
together, but their heads and minds are far asunder. So then, this must
needs be the conclusion, An answer answerelesse.
that my books were answered five years ago, and yet unanswered two years
ago. This in my conceit, is not only a Riddle, but a plain miracle. Yet such
a miracle understand, as the Jesuits wrought upon Sebastian the late King of
Portingall; In the doleful cry of Rome.
of which miracle, I have written elsewhere more at large, couple these Jesuits
by their tails, for their heads and wits can never meet. Well, all the world
may see by this their dealing, that they have published the best answer they
had in store, and are at their wits end, what to say or write, turning
themselves this way, that way, and every way, by cozening, lying, iugling, and
by what other means they possibly can devise, how to stay the outcries of the
people, and their popish vassals: for being so long silent touching the
answer of my books. Alas, alas; who sees not the misery and nakedness of
the late hatched Romish Religion? to what impudent, desperate, and damnable
shifts, are the Papists driven for the defense thereof? A shame of all shames
in the world.
how are they not ashamed to confess to the whole world, that they have been
buzzing about the answer of my Books, almost the space of six whole years:
and that when the answer was framed after their best manner, they have
suppressed the same, for the space of five years? These are the express words
of the Forerunner: Page 15.
Bells books have long since received their answer, and though upon just
occasion it has hitherto bin suppressed, yet shortly, Lo, how they are
netled, goared, and whipped with my books.
(viz. ad Calendas Graecas,) by Gods grace to be set forth. Thus writes our
shameless Forerunner. By whose words it is apparent to al ye world, that my
books are this day unanswered: albeit it has been avouched again and again
with open mouths, yea, audaciously affirmed to my face, that their answer was
abroad. For no Papist may read either my books, or any other books against
popery, without a special license from the Pope himself. For, if all were
permitted to read the^, the Pope would soon have but a small company, in this
kingdom of England. Yet the wiser sort I hope, will borrow a dispensation for
the safeguard of their souls. For, (O misery of all miseries!) seeing they may
not read my books, they must believe what their Masters tell them: to wit,
that this Forerunner has answered me galla^tly. Although he has confuted
himself unawares; when he says, the answer is yet to be published, and
that, that which he has done, is but a taste. When the Jesuits and
Seminarie-priests consulted with Garnet their Provincial, what course was best
to be taken in hand, His letter is to be scene, if need require. Lo* a great
number even of the best, have consulted to answer me.

Mark this wonderment, the answer to my books was 5. years a preparing, 5.
other years kept close in a pipkin from sun burning: and it must come forth ad
cale^das graecas, and live in tenebris Cimmeriis, till their woman Pope Joan be
with child again.


that my books might be answered; because their silence in that behalf, was
very dangerous unto their Pope and popery: the father Jesuit having on his
cappe of consideration, answered very peremptorily, though neither clarkely nor
honestly, that they must either not meddle with the matter at all, or else deal
rather with my person, then with my doctrine, yet he adds very gravely, these
words: Nevertheless, for this matter as you shall all agree. For I doubt not,
but so many and such will see what is best. Where we have to learn by the way,
in perpetuam reimemoriam: that not only Jesuit or Seminarie-priest writes
against me, but even the whole brood, tagge and ragge, have bent their bows
to shoot their arrows at me. For though one odd companion be singled out to
take the quarrel in hand, yet is the same fellow guarded and assisted with the
joint counsel, advise, judgment, and help of all the rest. Alas, alas, poor
answer? how art thou turmoiled with these shameless and cozening Jesuits?
after they have spent 5. or 6. whole years, in consultation about an answer;
and after they have employed other 5* or 6. years, with all might and maine to
give thee a being* in the end for all that, thy being is so ugly, so
unsightly, so deformed, and so euilshapen every way; that themselves are
ashamed on thy behalf, and thererfore have they kept the 5. whole years, Page
15.
(if we may trust the^,) under a Pipkin. Their meaning peradventure is, to
keep them from sunne-burning. They have learned (says our forerunner,) by
some of judgment, that not any was thought necessary. But is this possible,
trow we? does not the Jesuit Garnet, their provincial tell us, that they
were both many and very wise? I wot he does so, we have heard his own
words. Alas, alas, that so many will be carried away, with your foolish, vain,
ridiculous, and late vp-start Romish religion: Behold, here fit counselors for
the popes holiness.
were all your Jesuits and their Iesuited vassals, with your fathers the
secular priests, so sottish, so doltlesse and so senseless noddies, that they
could not for the space of five whole years, perceive, understand, and
penetrate the nature of the subject, against which they bent their force and
might, and took so great pains so many years for answering the same? must the
judgment of some few stay them from publishing that answer, which they took
in hand with the consent of al, or at least of ye wiser sort? that answer I
say, upon which they had bestowed so much time, so great pains, and study?
No, no, this is but your usual kind of cozenage, and old legierdemain: for you
tell us, that it must be published shortly. And for the better credit of your
report, you tell us ye number of the books, and the particular conte^ts of the
same. Touching the number, the Forerunner says they are 5. But the man is so
swift in running, especially in lying; that I dare not for my life, give any
credit to his words. Well, for the number, I must receive (when I can catch
them, Viz ad Calendas Graecas.
) 5* for 2. Here is great advantage and increase; it seems they would make me
a petty Usurer. But I thank God, I have published one whole book against
that subject: for the contents vou shall hear them in due time, Page 20. Page
21. He is a very cozening companion, as his own dear brethen have truly
termed him.
and order. Our Forerunner avouches audaciously, (but with lying lips after
his wonted manner), that he will take the pains to view oueral my books, which
came forth after my Motives and survey. But he fails as well in the naming as
he does in the performing. In the naming, because he makes mention only of the
hunting of the romish Fox, of the golden Balance, and of the downfall of
popery: as for the Anatomy of popish tyranny, he durst not so much as once
name it; their hearts pant so often as they remember it. I have in that book
so anatomized them, and so pourtraied them in their best beseeming colors, as
all the world may behold with all facility, their murders, their thefts, their
cozenage, their cogging, their lying, their iugling, their tyranny, their
counterfeite miracles, and other their manifold and unspeakable villainous
knauerie: al which I have sincerely collected, out of the books of their own
dear brethren the secular priests. Which my collection, I have been, am, and
ever shall be ready during life, If no Jesuit, or Iesuited papist dare this
do; then fie upon them all, both great and small.
to justify upon the peril of my life, against any Jesuit or Iesuited Papist
whosoever, that shall dare to encounter me, and to cast me his gauntlet upon
the like peril, for the due trial of the truth thereof.

Shame and confusion must needs befall them, for not accepting this challenge;
seeing sundry years are now expired, since it was made and published.

In the performance, because he says Ne gry quidem, neither against my golden
balance, nor yet against my hunting of the romish Fox. Which hunting I
performed, with seven couple of such well mouthed Romish Hounds; I have hunted
the Pope even to death and that with his own doctors; and yet no Papist is of
courage, once to encounter me therein.
as all the Jesuits and Iesuited Popelings in England and else where, are never
able to heal, and cure the wounds of their Pope. He is so gashed, so bitten,
and so wounded with the teeth of his own dogs, that his sores are become
incurable. What the silly Libeller says against my other books, is as
harmless to the truth thereof; as the biting of a toothlesse beagle, is to a
Bear, Bull, or Lion. And I must needs give him to wit; that it is as good
nothing at al, as never a whit the better; that it is as good nothing at al, as
never a whit the better. Touching the contents of their answer, (if any such
can be found,) our Libeller tells us, that their answer to my Motives, and
Survey, Page 18.19*20.
is contained in five books. I would once have a sight of it, it is long in
coming. I think it comes as near the matter; as if one should ask, how
far to London; and another should answer, a poke full of Plumbes. For so it
falls out with this Libeller, as partly we have seen already, and more
plainly it will appear hereafter. The dog is a^ London with the lie.
The first book of their supposed answer (says our Libeller,) contains many
of my notable vnvntruthes, corruptions, and falsifications. The second
presents a gallant and desperate fray, betwixt the reformed Minister of
Baskall, and Thomas Bell, Preacher of the word. The third handles a couple
more of extraordinary and choice contradictions. The fourth entreats of the
weak grounds of my works. The fifth and last answers the recapitulatio^ of
my Survey. The Libeller having thus gallantly discovered theirs and his own
treacheries, got bread and cheese, and went laughing away. But soft and fair,
good sir, have once about with you, if ye go but one mile a day. My answer
to this forged tale, of a mere chimericall imagined answer flying in the
air, and congealed in the middle region, stands thus. Page 33.
First, the Libeller protests in sad earnest, that reason is evident, because
he has made choice of a sentence taken out of my Motives, which mightily
galleth and goareth himself; as shall God-willing be seen, when I come the
second book. Thirdly, not What a shameless dealing is this? their consiences
condemn them* their hearts fail them.
but only with my bare recital of the contents of my books. As if they had
said; we will plead for the continuance of our Church after our old wonted
manner; so still to seduce the people, as we have done. But with his grounds,
reasons, and authorities, with which he battereth down our Popes usurped
Primacie, and confuteth our Religion, we will not deal at all.

For, in my recapitulation, I only tell the Reader plainly and briefly, what
I have proved in my whole book; so to help the memory and understanding of
the ignorant. And I pray you (my good friends) is this your manner of
answering? then doubtless, you need not have staid so long simpering upon the
matter. Well, let me have your answer such as it is, about which you have
been buzzing above ten years; and I promise, (if God grant me life and
health,) to return my reply unto it, within the space of one year. Thus much
for the third lie.

The Libeller gageth his credit many ways, and sets it a sale for a souse; so
to work my discredit, if it would or could be brought to pass. These are his
words, Page 19.
he gives them most just cause, to suspect him of playing booty, and that
his heart is still an harbourer of Popery, or at least not replenished with
the lively liquor of the new Gospel. These are his glorious words. It were
enough for his answer, to tell him, that by his own law, his words without
proof, are of no credit at all. But I will answer himself with himself,
Page 9,
and confound him with his own words, and beat him with his own rod. In
another place, Amost palpable contradiction in the Jesuit Parsons words.
he has these words; we make no doubt, but that he mightily enuieth her
felicity, (he means their Romish Church,) and greedily thirsts after her
destruction haec ille. Now, if the Reader will couple and combine the former
sentence, where he impudently avouches, (like a wretched Caterpiller and
bondslaue of Satan,) that I am an harbourer of Popery in my heart; together
with this other, in which he makes it out of doubt, that I thirst greedily the
destruction of their Romish Church; he cannot but see evidently a flat
contradiction, with a manifest lie implied in the same. What will not malice
do?
For I cannot both harbor Popery in my heart, and greedily desire the ruin
thereof. Thus much for the fourth lie. Many other lies he has, which I let
pass of purpose, in regard of brevity. But some of them shall be touched
Obiter, (God willing,) when I come to his supposed answer in my second book.

CHAP. III. Of the Libellers foolish, arrogant, shameless, and senseless
Challenge.
THus writes our shameless and namelesse Libeller; but in the name of Robert
Parsons, Page 14. soft and fair a while, your cooler is at hand.
and the rest of our Jesuits and Iesuited Papists. I challenge this challenging
coward, dare and redare this daring dastard, that he will for the honor of his
cause, the credit of his learning, and defense of his bragging and insolent
looks, labor effectually, that we may in manner aforesaid grapple together.
If he refuse this condition, so reasonable, so just* so indifferent; no
remedy, but I must come upon him, with a law case of Nouerint vniuersi, A
vain and insolent brag, as shall soon appear, God willing.
Be it known unto all men, that the date of his learning is out, his great and
flowing courage daunted, and drawn dry; proclaim him contemptible and
banckrout, having broken with his own dependants and creditors, and expose him
for a iesting-stocke to all Christian people, from generation to generation
world without end. Amen. Again in another place he writes thus; Page 9. 10.
the Minister braggeth and braueth others to disputation, either by word or
writing, and like a desperate coward, Behold a coward in grain. Neither this
Libeller Robert Parso^s, nor any of his crewe, durst now for ten years answer
or accept my challenge, And yet is he bold to call me coward, being himself the
coward indeed.
fears not to fight with any: provided always, that they be far enough off,
and himself out of al danger. haec ille. Then he tells a long tale of the
Coliar of Croyden, of his brethren in Wisbich, and of master Wright;
reproaching me, and charging me with cowardnesse, for that I went not to them.
To which unseasoned challenge and insolent bragges, I answer in this manner.
First, that he is a coward, who being challenged, dares not accept, nor
answer the same; nor he that challenges, if he be ready to perform withal,
whatsoever is contained in his challenge. And consequently, that not my self
am a coward, but our Libeller, and all other English Jesuits and Iesuited
Papists. That they are cowards, it is apparent to the world, seeing they durst
never to this day accept my challenge and offer made unto them; albeit I
offered it at the publication of my first book, to be effected either in
England, or in any other part of Christendom. The Libeller is the coward in
very deed.
This is so clear and evident, that our Libeller grants the same in these
words, Page 11. What a shameless Jesuit as this Libeller? his own words do
condemn him.
was he unwilling to take so long a journey? No just cause of any such
suspicion, when he affirms about the like businesses, with a safe conduct to
repair into any part of Christendom. Thus does he write. Now, let the
indifferent Readers speak the truth, whether my self, or the Jesuits and
Iesuited papists, are truly termed cowardes, I wonder, (before God I speak
it,) that they are not ashamed thus to confound themselves, and to murder their
own souls and bodies desperately, and maliciously, by lying, slaundering, and
couzening tricks. They give manifest signs, that they are given up in
reprobum sensum, and become the children of perdition. Is he a coward, that
offers to come into any part of Christendom, upon the safe conduct of any
Christian king, there to make trial of that which he has written? No
doubtless, O impudent Jesuits, more impudent then impudency is self.
no man in his right wits will say it. Yet we see, that our Libelber affirms
both the one and the other. No, No, their combs are cut, their crests are
fallen, they stand amazed with fear, their spirits rampant are made couchant,
their doom will soon appear. Amen.

Secondly, that the Libellers brethren in Wisbich, and master Wright in the
Clinke, if their courages had not failed them, would have accepted the
challenge, and have requested, that the trial might have been made here in
England; but they had no such desire. Again, the Jesuits might easily have
procured a safe conduct, and so have called me beyond the Seas. And that done,
if I had refused to perform my challenge, they might with reason have
exclaimed against me. But seeing their courages failed them, The Jesuits are
cowards, not daring to defend their popery upon their own soul.
and that they went never about the matter, I may with great reason both
exclaim and declaime against them, and truly tell them all, that they are
cowards indeed.

Thirdly, seeing the Recusants in York refused to talk with me, it gave me
just cause to suspect, that the rest would have done the like; especially
seeing none of them durst undertake to answer the challenge.

Fourthly, the best trial is to be made by writing, the reason is evident, for
sundry respects. First, because the Parties may better consider the matter, and
lay down their conceits more orderly. Secondly, because many men of good
understanding have weak memories. Thirdly, because sundry for their present
wit and excellent memory, are far ouermatches extempore for many learned
men, who indeed are better learned then themselves multis parasangis: Better
learned, Multis parasangis.
Fourthly, because the vulgar people are carried away with sugared words, if they
be delivered with a flowing tongue, howsoever they be void of truth. Fifthly,
because the truth cannot wholly and truly be reported, for that none can write
so fast as words do pass in any disputation. Sixthly, because littera scripta
manet, but words pass as the wind. Many other reasons may be alleged; but
these for this time shall suffice. Lastly, these things notwithstanding, I have
lately sent a book to the press, before the Libellers book came to my hands.
In which book, I have made a new challenge to all English Jesuits and
Iesuited persons, whosoever of them lists and dares to accept the same.
Which challenge contains a full answer to the challenging Libeller,
although I had sent it toward the Press, before I either saw his challenge, or
heard any thing thereof. A new larum to the Jesuits, and to all Iesuited
Popelings.
Which challenge I do at this present renew afresh, and do add this unto
the same, viz. that if the Libeller, or any other Jesuit, or Iesuited English
Papist whosoever, shall have a mind, heart, and courage, with the help and
advise of al other Papists, tagge and ragge, none excepted; to publish in
Print, a direct, just, and full answer, to my book entitled the down fall of
Popery; answering the book directly and fully, The Libellers answering, is
nothing else but a fond kind of fidling.
not omitting the chiefest grounds, foundations, authorities, and reasons, (as
the silly Fiddler and shameless Libeller has done) snatching here a piece,
and there a piece; or if he or they dare not deal with that little book, then
if he, or they, or any of them, shall publish in Print, a direct and full
answer, either to my book of motives, or to my book of ye survey of Popery,
leaving no ground, foundation, authority, or reason unanswered, or if he or
they be afraid to deal with those books; then if he or they, or any of them,
shall publish or cause to be published in print, a direct and full answer in
manner aforesaid, to my least book entitled the hunting of the Romish Fox; and
shall withal put down his name at large, with the usual addition of his
condition, order, or calling, signifying to the world, that he does accept the
challenge or offer: then I promise herewith under my hand, (if God shall grant
me life and health, Make have O Jesuits, and let me have an answer with speed.
to fall down prostrate upon my knees, before the feet of the most mighty,
wise, learned, and religious Monarch, James by Gods holy Ordinance, King of
great Britain, France, and Ireland, and my most gracious Sovereign: then and
there most humbly to request a safe conduct for his safe coming, safe abiding,
and safe returning, that shall accept the challenge in manner aforesaid, and
withal perform the answer in manner aforesaid. And I protest upon my
salvation, to do with a willing mind and cheerful heart so much as in me
lies, Prepare thy self O Jesuit, to fight the combat valiantly.
that the field may be fought valiantly Viua voce, for the due and upright
trial of the controversy with all convenient speed.

CHAP. IIII. Of the Romish Hotch-potch Religion, and the reason of the name.
THe Libeller can not endure to hear that their Religion should be called a
Hotch-potch of Omnigitherum; Page 2.
but after the due explication of the name, the original thereof, and the reason
of the same; he will no question wish in his heart, that he had never urged me
thereunto. The secular seminarie-priestes give this commendation to the
religion of the Jesuits. We desire you (say they) by the mercies of God, to
take heed of novelties and Iesuitisme: for it is nothing, but treachery,
dissimulation, ambition, and a very vizard of most deep hypocrisy. Import
consid. Page 39.
These words are set down in the important considerations.

The Jesuits have provided, that all who come out of Spain, must swear, vow,
profess, or at least acknowledge an obedience to M. Black well in all things;
yea, George Blackwell the new vpstart archpriest.
even to become rank traitors against their prince and country, for that is
principally intended. These words are in the sparing discourse toward the end
of the Epistle.

Now then, the actions of the Jesuits tending so evidently, as they do and
have done, to the ruin, subversion, and overthrow of our prince and country,
both by secret practices and open incursions of Spanish invasions, (as is
manifest both by their own books, letters, and other dealings, O bloody and
traiterous Jesuits.
as well in Ireland as England,) what good subject or true hearted English man,
can do less then disclaim with his mouth, resist with his blood, and open
with his tongue, all such unnatural and treacherous attempts? we are too much
acquainted therewith, and therefore bound to reveal what we know therein, when
it shall be necessary for the preservation of our Prince and country. Reply to
Parsons Libell, Fol. 28.
Al Catholics must hereafter depend upon Blackwell, and Blackwell upon
Garnet, and Garnet upon Parsons, and Parsons upon the devil. These words are
set down in the discovery. Page. 70.

By Parsons platformes, secular priests must depend upon Blackwell, and
Blackwell upon Garnet, and Garnet upon Parsons, and Parsons the priests bastard
upon the devil: and therefore do the Secular Priests pray thus, when they say
the Letanie: A machinationibus Parsoni libera nos Domine, Diseou. Page 70.
From Parsons devilish purposes, O Lord deliver us. These words are set down
in the discovery.

The Jesuits are to be marked out, for the most malicious, traitorous, and
irreligious calumniators that ever lived on earth, unworthy that ever the earth
should bear them; and it is an intolerable indignity to the whole Church of
GOD, that ever such wicked members should live unpunished in her, as they do.
These words are set down, Quodlib. 4. Art. 2. Page 99.

Lo, the Seminary Priests gave the name, Which turns to your eternal shame.
The Jesuits have made Religion, but an art of such as live by their wits, and a
very Hotch-potch of Omnium githerum. Quodlib. 2. Art. 8. Pa. 43. Thus write the
Popes own dear vassals, the Seminary Priests.

In whose words, the Reader may plainly behold, even as clearly as the Sun
shining at noonday, that the Religion which the Jesuits profess, to be termed
a very hotch-potch of Omniumgitherum.

Now, our Jesuits must either pardon me for this name, or else deny the Romish
Religion to be that which they believe and profess. Which if they will say, and
send their affirmance to me: I shall (God willing) shape the^ an answer
speedily, which I suppose, will not please their gravity. But let us proceed a
little further. I have proved by good authority, eue^ by the testimony of
best approved popish Writers: how that the late Romish Religion crept into the
Church by little and little. That Popish Primacie began, in the year 607. That
Priests marriage was never prohibited, till the year 385. In my book of
Survey, else where.
That Popes pardons were never heard of, till the year 1300. That popish
Purgatory took no root in the Romish Church, till the year 250. That Popish
invocation and adoration was not known, till the year 370. And so of the other
parts of late popish religion. I say, (of late popish or Romish Religion,)
because I only impugn the late romish Faith and Doctrine, which the Pope and
his Romish schoolmen have brought into the Church. See my book the downfall,
Page 83. Romans 1.8.
For I willingly grant with Saint Paul, that the old Roman Religion was
Catholic, sound, and pure, and with it do not I contend. And hence it is
apparent to all the world, that the late romish Religion is a patched
Hotch-potch of Omnigitherum; because the Papists dare not answer my proofs,
grounds, foundations, and reasons in that behalf.

I am persuaded in my conscience, (and I think many others are of mine
opinion,) that the Papists sigh, sobbe, groan, and pant at the very heart, so
often as they remember what I have written against them.

CHAP. V Of Bells Apostasy.
1. John 1. Verse. 8.9.10.
THe holy Apostle tells us, that if we deny our sins and our selves to be
sinners, then we deceive our selves, make God a liar, and have not the truth
in us. But on the contrary part, if we acknowledge our sins, then God is
faithful and just, and will forgive us our sins, and cleanse us from all
unrighteousness. Which being true, as it is most true indeed, (for the
spirit of God can not lie,) I do most willingly confess my self to be a
grievous sinner, with David, Matthew, Peter, Paul, and others: and in a godly
sense and meaning, to have committed two kinds of Apostasy. Which as I am
worthy to hear it, so is the Libeller unworthy to vpbraid me with it.

Page. 30. Upon my salvation, I deal truly. Page 59.
In one place, he has these words; Bell pretends great sincerity, like a
true Apostle, and yet like a false Apostara uses it not. In another place, he
has these words: who has as shamefully apostated from his vocation, and
waged war against his mother the church, as ever did that graceless Impe
revolt from his natural allegiance, and took Arms a against his father the
King. He speaks of Absolon, and my self. My answer stands thus.

First, that this Libeller and his brethren the English Jesuits, are most
notorious traitors, and consequently Apostataes, I have proved it at large in
my Anatomy of Popish tyranny. Which book whosoever shall read attentively,
cannot but abhor and detest in his heart, all Jesuits, and Iesuited villainy.
Secondly, that as their Angelical Doctor Aquinas tells them, Tho. Aquinas,
2.2. q. 12 Art. 1. corp.
Apostasy chances three ways: by breaking of Gods precepts, by departing
from Religion which he professed, or the order which he received: And by
departure from the true Christian Faith: and this last only is simply,
properly, and absolutely called Apostasy. I dare not bost of works, but I
appeal to Gods free mercy, for the merits of Christ Jesus.
Whose doctrine in this behalf, I willingly admit; confessing my self to be
an Apostata every day, by breaking Gods holy laws and Commandments, leaving
the Papists to boast of their holy lives and condign merits.

I likewise confess, that I have in a godly sort revolted from that Religion,
which I once did embrace; yet not aplos wholly, but cata ti, that is, from the
corruptions and superstition lately crept into the Romish Church. For so much
thereof, Whatsoever the Romish Church has consonant to the holy Scriptures,
our English Church holds the same.
as is consonant to the holy Scriptures, I still profess, admit, and believe.
I also freely grant, that I have departed from the Popish orders, which I
received in the Romish church; as many worthy, learned, and famous men have
done before me: but this I did only cata ti, not aplos* that is to say in
respect of their superstitious toys and beggarly ceremonies, which are merely
accidental and extrinsecall, and no way intrinsecall or essential to the
thing it self. Where I must needs tell the Papists this one thing, which (I
fear) they will not brook kindly, nor take it in good part. This it is. They
tell us, that their sacrament of Priesthood (as they term it) imprinteth an
indelible Character in the receiver; This is a memorable note
and yet do I avouch it constantly, that neither the Pope himself, nor any
other Popish so supposed Priest, can be assured by an infallible sign, rule,
or proof, that he is a Popish Priest. This I know, will at the first seem a
wonder; but I shall God willing, make it so clear and evident, that every child
may perceive the same; and every Papist sigh, sob, and mourn, when he
remembers it. Mark well gentle Reader, what I shall deliver in this behalf.
The Popish general Council of Florence has these words; Haec omnia sacramenta
tribus perficiuntur; Council. flor. Page. 390.
videlicet rebus tanquam materia, verbis tanquam forma, and persona ministri
conferentis sacramentum, cum intention faciendi quod facit ecclesia. Quorum si
aliquid desit, non perficitur sacramentum.

All these sacraments (Baptism, confirmation, eucharist, penance, extreme
unction, order, and Matrimony) are finished and made perfect with three
things, viz. with the things as with the matter, with the words as with the
form, and with the person of the minister that gives the sacraments, and has
intention to do that which the Church does. Of which three things, if any one
want, the Sacrament is not perfect. Out of these words of this popish general
council, (which by Popish doctrine cannot err) I note this point of great
importance, viz. that none can be a perfect Priest, but he that is made priest
of that Bishop, who had intention to make him a Priest. Now Sir, no mortal
man but the Bishop himself, can tell what intention he had; O miserable
Popery.
and consequently, no Priest, not the Pope himself, can tell and affirm
certainly of himself, that he is a Priest. Hereupon two most lamentable
corollaries, must be inferred of necessity: Alas, alas, for pity. The first,
The 1. coroll.
that the Priest who says Mass, must believe that none but a lawful Priest
can do that function, and withal this must be added, that he neither does,
nor may believe, that himself is a priest. O most wretched, cursed, and
miserable Popery.

The second, that every Priest which says Mass, The. 2. corol.
and every other Papist that hears and is present at the Mass, is bound by
the laws and doctrine of the Romish Church, to believe that y^ which the
Priest lifts up over his head, (which they call the host, O misery of all
miseries in the world.
) is God Almighty, and to adore the same with the honor and service due to
God omnipotent. And if any refuse to do so, he must be burnt with fire and
faggot for an Heretic. To which I must needs add for the vpshot, that if the
Priest which says Mass, want intention to do that which the Romish church
would have done, then the Host (as they term it,) is but a piece of plain
bakers bread, even by plain Popish doctrine; and yet at al adventures, it must
be adored for the everliving God.

Nicolaus de Lyra by name, affirms plainly and resolutely of your Popes.
These are his express words; multi principes, and summipontifices, and alij
inferiores, inue^ti sunt a fide apostatasse Many princes, Lyr. in. cap. 16. Mat.
and popes, and others of inferior calling, are found to have bin Apostataes,
and to have swarued from their faith. Lo, your own Popes have bin Apostataes,
even by the verdict of your best popish Doctors. Much larger proof of this and
other like matters, The Papists dare not touch the maine points of my books,
neither lugges, nor for their guts.

Oh, that I could anyway draw them to answer me directly.


you have in my books published against you and your fellows: But they are
too hot for you; you dare not once touch the^, lest they burn you. Only you
dare snatch at a sentence here and there, which is but spoken obiter, and
seems more easy to be dealt withal. And yet God wot, you do that so
niggardly, and so sparingly* as every child may epsy your cowardnesse in that
kind of proceeding. Marry, in lying, railing, bragging, and impertinent
by-matters, you are too too large and copious. I now have toward that silly
pretensed answer, which you have published against the downe-fall of Popery.

Here ends the first book.
The second Book, of the pretensed answer of the Libeller, against some odd
pieces, and broken periods of my Book, entitled, The downe-fall of Popery.
CHAP. I. Of dissension among Papists.
THE Libeller pretends to answer my book, entitled, The downe-fall of
Popery, and yet he is often fiddling after his best manner, at other impertinent
by-matters: But his fiddling is so untuneable, and his music so full of
discord, as it would make a dog dance to hear him. The Libeller knows not
what to say or do.
He is so afraid to deal with the Downe-fall (lest he chance to slip and
crush his bones) that he roueth in this book and in that book, and never
comes near the mark: he is sometime in my book of Motives, and sometime in
my book of Survey, as a poor Pilgrim that can find no Church, where he
should make his abode to pray. First therefore, I purpose in God, to examine
that little poor thing, (a poor thing indeed, and that will the Reader say
when he hears it) which he has chosen as the chiefest matter for him self
to deal withal, out of my book of Motives. I will deal sincerely; I will ever
allege his express words, and every sentence, word, piece of sentence, and
circumstance which he has laid down in his own behalf. These are his
express words: Many Papists (quoth he) as Aquinas, Richardus, etc. do hold
that a simple Priest, Page 25.
by virtue of the Popes dispensation, may lawfully and effectually minister
their Sacrament of Confirmation. We willingly grant it, as being the most
received and common opinion. Marry sir, you confute your own self: you leave
it not for others so do.
What of all this? But this opinion, says he, is stoutly impugned by other
great Papists, to wit, Bonauentura, Alphonsus, Durandus, Scotus, Mayor, etc. Be
it so, what then? such dissension as this, is without any violation of faith at
all. Mac ill^, Mark my Reply.

The Reply.
I answer; First, in my second book of Motives, and eight chapter, In my
Motyues, chap. 8. art. 12.
I have handled two and thirty articles of dissentions amongst the Papists: all
which I have proved by the testimonies of very learned and famous Popish
writers: among the which 32. articles, this rouing and ranging Iesuitical
Libeller, can find but this one for his purpose. In this very same book, being
the first that ever I published in print against the^, I have impugned and
battered to the ground, ten special articles of popish

de facto, not only as a private person in private opinion; but even as Pope
and public person, and that in his judicial and definitive sentence.



Fourthly, that the Popes dispensations are wicked,

Fifthly, that Kings are above Popes, that their power

This book was extant in print, about 12. years ago. The Jesuits have been long
fiddling and buzzing about some answer to this and my other books; yea, they
have many years ago promised the world, that they would speedily frame an
answer to the same: but while the grass grows (as the common saying is) the
horse dies. My self am now well stricken in years, and by the course of nature,
shortly to go the way of al flesh. They are so nettled, so pricked and goared,
and their religion so battred, with their own best learned Doctors, and most
skillful Proctors, that gladly they would satisfy their Iesuited Popelings, and
wipe away that discredit which hangs at their beards; for which end they use
many coozening tricks, iugglings, and legierdemains, so to stay the outcries
of the people, until I be dead, and then, by your favor, they will come upon
me with good speed: for Canis mortuus non mordet. They dare not (because they
cannot) answer me directly and fully.
But before that day (my life I gage in that behalf) they dare not for their
guts, publish any direct and full answer to my books: I say, any direct and
full answer; because to snatch here a piece, and there a piece, is no answer
at all, but a mere toy for young children to play withal.

Robert Parsons, Parsons penned the libel, but with the instructions of the
best learned Jesuits.
that honest man, if ye will) has picked out of all the two and thirty in
number, (as that with which he thought himself best able to grapple) does
utterly confound him, and strike him dead.

I prove it first, because he grants as much as I desire or affirm; for
these are his words: (We willingly grant it; be it so: what then?) This
forsooth; you grant the dissension among your best Doctors, which is all that
I took upon me to prove. O sweet Jesus! who sees not these Jesuits so
besotted and blinded with malice, that they cannot perceive their own dotage?
They impugn that in one sentence, which they grant in another. Who will not
persuade himself, They do instify my books unwittingly. Who cannot see it?
that my book of Motives (being the first I writ) is most sincerely and
soundly penned? No man can but do it: the reason is evident, because all that
the malicious Jesuit durst impugn, (who no question made choice of his best
advantage) is (by his own confession) as true, as the truth it self: but
(says he) it is no dissension in matters of faith.

Fie, fie, fie; Popery cannot stand, unless it be supported and underpropped
with slanderous lies. He would have his Reader to believe, that I affirmed the
dissension to be a matter of faith: which if I had done, as I did not, yet
would it nothing serve his turn. This is one notorious lie, that I affirmed it
to be a matter of faith.

Where I must needs put him in mind of his coozening tricks, in suppressing
the name of the Pope, with etc. which he did, Lo, Pope Adrian is against Pope
Gregory, in a matter of great importance.
lest the Reader should be dismayed, when he should perceive the Popes own
Doctors, yea, and Pope Adrian himself, (whose name he likewise suppresseth,
as he did the name of Pope Gregory) to withstand the Pope, and to tell him
flatly, that he was a man, and therefore both might err, and erred indeed
egregiously.

Lo, Pope Adrian with sundry learned Papists, taught this doctrine: That none
but Bishops could be the true Ministers of Confirmation.

Pope Gregory with other learned Papists, taught the contrary doctrine, and
put the same in execution.

Iosep. Aug. in 4. s. P. 1. Page 81. Bellarm. de matrimonio, col. 1259.
Pope Gregory, Alexander, Paludanus, and Bellarminus, hold it for a constant
doctrine, that Confirmation ministered per Sacerdotem simplicem (by a single
Priest, which is no Bishop) so he have the Popes dispensation, is a true
Sacrament of their popish church. But Pope Adrian, a very learned man indeed,
and Durandus a famous Schoole-doctor, hold Confirmation so ministered, to be no
Sacrament at all.

If this be not a dissension of importance, and touching popish faith, let the
indifferent Reader judge: for the silly vulgar people must believe, Here is
fast and loose, a sacrament and no sacrament, as pleases the Pope.
that their children being confirmed after the popish manner, have received a
Sacrament; and yet says Pope Adrian, and Bishop Durand, that it is no
Sacrament at all.

I therefore conclude, that the Libeller is a notorious liar; and that the
doctrine contained in my Motives, is so sound, true, and sincere, as no
Jesuit, or Iesuited Papist, can by any means gaynsay any thing contained in
the same.

CHAP. II. Of the marriage of Priests.
ABout three years ago, Robert Parsons, that scurrilous Libeller and traytrous
Jesuit (who will affirm or deny any thing, as his own dear brethren the
secular Priests write of him) published a sca^dalous and railing libell, which
he termed a Detectio^, etc. in which libel he finds himself grieved, for the
books which I have written against their Popes, and their late Romish Religion;
for which respect he frames himself this way, that way, and every way, to
find out some fit matter against me, and so to be aue^ged of me. At the last,
he has stu^bled on a silly so supposed contradiction, in my book of the Survey
of Popery. This Detectio^ was written and published in the year 1602. and my
Survey in the year 1596. so that my Survey had the^ bin in their hands 6.
whole years: howbeit, after so many years, For the space of six years, they
have espied but one only supposed co^tradiction in one book, and nothing in all
the rest*
they can find nothing at all in it, saving one only contradiction falsely so
supposed: and yet the seeking out of it has so troubled them, that they were
enforced to huddle up and mingle together three several places far distant one
from another: which supposed contradiction, if it were as they falsely imagine,
would be too dear of one quatryne. If they could have picked out of the said
Survey, or my Motives, or my Hunting of the Romysh Fox (all which three were
published long before their Detection) any one thing of moment, they would not
for very shame have published in a printed book, They never deal with any
matter of importance, but either with pieces of sentences, or else with
by-matters, and impertinent stuff.
such a silly objection as this. Now in the year 1605. an other Libeller in his
Forerunner (which runs as speedily as a Snayle after the truth) has ripped
up the same quarrel again; so to be avenged upon the poor book, for the
masters sake: which book they found so fortified with strong Bulwarks, and so
environed with invincible Rampires, that neither the brazen-faced Detector, nor
this shameless Libeller was able to pick out any fitter matter for them to
work upon, then one only silly so supposed objection: I say (so supposed)
because it is none indeed, as shall, God willing, be proved out of hand.

Survey, page 193.
In one place of my Survey, I affirm the Bishops of Rome to have bin very godly
men, till S. Austens time, and long after him. Page 228.
In another place for all that, I do charge Pope Siricius to have published
wicked doctrine: P. 488.
and in the third place, I charge Pope Sozimus to have falsified the Council
of Nice.

It appears the Survey contains most sound doctrine in it seeing nothing
can be reproved therein, but one silly, and that falsely imagined co^tradiction.
This is all that our two Jesuits, the one after the other, can say against my
Survey, after their many years studies how to pick a quarrel against the same.
They are neither content, that I commend their good Bishops of old time, nor
yet that I set before their eyes, the bad dealing of their Bishops of later
days. A man would think, that they would rather have employed their wits,
industry and learning, to have purged their Popes from most heinous sins
imputed to them, viz. from the publishing of false doctrine, and from the
falsifying of the famous general Council of Nice.

These matters and these most execrable sins they do not once touch, These
most detestable facts should have been defended: but, alas, they cannot answer
my books.
but smoothely pass them over with deep silence: and yet (as the common
saying is) Qui tacet, consentire videtur. The truth is (as every child may
easily perceive) that the crimes objected and imputed to their Popes, cannot be
defended, nor yet any other matter, point, or article of doctrine or manners,
which I have published against the late Romish religion.

Well, since it will be no otherwise, let us view what they say of the
supposed contradiction. I replied in my Counterblast, See my Cou^terblast,
chap. 4.
to the answer of E. O. or to Robert Parsons, where, by six several
answers, I showed the supposed contradiction to be none at all. It shall now
suffice, to allege one of them, which is the answer of their Cardinal
Bellarmine, in another like subject; viz. that it is the manner of the
scripture, so to speak of many, as of all. And therefore did I very modestly and
honestly, commend the old Bishops of Rome for very godly men; because sundry
of them were holy Martyrs (about the number of 30. after S. Peter) and diverse
others were good men, and taught the same doctrine which S. Peter had done
before them: yet our silly Libeller, beholding, as in a glass of cristall, not
his own shame and confusion only, but of his brethren the Jesuits, and of the
whole rabble of Papists in like manner, to be concluded by the general
judgment of the whole world, unless they did answer the books which I have
published against them, and their superstitious, idolatrous, and plain
Antichristian Romish religion, deemed it the best course for himself, In my
Counterblast, chap. 4.
and for the safeguard of the life of their mouse-eaten and rotten Popery, to
let pass untouched my Reply to Parsons his fellow Jesuit, and to set abroach
some new foolish and odd conceit, so to keep the peoples heads occupied: for
their only drift and shift is this, to seduce the people with coozening tricks
of their counterfeit legierdemain, See the story in my Anatomy.
as they dealt with Sebastian, the late King of Portugal.

Well, what says he? Forsooth, that I have charged the Jesuit E. O. or (if ye
will have it so) Robert to be a liar. This is my answer: First, that I see not
how I can offend in calling him a liar, to who^ the zealous Papists, the
secular Priests, give this Epitheton, as being his proper and peculiar Badge,
that he has a brazen face, and will affirm or deny any thing.

viz. that he set down his own words in stead of mine, and with lying lips
affirmed them to be mine: thus does he write: Pope Siricius (as Thomas Bell
affirms) was seduced by Satan, published wicked doctrine, Survey page 228.
and taught the flat doctrine of the devil. These are the express words of E.
O. in his Detection.

Mat. 19.^.11.12. Heb. 13.4. 1. Tim. 4.3. (...). Apo^^.
But these are my express words in my Survey: After that Christ had granted
marriage for all men, appoynting all such to use it for an wholesome medicine,
as wanted the gift of continency: after that S. Paul had pronounced freely
marriage to be lawful in all sorts of men: after that the Apostles had
decreed, that neither Bishops, Priests, nor Deacons, should leave the company
of their wives, under pretense of Religion: after that many holy Bishops,
Priests, and Deacons, had lived laudably in the church, and had the help of
holy wedlock above three hundred eighty and five years (all which I have
already proved) then one Siricius advanced to the Popedom, in the year three
hundred eighty five, seduced by Satan, published wicked doctrine, and
prohibited marriage as an unlawful thing. So then, E. O. omitting my words
(and prohibited marriage as an unlawful thing) and placing these words for
them, (and taught the flat doctrine of the devil) declared himself to be a
liar, and the child of the devil; let the Reader judge. No English Jesuit, or
Iesuited Papist in Christendom (this is a big word) dare send me a full and
direct answer to those 2. chapters of Priests marriage, in my book of
Survey, I fear, I must not live to see any full and direct answer. I forsake
my part of heaven, if I do not great^y desire to see it.
I mean the 3. and 4. chapters of the third part, and make due trial of his
answer when he has done. I dare and redare all English Jesuits and Iesuited
Papists whosoever and whersoeuer, to let me have their speedy answer, and the
acceptance of this challe^ge, in such manner as is required in the former
challe^ge. They have now 2. several times assaulted my book of Survey, and
have fought the combat with one silly so supposed co^tradiction, set down in
the 3. chapter of Priests marriage; they therefore cannot for shame refuse the
acceptance of this challenge.

I do require but an answer to two only chapters of my said book of Survey,
where the dealing of Pope Siricius is handled at large; and doubtless, if they
dare not answer two chapters of one only book, (because they cannot perform
the same) much less dare they answer the whole book of my Survey; They will
answer if they can, no question to the contrary.
and least of all dare they frame, set forth, and publish to the view of the
world, a direct and full answer to all my books: No, no, they dare never do
such an act, dum spiritus hos alit artus; what they dare do when I am dead, I
know not. Let us now proceed to the Downe-fall of Popery, and view how the
libelling Jesuit does underprop and stay the same from falling.

CHAP. III. Of a terrible Monster without both head and foot.
THE scurrilous Libeller, that noisome Caterpiller, having perused my whole
book of the Downe-fall of Popery, has picked out five things only of the
least importance, with the which his courage served him to grapple: yet like a
toothlesse dog that cannot bite, The Jesuit is a toothlesse dog.
he does but snatch here and there at my shoe-heeles, grinning and barking as
a mad curre. One article that book has of unwritten Popish traditions,
containing about eight and twenty whole leaves, four propositions, and four
conclusions, with sundry objections, solutions and much other matter of great
importance. This notwithstanding, O poor Libeller, I pity thy case!
the silly Libeller (alas for pity) has made choice, not of one sentence, but
of one only piece of one sentence: to what end and purpose, let the Reader
judge; for it passes my skill to divine. Dauus sum, non Oedipus.

These are his express words: Many Papists, quoth he, Page 49.
are so blinded and besotted with unsavory traditions, and superstitious
illusions, that they deem it a greater sin to eat flesh in Lent, then to
commit adultery, murder, or perjury.

This is all that the Libeller has against my book, touching the 5. things
whereof he made his choice. If it be demanded, to what end he brought this
patch or piece of one only sentence? I answer, as before in the title of the
chapter, that it is a monster without either head or foot, and so above my
reach. Quae supra nos, nihil ad nos. My sentence, Page 130.
being a part of the proof of my fourth proposition, begins thus: Another
co^trouersy touching traditions, etc. A most notorious corruption, which
shows the Libeller to be the child of the Devil.
It contains nine whole lines, whereof he omitted almost five, together with
the word (yea;) which word did intimate unto him, that his words were
respective, and had relation unto that which went before: yet he of purpose
omitted it, because it would not serve his turn, but have marred his game. But
does he say nothing for himself? Truly he says something, but it is scarce
worth the rehearsal. The substance is this; That I have uttered a notable
untruth, and brought nothing to support it, but mine own bare word. Mere
by-matters, and impertinent toys.
Much railing stuff he has of Precisians, of a Winters morning lecture
practiced in the Family of love, and of one that was drowned, etc. which things
being altogether impertinent, I let pass as foolish toys, and leave them to
himself. For the proof of

Secondly, that things known by experience, must

In the Anatomy of Popish tyranny, page 107.43.37.2^.
if we call to mind, what the Seminary Popish Priests have written against the
Jesuits. They charge the Jesuits to take pleasure in murdring Princes; to have
murdered Henry the third, King of France; to have suborned York, Williams,
Squire, and sundry others, to lay their violent hands upon Queen Elizabeth,
late Queen of England of happy memory. Piercie the Jesuit escaping from
Wisbich, Vbi super page 25.
is charged to have taken fraudulently from Benefactors abroad, fifty seven
pounds, seventeen shillings; and the year after to have stolen twenty seven
pounds of the common money, by the consent of the other his fellow-Iesuites.

An other Jesuit is charged to have taken at times, above five hundred pounds
that was given to the imprisoned Priests then at Wisbich, Page 24.
and to have employed the same at his own pleasure. The Jesuits are charged
to affect rule over the Secular Clergy, Page 21.
so to bring arms and conquest into the Church, contrary to all scriptures;
and to that end, to manage matters of State more Machauisianly, then Machiauel
himself: yea, the learned Papists of France (in their Catechism translated
into English by the seminary priests) affirm Henry Sammier of Luxenburge,
Lib. 3. cap. 11. fol. 162
that notable Jesuit, to have dealt as ordinarily with Dice, Cards, and women,
as with his prefixed hours of prayer.

Much other like stuff I might easily bring against our Jesuits, At the next
Mart, they shall hear from me ex abundanti, if they bring any new wares.
but let this content them until the next Mart: and yet forsooth, our Jesuits
(who deal so familiarly with murders, theft, cards, dice, women, and
coozenage) will in no wise without the Popes dispensation, eat an egg or a
piece of cheese in Lent: so scrupulous they are in the one, and so licencious
and prodigal in the other.

So Austens testimony is sufficient in this behalf, whose words are these:
August. Ep. 119. ad Ianuar, in five.
Sed hoc nimis doleo, quia multa quae in diuinis libris saluberrima praecepta
sunt, minus curantur, and tam multis prasumptionibus sic plena sunt omnia, vt
grauius corripiatur, qui per octauas suas terram nudo pede tetigerit, quam qui
m^ntem vinolentia sepelierit.

But this I greatly lament, that many things commanded most wholesomely in the
holy scriptures, are not regarded; and all things so replenished with
presumptions, that he is more severely reproved, who with his bare foot
touches the ground within his Octaues, then he that lies drunk in the
street. So then, it is apparent to all such as have eyes to see, that many are
more scrupulous to do against a superstitious observation, then to transgress
Gods holy precepts. Well, if the Libeller durst to have but once touched the
substance of any one article in the Downfall of Popery, The Libeller durst not
deal with any important matter.
I should have turned him vpside down, and wholly out of his skin: which thing
he so feared indeed, that he durst not deal but by snatches and patches, by
slaundering, lying, coozening, and iuggling.

CHAP. IIII. Of Cardinal Bellarmines opinion and doctrine.
IN the seventh Article, handled in the Downe-fall of Popery, the second
proposition is contained in these express words:

All persons, of what sex, state, or condition soever they be, may lawfully,
and ought seriously to read the holy Scriptures; as out of which, even the
simplest of all may gather so much as is necessary for their salvation. This I
say, against that Popish, ridiculous, unchristian, and very pestilent abuse,
where the Pope delivers to the people, as it were by way of Apostolical
tradition, the Scriptures, Sacraments, and Church-seruice, in a strange tongue
to them unknown: which to be flatly against the practice of the primitive
Church, I have proved copiously in my book of Survey. Here therefore I will
only show, that it is both lawful and necessary for all sorts of people, that
desire to attain eternal life, to read diligently the holy Scriptures.

This is the proposition with the reason of the same, being of 4. there
handled, the second in number. Which proposition I have there proved at large,
by the plain testimony of S. Chrysostom, Origin, S. Austen, S Hierome,
Theodorite, and Cardinal Bellarmine. Now, The Libeller, dares not for his
gut^ deal with the matter but by snatches only. Page 113.114.115.
the libelling Jesuit not daring to deal with the proposition, and the strong
bulwarks, with the which it is environed and fortified, snatcheth at the second
allegation out of Bellarmine, omitting the former, which gave light and
evidence to the latter. In the Downfall of Popery, my words against Bellarmine
are these: The Jesuit Bellarmine (a wonderful thing to be heard, and almost
incredible, saving that the truth must needs in time have the upper hand)
confesses so much unawares, as is able sufficiently to prove and conclude my
intended scope and proposition. These are his express words: His notatis* etc.
These obseruatio^s being marked, I answer, that all those things were written
by the Apostles, which are necessary for all men, and which the Apostles
preached openly to all the vulgar people; but that all other things were not
written.

Thus writes our skilful Jesuit, who in the name of all Papists (being as it
were their mouth) faith all that can be said, in defense of late Romish
religion: out of

Iesuitisme is the newest and the proudest sect of all.
but secretly to some few persons in secret corners; peradventure to our
Jesuits and Iesuited Popelings, saving that their sect was not then hatched, as
which is not yet 80. years old. Fourthly, that those

Fifthly, that seeing on the one side, al things needeful they may safely
contemn all unwritten traditions, as nothing needful or pertaining to them.
But let us hear our Cardinall-Iesuite once again speak for himself, and for
the honor of his holy father the Pope.

These are his express words: At in nouo, etc. But in the new Testament,
because Christ has fulfilled the figures and the prophesies; although many do
not understand the sentences of the Scriptures, yet do they understand the
mysteries of our Redemption, even the Country fellows, and the very women.

Thus writes our Jesuit, affirming that even women, and the very Rusticks of
the Country, do understand the Scriptures, so far forth as pertayneth to
the mysteries of their Redemption. And I pray you, why then does the Pope
debar them from the reading thereof? What more knowledge is needful, over
and besides the mysteries of man's Redemption? 1. Cor. 2.2^
It is all the knowledge which S. Paul desired to have: who (as he says of
himself) esteemed not to know any thing among them, save Jesus Christ, and him
crucified.

I therefore conclude, by our Jesuits own free grant, that it behooves all
men and women, children, and maids, diligently to read the holy Scriptures,
seeing they may understand therein all the mysteries of their Redemption; viz.
all knowledge necessary for their salvation. Which knowledge is so necessary,
as nothing can be more.

Deuteronomy. 11.18, 19, 20.
Ye (says God by the mouth of his servant Moses) shall lay up these my words in
your heart, and in your soul, and shall bind them for a sign upon your hand,
that they may be a frontlet between your eyes: and ye shall teach them your
children, speaking of the^ when thou sit in thy house, Deuteronomy. 6.8, 9 Deuteronomy.
4.9.
and when thou walk by the way, and when thou lie down, and when thou
risest up, and thou shall write them upon the posts of thy house, and upon thy
gates. But our Papists object against us, that when the fathers exhort all men
and women to read the scriptures, they speak then as Pulpit-men agreeably to
their audience, and the peoples default, Rhem. Test. (...) Pref. sec. ^5.
but not as Readers in the school, making exact and general rules to be
observed at all times and in all places. To which I answer; First, that the
truth must viz that the Pulpit has ever the prick of exhortation annexed,
which the school wants. For the Preacher may not speak at randon in the
Pulpit, but even there must he have the girdle of truth about his David
regarded no such popish distinction, Psa. 119.9.
when asking, whereby a young man shall cleanse his ways? He answers thus; By
study, meditation, and keeping of the law of God. Neither the godly men of
Berhaea, when they daily searched the Scriptures, Act. 17.11
even to examine the doctrine of the Apostles by them. Our Papists object
likewise, that S. Paul will have women to live in silence, 1. Tim. 2.12.
and not to chat and prattle of the scriptures. I answer, that though S. Paul
will not permit women to teach publicly before men, yet does he neither forbid
the^ to read the Scriptures, nor yet to teach privately, when due circumstances
do occur: Tit. 2.3.
for the same Apostle elsewhere commands mothers, to teach godly things to
their children. So Solomon, Prou. 31* 1.
the wisest child that ever was among the sons of Adam, one Christ ever
excepted, confesses plainly and humbly, what doctrine his mother Bathsheba
taught him. So Priscilla, wife to Aquila the Jew borne in Pontus, expounded the
Scriptures to the Jew Apollo borne at Alexandria, Act. 18.26*
a very eloquent man. So Timothy was thoroughly instructed in the Scriptures, by
his mother Eunice, 2. Tim. 1.5. 2. Tim. 3.15.
and by his grandmother Lois. By which notable examples, it is evident and
clear to every one, that neither mothers must forbear to teach, nor yet young
babes forbear to learn the holy Scriptures.

These be the things which I concluded out of Bellarmine, The Libeller is a
corrupter and false accuser.
and therefore may I justly call the Libeller a silly divine, and a most false
accuser: when he omitting the latter half of the words which I cited out of
Bellarmine, tells me, that I belly Bellarmine. But how does he prove it?
Truly, if the man were not either given up in reprobum sensum, or past all
shame, he would never for shame deal so childishly, in matters of such
importance.

He belyeth Bellarmine (says our Libeller:) he says not, that women and
rustickes do understand the Scriptures, so far forth as pertains to the
mystery of their Redemption. Nay, he says the contrary in the words by him
alleged. Although many, quoth he, understand not the sentences of the
Scriptures. In which number, I think Rusticks and women must be contained. If
then they understand not the sentences of the Scriptures, as Bellarmine
affirms, how do they understand the Scriptures, so far forth, as pertains
to the mysteries of their Redemption?

Thus reasons our Libeller, or more truly said; thus prateth our insolent
Sycophant, thus babbleth our false accuser: for, when he has corrupted
Bellarmine, nipping and cutting the sentence asunder, citing only the fore
part, and omitting the latter, which would soon have discovered his falsehood;
O shameless corrupter! where is thy honesty?
he forthwith tryumpheth, as though he had the victory: But if a very child do
but join the latter part of the sentence, which he omitted like a coozener and
deceitful Sycophant, to the former; he shall behold as clearly as the Sun
shining at noone tide, the victory to be on my side.

Bellarmines words are these, says the Libeller; Although many understand not
the sentences of the Scriptures: And then he cries out, that Bellarmine says,
they do not understand the mysteries of their Redemption in the Scriptures.
But here is plain legierdemaine, and deep coozenage, even coozenage in
grain: for Bellarmines words are these: But in the new Testament, Mark for
Christ's sake.
because Christ has fulfilled the figures and prophesies, although many do
not understand the sentences of the scriptures, yet do they understand the
mysteries of our redemption, even the common country fellows and women. Thus
writes Bellarmine* whose words, because they give a deadly wou^d to Popery,
our libelling Jesuit, Bellarmines brother in profession, not daring to reject
his doctrine, cites (as the Reader may easily behold) only the mids of the
sentence. First, he omitteth the former part, which contains the reason; that
is to say, these words; But in the new Testament, because Christ has fulfilled
the figures and the prophesies. Behold a very knave in grain.
Then he cutteth away the last part, which ministers the true sense and
meaning, that is to say, these words; Yet do they understand the mysteries of
our Redemption, even the rusticks and women. Who would not be ashamed, thus to
mangle a sentence which is in controversy? If I were a Papist, this kind of
dealing would cause me to renounce Popery.

Although they understand not the sentences of the Scriptures, says
Bellarmine: Popery must needs be underpropped with coozenage.
and there the Libeller rests himself, because he was wearied in hearing the
truth; yet do they understand the mysteries of our redemption, even the
country fellows and women. So then, 3. things must be observed; First, that
there is Bellarmine affirms it in very plain terms, and express words.
Secondly, that there

Bellarmine does not say at all, that the common people do not understand the
Scriptures, but the sentences of the Scriptures; which doubtless was not done
of him, but for some end and purpose: for he might sooner have said, They
understand not the Scriptures, then the sentences of the Scriptures.

Two things therefore are most evident in Bellarmine: first, that the
Scriptures are so obscure in many places thereof, that the common people do
not understand the sentences therein contained. Secondly, that sundry places of
the Scriptures are so plain and manifest, that the very country fellows and
women do understand the same, and the things therein contained are called of
Bellarmine, the mysteries of our Redemption.

The former observation, the Libeller does willingly admit; Tom. 1. col. 129.
and the latter, I shall prove out of Bellarmines Bellarmine answering to the
ninth argument, touching the difference between the old and new Testament,
affirms plainly the difference to be this: viz. that in the old Testament,
the people did neither understand the sentences of the Scriptures, nor yet the
mysteries of Christ. But in the new Testament, it is far otherwise: where
though the people understand not the sentences of the Scriptures (generally)
yet do they understand Bellarmine expounds his own meaning in his answer to
the sixth argument, where he has these express words: Quaedam reperiuntur
obscurissima, Tom. 1. col. 128.
quae nunquam in tota scriptura explicantur, vt magnapars Apocalypsis,
principium and finis Ezechielis, etc. Some things are found most obscure, which
are never explicated in the whole Scriptures, as a great part of the
Revelation, the beginning and the end of Ezechiel, etc. Now, Mark this point
well: for it is all that I desire.
when Bellarmine affirms but some special things only to be obscure, every
child can easily discern, that he grants many things to be plain and
manifest. And Bellarmine says nothing, but that which S. Augustine said long
before Bellarmine was borne, in far more plain and manifest terms. These are
his express words: In his, Aug. de doctr. Christ. lib. 2. cap. 9.
n^qua aperte in scriptura posita sunt, inueniuntur illa omnia, quae continent
fidem moresque viuendi: for in those things, which are plainly set down in the
holy Scripture, are found all things concerning faith and manners: which thing I
have proved so largely and substantially in the Down-fal of Popery, not only
by the testimony of S. Austen in many places of his works, but also of S.
Hierome, S. Chrysostom, S. Theodorite, and others, that all the English
Jesuits and Iesuited Papists in Europe, dare not once oppugn the same, by
publishing any direct answer thereunto: so as every article, conclusion, and
proposition therein contained, may truly be called ( Noli me tangere;) because
they dare not for ten thousand millions of gold, once touch the same fully and
directly.

Thirdly, that the same Bellarmine grants freely and willingly, that many
sentences of the Scriptures are most plain and easy. These among many others,
are his own words; Quid. n. facilius, qua^, diliges proximum tuum? Tom. 1.
col. 126. d.
for what is more easy, the^, thou shall love thy neighbor? Yea, a thousand
histories, as S. Chrisost. says, are contained in the Scriptures, which the
meanest and simplest cannot but understand. Which thing our Jesuit Bellarmine
did truly observe, Vbisuper, col. 128, d.
when he affirms the same S. Chrysostom, where he says the Scriptures are
easy to be understood, to speak only of the history and such like things. So
then, our sottish and doltish Jesuit may go sighing and sobbing to his
brethren, and tell the^ in sad earnest, that it is better for him to sit still,
then to rise up and fall, as he has already done.

CHAP. V. Of the condign merit of works.
THE Libeller has so long pleased himself in his coozening tricks, and in his
bewitching of the simple and ignorant Papists; that he bosteth thereof, and
presumes to prevail unto the end: but by the power of God, I shall prove him
such a noddy before I leave him, that all the world will deem him worthy to
wear in his forhead a cox-combe for his foolishnes, and on his back, a
fox-tayle for his badge. Disputing, Page 43. In lib. 2. sent. p. 150. The
Libeller falsifieth my w^rdes.
says our shameless Libeller, against the condign merits of works, he cites
this sentence of a Catholic writer, Josephus Angles: Eodem etiam modo, etc. as
other holy Doctors also, considering after the same manner, the natural value
only of good works, and perceiving that it is exceeding far distant from the
value and just estimation of eternal life, said wisely, That our works are not
meritorious nor worthy of eternal life: yet for the covenant and promise made
unto us, the good works of man with the help of grace, are worthy of eternal
life, and equal with it: which for all that, that promise of God which is
frequent in Scripture, set aside, were altogether unworthy of so great a
reward. Thus does the shameless Libeller recite my words; and that done, he
proceeds in this manner, in these words: Although nothing be contained
hurtful to Catholic doctrine, yet Bell by his Alchymisticall art of changing
truth into falsehood, can gather out matter sufficiently against us. Now mark
the answer, and both his knavery and folly will appear.

The Answer.
I answer; first, that Robert Parsons that traiterous Parsons is a most
notorious liar, and corrupter of the Doctors*
and malicious corrupter of my Authors. I prove it, because in the very
beginning of that only Doctors words, (of whom Parsons made choice before all
the rest,) he has changed the first word, which he perceived to strike him
dead, and to give the Pope a mortal wou^d: for where the Popish Friar and
Bishop Josephus Angles, has these words, (All other holy Doctors;) the
Libeller has these words, (As other holy Doctors,) placing the word (as) for
the word (all.) What a treachery is this? Parsons commits the murder, and
charge an other man with the fact.

He calls another man thief, and is the thief himself.
He tells me of changing truth into falsehood, which he neither is, nor ever
shall be able to prove; and yet does himself change so much truth into
falsehood, and use so many coozening tricks, as I am very weary in relating a
small part thereof. All other holy Doctors, says Josephus Angles; As other holy
Doctors, Ioh. 8.44.
says Parsons. Diabolus mendax est, and pater eius. Parsons our shameless
liar and impudent Libeller, not able to endure the sound of their holy Friar
and reverend Bishop, when he affirms all holy Doctors to be against their
holy Pope, Behold a most shameless, and most malicious corruption.
and his late Romish religion, deemed it his best course, to change the word
(all) into the word (as;) that so the Reader might be bewitched with his
legierdemaine, and not able to behold the truth. But Josephus Angles tells us
plainly, that all other holy Doctors teach the very same doctrine.

Mark well (gentle Reader) for Christ's sake, and for the saving of thine own
soul: for (my life and my soul I dare gage in this quarrel) the Jesuit is
at his non plus, condemned in his own conscience, and never able to defend the
cause, which he has taken in hand.

The Papists are so impudent, that they affirm their late Romish religion to
be the old Religion, and Catholic doctrine. And with this most shameless and
impudent asseueratio^, they have a long time seduced and bewitched a great part
of the Christian world.

But this very question of condign merits of works, (which the Libeller
snatched at, but durst not for his lugges answer directly to it) will make
their coozening tricks and their legierdemaine so manifest, and so unfold their
iuggling, and so lay open the nakedness of late Popery; that all the world may
perceive the doctrine which I deliver, (which is also the doctrine of the
Church of England) to be not the new Religion (as many silly souls do think;
This is proved in my book of Survey at large.
) but the old Roman Religion, from which the late Bishops of Rome by little and
little have swarued, and the true ancient Catholic faith. The doctrine (which
the Church of England maintayneth, and my self defends) is not a new Religion
(as the Papists falsely bear the world in hand;) but the old, ancient,
Christian, Catholic, Roman Religion; reformed, refined, and purged from
superstitions, errors, and heresies, which by peecemeale have crept into the
Church. Would God the Papists durst once answer my books directly, They dare
not answer directly.
that so the combat for the trial of this controversy might be foughten
valiantly. But they are cowards, they dare not do it. Secondly, that when the
Libeller says, The Libeller dares not deal with the whole sentence, but
snatcheth at a piece.
) he shows himself to be an impudent liar, with a shameless brazen face. For
Josephus Angles does not only tell the Pope, (and in him all his popish vassals)
that the best works of all, considered in their own nature and natural value,
are unworthy of eternal life: but also (mark well my words) that the best
works of all, even with the help of Gods grace, and the assistance of the holy
Ghost, are altogether unworthy of eternal life, if Gods promise and free
acceptance be set apart. Where I wish the reader to mark seriously these
words, prorsus indigna, altogether unworthy, which are not mine, but the
Friars, and are most emphaticall against the late Romish Religion. I proved
this point of doctrine, both by the Scriptures, fathers, The Libeller and all
his fellows, are cowards.
and best approved Popish writers; yea, even by the verdict of Cardinal
Bellarmine himself. But the Libeller durst not adventure to encounter me, and
to grapple with my doctrine. I will now add some few sentences out of
Bellarmine, which before I did not At vt bono operi debeatur merces ex iustitio,
Bellarm. Tom. 3. col. 1285.
conuentio vel promissio necessaria est. non. n. tenetur vnus alterius
obsequium acceptare, nisi co^uentio interuenerit. Deus autem non promisit
mercedem vita aeternae, nisi per Christi gratia^ regeneratis et adoptatis. But
that reward be due of justice to good works, a covenant or promise is
necessary: for one is not bound to accept the service of another, unless there
be a covenant: But God promised not the reward of eternal life, save only to
the regenerate through the grace of Respondeo, absolute non posse hominem a Deo
aliquid exigere cum omnia sint ipsius; Bellarm. Tom. 3. col. 1298.
tame^ posita eius voluntate and pacto, quo non vult e^^gere a nobis opera
nostra gratis, sed mercedem reddere iuxta proportionem operu^, vere possumus ab
eo mercede^ exigere; quomodo seruus non potest absolute a Domino suo vllum
praemium postulare, cum omnia quae seruus acquirit, Domino suo acquirat: tamen
si Domino place at donare illi opera sua, and pro ijsdem tanquam sibi non
debitis mercedem promittere, iure mercedem pro suis operibus postulabit. I
answer, that man cannot absolutely require any thing of God, seeing al things
are his; yet seeing his pleasure and covenant is such, that he will not require
our works of us for nothing, but will reward us in proportion of our works, we
may truly require reward of him; like as a servant cannot absolutely require
any reward of his master, seeing all things which he gains are his masters:
yet if it be his masters pleasure to give him his labors, and for the same as
not due unto him, to promise reward, he may justly require wages for his
works. The third sentence; Sed facilis est responsio. Nam Bellarm. Tom. 3. col.
1303.
quia nihil vlli debet absolute, sed solum ex promissione et dono suo. Pari
ratione dicimus Deo, Read, quia promisisti; no^ dicimus, Read, quia
accepisti; quoniam fundamentu^ primu^ debiti diuini, non in opere nostro, sed
in eius promissione consistit. But the answer is easy: for God is said to pay
debts, Who sees not the truth of the question?
being dettor to none; because he owes nothing to any absolutely, but only in
respect of his free gift and promise. In like manner we say to God, Give,
because thou have promised; we say not, Give, because thou have received: for
the chief foundation of Gods debt, does not consist in our work, but in his
promise. The fourth sentence; Primu^ igitur, opera iustoru^, remoto pacto
Bellarm. Tom. 3. col. 1300. Super cap. 14. in 2. ratione.
non esse meritoria vitae aeternae ex co^digno sieve ex iustitia, ita vt non
possit deus sine iniustitia talem negare mercede^, satis probatu^ est.
scriptura, siquidem et patres, vbicu^que dicunt deum fidele^ esse et iustu^ in
reddendo praemio, semper aut fere semper mention^ faciunt promissionis. First
therefore, it is proved sufficiently, that the works of the just, Gods covenant
and promise set apart, are not meritorious of eternal life condignely and
justly, so as God cannot deny such reward without injustice: for the scripture
and the fathers, whensoever they say, God is faithful and just in rendering
reward; do ever, or almost ever, make mention of his promise.

Out of these assertions of our Jesuitical Cardinal Bellarmine, Popery is
stricken dead.
I observe these golden lessons against the Pope, to who^ the book was
dedicated, against Popery it self, and against all popish and Iesuited
vassals. The Papists are stricken dead, by the verdict of their dearest Jesuit.
and brings the Pope to his funeral,) that both the Scripture and the
fathers, do either ever, or almost ever make mention of Gods promise,
whensoever they tell us, that God is faithful and just in rewarding men for
their works; and that they so do, for this end and purpose; that man may know
there is no reward due unto his works, for any merit, condignity, or
worthiness inherent in his best work; but only and solely for that promise,
which God of his free mercy made unto him in Christ Jesus.

All this is most plainly and fully contained in the 4. sentence out of our
Romish Cardinal Bellarmine. Bury the Pope, interre him, sing Placebo for his
soul: for he is dead vndoubted^y. Page 45. Lo, he hops to prevail, by
corruption and deceytfull dealing.
Read it, gentle Reader, again and again; peruse it, volue it, reuolue it,
think upon it when thou risest, and when thou go to bed, and never forget it
til thy lives end. Now, let us proceed and see, how gallantly the Libeller
answers me. These are his words; The fathers (says Bell) out of the
testimony of Josephus confess, that good works, according to their natural
value, be not meritorious of eternal life. What is that against us? do not al
Catholics grant as much, when they acknowledge that they receive all their
efficacy of working from Gods grace? which doctrine of ours he may learn out
of the Council of Trent, where it is handled at large. Now mark my Reply.

The Reply.
I answer, The Libeller is more shameless then the devil of hell.
and I wish the Reader to mark well my words, and to judge of them
indifferently, all partiality set apart: which doubtless, if it be performed,
the Reader who is a good Christian, will thereby be confirmed in his faith;
and he that is a Papist, will detest and renounce Popery world without end.
Amen.

First therefore, the impudent and shameless brazen-faced A most impudent
coozening trick Mark (...) well.
(I cannot name him so ill as he deserves) corrupts my words, cutteth the
testimony of Josephus Angles asunder, and puts down to the Readers eyes but
one only snatch, patch, and piece thereof, not daring for his lugges and guts,
to put the period wholly together, and to frame a full and direct answer to the
same.

Secondly, so soon as he has corrupted the testimony, and snatched only at
the third part, which is of least force, O impudent Parsons! O shameless
Jesuit! O Fairy brat!
leaving 2. parts behind him; which contain the main point, and the very life
of the co^trouersy, he exclaimeth in these words; What is this against us?
Truly, sir Libeller, it is nothing against you, as your lying lips avouch it
for a truth: howbeit, when the testimony of Josephus Angles, is truly, wholly,
fully, and soundly related, If ever it be truly answered, let me lose my life
for the same
as it came from his pen, and was by me fitly and rightly applied, it will make
so much against you, against your Pope, against your Counsel of Trent, and
against al other Papists, as they are never able to answer it while the world
indures. These are the express words of Josephus Angles, which I did truly
relate; but our shameless Libeller guilefully, deceitfully and maliciously
omitted them; because forsooth, he knew right well* that the rehearsal of the^
would mar his market, and strike him dead; Ex lege tamen, sieve conuentione,
sieve promissione facta nobiscu^, opera bona hominis cum adiutorio gratiae dei
fiu^t aeternae vitae digna, and illi aequalia; quae, seclusa illa dei
promissione, quae passim in sacris literis reperitur, fu^ssent taz to praemio
prorsus indigna. Yet for the covenant and promise made unto us, or with us, the
good works of man with the help of Gods grace, are worthy of eternal life,
and equal with it; which for all that, These words which he omitted, will be
his death
that promise of God which is every where found in the holy Scriptures set
apart, were altogether unworthy of so great reward.

These are the express words of Josephus Angles, that learned Friar, and
Popish Bishop. Now the question is, whether these words, which the Libeller
deceitfully omitted, do make against him or not. Mark well, for Christ's sake,
and yield thy censure with out partiality.
If they make for him against me, I am content to be the liar, and to be
ouerthrown in my pleading: but if they make against him, (as undoubtedly they
do) then must he be the liar, lose the victory, and be quite overthrown in
his own cause: yea, then must his friends sing a black Dirige for his soul,
and all Popish vassals a doleful Placebo for the Popes funeral.

The trial stands thus; two things are evidently set down in this part of
the period, and testimony of Friar Angles; first, that the good works of man
joined with the help of Gods grace, are by reason of Gods covenant and promise
made with man, worthy of eternal life.

Secondly, that the self same good works of man, even as they proceed from
the help and grace of God, are altogether unworthy of eternal life, if Gods
covenant and promise be set apart. What can be more plainly spoken? Nothing in
the world. But to understand the Friars testimony and doctrine exactly and to
the bottom; four things which are contained therein, must be severally, and
apart considered.

First, the natural value of man's works.

Secondly, good works proceeding of grace,

Thirdly, good works proceeding of GODS grace, but severed and set apart from
prorsus indigna, altogether unworthy) these 4. observations, every child may
find in the testimony of Friar Josephus, if he ponder the text seriously, In
the Down fall of Popery, article 5.
with this my explication: especially, if he peruse the whole article, as it is
set down at large in my former book. Now, the Libeller made choice only of
the first (such coozening tricks he uses) to wit, of the natural value of
man's works (omitting all the other three, lest if he once touched the^, they
should burn him to death.) and that done, he boasts ante victoria^, as if he
were a conqueror, O deceitful wretch! O coozening villain! O child of the
devil!
when his own conscience condemns him, and tells him, that he is a
dastardly coward, and must be taken prisoner for his deceitful dealing. Man's
works thus taken, that is, in their natural value, are not worthy of eternal
life. Herein I agree to the Libeller: but I must needs tell him withal, that he
is a pestilent Sycophant, and a most coozening villain, (who seems to have
entered league with the devil of hell, O most damnable coozenage.
and to have made shipwreck of his soul,) in that he rests in an imperfect
part of the period, omitting the very pith and substance thereof, so to seduce
and deceive his Readers. Mark these points soundly.
The second observation tells us, that good works joined with the grace of
God, are worthy indeed of eternal life; yet not absolutely, but respectively;
that is to say, in regard of Gods covenant and promise made to man. This is a
point and observation, of the greatest importance that may be. Seclusa illa Dei
promissione.
The third observation teaches us, that good works which proceed of Gods
grace, if they wanted and were destitute of the promise of God, could no way be
worthy of eternal life. The fourth and last observation tells us, that good
works joined with grace, but destitute of Gods promise, are prorsus indigna,
not only unworthy, but wholly and altogether unworthy of eternal life. Now I
refer it to the Reader, to give his indifferent censure, whether I be the liar,
or the impudent Libeller. And here once again, This is a more liberal
challenge. The fifth article in the Down fall of Popery. A direct and full
answer to every part of the article as it is set down in my book: but not by
pieces and snatches, omitting the chief proofs as the Libeller has done A new
challenge, which I desire with all my heart to be performed, as knows our
merciful God.
I do enlarge my former challenge, promising under my hand, that if this
Libeller will with convenient speed, or any other English Jesuit, or Iesuited
Papist whosoever he be, publish in print a direct and full answer to my first
article, which is of the condign merit of works, and putting down his name at
large, with his usual addition, shall accept the challenge, and promise upon a
safe conduct to defend the same publicly and viua voce, to fall down prostrate
upon my knees before the most mighty, learned, wise, virtuous, and religious
Prince, James, King of great Britain, France and Ireland, and my most
gracious Sovereign, so soon as I shall receive a copy thereof, then and there
with heart and voice most humbly to request his most excellent Majesty, that a
safe conduct may be published, for the due trial of the supposed condign
merit of works, in manner already specified. I require in this challe^ge, but a
direct and full answer to one only article. If no English Papist be of courage,
neither to answer directly and fully all my books, nor any one of them, nor one
only poor article, being but a small part thereof; what shall I say? or what can
I say? nay, what can the Papists the^ selves say? or what can all the world
say? but fie upon them, and upon their late vpstart Romish Religion.

CHAP. VI. Of the inuoluntary motions of Concupiscence.
SO shameless and impudent is the Libeller in all his dealing, that I do not
think it strange, to receine a huge fardel of lies from his pen. But now he so
far surpasses impudency it self, Quodl. 8. art. 5. Quodl. 4. art. 5.
that he seems not to be a mere man, but some Fairies Brat, begotten of
some Incubus or ayerish spirit, upon the body of a base woman; a monster of
mankind, fitter for hell then middle earth: For so his own fellows have
published to the world of him.

The Libeller, after his wonted manner, has singled out by way of snatching,
from the words upon which they did depend, and from whence they received their
true sense and meaning, ten lines out of ten leaves: which he has no sooner
done, but he glories in this manner; Page. 50.
S, Austen (quoth he) proves at large in sundry places of his works, that
inuoluntary motions of concupiscence are sin indeed, and truly so called. In
his first book of Retractations, Aug. lib. 1. retract. cap. 13. page 13. Aug.
retr. lib. 1. ca. 15. page 16.
he has these words; That which in Infants is called original sin, when as
yet they use not free arbitrime^t of will, is not absurdly called voluntary;
because being contracted of the evil will of the first man, it is become in
sort hereditary.

It is not therefore false which I said; Sin is an evil so voluntary, that it
is no way sin, if it be not voluntary.

Whether Bell fathereth not a notable untruth upon S. Austen, when he cites
these words of his, to prove that inuoluntary motions of concupiscence be sin
indeed, and truly so called, I report me to the words by me alleged; Your
brains are clean out of tune indeed, as will appear out of hand.
for no such thing is in them to be found. Nay, either my brains are not in
good tune, or else Saint Austen proves the clean contrary.

It is a constant doctrine with that holy father, that sin is voluntary,
otherwise no sin. And for as much as some doubt might be made of original
sin, because it seems wholly inuoluntary, he affirms also that sin to
be voluntary, and so concludes generally all sin to be so. Marry, a man of
the Ministers learning, Lo, it netleth the Papists, to be ouerthrown with their
own Doctors.
may quickly overthrow us with our own Doctors, if by that rare skill which
he has in lying, when they say one thing, he can without all blushing,
maintain them to say the contrary.

Thus gallantly prateth our shameless Libeller. Now hear my Reply.

The Reply.
My Reply or confutation stands thus. First, that the shameless Jesuit
durst not deal with my whole The Libeller never takes the whole sentence.
O strange and most dastardly cowardnesse! Fie upon your shameless dealing.
What a Religion and faith do you Papists hold, who dare not for your lives
answer directly to any one book, chapter, article, or period which I have
many years sithence published, O dastardly cowards!
against the chief parts of your late vpstart Romish Religion? You seek out
odd corners, you fly to by-matters, you dare not, for your lives, encounter
me in the openfield.



Robert Parsons, the traiterous Jesuit (whom I challenge to have penned the
Libel) is even by the judgment of the popish secular priests, an arrant
Traitor, a Priests bastard, a monster of mankind, All this is proved in my
anatomy of Popish tyranny.
a gybsey, a man so impudent, that he will affirm or deny any thing, a
notorious liar, an incestuous person, an heretic of the Family of Love, a
drunken sponge, a Fairies Brat, the slave of the devil; yea, the wickedst man
upon earth, no man of judgment and good conscience, will give credit to his
bare words, when he brings no proof for the same.

S. Austens books, that concupiscence remaining after Baptism in the
regenerate, is both called sin, and is properly sin indeed; that the first
motions of concupiscence, which are connaturall to the corrupt man, and can no
way be avoided, are flatly forbidden by this commandment, (Thou shall not
covet;) that though the said rebellious motions be voluntary in the work, yet
are they voluntary in the original; that Cardinal Bellarmine not able truly to
answer S. Austens words, Cardinal Bellarmine corrupts S. Austen.
has in his explication added very deceitfully, this word ( quoda^modo, after
a sort;) which word for all that, can neither be found in S. Austen, neither is
it agreeable to his meaning. But such beggarly shifts and silly euasions, are
the props and stays of late Romish Religion. This done, I have confuted the
exposition of the Rhemists, Rhem. Tossed. in Romans 7.
who bear the world in hand, that S. Paul speaks not of the habitual
concupiscence, or sensual desire and inclination to evil, when he forbids to
lust. For, if only the consent of our reason and mind to obey and to follow the
lusts thereof, were sin indeed; then should S. Austens exposition be very
childish and too too absurd, who tells us plainly in express terms; Aug.
de nupt. and concupisc. lib. ^ cap. 29.
that S. Paul could not fulfill that precept, although he did not yield his
consent unto it, neither did obey or follow the desires thereof. Where I told
the Reader, that it will not serve or help the Papists to object that, which is
ever in their mouths, viz. that it is inuoluntary, and can no way be avoided,
and therefore no sin at all.

Many strong reasons I alleged for the proof hereof, in the Downfall of
Popery: amongst which the Libeller found one only, with which his courage
served him to grapple. But alas, all that he has gained, is nothing else in
very deed, but to prove himself a malicious fool, and the master. Noddy of
all Popish noddies in the world. For the very next words in Saint Austen, set
down in the Downe-fall, (which the shameless Libeller maliciously and
guilefully omitted*) condemn him for a notorious coozener; as which do prove
Saint Austen flatly on my side, and wholly against himself.

Thus writes Saint Austen; Quod si quisquam, etc. But if any man say, See the
Downe-fall.
that concupiscence is nothing else, then a will that is vicious and serving
sin, there is no resistance to be made; neither must controversy be in
words, when the thing is clear and evident. For so we prove every sin to
be voluntary, either in the act, or in the original.

These are the express words of Saint Austen, with which our Libeller durst
not deal; although in my book they be immediately annexed to the former: They
know right well, that they are not able to answer me truly.
For the Libeller Robert Parsons, and all his cursed Iesuited English brood,
do know right well, that they are not able, (while the world endures,) to
answer tru^ly and directly any one of my books, or any one Chapter, or any one
Article of the same.

Alas, alas, the case is too manifest. For the Libeller confesses, that
hitherto they have not answered me. And he adds a toy for young children to
play withal, viz. that an answer was framed five years ago, Page 15.
but hitherto suppressed upon just occasion; because (forsooth) it was not to
the purpose, or (if ye will) none at all.

What a thing is this? the like was never heard, known, or seen. All the
Jesuits have laid their heads together to answer my books. About which
answer, (as due circumstances will convince,) they have spent six whole
years, plus minus; in which space of time, (as our Forerunner tells us,)
they have (though long first) answered my books. But what follows? Marry
sir, that the answer has hitherto been suppressed, even for the space of
five years, and no less.

Is this possible? It is most true; read his book, page 15. and you shall find
it to be so. Page 15.
But what pretense has he in this behalf? viz. To suppress the answer so
many years. Forsooth he says, upon just occasion. But what just occasion that
is, neither can I tell, neither I think himself.

Well, gentle Reader, will thou know the truth? The Papists are stricken dead.
They have no answer to my books, and therefore do they publish none. And if
they will needs stand upon this point, that they have an answer in store, but
still suppress it for unknown causes, I must be so bold with their
grauities, as to tell them in sad earnest, that their answer is such a silly
one, as they are ashamed to have it known or seen; and therefore do they hide
it in a poor pipkin, lest wisemen should deride their folly therein. For upon
my credit (and my life I gage for the trial thereof; O most dastardly cowards!
O most shameless Jesuits! why durst you not publish your answer in five
years space?
) I have confuted Popery, even by the testimony of the best approved Popish
writers. When we affirm with S. Austen and S. Paul, that the vnuoluntary
motions of concupiscence in the regenerate, are truly and properly sin indeed;
the Papists answer us with S. Austen, that every sin is voluntary, and
consequently, that the said motions being vnuoluntary, are no sin at all. To
this objection, I replied out of S. Austen in many places of his works; that
albeit such motions were vnuoluntary in the act, yet were the same voluntary in
the original. To which I added, that the Papists may as well deny
concupiscence to be sin in unbaptized infants, as in them that are baptized,
upon this their falsely supposed ground: for it is as inuoluntary in the one,
as it is in the other; neither can it be any more avoided in the one, then in
the other. Now let the Reader judge, what coozening tricks the shameless
Libeller uses.

CHAP. VII. Of Pope Martins dispensation.
THE Libeller is here in great iolity, and tryumpheth before the victory.
howbeit, I have reserved this Dispensation for the last end, which he placed in
the beginning. My reason is this; because I hope in God to give him such a
Downfall thereby, as all the Papists in England and elsewhere, shall not be
able to lift him up again. Marry, if the Popes holiness will dispense with him
therein, It is sacrilege to dispute of the Popes power
(of whose power it is sacrilege to dispute,) to that can I say nothing. In
the Down-fal of Popery, I have proved most evidently, even by the testimony of
most famous Popish Doctors, that the Pope has often by his most execrable
dispensations, taken upon him to dissolve that matrimony, which is most firm
and stable by Christ's holy institution.

One only example the Libeller espied, with the which his courage served him
to deal, The Papists may sing Dirge for the soul of their Forerunner.
not daring for his guts to answer the article directly, though it be a very
short one. No, no, this one example will be enough for him, if not too much.
It will make his heart pant, his neck crack, his belly ache, and his bowels to
gush out; when he shall read or hear my Reply, which I have directly and
soundly framed to the same. The controversy stands thus. I affirmed out of
Antoninus, that Pope Martin gave one license to marry his own natural sister.
The Libeller answers, that I have belyed their Archbishop, and that their
Pope gave no such dispensatio^. Now, that the controversy may be examined ad
amussim, I purpose in God to proceed in this manner. First, I will purge my
self, and An in esragable demonstration.
And this I will perform (God willing,) by the testimony of most famous, and
best approved Popish writers. This being truly and soundly effected; al wise
men (I ween) will deem the Libeller worthy for his just reward, to keep
continually a whetstone about his neck, a cox-combe in his forhead, Robert
Parsons attire.
a Fox tail in his right hand, and a fools babble in his left; to this end
forsooth, that being so comely attired in regard of his great wisdom, A fit
Counselor for our holy father the Pope.
he may henceforth be a fit Counselor for the Pope. Howbeit, if he shall use
no better dexterity in counselling, then he has practiced in defending the
Pope; it may be feared, that his final reward will be a rope.

Siluester Prieras, a religious Friar, an absolute divine, so termed by the
Papists, and sometime master of his Holiness sacred Palace. He must therefore
be of good credit amongst the Papists; and the victory is mine own, if he
stand on my side. These are his express words; Reperitur tamen Martinus
quintus, Siluest. in verb. Papa. page 279.
(vt archiep, refert) dispensasse cum eo qui cum sua germana contraxerat and
consummauerat; habito consilio cum peritis Theologis and Canonistis, propter
mala and scandala alias inde ventura; licet aliqui dicerent, eum hoc non posse.
Howbeit Pope Martin the 5. (as the Archbishop reports) dispensed with him,
who had contracted and consummated matrimony with his own natural sister;
Lo, this learned Papist iumpeth with me.
having first consulted with his skilful divines and Canonists* so to avoid
sca^dall, which otherwise was likely to ensue thereupon, although some said, he
could not do it.

The second Popish Doctor, is Bartholomaeus Fumus, a religious Dominican Friar,
and one of the masters of their most holy Inquisition (as they term it;) and
therefore a man of great credit among the Papists: For I will confound and kill
Popery with Popery (God willing,) after my wo^ted manner. These are his express
words; Barthol. Fumus, in verbo, dispensatio.
Post factum tamen, dicit archi. Flor. Martinum quintum dispensasse cum quoda^,
qui cum sua germana contraxerat, and consummauerat, habito tamen prius
peritorum consilio propter scandala and alia mala vitanda.

Nevertheless, when the deed was done, the Archbishop of Florence affirms,
Lo, this learned Papist is also on my side.
Martin the fifth to have dispensed with one, who had contracted and consummated
marriage with his own natural sister; after he had the counsel of the
learned, for the avoiding of scandal and other evils.

The third Popish Doctor is Angelus de Clauasio, a very religious Franciscan
Friar, and Vicar general of the Cismontain-Minors; and consequently, a
witness of good reckoning among the Papists. These are his express words;
Vnde Dominus archi. Flor. in summa, Angelus de Cla. in verbo, Papa.
dicit se audiuisse a fide dignis, quod Papa Martinus quintus, habita
consaltatione cum multes doctissimis viris in sacra Theologia and iure
Canonico, dispensauit cum quodam qui acceperat germanam suam in vxorem; propter
multa mala and scandala quae euenissent, si eam dimisisset, and quae euitari
non poterant, nisi sic dispensaretur.

Whereupon my L. Archbishop of Florence in his su^me, affirms, that he heard
men of good credit say, that Pope Martin the fifth, Lo, this learned Papist is
also on my side.
after he had consulted with many very learned divines and Canonists,
dispensed with one that had married his own natural and full sister, to avoid
much evil and scandal which would have chanced, if he had forsaken her, and
which could no way be avoided, but by such a dispensatio^.

Thus write these three learned Papists, who were religious Friars, Lo, three
most famous Papists are on my side, against the Libeller.
famous Schoolmen, great divines, and men of high esteem and authority, even
in the church of Rome. By whose joint and uniform testimony, it is most true
and evident; which I affirmed out of Antoninus, the Popish Archbishop of
Florence; viz. that Pope Martin the fifth of that name, dispe^sed with one who
had contracted and consummated matrimony, with his own natural and full
sister. Whosoever is not either blinded with malice, or carried away with
partial affection, cannot for his life, but give judgment on my side. But
this case will yet be far more apparent, when I shall have confuted the
Libellers most silly, sottish, and plain childish reasons, which he in a
fools paradise extolleth above the skies. Let us therefore proceed. The
Libeller has 5. reasons in all, such as they be; which I will (God willing)
propound and examine otothen, framing direct, plain, and sound solutio^s to
the same. Which being effected, I will sound alarm against all English
Jesuits, Alarm against the Papists.
and Iesuited Popelings, as well in England, as throughout the Christian world:
and, that the controversy may be sounded to the bottom; I will ever put down
the Libeller before his reasons, and my name before my answer.

The Libeller. FIrst therefore I say, The first reason, pa. 35.

Truly said, I believe it.


that it is nothing prejudicial to the Catholic Faith, were it true. For we
defend not all the particular facts of any, though Popes. We know, that they
may err, either by wrong information; yea or of wilful malice.


Thomas Bell. I Answer; first, that I yield to the first part of Ma. 16.18 1.
Cor. 3.11 1. Tim. 3.15.
which follows him and believes as he does. But his Errors are nothing
prejudicial to the true Chatholike Church indeed, which is built upon a most
sure rock, (even Christ Jesus) and never swarueth from the Truth. Secondly,
that it is the Libellers best course, not to defend all the Boniface, who
entered into his Popedom as a Fox, lived in it as a Woolfe, In the doleful
cry of Rome.
and dyed out of it as a Dog. Yea, he must defend much other most execrable
and abominable stuff, whereof I have written else where at large. Thirdly,
that he must either defend this fact now in question, (as it shall appear in
the due place, God willing;) or else cry fire and faggot for the Pope, and Vbi
supra.
For else, they may perhaps, (as I have proved elsewhere,) adore and worship
damned O bloody and cruel Tyrant!
it must needs be a most intolerable tyranny, and cruel villainy, to tie
men's souls to his decree of faith and manners. For, whether his Holiness
decides matters of wilful malice, or not; God and his own conscience only
can tell, all others must remain perplexed and in suspense, Bellarmine the
popes mouth teaches us, Bellar. tom. 1. Col. 744. c.
) this is the Romish faith. Non solum in decretis fidei errare non potest
summus pontifex, sed neque in preceptis morum quae toti ecclesiae
praescribuntur, and quae in rebus necessarijs ad salutem, vel in ijs quae per
se bona vel mala sunt, versantur. The pope cannot err, not only in the decrees
of faith, but neither in the precepts of manners, which are prescribed to the
whole Church, and which pertain to things necessary unto salvation, and which
of their own nature are good or evil. Now so it is, that this dispensation of
pope Martin, concerns a matter of faith and salvation. For after the popes
dispensation, the man was bound to believe, O most miserable Papists! How
dangerous is the state of your souls
that his Sister was his lawful wife: neither could he have lived with her as
with his wife under pain of damnation, if he had been persuaded otherwise.
Here the Libeller fills up his Pamphlet, with a long tale of a Prelates
Daughter; to no end or purpose at all, but only for want of matter. For our
English Church holds not, as their popish Church does of her popes; that her
Bishops cannot err in the decrees of faith or manners.


The Libeller. SEcondly, I tell him, that his lips have lashed out too lustily,
The second reason. pa. 37.
and that he has wickedly slaundred Pope Martin, and most perfidiously
corrupted Antoninus. The very Title of the Chapter might have taught him, that
he was in error, Sir, you speak like a Pope, but you have well deserved the
Rope.
or at least have given him a greater Caveat, better to consider of the matter:
for it is de affinitate, of affinity. And therefore, had the Pope given one
license to marry his own natural sister, he had dispensed in
consanguinitie, and so nothing fitting the matter entreated of in that Chapter.


Tho: Bell. I Answer: first, that this silly kind of reasoning The Jesuit is
at a Nonplus, and in great danger to loose his wits for sorrow.
himself at a Nonplus, and his wits not at home. For if Antoninus may not
entreat of consanguinite, because the Title of the Chapter is of affinity:
great absurdities may justly be imputed to many, not only profane, but also
most holy Writers: even to those, whose pens were directed by the holy ghost.
For, holy Moses entitled, The first Book of his Pentatench, ( Bereshith) to
which Title, the first word only was answerable. S. Matthew semblably, entitled
the sacred gospel, ( The Book of the Generation of Jesus Christ: The Jesuit
is a fond Doctor, even a Doctor Doddie poll.
) to which title, one only part of the first Chapter, is fitly answerable.
Yea, the Libeller intituleth his railing and slanderous pamphlet, ( The
Forerunner of Bells Downfall:) and for all that, small fore running can be
found in it, but great store of lies, slanders, cosening tricks, and I cannot
tell what. Page 51. Page 25.
Nay, he deals both with my counterblast, and with my Motives. So exactly
does this Goodfellow our Jesuit observe that, to which he more than
peremptorily would gladly tie his betters.

Secondly, that though Antoninus entreat in de affinitate, of affinity: yet
has he in the same Chapter one whole Paragraph, of the Popes power in
dispensing, as well with consanguinitie as affinity. O Noddie, noddy Jesuit.
These are Antoninus his own express words: In primo gradu affinitatis
ascendentium, sicut and consanguinitatis, Papa dispensare non potest: Antonin.
3. page tit. 1. Cap. 11.. 1
quia est contraius diuinum and natural. Sequitur; item and in linea
transuersali, in primo gradu prohibetur matrimonium consanguinitatis and
affinitatis iure diuino. Lo, here are the very words in controversy.
Vnde nec Papa dispensare potest, etiam quodammodo est contra naturam, vt scz.
quis contrahat cum germana sua, vel vxore germani sui eo mortuo. In the first
degree of affinity of ascendents, as also of consanguinitie, the Pope cannot
dispense* because it is against the law Divine, and the law of nature. Even so
also in the line transuersall: in the first degree, matrimony of
consanguinitie and affinity is prohibited by the law Divine. So that the Pope
cannot dispense, it being in sort against nature, that one marie his own
natural sister, (mark these words, for they touch the quick) or the wife of
his own natural brother, when he is dead. Lo, he speaks of despensing
with ones own natural sister.
Much more Antoninus has in the same chapter to the same effect; but this may
suffice the Reader, to prove that Antoninus speaks plainly, and chiefly of
the Popes dispensation, by which he licenseth the brother to marry his own
sister. Let this be remembered, until opportunity be offered, to speak yet
more plainly thereof.


The Libeller. LEt any that is desirous of truth, by this one place take a
scantling of Bells holy sincerity: The third reason, Page 39.
because he found S. Antoninus to speak of a dispensation granted to one,
after he had married and consummate matrimony with her, A most notorious lie.
whose sister before his marriage he had known carnally, and so a dispensation
only in affinity, contracted by unlawful copulation; (for which the
Minister, had he been consulted, would rather have laughed at him for his
simple scrupulositie, then thought it needful to sue for any such favor or
grace, Here is knauerie in grain. Mark well the answer.
) which did nothing fit his purpose; and therefore meaning to make it in spite
of all honesty to serve his turn, he has first corrupted the sentence by
false translation, saying (with his natural sister) in stead of these words,
(with her natural sister.) And although every one cannot epsy his cunning
conueyance, because he suppressed the other part of the sentence following,
yet it is apparent enough to any Gramarian. O shameless Jesuit!
For were the Latin as he turns it, then should it not be, cum quadam eius
Germana, O folly of all follies!
but cum quadam sua Germana.


Thomas Bell. Martin dispensed with one, This answer strikes the Libeller at
the very heart.
to marry his own natural sister. And I have already proved the same, by
the flat, plain, and evident verdicts of three famous popish writers: viz.
Syluester Prieras, Eartholomaus Fumus, and Angelus de Clauasio. Secondly, that
all Antoninus as I do. Thirdly, that the same Doctors omitted eius) sua.)
where I wish the Reader to understand, Who sees not this proof too evident?
that the Libeller is clean overthrown in his own pleading. I prove it,
because he grants, that if Antoninus had said, ( cum Germana sua) and not (
eius;) the meaning had been, as I do hold. And therefore, seeing so many
learned papists did change ( eius) into ( sua;) it follows of necessity,
that it must needs be as I say, and not as the Libeller would have it. To which
I add, that the Libeller, though he seem to glory in his skill of Grammar,
The Libeller is a poor Gramarian.
may go to school again to learn it better. For albeit, that ( eius) may be
referred as well to that which follows, as to that which goes before, and (
sua) only to that which goes before, because it is reciprocal, yet may they be
used mutually in antecedentibus, the one for the other, as I could prove by
infinite authority. One only authority I will use, which cannot but strike
the Libeller dead. It is the Latin Vulgata aeditio, which he neither may nor
dare deny. It has in very many places, eius for sua. It is five times at the
least, Math. 2. verse. 11.13 14.20.21.
in one only Chapter. So in the 4. Chapter, verse. 21. chap. 10, verse. 3. Luke
6.14. Act. 16.15. Job, 5.4. Job. 14.21. Ezech. 46.17. Psalm. 108. verse. 7.9.
Prou. 31. verse. 27.28. ( eius) and sua) are used indifferently. Sixthly, that
the true sense and meaning, may be clearly gatherd out of Antoninus his own
words. For first, he grants, (as is already proved) that the pope cannot
dispense with marriage between brother and sister. Secondly, because Antoninus
says, that the learned men with whom the pope consulted, This is a strange
reason.
cold not agree: some of them holding that he could dispense therewith, others
that he could not, who doubtless would all have agreed roundly, that the pope
could have dispensed therewith, if the case had been as the Libeller would have
it. Wherefore Antoninus, Syluester, Fumus, and Angelus, do all conclude: that
because it is as sacrilege to dispute of the popes power, they must refer
the judgment thereof to God, as being a thing far above the capacity and
reach of man. Fumus in verbo, dispensat. page 221.
Fumus has these words: Quando facit, credendum est talem dispensationem esse
validam. Cur, Deus ipse nouit: when such a dispensation is granted, we must
believe that it is of force. But why it is so, God only knows. Here I wish
the Reader to observe two memorable things with me: the one against the Libeller,
denying the Popes dispensation for marriage between brother and sister.
The Other, against all papists in general, Popery is a fond Religion, and a
very hotchpotch of omnigitherum.
because they must believe the Pope to have that power, whereof and for which
they are not able to yield any reason. Fie upon such Religion. And to make this
controversy out of doubt: let the Reader persuade himself undoubtedly, that
great learned papists, even Cardinal Caietane for one, do hold it for a
constant position, that the pope may dispense with the brother to marry his
own natural sister. Fumus, vbi supra.
Thus does Bartholomaeus Fumus write of him, Caietan tamen 2, 2 q. 154. ar. 9.
dicit Papam in omnibus gradibus consanguinitatis and affinitatis, nisi cum
patre and filia, and matre and filio, posse dispensare. Howbeit Caietane
affirms, Behold, the Pope takes upon him that power, which is proper to God
alone. Nauarr. euchir. page 515. Caiet. in Leuitic. cap. 18.
that the pope can dispense in all the degrees of consanguinitie and affinity,
save only with the father and his daughter, and with the mother and her
son. It is therefore no strange thing, to charge the pope to grant license
for marriage between the brother and the sister. Nauarrus that famous popish
Canonist, defends lustilie the same opinion; yea Cardinal Caietain in his
commentaries upon Leuiticus, which he dedicated to pope Clement with the popes
good liking and grateful acceptance, sings the same song.


The Libeller. The fourth reason, page 40. O shameless and foolish Jesuit!
FOr, had one married his natural sister, as Bell not so confidently as
impudently affirms; then should it not have been truly said, that he had
committed Fornication, but incest; a sin distinct in nature, and far more
odious in the sight of God.


Tho: Bell. reprobum sensum, O impudent brasenfaced Parsons!
and so linked in covenant with the Devil, that he must needs strive against
the truth: he would never so desperately make ship-wracke of his own soul,
wittingly and willingly oppugning that, which his Fornicatio stricte and l^ge
sumitur.
and in Adultery. For albeit Fornication, stricktly taken, be a sin distinct
in nature from incest and other sins of the flesh: yet in a more large and
general acceptance, it compriseth and conteyneth under it, all manner sins
of the flesh. And the same may be truly verified, of Adultery in like sort.
For the Libeller (I ween) will grant incest to be prohibited in the Dialogue,
under the general name of Adultery. And for Fornication his own approved
popish Doctors, shall teach him the truth in this controversy. Fumus has
these express words: Fumus, in verbo Fornicatio.
Fornicatio tripliciter capitur: vno modo pro omni peccato, secundum Tho: 22.
q. 151. ar. 2. alio modo spiritualiter, pro idololatria, Iere. 5. tertio, pro
omni illicito coitu. Proprie tamen accipitur, vt distinguitur contra alias
species luxuriae. Fornication is taken three ways: one way, for every sin
after the mind of Aquinas. Another way, spiritually, for Idolatry. Thirdly,
for every unlawful copulation. Yet it is taken properly, as it is
distinguished against other kinds of Leacherie.

Angelus a Clauasio has these words: Fornicatio est omnis illicitus coitus:
vt, 30. q. 2.. qui ergo. Angel. in verbo fornicatio.
Sed proprie fornicatio est inordinatus concubitus naturalis, quo solutus
solutam naturali vsu cognoscit. Fornication is every unlawful copulatio^: but
properly it is that inordinate natural copulation, in which a single man
knows a single woman by natural use. Abundant testimonies I could allege,
out of famous popish writers: if it were needful so to do. But I will appeal
to the verdict of S. Paul, for the utter confusion of the impudent and
shameless Jesuit. Amongst the Corinthyans one had committed most notorious
incest; which sin for all that, the holy Apostle was not afraid to term
fornication. 1. Cor. 5. verse. 1.
There goes a common saying, (says S. Paul) that there is Fornication among
you; and such Fornication, as is not named among the Gentiles; that one should
have his Fathers wife. Thus says S. Paul. The original word in the Greek is
(...); The Libeller controlleth S. Paul.
the Vulgata editio in Latin, approved by the late popish Council of Trent,
has the word Fornicatio; Arias Montanus that famous popish Linguist,
translateth (...) into Fornicatio; and the Rhemists translate, as I have
Verbatim put down their words. So then, if Incest cannot truly be termed
Fornication, (as our most impudent Libeller avouches,) then is not only
Thomas Bell a liar, but together with him S. Paul also; Arias Montanus; the
Rhemists; the Council of Trent; yea, and the Pope who approved it; to say
nothing of Aquinas, Fumus, and Angelus. But alas, alas, the Libeller may tell
the Pope and his Popelings, that his wits fail him; and that therefore he will
henceforth give over all dispute in Theology, and take a more fit Occupation
upon him. And what is that I pray you? Forsooth to be a Swine-heard, Ah poor
Jesuit: art thou become a Swine-heard?
and to keep the Towns Swine. Where I would as a friend advise him; to keep
his fingers from stealing, and his tongue from lying. For doubtless, if he
deal not more honestly in keeping Swine, than he has done in matters Divine,
I will tell him one thing in good fidelity, that his best preferment will be
the Pillorie.


The Libeller. The fifth reason, page 40.
NEither could the matter have been secret, as Antoninus says it was, not yet
the separation scandalous, but rather offensive to have suffered them to
continue together in filthy pretensed matrimony.


Tho: Bell. I Answer, This cannot with reason be denied.
that this matter might as well be secret as the Pope of Rome might be a woman,
and never known till she had a Child. Now, seeing you will needs enforce me,
to discover your Popes shame: I will take the pains for the good of the
Reader, to relate the Story truly, as I find it in famous popish writers.
Marianus Scotus a religious Monk, a learned Divine, In Chron. an. 854.
and a very famous Historiographer, has these express words; Huic successit
Iohanna mulier, annis duobus, mensibus quinque, diebus quatuor. Pope Johan a
woman was successor to Leo, and continued Pope two years, five months, and
four days

Sigebertus Gemblacensis, Jn Chron. an. 854.
another religious Monk or Friar, has these express words; Fama est hunc
Iohannem foeminam fuisse, and vni soli familiart tantum cognitam, qui eam
complexus est, and grauida facta peperit Papa existens: quare eam non numerant
quidam inter pontifices. The same is, that this John was a woman, known only
to one sole familiar friend, who embraced her, and she being big with child
labored in time of her Popedom; for which respect, some do not reckon her
among the Popes.

Martinus Polonus, a Popish Archbishop, and the Popes own dear
Paenitentiarie, has these express words; An. 855.
Post hunc Leonem, Johannes Anglus Moguntinus sed^t annis duobus, mensibus
quinque, diebus quatuor. Hic, vt asseritur, foemina suit, etc. After this Leo,
John who was reported to be a woman, lived in the Popedom two years, five
months, and four days.

An. 858.
Iacobus Phillippus Bergomensis, a religious Heremite, and a famous
Historiographer, affirms the same doctrine with the rest. And both this
Bergomensis and Polonus tell us for a truth, that this woman Pope or popish
woman labored suddenly, as she went in procession from Vatican to Lateran,
between Colisaeus and S. Clement, where she died and was buried without all
honor. In detestation of which fact: the Popes since that time, refuse to go
that way in procession.

In summa conc. page 334.
Bartholomaeus Caranza, a Dominican Friar, affirms this woman to have belyed
her sex, and by evil means to have aspired to the Popedom.

Matthaeus Palmerius, (who continued the chronicle of S. Hierome, Matthae
Palmer. Florent.
until the year 1449.) stands wholly for the truth of the same History.

Baptisia surnamed Platina, a most learned papist, and of such esteem with the
popes, Platina in vita Ioh. 8. cap. 134.
that he was made Apostolicus Abbreuiator, relates the story of our holy
mistress pope, John that womanly pope, even in the same words with Martinus
Polonus, and Iacobus Phillippus Bergomensis.

Thus the indifferent Reader may behold and perceive as clearly as the
sunne-shining at noone day: that by the testimony of seven learned papists,
(who were all of them in high esteem even in the Church of Rome,) one of their
popes was a woman, yea, a very strumpet, filthy whore, and most detestable
drabbe; so as from her no lawful authority, no true orders, no public
Doctrine, no true sacrament could be had? For by S. Paul's constant Doctrine,
(which must needs be of credit against our mistress Pope) no woman can have
public regiment in the Church. 1. Tim. 2. verse. 11, 12
And consequently, it being true, (which so many Papists of great note in the
romish church affirm for truth,) Popery must needs thereby receive a
markeable and most deadly wound: yea, be overthrown and turned vpside down.
And the truth of the story, may yet be more strongely confirmed, if need
shall so require. In annot. Ioh. 8.
For Onuphrius Panuinius in his Commentaries upon Bap. Platina, when he has
said all that possibly he could say, for the good pleasure and contentation of
the Pope, (to whose Holiness he dedicated his holy labors,) confesses
freely, (because the truth it self enforced the Friar to speak the truth,
Mark the Friars confession; for it is wonderful.
) that not only the common people, but men also of high esteem, and many in
number, did receive the Story of our holy mistress woman-pope, as true and
authentical. And the silly evasion, which he like a flattering Friar uses, is
not worth the hearing. I add hereunto, as a memorable post-past, that this
story of John their woman Pope, is publicly painted, and this day to be
seen, in the Cathedral Church of Scyenna, or Sena. Which painting did so
goare and gall our newly hatched Jesuits, The Jesuits are a newely hatched
Sect.
(whose sect was not known in the world, for the space of fifteen hundred and
forty years after Christ,) that they labored with might and maine (as I
heard by credible report,) to have had that story defaced, in the late
repairing of that Church; but the Cardinal being the chief there, would not
suffer them to have their hearts desire in that behalf. And doubtless, the
Reader cannot but persuade himself: that seven famous popish
Historiographers, Let this be very well noted, as a thing of very great
consequence
(who lived a long time one after another,) would never have published one and
the self same story to the view of the whole world, (especially such a
story, as brought utter shame, confusion, and ruin, to their Popes,
themselves, and their popish religion,) if any one of them cold in his
lifetime, have learned the contrary to be the truth. Nay, the popes (who
most cruelly and tyrannically burn both the Books and their authors, when
they make against them and their popery,) would never have suffered such
Books to remain unburned to these our days, A reason insoluble, which
strikes the papists at the heart.
for a constant and evident testimony against them and their patched religion;
if the unsearchable wisdom of God had not so ordained, for the utter shame,
confusion, and desolation, of late vpstart romish Doctrine.


The Corollarie.
FIrst therefore, seeing three famous popish Writers, (viz. Syluester Prieras,
Bartholomaeus and Angelus de Clauasio, Mark this point of very great
importance.
do all constantly and with uniform assent affirm, avouch, and publish in
print to the view of the whole world; that Pope Martin granted license to the
brother, to marry his own natural sister; Secondly, seeing the selfsame
popish Doctors do constantly hold and affirm, that the popish Archbishop
Antoninus did relate the same before them; Thirdly, seeing the Libeller
himself confesses, sua) had been in Antoninus for that the word ( eius,)
then the sense had been as I affirm; Fourthly, seeing all the aforenamed
writers, Syluester, Fumus, and Angelus, do constantly and uniformly use the
same word ( sua) for the word ( eius) in Antoninus; Fifthly, seeing the reasons
which the Libeller brings for his grounds, Caietanus, If this power be not
proper to God alone, let others judge.
and their famous Canonist Nauarrus, do resolutely hold and affirm, that the
pope has power to dispense with all manner of persons in the contract of
matrimony, the father with his daughter, and the mother with her son only
excepted; Seauenthly, seeing Antoninus, Syluester, Fumus, and Angelus, dare not
counsel the pope to give such dispensations, because they deem it to be a
thing unlawful; yet are they so fearful to censure the Popes dealing
therein, O foolish papists, how has Satan seduced you?
(because it is holden as sacrilege to dispute of his power;) that after the
fact be committed, they affirm the Popes doing to be lawful and of force,
albeit they have neither ground nor reason for the same; I cannot but conclude,
and affirm it for an undoubted truth, that the Pope takes upon him that
power, which is proper to God alone. And consequently, that our Libeller (
Robert Parsons that shameless and impudent Jesuit,) is a most notorious liar,
and in regard of his manifold slanders, corruptions, lies, and cozening
tricks, well worthy to gain the pillotie for his just reward.

A FRESH LARVM OR NEW CHALLENGE, to all English Jesuits and Iesuited Papists
in the universal World, tagge and ragge none at all excepted, whosoever shall
appear in the shape of man.
I Here make a new and fresh Challenge, to all English Jesuits and Iesuited
papists whosoever and wheresoever they be; not to cassiere, retract, deny, I
am most willing to perform every Challenge, as I desire to be saved. Would
God any Papist durst encounter me.
or call back any of the former Challenges, (as who most heartily and earnestly
desire the true perfourmance of them all, and will for mine own part omit
nothing that can be wished in that behalf,) but that all the world may know
the evident truth to be on my side, and that I am innocent and free from those
notorious slanders, with which the shameless Libeller charge me; as also
that it may be known to al languages, people, and nations, that the Jesuits
and Iesuited popelings, are condemned in their own consciences, and have now
no other shift or means in the world, but to face out the matter with flat
lies, notorious slanders, A silly shift in deed.
and deep cozenage; albeit this be the meanest, and the silliest shift of all
others. I therefore challenge all English Jesuits and Iesuited papists jointly
and severally to lay their heads and wits together, and to choose out some
one among them all, whom they shall think the fittest for learning and
courage to take the quarrel in hand; and that done, to put down his name and
addition in print, so to make it known unto the world, that he is willing and
ready to answer the Challenge; viz. either to justify all the assertions
contained in the Forerunner, If none of them dare undergo this Challenge,
who will not detest popery? none doubtless that has either conscience,
sense, or reason.
or at the least two of the same; that is to say, that more bold than wise
assertion, which charge me to have belyed Josephus Angles, touching the
condign merit of works. And that other audacious and plain Antichristian
speech, which diabolically charge me to have slaundered Pope Martin,
concerning his license for marriage between the brother and his own natural
sister. And if any one Jesuit or Iesuited papist whosoever, either in England
or elsewhere, shall have courage to undertake the Challenge, and so valiantly
to encounter me, viua voce, for the due, sinceere, and sound trial of the
Forerunners answer to Bells Downfall, as he terms it; I promise, (as I
will answer God and intend to be saved,) upon the receipt of notice given
thereof in print in manner aforesaid, to do so much as in me lies, If the
Papists will not accept and perform this Challenge, all careful of their
salvation, will forsake the^.
to procure a safe conduct for the safe coming, safe abiding, and safe
departure of him, (whosoever he be) that shall accept and undertake the true
performance of the Challenge, in manner aforesaid. Now, if no papist in all the
world, shall have courage to defend this short answer, which is but an answer
to some odd sentences and pieces of my Books, and of those pieces which
themselves have made choice of, and in their best judgment singled out, as the
weakest parts and things of least force; I cannot but persuade my self, that
all the world knowing and hearing of their dastardly cowardnesse in defending
their Religion, will forthwith acquit and discharge me of their notorious lies,
cozenage, and slanders; and withal, detest as the deadly poison of their
immortal souls, their lies; their iugling; their slanders; their
legierdemaine, and their usual cozening tricks; wherewith they have a long
time seduced, deceived, and bewitched, a great part of the Christian world The
Libeller in one place, charge me thus; Be it known to him, that he belyeth
Josephus, page 45. Mark the end of all. page 37. The Devil is a liar, and the
Libeller his Brother.
for no such thing as he notes, can be wrong, racked, or coniured out of his
words. Again, in another place he charge me in this manner; I tell him, his
lips have lashed out too lustily, and that he has wickedly slaundered Pope
Martin. Where the Reader may see evidently, that I am peremptorily charged, as
a most notorious Malefactor, with two heinous crimes; viz. to have belyed
Josephus Angles, and to have wickedly slandered Pope Martin. Well, if I be
found nocent and guilty of these two most heinous crimes; then let all the
people and nations spit in my face, and speak their full pleasures on me, in
Gods holy name. But on the other side; if either no papist dare appear to
perform and answer the Challenge, (and to speak plain English, I think it
will so fall out;) or if some foole-hardie Iesuited papist shall appear, who
shall fail in defending the cause, and be overthrown in his own pleading,
(which doubtless is the best end, that can fall on their side;) then I hope,
the people will spit in his face; and not that only, but also detest him, the
pope, and all late vpstart Romish Religion, Amen.

The Popes neck is already broken; his funeral is prepared; and no remedy,
but he must in all have be interred. And doubtless, if ever this future
expected Challenge, come once to handstrokes and valiant bickering, viua voce;
the whole crew of Jesuits and Iesuited papists, will thereby receive such
mortal wounds, that they must shortly be interred after their pope.

If any Jesuit or Iesuited papist now in England, (wheof there is good store)
have any heart and courage to defend their Forerunner, let him signify so much
in manner required in my Challenge, that we may grapple together viua voce,
while I am in London. They are so earnest to know my reply, that (as I hear,)
they fetch every proof from the press, as soon as it is ready. If none of
them dares this perform, then may all the rest persuade themselves, that they
hang their souls upon them, who are not able to defend that, which they force
them to believe. (...).

(...).

A Caueet, or Christian admonition to the Reader.
AFter my Reply against a shameless Libel, entitled the Forerunner of Bells
downe-fall, was sent to the the Press, being authorized by higher powers to
be imprinted; a sincere Christian of good esteem, (the Lord of Heaven and
earth reward his godly zeal,) acquainted me with a new Forerunner of Bells
downfall, (so eagerly do the Papists wish my downe-fall,) with this new
addition in the Title. The second time set forth, and such faults corrected as
escaped in the first Print, as in the Preface is declared. To this second
Forerunner of Antichrist, and to the Catch-poll of Satan, the Preface
addressed for an ornament in that behalf; I have deemed it Operaepertium, to
add a brief censure thereunto, for the instruction and necessary satisfaction
of the godly and well affected Reader; albeit it came so lately to my hands, as
very hardly I could effect the same. A great wonderment it is to me, (and if I
be not deceived,) to all the Sages and wise men of the Christian world; what
should move the Author of the Forerunner, so suddenly to set forth a second
Forerunner immediately after the former. If I may divine, and without offense
to the Popes holiness, and the gravity of his sanctified Popelings, this is
the true cause indeed; and not that with which the Libeller would gladly dazell
the eyes of his Reader, viz. The Jesuits who rule and overrule all papists in
ye world, (I dare not say the Pope himself.) and who have their spies in every
corner of this land, having received intelligence by their said Spies, that I
was in hand with a Reply or answer to their said Forerunner, and their own
consciences withal condemning them, and telling them that they are not able to
endure the force and truth of my reply, have laid their heads together, and
devised the best shift they could to seduce the simple papists which depend
upon them, and hang the salvation of their souls upon their shoulders. For
thus the case stands with them. They may not read any Book, no, nor hear
any read unto them, which either my self or any other good Christian shall set
forth against the Pope, or any one jot of Popish religion. If otherwise, the
party that shall so do, (unless he have the Popes dispensation,) is
excommunicated Ipso facto, delivered up to Satan, and cast out of the Popish
Church.

Now sir, when these simple and silly Papists, (alas, alas, for pity, shall
hear of my Reply, and shall tell the Jesuits and Iesuited Priests, what report
flies abroad of the condemnation of their Forerunner and Religion, they will
tell them roundly a tale of Robin Hood, and little John: viz. That I have not
answered their Book at all, but another counterfeit Pamphlet devised by mine
own brain. This to be so, I prove by a triple mean.

I have framed my Replye.

in every Chapter, in every Page, in every sentence and Period, the very same
in true sense and meaning, with the former Forerunner, of Bells downfall: yea,
so many faults have escaped in the latter Print, as in the first.

To which I must needs add, that as I did not once touch their faults escaped
in the first Print, no more do I say any thing against the faults escaped in
the second Print. For I do and ever did scorn to take any advantage against
the Author, by reason of that which chances through the default of the Printer.

Thirdly, because himself freely grants, that he Lo, the Libeller wishes
that all his books had been burnt.

In the Preface of the second Forerunner.


as it grieueth him to think yt any be escaped to carry news unto Bell. And
why, (I pray you) does he desire and wish, that all his books had been burnt,
and yt none of the^ had escaped to bring news to Bell? doubtless, because his
own conscience condemned him for that silly patched answer which he had
framed against Bell, and which he knew himself very unable to defend. And for
that end, if all the Copies had been consumed up of Vulcan, he would have
rested in peace, and never have bickered with Bell at all. Marry, seeing all the
Copies, could no way be kept from Bells knowledge, he thought it a matter of
great consequence and policy, to invent some cozening trick and point of
legierdemain, by help whereof he might set such a brave face on the matter, as
though he were innocent, and no way to be touched. This is the first point,
which I have thought good to intimate to the Reader.

The Libeller in one place of his first Forerunner tells us, Page 25.
that we shall have more choice of wares at the next Mart: and in another
place he affirms, that by the next Post we shall know more of his meaning.
Now sir, both the next Post is come, Page. 30.
and the next Mart is past, and yet have we received no other wares, nor any
further meaning, save that only which is already touched. The Libeller
therefore must perforce, either confess that this cozening trick and point of
Legierdemaine, was the thing which he intended: or else, that he is a
notorious liar. Vtru^horum mavis, accipe, gentle Forerunner. This is the
second point, which I have observed for the good of the Reader.

The Libeller in his second Forerunner, tells his Reader, that unless I
stay my self from answering him, In the Preface.
until I hear another manner of peale rung of five Bells, he will commend me
to my friends for a wrangler, and contemn me for a captious cauelling
companion. Oh sweet Jesus, what manner of people are our English Jesuits, and
other Iesuited Popelings? My Books have been in their hands many years: they
have volued and reuolued them; they have read and perused them again and
again; they have tossed and turned them over and over: they have a long time
borne all simple Papists in hands, that my books have been answered many years
ago.

To which most impudent and false assertion, the silly ignorant Papists (who
dare not once read or turn over one leaf of any book, which looks awry
against the Pope or popish doctrine,) have given such credit, that they have
audaciously affirmed to my face, that my books were answered by the Jesuits.
Although (such is the force of truth,) the libeller both in his first and
second forerunner, confesses plainly without all dissimulation, Page 15. Page
18.
) which is not his usual manner,) that albeit my books have five years ago,
(if his tongue were not a liar, I would believe it,) received their answer,
yet is that answer hitherto suppressed upon just occasion. Now, if you demand
of me what occasion that is, I know not doubtless how to answer you more
truly, then in this plain and simple manner. viz. That either they have no
answer at all in store; or else that it is such a silly one, that they are
ashamed to publish it; or at the least, that the answer which they speak of,
is mere and deep silence. And so I grant willingly, Silence is the answer to
my books.
that my books have received their answer in very deed. For as they have
hitherto answered me with silence, so I think they mean to do in future times;
unless perhaps they purpose to publish some silly counterfeit answer, after
it shall please God to call me to his mercy, and to take me out of this vale
of mortality. For indeed they have no real answer in store, as I have proved
out of their own books; which the indifferent Reader will perceive with all
facility, in due peruse of this my present discourse: This is the third point,
In the preface of the second Forerunner.
which the gentle Reader is to observe.

The Libeller tells his Reader, (if he may believe him,) that in this
spiritual fight we have the advantage of the ground, and they both sun and
wind against them. And the Jesuits with their Iesuited Popelings, do often
complain of the inequality of time. But it is a false complaint, and wholly
swaruing from the truth, in this present case of writing and publishing of
books. For first, they are many, and my self but one. Secondly, they either
al or the best learned amongst them, have consulted and laid their heads and
wits together, how and in what sort to answer me; as I have already proved, in
this short discourse. But my self have consulted with none save only with God
alone; They are more able to buy books, then I am: for else I would have
better store, then yet I baac.
how or in what sort to writ against the^, as I protest upon my salvation.
Thirdly, they have better store of books, (though they complain of want
therein, so to save their credit if it would be,) then I either have, or am
able any way to procure. I prove it many ways. First, because the Jesuits in
other countries have most excellent Libraries, and are indeed many of them very
profound and learned men. By means whereof, our English Jesuits are able to
write and publish more books in three months, then my self can do in three
whole years, if the truth were on their sides. For their father general, has
all the Jesuits in the world at his command: who must lay their heads and
wits together to do at a beck whatsoever he shall design to be done. Hence
comes it, that our English Jesuits have written and published, and this day
do write and publish books at their good pleasure. But the truth does and
will prevail, maugre their malice, and in spite of the devil. Secondly, the
Jesuits have all the Libraries of all the Papists in this land, to use them at
their pleasures and commands. Thirdly, the Jesuits can command the purses of
the ablest and richest Papists in this kingdom, for the provision and buying
of all such books as they desire. Fourthly, they can have what books they
will to be sent out of other countries to them. Fifthly, they have such store of
Gold and money, that (as the secular Priests their brethren write of them,) the
Jesuit Garnets pomp and expe^ces amounted yearly, to five hundred pounds at
the least. The extraordinary excess of John Gerard that gallant and
swaggering Jesuit, was valued at an higher rate, then the priests could for
shame express: the horses of the same Gerard were many, and of no small price.
He had two Geldings in a Gentleman's stable, at 30. pounds a Gelding, besides
other elsewhere, and horses of good use. All this is proved at large in my
anatomy.
When he was Prisoner in the Clinke, he rode into the country at his own
pleasure, (oh grievous imprisonment,) and he maintained two horses in the
town, with servants in them continually. The apparel of the Jesuit Oldcorne,
(though but a petty Jesuit,) was seldom less worth, then thirty or forty
pounds. Beside he had eight good geldings, at one and the self same time.
Another Jesuit had a girdle and hangers, at the price of thirty pounds. O
brave Jesuits. O poor begging Friars. Where is that poverty, which you
profess? the Jesuit Holt and his companions gathered of the Papists in this
Realm, 50000. pounds given for dispensations.
the full sum of fifty thousand pounds for English dispensations; which (as
the secular Priests their brethren do reckon it) make two hundred millions of
Italian scuts. All this which I here affirm of the gallantrie of our poor
begging Friars the Jesuits, is to be seen in my anatomy of popish tyranny;
even verbatim, as it came from the Pens of the Popish Seminary-Priest. Which
I have for this end here inserted, that the Reader may the better understand
that in equality of time, whereof the Libeller complains in the preface of
his second Forerunner.

FINIS.

