harp
Mount Taraghs Triumph. 5. July. 1626.
To the tune of the Careere.
KIng Charles be thou blessed, with peace and with rest;
who caused this assembly hither.
Welcome ye Peers, ye Earls of our Shires,
ye Viscounts, and Barons together.
Taragh the Mount, his joys does account,
being grat'd with your grateful presence.
Nobles then all, at Falkland his call,
to Charles see you give your obeisance.
Knights of great merits, generous of spirits,
to Taragh ye'are welcome this day:
Esquiers, and gentry, the force of our Country,
so march on in battle array:
Spirits of great worth, from the South to the North,
whose hearts do to honor aspire,
To stand with renown, for Charles and his Crown,
is your only delight, and desire.
The Squadrons appear, the Troops they Careere,
from the foot of the Hill, to the top:
With force (like a flood, being mainely withstood)
their courage indureth no stop.
King Charles to thy Troops, the hill of Taragh stoupes
that long a Royal Mansion has been:
With Echoes in the skies, it shouts and it cries,
long life to King Charles and his Queen.
What can your foes, expect but your blows,
and the force of your conquering hands?
If they be bent, to take their event,
to approach to your shoars, or your sands;
Back you will send them, or altogether end them:
for the heavens and your right will uphold you:
Captains why then, come marshall your men,
As if Mars, or King Charles did behold you.
Falkland behold, this Army most bold,
most constant, and loyal of hearts;
To make up their Fortes, or to maintain their Ports,
prepared to perform their parts:
With hearts they do show such homage as they owe,
and straight at a call do attend:
King Charles his Pauillion against an armed Million
of foes, they will stoutly defend.
The Median-soyle, impatient of the foil,
is the heart of our native land;
Mount Taragh of fame is the heart of the same
whereon this Royal army does stand:
That heart, of her heart, with every other part,
fair Ireland presents to her King,
With Trumpets and Drums (not fearing for that (...))
King Charles his triumph let us sing.
Ye Gentlemen and Squiers, ye Knights of the Shires,
your service with courage maintain:
In every degree let noble Falkland see
that your hearts, with your Prince do remain:
Then will be relate unto the King and State,
that Ireland breeds subjects most loyal,
Ye Barons, Viscounts, Earls, give thanks to King Charles*
who caused this assembly most royal.
FINIS.
God save the King.
Imprinted at Dublin,


