A Discovery of Edmund Campion, and his Confederates, their most horrible and
traitorous practices, against her Majesty's most royal person, and the Realm.

Wherein may be seen, how through the whole course of their Araignement: they
were notably convicted of every cause.

VVhereto is added, the Execution of Edmund Campion, Raphe Sherwin, and
Alexander Brian, executed at Tiborne the 1. of December.

Published by A. M. sometime the Popes Scholar, allowed in the Seminary at
Room amongst them: a Discourse needful to be read of every man, to beware
how they deal with such secret seducers.

Seen, and allowed.

Imprinted at London for Edward White, dwelling at the little North door of
Paul's, at the sign of the Gunne, the 29. of Ianua. 1582.

To the right Honorable Sir Thomas Bromeley Knight, Lord Chanceller of
England: William, Lord Burleigh, and Lord Treasorer: Robert, Earl of
Leicester, Thomas, Lord Chamberlain, and Fraunces, Earl of Bedforde, with
the rest of her Majesty's most Honorable Council: continuance of health,
increase of Honor, and all heavenly wisdom.
IT has been always seen (right Honorable) that the Peaceableste Prince has
had the priuiest enemies, the most civil government, some uncivil
adversaries: whose tedious natures, could not live within the compass of
vert^e and modesty, and therefore they were at continual war with them, who
established and maintained a thing of such excellency within their Dominions.
I need not travail for circumstances, to approve what I have said: for that
it has been manifested here in our Realm of England. Her Majesty, under
whom we have been so godly, graciously and famouslie governed, her self
being a spectacle to the whole world, for virtue and modesty of life: how
greatly she is defamed, contemned, and despised therefore, of those whom
iniquity and error has peruerslie blinded, I leave to your Honorable
judgments, my humility and unfeigned loyalty remembered. But fearing to
entangle my self in any such matters, as may either seem tedious to your
Honors, or troublesome to any modest mind: I betake my self to such a simple
course of brevity, as may discover my true intent, and the duetiful reverence
I owe to so Honorable personages.

It is not unknown to your Honors, how not long since I witnessed my
faithful service to her Majesty, to the disproouing of such, as were both
her professed and sworn adversaries: at which time, how notably they were
approved guilty of every objection, both by their own writings,
sufficient evidence, and unreprovable witnesses: it were needless here to
rehearse, for that the matter is yet apparent.

Since that time (right Honorable) there has been cast abroad, by the
secret favorers and ^reends, of these so sufficiently co^uicted: such
reports, Lybels, and traiterous speeches in the behalf of the aforenamed,
both against me, and the other of the witnesses: as many have been enforced to
muse and merua^le, they have been dely^ered soorth after such spightfull and
unjust manner.

Wherefore, at the earnest entreaty of diverse, godly and well disposed men,
as also to discharge my self of the manifest vnt^^^ethes, (to such as have
heard and seen them published against me:) under your Honors favor I hau^
been so bold, to discover these Traitors, and their tr^tcherous practices,
that it may be seen and known, how falselie and untruely they have accused
me, and that they may well understand, how I have been in those places,
where I ha^^ heard and seen more then I will here report, to the confounding
o^ them, and (...) such as they are, though in their Libels, they give forth
otherwise of me.

My request is therefore to your Honors, under whose favors I confess my
self both safely and sufficiently defended: that this my good intent may
attain your Honorable liking^, which will cross all the (...), wherewith I
have been endaungered and discouraged by many.

Thus remaining the most affectionate in duetiful service to her Majesty, and
an humble and obedient servant to your Honors: I cease at this time,
beseeching God long to preserve her Majesty, and your Honors in continual
happiness.

Your Honors in all humility and duty. A. Monday.

To the Courteous and freendly Reader.
HOw precious a thing (courteous Reader) faithfulness to our Prince and
Country is, cannot be so much spoken of, as it does worthily deserve: for
that as Cicero Cicero.
defines, it is the only foundation of Justice, and without which, Prudence
is but Deceitfulness, Temperau^ce but Luxuriousnes, Fortitude mere Cowardice,
and Justice her self, plain Cruelnes. The Heathen and other, failing in this
so commendable virtue, would esteem themselves unworthy to use the company of
men: how much more then ought we Christians, to reverence and honor such an
especial or^ament?

The Romans would take a Hog, A notable example of the Romans.
and break it to pieces in a Mortar: wishing their own bones might so be
broken, if they did prove false of their faith.

The Medians and the Arabians were w^nt to pri^^ their fingers, Medians and the
Arabians.
and each of them should (...) thereof signitying (...), that their blood
should be spilte th^^ kept not their ^aithe.

Among the Scithians, Scithians.
if any were sound to (...) their ^aithe: they were by the law presentlye
adjudged to death.

Cicero writing to Trebatius, Cicero* epist. 12. li. 7 Epist. famil.
reports a notable custom among (...) people, how they would take Jupiters
Stone in their hands, uttering these words: Even as I cast this Stone from
me, so ^et Jupiter cast me out of the society and company of all men, if
willingly I break my faith.

The Aegiptians Aegiptians.
could never abide such persons, as were (...) their faith: and therefore they
that so offended, no redemption might seem to save their lives.

Gaudentius Merula reports, Gaudentius Merula, de Memorabilibus. li. 3. Chap.
3.
that in Bithinia there is a River called Aleos, and of some Olochas: of which
if any one taste, that has broken his faith to his Prince and Country: his
entrayles are presently set on fire within him, and so he ends his life
marvelous miserably.

I would such a River were in all Cities in the world: for then less Treason
and impiety would be practiced among men, against their Prince and natural
Country.

You see of late how it has happened by our own Countrymen, borne and bred
here among us, how they neither regarding their duty to God, or faithful
love they ought to bear their Princess and Country: wilfully yielded
themselves to the enemy of the whole world, with him to practice the
destruction of their lawful Sovereign and her dominion: which being
manifestly proved to their faces, is nevertheless misreported by some of
their secret favorers.

Wherefore, that thou may beware, how thou give credit to any of them all,
whose wicked minds kick and spurn against the truth: read this Discourse,
and thou shall evidently see into the depthe of their secret and traiterous
dealings.

And if thou find in some places, such words as modesty can hardly suffer:
bestow such reverence in the reading, as thou maiste be warned by them, to
remain ever a loyal and faithful subject.

Thine to use, A. Monday.

These faults good Reader, where thou shall find them escaped in the Book, I
desire thee freendly to correct.
In the first Page of B. among the names, thou shall find James Bosgraue by
misaduenture left out: I desire thee to bear with the Printers fault, and to
allow the name there.

In the 11. page of C. 3. line, for, ought to be committed, read, ought not to
be committed.

In the 15. page of C. 8 line, for, aforenaned, read, aforenamed.

In the 16. page of C. 9. line, for, your ^wayne, read, you twain.

In the 5. page of F. 16. line, for, Edward Bishton, read, Edward Rishton, as
also in the Margent.

All other faults whatsoever, escaped unwittingly, and not wilfully: I desire
thee freendly, to amend as they should be.

A Discovery of Edmund Campion, and his Accomplices, their most traitorous
practices, against her Majesty, and the Realm.
Edmund Campion, Raphe Sherwin, Lucas Kerbie, Edward Rishton, Thomas Coteham,
Henry Orton, and Robert Johnson, all these aforenamed persons, were brought on
Monday, the 20. of November to the high Bar at Westminster: where they were
severally, and all together, endited upon high Treason, the sum whereof,
follows in brief as thus.
THAT these persons, contrary both to love and duty, forsook their native
Country, to live beyond the Seas, under the Popes obedience, as at Room,
Rheimes, and diverse other places: where, (the Pope having with other Princes
practiced, the death and deprivation of our most gracious Princess, and utter
subuertion of her seat and kingdom, to his deuillish and abominable Religion)
these men, having vowed their alleageaunce to the Pope, to obey him in all
causes whatsoever, being there, gave their consent, yea uttermost furtherance
they might, to aid him in this most traitorous determination.

And for this intent and purpose, they were sent over, to seduce the hearts of
her Majesty's loouing Subjects, and to conspire and practice her Graces death,
as much as in them lay, against a great day, set and appointed, when the
general hauock should be made, those only reserved that joined with them. This
laid to their charge, they boldly and impudently denied: whereupon a lewrie
was impaneled, their own confessions, their own writings, and credible
witnesses, Viua voce, produced to their faces, approouing them guilty of the
former allegations, as hereafter follows.

After the Endightment was read unto them, and their answer, that it was
beyond their power to prove them faulty in any such matters, so stiflie they
stood in their apparent impudency: first was moved to them, sundry Treasons
past, attempted against her Majesty, by those of their sect and disposition,
yet notwithstanding the uttermost of their malice and cruelty: how mightily
God had defended his chosen Elizabeth, returning their dealinges to their own
destruction.

Among sundry these Treasonable practices, The rebellion in the North, only
through the Popes means.
which the Pope, the ancient adversary to her Majesty: has at diverse times
set a broche, the rebellion in the North may remain as a witness, of his
exceeding malice and spite against her Grace and government.

Whereto let us ad, the Bull sent over by John Felton, The s^m of the Popes
Bull, which our English men beyond the Seas, hold as their authority, to
rebel against her Majesty.
which Traiterouslie he placed on the Bishop of Londons gate: in which Bull,
the Pope utterly excommunicated her Majesty, she was an Heretic, he had
dispossessed her of her Crown and Dominion, she was not the lawful Queen of
this Realm, and her Subjects were not bound to obey any of her Laws or
Decrees: but they were all free, and perfectly discharged of their allegeaunce
to her, so that they might lawfully, when time served so convenient for them,
both stir rebellion against her, and also enter into Arms against her
Majesty.

The Popes will in this, has been put in execution, as through the ill
demeanor of diverse persons to him affected, it was moved in the North: where,
maintaining themselves on the authority of the Pope, and his traitorous Bull,
secretly dispersed abroad, they entered into a plain and manifest rebellion.
Doctor Saunders his rebellion in Ireland, through whom the people were seduced
to fight against their lawful Princess.
The like was put in practice in Ireland, through Doctor Saunders, and other
Traitors, who there joined themselves together, under the Popes standard, to
bring to pass^ their secret appointment in this Realm. Through their
persuasions and dealings, the people were moved in the Popes name, to fight
against their lawful Princess under his Banner: and to rebel against her, so
notoriously as they might. The encouragement to this great disobedyence, they
received through Doctor Saunders, a Fugitive and rank Traitor to his Prince
and Co^ntrey: as also through diverse Jesuits, both English and Irish, whose
hippocriticall show of holiness, and deuillish persuasions on the behalse of
the Pope, their Master and head: entised a multitude of the people there, to
change their profession in Religion, and to yield them selves to the Popes
authority, whereby they should renounce the most certain and just title of
her Majesty, and when foreign forces should be assembled there, they to join
with them in their intent, and so traitorously rebel against their lawful
Sovereign. All these practices took their origynall from the Pope, as well by
sending his secret Messengers, as also by his traiterous Bull: This Bull
remains in his former force, by this Pope, only a tolleration for the
s^raitnes to the Subject therein amended.
which being sent by Pius Quintus, is never thelesse confirmed (in the former
authority) by this Pope Gregory, xiij. and remains in hope to take effect
at some time or other, for which he does watch opportunity as conveniently
as he may.

But God, the just auenger of all causes, as he has hitherto preserved her
Majesty, and this little Island, from all their malicious attempts and
practices, and has deservedly thrown the yoke of their shame, on their own
necks: so will he, no doubt, continue his fatherly care, that his Children
shall be preserved, and their adversaries confounded.

But says Master Campion: Master Ca^pion destreth not to hear, how their
Treasons took their original, and how from time to time they have been
enterprised and confounded: wherefore to blind the peoples ^yes, he makes this
counterfeyt answer.
what is this to us here present? what appertains this to our endytement? we
are here both severally and altogether endyted on high Treason, and for
that that is objected against us, we must answer. Let not other men's
offenses be laid to our charge, that we should answer for other men's
faults committed long since: some of us were then but Nouises here in y^
Uniuersities, and were altogether ignorant of these matters. What have we to
do with any thing that they did? they that were offenders, let them answer
to what you can lay against them.

For us that be here at this instant, you must either say: thou Campion
dyddest this thing, or thou (naming some of the other) committedst this
offense, and thereupon bring your proofs and witnesses, otherwise you shall
never be able to touch us. As for these assertions, for the strength they have
against us, I will not esteem it worth a penny worth of Pippins: and therefore
to your endytement.

This answer, so smoothly delivered, and with such coy looks, and
protestation of action iested: to all the standers by gave perfect notice of
the man, both of his nature and disposition, as also of his prompte and
ingenious capacity, to shaddowe an absolute truth, with a show of great
wisdom and learning. For this he knew^ right well, that before he came to
that place, he had w^n a meruaylous goodly report, to be such a man, In the
Libell against me, was made this report of Campion, to be a man of so rare
learning and excellency. etc.
as his like was not to be found, either for life, learning, or any quality
that might beautify a man, so that by his favorers and friends it was blown
abroad: that we had neither Doctors nor other, that were worthy to enter
disputation with him, he was so far above them all, that they might not deal
with him.

Now being brought unto a public trial, it stood him upon to argue
somewhat of the praise that had been given him: wherefore, in very quaint and
familiar eloquent gloses, he stood upon quirkes and fine devise of speech,
thinking, as he had deluded many before, so at that present, he might blind
the eyes of Justice, and acquit him self of his horrible treasons. But as
truth shows most brave, when she goes naked and bare, and deceyt finest,
when he is cunningly flourished: even so, the poor habit of the one,
discovered the proud heart of the other, and confounded his boldness with her
sacred bryghtnesse: giving all men to understand, that Veritas vincit omnia.

And because Master Campion would have made such a cunning conueyaunce of the
matter, as though it neither might or could attaint him or any of them: it was
given him to understand, that they would not alone touch him in the sequel
of the former causes, but them all, and he that supposed him self the cleerest.

Whereupon, Doctor Saunders, and Doctor Bristowe, Doctor Saunders and Doctor
Bristowes books, were there read unto them, wherein, most trayterouslie they
defended the rebellion against her Majesty.
their traiterous writings in defense of the Popes Bull exhibited against her
Majesty, was read unto them, how they both allowed it, and also the
Rebellion in the North. Afterward, it was manifestly proved to their faces,
that Bristowes book in allowaunce thereof, named his Motives, was especially
commanded to be used amongst them both at Room, and at Rheimes, every one
being expreslie charged not to be without one of these Books.

This with open mouths, they altogether denied, some that they had never seen
it, and some that they never heard of any such commandment: They denied what
one of their own fellows had confessed* and subscribed to, and what every one
of the witnesses knew to be most certain.
when as John Heart, one of their own fellows, had avouched it, and thereunto
subscribed.

Besides, my self when I came to Rheimes, saw them as common amongst them, as
the little Catechism here among Children, the inequality of the number
considered.

Again, at Room they were as common likewise, in the Seminary, and among the
Englishmen in the City, for my self had it, and one of Doctor Allens
Catechismies delivered me, with great charge to embrace it as my chief
instruction. My Companion that went with me, he had one likewise: the rest of
the witnesses, they had seen how common they were, and in what reverence and
authority they esteemed them: yet these men would with shameless faces deny
it, yea, and if they might have been so credited, would have sworn against it.

This manifest reproof, they would not grant unto: but Master Campion takes
upon him to wrest it according to his humor, by answering that the book was
not so ill as they took it for, nor deserved any such judgment of prejudice.

Now he thought he could not be taken tardie, but supposed his argument to
pass unreprovable.

For that in the new imprinting of this Book, such matters as did most sharply
touch them, Master Campion answered this point subtly: because in the last
edition of the book, the chief matters against them selves were abridged.
were abridged, thinking none of the former books should come to light: but
heerin Master Campio^ ouershot himself, for so sly an answer could not cover
so foul a blemish. When they had notably convicted them of these matters,
which with obstinacy they still denied: they came to the intent of their
secret coming over into this Realm, which was for y^ death of her Majesty,
and overthrow of the whole Realm, which should be by domestical rebellion, and
foreign hostility, y^ sum whereof, in brief is thus. This little Island, God
having so bou^tifullie bestowed his blessings upon it, that except it prove
false within it self, no treason whatsoever, can prevail against it, and the
Pope being heerof very well persuaded, by reason y^ all his atte^pts have
proved of no effect: he has found out a mean, whereby he assures himself to
speed of his desire. Secret rebellion must be styrred here at home among our
selves, The general determination, how to bring to pass theyrecret intent in
this Realm.
y^ hearts of the people must be obdurated against God and their Prince: so y^
when a foraine power shall on a sudden invade this Realm, the Subjects thus
seduced, must join with these in Arms, and so shall the Pope attain the sum
of his wish. But now let us examine each matter with our selves, and see into
the bowels of this traitorous action: yea, let us before we pass any farther,
resolve our selves how this secret Sedition should be brought to pass. The
people must be first reconciled from their religion, to embrace the laws and
decrees of y^ Pope, then, they must be persuaded to forsake their duty and
allegiance to her Majesty, because she is excommunicated out of the Popes
Church, and he has freede them of any obedience they should use to her: so
that they may lawfully resist against her, and take weapons of defense in this
behalf.

But now, what are they that must take upon them, to win the hearts of the
people in this sort? they are no strangers, for if the Pope should send them
on this business, he might hap to fail, as he has done before: for, the
simple and unlearned, ignorant in their language, doubtful of their intent,
and beside hard to be wun by those they know not, would rather appeach them
openly, then agree with them in this privily. And if so be they might light
upon some, easy to be entreated, because their Faith is not stayed: they
might chance upon some again, whose faithful hearts to their Sovereign,
would embolden them rather to die upon such a Traitor, then once they would
hear a motion, to offer them disobedience.

No, no, the Pope was well assured, that these affairs would not be so
slightly dispatched, and therefore such a doubtful matter, required far more
dilligent Messengers. The only cause why the Pope has kept his two Seminaries
at Room and at Rheimes so long: for that none might better move secret
r^bellion in England, then they.
He has not kept his two Seminaries, the one at Rheimes in France, the other
at Room, all this while for nothing, he has not looued them, cherished them,
and so fatherlye provided for them, but that he had some farther intent in his
dealings: these are they must do the deed, this is the ready stringe to his
bow, and through them he hops to speed surely.

These being our own Countrymen, sworn to him in all causes whatsoever,
well schooled and instructed in these affairs: they can with more dexterity
order these matters, because they know their Host before they come over, they
can disguise them selves for being known, and to be brief, are more privy
to our nature then any stranger can be, therefore this is the only mean.

To this end and purpose are our English men there mayntayned, A sure way, to
make all Englismen they can get out of England, to ioy^e with them in this
traiterou^ intent. For none but such as will be Preests, must stay there.
there receive they their Preesthoode, and then they are apt to serve the
turn. As for such as shall come thither, not minding to be Priests: there is
no place for them, there are excuses sufficient, so that he must be a Priest,
or else depart thence.

And good reason have they for this, for when they enter into Preesthood, they
are sworn duetifull and faithful to the Pope, to obey him in all causes what
soever, and to do what soever their Superiors shall command them: now if
any one should remain among them, not entering into this oath, their secret
practices might be discovered, and beside, that man unsworn, to be sent about
these matters, might choose whether he would fulfill his charge or no.

As for those that be Priests, and are sworn to this obedience: they must,
what ever happen to them, do their vttermoste, or else they fall into the
Popes curse, and are excommunicated, beside, their sins (breaking their
promise with him, Their persuasion on the Popes behalf, to urge our Englismen
to fulfill the Popes mind, what ever comes of them.
who is Christ's Uicare on earth) shall never be forgiven them (say they)
neither in this world, nor in the world to come. With such threatenings, lies
of miracles of their Church, and styncking Relics they show: they make our
English men bewitched unto them, so that they stand in as much aw^ to offend
him, as they do God, which is in Heaven. For through his Indulgences granted
to their Agnus De^s, their Beads* Crosses, and Medalles: they as verily
think that they redeem so many souls out of Purgatory, as the Pope does set
upon them at his blessing them, even as verily do they credit it, as we hope
to go to heaven.

And for this intent, A thing to be looked unto, for through their secret
friends, they have here, a number are brought to ioyn^ in this action.
they have their perswaders here, who, if they know any young Gentleman or
other, that is willing to travail: they will both proffer him such
sufficiency of money, as shall bring him to their Seminary at Rheimes, beside
Letters for his entertainment there, shall be given him, that when he comes
thither, he shall not only be welcomed gratefully, but also esteemed equal
with any of the other.

Then when they have studied there a while, that they are brought within the
compass of their determination: they shall be sent to Room, to receive their
Preesthood, if so be their minds serve them to travail so far, otherwise
they receive it at Rheimes, and this is the continual dealings between the
two Seminaries, to be sure of store for maintenance of their matter.

These men thus made Preests, Priests yeer^ly appointed, and sent for England.
are appointed yearly by their Superiors, so many of them as shall be thought
convenient, to be sent into England, to make preparation for the Popes former
intent. They have their charge delivered them, how wary and circumspect, how
faithful and dilligent they must be, in execution of so great a cause: they
are pardoned for so many days as they cannot say Mass, by reason of the
danger here in England, and therefore they may let their Crowns alone
vnshauen, where if they stayed there, they must be shaven duly every week.
But, if when they are here, in such a man's house where they may say Mass:
they do not daily do it, then they sin mortally, and for want of some other
Priest to absolve him, he writes down all such sins as he daily commits,
till he may attain unto confession. But nevertheless, himself has
authority to reconcile, confess and absolve, so many of her Majesty's
Subjects as he can win from their obedience.

Then with them they bring Agnus Deis, The Popes Merchandise, that his
Commissioners bring with them into England.
hallowed Grana, and Beads, sanctified Images, holy Gyrdles come from S.
Peeters Chair, Crosses and Medalles, and a number of such paltryes.

The Agnus Dei, is included within a case made fit for the purpose, and the
virtue of it is, that the Devil dare not come near him, so long as he has it
about him, nor any sprights, or evil motions may attempt to fraye him: for
that say they (most traitorously and blasphemously) he has the very Lamb of
God about him, which is the stinking Agnus Dei, made of War, chrisma, spittle,
salt, Oil, and such trumperies, whereof I have seen abundance made in the
Popes Palace, and they be nothing worth, till he have said a few Enchaunting
words over them, where they stand great Chests full, Sackes and Baskets. Yet
they allow no holiness to the Chest, Basket or Sack, which receives as much
blessing as they.

It were too tedious to discourse here, the manner and order of all these
^ables: wherefore I refer you to a book, which by the grace of God shall
come forth shortly, entitled, The English Roman life.

Wherein, our Englishmen, and their order of life, shall be truly and not
malliciously reported: with so many of their Popish knaueries discovered, as I
know will move some both to laugh and lament.

To laugh, in that their dealinges are so ridiculous and foolish: and to
lament, in that they will be governed by so vain imaginations.

When they are thus arrived in England, Their own confession, how they behave
them selves, when they come into England.
they dispearce them selves into such places, where they think them selves to
be surest: some in one place, some in an other.

And disguising them selves like Gentlemen, Seruingmen, or what Apparel they
may find meetest for them: they have access to many and sundry places,
where having reconciled some, their friends must likewise be of the same
stamp, and so, what from Father to Son, Husband and Wife, Kinsmen and
acquaintance, a number are seduced and brought into their detestable dealinges.

For, after they have gotten any little ground within them to build upon,
then do they lay unto them, what a general blooddy day is toward England,
that the Pope and other foreign Princes have fullye determined to over run
the Realm: then better it were for you (say they) to yield your selves
willingly, then to see so horrible a slaughter, both of your Princess, and
all that dare presume to take her part.

Your selves, yea, and your friends shall abide the same hard judgment,
except you join with us in this action. Thus through terrifying, and a
thousand Traitorous fetches they have: one friend brings an other, and one
Kinsman an other: so that, as they them selves will make their boast, in short
time they doubt not to have the most part of all England, yea, and farther
they presume, that her Majesty thinking her self in most safety, shall then
be soonest of all deceived.

These are the men that make them selves so sound and substantial, Master
Campion coulloreth their com^ing over, ^if^ming it was for the sauegard of
souls.
that they are as true Subjects to her Majesty, as the best of us. Yea, says
Master Campion, never shall you prove this, that we came over, either for
this intent or purpose: but only for the saving of souls, which mere loo^^
and conscience compelled us to do, for that we did pity the miserable estate
of our Country.

But where are your proves, (says he) these are but quirkes by the way, our
lives I perceive stands upon points of Rethorique, you have showen us the
Antecedent, now let us have the Ergo.

With this continual course of holdnesse and impudency, Master Campion and
his fellows would grant nothing, but stiflie denied every cause: and Master
Campion, he took it for a custom, to wrest every thing as pleased him,
saying: That y^ Iewrie were not men learned, When he had no other shift, he
fell into these words.
and therefore causes of conscience ought to be committed to them, neither was
that bar appointed to define on causes of conscience: wherefore, all that you
do (says he) is but to bring us into odium with y^ Iewrie. After this order
he deluded y^ people, appealing still on the deuoutnesse of his conscience:
because he saw the matter brought to the very pushe, that would generally
conuicte them all, for the witnesses were produced and sworn Hearts
confession, and their own writings before them, so that they would remove
them from their ordinary illusions.

George Elliot, one of the ordinary Yeomen of her Majesty's Chamber, upon his
oath gave forth in evidence, as follows. That he, living here in England,
among certain of that S^cte, fell in acquayntaunce with one Pain a Priest:
who gave him to understand, of a horrible Treason intended against her Majesty
and the State, which he did expect^ shortly to happen, the order, how and
after what manner, in brief is thus. That there should be leueyed a certain
company of Armed men, which on a suddayne should enterprise a most monstrous
attempt: a certain company of these armed men, should be prepared against her
Majesty, as many against my L. of L. as many against my L. T. as many against
S. F. W. and diverse other, whose names he does not well remember. The deaths
of these Noble Personages should be presently fulfilled, and her Majesty
used in such sort, as modesty nor duty will suffer me to rehearse: but
this should be the general cry every where, Queen Marie* M^^ning the
Queen of Scot^.
Queen Marie. It was also appointed and agreede upon, who should have this man
of Honors room, and who should have that Office: every thing was determined,
there wanted nothing but the coming over, of such Preests and other, as were
long looked for.

Upon this report, this aforenaned George Elliot, took occasion to question
with this Pain, how they could find in their hearts to attempt an act of so
great and horrible cruelty, considering how high an offense it should be to
God, beside, great danger might arise thereby. A most traitero^s and
villainous answer: of every true Subject, to be read with re^erence of the
person.
Whereto Pain made answer, that the kylling her Majesty was no offense to
God, nor the uttermost cruelty they could use to her, or any that took her
part: but that they might as lawfully do it, as to a brute Beast, and him
self would be one of the foremost in the executing this vilainous and most
traitorous action.

By this you may perceive, that the death of her Majesty, No ^ote of their
good will wanted, if God did not as he daily does, prevent their purposes.
and overthrow of this Realm, was thorowlye agreede upon, and fully
determined: there wanted nothing but opportunity, for Priests both then and
since, came over continually, to farther it, so much as in them lay.

Now that you may be perfectly resolved, that this was a general determination
of our Englishmen, dispersed beyond the Seas, that this bloody slaughter and
great day, as they called it themselves, was especially provided for, and that
both Campion, and the rest of his Accomplices* came all only over for this
intent: mark this which I shall now deliver unto you, wherein you shall
perceive the full issue of the matter.

At what time, I my self went over, accompanied with one Thomas Nowell, whom I
left at Room, vowed to be a Preeste, and to remain there among them: when we
came to Amiens in France, we ^ounde an old English Priest, lying there,
named Master Woodwarde, of whom I could report, more then I will do at this
present, because I will declare things more at large in my other Book.

This Priest, This Priest was the first, that ever I heard to name the treason.
having my fellow and me alone in his Chamber, began to open to us the
imminent danger toward our Country of England: which he feared would be
utterly wasted and spoiled ere long, yea, her Majesty, and all that durst
take upon them to defend her.

For (quoth he) the Popes holiness owes them a payment, which ere long they
shall feel, and that surely.

And trust me (quoth he) this is the happiest deed that ever you did in all
your life, to come from thence, leaving them to the terrible judgment which is
toward them, and I would your parents and friends were here with you, not to
endure that grievous extremity. As for your twain, the best counsel that I
can give you, is to enter into Preesthood, and so you may be able to benefit
your Country an other day: because it is to be doubted, that there will be
great want of men of the Church there.

If you can conform your selves to enter into this holy and blessed kind of
life: I will direct you not far hence, to a place called Rheimes, In my other
Book, you shall understand more.
where you shall be entertained, among a goodly number of our own Countrymen,
who live there only for this purpose.

We made promise to do as he had willed us, but we deceived his expectation:
as because the matter is not incident to this place, I leave to be discovered
in my other Book.

At Paris we heard the very same matter of danger to be toward England and
her Majesty: the Englishmen there, The Englishmen at Paris, rehearsed the same
matter that the Priest had done.
discoursed it, even as we had heard by the Priest at Amiens.

At Lions, we understood heerof again, reported by one of them now condemned,
named Henry Orton, Henry Orton, lying in the house of one Master Deacon,
ga^e forth notice of the former matter.
Gent. he said that her Majesty was no lawful Queen, but an usurper, and
that as Iezabell was served: even so should she ere long be used, when the
chief matter went forward in England. And to his companion he said, that he
understood there were Preests appointed for England, and because he saw that I
gave out some cross words, of misliking that he had said: he set his Boy to
pick quarrels with me, to the end, that if I would have quarrelled again, he
might have done me some mischief by the way, for he liked every bodies
company better thine mine.

Yet when I justified this to his face at the Bar: he would not know me, but
desired my Lord to examine me where I knew him. Then upon my opening of time,
place, and other tokens, he began to deny all, that it was in no point true
which I had said.

When I came to Room, The common and general speeches in the Seminary at
Room. (...) with all that we heard by the way.
I was allowed the Popes Scholar, and lived there in the Seminary among them:
if I should report all that I heard, it were more then modesty would suffer,
wherefore I am constrained to let it pass. But they that have been h^ere
convicted, if they would confess and agree to the truth: themselves would
say, that I report nothing but their own words: because some of them spoke
them, other some were present by when they were spoken, greatly triumphing and
rejoicing: and not one of them, but are very well acquainted with them, and a
number of such like Traiterous speeches.

At what time God str^^ke me with sickness there, and they as was their daily
wunt, would come to visit me, some of them lying in the Chamber with me: they
would sit down on my Beds side, and other some on Stools by, when as they
would enter into such horrible speeches against their Prince and Country: as
at every remembrance, my heart does bleed to think upon them.

Quoth one of them* there is a Rod in providing, that shall rouse that
presumptuous Iezabell (meaning our most Gracious Princess) out of her usurped
authority, Their only delight to (...) and ^ayle against her Majesty, and her
honorable Counsel, to whom they give such names, as modesty will not suffer
me to report.
which she has so long time held, to our no little grief, and then look how
Iezabell was served: even so shall she be, yea, wurse if wurse may be: oh most
traitorous words, yet there passing every man's mouth with great laughter and
joy.

Quoth an other to me, you may be happy, if God take you out of this world
here: then shall you never see the bloody ruin of your own Country, which
will be shortly, and sooner then some of them looks for: wherefore, if you
have any friends in England, which you doubt to be fallen from the faith, and
take part in that abominable Religion: send to them so soon as you can, that
they may go to some of our Preests, there laboring about the chief cause, to
be reconciled by them, and so to conform their lives a new.

And then they will deliver them certain Grana Benedicta, Tokens appointed to
pass among them, when this great day shall come, which they hope for.
that is appointed by the Popes holiness for them, or else the watch word Jesus
Maria: for being found without these two, they will be destroyed, as all the
rest shall be, that are not so provided. Now they mean to deal surely,
because they have sundry ways attempted, yet still have been deceived, and
therefore they have appointed a great day, when as the general havoc shall
be made through all England.

Robert Parsons, commonly called among them Father Parsons Jesuit, at what time
Pater Alfonsus, Rector of the Seminary, was so strooken with sickness, that
he could not be conuersaunt among the Scholars as was his wunt, but inclined
to such means, as might soonest restore his health: After what manner* Father
Parson^ used to school and instruct the Scholars (while he was in office.
this aforesaid Robert Parsons, by consent of their General, was appointed our
Rector, till father Alfonsus was well again.

In the time of this his office, it was his often use to have us all assembled
together, and then he would come and sit down in a Chair in the midst: when
he would open unto us, in what miserable and lamentable estate our Country of
England stood, which (quoth he) I bemone with a bleeding heart, and would to
God my death might restore it according as it should be.

You see what a bloody and tyr^unicall Princess has gotten the Swoorde in
hand, They rem^mber not their own government that call this so (...) and
cru^ll, for they say, that then they (...) nothing but good deeds.
wherewith she s^riketh in such vnmerci^ull sort: that if any of our P^eestes
he taken, which are sent to win our deers Countrymen, from her abominable
and heretical religion: they are presently martired, and entreated more like
Dogs then Christians.

Yet let not your faythes fail for all their torments, but be you constant and
vnremooueable, for the day will come, when she her self shall taste of the
same sauce: and then blood shall be paid with blood, and all that is now
wrong, shall (to your own minds) be made right.

In the mean while, Meaning the Queen of Scots, whom the Pope has vowed to
restore again.
pray for that gracious and thrice blessed Queen, who though she be now held
down by that Iezabels oppression: shall ere long undoubtedly be the glad
Mother of our joy, and though she be kept from that which is her right: she
shall have it, when the proudest of them, shall be of two weak power to defend
them selves.

It is not for me to rehearse the words, The overthrow of England, was
daily ^^lked of.
that he has used, to encourage them in their obedience to the Pope, and
beside, what he has said to me, when as I came to confession to him: but this
I give you to understand, that the chief cause was never forgotten, the great
day was kept in remembrance, and supposed long ere this to have taken
effect, if things had fallen out to their expectation.

I omit here to rippe up, The Scholars them selves, would enterprise the
death of her Majesty, and the Lords of her Counsel.
the innumerable traiterous speeches used among the Scholars themselves,
whereto they are imboldened by these and such like perswaders, whereof the Pope
has good store.

What traiterous causes they dare take upon them, to fulfill themselves by
their own hands, upon her Majesty's most royal person, as also the Lords of
her honorable Council. But because they shall not report, that in concealing
their speeches (which for the odious and abominable terms I ought to do) I
am not therefore able to charge them with any: I will (my humility and duty
to her Majesty, and the honorable Personages considered) reveal ye words of
one or two of them, which although it be most horrible and traiterous, yet is
it the simplest that I heard used among them.

It chanced, By this, which is the simplest of all their traiterous intentes:
judge how horrible the other be.
that one day I walked with two or three of the Scholars, to a place without
Room, called Petro Montorium, where (as they say) Saint Peeter was martyred:
and by the way as we went, we fell in our accustomed talk, about the
proceeding of matters in England. Among which talk, they entered into
appointment and determination with them selves, if all other things failed, as
they had good hope they would not: what each of them would do, to
accomplish the Popes long desire.

Quoth one of them, while two or three persons be a live, we may stand in
doubt of our matter in England.

Who be they (quoth I) here I must crave pardon, for that I may not with
modesty, name these men of Honor, according as they did and do: but these
they were, my L. K. then living, my L. T. whom they called plain C. and S. F.
W.

Oh (quoth he) had I the hearts of these in my Purse, and their headdes in the
Popes holiness hands: I would not doubt but ere long, we should all merrily
journey homewarde. Nay trust me (quoth an other of them) if you would so feign
have their three hearts and heads h^ere: then let me ad to the fowrth, and the^
take the whole mess together. I should call her Queen of England (quoth he)
but I will not. Read with reverence and regard.
for that I know she is but an Usurper, and keeps that good Queen of
Scotts from her lawful Seat: for whom our holy Father has so well
provided, as we are credibly infourmed, that she shall be set up again
ere long, or it shall cost the best blood in England.

How say you to her? had we but her head ^eere, we would not doubt but in
short time to bring the prowdest of the other, whether they would or no.

My friends (quoth the third) this is the least matter of a hundred, and I
durst wadge my life, to bring it to pass of my self.

You know that our friends in England will not see us to want any money: if
then I have money good store, let me alone to bring this matter arteficiallie
to pass.

I would (quoth he) make my self very gorgeous and sumptuous apparel,
Behold here the (...) these Traitors have, against their (...) Country.
and keep two or three men to wait on me as I walk through the streets:
then would I go to the Court eueri^ day, for that I have some good
acquaintance there, beside, being so brave and gallaunt, I should be a
companion for every one, so that in their companies I might go into every
place of the Court, and be in the presence of the Queen every day.

Then would I feign to give some gift unto her, and so on a sudden give her
such a gift, as should dispatche her for ever styrring more.

Oh villainous words, able to make a ^lintie heart to gush forth abundance
of tears, to think that such a merciful Princess, should have so merciless
an enemy, especially, that any Subject should but imagine such a monstrous
cruelty. Then (quoth I unto him) admit God did suffer you to do such an
horrible deed, what think you would become of you? you could not escape away,
but you must perforce suffer the awarde of Law.

Tushe (quoth he) what care I for the vttermoste cruelty they would use to me:
I that could accomplish such a famous thing, would never respect Rack, Rope,
nor any torment. He respecte^h ^ore the abominable trumperi^s of the Pope,
then either the safegarde of his soul, or wealth of his Princess and Country.
For this I know, that the Popes holiness, would, in the remembrance of me,
both give forth Indulgences, and a notable benediction: which should be called
after my name, as the benediction for the Queen of Scotts is, and those that
were given for Stukely, the Bishop of Cork, Doctor Allen, and diverse other.
Then when any shall have of my Grana, Crosses, Medalles, and Beads, they will
say: these were blessed for such a one, that did bring to pass in England,
what could not be done in many years before, and then my Beads shall be
prayed upon more then any other.

Beside, my Indulgences should be Plenaria for ever, I should have remission
of all my sins, Masses continually said for me, and all my Country and
friends have liberty of their conscience: then what is he that would not
adventure the extremest hazard of his life, to gain such a heavenly and
blessed reward?

I perceive (quoth he to me) you have but a slender stay of your Faith, that
would fear to do such a good deed for your Country: where through, your
same would be registered for ever* both in our Martirilogium, It is not
possible for us to imagine so ill, as they do daily report.
as diverse of our Country are, and also through the whole world.

A great deal more talk they had, so traiterous and horrible: that no godly
and virtuous minded, can suffer to hear it.

So when we came to the Seminary again, because I had been there but a
while, the same party brought me their Martirilogium: wherein he read to me
the execution of the two Nortons, the death of Doctor Story, and the
Martyrdom of John Felton, and other, altogether Imprinted in a great Book of
their Saints and Martyrs.

The least report of these traitors, which they had there Canonized for
Martyrs of their Church, contained (...) or eight sheets in Folio, (...) of
a very small Letter: but in no point true, because I knew my self the
contrary, for that before I went over, I saw the execution of them all.

There were diverse other of their Martirs, the discourses of their lives and
deaths reserved there to be imprinted in the same Book: as of Barlowe,
Madder, Wilkinson, the Iaylor of York, Sherwood and Nelson, sometime Sexton of
the English Church in Room, all these executed at Tiborne for high Treason,
and there esteemed for their Martires.

William Filbie, at the Bar would challenge me, that there was no such Book
there: when I am sure, not one of the other will attempt to deny it, if they
should, they be here in the City that are able to disprooue them.

A number of such like traiterous speeches and practices, which on my own
knowledge I am able to report, but to avoid tediousnes, as also not to offend
any chaste and discreet mind, I let them pass in silence, desiring pardon
for that which I have already set down. And now you may perceive, what
affection these fellows, afforde their lawful Queen and Country: well is he
that can imagine most against her Majesty, and highly is he esteemed that
bears the most traiterous heart to her.

Yet Master Campion, Master Campion nor his fello^^^, will grant to any
thing: but ray^e and use bold speeches, whereby their guilty* consciences
were discovered.
and the rest of his fellows, they plead ignorance in all these causes, they
bolster up one another with large protestations, railing words, and subtle
surmises: affyrming that they were not sent hither for any such intent, which
is as untrue, as we know it for truth, that the Lord God lives in Heaven.

For this I am able to say my self* that both then and at diverse other times,
it was whispered among them in the Seminary: that shortly there should be
Priests appointed for England, to win the people against the appointed time,
when as a great Army should be ready to join with them: and Master Campion,
who was then at Praga in Bohemia, he was spoken off amongst them all, to be a
rare and singular fellow, and therefore generally was taken for a meet man,
to be sent about such a Message, so that they judged that he should be sent
for, to be a chief man in this matter.

Well (says Master Campion) it may be they had such an oppinion of me,
Master Campion covers their (...) in^e^^s, under the saving of Souls.
which in my self I find not to be deserved, and it may be that I was
appointed to be sent into England, according as those other Priests were, for
the saving of Souls, and benefit of my Countreye: must it follow then, that
we are sent to practice the death of the Queen, and to seek the ruin of our
Country?

Alas, this is a hard case, and I desire you of the Iewrie, to mark it, for
these are but shadows without any substance.

This you are to note, that we which enter into that blessed society of the
Jesuits: A holy kind of life* were it not for the B.
we do, as it were, forsake the world, vowing our selves to chastity, and
sincerity of conscience, to obey our Superiors, and to be ready to go
whether they shall appoint us.

If they send us to the Indiaes, or to any such places, where the people have
not the true Catholic Faith: we are bound by duty in Conscience, to go
whether they appoint us.

And shall it then be said, that we come for the destruction of the Prince
and Countreye, where we settle our selves? Alas, that were a hard case, for
Christian charity wylleth us to comfort one an other, Note here the perfect
Image of hypocrisy.
and if we can, to get the Sheep into the Fold, which has long run a
straye. And when we hear confession, we do not persuade them to any
disobedience, for that is against the nature of Confession: God forbid that we
should once think any such thing.

Behold the subtle shifts, that he found out still to fly unto, yea, though
the manifest disproofe lay before them, yet would he find some cavil or
other: for not only the evidence of their general determination beyond the
Seas, was showen them, but also the traiterous Articles were there read unto
them, (...)
which John Heart had coppyed out for Doctor Allen (concerning the proceeding
of these traiterous causes, and for which he went purposelie to Room to
confer with the Pope about) and subscribed unto, that they were certain and
true: as also their own confessions and writings were laid open before them,
approouing them notably guilty of the matters aforesaid.

Charles Sled, who sometime served Master Doctor Moorton in Room, in whose
house there was many matters determined, both by Doctor Allen when he came to
Room, and diverse other Doctors lyuinge there in the City, as also diverse of
the Seminary: he likewise understood of the provision for the great day,
that it was generally spoken of among the English men, and to be more
rertayne, he kept a Iournall or Book of their daily dealinges, noting^ the
day, time, place, and persons, present at their secret conferences, and
very much matter has he justified against them.

One Master Cradocke a Merchaunt, when he was in Room, he understood the
aforesaid determination, and how that Doctor Shelley, the English Priour,
who is a Knight of the Rhodes, for that he somewhat spoke against such
cruelty, to be used to his Native Country: was somewhat mislyked of him
self, and had almost been turned out of his office.

And this aforesaid Master Cradocke, being in Prisonne there, for the space
of twenty Months and more: it was said to him, that he might accoumpt him
self blessed of God, that he was there, because he should not see the
grievous ruin of his native Country.

He that has but half an eye, Consider (...) they concord and agree together.
may see how these matters concord and agree together, and noting every
thing as it lies, may plainly see their horrible and traiterous devises.

And farther, A Book which they use as their instruction how to answer to
every question Sophistically.
there was a little Book in Latin, which they them selves brought over with
them, it was there openly read unto them: wherein was certain rules and orders
prescribed, how they should behave them selves here in England, and how if
they were demanded of any thing, they should make answer indyrectlie: or to
take the word it self, according as it is mentioned in the Book, they must
answer Sophisticae, whereby is meant as thus.

If they be examined, as concerning their allegeaunce to her Majesty: they
will make their answer after this manner. She is our lawful Sovereign Lady
and Queen, and we do obey her.

But then object unto them: will you obey her, notwithstanding the Popes
excommunication, or any thing that he commands to the contrary.

Then will they answer: we desire you not to charge our consciences, To do
their du^tie to a waight^e burden to their cons^ie^ces, and therefore they
abide in their obs^^ancie and blindness.
and that you would not enter so deep into our consciences, we trust the Pope
will not command us any thing against her: and a hundred such like sleeuelesse
aunsweres they make, never agreeing to any certayntie, but holding the Pope in
more reverence then they do her Majesty.

For this consideration they carry with them, that if by their show of
humility, and devised order of craftye aunsweringe, they might move our
Maiestrates to have a good oppinion of the^, and not to deal so strictly, as
law and their deserving does worthily merit: then they might with less
suspect go about their holy Fathers business, in that their Sophistical
aunswers, covered so foul an abuse.

And then so many as comes after them, purposely sent about the same affairs,
seeing their passage made before them, and being Schooled after the same
manner: they might withdraw the hearts of a number her Majesty's Subjects, by
such means as is before largely expressed, so that destruction should come
upon us, before we had discovered their treatcherous dealings.

But God be thanked, as all their devises have had their deserved success,
this Sophistical order has sped a like with them for company: and this let
them fully assure themselves, that what means soever they seek against their
Princess and Country, God will reward them after their own dealings.

To Campion himself, Campion his own answer, as concerning his allegeaunce to
her Majesty.
the former questions were put forth at the Bar: and this answer he made
unto them.

She is my lawful Sovereign Lady and Queen, and I do obey her.

But when he was demanded, although the Pope did expreslye command him the
contrary: if he would nevertheless faithfully obey her.

Oh then they must not so deeply enter into his conscience, that Bar was not
a Bar to define on causes of conscience: that question touched his
conscience, wherefore he flatly said he might not answer it. No, no, he knew
full well, that the traiterous affairs he came about, would not allow him
such a direct answer as they looked for, and gladly would have had, that of a
Saul, they might have made him a Paul. Wherefore his secret and guileful
behavior, made perfect apparaunce of his wicked intent: which he shaddowed
under the counterfeit cloak of saving souls, and reconciling his Countreyme^
to the Catholic faith.

Here it cannot be greatly amiss to rehearse unto you the cause, The cause why
this Pope has tolerated the former Bull of Pius Quintus
why this Pope has tolerated the former Bull, seeing this Sophistical kind
of aunswering grew cheefely thereby. When any of these secret messengers, should
be sent about their holy fathers determination, here in England, to reco^cile,
shriue and win her Majesty's Subjects to their deuillish intent: if such
misaduenture should happen to the^, ye their secret dealings came to the ears
of Justice, then they fell into the danger of law, wherefore, to shadow their
subtlety, and to prosecute the effect of their message, the Pope thought good
to harten them by this Sophistical addition.

For well we know, and themselves likewise are not ignorant thereof, that
being examined, if they should deny the Queens Majesty, to be their Supreme
Princess and Gouernesse, in all causes: then they fell into condemnation by
her laws.

Again, if they denied the authority of the Pope, as of force they must
needs do, if they will esteem themselves good subjects, and manifest a
duetifull and obedient heart to her Majesty: then they break their vow made
to the Pope, and so fall into his curse and condemnation likewise, so that
this is certainly appointed them, to cleave faithfully to the one, and utterly
to forsake the other.

Yet that they might have as much favor and freendship, as the furtheraunce
of such a cause required: this hard clause (being well scanned of diverse our
English Doctors and other, Our English Doctors conferring with the Cardinals
found out the mean for this tolleration.
both at Room and at Rheimes, was through earnest suit, delivered to diverse
of the Cardinals, who laying their heads together, and thoroughly searching the
bottom of every doubt: a tolleration for that strict point was found out,
which was ordained as you have heard before.

Then in all the haste the Pope was given to understand thereof, who
respecting what might be for his benefit, and what might turn to his
discommoditie: authorized them this former tolleration, which God be thanked,
carried as slender strength as the rest of his practices has done.

Yet all this being known to us, Master Campion and his fellows will grant
no knowledge: but pleads still their devout consciences.

An other of their own Books was there read unto them, Another Book how to
handle all manner of persons to win them to their intent.
wherein was other orders prescribed them, how they should handle a Noble man,
how a Gentleman, and how a poor man: which being openly read before them,
gave all there present to understand, how assuredly they had appointed the
course for their Treason.

A number of invincible proofs passing against them, they came at last to the
point of their coming over: how suddenly, how hastily, and all through a
general appoyntement.

Master Campion, Master Campion sent for from Praga to go with other
Priests appointed for England.
he had stayed a long time at Praga in Bohemia, and on a sudden he was
hastily sent for to Room: by his own confession he knew not wherefore, but
the message was in such haste, that he must come thither with all speed.

When he came to Room, he stayed there but five days: in which time,
receiving the sum of their charge, from the Pope, as is their usual wunte,
and their Father General delivering them what he has in office: he was
dispatched from thence with other Priests, who had their Viaticum from the
Popes Treasury, and were all especyally appointed for England.

These Priests were sent (as all other are) about the chief cause, The
Priests are there only maintained for this purpose, and none come from thence,
but about this cause, which proves them all together guilty.
for that none come from thence but only for that purpose: the estate of the
cause before expressed, it is too mani^est, that Campion and his fellows are
guilty of the matters objected against them.

For this you are to remember, that none must stay there without they will be
Priests, when they receive their Preestehood, they enter into their oath,
which oath contains the sum of the Treason: so that all which come from
thence (having taken that oath) come about the execution of the Treason, in
that* none but they that are especially sent, can have their Viaticum of the
Pope, and then he sending them, the case is too evident.

Let not a light judgment pass over a matter of so great respect, let the
Popes intent of keeping them there be considered, the great malice and spite
that he bears her Majesty and the Realm, and then their oath to execute his
commandments, all these laid together, discovers the depthe of their
tretcherie.

But what answers Master Campion to this? Master Campion grants, he
came as the other Preests did to reconcyle and shriue: but he will not allow
that he came for any treason.
he confesses that he was quietly settled at Praga, and little expected any
such hasty sending for, beside, that he went to Room, with great speed,
tarrying there no longer then five days, as is before expressed, and that he
received his Viaticum of the Pope, when as he was dispatched thence with other
Priests, purposelie appointed for England, and that he came no otherwise then
they did, nor for any other intent, then for the benefit of Souls, as he
still termed it: but he would not grant that he came for any treason.

So that to seduce her Majesty's Subjects, to persuade them from their duty
and obedience, and to ioy^e them selves in such sort, as their Princess and
Countreye must be destroyed thereby: this is no Treason in his oppinion,
Master Campion and his fellows pleaded ignorance still, they saw and would
not see, they were so craftily schooled.

James Bosgraue, James Bosgraue, his hasty coming from Vilna, when he heard
that Priests were appointed for England.
he was at Vilna in Polonia, and as he confessed him self, he understood that
there was Priests appointed for England: upon which report he came away from
thence in very great haste.

And in his passage, he mentioned to one in the Ship, who was sworn, and
confessed the same before certain Justices, that there was such matters toward
in England, as has been before expressed: and thereupon he sought to have
wunne him, if his purpose could have taken effect.

Master Campion seeing this begun somewhat to touch the quick, and that in
truth it discovered the dealinges of them all: he takes upon him to answer
on his behalf, for that they all reposed them selves on him.

He says, Master Campion frequenteth his accustomed order of subtle
answering.
that if Bosgraue did hear such news, that there were Preests appointed for
England: why should they take hold on so small a cause? Flying reports are
not to be credited, for albeit he heard such news, how knew he, if they
were certain^ or no?

Again (quoth he) the man has been long out of England, and he does not
speak the English perfectly: it may be then, that some word may escape
him unawares, which you are not to build upon, consydering the defecte of
the man, for he may peradventure speak he knows not what.

And where you say, that such a one has avouched before certain Justices,
that he used such and such words to him: where is the man, we are not to
credit a written Paper, what know we if it be true or no? let us hear him
self say so, and then we will believe it.

S^e what a number of shyftes he had continually, Traitors will never believe
any truth, especially, if it touch them selves.
to waste the the time, and all to no purpose: the man's own confession was
there, whereto him self had subscribed, and four or five Justices set their
hands to it, for the certayntie thereof, yet this was not sufficient to
answer them.

Robert Johnson, he was likewise at Auinion in France, Robert Johnson, his
coming from
from whence he came also in very great haste, upon the report he had heard,
Auinion in France.
of Priests that were appointed for England.

Now there is an other thing to be considered, that these men, settled where
they were, by their own confession they must not depart from thence, without
they be appointed by their Superiors: then it is easy to be answered, that
they came by their Superiors appointment at this present, and as the general
determination was, so they came all, for one cause and intent.

Edward Bishton, he being here in England, Edward Bishtons Letter, to
Richardson one of the condemned.
wrote a Letter to Richardson a Priest, and who is likewise condemned amongste
them: which Letter was there openly read to his face.

How there were four Goldsmithes of his occupation lately come over, who in
deed were Priests, and how all things went successively foreward.

And Master Campion, being in the Tower, Master Campions Letter to Master
Pownde in the Tower.
wrote a Letter to Master Pownde there likewise, wherein he gave him to
understand, that he was very sorry, that through his frayltie he had bewrayed
those, at whose houses he had been so, friendly entertained: wherefore he
asked God heartily forgiveness, and them all whom he had so highly offended.

But (says he) as for the chief matter, Master Campion was resolut^ in the
chief matter.
that is as yet unrevealed: and come Rack, come Rope, never shall that be
discovered.

A number of matters more were brought against them, which to rehearse, would
require a far more large discourse: but to be breese, in the end this was
the full and certain issue.

That these men, when they were beyond the Seas, the general agreement and
determination amongst them: was to work the death of our most gracious
Princess, to destroy her Dominion, and to erecte such as pleased them, when
this aforesaid great day should take effect.

And that their coming over, was to seduce her loouing Subjects, to win
their obedient hearts from her: so that they should be in a readiness to
join with a foreign power, and so they should likewise be destroyers of
their Princess and Country. And that in the mean while, they them selves
sought to accomplish her Majesty's death, so much as in them lay.

This was manifestly proved, by very large and ample evidence, credible
witnesses, and their own confessions and writings: whereon the Iewrie having
wisely and discreetlie pondered, and searched and seen into the depth of every
cause, woorthilie and deservedly gave them up all guilty, of the Treasons
whereof they were endighted and arraigned.

Which being done, after a godly and comfortable exhortation, persuading them
patiently to suffer, and abide the death for them appointed, and to be
heartily sorry for their grievous and heinous offenses: the sentence of death
was pronounced on them.

That they should depart to the places from whence they came, and from thence
to be drawn on Hurdles to the place of execution, where they should be hanged
till they were half dead, then to be cut down, their privy members to be
cut off, and their entrayles taken forth, and to be burned in the fire
before their eyes: then their heads to be cut off, their bodies parted into
four quarters, to be disposed at her Majesty's pleasure, and the Lord God to
receive their souls to his mercy.

Afterward they were conuayed from thence with Boats, to a place of landing
for them appointed, from whence they were conducted to the Tower of London,
diverse of them giving forth sundry wicked and dishonest speeches: as Thomas
Cotehan, seeing so many people to behold them, desired that fire and Brimstone
might fall from Heaven, to destroy both the City, and all that were in it:
with diverse other wicked words, which for modesties sake I omit here to
rehearse, desiring God in mercy to remember them all, and to forgive their
souls, their bodies misdeedes.

ON the next day, being Tuesday, and the xxi. of November, there was brought
to the said high Bar these persons following. John Heart, Thomas Foord,
William Filbie, Lawrance Richardson, John Shert, Alexander Brian, and John
Collington.

Alexander Brian, A very holy thing, but very meet for his de^^tien,
he had shaven his Crown himself, and made him a Cross of a piece of a
trentcher, which he held in his hand openly and prayed to: which when he was
rebuked for, he boldly and stoutely made answer. That his Crown was of his
own shauing, and he had good hope to do it again.

In brief, they were all endited on the self same treasons as the other were
the day before, and John Heart, his traiterous Sermon which he made at Rheimes
against her Majesty avouched to his face: their own writings and confessions,
with (...) witness produced against them: so that they were found guilty of
the treasons, as the other were before them, except John Collington, he was
quit of the former high Treason by the Iewrie.

Thus in brief I have certified you, of the Treasons which Campion and his
confederates, conspired and practiced against her Majesty and the Realm, how
they were manifestly convicted of every cause, and notably approved guilty,
notwithstanding all their cullored surmises. I beseech God long to preserve her
Majesty and this Realm, and all that bear like false hearts as these did,
that he will either turn their hearts, or cut off their traiterous and
deuillish devises.

FINIS.
A brief Discourse, concerning the deaths of Edmund Campion, Jesuit, Raphe
Sherwin, and Alexander Brian, Seminary Priests: A reigned and condemned for
high Treason, and executed for the same, at Tiborne, on Friday, being the 1.
of December. 1581.
ON Friday, being the 1. of December, Edmund Campion Jesuit, and Raphe
Sherwin, and Alexander Brian, Seminary Priests, being condemned for high
Treason, against her Majesty's most royal person, as also for Traiterous
practices, touching the subversion of the true and undoubted Religion here
maintained, with the utter ruin and overthrow of this Realm of England: were
drawn from the Tower of London on Hurdles, to the place of execution
appointed, being guarded with such a sufficient company, as might express the
honor of Justice the larger in that behalf.

Being come to the place of execution, where diverse of her Majesty's Honorable
Counsel, with many honorable Personages, and Gentlemen of worship and good
account, beside a multitude of people, not here to be numbered, attended their
coming: Edmund Campion was first brought up into the Cart, where, after the
great rumor of so many people somewhat appeased, he began to proceed in his
confession.

First he began with a phrase or two in Lattin, when seen after he sell into
English as thus.

I am here brought as a Spectacle, before the face of God, of Angels and of
men, satisfying my self to dye, as becomes a true Christian and Catholic
man.

As for the Treasons which have been laid to my charge, and I am come here
to suffer for: I desire you all to bear witness with me, that thereof I am
altogether innocent.

Whereupon, answer was made to him by one of the Coun^ell, that he might not
seem to deny the objections against him, having been proved so manifestly to
his face, both by sufficient witness and evidence.

Well my Lord (quothe he) I am a Catholic man and a Preeste, in that faith
have I lived hitherto, and in that faith I do intend so dye, and if you
esteem my religion Treason, then of force I must grant unto you as for any
other Treason, I will not consent unto.

Then was he moved as concerning his Traiterous and heinous offense to the
Queens most excellent Majesty: whereto he answered: She is my lawful
Princess and Queen, there somewhat he drew in his words to himself, whereby
was gathered, that somewhat he would have gladly spoken, but the great
timeritie and unstable oppinion of his conscience, wherein he was all the time,
even to the death, would not suffer him to utter it.

Here is with judgment, a deep point and high matter to be considered, that
this man, always directing the course of his life to a vain glorious
imagination, and always covetous to make himself famous: at this instant made
a perfect discovery of himself.

For being somewhat learned, all matters whatsoever, as you have heard before,
he bare away with a magesticall countenance, the visor of vanity, aptly
fitting the face of only hypocrisy: what was sound he would make
Sophistical, what was the infallible truth of it self, he would carry in his
own conceit, and delude the people with a pleasant quirk, or some such stuff,
only to purchase him credit and affection.

And he was not to learn, to set a courageous countenance on every such
slight reason: whereby he perverted many, deceived more, and was thought such
a Champion, as the Pope never had the like.

But now behold the man, whom neither Rack nor Rope should alter, whose
faith was such as he boasted invincible: fear had caught hold on this brave
boaster, and terror entered his thoughts, whereby was discovered his impudent
dissimulations.

Now let it with patience be moved a little, that the outward protestations
of this man, urged some there present to tears, not entering into conceyte of
his inward hypocrisy: to make a plausible definition of this perilous
deceiuer, not by conjecture, but by proof it shall be thus answered.

Edmund Campion, as it is by men of sufficient credit reported, at what time he
spent his study here in England, both in the Hospital, and also at the
university of Oxenford: was always addicted to a marvelous suppose in
himself, of ripe judgment, pro^pt audacitie, and cunning conueyaunce in his
School points, wherethrough, he fell into a proud and vaineglorious
judgment, practicing to be eloquent in phrase, and so fine in his quirkes and
fantastical conjectures: that the ignorant he wun by his smoothe devises, some
other affecting his pleasant imaginations, he charmed with subtilitie, and
choked with Sophistry.

The learned, who beheld his practices and peremptory order of life, pitying
his folly, and wishing him a more stayed determination: loathed his manners,
yet looued the man, because Christian Charity wylled them so to do.

Now this glorious Thraso, having by his Lybeiles made him self famous, and
under show and suppose of great learning, (though in deed being approved,
found very simple, to the speeches given of him) subdued many to affecte him
very much: when he was taken, he knew it stood him upon, not to loose the
credit openly he had wun secretly, wherefore in his former ridiculous manner,
both in Prison, at his Araignement, yea, and at his death, he continued the
same in all points, which the foulnes of his Treasons blemished every way.

Now indeed, as our English nation is both loouing and pitiful: so, many
seeing the gifts of God, so well bestowed on the man, and by him applied to so
great abuse, through natural kindness bemoned his case, wishing be had not
fallen in so traitorous a cause.

This point, least some should have used to a wurse conjecture, I thought good
in brief somewhat to manifest.

Then was moved to him again his Treasons and heinous offenses against the
Queens Majesty, which impudentlie he still denied, seeming to utter words
on the behalf of one Richardson, one likewise of the condemned Traitors,
taking upon his conscience that it was not he: which has been proved to the
contrary, for that it is known, how this Richardson is he, who distributed
Campions Libels and Books abroad, and when he was put to his oath, whether it
was he or no, he refused to swear on his behalf.

Pray with them in English, as he was desired, he would not, but said his
Pater noster in Latin, and desired all those of the householde of Faith, to
say one Credo for him.

Many indirect aunsweres he made, as when he was moved to ask the Queen
forgiveness, and when the Preacher requested him to show some sign of a
penitent sinner, when shortly he replied: You and I, we are not of one
Religion. After a few silent prayers to him self, the Carte was drawn away,
and he committed to the mercy of God. There he hanged till he was dead, when
being cut down, he was bowelled and quartered, according as it was appointed
by Justice.

Raphe Sherwin seemed a man of better judgment, more learned, and more
obedient, he said the Lords Prayer in English, believing in God that made
him, in Christ his son that saved him, and in the holy Ghost that
sanctified him: and according to the saying of S. Augustine, desired Jesus, that
he would be to him Jesus, as much to say, as his Savior and Redeemer. He
likewise confessed him self a Catholic man, and a Priest, intending to die in
that faith. But when the Treasons were moved to him, he likewise seemed to
make denial thereof.

He asked the Queens Majesty forgiveness, and desired that she might long
live and reign over us. Then was read to him the Book of the aduertiseme^t,
which before had been read to Campion, and after a few prayers he likewise
ended his life.

Alexander Brian seemed more obstinate and impious, using very little sign of
repentance, and hearty humility: he used many prayers to him self, and spoke
very little worthy the rehearsal. Justice being executed on him, he and
Sherwin were quartered, according as Campion had been before them. God grant
that the offenses of these, may be a warning to all other.

God save our Queen Elizabeth.

An Admonition, to all true and faithful Subjects.
YOU HAVE in this discourse (right courteous) breefelye understood the horrible
and traitorous intent, of Edmund Campion and the rest of his secret
confederates, how both against God and natures law, they practiced and
conspired the death of our most gracious and Sovereign Princess, as also the
(...) the sum whereof, how denill^sh and unchristian like (...) was intended, I
leave to the discreet consideration of (...) true and fay^hfull Sub^^^.

Let us therefore, that profess ourselves the children of light, faithful
Stewards to our heavenly ma^ster, and duetifull Subjects to her Majesty, who
(by his sacred and Divine will) is authorized to govern us, remember the
odious and heinous offenses by these our own Co^ntreymen committed, and let
them remain as spectacles before our eyes, how dangerous a thing it is for
any of us to fall in the like.

For of this we may be fully assured, that though we kick and spurn against
the truth for a time: he, who is the Author of all trueth^^ yea, and the
very truth himself, though he suffer us a (...) to run in our own folly,
yet at length he will strike us so severely, that we shall woorthelye taste
the desert of our trespasses, for he is the only Auenger, and he will reward
us in his Justice.

Learn we^ therefore by their example, to abhor and detest that An^echriste
of Room, the ancient adversary to Gods truth, to beware how we deal with
any of his wandering shauelinges and Messengers: for he has choked them with
his abominable driftes and devises, and they vowing themselves his obedient
children, are prepared to root up love, duty and obedience, both to God,
our Princess and Country.

Long may his Gospel floorish and spread here among us, and long may her
Majesty live in health and quietness to nourishe and mainetaine it: as for her
adversaries, God either turn their hearts, or speedily cut them off in their
own devises.

To him therefore let us commend our selves, our dealings and thoughts to his
will and pleasure; so shall we live in continual happiness, by her, whom God
long preserve to our comfort and wealth of conscience.

A. Monday.

FINIS.
Imprinted at London for Edward White, and are to be sold at his shop at the
little North door of S. Paul's Church, at the sign of the Gunne.


