A PREAMBLE UNTO AN INCOVNTER WITH P. R. THE AVTHOR of the deceitful Treatise
of Mitigation: Concerning the Romish doctrine both in question of Rebellion and
of Aequiuocation:

By THOMAS MORTON.

Am I your enemy because I tell you the truth?

GALAT. 4. 16. Published by Authority.

LONDON, Printed by Melch. Bradwood for John Bill and Edmond Weauer. 1608.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, and his singular good Lord, ROBERT Earl of
SALISBVRY, Principal Secretary to his Majesty, etc. and the most worthy
Chancellar of the University of CAMBRIDGE, Grace and peace.
THere are not many weeks past (Right Honorable) since a person, disguised by
these dumb characters of P. R. had covertly sent forth a Book, inscribed, A
Treatise of Mitigation, which he adventured to address unto both the
Universities, especially that, wherein, by the blessing of God, I have had my
education, and whereof this is the happiness, that it has your Lordship
Chancellar and Protector. I therefore esteemed it my duty in presence of your
Honor, by this Preamble, to sponge out such vile imputations, wherewith he
endeavored through me (alas) one of the least of the Prophets to distaine both
my Mother and her Sister the famous Universities; and those honorable persons
unto whose care and providence they are committed. At the first reading
thereof, although (I confess) I received some such impressions as that I was
not able to imagine that any, professing Divinity, could be so utterly
destitute of humanity, as when he clamorously inueigheth against (as he
pretends) multiplicitie of falsifications, he himself should most usually
and egregiously falsify: yet then, even in my greatest jealousy of mine own
miscariage, I conceived a double matter of comfort: first, from my self, that
knowing I durst present my supplications unto the Judge of the secret thoughts
of all hearts, and just Revenger of all lying wickedness; I did not doubt but
that being able with true confidence to appear before God, I should not
greatly fear the censure of man. Secondly, from my Auersarie, presuming that
he that would write in defense of their Mental Aequiuocation, would be found
to aequiuocate in writing. But much more was this my divination fortified at
the reuiew of his Treatise; for even as the Greek Commander, who being in
appearance mortally wounded, demanded of his Soldiers, Numquid tuta est
Ciuitas? numquid clypeus meus integer? Is the City safe? is my shield sound?
And being satisfied in both recovered his health, and afterward became
victorious: So I likewise, under so many ghastly wounds of a virulent pen,
having generally inquired and uprightly answered my self, that my cause was
safe, and my conscience sound, and free from any notorious and wilful
falsitie; I then began more resolutely to confront my Adversary in this
Prelude and First assault: and promise (if God shall be pleased) a more
forcible Encounter, after that I have discharged my part in another task of
more importance, namely, in The Answer unto the misconceiued Catholic
Apology: which by this calumnious Treatise of P. R. his Mitigation, as by an
adverse tempest, has received some interruption. This Preamble (Right
Honorable) as a Survey of some particulars, which being unfolded, may, if not
satisfy the expectation, yet at the least stay the prejudice and precipitation
of some, I do humbly present unto your Lordship, as unto a most zealous Patron
of the Truth, a vigilant Discouerer of malignant practices, a provident
Directer of one of those Universities, whereunto my Adversary presumes to
appeal; submitting my self unto the equanimitie of your honorable judgment;
to which, if by this Brief it be not manifest, that P. R. has in this
Treatise preuaricated in his whole cause both in the question of Rebellion and
of Aequiuocation, betrayed his Countries State, disgraced the Romish Schools,
strangled his own conscience, I refuse not, that to the crimes objected
against me by him, this may be added, That I durst affirm thus much before
your Lordship. For whose continuance of health, increase of honor,
accomplishment of all Spiritual Graces I shall not cease to pray. Our Lord
Jesus preserve us to the glory of his saving Grace.

Your Honors in all Christian duty THOMAS MORTON.

A PREAMBVLATORY EPISTLE unto P. R. the Mitigator.
THere be but two Romish Maladies (Master P. R.) which in my books of Discovery
and Full Satisfaction might stand need of your Mitigation: the one is the
usurped and transcendent Jurisdiction of the Pope advanced above all Christian
Kingdoms, to the troubling or subuerting of all Princes and people of contrary
Religion; the other is your professed Art of mental Equivocation. The first of
these I have proved to be (in the Protestant States) the Damme, and the second
the Baud to rebellion: therefore have I been by you censured for a false and
slandrous Libeller. But if, as the woman in pleading of her cause appealed from
the Judge sleeping unto the same Judge better informed, you will give me leave
to appeal from P. R. as he is a Passionate Railer, unto P. R. as he is a
Placable Reasoner; then I am sure no man shall prove either me a false
slanderer, or you a true Mitigator: because you in your Treatise have
established such a Papal authority, which (after denunciation of sentence) may
deprive Protestant Kings (in your opinion Heretics) of their Kingdoms; making
all such Protestant Princes and all their adherents also alliable unto all
those penalties, which the Popish Canons, by you defended, have awarded against
Heretics, which are, loss of lands, of honors, and of their lives; so far,
as to allow that every man may in such a case sheath his sword in his brothers
throat: not disproouing your fellows, who conclude that all this must be done,
when there is sufficient means of performance. And shall not Protestants
(except they will acknowledge themselves to have deserved a new Massacre) call
this your doctrine execrable and rebellious? We read of Petilian a Donatist,
who to the end he might moderate and mitigate the sharp reproach of the
cruelty of his sect intended against the Orthodoxall Professors, did make a
great boast of courtesy and humanity: against whom S. Augustine writes thus:
Isto modo and miluus, Aug. lib. 2. adu. Petil. cap. 83.
cum columbos rapere non potuerit, columbum se nominat; vbi enim potuistis, and
non fecistis? That is, By this means (says S. Augustine) a Kite, when he can
not seize upon a Dove, will be a Dove: for, I pray you, when did you spare us,
being able to hurt us? The like boast of other Heretics, called Rogationists,
received the like Answer: August. Ep. 48. ad Vincent.
to wit: Nulla bestia, si neminem vulneret, propterea mansueta dicitur, si
dentes and vngues non habet: saeuire vos nolle dicitis, ego non posse arbitror;
si autem possetis, quanta faceretis, quando nihil potestis, and non cessatis?
That is, There is no beast, which may be called tame, because it does no hurt
when it has neither teeth nor talant: You (Rogationists) say you will not
mischieue us; but I rather think you can not: for how will not you do what
possibly you can, seeing you cease not to be doing, when you can do nothing at
all? Are not these Rogationists and you Romanists equally bent to like
mischief? Is not your Defense (P. R.) Miluus and Columbus, A Kitish Dove? For
by the Title pretending Mitigation and Obedience, it may seem to be a Dove, but
by the Treatise it self professing a plain rebellion, it proves a Kite.
Whereby we may suspect that in the capital characters of your name P. may
betoken a Petilian, and R. a Rogationist. Otherwise, answer your Adversaries
sincerely unto this their Interrogatorie; Did you ever spare us, being
sufficiently able to hurt us? For the time past you can not satisfy; for the
time to come you will not engage your self further than your Preface has
promised, viz. It is not impossible for us to live in subjection. But will you
know the best way to prove your Adversary T. M. slanderous? Then must you
teach your Disciples to cease to be murderous. Your second, and (as you call
it) the special part, which is the Defense of Mental Equivocation, is no whit
better fortified: for the maine reason to free it from a lie, is, because the
outward speech, [as I am no Priest] is mixed with a clause reserved in the
mind, [as, To tell it unto you.] Wherein again I appeal from your Position
to your Confession, granting, That there is a mental Equivocation, which no
clause of reservation can save from a lie. Which one Confession is sufficient
to convince all your Mental Equiuocators to be apparently liers. Having thus
obtained my cause in both questions, although you rage and rave, disgorging
your stomach, and casting upon me all the cankred and galfull terms it could
utter: yet can I not be offended with you, except only (as Tully spoke in the
like case) Quiame nocere vol^isti: Because you meant to do me injury. After
you had labored, by disabling my judgment concerning the cause, to wound me
in the head, you proceed further, to prejudice my conscience, by pretending
multiplicitie of frauds and falsifications, seeking thereby (for so I may call
it) to stab me at the heart. But know ( P. R.) that your false and calumnious
objections of falsifications are in this Preamble so far discovered, that I
may truly think the Scripture verified upon you, Romans 2. 1.
where it is thus written: Therefore art thou inexcusable, o man, whosoever
thou be, that iudgest; for doing the same things, by judging another thou
condemnest thy self. Therefore I wish you in the fear of God, so to use your
judgment in this life, as still remembering, that after death you must be
called to judgment. Our Lord Jesus preserve us to the glory of his saving
Grace. Farewell.

Yours to warn, and to be warned, THO. MORTON.

A table of the particular contents, and Paragraphes of the ensuing Preamble.
FIrst part is concerning the sufficiency of P. R. to undertake any challenge..
1. page 1 An argument that P. R. his wit was in a slumber in answering to the
point of the sleeping soldiers.. 2. page 2 An argument of his memory bewraying
his free will to lying in the point of the clause of Reservation.. 3. page 5 P.
R. his skill in Logic, provoking all Universities to laugh at him, both in
the point of Syllogizing,. 4. page 7. And also in dividing page 12 P. R.
obiecting Greek and Hebrew texts, and thereby gaining to himself the opinion
of rare ignorance.. 5. page 12 P. R. glorying in a triumphant falsehood in his
objection of falsitie concerning the testimony of Carerius.. 6. page 15 P. R.
his presumptuous falsehood in charging T. M. with falsitie in allegation of the
testimony of Dolman.. 7. page 18 P. R. his four malicious tricks of falsehood
in obiecting a falsitie concerning the testimony of Frisingensis.. 8. page 25
The second part, proouing that P. R. is no sufficient Advocate for our English
case, deciphering the disposition of both my Adversaries, viz. the Moderate
Answerer and this Mitigator, by way of a Dialogue bringing them upon the
stage.. 9. page 30 The third part shows that P. R. has not performed his
challenge in respect either of his cause or conscience.. 10. page 34 That the
very Title of the book of Mitigation is ominous and unlucky unto them whom P.
R. labors thereby to defend.. 10. page 34 That P. R. betraieth his whole
cause in question of Rebellion, by many impossibilities of subjection.. 11.
page 36. showing his sportfull or rather execrable impostureship therein. page
39 That P. R. has by necessary consequence overthrown his whole defense of
mental Aequiuocation.. 12. page 43 A general answer to the accusation which
P. R. urges concerning malicious falsehoods.. 13. page 49 The hypocritical,
prodigal, and prodigious ostentation which P. R. makes in auouching the
integrity of his Romish writers.. 14. page 50 Popes falsificatours. page 51.
number. 57 A notable spectacle of manifold contradictions of Romish Doctors in
perverting three testimonies of antiquity in one controversy about Images.
page 53. as namely the Council of Eliberis, page 53. the Council of
Francford, page 55. the Epistle of Epiphanius. page 59 An instance in a notable
Romish falsificatour, to wit, Cardinal Bellarmine.. 15. both in slandering his
adversaries, page 62 and also in the corrupt allegation of testimonies of
Fathers,. 16. page 66. by many examples even in one controversy of Purgatory.
page 68 Another notable Romish falsificator, even P. R. himself.. 17 page 71
One falsehood of his, about the clause of Reservation. page 72 A second, in
turning one Doctor into many Doctors. page 72 A third and fourth in changing
condemnation into justification. pa. 73. number. 82. 83 A fifth, in changing
Campian into Bellarmine. page 74. number. 84 A sixth, in changing a denial into a
confession. page 75. number. 85 A seventh, in changing an interrogation [Haue you
any thing to say to their practice?] into an asseueration, and a manifest
noting an objection into an hypocritical dissimulation. page 76. nu. 86 An
eight falsitie changing Holinshed into Fox. page 79. number. 88 A ninth, noting
falsely a corruption of the English text. page 81. number. 90 A tenth, eleventh and
twelfth. page 82 A thirteenth falsitie in his claim of universal consent for
the doctrine of Equivocation. page 82. number. 93. wherein he is convinced of
notorious falsehoods by the known testimonies of three Jesuits, as Azorius, pa.
84. number. 96. by Emmanuel Sa and others, page 86. number. 98. by Maldonate. page 99
Answers to the particular accusations of falsehood which P. R. has falsely
objected to T. M. and wherein he has gloried and insulted most. page 88.. 18
First his insultation in the testimony of Polydor, concerning the change of
Popes names. page 89. number. 101 A second insultation in the testimony of
Nauclerus, concerning the Pope choked with a fly. page 91. number. 104 A third
insultation in the testimony of Bouchier, de iusta abdicatione, concerning
killing of Tyrants. page 95. number. 108 A fourth, in the testimony of M.
Reinolds. page 99. number. 115 A fifth out of Gratian. page 103. number. 120 A sixth
also out of Gratian. page 106. number. 124 A seventh concerning the text of Esaias
29. page 109. number. 129 An eighth concerning the testimony alleged of the
Extrauagants. page 109. number. 130 A ninth in the testimony of Bellarm. about
putting in Illos, and putting out Hoc. page 112. number. 134 A tenth in the
testimony of Carerius about vero and vere, etc. page 115. number. 138 An eleventh
in the testimony of Dolman. page 116. number. 139 A twelfth about the succession
of Protestant Princes. page 116 number. 140 A thirteenth in the testimony of
Frisingensis. page 117. number. 141 A fourteenth and most rigorous accusation in
the testimony of Lambertus Scaffnaburg. page 117. number. 142. etc. The falsehood,
foolishness, vnfortunatenesse, and impiety of that Accusation. page 120. 121.
123. 124 A challenge against P. R.. 19. page 126. number. 150. etc.
A PREAMBLE UNTO THE INCOVNTER WITH P. R. in Confutation of his deceitful
Treatise of MITIGATION.

. 1.
1 EVery man reprehending his Adversary, thereby binds himself to good
behauior: otherwise to reproach another in his own guilt, is to throw dust
against the wind, which will reflect and return with greater violence upon his
own face. My Adversary P. R. to make me odious to his Reader has plashed me,
as it were, with these aspersions, of Ass, Silly fellow, Unlearned, Not
understanding Logike, Shameless, False, Malicious; which a man would think he
could not have spoken without presuming of his own Wit, Learning, Truth,
Modesty, Charity, together with all their complements in himself. In
ostentation whereof he offers himself to the trial of all Divines,
Schools, Universities, and every Reader of his Treatise. But I (alas) what
shall I say? who shall plead my cause? who? though all Divines should condemn,
Nobility disdain, and Universities hiss me out of Schools, yet is there
one, unto whom I dare appeal, even P. R. himself in his Book of MITIGATION:
where I find, that this my most rigorous Adversary will prove my rightful
Advocate; his wit freeing me from silliness, his learning from ignorance, his
modesty from shamelessness, his charity from malice, his truth from lying.
And though he vilify me with terms of indignity and tread upon me with his
dirtie footings, as men do upon brass, I shall not be greatly offended, being
assured that the more he rubbeth, the brighter I shall appear both in my cause
and conscience unto every Christian and conscionably affected Reader.

2 To this purpose I divide this Preamble into Three Inquiries: The First is,
What sufficiency and excellency there is in P. R. to make so great an
insultation as he does: The Second, Whether he may be thought a sufficient
Proctor in this case or no: The Third, Whether he has sufficiently performed
his task either for the Defense of his cause or Justification of his
conscience: together with a Challenge against him in them both.

THE FIRST INQVIRIE.
The true Symptoms and Arguments concerning the sufficiency and excellency
of the wit, memory, learning, charity, modesty, and truth, of P. R. by a
taste in each one, even in such instances, wherein he glories and boasts most.

An Argument of P. R. his kind of wit, which may seem to have been a slumber
when he made his Reply.

2.
3 LOquere vt te videam, that is, Speak friend, that I may see thee, said the
Philosopher unto a young man; because (Oration, being or is ratio) the reason of
man can not be outwardly discerned better than by the mouth, which is the
messenger of the heart. Therefore let us see P. R. speaking thus: The treatise
of Mitigat. Epist. Ded to the Vniuersit. number. 24.
The chief proof of Thomas Morton (to show our Priests to be bad Doctors)
consists in a certain comparing of them with those Jewish Priests of the
old law, in Christ's time, who taught the soldiers which watched at the
Sepulcher of our Savior to say, That whilst they were sleeping, his Disciples
came and stole him away. [Common sense (says Thomas Morton) might have
replied, How could you tell what was done when you were asleep? But minds
inthralled in the opinion of a neuer-erring Priesthood (which confirmed that
answer) could not possibly but err with their Priests. Such (alas) is the case
of all them etc.] Do you see how substantially he has proved this matter?
Let us examine the particulars: First the story, then the inference. About the
story S. Matthew recounteth in the 28. Chapter of his Gospel, how Christ our
Savior being raised miraculously from death to life with a great and dreadful
earthquake and descent of an Angel, so as the soldiers which kept the
Sepulcher were astonished, and almost dead for fear; some of them ran and
told the Chief Priests thereof, who making a consultation with the Elders,
devised this shift, To give them store of money, and to bid them say, That in
the night when they were asleep his Disciples came and stole him away: and so
they did. And S. Matthew adds, That this false bruit ran current among the
Jews, even until that time wherein he wrote his Gospel. This is the
narration. What has Tho. Morton now to say to this against us? for thereunto
is all his drift. First, he says, as you have heard, That this device was
improbable, and against common sense it self. Common sense (says he) might
have replied (to the soldiers) What could you tell what was done when you were
asleep? See here the sharpness of Tho. Mortons wit above that of the
Priests, Scribes, and Pharisees. But what if one of the soldiers had replied
to him thus? We saw it not when we were asleep, but afterward when we were
awakened we perceived he was stolen away. What reioynder would our Minister
make? As for example, if Tho. Morton were walking with a Communion-booke under
his arm through a field, and wearied should lie down to sleep with his Book
by his side, and at his awaking should see his Book gone, were it against
common sense for him to say, That his book was stolen from him while he was
asleep? Or is not this an Assertion fit for one of those Doctors, whereof S.
Paul talks, that understand not what they say, nor whereof they affirm? But
this will better yet appear by the second point, which is his inference.

4 The Minister has only this to reioyne, That his Adversary P. R. has
showed himself, by this his Inference, both shameless and witless.
Shameless, to impute that for an absurdity unto me, which he might have
known to be the wise and learned Inference of ancient Fathers, amongst whom S.
Augustine says to this Answer of these soldiers thus: Aug. tom. 10. homil.
36. ad finem.
O mal^, o pessimi, aut vigilabatis, aut dormiebatis; and quid sit factum
nescitis: impletum est enim quod a Spiritu Sancto multum ante per Psalm. 20.
Psalmistam praedictum erat, Cogitauerunt consilium, quod non potuerunt
stabilire. That is to say, O evil and most wicked men, either you were awake
or asleep, and knew not what was done, etc. intimating this Dilemma; Either
were you awake or asleep: if awake, then confess what was done, Christ is
risen out of the grave: if asleep, then you knew not what was done. For say,
P. R. grossly ignorant in Divinity.
I pray you, P. R. When Christ by the power of his Godhead raised himself out
of the grave, had it been a good answer of the soldiers (supposing they had
slept) to say, We know that Christ was stolen out of the grave, when we were
asleep, because we found him not when we were awake? This Inference P. R. does
hold for good: whereby my Reader may guess how acceptable a servant he would
have been unto those Jewish Priests, if he had lived in that Synagogue, in
setting on foot that bruit of infidelity, by persuading the people, that the
soldiers reason was good; the Conclusion whereof is, Christ did not rise, but
was stolen out of the grave: though, I hope, P. R. his faith is not so far
asleep, as so to prejudice the chief Article of Christian faith, The
resurrection of Christ from the dead: without which, as the Apostle S. Paul
teaches, 1. Cor. 15.
our preaching is vain, and faith vain.

5 Howsoever, I am sure he has shown himself heerin very witless, who
knowing that I set down the maine question in these words in great letters,
for distinction sake, His Disciples came and stole him away: specifying the
persons, His Disciples, the principal subject of that question: And could
sleeping soldiers tell what was done of Christ's Disciples? As for example, If
I falling asleep in the field, and having twenty shillings in my purse, one
should come and pick my pocket, and cut my purse; after, I awaking, and
conuenting P. R. before a Magistrate upon suspicion of felony, should yield no
other reason, but that when I was asleep, sure I am, P. R. came and cut my
purse. P. R. confuted by the Text.
Then the Justice of Peace replieth, How know you that P. R. did it, you being
then asleep? What reioynder would P. R. teach Tho. Morton to make? I could
have vexed P. R. with a more familiar example, if I had been bent to
scurrilitie. It is sufficient to understand, that as it pleased God so to
infatuate that lying Priesthood, when they thought themselves most wise, for
the greater glory of Christian faith, as to build their incredulity upon no
better foundation than a fained senseless report of men asleep: even so it
falls out with my Adversary P. R. who has bewraied his singular sottishness
in the Inference, wherein he meant to give us a special Argument of his wit.

An Argument of the rare memory of P. R. bewraying his free will to lying.

3.
6 TO make me seem ridiculously cautelous, as intending whenever their
Equiuocating forgerie was to be spoken of, to keep the clause of mental
reservation under a Latin lock, and not Englished, lest weak ones might
learn to practice that Magical Art, P. R. opposes heereunto, Treatis.
Mitigat. Ep. Ded to the Vniuersit. number. 21.
He (meaning Tho. Morton) has not to my remembrance set down the clause of
Reservation in Latin but once thorowout all his book, and that in four words
in the second page, the said Reservation being mentioned in English more
perhaps than (...) times.

7 If my Reader will be willing for my sake to lose so much time as to peruse
but the places which I have noted, he shall find the clause of Reservation set
down by As for those set down in the Moderate Answer, I am not to answer.
me in English not above See Satisfac. part. 1. c. 17. lit. (a) and lit. (e.)
And Part. 3. c. 3. lit. ( b)
three of four times through my whole Book, and in the Treatise professedly
written of that subject of Equivocation it is (the thing it self challenging
so much) but once: but it is couched in Latin phrase above twenty times. See
the Full Satisfact. Part. 3. 1. 2. See Satisfact. Part. 3. c. 1. lit. (c) the
3. in chap. 2. the 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. in the chap. 3. the 9. 10. in the chap. 4.
the 11. in cha. 5. the 12. 13. 14. in the cha. 7. the 15. 16. 17. 18. in cha.
8. the 19. 20. 21. in the chap. 11. the 22. 23. in the chap. 13.
First, 1 Vt quis teneatur illud detegere. Second, 2 Vt tibidicam. 3 Vt tibi
reuelem: in one Chapter. 4 Vt tibi significem. 5 Vt tibi reuelem. 6 Vt tibi
narrem. 7 Vt narrem tibi. 8 Vt narrem tibi: five times in one Chapter. Again,
9 Vt tibi significem. 10 Vt tibi significem. 11 Quatenus vir longissime abesse
potuit. 12 Vt in commune bonum conferamus. 13 Vt alijs largiamur. 14 Vt vobis
significemus: and 15 Vt narrem tibi. 16 Viuit in Purgatorio. 17 Vt tibi
reuelem. 18 Vt tibi reuelem; four times in one Chap. and 19 Vt dicam vobis. 20
Vt dicam vobis; vt vobis significem. 21 Vt vobis significem, 22 Abomni spe
obtinendi Romans Imperium. 23 Admodum exiguam. Thus often it is expressly set
down even in those places whereunto P. R. himself has shaped such Answers as
his want of grace did permit: so that he could not pretend ignorance herein.
Wherefore what this his so open lying might portend, I know not, except he felt
his wit wax somewhat blunt, and therefore meant to deserve the whetstone.

8 The excellency of his memory appears in this, that he could remember
fourteen English clauses of the Reservation, where there was (I think) not
above four: but of twenty Latin clauses he would remember but one. Now seeing
that one instance does confute a general assertion, as he that shall say,
There is not any Stew allowed in Rome, is easily confuted if but one may be
proved to be there: He therefore wilfully denying that there is any such
Latin clause, excepting only one, must, upon the evidence of three and twenty
more, be thought to have made two and twenty lies at once. And shall we
expect, that when he is brought into exigents and straits of greater
importance, that he will speak truth, who does lie so lauishly in a matter so
needless? No, for an horse is like to stumble in the rough way, who falls
flat of all four in the plain. Next follows

An Argument of P. R. his kind of learning in Logike, wherein he has provoked
all Universities in the world to laugh at him.

4.
9 FOr proof of his dexterity in Logike, he takes upon him to discuss an
absurd Syllogism ( as he calls it) of Tho. Mortons, in this manner. Treatis.
Mitig. cap. 11. page 473. and 474. number. 50. 51. 52. 53.


His Syllogism ( says he) is in these words: [The competencie of God, by whom
we swear, makes eury one competent Judges and Hearers, to whom we swear. But
by swearing by God, whom we can not deceive, we religiously protest, that in
swearing we intend not to deceive. Ergo your deceitful Equivocation is a
profanation of the religious worship of God.] This Syllogism I leave to be
discussed by Cambridge Logicians, where I hear say the man learned his Logike
(if he have any) for here he shows very little or none at all, no boy being
among us of four months standing in Logike or Sophistry, which will not
hiss at this argument, both for form and matter. -- Because it has six
terminos, -- and there should be but three. For it is no more a Syllogism than
this: viz.

q. sup. page 475. number. 51
Every man is a living creature:

Every Ox is a foure-footed beast:

Ergo every Ass hoth two long ears. Where you see there be six termini, as in
Tho. Mortons Syllogism, without connection or dependence one of the other. And
as much concludes this as that. -- And now compare this his skill (I pray you)
with that brag of his in the beginning of his Treatise against Equivocation,
when he said to his Adversary, Dare you appeal to Logike? This is the Art of
Arts, and the high tribunal of reason and truth it self, which no man in any
matter, whether it be case of Humanity or Divinity, P. R. his Thrasonicall
insultation.
can justly refuse. Who would not think but that the man were very skillful in
that Art, wherein he presumes to give such a censure?

10 I would gladly do my Adversary the credit, as to think that not he
himself, but rather some of his boyish Sophisters has thus canuased that
silly Argument, but that thorowout his whole Book I find him so prodigal of
his wit, time, and paper, every where pleasing himself in such superfluous
vanities. Here therefore he calls that a Syllogism, which I named only in a
more general term a Reason, and not a Syllogism. Now there be many forms of
reasonings besides Syllogismes; neither did I, indeed, intend to make an exact
and formal Syllogism, but only such an Argument, which by due inference and
deduction might prove my Conclusion good: and P. R. confesses of that my
Argument, that by a double Inference the reasoning is made good. I can not see
therefore what cause he had to be more offended at me for delivering that in
gross, which being divided into his parts was good reasoning; no more than a
man may mislike to-pence because it is not a couple of single pence. As for his
example of a Syllogism, it can not admit any such Inference to make any good
reasoning: for by what deduction can he make his creature man and his other
creature ass with long ears meet? But how will P. R. now use me upon this
advantage? Mitig. Epist. Dedic. to the Universities, number. 17. P. R. amplifieth
his own vanity.
I do show him (says he) to be a silly Disputer, as that he knows not how to
make a Syllogism, and therefore am forced to send him again to Cambridge to
reform his Logike, and to learn more. O good Sir, deal not so extremly with
me, to put me to that trouble, charge, and shame, but rather vouchsafe (I pray
you) to teach me your self, you shall find me docible I warrant you. P. R.
Mitig. sup. lit. g. pa. 475. number. 53.


Now then let us help him out to make his foresaid Syllogism in form. It
should have been thus, if he would have said any thing in true form;

The competency of God, P. R. frames a Syllogism.
by whom we swear, makes every one competent Judges, to whom we swear:

But in every oath we swear by God either expressly or implicatiuely:

Ergo in every oath they are competent Judges, to whom we swear.

And then by another inference again, I spare the examination of this second
infere^ce, leau^ng this labor to his Sophisters, which will make the^ sport.
he might have argued, That unto every competent and lawful Judge we have
confessed before that a man is bound to answer directly, and to swear to his
intention, and not only to his own. Ergo in no oath to whomsoever, may a man
equivocate, which is his principal Proposition. And thus had his form of
reasoning been good, according to the rules of Logike.

11 If there had been either sinew or sap of Logike in this Priest, it stood
him upon here to express his best Art, where he means to play his prize,
especially now when so scornfully he insulteth upon his Adversary, and so
confidently appealeth unto Universities, as though he would heerupon raise his
Io poean and triumph. Had we not now reason to expect as absolute a Syllogism
as all his wit, art, and industry could invent? I am not worthy (I confess)
to enter in comparison with men of great learning, because I think my self
inferior unto thousands in our own Kingdom, yet some Logike I have learned,
and sometime publicly taught; upon which little I dare presume to make a
general appeal to Cambridge, Oxford, Rhemes, Rome, and unto all Universities,
whether of Protestants or Romanists, whether Christian or Pagan, yea, even to
his own hissing boys and Sophisters, who P. R. says are able to make
Syllogismes in one month, and challenge P. R. for this his false Syllogism,
willing (if he dare) that heerupon we venture our degrees, The manifold
absurdities of his Syllogism.
which we have taken in the Schools. To come to the point: This Syllogism
can find no place either in mood or figure, by reason of four capital
faults. First, there be in it five termini, as namely, 1 competencie: 2 God by
whom we swear: 3 every one competent Judges to whom we swear: 4 in every
oath: 5 either expressly or implicatiuely: whereas, according to his own
censure, there should be but three. Secondly, these words, The competencie,
being part of the Medium, should have been repeated in the Minor proposition,
thus: But in every oath there is a competencie of God by whom we swear.
Otherwise it is no better than if P. R. should dispute thus:

Every Mitigation of doctrine concerning rebellious positions, which are
imputed unto us, will procure us favor of the State:

But this is the doctrine of rebellious positions imputed unto us:

Ergo this doctrine of rebellious positions imputed unto us will procure us
favor of the State.

The fault in this Syllogism is because this word, Mitigation, which is part
of the Medium, is not repeated in the Minor. Thirdly, there should be but one
minus extremum: with this, We swear by God, he has joined another in these
words, either expressly or implicatiuely: which words being a part of the minus
extremum, should not have been omitted in the Conclusion. Like as if a man
should reason thus:

Every penitent Confessarie must receive absolution:

But every Drunkard is a penitent Confessarie, repenting either of drinking too
much, or of drinking too little:

Ergo, every Drunkard must receive absolution.

The fault of this is the addition to the minus extremum [either for drinking
too much, or too little.] The fourth, the Verb and copula [maketh] every one
competent, is altered in the Conclusion into [Are] competent Judges: than the
which there can not be a greater absurdity in Syllogismes. As may appear by
this like example.

Every man in framing his last Will and Testament, makes his own Executor:

But T. B. frames his last Will and Testament:

Ergo T. B. is his own Executor.

The fault is the changing of the copula or Verb [maketh] into [is.] What will
now P. R. do, after that this his montanous boast of A true Syllogism has
brought forth this ridiculous mouse? It is to be feared, that his hissing
Sophisters will turn him into a Proverb, for thus disgracing their College,
calling him P. R. the Syllogizer, when they will note any man so egregiously
absurd, as in his greatest vaunt of skill to bewray his greatest want. But I
may not be so unthankful as not to reform him, who was so willing to help
me; thereby to redeem him from scorn: and therefore wish him to frame his
Syllogism thus:

Every speech, wherein we swear by God, either expressly or implicatiuely, does
by the competencie of God, by whom we swear, make the Judges competent, unto
whom we swear:

But every oath is a speech wherein we swear by God, either expressly or
implicatiuely:

Ergo, every oath does by the competencie of God, by whom we swear, make the
Judges competent, to whom we swear.

12 But I fear lest I may seem too much to detract from his skill in Logike,
who has given us so many tokens of his rare faculty therein, especially in
exact dividing and subdiuiding; a principal property of that Art. As for
example: Mitigat. chap. 12. number. 4. page 485. initio.
Wherefore all our speech, says he, in this place shall be about the second kind
of Equivocation, which is false and lying, and thereby also ever unlawful;
which though not properly, yet in a general manner, may be called Equivocation, A
fond division of P. R.
as I have said, for that the hearer is always wrongfully deceived or intended
to be deceived by some falsitie, which is known to be such by the speaker, and
consequently is plain lying. And for that lying also has been showed before
to be divided into two sorts; the one a material lie, when the thing spoken is
false in it self, but not so understood by the speaker; the other a formal
lie, when the speaker does know it, or thinks it to be false, and yet
speaks it. This kind of Aequiuocation, which really is a lie, must have also
the same subdiuision, so as the one sort thereof may be called a material
lying Equivocation, and the other aformall: and so much worse, as a formal
lie is in it self (which always is sin) than a material (which often times
may be without sin of the speaker) by so much is a formal lying Equivocation
worse than a material. There is no boy (I think) in his College, but he can
analyze the members of this division thus:

A lying Equivocation is that which is known to be such unto the speaker. And
this is to be subdivided, for it is either

A material lie, which is when the thing spoken is a lie in it self, But not
so understood of the speaker.

Or, A formal lie, when the speaker Does know it, and think it to be false.

Where he makes a material lie, which is not known of the speaker, to be a
species or member of that lying aequiuocation, which is known to the speaker.
As if he should say, Some lier knows what he speaks, when he knows not
what he speaks. And could any say thus but a lier? Here indeed is Logike
whereat the boys of our Universities may hiss, and the boys of his College
may blush* yea, any rural boy (if of any mean capacity) may laugh, by sight
of the like: for his division is all one as if he had said thus:

Every one of our Priests is shaven in the crown, whereof

Some are sent into England, and they have no shaven crowns.

Others remain beyond the seas, and they are shaven in the crowns.

Which division if it were true, then might a man conclude by good Logike, that
a man with a shaven crown has no shaven crown. And yet P. R. our great
Logicioner can tell us, that Mitigat. Epist. Ded. unto the Vniuersit. number. 3.
According to Aristotle's observation, Prudentis est distinguere: It
appertains to a wise and discreet man to distinguish, whereas the ignorant*
and the unlearned does commonly confound all without distinction. But my friend
P. R. (I must needs say) is not one of those Ignorants, who confound things
without distinction; but worse: for he has taken pains to confound things by
distinguishing. I can not be delighted with these kind of taxations, and
except it were against such a scornful Adversary, I would not have insisted
upon them. My purpose is only to teach him hereafter to be more serious, who
still multiplieth his vanities, as next appears in

An Argument of his kind of skill in Greek and Hebrew, whereby he has gained
the opinion of rare ignorance.

5.
13 YEt again, to expose me to the scoff of his Reader, the conceited
Gentleman says thus: Mitigat. cha 2. page 88. number. 58.
And yet truly I can not well pretermit, for ending this Chapter, one little
note more, of rare singularity in this man above others, which I scarce over
have observed in any of his fellows, and this is, That the very first words of
Scripture alleged by him in the first page of his book, for the poesy of his
pamphlet, are falsely alleged, corrupted and mangled, though they contain but
one only verse of Isay the Prophet; and then may you imagine, what liberty he
will take to himself afterward thorowout his whole Discourse. His sentence or
poesy is this. Isay. 29. verse. 9. But stay your selves and wonder, they are
blind and make you blind: which he would have to be understood of us
Catholics. But let any man read the place of Isay it self, and he shall
find no such matter either inwords or sense, but only the word, wonder, to
wit; Obstupescite and admiramini, fluctuate and vacillate, inebriamini and non
a vino, monemini and non ab ebrietate. And according to this are the Greek and
Hebrew texts also. So as what should move T. M. to set down so corruptly the
very sentence of his book, and cite the chapter and verse wherein his fraud
may be discried, I know not, except he observed not the last clause of the
Prophets precept, Mouemini and non ab ebrietate. And so much for this.

14 Which is much more than any man of a temperate sense would have objected:
for let any man read the English translation, and he shall find the same
words expressly set down. Seeing therefore that P. R. does intimate to his
Reader, That I have forged a new Text, and that the words are by me falsely
alleged, can there be a more false, yea and (if wilful rashness do not take
the upper hand of impudent boldness) a more shameless cavil than this?

15 Thus much of the words, Ye are blind, etc. His next quarrel is against
the sense, he repeating the Latin, yet but manglingly, and does not English
it, lest (I think) his common Reader might apprehend the sense: or else he left
it for me to translate. Thus then: Isa. 29.
Be ye astonished and wonder, waver ye and reele, ye are drunk, but not with
wine, ye are moved, but not with drunkenness: because the Lord has mingled
for you the spirit of slumber, he will shut your eyes, he will cover your
Prophets and chief ones, which see visions, etc. The sense of all is delivered
by S. Hierome Hierom. Com. in Isa. 29.
in his Comment upon the same place: Scitote ergo, etc. Know therefore ye
Scribes and Pharisees, who are the chief among the Jews, for you hearing the
Lord* and Savior would not understand, and have shut your eyes, that you
should not see: Therefore will God shut your eyes (who are the Prophets) by
whom you received the knowledge of God. A little after: P. R. his arrogancy in
urging the Greek and Hebrew text.
Or according to the Septuagints, he will shut the eyes of them, who boasted
they saw secrets, etc. In all these we hear of the spirit of slumber, of
covering and shutting of eyes, of not seeing: and can these signify any thing
but a spiritual blindness? Again, Pagninus translateth the text according to
our English: Pagninus.
Excaecati etc. They are blind, and make you blind. And not this only, Pintus.
but their own late authorized Doct. Pintus, in his Comment upon the same
place, says: In Hebraeo est in hunc modum, etc. Thus it is in the Hebrew text
( says he) Your Priests shall be blind, and make others blind.

16 Let us confer circumstances together. First, I am noted by P. R. to have
forged a text, but am acquitted by the English Translation, They are blind,
etc. This then is his first falsehood. And next, for his sense he obiecteth the
Latin and Greek, but by the exposition of S. Hierome both the Greek
Septuagints and Latin vulgar have the same sense, to wit, Shutting up of eyes,
which is to be blind: which may argue his second falsehood. In the last place
he opposes the Hebrew text, as different from the English, which by the
judgment of Pagninus, and Pintus, is almost the same both in words and sense,
wherein is discovered his third falsehood. So as I can not guess what moved P.
R. to deal so slanderously with me, in noting me of fraud and corruption,
except it be that he meant we should reckon himself in the number of these
Priests thus mentioned in the Text, You are blind, and make men blind: or in
the words following, You are drunk but not with wine: With what then? I pray
God I may not say with malice. In this, both P. R. and I may learn a caution,
to take heed we do not peremptorily meddle with Hebrew texts: for if they say
true who know him, as I can say of my self, we are but Alephbetharians in this
language.

An Argument of P. R. his kind of Charity, attended with a triumphant
falsehood.

6.
17. I Do not mean to bring in, as tokens hereof, his disgraceful and
reuiling terms, calling me Ass, Silly grasshopper, Lewd lad: which kind of
Rhetorike the learned call Caninam eloquentiam, that is, Doggish eloquence,
wherein this fellow has (I must confess) a singular gift, which I shall
rather pity than envy, till I see it better employed. In the interim it can
not offend me to be called Ass in that cause, wherein I carry my Savior in
his Hozanna; nor to be termed Grasshopper in that cause, wherein I may be a
plague unto Egypt, I pray God rather for conversion than destruction: nor to
be named Lad, whilst I carry a stone in a sling, In nomine Domini, wherewith
a noble and gracious Lad did hit an enemy of the true worship of God, a
vaunting Goliath, in the forehead. But I have a better argument of his
charitable devotion toward me than this. For thus P. R. Treatis. of Mitigat.
cha. 6. number. 60. page 234.
I let pass as trifles in this very place (but yet such as show a guilty mind
and meaning) that he citing the book of Alexander Carerius, a Doctor of the
Canon law in Padua, which he wrote of late De potestate Romani Pontificis,
puts in of his own, contra huius temporis haereticos, against the heretics
of this time, which are not in the title of that book. And then whereas the
said Author, naming or citing many other Writers to be of his opinion, does
say, Nuperrime vero Celsus Mancinus in tract. de Iurib. Princip. etc. and last
of all Celsus Mancinus does hold the same in a certain Treatise of the rights
and principalities: this man to frame unto himself some matter of insultation,
turns vero into vere, and then plays ridiculously upon his own fiction in
these words: Carerius cites another called Celsus, by interpretation high or
lofty, and therefore instiles him with Vere Celsus, as truly so named, and so
truly he may be, if we judge him by the loftiness of his style and Conclusion.
So he. And do you see this folly? Or will you think it rather folly than
falsehood, that could not discern between vero and vere? Or not be able to
judge by the contexture of Carerius his speech it self, that it could not be
apt construction be vere if he had lighted upon a corrupt copy, as he could
not; for that there is but one, and that has very plainly vero, and
consequently all this Commentary of Tho. Morton is out of his own invention.
And where now is the assurance of his upright conscience protested to his
Majesty in his Epistle Dedicatorie? Where is his simplicity in Christ Jesus?
Where is his naked innocence? Can this be ignorance? Can this be done but of
purpose, and consequently by a guilty conscience? What may the Hearer believe
of all he says, when every where he is found entangled with such foolish
treachery? But let us proceed. Thus far P. R. 18. It is but a point of
Oratory in this man to say he lets pass, which notwithstanding he insisteth
and dwells upon as violently and virulently as upon any one taxation in the
whole book, and yet the matter, we see, is but only about trifles, as himself
says, and therefore such, as not only Christian equity, but even common
humanity might have either spared: or if I deserved correction, yet with
moderate Schoolmasters to know when to use a ferula, and when a rod. The fault
objected is a wrong intituling of a book, which notwithstanding the title
which P. R. allegeth (being De Pontifice Romano) might have born out, because
it is the very scope of that book: so that my error therein could have been
no more than if in signs which hang in the street, I had taken an Iuie bush
for an Hollie, both which do equally betoken a Tavern. The next excuse might
have been from a possible weakness of sight in taking vere for vero. A forced
and strained calumniation.
But this man's charity is so hot, that whatsoever slip his Adversary makes,
it must rather be falsehood than folly. Must it be even so then P. R? And shall
the Minister find no more favorable construction at the hands of a Priest,
than to be pronounced guilty of forgerie for such an easy escape, not of a
sentence, or word, or syllable, but for this little element o? othen give me
leave to plead for my self, and know P. R. that the Book it self will
witness against you, which many have seen in my hands, and any may see that
will. Carerius, then in the Book above mentioned, printed at Colen, Anno Domini
1601. in 8o. (and joined with another book of Zecchius De Indulgentijs and
Iubilaeo, which has the first place in the volume) has in the front and
beginning of the whole Book this title followieg: viz.

De potestate Romani Pontificis, aduersus impios Politicos, and nostri temporis
haereticos, Authore Alexandro Carerio Patauino. That is:

A Treatise concerning the authority of the Pope of Rome, against the wicked
Politicians and Heretics of our times, by Alexander Carerius, etc. Which title
is again repeated alone in the beginning of Carerius his Tract, after F. 4. De
potestate Romani Pontificis aduersus Politicos and huius temporis haereticos,
etc. A Treatise concerning the authority of the Pope against the politicians
and heretics of these times. I have therefore committed no fraud in the title.

19 The second is of the particle Vere, which is also as plain in the place by
me alleged out of Carerius lib. 2. cap. 9. page 133. about the midst of the
page, before the end of that Chapter, Nuperrime vere Celsus Mancinus in
Tractat. de iuribus principatuum, etc. Of late truly Celsus Mancinus, etc.
Which the contexture may seem also to import, because after that he had
recounted sixteen Authors for maintenance of his Conclusion, A peremptory
falsehood of P. R.
and coming last unto Celsus Mancinus, may well be thought by that particle
vere, to have honored Celsus with the note of Truly lofty, that by the
excellency of the Author he might have gained grace and dignity to his
cause. Where then is the sincerity of this man's conscience? Shall excuse him
by diversity of Editions? He will not be thus excused: For (says he) there
is but one Edition. What Menippus (whom the Poets fain to be the man in the
moon, beholding all the infinite corners of the world) could have made so
peremptory a negative as this? There is but one, that is, there is no other
Edition in the world? seeing that it is free for all Universities in France,
Spain, Germany, Italy to print and reprint all such priuileged books, and
yet P. R. dare avouch that there is but one. Take heed P. R. nay it is past
take heed, for you are already fallen into a whirlpoole: because if there be
but one, then has P. R. wickedly falsified the Author, by turning vere into
vero (which all men may find in the Colen Edition, anno 1601. where it is
vere) if there may be another, then has he wilfully bolted out this exception,
saying, that there is but one Edition. The guilt of the first must be needs
malice; of the other, madness: whereby (I hope) my Reader may judge, that the
sincerity of my conscience herein has been where it ought, even in the
heart of a Minister of Truth: and that it is no marvel, if the conscience of
my Adversary has been (according to his profession) in the heart of an
Aequiuocator, who says furthermore, I let that pass, which notwithstanding
even upon a wrong sense he prosecuteth in titles and triflels so curiously, or
rather (if desert may speak) so currishly, and with such spightfull
insultations, viz. Where is his naked innocence? Where is his upright
conscience? Where is his simplicity in Christ Jesus? And is not this a passing
treachery, trow we? Yet this also is excusable in respect of many others,
whereof (so much as the nature of a preamble may require) I shall give my
Reader that taste, which may prepare him for a sufficient presumption of the
rest. But some will say, in so manifestly impudence how can any argument of
modesty appear? Behold

An Argument of P. R. his kind of modesty, accompanied with a presumptuous
falsehood.

3.
TO this my Objection, See Full Satisfact. part. 1. cha. 13. page 39.
All Popish Priests (...) abolish the title of succession in all Protestant
Princes, by a pretended prerogative either of Pope or people: producing for
proof of this Popish doctrine the testimonies of their own Doctors, to wit,
Reinolds, Stapleton, Symancha. Heereunto. P. R. takes two exceptions. The
first thus: Treatise of Mitigat. cap. 2. page 71. nu^. 71.
But let us see and consider how falsely and calumniously this Makebate does
heerupon argue in his third Reason, inferring for his Assumption or Minor
Proposition thus: But all Popish Priests upon this pretended supremacy and
prerogative of Pope and people do utterly abolish the title of succession in
all Protestant Princes. Ergo. Wherein to show him a notable liar, it shall be
sufficient to name all the Protestant Princes that have had title of succession
in our Country (for thereof he speaks principally) since the name of
Protestant has been heard of in the world, being three in number, to wit,
King Edward the sixth, Queen Elizabeth, and King James that now reigns, all
which were admitted peaceably to their Crowns as well by Priests as Catholic
people, who notwithstanding in some of their admissions wanted not means to
have wrought disturbances, as the world knows: so as if one instance only
does truly overthrow any general proposition, how much more does this triple
instance, not able to be denied, overthrow and cast to ground this universal
false assertion of T. M. which auerreth, That all Popish Priests do utterly
abolish the succession of all Protestant Princes? Will he not be ashamed to see
himself convinced of so great and shameless ouerlashing?

21 What have I said, which I have not proved? From the Priest Reinolds Full
satisfact. part. 1. chap. 13. page 39.
I reported this testimony, The right of Kings Christian must depend rather
upon their religion than order of succession, and therefore all Christians must
cut off all hope, lest any such (speaking of Protestants) may aspire unto the
throne. Secondly, from M. Stapleton, this: If they do not withstand such a
succession (speaking of Protestant Kings) what do the people else but even
prefer man before God? Thirdly, from Symancha, this: That if the heir
apparent (speaking of Protestants) be heretical, then the Catholic
Commonwealth may choose another, and if the Commonwealth be heretical (noting
Protestants) then the choice belongs to the Pope, and so the kingdom (which
was to make way for the Spanish Invasion against England, in 88.) may be taken
by Catholics. From which three testimonies (besides that of Dolman, which
follows) I made bold to conclude a general, That all Romish Priests are of
the same opinion: and am therefore censured for a notable liar: his reason,
Because three Protestant Princes have been peaceably admitted unto the Crown,
when yet there wanted no means of disturbance. It can not be but that this P.
R. when he calls any man liar, does presently lick his own lips, as we may
perceive by his strong breath: for first, I reported not mine own conjectures,
but the express positions of their own principal Doctors, A calumnious
falsehood.
finding no one of that side, writing of our English cause, to hold the
contrary.

22 Which is herein more apparently the general doctrine of all their
Priests, in as much as this Priest P. R. even now, when the case challenged him
to answer concerning that doctrine, yet neither could oppose, of the infinite
number of all his crew, any one Priest who ever set pen to paper to confute
that doctrine, neither durst he in this answer condemn it himself. And
therefore where my question is Deiure, that is, of the doctrine, Whether their
Priests think it lawful for subjects to admit a Protestant Prince, and heir
apparent, to succession, he answers De facto, that is, of the events of
things that happened, to wit, That three Protestant Princes have been quietly
permitted to succeed, giving his Reader an alms of a piece of chalk for a
morsel of cheese. As for example: It is a law amongst thieves (no one of them
holding the contrary) not always to rob, when they may make disturbance, but
then only, when they are in most probable hope to enjoy their prey: so that it
falls out many times, that when they meet with passengers, they entertain
kind and courteous talk with them, and yet dog them on their way, with
purpose to rob them in some presumed place of advantage: but then by the sight
of more company of true men they, being frustrate of their hope, let them pass
without any manner of disturbance. P. R. his calumniation manifested by a Simile.
If, notwithstanding such escape, any shall affirm, that all thieves profess
robbery and spoil, whenever their opportunity may serve: shall he therefore
be termed a slanderer of thieves, and a notable liar? I know P. R. is witty,
and can apply this similitude unto himself, whom it most concerns: for he
who in this place brings in a triple instance of Protestant Princes, who were
admitted peaceably to their Crowns, insinuating that therefore they were
willingly admitted on the Romish part, may be easily confuted by another triple
instance taken from himself. 1. Of the now K. of France, See hereafter. 12.
number. 38. and. 13. number. 39.
who being K. of Navarre, was resisted, that he should not succeed in the
kingdom of France, lest being in that disposition (meaning a Protestant) he
might have altered religion in France. 2. of Q. Elizabeth he has also said,
that she was excommunicate by the Pope, A falsehood full of dangerous delusion.
(by whose Bull she was also pronounced to be no Queen) because she had
changed religion. Will they not for the same reason hinder succession, for the
which they have endeavored to disturb a possession* 3. The third instance is
in our dread Sovereign K. James, P. R. in his Dolman has held against his
succession to the Crown four arguments of exclusion. Observe now three
singular notes of this man's modesty: 1. He accuses me to be a slanderer for
auouching a report, proved true by incontroleable consequence, and whereunto
no instance of any Priest was or could be objected. 2. He offers to satisfy
a question of Right and justice with an instance of fact and event, as if he
would teach us to reason thus: Romish Priests do not say Mass publicly in
England: Ergo they think it utterly unlawful that Mass should be said publikly
in England. 3. He has so assoiled the question by a triple instance, that by
another triple instance of his own he is more strictly and dangerously
entangled. Let me mention, for further discovery of this his delusion, the
Breue of Pope Clemens the 8. commanding that at the death of Q. Elizabeth none
should be suffered to succeed, who was not a professed Romish Catholic. This
M. Garnet confessed at the Bar, which his confession remains in public
Record. If any shall require a reason why they resisted not his Majesty's
entrance, they can not possibly yield any, but only want of means of
disturbance. So that I might confess my self very shameless indeed, if I
should not blush and sorrow in his behalf, to see any man by so presumptuous
falsehoods to murder his own soul.

23 Which is yet more visible by the second part of this accusation which P. R.
infers thus: Treatis. of Mitigat. chap. 2. number. 35. page 72. The objected
falsehood out of the testimony of Doleman answered and confuted.
What or how far this fellow may be trusted in these his assertio^s may be
gathered by the last sentence of all his discourse in this matter, where he
has these words: [F. Parsons (in his Dolman) does pronounce sentence, that
whosoever shall consent to the succession of a Protestant prince, is a most
grievous and damnable sinner.] And is it so Sir Thomas? And will you stand to
it and lose your credit, if this be falsely and calumniously alleged? then if
you please, let us hear the Authors own words, viz. And now (says Doleman
part. 1. page 216.) to apply all this to our purpose for England, and for the
matter we have in hand, I affirm and hold that for any man to give his help,
consent or assistance toward the making of a King, whom he judges or
believes to be faulty in religion, and consequently would advance either no
religion, or the wrong, if he were in authority, is a most grievous and
damnable sin to him that does it, of what side soever the truth be, that is
preferred. So he. And his reason is, for that he should sin against his own
conscience in furthering such a King. And is there here any word peculiar of a
Protestant Prince, or of his successor? nay does not the Text speak plainly
of making a King, where none is? does it not speak also indifferently of all
sorts of religion, of what side soever the truth be? How then can this
malicious cauilling Minister expect to be trusted hereafter, or how may any
man think that he speaks or writes out of his conscience, seeing him to use
such gross shifts and falsehoods in so manifest and important a matter? It is
no marvel if he set not his name at large to his book, as not desirous to
have the due praise of such desert.

24 Venture my credit, Sir? yes that I will, though I value nothing to be more
precious among men, and therefore willingly put it into this affirmative
balance concerning the sentence of Doleman, proouing it true in that sense it
has been alleged, if you will put yours in the other, which is the negative,
our Reader shall hold the scales, and the evidence of Dolemans book shall cast
it.

The subject of our question is, whether Doleman, one of the three Romish
Priests, does account it a damnable sin in his Catholics to suffer a
Protestant Prince to succeed in the Crown: after I had proved this to be the
Romish doctrine by the testimony of three Priests, I added this fourth, which
was Doleman. Wherefore we must examine whether this be the judgment of
Doleman or no. It belongs to me to prove the affirmative, to wit, that this
was the judgment of Doleman.

25 The title of that book is, A conference about the next succession to the
Crown of England ( namely, next after the death of Q. Elizabeth) and about all
such as may pretend a right, whether within England or without. One of the
contents of the first Chapter is, that Neerenesse of blood may upon just causes
be altered. And of the sixth Chapter: that, An heir apparent to the crown
before he be crowned may be justly put back. After this he proceeds to
express his just causes, the principal he delivers in the ninth chapter,
the very place now alleged: The Contentis this, That one principal cause of
excluding any Prince is diversity of Religion. Whereof he resolves thus:
Doleman. part 1. cap. 9. page 212.
Nothing can more justly exclude an heir apparent from his succession, as want
of Religion, nor any cause whatsoever justify the Commonwealth, or conscience
of particular men, that in this cause should resist his entrance, than if he
find him faulty in this point, which is the head of all the rest. Where we see,
that the person spoken of is an heir apparent. By which word cannot be meant a
successor by Election, but a successor by natural descent and right of
inheritance. Of this heir apparent he Doleman page 213.
says further; that as when a woman is espoused unto an husband which is an
Infidel, this contract (by the doctrine of the Apostle) may be dissolved: so is
the case of an Infidel pretender unto the Crown. And lest any may doubt who in
this case may be held an Infidel, he adds that Ib. page 214.
Seeing there can be but only one faith available unto salvation, certain
it is that unto my conscience whosoever believes otherwise than I do, and
stands wilfully in the same, is an Infidel, for that he believes not that
which in my faith and conscience is the sole saving faith. This ground thus
laid, he comes at last unto the application before specified, saying: And now
to apply, etc. affirming that, Whosoever gives any help to the making a King,
whom he judges to be faulty in Religion, is a most grievous and damnable
sinner.

26 One Syllogism will assoile the whole doubt.

Every man is a damnable sinner, who admits any Prince to succeed in the
Crown, Mayor.
whom he thinks faulty in Religion.

But every Romish Catholic thinks all Protestant Princes faulty in Religion.
Minor.


Ergo, every Romish Catholic, who admits of a Protestant Prince to succeed
in the Crown, is a damnable sinner.

What is there in all this Syllogism which Doleman alias Parsons, can deny to
be his Assertion? The Mayor he has said, He that admits of any to the
Crown, whom he thinks to be of faulty religion, is a damnable sinner. Is it
the Minor? why, he has said that, There is but one true Religion. And Parsons
being a Romish Priest must intend that all Protestants in the judgment of all
Catholics are of a faulty Religion. Will he then deny the Ergo or
Conclusion? this were against the Law of Logic, and then his Sophisters would
deride him. How then can my assertion be thought slanderous, which necessary
consequence of reason proves to be too true? The idle and ridiculous
calumniation of P. R discovered by two Similies.
As for example, Suppose that this P. R. has promised his Creditour to pay him
four Nobles, at a certain time appointed, at what time his Creditour
challenges him saying, Sir you are to pay me twenty six shillings eight
pence, according to the words of your own promise; by and by P. R. (purging
his choler) answers, This is falsely and calumniously urged, was there any
such word of twenty six shillings eight pence in all my promise? Nay did I not
expressly say, that I would pay thee four Nobles? What a malicious cauilling
Creditor art thou, or how shall any think thou seek thy debts with good
conscience, seeing thou use these shifts and falsehoods in a sum of this
importance? Would not bystanders either laugh at him, as at a lunatike, or
else suspect him for a cosening cheater? because he that promises four
Nobles, promises twenty six shillings eight pence, though not in the same
literal words, yet in the real sense. Or else more pertinently thus: Let us
suppose this to be a general doctrine amongst his Catholics, that no person
borne without England can be accounted lawful heir to that kingdom: which
Doleman part. 2. cap. 5. page 116.
Doleman insinuates by his particular observation of the same Maxim against
the succession of our dread sovereign, then the only king of Scotland, and
that some thus libelling were taken, and by some Protestant accused of treason,
for affirming that K. James had no right to the Crown of England: the libeller
should answer saying: This accusation is false and slanderous, I named not K.
James, but only said in general (though particularly I intended K. James) that
none borne without England was a just successor to the crown: See a further
answer hereafter in this Preamble.
the Judge should say, well then thine own mouth has condemned thee, inasmuch
as if thou should now say that there is no king in England, (although none
be named) because the right one, who is K. James, is disabled, when every one
is excluded. It is true, (says the libeller) by just consequence, but yet I
named none. Would P. R. if he heard this, pronounce this fellow vnguiltie? then
is he no Mitigator: would he justify his accuser? then am I no liar. For the
case is alike, especially knowing that the scope of that whole book, called
Doleman, and penned by Parsons a Priest, is only this, to disable the titles of
all Protestants (yea even K. James by name) and to debar them all hope of
succession in Great Britain: and to prefer the Infanta of Spain before all
other pretenders. This then has been but his cauilling malice thus
injuriously to accuse me of malicious cauilling. There remains only

An Argument of P. R. his kind of truth, full of triumphant treachery.

8.
27 THough all the former Arguments of P. R. his wit, memory, learning, and
modesty contain in them the lively characters and demonstrations of a liar,
yet have I reserved to this last place of truth, such an accusation, from
whence one would think he had gained a triumph saying: Treatise of Mitigat.
cap. 6. number. 36. page 215.
In the very next page ( says P. R.) after, he talking of the great and famous
contention that passed between Pope Gregory the seventh, called Hildebrand,
and Henry the fourth Emperor of that name, about the year 1070. he cites the
Historiographer Otto Frisingensis, with this ordinary title of Our Otto, for
that he writes that he found not any Emperor actually excommunicated or
deprived of his kingdom by any Pope before that time, except (says he) that
may be esteemed for an Excommunication which was done to Philip the Emperor by
the Bishop of Rome, almost 1400. years agone, when for a short time he was
inter poenitentes collocatus, placed by the said Pope amongst those that did
penance; as that also of the Emperor Theodosius, who was sequestered from
entering into the Church by S. Ambrose, for that he had commanded a certain
cruel slaughter to be committed in the city of Thessalonica: both which
exceptions this Minister of simple truth leaves out of purpose, which is no
simplicity, as you see, but yet no great matter with him, in respect of the
other that ensues, which is, that he allegeth this Frisin. l. 6. hist. c. 32.
Frisingensis quite contrary to his own meaning, as though he had condemned
Pope Gregory the seventh for it, whereas he condemns that cause of the
Emperor, and comme^deth highly the Pope for his constancy in punishing the
notorious faults of the said Henry. Hildebrandus (says he) semper in
Ecclesiastico rigore constantissimus fuit: Hildebrand was ever the most
constant in defending the rigor of Ecclesiastical Discipline. And again in
this very Chapter alleged by T. M. Inter omnes Sacerdotes and Romanos
Pontifices praecipui zeli and authoritatis fuit: He was among all the Priests
and Popes that had been of the Roman Sea of most principal zeal and
authority. How different is this judgment of Frisingensis from the censure of
T. M. who now after 500. years past compares the cause of Pope Gregory to
that of pirates, thieves and murderers, and so cites our Otto Frisingensis,
as though he had favored him in this impious assertion? Can any thing be
more fraudulently alleged? is this the assurance of his upright conscience
whereof he braggeth to his Majesty?

28 In the Full Satisfaction Part. 3. Cha. 11. Pa. 28. that which was intended
to be proved was this: That not till a thousand years after Christ did ever
any Prelate or Pope attempt the deposing of Emperors and depriving them of
their Crowns. For proof hereof I brought in the testimony of Otto
Frisingensis from the witness of Tolossanus lib. 26. De Repub. cap. 5. in
these words, I read and read again, and find, That Pope Hildebrand, in the
year 1060. was the first Pope, who ever deprived an Emperor of his regiment.
Wherein now have I wronged my conscience? Is it because Otto Frisingensis is
cited contrary to his meaning? If this should be supposed to be true, yet
could it not prejudice my conscience, because I cited not the Author himself,
A treacherous falsehood.
but only Tolossanus a Romish Doctor, who reported that sentence of
Frisingensis. And is not this a fine treachery of my Accuser to conceal the
Author, and so eagerly and bitterly to inueigh against me, who am only the
Relater, and might answer him, That if I be deceived your own Doctor has
deceived me? This answer I use here to demonstrate the malice of my Accuser,
and not (although it might suffice) to satisfy the point in question, in
behalf whereof I avouch my Allegation to be true. And why not? Otto
Frisingensis (says P. R.) mentions ancient examples of two Emperors, who
were excommunicate, both which the Minister of simple truth leaves out of
purpose. I left them out of purpose (I confess) otherwise I should have been
like to your self in this and other such cauilles, who desire to say much,
though nothing to the purpose. For to what purpose, I pray you, had this been,
seeing our question was not to show what Emperors had been excommunicated, but
who, being excommunicate, had been deposed from their Royalties? Then my case
is no otherwise, than supposing that P. R. or any other had been degraded in
any University, and demand being made concerning the time, when this was done:
I should answer (and that truly) that it was in the days of Elizabeth Queen
of England: A dull taxation, as the simile shows.
presently P. R. after his ordinary manner of salvation should call me Liar,
because I ought to have told that he was admonished and excommuned before he
was degraded. So dull and frivolous is his present taxation in a question of
Antiquity, concerning the time when first any Pope did take upon him to depose
Emperors. Frisingensis says plainly, that Hildebrand was the first: he says
moreover (commending him) that Hildebrand was constant in punishing faults. Say
then (good P. R.) seeing both these two are true, can one of them be a lie? As
if when two noble men H. and B. contend whether of them are of more ancient
descent, I should hear F. an Herald say, that the house of B. is not so
ancient by much: yet is B. (says the Herald) in his own person both in regard
of valor and bounty far more honorable than H. Then I, purposing to answer
to the question, report the Heralds speech: A Simile.
to wit: The house of B. is not, by much, so ancient as is the house of H.
Would P. R. hearing this, presently cry out, o notorious and intolerable liar!
said the Herald so? did he not commend B. for valor and bounty? Could any
by-stander contain laughter, to hear such a senseless exception as this?
because that although I omitted the commendation of bounty, yet did I truly
relate the observation of Ancientrie, which was the principal matter in
question. I leave the application unto P. R. let H. be Henry the Emperor, B.
the Bishop of Rome, F, the Herald, Frisingensis, etc. But P. R. is jealous of
his Fathers honor, and therefore will have it known that he is commended by
Frisingensis, and yet could not be ignorant, that the next witness, whom I
Full Satisf. part. 3. chap. 11. page 28.
produced, Claudius Espencaeus, their own Romish Bishop, does plainly auerre,
that Hildebrand was the first Pope, who without any example of antiquity made
a schism between Emperors and Popes, and by his example provoked the Popes
following him, to take arms against Kings excommunicate. A falsehood in
concealment.
This Author disabling not only the antiquity of that rebellious practice of
the Pope, but also condemning the fact it self. Therefore has P. R. by wily
silence made as it were a pocketting of this Author, as of a medlar. And was
not this a piece of fine fraud?

29 But P. R. is not contented to have noted me in the former (as he calls
it) notorious fault, but repeateth it again, making himself therein in a
manner triumphant, saying, that Treatise of Mitigat. chap 6. nu^. 39. pa. 217.
Otto Frisingensis commends Hildebrand, and yet is brought in to condemn
him. After this again he insulteth upon it in this sort: Truly, if any man can
show me out of all the Catholic writers that be extant, English or other, that
ever any one of them used this shameful fraud in writing, where no excuse can
free them from malicious and witting falsehood, then will I grant that this is
not proper to the Protestant spirit alone. Mark how heinous he makes his
accusation.
Hitherto, I must confess, that I never found it in any, and if I should,
though it were but once, I should hold it for a sufficient argument not to
believe him ever after. And this shall suffice for a taste only of M. Mortons
manner of proceeding. For that to prosecute all particulars would require a
whole volume, and by these few you may guess at the man's vein and spirit in
writing. So P. R.

30 Aristotle tells us of one Antiphon, who was of that weak sight, that
whenever he walked he saw his own image reflecting upon him in the air.
What shall we imagine of this exclamation against shameful and malicious fraud
in writing, except it had been spoken in respect of the reflection of his own
image, Four excellent tricks of falsehood in one.
who has played me four malicious tricks in one page? One is, To lay an
imputation of falsehood upon me, as though I had cunningly pretermitted the
examples of Emperors excommunicate, whereas the question was only concerning
Emperors deprived of their state and dignities. The second cavil is, Not
acknowledging the commendation of Hildebrand in Otto Frisingensis, when as I
intended not to prove out of this Author the equity, but only the antiquity
of that practice. Thirdly, In making me so perniciously envious, as to condemn
Hildebrand without a witness, when as I produced their own Bishop Espencaeus
to condemn him. Lastly, In charging me with a wilful perverting of the
meaning of the Author Otto Frisingensis, when as (if it had been so abused)
yet not I but their own Doctor Tolossanus was the Author of that report.

31 The view of all these and other formerly mentioned wilful and transparent
falsities of P. R. together with some other the like desperate calumniations to
be pointed at in this Preamble, causes me justly to present him with his own
image, professing unfeignedly, that I never found any Writer of any profession
whatsoever, who has used such shameful fraud in answering. And this, I doubt
not, but the Christian Reader will confess, when he shall see this
transfigured Parson appear in his own likeness.

THE SECOND INQVIRIE.
Whether P. R. may be judged a competent Advocate for this cause which he has
assumed: and whether he has not been excepted against by his own fellow.

9.
32 THis P. R. has bestowed six or seven sections in censuring me and my
Adversary the Moderate Answerer, concerning whom he writes thus: Treatise of
Mitig. chap. 3. page 101.
I must needs say that the Answerer has endeavored to effectuate so much as he
promised in the title of his book, which was, of A just and moderat Answer, and
in performance thereof has not only borne on matters temperatly, as before
has been showed, but spared also his Adversary in many points, and namely in
passing over his allegations without note, or check. -- In the rest the
Answerer quitteth himself learnedly, and shows much reading in particular,
as by the multiplicity of Authors by him alleged does well appear.

33 Say you so P. R.? Did your fellow answer Learnedly? Why who are you, and
where is your abode, tell me? Treatise of Mitig. chap. 3. page 92. number. 3.
The Book of Tho. Morton was sent me out of England. Then belike this
Mitigator is out of England, who, by the constant and general voice, has his
residence at Rome. May it now please him to hear what this Moderate Answerer
(whom he so greatly commended) has judged of such extrauagant persons as he
is, if peradventure any such write books concerning our English State? That
answerer being pressed with the testimonies of many foreign Jesuits and others,
who defended the first ground of all rebellious positions and practices, was
driven for a Moderation, to use this evasion; The Mother. Ans. chap. 2..
wherefore to purge, etc.
I suppose, (says he) that no learned Catholic within this kingdom (yet such
can best judge of this country cause) does defend this opinion. Hereby
censuring all Priests without the kingdom less fit or sufficient to meddle in
this cause. We see that this Mitigator has commended the Moderator for a
learned Answerer, and that Moderator by this his general censure, has taken
exception unto this Mitigator, concluding him to be an Answerer (in his
opinion) insufficient.

34 If both these should meet upon one stage to act their dispositions, they
could not but make good sport for the beholders. As for example (for I will
feign nothing in their names, which shall not be consonant and agreeable to
their conditions.) First then the Moderate Answerer might have said, P. R. you
have been altogether presumptuous to take upon you this Answer called the
Mitigation, knowing that you shall but bewray your ignorance, because residing
out of England, you cannot be rightly experienced In this our Country cause.
To whom the Mitigator might reioine, saying; Nay I have not been arrogant, but
thou have been rash and precipitant, for if thou by thy former answer might
have been thought sufficient for a Reply, what needed such posting to me
beyond the seas for a supply of a more exact and learned Reioinder? Then the
Mod. Answerer; Have patience, I pray you, For when I perceived so many of our
Authors objected, al of them by due consequent giving Protestants cause of
hatred against us, as against those that had by our doctrine decreed a
depriving them of their debts, goods, crowns and lives, whenever opportunity
might serve, I was enforced to use this answer for a refuge, taking exceptions
to all Authors out of England, who writ of this English case: and to appeal
rather to other Catholics, Craft in Titles of books.
who being in this kingdom, have written nothing hereof. This is the ground
of my Moderation, which not the truth of our cause, but the necessity of the
time did exact at my hands. Whereunto the Mitigator thus: Thou have done well,
and such has been the cause of my commendation of thy Answer, as thou may
perceive, for I have said that Mitig. supra.
I must need^ say that the Answerer has acquitted himself learnedly. Not that
I could think so, but because (thou know) we must commend and justify one
another, especially in these times, wherein our malice and madness both in
doctrine and practice has been so fully discovered. And therefore I thought it
necessary also to entitle my Book a Mitigation, concealing in my mind this
reservation [To delude my Reader.] Thus it must be, when we raise a flame of
rebellion, which shall not succeed, then it is policy to cast about us some
holy water sprinkle of plausible terms Moderation and Mitigation, as though we
intended to quench that with our water, which we had rather do with oil. The
Mother. I perceive you are subtle and therefore willingly yield you place to
answer my Adversary, the rather because I think you are troubled with the
disease of some of our Catholic Lawyers, of whom you have said, Treatis.
Mitig. preface to the Reader number. 10. P. R. his disease in so often writing.
They itch to be doing, and answering M. Attorney. This was also my disease,
but I after found a scratch, and so may you. Then Mitig. Tush, we need not
care, namelesse are blameless, for thou set no name unto thy Moderation,
and I only set down mute and dumb characters, which are as good as nothing,
to my Mitigation. Again, we have many great and principal odds of
Protestants, besides railing, viz. When our Adversary proves any thing by
many testimonies out of our own Authors, and we are not able to satisfy the
common opinion objected against us, then to single out any allegation of any
one of his witnesses, which he has produced, and if thou perceive him to
fail in the manner of alleging, squeeze every such answer to make him, at the
least, seem to be fraudulent: And if thou can find him faulty in one, it is
no matter though all the rest of our Authors cited against us be never so true,
we shall wound the cause in his person, as he does our persons in the cause.
Furthermore be always echoing out against him some opprobrious terms, as
Mountbanck, Railing.
Grasshopper, Malicious, shameless, false, and what not? The Moderat. I
remember I have often charged him with slanders when as not he but my self
did falsify; which he has discovered, and in a manner silenced me. The Mitig.
We need not fear any such event, because of our manifold advantages: The
advantages the Romish faction has.
For Protestants are licenced to read any books, and some in curiosity, as
Eve, some in doubtfulnesse, as the Capernaitans; many in presumption, as
Balaam, most for the delight which they find in an eloquent and inuectory
style of writing (o mine is excellent!) as Athenians; So that it cannot be but
where so many mice be still nibbling at the bait, some will daily be catched.
But our Professors be kept secure under the lock and key of the vow of
obedience, or else have their hearts so stupefied with that Opium of implicit
faith and blind devotion: that though my adversary in his Answer shall prove
me never so monstrously calumnious and slanderous, yet of our Catholics few
can, and none dare examine or believe any thing against a Priest: this is our
sufficiency. The Mother. You have forgot an other policy we use, which is,
though our Adversary write never so methodically and orderly, yet not to follow
him exactly in his course, and commonly to pretermit those authorities which he
brings, and wherein is the chief strength of his cause. Mitigat. And is not
this good policy? he that will cunningly put away a counterfeit piece of coin
in stead of current, must do it apart from the other money, for if true and
counterfeit be compared together, the good will discover the bad, and his book
thou know is A Discovery. Again, thou may perceive that when I use no
method my self, I challenge him for Mitig. page 113. cap. 4.. 2. number. 15.
want of method. But why do we spend time in talk, let us about our
business. I will be writing a Mitigation for security of our Catholics in
England, whilst our fellows are practizing rebellion in See the late
Proclamation.
Ireland for the subversion of Protestants. Thus, thus it must be. Farewell. In
all this there is no more represented then is too certainly acted by the
Romanists, as in our Encounter unto P. R. will more plentifully appear. It is
time we come unto

THE THIRD INQVIRIE:
To examine how sufficiently P. R. has performed his challenge as well for the
equity of his cause, as for the integrity of his conscience: His cause, both
as it is premised in the title of his book, and as it is discussed in the
Treatise.

Of these summarily and in order. FIRST: That the title of the Book of P. R.
called A Mitigation, is very ominous and unlucky to them, whom especially he
labors to defend.

10.
35 THe subject of his whole Mitigation is by P. R. thus propounded in the
Title of his book, viz. That it is not impossible for Subjects of different
Religion (especially Catholics and Protestants) to live together in dutiful
obedience and subjection under the government of his Majesty of Great Britain.

It is not impossible, good: For why? It is not impossible for 2. Reg. 1. 10
fire to descend from heaven, and the Exodus 14. 22.
people of God to pass safely through the Red sea: It is not impossible for
(...) Number. 22. ver. 28. 29. 30.
Ass to speak reason, and the Matthew. 8 29. and alibi.
Devil to tell truth: It is not impossible for the Ioh. 11. Matt. 9. etc.
dead to be raised to life, and for the Disciples of our Savior by Matt. 21.
21. Marc. 11. 23. etc.
faith to remove mountains. Nothing is impossible with God: who as he
prescribes the raging Sea his bounds, which it can not pass, though naturally
it affect an ouerflow and deluge of the whole world; so does he by his
gracious providence often repress the fury of rebellious spirits in what
profession soever; and, notwithstanding they travel with mischief, yet he
keeps them in an awful subjection. And shall now this Mitigation of fears,
conceived by Protestants against the bloody designments of their Romish
Adversaries, consist of no better terms then the possibility of things, which
are in the ordinary course of nature impossible? Though a man taken upon
suspicion of felony be charged by his accuser to be most certainly the man,
who assaulted him by the way, might not be thought to satisfy the Justice,
saying, Sir he charge me that it was impossible but that I must have done
this mischief; Nevertheless I shall prove the contrary, to wit, that it was
not impossible, but an other might have done it, and not I. Although this
Answer might confute his accuser, who said, It is impossible but that it was
you: yet could it not satisfy the Justice, because still the answer implies
as well a possibility that he did it, as an impossibility that he did it not.
Has not therefore P. R. their learned Advocate merited of his Clients, P. R. a
miserable Advocate for his Catholics.
a Catholic, that is, an universal fee, who now intending a Mitigation of
their punishment, has given the State so great cause of suspecting their
disloyalty, as that he dare promise no better assurance in their behalf, then
only, It is not impossible for them to live in obedience? S. Paul's charge
concerning temporal obedience is, Romans 13. 1.
Let every soul be subject to the higher powers; And again, verse. 5.
We must be subject not because of wrath only, but also for conscience sake.
Wherein he has prescribed us not a may but a must; and thereby enjoined not a
possibility, but a necessity of loyal subjection. But this [It is not
impossible to live in obedience] is no more by Logical conversion then this;
It is possible to live in obedience. Which so suspicious and imposturous a
Title of his whole book can minister no more hope to Protestants of his
pretended Mitigation and composition, then an adulterous woman can satisfy her
husband, and mitigate his jealousy by this manner of submission: Simile.
Be contented, good husband, though I have committed folly as often as I had
presumption of secrecy and opportunity to satisfy my lust; yet now may you
be better persuaded of me, for I protest unto you, it is not impossible that I
shall live honestly hereafter. This case is nothing different from the former.
What shall we then think of P. R. but as of the man, who had purposed with
himself either to scorn Protestants, or else to betray his Catholics?
Nevertheless as worldly feasters usually offer their guests Ioh. 2. 10.
The best wine first, and then that which is worse: So he has prefixed in the
forehead of his book this Title of Mitigation, although prodigious and
intolerable (as we have heard) yet more plausible than the whole Tract of the
book it self, which teaches indeed an impossibility of all voluntary
subjection unto Protestant Princes; insomuch that after but a summarie view
hereof, it will appear that the title of his book and his Treatise are no
more proportionable and agreeable, than the head of an Ape joined with the
body of a Bear. From the Title we proceed unto the Treatise, and manifest

That the Mitigator in his Treatise has betrayed his whole cause both in the
question of Rebellion, and Aequiuocation.

11.
36 WHen the Apostle S. Jude in his Catholic Epistle, speaking of men opposite
unto the soundness of faith, exhorts Christians to Verse. 22.
Have a compassion on some in putting a difference, And others to save with
fear, pulling them out of the fire: he teaches us likewise a lesson of great
discretion, which is, to distinguish between men who are adverse unto us in
Religion. A difference of Romish professors concerning the case of rebellion.
So now I write against our Adversaries, but not without note of difference and
distinction, being verily persuaded that diverse even of the zealous amongst
them, partly by the power of the ingraffed law of reason, partly from a glimpse
of the truth of the Gospel, do abhor such doctrines and practices, as have
been discovered in the cases of Rebellion and Aequiuocation. So that my only
aim has always been at those, who are so inspired with the persuasion of
their Priests, as to believe their doctrine in both these specified Articles.
Concerning whose pretended voluntary obedience, I shall prove to be in a
manner, a confessed impossibility of dutiful subjection unto Protestant
Princes; and consequently as sensible an opposition as was between Jews and
Iebusites in one kingdom, Isaac and Ismael in one house, Jacob and Esau in one
womb: as by this Treatise of P. R. will directly appear.

The First confessed Impossibility.
37 We first demand what Sovereignty our Mitigator will allow his Majesty of
Great Britain: and whether there may be any foreign Potentate, whom he would
advance above him in respect of his temporal charge? P. R. resolves thus: P.
R. Treatis* in the Preface page 24. number. 22. which he applies to the Pope,
page 70.
Whether with this Commission in spiritual affairs our Savior gave also
immediately and directly, the charge and oversight of temporalities in like
manner, or rather indirectly and by a certain consequence, that is to say,
that when the government of spiritual affairs, to wit, of souls to their
eternal bliss and salvation is so let and impugned by any temporal
governors, as the said spiritual Commission cannot be executed without
redress or remedy, in such cases, and not otherwise, the said supreme Pastor
to have authority to proceed also against the said temporal governors, for
defense and preservation of his spiritual charge. Of which question the
Canonists do commonly defend the first part, but Catholic Divines for the most
part the second: but both parts full agree, that there is such an authority
left by Christ in his Church, for remedy of urgent cases. Romish doctrine
against the oath of due allegiance unto Protestant Princes.
Thus far P. R. See then that by this arguing he seeks to establish a
Papal power and ouer-sight even in Temporal affairs, whether directly or
indirectly it skilleth not, seeing (that in his opinion) both do agree: But the
oath of Allegiance with Protestants is otherwise: namely, that No foreign
personor Potentate has any such supremacy in Great Britain. Therefore the
Mitigation of P. R. stands of no more possibility, than Pope and no Pope,
Kings supremacy and not supremacy. Which opposites can never be reconciled
together.

The Second confessed Impossibility.
38 Secondly, because he has told us, that there is a Power ordained against
Kings in temporal affairs, it may concern us to understand the first extent
thereof, whether against the goods, or persons, or lives of such Princes as
shall resist the spiritual jurisdiction of Popes? He does deliver his meaning
in two examples: P. R. Trea. cap. 2. page 77. number. 42. Romish doctrine
derogatory to the Crown and dignity of Protestant Princes.
Two Protestant Princes were excommunicated, censured, molested by the Sea
Apostolic, Q. Elizabeth of England, and K. Henry then of Nauar, now of France:
the first of these two for the violent change of Religion which she made in the
Realm with deprivations and imprisonments of Catholic Bishops, Prelates, and
Clergy, etc. The other for fear he coming to the Crown of France in that
disposition, wherein he then was presumed to be, should attempt the like
change in that great Kingdom, etc. These examples are both plain and
pregnant, a Protestant Queen must be deprived for resisting the spiritual
jurisdiction of the Pope, and a Protestant King also must be deposed, lest
peradventure he may make any resistance. Now we see that the same Papal
authority is by the laws of Great Britain as expressly excluded, their
Religion suppressed, their Clergy exiled, and Protestants religion (according
to former proceedings) continued. All which does argue as great an
impossibility of dutiful subjection, as it is for hinderance and sufferance,
change and continuance of the same Religion to be matched and married together.
And could our Mitigator show himself a more egregious Preuaricator than thus?

The Third confessed Impossibility.
39 Because P. R. has told us that Protestant Princes have been molested by
the Pope, it will be material to inquire what this word Molestation may mean:
For a man would think it some qualifying term, and to import no greater
injuries than either reuiling the names of Kings, or disgracing their
Ambassadors, or damnifying their Merchants, or such like wrongs. Tush no, for
all such like contempts are contemptible, and may easily be devoured, but this
molestation (according to the discovered positions and practices of rebellion,
whereunto this Mitigator neither has or could take any exception) is, The Bull
of Pope Pius Quintus. See the Satisfact. part. 1. page 51.
Because the Queen of England has forbid her Clergy and people to
acknowledge the Roman Church, or obey her decrees, etc. And because we
understand her to be so obstinate, as not to suffer our Legates to come into
England, etc. We therefore pronounce her heretical, anathematizing her and all
her adherents, and furthermore deprive her of her Crown and dignity, absoluing
all her subjects from the oath of allegiance. So likewise of the K. of France,
Lib. de iusta abdicat. Hen. page 370.
Pronouncing him to be deprived of his Regal dignity: Reinolds his Rossaeus,
page 466. See Satisfact. part. 1. page 58. and 40. Romish doctrine bloodily
treasonable in the Protestant government.
Because he is a Caluinist. Upon this followed the Spanish Invasion, the
Rebellions in Ireland, the troubles in France, none without an effected or
intended horrible and tragical bloodshed. All these with P. R. are but
Molestations. So the powder treason, an immanity barbarous and matchless,
which he calls but P. R. Treatis. cap. 1. page 50. number. 27.
A particular temerarious fact of half a score young Gentlemen, put in despair
by apprehension of public persecution, without demerit of the persecuted,
though this also be inexcusable. By which his so tender touch of so cankred and
desperate evils, we may well think that Nabal by his foolerie never deserved
better to be so called, than this book has merited in this only respect, the
name of Mitigation: being indeed nothing but an hatching of a Cockatrices egg,
and a close professing of subuerting all Protestant Princes, whenever they
shall seek the like public maintenance of Religion. This Mitigation therefore
as yet affoordeth us no more possibility of their voluntary obedience, than to
hope that reverence and violence, Subjection and Rebellion, pole arctique and
antarctique, may be drawn into union. And because this is so plain, that
blindness it self may seem to behold it, therefore does P. R. cast his
Reader into a sleep with a dos of his Opium. Let us see

The Fourth Impossibility, wherein may be observed, A sportfull or rather
execrable Impostureship of P. R.
40 Lest Protestants might, from experien^e of former dangers arm themselves
against future designements, P. R. thought good by ^reoccupation to possess
his Reader with better hopes, saying: P. R. Treatis. of Mitig. cap. 3. page 95.
number. 8.
That we do ascribe power to the Bishop of Rome in certain cases to censure*
excommunicate, and deprive Princes, whereof is inferred that such and such
dangers do ensu: which finally is nothing else but a [May:] So as the question
being de futuris contingentibus, of things contingent to come (whereof the
Philosopher says there is no science) all remains in uncertainty, but only
the suspicion and hatred, which he would raise against us. I cannot laugh for
wonder and horror to see any Englishman conceit so basely of the wits and
worth of his Contrymen, as to imagine they could be deluded with so
senseless, so shameless, so pernicious, so impious a Mitigation as this is.
For, to be persuaded therefore not to labor for preventing Ensuing dangers,
because they be contingent, that is, such as may happen, what can be more
senseless? For Science properly taken is a certain knowledge of conclusions,
arising from infallible demonstrations, as this conclusion, The number of 3. is
a less number than 9. from this demonstration, Every part is less than the
whole. And so is the opinion of P. R. good, There is no science of things
contingent, because science stands upon demonstrable principles. But Science
in a more common and large sense is exercised upon (...), that is, every thing
which is subject to man's will: whereupon it is that Physicians prescribe diets
to prevent future diseases; passengers provide weapons to defend them from
future violence; kingdoms provide laws and officers to avoid future
mischiefs: Nay what is there almost in mankind, considered in it self, but
case of contingency? So that all are actions of providence directed for the
preventing of future evils and dangers which may happen. And is not this then a
stupifying receipt, which P. R. has propounded, casting the State into a
slumber, of not regarding Ensuing dangers, because they may be hereafter? Does
not nature in beast, reason in man, precept of God teach us the contrary law of
providence, even therefore to seek to prevent Ensuing dangers, because they
are contingent, and may be hereafter?

41 It is also most shameless, for P. R. Treatis. cap. 2. page 77. number. 42. P.
R. contradicts himself.
Henry K. of France (says P. R.) was excommunicated, censured and ^^lested,
lest he should attempt the change of Religion in his kingdom^ And again
(speaking of the necessity of Papal Jurisdiction over Kings) he says that
Preface to the Reader page 25. number. 22.
If Christ had not left such a remedy to his Church, he should not have
provided for the necessity thereof. Concluding that therefore Popes may impugn
temporal Governors. Here we see he challenges a necessary providence in
the Popes against Kings, who happily may (de futuris contingentibus) abuse
their authority. And shall Kings therefore neglect their States, because Popes
by Antichristian usurpation (de futuris contingentibus) may seek to subvert
and ruinate their kingdoms, and so make themselves to their enemies no better
than a matter of a May Game?

42 I have also called this Mitigation pernicious. For our Adversaries have
taught that Bellar. See Satisfact. part. 1. page 56.
Kings must not be suffered to reign, when they draw their Subjects unto
heresy. But, Sanders, Creswell, in the same place.
Must be rooted out. Sanders ib. page 67.
Which must be done by all means possible. Whether it be as Bowchier.
Iehu did Iezabel; or as Parsons.
David did Goliath; or as Reinolds.
Judith did Holofernes; or as Bellar. See all these Satisfact. part. 1. page
56. and 57.
A shepherd does a Wolf, etc. The Bull of Pope Vrbane against Protestants in
Germany. See Satisfact. page 9. and Sander. page 67.
And not Kings only, but all the favorers of heretics, by what name so ever
they be called, must be destroyed. All these their cursed resolutions P. R.
passes in silence. In all which we hear prescribed a must for necessary
destruction of Kings, and yet this Mitigator will allow but only a may for
their preservation. This is fine May-butter which he has mixed in this
receipt, or rather deceit of Mitigation: made thus pleasant and palitable only
that the too credulous patient may be more sweetly poisoned, especially
knowing that all his fellows have professed all violence, Bannes, Creswel, lib.
de Just. Abdicat. Bellar. See Satisf. part. 1. cap. 24. P. R. would flout and
delude the State of England.
As soon as they shall have force to resist. Therefore this Mitigation is but
as if P. R. would have thus counseled our English State in the last danger,
saying; Trouble not your thoughts (o King) with divination upon that letter,
for peradventure that Terrible blow does signify nothing else than that there
may be a blowing up of the Parliament with fire. And you Officers of his
Majesty what need you to use such diligent search under the vault, where you
see nothing but billets, under which it may be there is hidden many barrels of
powder. Yea and now again, though the like (if yet the forge of he^ can devise
the like) may be prepared hereafter, Yet what necessity is there of preventing
ensuing dangers? What is this else than to seek to catch our State, as a man
would do an horse, offering bread in the one hand, and holding an halter in the
other behind him? Dutiful subjection in the Preface, and lurking treason in
the Treatise. In a word the impossibility of this Mitigation is no less than
to think that murderers and murdered can host well together.

43 Lastly I call it impious, because this profession of their forbearance of
rebellion, until they may resist, has been proved by incontrolable
testimonies of See Satisf. part. 1. page 185. Allen, Parsons, Martin, etc.
Tertul. Cypr. Athan. Nazian. Leo, Basil, August. Greg. (besides the confession
of our Adversaries, Tolossan. Espencae. Barclay) to be contrary to the
discipline of the ancient Catholic Church for a 1000. years continuance. By
all which testimonies the now Romish faction is so notably condemned, that even
P. R. thought it the best security of his cause to pass almost every testimony
(except one) without any particular examination. As yet therefore we hear them
only pretending that they may perform obedience, which they profess they
must not, whenever they shall be able to make a possible resistance. So
hopeless is this his pretended possibility of subjection.

The last Impossibility in the practice of Aequiuocation.
44 The use of Aequiuocating even in an oath is taught by P. R. to be most
lawful, whenever a party is examined before an unlawful Judge, yea or
before a lawful Judge examining unlawfully. Now what opinion they have of the
Magistrates and Officers of England their Priests have told us (amongst whom is
Parsons himself) viz. that See Satisf. part. 1. cap. 27.
It is lawful in England for Priests to equivocate even in their oaths before
Protestant Magistrates and Officers, etc. To let pass the daily experience of
the professed damnable practice hereof by M. Garnet and his fellows.
Wherefore this Mitigation stands still of as great an impossibility, as it is
for cosenage and simplicity, a lie and truth to harbor in one heart. Hitherto
we have spoken of the question of Subjection, only mentioning Aequiuocation,
as it is in the vs^, a bawd to Rebellion. We are therefore to speak of the
nature thereof, and to consider whether mental Reservation be a lie: and
briefly show*

That P. R. has flatly overthrown his whole defense of mental Aequiuocation.
Which is made so evident, as that no wit of man can possibly excuse him.

12.
45 SAy ( P. R.) what is your mental Equivocation? P. R. Trea. Mitig. page
321. cap. 8. What Jesuitical aequiuocation is.
We restrain our speech to Equivocation only, which is mental reservation.
To wit, [I am no Priest] so, as I am bound to tell it unto you. The first part
thereof [I am no Priest] uttered with my mouth, the latter [viz. To tell it
unto you] is reserved in my mind. Which Thomas Morton says is not an hidden
truth, but a gross lie. Treat. of Mitig. in the same chap.
But I say it is a truth, because the speech agrees with the mind of the
speaker, etc. How now would my Reader hear this noble Equiuocator confuted? by
Fathers? or by his own Doctors? or by sensible reasons? This will be no hard
matter to perform, as I hope (God willing) to avouch in due time. But here is
offered unto me a briefer course, more fit for a preamble, and for the triumph
of truth more glorious; which is to see (as politic Achitophel hanged in his
own halter) so this Doctor of the art of lying confounded by his own
assertion. I desire every child of truth to lend me attention, and see

The whole Treatise of P. R. in defense of Aequiuocation subverted by his own
consequence.

46 The sentence of P. R. is to be found in these words: Treatise Mitig. page
459. number. 29.
Let us come ( says he) to the application of this example against
aequiuocation, which he has chosen to use principally about the woman's speech.
The woman is asked (says T. M.) sold you the land for so much? her answer is,
yea for so much, meaning but one half, and concealing the other, in which
dissimulation it is impossible but that your reserved clause must have come
into her head to think, but for so much to give in common: or to signify unto
you. Example of aequiuocating in an accursed person.
So T. M. teaches that poor woman to aequiuocate after this manner of
aequiuocation, that is to say, lie: for that now, I suppose, he has learned by
that which has been set down in our precedent chap. that to speak an
untruth, or conceal a truth, or use any aequiuocation, when we are justly
demanded by our lawful superior, and when no injury or violence is used unto
us, is a grievous mortal sin in our Catholic doctrine; and consequently she
being lawfully demanded by S. Peter in a lawful cause, touching her own vow
and promise, No clause of Reservation could save her speech from lying, as our
Minister does foolishly imagine. So P. R.

Know first (gentle Reader) that the last words, viz. [As our Minister does
foolishly imagine,] do not betoken that the consequent going before, viz.
[Therefore no clause, etc.] is my collection, but the quite contrary: for I
said that a clause of Reservation might as well have saved the woman's speech
from lying, as the clause which Priests use can free a Priest: he holds the
contrary, because (says he) she being lawfully demanded, etc. no such clause
could save her speech from lying. This kind of phrase is usual in our English
tongue. As for example: a man brings a piece of some kind of metal unto a
goldsmiths, which the bringer thinks to be good gold: the goldsmiths after
touch answers him saying, Friend, this is not good gold, as you suppose:
which words do not signify that the owner did not suppose it to be good
gold: and the words, It is not gold, were the words of the goldsmiths, and not
of the owner. So here: which I therefore explane, to make it appear that in
these words, (And consequently no clause of reservation could save her speech
from lying) P. R. has set down his own conclusion. And now we proceed to the
maine matter in hand.

47 The supposed Aequiuocation of the Woman was this, I have sold it but for so
much, reserving in her mind ( for ought that you shall know:) which is
agreeable to their own example of equivocation ( I am no Priest) meaning ( To
tell it unto you) This latter P. R. has defended through his whole book, and
now of the other he is enforced by the word of truth to say that it is a lie:
yea, and that, No clause of Reservation could save it from a lie: From whence
it shall inuincibly follow, that Priestly Aequiuocation is a Satanicall lie.
These two speeches being so semblable in themselves, if he shall say they
differ, then must the difference be either in respect of the speakers, or in
respect of the hearers. But first

The difference of these two kind of aequiuocations, viz. of that woman, and
these Priests (the one whereof is confessed to be A lie) can not be in respect
of the speakers.

48 She indeed was a woman, and a Priest is a man, but P. R, knows that it is
as possible for a Priest, a That he do not object unto me the woman pope Joan.
man, to lie, as for a woman to tell a truth. Neither may he object, that her
lie was in respect of her vow; for the question in this place is not about her
vow unto God, whether she had promised to sell all their possession, and to
give up the whole price to the Apostles for the common good of the Church, or
no: but it is concerning her speech unto man about the sum and proportion of
the sale of their goods, Whether sold you your possessions for so much? And
she answering, But for so much; is (notwithstanding all supposed clause of
Reservation) condemned by S. Peter for a Liar. And this is the very case of P.
R. for (if he be a Priest) he has vowed himself to the Order of Priesthood;
and yet being demanded whether he be a Priest or no, professes it lawful for
himself, by mental aequiuocation, sometime to answer, I am no Priest. In the
next place we are to show*

That (concerning the nature of a lie) there can be no difference between that
aequiuocation of the woman, and this other of these Priests, in respect of the
hearers.

49 The only cloud of words which may hinder the perfect view of truth for this
confession that all Aequiuocation is a lie, may seem to be because she is said
heerby to have intended to deceive S. Peter, being then a competent Judge,
whereas the Priests admit no aequiuocation except only in examinations and
judgments incompetent. But P. R. can not object this without gross and stupid
contradiction to himself thorowout his whole Treatise. For our question is not
of deceiving, or not deceiving, which is only the effect of lying (as P. R.
also every where acknowledges) but it is about the speech it self, and the
very nature of a lie. Now that there can be no difference hereof in regard of
hearers, whether they be competent Judges or incompetent, our Mitigator
himself will demonstrate unto us.

First from his one exposition of mental Equivocation, Treatise Mitig. cha. 8.
number. 55. page 344.
I say ( says he) that in mental reservation the speech agrees with the
mind of the speaker, for that I truly and really mean that I am no Priest in
that sense I speak it, which may be what pleases me, or that which I list to
frame to my self: so as I mean I am no Priest, such as I should be, or such
like.

Mark, the truth of Aequiuocation is not suspended upon the understanding of
the hearer, who may conceive or misconceiue the speech, and so might pervert
the speakers truth into a lie, that seeming false to the hearer, I am no
Priest, which in the sense of the speaker (as P. R. resolves) is by virtue of
reservation (as To tell it unto you) a perfect truth. Well then the supposed
aequiuocation of the woman was such a like fancy, I have sold it but for so
much, to give it in common, or, Tell it unto you. And yet hereof has P. R.
concluded, that Supra.
No clause of reservation could save her speech from a lie. Consequently
condemning himself and all other mental Aequiuocators for fantastical liars.

50 Secondly, as we here find a woman making a lie unto S. Peter, a competent
Judge, so do we read that S. Peter made a lie unto a Mat. 26. 70.
woman, an Examiner incompetent. So that the difference of hearers does not
alter the nature of the speech. The reason is that which has been already
specified, to wit, because (as is confessed) In the same place, number. 46. page
338.
The essence and formalitie of a lie requires that the speech disagree from
the mind and understanding of the speaker. And yet again, In the same place,
number. 47.
A false speech is only a lie as it has the essential point before mentioned
of dissenting from the mind of the speaker. And lastly, In the same place,
number. 55. page 344.
My speech is truth as it is truly spoken in my sense, not in the sense of the
hearer. By all which is signified, An evident conviction of P. R.
that it is not the person of the hearer, but the understanding of the speaker,
which makes a lie formally a lie: and consequently, as a slander is a slander,
so a lie is a lie, and truth is truth, whether it be uttered unto man or woman;
whether to Prince or people; to Simon Peter, or to Simon Magus; yea, whether to
Archangell or to Satan; Judge competent or incompetent, it can not free a
lying speech from the nature of a lie. So that seeing (notwithstanding the
woman's supposed clause of Reservation) there was formally a lie in her
Aequiuocation; it consequently follows, that the Priests Aequiuocation must
be as formally a lie.

51 Thirdly, in mental Equivocation (says P. R.) the clause of Reservation
mixed with the outward speech makes but one proposition, which is as true in
the mind of the speaker, as if it were wholly delivered in the outward speech.
As for example: I am no Priest, mixed with this clause conceived in mind, To
tell it unto you, is as true (in the judgment of P. R.) as if it had been
without Reservation fully expressed with the mouth, A plain demonstration.
saying, I am no Priest, to tell it unto you. Now then, say P. R. (for I mean
to fetter you with your own shackles) The woman, when she said to S. Peter, I
have sold it but for so much, if she had reserved in her mind this clause, To
give it unto you: either had it been by the virtue of Reservation a truth, or
else (notwithstanding that Reservation) it had been a lie. If the clause of
Reservation might have made it a truth, then has not P. R. said true in
concluding, that No clause of Reservation could save it from a lie: if
contrariwise the trick of Reservation could not save it from a lie, then does
not the reserved clause, To tell it unto you, being mixed with the outward
speech, I am no Priest, make up one true proposition. And consequently, it must
be concluded of the Priestly Equivocation, as is here by P. R. confessed of
the woman's, viz. No clause of Reservation can save their speech from a lie. For
if she had said unto S. Peter in plain words [I have sold it but for so much
to give it in common] or such like, this every one knows had been a true
speech: yet saying, I sold it but for so much, with mental reservation,
reserving in her mind [To give in common, or, To tell it unto you] was
notwithstanding this Reservation (even by the judgment of P. R.) a flat lie.

52 Let us, The lying woman and the lying Priests paralleled.
for conclusion, parallel both these examples which are very near a kin: for
if we do compare speaker with speaker, that is, the woman and a Priest, both
will be thought to be Votaries: if outward speech with outward speech, that is,
For, But for so much has the nature of a negative, and is as much as, Not for
any more.
I have sold it but for so much, and, I am no Priest, both are negatiues: if
Reservation with Reservation, as [To tell it unto you] or [To give unto you]
both are mental: if the form with form, both equally answerable to the mind
of the speaker: if, finally, end with end, both are to deceive the hearer.
Wherefore P. R. granting, that No clause of Reservation could save her speech
from a lie, must by irrepugnable consequence be forced to confess, that his [I
am no Priest] uttered by a Priest, to whomsoever it be spoken (notwithstanding
any mental Reservation of [To tell it unto you etc.) is a Satanicall and
damnable lie.

53 And where is now P. R. his boast of Scriptures, Fathers, Reasons? where is
his challenge of Canonists and Schoole-diuines? where is his appeal unto both
our Universities? nay, where is this man P. R. himself, the new select
Advocate for this cause? may he not say hereafter, I was ashamed, and
therefore I hid my self? so naked does his deformity appear. He has said,
That his Adversary T. M. is like one, who, when the game is desperate, will
notwithstanding play it out, and see the last man borne. Here he himself
has made such a blot as can not but be the infallible loss of his whole game,
who being pressed with this example out of Act. 5.
Scripture, is driven to such a vertigo and giddiness, that even when he would
defend his Art of Equiuocating from a lie, is by consequence from Gods Word
forced to confess an outward speech, which No clause of Reservation could save
from a lie. Whereby his own Magi (I doubt not) will be brought to acknowledge,
that digitus Dei hic est, this is the power of Gods truth. Thus being
contented, for this present, to have my whole cause in both questions,
Aequiuocation and Rebellion so justifiable, that my Adversary his own
confessions may free me from his imputation of slander; I do with better
alacrity proceed unto his next challenge, yielding

A general Answer to his accusation of malicious falsehoods.

13.
THe sum of all is this: P. R: Treatise Mitig. c. 11. number. 3. pa. 441.
I have taken Thomas Morton in so many falsifications of things alleged by him,
as before you have seen. And the law says, Whosoever is once evil, is
presumed to be so still, until he prove the contrary. In y^ Preface, and
elsewhere.
But he has bewrayed euery-where malicious falsehoods.

54 From the imputation of malice against the persons of men, if I should need
the testimony of man, my Adversaries may acquit me, who have acknowledged in
me better measures by their own experience, as M. D. Wri. M. Constable. M. Ga. I
have half iniuried them with half naming them: but I hope they will pardon me
this wrong, knowing that it is not spoken in exprobration to them, but for
justification of my self, forasmuch as selfe-commendation, if forced, is (in
the judgment of the Apostle) a wise folly. Howsoever, I can not understand,
Why we may not malice any man's person.
how any man beholding others with Christian eyes, should be malicious: for
either he perceives them wandering from grace and salvation, which moves
pity; or else discerns them to be companions with him in the way of life,
which works love. But neither can malice be pitiful, nor love malicious. If
my Adversaries shall further persist in this despightfull objection of malice,
they must give me leave rather to fear Gods denunciation of Woe, than their
Wrath. Esa. 5. 20.
Woe unto them (says God) that put light for darkness, and darkness for
light, that put bitter for sweet, and sweet for sour. And if I prove not
their doctrine concerning Rebellion and Aequiuocation to be as bitter as the
water of Meribah, then let them note me for a man above the nature of mankind
malicious. Otherwise, I must expostulate with them according to the Apostles
example: Gal. 4. 16.
Am I your enemy, because I tell you the truth? Which truth in my Encounter to
the Mitigator (God willing) I shall shortly avouch.

Thus from malice the gangrene of a wicked conscience, we come unto falsehood,
the He that lies slays his own soul. Sap. 1. 11.
cutthroat thereof. Concernign which two things must be discussed: First the
protestation P. R. makes, in justifying the sincerity of all Romish writers,
presuming them to be free from all falsehood: Secondly, his accusation against
my self, whom he has notoriously traduced. Now of both these orderly.

P. R. his hypocritical, prodigal, and indeed prodigious ostentation, in the
auouching of the integrity of Romish writers, and freeing them from all note
of wilful falsifications.

14.
55 Treatise of Mitigat. page 489. chap. 12. number. 11.
IN this then, if you please to insist a while, and let Thomas Morton bring
forth any Catholic authors whatsoever, that wrote against Protestants since
these heresies began, that has been taken in this impiety, I mean, that
has set down in Print any such falsitie, as can not be excused either by
ignorance, oversight, negligence, error of print, translation, diversity of
editions, or the like, but that it must needs be presumed, that he knew the
untruth, and yet would set it forth: of this kind (I say) let him show me but
one example among all Catholic writers of our time, and I will in my
conscience greatly mistrust, and discredit the Author, whether it be another or
my self: But if he show me two or three in any writer of this kind, I shall
never be able to believe him more. And whereas the number and variety of
Catholic writers is so great, as the world sees, it were no great labor to
show it in some, if that spirit did reign among them.

56 What if one of his late Authors have been found presumptuously false in
any one report, or else any one but in three points, though this be even his
own self? Does the man (who makes mention of his Mitig. cap. 3. page 89.
Interruption by sickness) know what he has now said? whether he spoke this
being in his feauer-fit, or in temper? whether in a dream, or awake? whether
in his right mind, P. R. his unlucky ostentation.
or in distraction? For sure I am, that this ostentation will prove in the
issue as unfortunate unto P. R. as ever was boast either by Thraso on the
Stage, or by Goliath in the Camp, or by Gorgias in Schools: by the which he
must be driven unto so miserable and shameful a palinodie, as ever hereafter
utterly to discredit his own friends, and work a perpetual discontent within
himself, as presently will fully appear.

57 But before I can come to manifest this, I may not deny even this my
Adversary his due commendation of modesty, who being ashamed (we may think)
of the Romish frauds and falsifications of former times, will insist only upon
such men's examples as have professedly written of late against Protestants. It
were to be wished, that his fellow Jesuit Costerus had kept himself within the
same precincts; but he makes a more general challenge, thus: Costerus Ies.
Enchirid. cap. De summo pontif.. Constat.
Nemo hactenus vel Princeps, vel Praesul, vel Scriptor fuit, qui mendacij, vel
malae fidei Romanos arguerit: that is: Never yet (says he) did any Prince, or
Prelate, or Writer accuse the Romanists of falsehood. When he could not be
ignorant of that which their own volume of Councels has made obseruable for
perpetual remembrance, Three Popes falsificators.
how three Popes, Sozimus, Boniface, and Celestine, at the Council of Carthage
in Afrike, did claim a right of appeals unto Rome by virtue of a Canon of the
Council of Nice, as they pretended. And when all the ancient copies of that
Council had been diligently sought, it appeared by the testimony of three
Patriarks, viz. of Constantinople, Alexandria, and Antioch, In quibus non erat
Canon ille de appellando ad Romans Pontificem deprehensus. Lindanus Panopl. lib.
4. cap. 89.
That that Canon concerning Appeals to the Bishop of Rome (as their Lindan
speaks) could not be found in those Copies: Or, as the Council it self
speaks: Liber Conc. De Actu Conc. Carthag. 6.
Istius Concilij Africani seu Carthaginensis ducenti tres tribus Papis
restiterunt, and Canonem Concilij in defensionem Primatus sui falsum esse
deprehenderunt. A little after: Concludunt tandem nemini licere ad Romanum
Pontificem prouocare: that is: Two hundred and three Fathers of the Council of
Carthageresisted the three Popes, and found, That they suggested a false Canon
for defense of their Primacie. Therefore in the end they concluded, That it
should not be lawful for any of Afrike to appeal unto the Bishop of Rome.
Will P. R. believe any claims which Popes make for Papal jurisdiction, seeing
that three Patriarks, and two hundred and three Bishops, have convinced three
Popes of so apparent a falsehood as this? Gratian a falsificator.
Or what can be said for the defense of Gratian their public Compiler of the
Decrees of Popes, Council. Mileuetanu^ statuit ne quis ad transmatina loca
putauerit appellandu^: Respondent aliqui cum Gratiano, qui addidit ad hunc
Canonem exceptionem, Nisi forte ad Apostolicam sedem appelletur. Sed haec
exceptio non videtur quadrare, Nam praecipue propter Romans Ecclesiam Africani
statuerant, vt non liceret appellare vltra mare. Bellar. lib. 2. De Romans Pont.
cap. 24. * tertio.
who (as Cardin. Bellar. witnesses) citing a Canon of a Council of Mileuet,
wherein it was decreed that none should appeal beyond the sea, did ad of
himself this exception, Except it be unto the Apostolic sea of Rome: when as
that Council in forbidding appeals beyond the sea, did especially intend to
forbid appeals to Rome?

58 Many such like falsehoods might be alleged, wherein Popes and Popish ones
have entangled themselves, and deluded the world, not in school cases of Sic
videtur, and non, or in strifes de stillicidijs, and such trifles: but about
the right of Appeals, yea spiritual and also temporal jurisdictions. But the
nature of a Preamble will not suffer me to pursue old forgeries: and I must
yield something unto P. R. his modesty, who to pass over the blemishes of
ancient Authors, does challenge only an instance in new writers, whether it
be of his fellows, or of himself. And I will endeavor to give him
satisfaction in both. And first tender

A Satisfaction unto P. R. his first Motion concerning his fellows, who have
entangled themselves in open falsifications.

59 Though it be just in God, who is justice it self, to impose this law upon
man, He that offends in one is guilty in all: yet man with man may be more
partial, than for the guilt of one testimony to renounce him in all. And P. R.
is more merciful, therefore he requires three sensible instances, as it were
three witnesses against any one. And yet this also is horribly unmerciful on
their part. I wish he had but named any one, whose credit he valueth most,
that I might have answered his challenge in that one. Howsoever it will be no
more easy a task for me to find one falsehood in many, then many in one: whereof
I exhibit some examples, and

First a notable spectacle of their own manifold contradictions in perverting
three testimonies of antiquity in one controversy.

The First testimony.
60 In the Controversy about Images the Protestants appeal unto antiquity
both of Councels and Fathers: the first Council is that of Eliberis about the
year of Grace 305. which Opponit Caluinus Canonem 36. Conc. Elibertini, in quo
sic dicitur, Placuit picturas in Ecclesia esse non debere, ne quod colitur aut
adoratur in in parietibus depingatur.] Huic vary respondent Catholici Vasques
Ies. de Adorat. l. 2. disp. 5. c. 2. number.. 120.
Protestants urge as forbidding that there should be any Images in the church.
Now let us try the spirits of their answerers* Payua respondet, solum
prohiberi imaginem Dei, quae pingitur ad effigiem Dei repraesentandam. To whom
Payua answers that, They meant only to forbid such an Image as was made to
represent the nature of God. Not so, says Bellarmine, Bellar. Sed non videtur
satisfacere, tum quia loquitur Conc. de picturis in genere, tum quia huiusmodi
imagines non erant in vsu eo tempore. Bellar. l. 2. Imag. cap. 9.
For such images were not then in use. The second, they forbad Images, (says
Sanders) upon a particular occasion peculiar to that time: to wit, Nicolaus
Sanderus l. 2. de cultu Imag. c. 4. respondet, Concilium illud prohibuisse
imagines in templis, quia tempus and locus id require bat: tunc enim periculum
erat, ne Gentiles existimarent nostros adorare ligna and lapides.
For fear lest the Heathen seeing Images in the Churches of Christians might
think that Christians worshipped them idolatrously, as did the Heathen. So
he* Haec solutio bona est. Bellar. l. 2. de Imag. c. 9.. Nicolaus. Immediately
after speaking of the same answer:
This is a good answer, (says Bellarmine:) although in the same place he
confess that that same reason of the Canon Fateor t^lrationem illam Canonis
(ne id quod adoratur and colitur in par^^tibus depingatur) non multum quadrare
huic expositioni* Idem ibidem.
agrees not much with this exposition. Which is a very charitable defense, and
all one, by interpretation, as if he had said, The answer is good, but that it
is naught. We expect a better. The third, They were forbid (faith Alanus Copus
and others) not because Christians seemed to commit Idolatry with those
Images, Alanus Copus in Dialog. l. 5. c. 16. dicit hic prohiberi imagines, quia
ab illis Christianis adorari coeperant, ta^quam Dij, and hunc esse sensum;
Placuit in ecclesia non esse picturas, ne aliquid in parietibus existens
adoretur and colatur vt Deus. In quem sensum accipit istum Canonem B. Iuo in
suis Decretis, par. 3. c. 40. Bellarm. quo iam supra. Hanc interpretationem
amplectuntur Martinus de Ayala, and Sixtus Senensis Bibl. l. 5. Annot. ^47.
Vasques De Adorat. l. 2. disp. 5. c. 2. number. 126.
But because they did so indeed. But, Sed huic etiam expositioni ratio Canonis
non omnino quadrat, nam debuisset dici potius, Ne id quod pingitur adoretur,
quam, Ne id quod adoratur pingatur. Bellar. quo sup.. Alanus. And another, Mihi
non probatur: Si enim a Patribus illius Concilij zelo religionis ita factum
esset, vt omnes imagines etiam in tabulis depictae, aut in materia aliqua
sculptae e templis eijcerentur, Gregorium Magnum postea non latuisset, etc.
Vasques quo sup. number. 127.
This exposition (says Bellarmine) is not agreeable to the Canon. Therefore
Sanders, Allen, Turrian, and Bellarmine, all four, resolve upon a fourth
answer, telling us that those Images Altera interpretatio Alani accomodatior
esse videtur, quam sequuntur etiam Sanderus l. 2. Ador. c. 4. and noster
Franciscus Turrianus l. 3. de dogmat. charact. Dicunt ergo pro tempore and loco
summopere fuisse conueniens, imagines e templis auferre; Imminente enim
Gentilium persecutione, quae sane in Ecclesia Dei adhuc perseuerabat (vt ex
multis Canonib. illius Concilij colligitur) oportebat Christianos secum
imagines defer, and occultare, ne in templis ludibrio Gentilium expositae
manerent. Id autem fieri non poterat, si in parietibus templi, been tamen si in
tabulis depingerentur, aut in materia aliqua sculperentur, etc. Vasques ibid.
number. 128. Another: Huic expositioni aptissim^ conuenit ratio Canonis. Bellarm.
De Imag. lib. 2. cap. 9.. Alij ergo dicunt.
were forbid to be painted upon walls, lest that in that time of persecution
they might have been made a scorn and contempt unto Infidels. But Caeterum
secunda illa interpretatio Canonis 36. mihi non probatur, quod cum ratione,
quam in ipso Canone Concilium expressit, minime conueniat. Ideo enim dicit,
Placult imagines in Ecclesia esse non debere, ne scilicet quod adoratur in
parietibus depingatur. Si tamen praedicta interpretatio vera esset, dicere
potius deberet in hunc modum, Placuit in parietibus Ecclesiae imagines non
depingi, ne persecutoribus fidei nostrae ludibrio esse possunt. Vasques ib. nu.
131.
I cannot allow of this exposition (says the Jesuit Vasques) because it
agrees not with the intention of the Canon. Wherefore he deuiseth another
which we may call the fifth, and which he calls the best, saying:
Interpretatio, quae mihi caeteris omnibus praeferenda videtur, haec est, Non
prohiberi imagines in tabulis depictas aut in alia materia sculptas, sed solum
in ipsis templi parietibus depingi: iudicat enim Concilium indecens esse, vt id
quod colitur parietibus sit affixum, sed debere potius in tabula aut alia
materia reuerenter collocari, nesplendorem amittat. Vasques lib. 2. De Adorat.
disp. 5. cap. 2. number. 132.
They were forbid to be painted on walls, lest by the decay of the walls they
might lose their luster: but yet were not forbid to be painted in tables. Which
best how good it may seem to be, may appear by their sixth and last answer.
Recentiores aliqui pondere illius Concilij quasi oppressi, ta^quam optimu^
effugium elegerunt, authoritatem Concilij ne. gare, quod prouinciale fuerit 19.
Episcoporum tantum, nec ab vllo summo Pontifice co^firmatum. Existimant vero
nullius debere esse authoritatis, quia etiam in multis alijs Canonibus
manifest errauerit, denegans viz. Poenitentiae sacramentum in extrema
necessitate propter aliqua angentia crimina: aut, vt alijs placet, Communionem
Eucharistiae, id quod errorem etiam intolerabilem esse autumant. Atque hac
forsan de causa Canus l. 5. de locis. c. 4. post sextam conclusionem de Conc.
Elibertino, inquit, ea part, qua errauit, semper a Catholicis explosum fuisse.
Et sane si alia via Concilio satisfieri commode non possit, hoc nobis effugium
sufficiat: nec Caluinus contra vniuersalem Ecclesiae definitionem prouinciale
Concilium obijcere deberet. Vasques ib. q. sup. number. 121.
Diverse late Divines (says the Jesuit) oppressed with this objection, taken
from the Council of Eliberis, have thought it their best refuge to deny the
authority of the Council, because it was but provincial, and never confirmed
by the Pope. Which refuge (says he) might serve us in good stead, if a better
could not be found. And though Bellarmine and Baronius made the Etiam Canus
loc. Theol. Bellar. l. 2. Imag. c. 36. Hanc Synodum aiunt erroneam esse, and a
nullo Romano Pontifice confirmatam. Baronius Tom. 1. Anno 57. number. 119* ob
eandem causam quasi prope fines Nouatiani dogmatis Conc. hoc attigisset, paulo
liberius and acrius de eo scripsit. Sed ea deinceps Tom. 2. Anno 305. number. 42.
valde mitigat, ita enim de eodem Canone [Lapsos ne quidem in articulo mortis
absoluendos] cum quae ab illis de ea re statuta sunt ab Innocentio Pontifice
excusentur, nemo sit qui accusare praesumat. Existimat igitur hanc Synodum
legitimam fuisse, atque ab omni errore liberam. Binius De Conc. Comment* in
hunc Canonem, page 245.
same Answer, yet this latter together with Binius confess and prove that, It
was a lawful Council, and free from all error. So that whatsoever the
occasion of forbidding might have been, this is a confessed conclusion of
Senensis, that Populus Christianus recens a superst^tione ad Christianismum
addu^tus, ad idololatriam nimis pronus erat, idcir^o omnino vetuit Synodus
Elibertina imaginu^ cultum. Sixtus Senens. Biblio* lib. 5. Annot. 247.
The Council of Eliberis did absolutely forbid the worship of images. Which
one testimony being so tortured by so distracted and contradictory Answers, as
though they had professed to prove each other a liar: it cannot be (especially
seeing some of them are confessed to have been oppressed with the force of
this objection) but diverse of them must incur (for ought that man can see)
the guilt of wilful falsification. The like is as manifest in

The Second testimony, from the Council of Francford.
61 Protestants object the Council of Francford, which condemned (they say)
the second Council of Nice for approouing the worship of Images: heerupon
their Adversary Surius* does bitterly inueigh against them, calling Protestants
Haereticorum nostrorum, qui se Euangelicos dici volunt, incredibilis impudentia
in hoc apparet, quod docere velint in Concilio Francofordensi damnari Conc.
Nicaenum secundum: adferunt pro se Decretum Francofordiensis Synodi, quo
illorum deplorata mentiendi and quidlibet fingendi libido ita coarguitur, vt
mirum sit illos vnquam in cuiusquam boni viri ausos esse prodite conspectum.
And a little after.
Men of such incredible impudency, and so dissolute lust of lying, that it is a
marvel they dare appear in the presence of any honest man. A fearful
crimination. Shall we know the cause? Vbi homines versuti vellent persuadere
Lectori Nicaenam secundam de adorandis imaginibus damnatam esse, decretum
Francofordiense corruperunt quidem, sed mirabili Dei iudicio, vt illorum
impostura omnibus proderetur, obliti sunt Constantinopolin eradere, atque eius
loco Nicaeam substituere. etc. A little after. Sed valiant isti cum malis suis
artibus. Surius Praef. in Synod. Francofordi.
Because they would craftily persuade men to believe that the second Council
of Nice was condemned in the Council of Francford for the point of the worship
of Images, when as they corrupted those Councels, albeit by the marvelous
providence of God their fraud is made notorious, for they forgot to race out
the name of Constantinople, and put in stead thereof the Council of Nice. Was
it then the Synod of Constantinople, that was condemned in the Council of
Francford, and not the second Synod of Nice? Concilium Francofordiense
prouinciale fuit, in quo Episcopi 300, etc. Acta Concilij Nicaeni secundi in
causa imaginum confirmarunt. Paulo post. Ita docuit Alanus Copus, Sanderus,
Surius, Suarez. Hactenus Binius Com. in hanc. Synod. page 429. Scriptores illi
cum dicunt Synodum 7. in Francofor. Conc. damnatam, non intelligunt Nicaenam
secundam, quae vere septima fuit, sed damnabant Ephesinam secundam. Coster.
Ies. Enchir. ca. 13. Multi recentiores historici dicunt in Francfordiensi non
damnari Synodum de adorandis imaginibus, sed de tollendis, Platina, Blandius,
Sabellicus. Bellar. l. 2. De Conc. cap. 8.
No, (say nine of our Adversaries together) the second Synod of Nice was not
condemned, but rather confirmed in the Council of Francford, by three hundred
Bishops there. Now it is like that by these men's verdict Protestants shall be
adjudged unto the Pillory, for Surius is the chief of that inquest, who has
said, that Protestants sought by forgerie to corrupt a Council. Can there be a
more grievous accusation than this? But behold one Vasques a Jesuit, as it
were another Daniel, ready to acquit the innocent, saying and proouing that
Huic ( sententiae Surij) duo manifest obstant, vnum est, quod si Francofor.
Synodus de Constantinop. Concilio loqueretur, non diceret [Quam pro adorandis
imaginibus fecerunt] ea enim contra imaginum venerationem celebrata est.
Loquitur ergo, sicut Historici omnes, de vera septima Synodo Nicaena secunda,
quae reue^ a pro adorandis imaginibus habita ^uit: alterum est, quod praefatio
asserit, vt referunt Authors, Synodum illam, quam abrogauit Concilium
Francoford celebratam fuisse in Bithynia, in qua quidem prouincia est Nicaea,
non autem Constantinopolis. Vasques l. 2. Imag. c. 4. number. 225.
The sentence of Surius cannot stand, being contrary unto all Historians, who
affirm that the second Synod of Nice, and not the Synod of Constantinople, is
mentioned in the Council. And of Francford Bellarmine more plainly
acknowledges that that Synod of Nice was condemned in the Council of
Francford in this point of the worship of Images. And therefore can do no less
but Sententiam Alani optarem esse vera^, sed suspicor esse falsam, quia etc.
Bellar. l. 2. Conc. c. 8. Propter hanc. Et paulo post, Videtur igitur mihi in
Francoford. Concilio vere reprobatam fuisse Nicaenam secundam.
wish that it were otherwise. Lastly Reuerendis. Cardin. Baronius hanc
sententiam veriorem esse iudicat. Binius Comm. in Conc. Francof. page 391. col.
1.
Baronius also does agree with Bellarmine. What will P. R. judge of those three
Jesuits, Sanders, Suarez, Coster, with their accomplices, who maintain that the
second Synod of Nice was confirmed in the Council of Francford, wherein (in
the opinion of Bellar.) it was condemned? or how will he censure Surius, who
charge Protestants with impudency and forgerie in such degree, as though they
were unworthy the company of men; and when the matter is examined, by three
Jesuits, their opposite Adversaries, Vasques, Bellarmine and Baronius, the
defense of Protestants is warranted for true? Will now our P. R. call Surius,
Furius, (who has published the body of Councels) and annihilate all his
credit hereafter?

62 But I proceed to their second Answer, Damnauit illa quidem Nicaenam
secundam, sed per errorem and materialiter, eo prorsus modo, quo Synodus
Ariminensis damnabat homousion. Nam Author librorum Carolinorum Synodo imposuit
per duo mendacia; vnum erat, illam Synodum cultum latriae imaginibus oblatam
approbasse. Bellarm. l. 2. De Conc. c. 8.. Videtur. Et paulo post. Concilium
Francof. quod frequentissimum fuit, errare potuit, and errauit non in iuris sed
in facti quaestione: nec mirum est quod errare potuit, quia non consenserunt
legati Romani, vt Magdeburgenses dicunt: Papa autem non modo non consensit,
verum etiam reprobauit illud Concilium, vt patet ex libro Adriani, etc. Bellar.
ib.. Si dicas. Idem sensit illustriss. Cardinalis Baronius, Patres Francof.
Concilij mendacijs and imposturis Autorum libri Carolini fuisse deceptos, vt
Nicaenam secundam, quasi ipsa imagines cultulatriae, soli Deo debito, colendas
sanxisset. Test Binio, Com. in Conc. Francof. pa. 397. But,
Though the Council of Francford (say their two Cardinals) did condemn the
Council of Nice in this point, yet did it err herein in a question not of
faith but of fact, for being deceived by reports of the Author of those books,
which are entitled in the name of Charles the Emperor, they did erroneously
think that the Council did allow, that Images should be worshipped with an
honor proper unto God. This answer also is so preiudicious to their own
cause, that their own Doctors Vasques, Suares, and Binius do openly confute
it, proouing first that the Council of Francford Definitio septimae Synodi non
minus nota esse potuit Conc. Francofordiensi, quam Autorib. libri Carolini,
siquidem eodem tempore liber ille conscriptus fuit. Vasques Alorat. l. 2. disp.
7. cap. 5. number. 230.
Could not be deceived by that information. Secondly, that the Rursus
Concilium Francof. habuit Legatos Adriam Pont. vt tradunt omnes in quaestione
praecedenti citati, and ex subscriptionibus co^stat, atque haeretici
Centuriatores fatentur. Ibid. number. 232.
Legates of the Pope did subscribe unto it. Thirdly, that the contrary answer
Ego cum viro doctissimo Francisco Suarez sentio, istam responsionem infirmis
niti fundamentis. Binius q. supra.
stands not upon any sound ground. And if I shall object the answer of
Bellarmine, I think P. R. will return me no satisfaction: he to allow the
Council of Francford thus far, as to think i^ did not err in a question of
right or faith, but only failed in an error of fact. Tell me in good earnest
P. R. if the Fathers of the Council of Francford judging that the second
Council of Nice, confirmed by the Pope, did err in defending Idolatry, did
they err in faith or no? if they did, then where was the faith of Bellarmine
and Baronius, who say it did not err in question of faith? if those Fathers
judging the Council of Nice to err in faith, did not err themselves then it
is not prejudicial to faith to think that The Pope and his Council may err
in defending Idolatry, and consequently heresy, and what not? Therefore yet
they have not satisfied the Protestants objection.

63 Their last refuge is to contemn it as being only a Si Conc.
Francofordiense aliquid contra Synodum septimam ( which was Nicaena secunda)
statuisset, tamen nullius esset momenti, tum quia Prouinciale non valet contra
generale, tum quia non erat a Pontifice Romano approbatum. Bellar. l. 2. De
Imag. c. 14.
Provincial Council: and amongst others their Binius teaches his fellows
how to wind themselves out of this whirle-poole. Necessario igitur fatendum
est, vel Historicos errasse, vel aliqua ex part deprauatos esse, vel certe non
de vera, sed de Pseudosynodo loquutos esse. Denique possit quis libere negare
quicquam actum esse in Francof. Synodo sieve pro Imaginibus, si^e contra illas.
Binius Tom. 3. Conc. Comment. in Conc. Francof.
We must necessarily confess (says he) that either our Historians have erred,
or else the Acts of the Council have been corrupted, or else that it
condemned some other false Council: or else freely deny that it makes
neither for us, nor against us* He might have added, Or else let us grant (as
we ought) the objection of Protestants to be true. To all the other not the
equity of the case, but desperate necessity has enforced them, as may appear
by their intestine war among themselves, one of them proouing another answer
to be flatly repugnant unto the tenor of the Council which could not have been
without gross falsitie on some part. Wherefore we conclude with the saying of
the Jesuit Suares: Periculosum and temerariu^ est, acta illius Concilij veluti
supposititia and apocrypha reijcere, quia nihil in eis actis, vt nunc extant,
reperitur, quod non ad veram religionem stabiliendam valeat. Suares Jes. disp.
49. sect. 3. Test Binio, in loco supra citato.
It is a dangerous rashness to reject the Acts of that Council of Francford
as false: And proceed unto

The Third example.
64 Protestants object the testimony of the ancient Father Obijciunt
Protestants nobis Epiphanium, qui in Epistola ad Iohannem Hierosolymitanu^ sic
scribit. Cum venissem, inquit, ad villam Anablatha, and in Ecclesiam intrassem,
vt orarem, inueni ibi velum pendens in foribus eiusdem Ecclsiae, habens
imaginem quasi Christi aut Sancti ^^^usda^: cumque vidissem in Ecclesia
Christi, contra authoritatem Scripturarum, hominis pendere imaginem, s^idi
illud velum, etc. Vasques Jes. lib. 2. de Adorat. disp. 5. cap. 3. number. 136.
Bellar. lib. 2. de Triumph. Eccl. cap. 9.. ^.
Epiphanius, who by his own report entered into a Church at Anablatha to pray,
and perceiving a curtain, wherein was a Picture as if it had been the image
of Christ, or some Saint, he took the curtain and rent it, as being an abuse
contrary to the authority of holy Scriptures. Our Adversaries are changeable to
answer thereunto. Therefore first Waldensis is bold, and says that Hoc fecit
Epiphanius propter periculum erroris Anthopomorphitarum, qui Deum corporeum,
and membris compactum esse asserebant. Waldens. Tom. 3. tit. 19. cap. 157. Sic
quidem Waldensis, qui reprehendit in Epiphanio zelum nimium, and non secundum
scientiam.
Epiphanius did this upon a good zeal, but not according to knowledge, all for
fear of giving advantage unto the Anthropomorphitae. But Cardinal Bellarmine
cuts him short, telling him, that Verum Waldensem textus ipse resutat, non enim
erat Dei imago, sed hominis cuiusdam. Ergo non potuit Epiphanius hac occasion
motus velum abscindere. Vasq* q. sup. disp. 5. c. 3. number. 137.
His answer is confuted by the text. The next is Vasques the Jesuit, noting
Protestants for dullards, who could not perceive that the image, which
Epiphanius rent, Hinc intelligi potest, quanto ^udioris ingenij fuit Caluinus,
and alij, qui hoc nobis testimonium obijciunt. Si enim attente legatur
Epiphanius ne verbum quidem de sanctorum imaginibus habet. Vasques q. sup. c.
3. number. 144. Sed loquitur de imagine hominis prophani, quae in sanctarum
imaginum Catalogo ferenda non est. Ibid. cap. 4. number. 148.
Was not the image of a Saint, but of some profane man. But Cardinal
Bellarmine will tell him that, Alij dicunt loqui de imagine hominis profani,
sed communior and verior solutio est, verba, etc. Bellar. lib. 2. de Triumph.
Eccl. cap. 9.
There is a better and more common answer than this. Sure, for this is naught,
forasmuch as their Senensis has taught them that Epiphanius in other his
Epistles Epiphanius in alia Epistola, quae in actis primae Synodi citatur,
Estote, inquit, memores, dilecti filij, ne in Ecclesias imagines inferatis, nec
in coemiterijs statuatis. Sixtus Senens. Bibl. l. 5. Annot. 247.
Does forbid Images to be brought into the Church. We require therefore a better
answer than this. Alphonsus de Castro, to rid his hands of Epiphanius, numbreth
him among those whom he calls Epiphanius inter Iconomachos haereticos fuit.
Alphons. de Castro haeres. Tit. Image.
Iconomachos haereticos, heretical Image-breakers. This will not be current
with Vasques, who supposing that it was the Image of some profane man, says
that Velum habens quasi Christi aut Sancti cuiusdam: Illa vox [Quasi]
significat hominis profani imagine^ ibi pependisse, tanquam esset imago aut
Christi aut Sancti alicuius: ideoque merito fuisse abscissam. Vasques quo
supra. cap. 4. number. 149.
Epiphanius did well to take it away. As yet nothing is said which may give
satisfaction. Where is that which was called the Common answer? Alanus and
Sanderus difficultate oppressi responderunt, verba suposititia esse. Vasques
ibid. number. 140. Corrupta est haec Epistola a veteribus Iconoclastris. Costerus
Jesuita E^^hi^id. cap. 13.. Corrupta. Esse quidem supposititia probatur, primo,
secundo, tertio, etc. nono. Bellar. quo supra.
Allen, Sanders, Coster, Bellarmine have all resolved to cut the knot, which
they cannot untie, and therefore say, The Epistle in that part is forged or
corrupted by Heretics. It is no marvel they be so brief, for Vasques has
told us, that those which answered thus See in the next number before.
Were oppressed with the difficulty. Wherefore he concludes directly, Verba,
quae alij suppositia esse putant ad eandem epistolam sine dubio pertinent, nam
postquam Epiphanius se excusabat ad Iohannem Hierosol. de erroribus, quos
Johannes in eo notasset, merito aliam causam, cur alij de se murmurarent,
subiun^it, dicens, Cum venissem Anablatha, etc. Vasques Jes. lib. 2. de Adorat.
disp. 5. cap. 3.
That without all doubt the Epistle is not counterfeit. It may be Bellarmine
will not speak any thing without reason: Hieronymus in Epistola ad Pammachium
contra Iohannem Hierosol. Episcopum, totam fere hanc epistolam Epiphanij a se
Latin factam recitat, and tamen non meminit huius veli. Ergo illa verba
supposititia esse videntur. Bellar. l. 2. de Triumph. Eccle. cap. 9.
Hierome (says he) in his Epistle unto Pammachius against John Bishop of
Jerusalem, does translate almost this whole Epistle into Latin, and yet
makes no mention of this part of the Epistle concerning this image. Therefore
is this part counterfeit. Who would think that this great Rabbi could have
been ignorant of that which any man may see, and his own learned Doctors have
acknowledged, that Est Epistola Epiphani^ ab Hieronymo translata and approbata
in haec verba [Cum venissem Anablatha. Senens. l. 5. Bibl. Annot. 247. Haec
epistola Epiphanij de velo ponitur inter Epistolas Hieronymi, ordine 60: imo
idem Hieronymus in epistolam ad Pammachium huius epistolae mentionem facit.
Vasq. quo supra. It is found in the epistle of S. Hierom. ad Ioh. Hierosol.
The Epistle which is translated and approved by S. Hierome, has this part in
it concerning the Image [when I was at Anablatha] Which is evident to them who
will read the Epistle of S. Hierome to John Bishop of Jerusalem: yet does
Senensis instance in the authority of Cum vero Damascenus dicit ( id quod
Bellar. obijcit supra) Epistola^ Epiphanij esse con^icta^:
Damascene to prove this Epistle a forged device: but Damascene is falsely
alleged, says Vasques: adding that Non de hac Epistola ad Iohannem Hierosol.
(vt falso Senensis autumat) sed de epist. ad Theodosium intelligit. Ergo hoc
commune and frequens nostrorum effugium mihi non placet, and Hieronymo necesse
non fuit in epistola sua ad Pammachium huius veli meminisse, quia Hieronymi
institutum erat tantum de Iohannis Hierosol. erroribus agere. Vasques ibid.
This our common refuge, in excepting against the Epistle as counterfeit is no
way allowable. Hitherto they have delivered no Answer sufficient. We marvel
why their great Jesuit Valentia has been so long silent: therefore he, Aut
si maxim exploratum sit eam epistolam esse genuinam, respondemus, apud nos
Ecclesiae authoritas plus ponderis habet. Greg. Valent. Ies. l. 2. de Idol. c.
7. page 719. Vna hirundo non facit ver. Anglo-Rhemens. transl. in non. Test.
vide Indicem de Imaginibus.
If it shall appear that it was the proper Epistle of Epiphanius, yet we
answer that the Church is of greater authority with us than Epiphanius.
Whereunto we oppose that which Epiphanius preferred before any pretense of the
Church, when he said that the abuse of that image was Cum vidissem (inquit
Epiphanius) contra authoritatem Scripturarum hominis pendere imaginem, etc.
Epiphan. vt est ab ist^citatus.
contrary to Scriptures.

65 In all that has been spoken we see many falsehoods, and that in a part of
but one controversy. If P. R. shall desire 500. of this kind, I bind my
self unto him by a faithful protestation in a Months warning to satisfy
him, whenever he or any for him shall exact it. Neither shall I need to
borrow oil for this lamp to make it manifest unto the world, that in all
their passages in all controversies of greatest moment when they are to be
discussed by Scriptures, Fathers, and reasons, there are such crossings,
thwartings and contradictions among them, as though (as the Poet faineth) the
teeth of the Dragon were fallen out of his mouth and metamorphosed into armed
men, presently bent to kill one another. But I will come one step nearer to P.
R. his demand, Offering him

A Satisfaction to his first demand in a particular instance of a noble
Falsificator on his side.

15.
66 P. R. requires an example of Any one, who has been found so grossly false,
that in the eye of man he may not be acquitted either by Ignorance of
translation, etc. Which demand if it proceed from vnfeinednesse, it seems
unto me so intolerably reasonable, that now I am driven to a twofold trouble
in yielding satisfaction; the one is that I know not with what one to begin
first, the falsificators be so many: the second is, when I shall begin with any
choice one, how to make an end, so manifold are their falsifications. Therefore
in respect of the falsifiers I would require of P. R. to propound unto me any
one of his Doctors, in whom he has best assurance of integrity, whether
Greg. de Valentia, Stapleton, Bellarmine, Coccius, Suarez, Turrian, Campian,
Gretzer, Fuerdentius, the Remish Translat. in their Annotations: or any, I say,
of those which have been publicly authorized of their Chruch, and I will not
doubt but to give him thrice three examples of their fraud. In the mean time I
think it requisite to single out of all such an one as is commended of all: to
wit, Cardinal Bellarmine, that P. R. may not repine, saying: he has chosen a
David the least in his fathers house: but confess that I have preferred a
Saul, one higher by the head and shoulders than any of the rest: not a dead
man, who cannot interpret his own meaning, whether he had falsified upon
ignorance, negligence, etc. but one, which now living is able to answer for
himself, whose credit P. R. does tender, and with whom he may consult to know
whether I do him injury or no. Now to the point.

First, examples of such kind of falsities in wilful slanders, whereof
Cardinal Bellarmine has been guilty, as will appear even by the evidence of
his own confession.

67 Let P. R. for a while take Cardinal Bellarmine into secret confession, and
first ask him with what conscience he has charged Calvin with the heresy of
the Pelagiani docebant non esse in hominibus peccatum originale, and praecipue
in filijs fidelium. Idem docent Caluinus and Bucerus, etc. Bellar. lib. 4. de
Eccl. milit. c. 9.. Pelagiani.
Pelagians, who denied that there was any original sin in infants,
especially in the children of faithful Christians? For as he could not be
ignorant Hic proprius erat Pelagianorum error, negare peccatum originale esse
haereditariam naturae nostrae corruptione^. Greg Val. Jes. lib. De orig. pet.
c. 2. in initio.
That this doctrine of denying original sin was (as their own L. Jesuit
confesses) the proper heresy of the Pelagians. And not so only, but says
furthermore that Caluinus and Lutherus, caeterique Protestants adeo non
negarunt originale peccatum, vt illud prodigiosis loquendi modis exagitant,
etiam in renatis manner dicunt, etc. Idem Ib. cap. 8. and in Tom. 2. disp. 6.
q. 11. punct. 1.. Quam quaestionem.
Calvin and all other Protestants are so far from denying original sin, that
they do monstrously extend the nature thereof even unto persons regenerat. I
let pass a dozen such criminations cast by him upon Protestants, which by the
testimonies of his own Doctors may be proved to have been lewd and
intolerable slanders. I insist now only upon such his confessions, whereby it
may appear he has been, in his injuries against his Adversaries, the greatest
Adversary to his own conscience.

68 First he makes Protestants guilty of the heresy of Nouatianorum error
praecipuus erat, non esse in Ecclesia potestatem reconciliandi homines, nisi
per baptismum: Postea etiam addiderunt, non debere baptizatos inungi chrismate
ab Episcopis. Caluinus negat vllum esse Sacramentum poenitentiae praeter
Baptisma, Lutherus Poenitentiam reijcit. Bellar. l. 4. De not. Eccle. cap. 9..
Nouatianorum.
The Nouatians, in taking from the Church all power of reconciling men unto
God. When as his own Authors note that, Nouatianorum haeresis peccantibus omnem
poenitentiae virtutem tollit, dicens eos, qui semel post Baptismum lapsi sunt,
nunquam postea consequi remissionem peccatorum, etiamsi eos poeniteat. Alphon.
De castro. lib. 12. haeres. 3. tit. Poenitentia. Omne peccatum lethale post
Baptismum commissum irremissibile censuerunt. Vega. l. 13. de Justif. c. 2.
page 486. In Ioh. 5. 4. Dixit Christus, Noliamplius peccare, ne deterius
aliquid tibi contingat. Ex quo loco probat Pacianus contra Nouatianos, non
negandam esse poenitentibus veniam, nec enim dixisse Christum iam noli peccare,
quia non sanaberis iterum, sed, ne deterius aliquid tibi contingat. Maldonat.
Jes. Comm. in ^um locum Joh.
The heresy of the Nouatians was this, viz. to deny any man, who should sin
after baptism, all hope of remission of sins, although he should repent. Yea
and also Bellarmine himself in behalf of Protestants confesses elsewhere
that Dicunt Protestants in Christianis post Baptismum requiri fidem and
poenitentiam, vt iustificentur and remissionem consequantur. Bellar. lib. 3. de
Justif. cap. 6, and saepe alias.
They require repentance and faith in Christians, that they may be justified
and obtain remission of sins. Nor this only, but Non de quauis poenitentia
inter nos and Protestants controuersia habetur, potest enim vera poenitentia
vel in sola mentis conuersione, atque interna peccati detestatione consistere,
vel in externis signis, vt moerore, lachrymis, confessione, corporis
afflictatione se prodere, neque de hac re vlla est controuersia. Ipsi
aduersarij Caluinus and Che^nitius opera externa laboriosa, vt signa verae
poenitentiae internae non reijciunt. Deinde absolutionis ritum aliquem fere
omnes agnoscunt. Sed hic est status controuersiae, vtrum poenitentia signis
externis manifestata, accedente ad eam verbo absolutionis, sit Sacramentum
proprie dictum. Bellar. lib. 1. de Poenit. cap. 8.. Vt igitur.
There is no difference between us ( says he) and Protestants about
repentance as it is a conversion unto God with detestation of sin, or as it
consists in outward signs of sorrow, weeping, confession, and outward
chastisements, yea and almost all of them allow an outward rite of absolution.
But the only controversy between us is, whether Penance be properly a
Sacrament. The contradiction is this, to impute unto Protestants an heresy
which takes away all manner of Repentance and hope of remission for sin past,
and yet to acknowledge in them a contrary orthodoxall truth, which is, to
profess a necessity of Repentance, and reconciliation and remission of sins.

69 Again, he attributes unto Calvin the heresy of the Manicheis,
Manichaeorum est (inquit Hieronym.) hominum damnare naturam, and hominum
auferre arbitrium, and peccatorum originem non tribuunt Manichaei libero
arbitrio, inquit Augustinus. Idem Calunius. Bellar. l. 4. de Not. Eccles. cap.
9.. 8. Manichaeorum.
Who ( says he) did condemn the nature of men, depriving them of freewill,
and ascribing the original and beginning of sin unto the nature of man, and
not unto his freewill. Seeing he has himself observed that, Johannes
Calunius docet quod in initio homo habuerit liberum arbitrium, nunc non habet.
In hac integritate (inquit) libero pollebat homo arbitrio, quo, si vellet,
adipisci posset vitam aeternam. Bellar. l. 1. degrat. primi hominis.. in eodem
principio.
Calvin teaches that man in his first creation had freewill, whereby in his
integrity he might, if he would, have attained unto eternal life. This
contradiction in this point is no more than this, to charge Calvin with that
which he did not believe. Is not this singular falsehood? and yet behold a more
notable than this.

70 He accuses M. Bullinger of Henricum Bullingerum non puduit scribere tres
esse in diuinitate personas non statu sed gradu, non substantia sed forma, non
potestate sed specie differentes. Certe personas gradu, forma, specie
differentes, vix Ariani ipsi dicere ausi essent. Bellar. praef. in Contro. de
Christo.. Henricum.
Arianisme, because of this sentence [Tres sunt, non statu sed gradu, etc.]
Notwithstanding he knew this was the very sentence of Sic scribit Tertullianus
in libro aduersus Praxeam, Tres sunt non statu sed gradu, non substantia sed
forma, non potestate sed specie. Greg. Val. Jes. lib. de vinit. and Trinit. c.
9.
Tertullian. And is therefore elsewhere expounded as orthodoxall and
justifiable by Tertullianus in libro aduersus Praxeam cum dixit filium
distingui a Patre non statu sed gradu, per gradum intelligit ordinem
personarum. Bellar. l. 1. de Christo, c. 10.. Respondeo secundum.
himself.

71 Though P R. require but three examples of falsehood, yet may I not envy him
a further choice, because I know not the curiosity of his palate. Therefore
let him again consult with Cardinal Bellar. in another taxation of
Protestants, saying in one place that, Secundum errorem Caluinistarum (
speaking of a Christian soul departing this life) non ad Deum ibat, sed ad
inferos, aut alium locum extra coelu^, vbi non magis Deus est, quam hic
nobiscum. Bellar. l. 1. de Beat Sanct. cap. 4. paulo post initium.
They teach that the souls of faithful men departing this life do not go
directly unto heaven. In another place he himself together with his fellow
Jesuit have publicly recorded that it is a common Octaua obiectio ( answering
to the objection of Protestants) sumitur ex 2. Cor. 5. [Si domus terrena
nostrae habitationis dissoluitur, habemus domum non manu factam in coelis]
recta igitur post mortem sine Purgatorio pij homines transferuntur in coelum.
Respondeo etc. Bellar. l. 1. de Imag. c. 8.. Octaua obiectio. And Obijciunt
nobis Protestants loca Scripturarum and Patrum, in quibus duplex status eorum,
qui moriuntur, significatur, impiorum in supplicium aeternum, and iustorum in
vitam aeternam. Deinde huiusmodi loca Scripturarum urgent, quibus determinate
significari videtur, eos qui ex hac vita discedunt in statu gratiae statim
recipi ad beatitudinem. vt Apoc. 14. Beati qui moriuntur in Domino, requiescunt
a laboribus: Si (inquiunt) omnes beati, tum nulli in Purgatorij cruciatibus
continentur. Greg. Valent. de Purg. c. 8. and the Rhemish Annot in Apoc. 14. 13.
Objection of Protestants proouing from Scriptures against the doctrine of
Purgatory, that the souls of the faithful presently after death go directly
unto heaven.

72 He rests not here, but once again challenges Quidam antiqui haeretici
fuerunt, qui negabant Eucharist^am esse veram carnem Christi, and tantum esse
volebant signum and imaginem corporis Christi. Hanc haeresin refert
Theodoretus, eandem docent hoc tempore Zuinglius, Caluines. Bellar. l. 4. de
not. Eccl. c. 9. ad finem.
Calvin for (as he calls it) an ancient heresy alleged by Theodoret,
affirming, that there is only a figure of Christ's body in the Eucharist. And
yet in another place affirming both Quae sententia citatur a Theodoreto in
Dialogo, vbi tamen nunc non habetur. Sed ne glorientur Caluinistae sententiam
suam valde antiquam esse, illud est obseruandum, antiquissimos illos haereticos
non tam sacramentum Eucharistiae, quam mysterium incarnationis oppugnasse.
Bellar. l. 1. de Euchar. c. 1. in initio.
That that opinion is not ancient, nor yet now to be found in Theodoret, and
also that, Docet Caluinus symbola and corpus Christi, licet inter se loco
plurimum distent, tamen coniuncta esse non solum ratione signi, quia vnum est
signum alterius, sed etiam quia vna cum signo Deus exhibet verum Christi corpus
and sanguinem, quo animae nostrae alantur ad vitam aeternam. Bellar. ib..
Secundo docet.
The foresaid doctrine of Calvin does teach that in the Eucharist there is to
be exhibited unto the faithful not only a sign of Christ's body, but also the
body and blood it self by which men's souls are nourished unto eternal life.
Or as another Jesuit testifies for Calvin, Docet Caluinus corpus Christi ab
animis nostris in Eucharistia substantialiter communicari.
That our souls communicate with the body of Christ substantially. Here is no
more odds in this accusation, than ancient and not ancient, heresy and not
heresy. All these contradictions do certainly euince that he has by public
imputations slandered those, whom in his conscience he did acquit. And shall
we think that his conscience could be sincere in alleging other men's
testimonies and witnesses, Greg. Valent. Jes. tom. 4. disp. 6. q. 3. punct. 1..
Item.
who is found thus perfidiously unjust in exhibiting his own? I spare to
produce multitudes of this kind which I have in store, and will be a debtor to
P. R. for many of this sort, ready to pay my debt as soon as this my promise
shall be exacted.

Some examples of Cardinal Bellarmine his falsifications in the allegation of
testimonies.

16.
SAint Cyprian says, Cyprianus epist. 10. ad Pomp. Vnde est haec traditio? an
ex dominica autoritate descendens, an de Apostolorum mandatis and epistolis? ea
enim facienda esse quae scripta sunt testatur Deus. He^reunto Bellarmine.
Whence is this tradition? is it derived from the Lords authority, or from the
precept of the Apostles? For God wills that we should do those things which
are written. From whence Protestants conclude, that the Scriptures are of
sufficiency for our direction in all questions of faith. Bellarmine answers,
that Respondeo, Cyprianum haec scripsisse cum errorem suum tueri vellet, and
ideo non mirum si more errantium tunc ratiocinaretur. Quare Augustinus contra
Donatistas cap. 23. and ^equentibus hanc epistolam merito refellit. Bellar.
lib. 4. de verb. Dei, cap. 11.. profert Cyprian. etc.
Cyprian spoke this when he thought to defend an error, and therefore it is no
marvel if he erred in so reasoning, for the which cause S. Augustine (says
he) did worthily refute him. The question is not what error Cyprian held, but
whether his manner of reasoning from the sufficiency of scripture were
erroneous, or no. Bellar. pretends that S. Augustine did worthily reprove
him. But whosoever shall consult with S. Augustine in the chap. specified,
shall find that this point by him is excellently commended, Quod Cyprianus
monet vt ad fontem recurramus, id est, Apostolorum traditionem, and inde in
nostra tempora canalem dirigamus, optimum est, and sine dubitatione faciendu^*
Traditum est igitur ab Apostolis quod sit vnus Deus, vnum Baptisma, vna fides,
Ephesians. 4. August. lib. 5. de Baptismo. cap. 26.
That Cyprian warns us (says S. August.) to run unto the fountain, that is,
unto the tradition of the Apostles; from thence to derive a conduit to our
times, it is chiefly good and doubtless to be performed.

74 Secondly, Bellarmine to establish the authority of the Pope, does give this
prerogative to S. Peter, to wit: Vigesima secunda praerogatiua Petri est, quod
solus Petrus Episcopus ordinatus fuerit: caeteri autem a Petro. Probatur ex
Anacleto Epist. 1. In nouo Testamento etc. a Clemente Alexandrino, a Cypriano
lib. 4. Epist. a Leone Sermon 3. de assumptione sua ad Pontificatum etc.
Bellarm. lib. 1. de Pontif. Romans cap. 23.
That S. Peter was the only Bishop, and that other Apostles took their orders
from him: which he labors to euince from the testimonies of Anacletus,
Clemens Alexand. Eusebius, and Cyprian; wherein he is refelled by his own
Doctors. One saying, that Nonnulli contendunt caeteros Apostolos eam
potestatem iurisdictionis accepisse, idque probare conantur ex authoritate
Anacleti, Cypriani, Augustini, Leonis, Clementis Alexandrini. Sed reuera non
faciunt id quod istius sententiae autores volunt. Franciscus de victoria
relect. 2. conclus. 1.. quod.
Indeed those Fathers mean no such thing: Another, that De epistola pontificum
Clementis and Anacleti, multa sunt quae manifest ostendunt illas esse
supposititias, quibus nituntur ij, qui plus quam expedit Sedis Romanae
authoritatem amplificant. Cardinal. Cusanus de Concord. Cathol. lib. 3. cap. 2.
The Epistles of Anacletus are counterfeit, which many urge more than is meet to
the end they may advance the authority of the sea of Rome.

75 Again, where Bellarmine cites the testimony of Extat apud Platinam forma
electionis Hildebrandi in haec verba: Nos sanctae Romanae Ecclesiae etc.
Bellarm. lib. 4. de Roman. Pontif. cap. 13.. Extat, etc.
Platina for the commendation of Pope Hildebrand: And in another place finding
Platina objected in the question of confession, answers for the disabling of
the Author, saying, Being urged with his testimony in the case of Romish
Confession, by the Decree of Innocentius, he answers: Sed neque Platina
publica authoritate and ex publicis archiuis vitas illas Pontificum scripsit.
Bellarm. lib. 3. De Poenit. cap. 13.. Sed neque.
that Platina had no public authority to pen the lives of the Popes from
public records. Which is notably false, Platina himself in his epistle
Dedicatory unto the then Pope writing thus: Tu Theologorum Princeps (maxim
Pontifex) non frustra mandasti vt res gestas Pontificum scriberem. Platina in
Praefat. operis.
Thou (o Prince of Divines, and chief of Bishops) have commanded me to write
the lives of the Popes: whose history is therefore greatly commended by Balbus,
as being Quae Platina de vitis Pontificum scripsit vera sunt existimanda,
quippe cum ea ex publicis tabulis scripsit, aliisque legitimis documentis
deprompsit: in quibus res gestae Pontificum historica fide continentur. Hieron
Balbus de coronatione.. Post mortem Constantini, etc.
True, and taken out of public monuments. I could furnish P. R. with infinite
such like delusions, and will also whenever my Adversary shall renew his
demand: for such a multitude of examples I could bring, that I find it a
greater difficulty for me to subtract, than to multiply.

76 Therefore I will now confine my self within the precincts of but one only
controversy concerning Purgatory: where Bellarmine distinguishing of the
diverse acception of the word fire in the writings of ancient Fathers,
concludes that, Vocatur purgatorium locus quid a, in quo, tanquam in carcere,
post hanc vitam purgantur animae, quae in hac plene purgatae non fuerant. De
hac est tota controuersia. Bellar. lib. 1. de purgat. cap. 1. vocatur. Patres
aliqui per ignem non intelligunt ignem purgatorij, sed ignem diuini iudicij,
quomodo loquitur Paulus in 1. Cor. 3. cum ait, vniuscuiusque opus quale sit
ignis probabit. Bellar. lib. 2. de purgat. cap. 1.. Add. Apostolus 1. Cor. 3.
lgnis probabit] loquitur de igne seueri and iusti iudicij Dei, qui non est
ignis purgans and affligens, sed probans and examinans. Bellar. li. 1. de purg.
cap. 4.. Superest.
When the Fathers speak of the fire of the day of doom, when all the world
shall be of a flame, they mean not Purgatory fire, which souls suffer
immediately after death. After this he allegeth. Sunt apertissima loca ex
patribus, vbi asteritur purgatorium, quorum pauca quaedam afferam. Bellar. lib.
1. de purgat. cap. 6.. Denide etc.
Most plain places, (as he calls them) out of the Fathers for proof of
Purgatory. Amongst others (in his first book de Purgatorio) S. Vide Ambrosium
Sermon. 20. in Psalm. 118. Ibidem,. Ambrosius etc. Is in Psalm. 118. Sermon. 20.
Omnes, inquit, oportet transire per flammas, sieve Ioannes sit sieve Petrus etc.
Bellar. lib. 2. de purgat. cap. 1.. Ambrosius. Et paulo post
Ambrose sermon. 20. in Psalm. 118. for proof of Purgatory fire: which he
himself confesses in his next book Ambrosius hoc posteriore loco ( speaking
of the Psalm. 118) videtur per ignem non intelligere purgatorium. Bellar. ibid..
Add etc. He urges Hilary
not to be meant of Purgatory. So he deals also with S. Inter apertissima
loca. Hilarious in Psalm. 118. illud [concupiuit anima mea desiderare iudicia
tua] nobis (inquit) est ille ignis obeundus in quo subeunda sunt grauia illa
expiandae a peccatis animae supplicia. Bellar. li. 1. de purga. ca. 7..
Hilarious. Rursus
Hilary, urging his sentence upon the Psalm. 118. as an evident place for
Purgatory, which by his own judgment Hilarious in Psalm. 118. in illa verba:
Concupiuit anima etc. vbi insinuat B. Mariam transire debuisse per illum ignem.
Bellar. lib. 2. de purgat. cap. 1.. Idem videtur: Rursus. Aliqui ( amongst whom
he cites Hilarie) videntur non intelligere ignem purgatorium vt ( answering to
the place above mentioned) Hilarious. ibid.. Add.
Seems not to signify Purgatory. And yet again, among his Sunt apertissima
loca in patribus. Bella. lib. 1. de purgat. cap. 6.. Deinde sunt, Paulo post.
manifest places of the Fathers for Purgatory, he allegeth the testimonies of
Vt Origenes homil. 6. in Exodus Saltus fit si quid forte plumbi habent admixtum.
Origin, Et Basilius in Isa. 9. quod depascatur and deuoret ignis purgatorius.
Basil, Et Lactantius lib. 7. cap. 21. perstringentur igne atque comburentur.
Lanctantius, Et Hieronymus in fine Comment. in Isaiam: quorum opera in igne
probanda.
Hierom, Ambrosius in Psalm. 36. Non exuremur, tamen vremur, etc. Haec omnia
Bellar. lib. 1. de purga. cap. 6.
Ambrose: all which are acknowledged expressly by Origenes dixit: Omnes homines
excepto Christo, aliquo modo vrendos esse igne conflagrationis diuini iudicij.
Et Hilarious vna cum Ambrosio Origenem sequu^us est. Eodem pertinere videntur
quae Basilius annotauit: ad eandem opinionem aparet allusisse Hieronymum, and
long ante Hieronymum quoque Lactantium. Sixtus Senensis Bibliothe. lib. 5.
annot. 171. Lactantius lib. 7. cap. 21. perstringentur inquit etc. loquitur de
ijs qui in resurrectione sunt igni tradendi. Suarez Iesuita in part. 3. Thom.
qu 59. art. 6. disp. 57. sect. 1.. Ambrosius in Comment. in Psalm. 36.
consentire videtur cum Origene qui dicit omnes homines, Christo excepto,
probandos esse and aliquo modo vrendos igne conflagrationis diuini iudicij.
Sixtus Senens. Bibliothe. lib. 5. annot. 171.
Sixtus Senensis, from the evidence of the contexts to have spoken only of the
fire of the day of judgment, and consequently as See before numb. 12.
Bellarmine has taught us; not of the fire of Purgatory. Lastly he professes
to confirm the doctrine of purgatory out of most of the Purgatorium ex
Patribus Graecis and Latinis probamus. Bellar. lib. 1. de purgat. cap 6.
Greek and Latin Fathers. And another Jesuit says more largely Omnes
veteres Graeci Patres agnouerunt purgatorium and Scriptis suis luculentissime
prodiderunt. Salmeron Jesuit. Comm. in 1. Cor. 15. disp. 25. in fine.
of all the Greek Fathers: which is an assertion as false, as peremptory, even
by the confession of their own Bishop saying: Legate qui velit Graecorum
veterum Commentarios, and nullum, quantum opinor, aut rarissimum de purgatorio
sermonem inueniet: Sed neque Latini simul omnes huius rei veritatem
conceperunt. Roffens. art. 18. aduers. Lutherum.
That there is very rare mention of Purgatory in the Greek Fathers; and that
the Latin Fathers did not all at first apprehend the doctrine thereof.

77 If any shall but observe in this one controversy the number of witnesses
brought in for the confirmation of this their new Article in the name of
ancient Fathers, which are by confession of our Adversaries merely counterfeit.
as Clemens his Constitutions, Clemens Epistles, Athanas. in quaest. Eusebius
Emissenus, Josephus Ben Gorion, Hieron. in Proverb. August. ad fratres in
Eremo, the Liturgies of James and others: All which as they are urged for
proof of Purgatory, so are they rejected by their own men (I desire to be
challenged for proof heerof) as forged, or corrupted, or Apocrypha; and indeed
no better witnesses for truth, than the Knights of the post be fit men for a
Jury. If further he shall mark how true Fathers and Scriptures are instanced in
for proof of the same Article, whereof (when I speak of Fathers) most of them
(when I speak of Canonical scriptures) all of them are found by the judgment
of their own Doctors to be tortured, wrested, and forced, as it were, to say
that which they never meant. If he, lastly, consider how almost every one of
them indeuouring the defense of the same doctrine is in his own assertions
contradicted by himself, which may be in this one controversy concerning
Purgatory, a late Article of their faith, most plainly discerned.

78 These observations may give our Reader such a scantling of their dealing,
that we may justly pronounce P. R. his censure upon themselves, Not to be
believed hereafter. So desperate has his demand been, when he required any
one overtaken in a triple falsitie, as though he would venture all the credit
of all the Annotations upon the Remish Testament, all the volumes of Baronius
his Annals, all the monuments of Councels in their Binius and Surius, all the
disputes of Bellarmine, of Greg. de Valentia, of Coccius, and all other their
late Doctors, upon (as I may so call it) only tray trippe, a triple falsitie,
and then never to be credited again. I am persuaded that no Protestant, who
has been conversant in reading and examining their Authors, but he will stand
astonished to hear this grant our Mitigator makes, as being (as I have said)
intolerably disaduantagious unto the Romish part: but he will easily cease to
marvel when he perceives by whom it is made, to wit, P. R. the Author of the
book of Mitigation, who himself is guilty of thrice three palpable falsities,
so that none shall hereafter need to wonder why he has been so lavish in
hazzarding other men's credits, seeing he is so desperately prodigal of his
own. Let us draw near unto him to show this, for he calls us unto him.

A Satisfaction unto P. R. his second demand concerning himself, in the
discovery of his own not orious falsehoods, enforcing him by virtue of his
own promise never hereafter to credit himself.

17.
79 P. R. amongst others is bold to insert himself: Pref. to the Reader pa.
28. number. 25.
If any ( says he) has set down in Print any such falsity, so that it must
needs be presumed that he knew the untruth, and yet would set it forth: I
will in my conscience greatly discredit that Author, whether it be another or
my self, if two or three such falsities may be shown. So he.

Our Mitigator would seem to have a conscience, and so I doubt not but he
has; but so miserable, as (if it be lawful to judge by probabilities) it were
a kind of happiness for him to have no conscience at all. Let our Reader
witness between me and him according to the evidence of testimonies which
shall be brought against him; most of them shall be so apparent, that any one
understanding English may presently discern them. I will not urge him with his
own contradiction, who in his preface to his Reader says, Pref. to the Reader
number. 25. page 28.
I return to the Treatise of T. M. for more of his name we cannot yet find
out. And yet had in his Epistle Dedicatorie unto both the Universities, which
is set before the Preface, mentioned T. M. in his express name Epist. Ded.
number. 5. and nu^. 25. and again, number. 25. and number. 28.
Thomas Morton, five several times. But this fault were very pardonable, were
it not in him who will think no fault pardonable in his adversary:
nevertheless I hold it excusable by the virtue of this common Proverb: Cart
before the Horse, as we say. I therefore note not this for a falsity, because a
lie is only then, when the tongue or pen goes against the mind and wit of the
speaker or writer. But in this contradiction I think rather that P. R. his pen
run before his wit, and so will he excuse himself, except he had rather
be accounted lyingly witty, than witlesly rash. Other such like stumblings I
ouerpasse. I come to note such his falls, as may seem to be recouerable by
no excuse.

One falsehood of P. R.
80 Let that be first which I See above. 3. number. 6. 7. 8. etc.
have already mentioned, where peremptorily he affirmed that the Clause of
reservation was not by me set down in Latin throughout my whole Treatise
against Aequiuocation above once: whereto the Reader may answer for me that it
is set down in Latin above twenty times. What excuse can he pretend?
ignorance, oversight, negligence? why, the book was present before his eyes,
even in those places which he particularly discussed. Could that error be by
error of Print, diversity of translation, or difference of Editions? (for
these are all the pretenses which he will allow) not one of all these (he
knows) can redeem him from guilt: and therefore I may pronounce against him
in his own words: He must needs be presumed to have known the untruth of his
assertion, and yet would set it forth. And therefore by this one example may
learn hereafter to mistrust himself.

A Second falsehood.
81 Where I writ of my Adversary the Moderate Answerer thus: Full satisfaction
Epist. to the seduced brethren.
He (say I) wilfully seating himself in the chair of those Doctors, whom the
Apostle describes, saying [They will be Doctors, and yet understand not what
they say, nor whereof they affirm.] By which particle, [He,] even the vulgar
Reader may understand that I described but one, which was, my Adversary the
Moderate Answerer, who used to satisfy objected testimonies, saying: If this
be these men's opinions, and never inquired what their opinions were. Therefore I
judged him to be a Doctor of that chair signified by the Apostle: where the
Doctor faith, he knows not what. This my application unto only that one, our
P. R. sets on his own tenters, and stretches it unto all, saying, Treatis.
Mitigat. Epist. Dedic. number. 23.
But whether this description of fond presumptuous Doctors does agree unto our
Catholic Priests or to Protestants, will appear, etc. And again, Now let us
see how he goes about to prove our Priests such bad Doctors, etc. Which he
did to make me seem so presumptuous, as to think all Romish Doctors unlearned,
which had been (I confess) an odious presumption. Let them be as greatly
learned as they are, or else as they would seem to be, yet must there be a
con, I mean an heart zealous of the truth, to be joined with science to make
up a perfect conscience, which is the true Doctor indeed: otherwise we know,
that Genesis 3. 1.
The Serpent by being the most subtle of all the beasts in the field, will
deserve no better commendation, than to be accounted the skilfullest Seducer.
Of which kind P. R. will prove himself to be; for what excuse may he now use
to free himself from falsehood? Editions? Translations? Prints? Here is only
one Edition, and that only in English. Will he say, that it was an error of
ignorance, oversight, negligence? So might some peradventure judge of it, who
do not observe that he is euery-where ouer-diligent to draw upon me an
imputation of arrogance and malice.

A Third falsehood.
82 Where the Moderate Answerer, to prove the doctrine of Protestants
rebellious, objected unto me the positions of Goodman, I made this answer, See
Full satisfact. Part. 2. chap. 3. page 103.
If I should justify Goodman, although your examples might excuse him, my
heart should condemn my self. Signifying, that although Goodman were
graceless in his conclusions, yet compared with the heinous practices of
Romish Priests, might (but as Tire and Sydon in respect of Capernaum and
Bethsaida, that is, as the less sinner in respect of the greater) be thought
excusable. And I added also heerunto these words, Let us leave Goodman as a man
who by his false and wicked positions has falsified his name. Yet P. R.
aduentureth to say thus; Treatise of Mitig. cap 3. number. 14. page 100.
He (meaning Tho. Morton) does particularly justify Goodman. What falsitie
shall we call this, where an accusation is laid against me for justifying that
man, whose positions I call false and wicked; whose person I hold unworthy of
the name of a good man; whom, I say, I cannot justify without condemnation of
mine own soul? What excuse now shall P. R. make? shall it be edition, print,
translation? there is no difference in these kinds. Was it negligence or
ignorance? the words are plain and all in English. Wherefore if my speech
concerning Goodman be a justification, then may not P. R. be offended to be
justified by me in like terms, thus: If I should justify P. R. his
accusations, or think that he writ with a good conscience (although the
example of some libelling spirit might excuse him in this kind) my heart should
condemn my self: and therefore I pass him over as one who is not worthy of
any name, except P. R. which may signify Perfidiae Reus, that is, a man guilty
of perfidiousnesse, his positions are so rebellious, and his accusations so
false and calumnious. Whereof he will give us many examples.

A Fourth falsehood.
83 The Moderate Answerer objected also the examples of Knox and Buchanan as
Doctors and Actors of the rebellion in Scotland. My Answer was, that See Full
Satisfact. Part. 2. cap. 4. page 107.
Their seditious doctrine was condemned in Scotland, noting them to have been
worthy of all condemnation. Nevertheless P. R. does object, that Treatise of
Mitig. cap. 3. number. 14. page 100.
He (meaning Tho. Morton) takes upon him a justification of all Protestants
for rebelling against their Princes in any Country whatsoever, but more
particularly some in England, and others as Knox and Buchanan, and the like
Ministers in Scotland, turning vpside down the States against their
Sovereigns. This is no more, than if an Italian obiecting unto me that we
have thieves in England, and I should answer, It is true we have so: but yet so
far is theft from being tolerable in our State, that when thieves are
catched, they are forthwith condemned and hanged: and then the Italian should
challenge me that in thus answering I justified thieves. The crimination of P.
R. is altogether alike, and consequently he must needs be presumed to have
known the untruth, and to have objected this for the prejudice of my
conscience, to the strangling of his own.

A Fifth falsehood.
84 In my book of See Full Satisfact. Part. 1. chap. 7. page 20.
Satisfaction I had this passage, concerning an objection against some
Protestants, answering, Deny Christ's to be God? God forbid! but to be God of
God only in a particular sense, this indeed they do. But can you find no
more Protestants of this opinion, (to wit, besides M. Willet, and D. Fulke?)
Your Jesuit reckons up Calvin and Beza, and I think he says truly. I would
either he or you did as truly understand them. But yet we wish to hear what
your Doctors think of this Protestants opinion: your Campian calls it
monstrous, etc. A little after I added; This doctrine, Does ( in the judgment
of your famous Bellarmine) seem Catholicall: because they deny not the son
to be from the father; but they deny the essence of the Godhead to have any
generation. Hence P. R. infers and inforceth thus: Treatise Mitig. ca. 6.
number. 53. and number. 54. pa. 230.
Thomas Morton says that Bellarmine reckons up Calvin and Beza to be of
that opinion. And who would not think upon this Assertion of T. M. but that
Cardinal Bellarmine were contrary to himself, accusing Calvin, and yet
justifying his doctrine? You see how many sleights are used here in deceiving
the Reader. As though I had endeavored to make Bellarmine contrary to himself,
when as against the Jesuit Campian accusing Calvin and Beza, I opposed
Bellarmine the greatest champion among the Jesuits as to be contrary unto the
other for defense of Caluins doctrine: manifesting this difference of Campian
and Bellarmine, in these distinct letters r, s, z. Yet this Falsificator to
make me seem to have used sleights as falsely herein to make Bellarmine seem
contrary to himself, has with his own nimble slight confounded the
different testimonies of Campian and Bellarmine, who were produced as contrary
one to another. What excuse may be admitted in this place? ignorance,
negligence? etc. Why P. R. looks upon the place, and understands English:
and yet falsely obiecteth a sleight of deceiving my hearer, himself by a fine
slight abusing both me and the hearer. The only excuse (I fear) must be that
he beheld the place with a squint-eid malice, which can never rightly discern
the truth.

A Sixth falsitie of P. R.
85 Here P. R. rangeth at large, saying, that (...) ^um. (...) page 113.
Thomas Morton framed a second part of his book for justification of Protest^
yet in effect he confesses all that his Adversary opposes. Let P. R. learn
what this means, Litera occidit, and then let him come to be tried by my
Book, and almost a child may discern that in this one objection he has
given his conscience many a mortal wound. Many falsehoods in one.
In effect confessed all that was opposed? What is there almost of all that was
opposed by the Mod. Answ. (excepting the examples of Knox, Buchanan, Goodman,
Munster, which all I justly condemned) which was not directly confuted? for in
the part. 2. of the Full Satisfact. cap. 1. it was proved out of Bellarmine to
be the general doctrine of Protestants, that, Spiritual men have no
authority to deprive Princes of their kingdoms. In the cap. 5. is set down
the express doctrine of Calvin and Beza, condemning all rebellious doctrine.
In the chapter 6. are produced two Romish Historians acquitting the Protestants
in France from suspicion of rebellion. In the cap. 10. the Moderate Answerer is
proved to be impudently false for alleging only dumb Authors to make Luther
guilty of the loss of Rhodes and Hungary, which then fell into the paw of the
Turk: where I, from their own Historians, did euince that Adrian the Pope was
chargeable for that great loss in Christendom, which was without any witness
or conjecture objected against Luther by that Moderate Answerer. In the cap.
11. my Adversary would needs accuse Luther to be of the same opinion with
Munster, who raised horrible rebellions in Germany, which is so notorious a
slander, that their own Doctors (as I have showed) have acquitted Luther,
confessing that Luther writ against those turbulent spirits, and taught all
Christians to arm themselves against that rebellious crew, and to put them to
death. These and many such confutations I used against the Moderate Answerer,
conuincing him of notorious ignorance and falsehood. And can now P. R. call a
Confutation a Confession without a gross abuse of the confidence of his
Reader, and his own conscience?

A Seventh falsitie.
86 In the Full Satisfact. part. 2. chap. 5. the Moderate Answerer did object
thus; Full Satisf. part. 2. cap. 5. page 107.
Calvin and Beza and the rest of that holy Synod say, that the Kings and
Queens, their children, posterity, and all Magistrates must be put to death.
And so every Protestant must be more than a Pope. This he delivered without
just witness, and this I confuted from the direct and express doctrines of
Calvin and Beza. And after a long justification of them concerning their
doctrine, at the length in the chap. 7. page 119. I concluded thus; We have
heard of their opinions, have you any thing to except against their practice?
Which question was not made in way of denial, as though my Adversary would not
charge Calvin and Beza with any practice of rebellion; but after the manner of
art and common speech, by way of Transition, to show more orderly and
emphatically what was by the Moderate Answerer objected against their practice,
which is set down immediately after. And yet P. R. makes this one of his
instances, and proofs of my fraudulent dealings. Here I would charge my
Christian Reader in the obligation of truth it self to give him audience, for
his clamor is vehement, and his accusation may seem to be important.Thus then
P. R. Treatis. Mitig. c. 4. number. 42. page 131.
And having said thus, he (Tho. Morton) passes yet further, adding a second
provocation about practice, in these words: We have heard of their opinion ( to
wit, of Calvin and Beza) have you any thing to except against their practice?
And this demand he made, when he knew and had seen his Adversaries many and
most grievous accusations against them in that kind, Mod. Answ. c. 9.
not only for moving that people of Geneua to open rebellion against their Lord
and Prince the Bishop, but also the people of France, against their King and
Sovereign, citing good authorities for the same, saying: Calvin and Beza
armed the Subjects against their Prince of Geneua, and ( as Caluiue himself,
Doctor Suttcliffe, and the Bishop of Canterbury be witnesses) deposed their
Sovereign from his Temporal right, and ever after continued in that state of
rebellion. They celebrated also a Council, wherein was concluded that K.
Francis the Second, then king of France, his wife the Queen, his children,
Queen mother, etc. should be destroyed. And his quotations for these things
are: Beza lib. de iure Migistrat. Suttcliff. answ. to Suppl. and Survey. Calvin
in Epist. Pet. Far. orat. cont. Sect. defens. reg. and relig. etc. All which
being seen by our Minister, he demands notwithstanding, as you have heard,
with this hypocrisy, Have you any thing to except against their practice? as
though there were nothing at all not only not to be accused or reprehended in
them, but not so much as to be excepted against. And is not this notable
dissimulation in a matter so clear and evident? Who can believe this Minister
hereafter?

87 Nay is there any but will rather believe me hereafter when he shall see
me abused by so intolerable impudency as I am persuaded he never heard of
heretofore? For I am accused to have used that interrogation [Haue you any
thing to say unto their practice?] in dissimulation, as though I would have
concealed my Adversaries objection against Calvin and Beza, in pretense that
nothing at all were not only not to be accused or reprehended, but not so
much as to be excepted against. Whereunto I have only this to answer, that there
is nothing in all this objection which has not been both literally expressed
by me, and also particularly confuted. Let us compare the objection as it is
repeated by P. R. and see if there be any thing which I have pretermitted.
First these words, Calvin and Beza armed Subjects against their Prince of
Geneua: these The Full Satisfaction part. 2. cap. 7. page 119
I have verbatim expressed, except only that for At Geneua, I have Of Geneua.
Can there be any falsehood in the particle Of? In the next words, And as Calvin
himself, Doctor Suttcliffe and the Bishop of Canterbury be witnesses, deposed
their Sovereign from his temporal right, and ever after continued in that
state of rebellion. And this Satisf. part. 2. cap. 7. page 119.
has been by me repeated also verbatim, excepting that for continued, I said
continue. And can P. R. suspect any hypocrisy in the letter d? The next, They
celebrated a Council, wherein was concluded that K. Francis the Second, the
king of France, his wife the Queen, his children, Queene-Mother should be
destroyed. This objection also has been set down in these words: Satisf.
part. 2. cap. 4. page 107
Calvin and Beza and the rest of the holy Synod say that the Kings and Queens
of France, their children, posterity and all Magistrates must be put to death,
and so every Protestant must be more than a Pope. Here is more propounded than
this my rigid Adversary has noted, namely, Every Protestant shall so be a
Pope. Shall he fear any ambush in this clause? Lastly the testimonies which
are here repeated, Satisf. page 119. Beza de iure magist. Suttcliff. Arch.
Can. Calvin, And page 111. P. Frarer.
were by me particularly both noted, and answered: and most of these P. R.
himself (that we may know he was not ignorant hereof) has particularly
discussed. Under what visard then could he call a perfect manifestation of this
objection a dissimulation? or a full answer unto every objected exception a
concealment, as though nothing had been reprehended? or a particular
repetition and satisfaction to all, an hypocritical dealing, as though there
had been nothing objected at all? Sure I am, it had been more for the credit
of P. R. if he had played the hypocrite in this taxation, to use some
colorable slander, and not to have laid himself so nakedly shameful in this
kind, that very boys, by comparing these places, may see his deformity. But O
the impotency of malice! it is not unlike unto the blindness of the Sodomites,
who after that they had seen Lots house, yet groped for the door. So P. R. a
little after Tract. Mitigat. c. 4. n. 42. page 132.
discusseth some of my Answers, to this objection of Practice, and yet now will
not acknowledge the beginning.

An eight falsitie of P. R.
88 To the Satisfaction part. 2. cap. 3. page 102.
Moderate Answerer obiecting the Commotion of Wiat in Norfolk, in the days of
Q. Mary, which my friend P. R. has observed, and thereby (to make me one of his
incorporation) would conclude me a double Liar. Let us hear him. Treatise
Mitig. cap. 4. number. 36. and 37. page 128.
To that then of Sir Thomas Wiat, the Duke of Suffolk, and others, he
answers diversely. First, The History relates ( says he) the pretense of Sir
Th^mas Wiat thus: A Proclamation against the Queens marriage, desiring all
Englishmen to ioyn for defense of the Realm, etc. Then that in Queen Mary's
Oration against Wiat there is not to be found ( says he) any scruple
concerning the cause of Religion. Thirdly, that no Minister of the Gospel was
brought in question as a Commotioner in that cause. Lastly, if intent might
answer for Protestants accused in that name, then is it plain, that it was not
Religion; if for Wiat and his fellows, it is plain, that it was not against
the Queen or State, but for both. So he. In all which different clauses of
Answer, consider if any one be in it self true: for as for the first and
second, though Wiat pretends in his Proclamation the said marriage with Spain
to be the chief cause, yet not alone, but that the Queen and Counsel (says
Fox) would also by this marriage, as he affirmed, bring upon the realm
miserable servitude, and establish Popish religion. And the same Fox relates
Queen Mary's words in her Oration thus: Fox anno 1554. page 1289.
That the matter of the marriage is but a Spanish cloak ( says she) to cover
their pretenced purpose against our religion. So as in these two points the
Minister lies openly, but more in the last, That Wiats attempt was not against
Queen Mary or the State, but for both: For that Q. Marie in the same Oration,
as both Fox and Hollinshed do jointly relate, affirmed Wiats answer to have
been to Sir Edward Hastings and Sir Tho. Cornwallis, sent from her unto them,
which he also at his arraignment confessed, That he and his would have the
governance of her person, the keeping of the Tower, and the placing of her
Counselors.

89 The first lie he notes, is in relating of the Oration of Q. Marie, wherein
I said there was no scruple concerning Religion: and I cited for witness
Hollinshed. This Author (as we may perceive) P. R. has examined, and could
find nothing in him against me for this first point touching Q. Mary's
Oration: therefore he seeks other evidence, and brings against me the
testimony of M. Fox, wherein there is mention of Religion. What therefore?
Therefore I am by him condemned for a liar. Nay, but rather by this opposing M.
Fox P. R. has wilily imitated the fraud of a fox, which creature, men say,
does usually prey furthest from home. So likewise P. R. if he would have proved
me a liar, should have done it out of Hollinsheds relation of Q. Mary's
Oration, which was the witness whom I produced: but he wanting cause of
reproof herein, does therefore range further to convince me of lying by the
testimony which I mentioned not. But whereas this Mitigator has said, That
Treatise Mitig. page 92. P. R. confuted by himself.
Advertisement was given him, that this Minister T. M. was Chaplain unto my L.
of Canturbury (and upon this Advertisement does note me for his Graces
Chaplain) when he shall be more certainly informed that the Minister was never
Chaplain to his Grace, I would but know whether he will give his Reader leave
to call him a Liar, or no. For, if, because he was deceived in his
Advertisement, he will be judged a liar, then can not he (a liar) be a fit man
to charge another of untruth: if he will avouch his own truth and sincerity,
because he reported nothing not whereof by his Aduertiser he had been informed,
then am I no liar, who have said no more than whereunto my Author Hollinshed
did direct me. So that my Adversary is now chargeable by an argument a
paribus, either to acquit me, or else to condemn himself. We may suffer
professors of the feats of Legerdemaine to delude the beholders, to convey one
man's ring into another man's pocket, and then call him a cosener; but for us
Divines to play such tricks, as he has done, changing Hollinshed into M. Fox,
and then to tax me for falsehood, is a device inexcusable. His second exception
is of no better moment, because even that purpose of Wiat, To keep the Tower,
wanted not the supposed intention, which was, The preservation of the Queen
and State: yet so far was it from me to justify any such rebellious action,
that I (according to the manner of Schools, using argumento ad hominem)
objected this to our Romish Adversaries, only, that they, by accusing of Wiat,
(who professed a good intent) might learn to condemn themselves, whose only
ground of Rebellion is pretense of a Catholic intent; the rather, because a
good intent destitute of precept and commandment of God, is but (as the
Apostle teaches) Romans 3. 8.
a damnable good. Wherefore the two lies which P. R. would have bestowed upon
me, he by virtue of his place and patent may keep to himself.

A ninth falsehood of P. R.
90 A ninth falsehood may be accounted, his peremptory reprehension of our
English Translation upon that of Esa. 29. They are blind etc. as dissenting
from the Latin, Greek, and Hebrew, both in words and sense. In which censure
he See above. 5. number. 15. and 16.
has been convinced of a gross falsehood in both, by the judgment of his
own Doctors.

A tenth falsitie of P. R.
91 For a tenth take his wilful See above. 6. number. 17. and 18.
falsehood in pressing one only Edition of Carerius, thereby accusing me of
falsehood in corrupting that Author: whereas the Collen Edition has justified
me, and discovered this disposition of P. R. to have been willing that I should
rather be condemned rashly than justly acquitted.

An eleventh and twelfth fraud of P. R.
92 For an eleventh may be remembered his unjust See above * 7. number. 21.
crimination, in noting me as a notable liar for affirming that, which his own
triple instance does evidently euince. We may See above. 8. number. 28.
add for a twelfth his objection of the Author Frisingensis; wherein, that he
might prove me a Falsificator, he does himself play four excellent feats of
falsehood.

A thirteenth new and noble falsehood.
93 I may not deal niggardly with P. R. especially in recounting unto him his
own, and therefore to his former dozzen add one other for advantage, yet such
an one as whereat most of the former, although otherwise very impudent, may
seem to blush. P. R. pleads for their mental Aequiuocation, (which I have
truly called the Baud or Broker of their Rebellon) after this manner: Treatise
Mitig. cap. 7. number. 8. page 279.
The Minister himself ( says he) does in effect confess here in his second
Treatise, that for the space of the last 400 years the doctrine of
Equivocation has been received for true in our Schools, and consequently
practiced thorowout all Christendom etc. And again: Ib. number. 12. page 281.
How can a doctrine so ugly and abominable ( as T. M. calls it) be received
so generally thorowout the Christian world, that is to say, The doctrine of all
Schools, Chaires, Universities, Casuists, Lawyers both Canon and Civil,
Divines both Scholasticall and Positive approouing the same? And a little
after: Was there none at the first admittance of it to stand for the truth, and
reason to the contrary in any Province or State, in any place or time, within
the compass of 400 years? And yet again: Ib. number. 15. page 284. ^
Seeing it has been admitted so long time in Christendom, as our Adversaries
do confess, and that it has been received so universally and generally both
by Prelates and people; and if it have been so publicly taught by all learned
men, and contradicted by none, it ought to be a great argument to discreet men,
that it has some ground of truth.

It seems to me, that P. R. after that by custom of falsifying he had cast
himself into such a slumber, that he had little sense of lying; now at length
he may be thought to be fallen into a dead sleep, and to have cast away all
conscience of truth: as may appear by these so large and lavish assertions.
The summary points are two:

94 The first is in perverting my confession. The Minister himself (says P.
R.) does in effect confess here in his second Treatise, That for the space of
the last 400 years the doctrine of Aequiuocation has been received for true
in Schools, and consequently practiced thorowout all Christendom, and
generally received of all Chaires, Universities, Schools, Divines, Casuists,
etc. Is it even so P. R? Can you extract such a general consequent out of the
confession of the Minister? Did he ever acknowledge your mental Aequiuocation
so universal, as you make it, of all Universities, Schools, Divines,
Casuists? Nay did not he Satisf. Part. 3. cap. 12.
confute this your assertion of generality by the express sentence of your
own Doctor Genesius Sepulueda? His words are these: Genesius in Theoph. cap.
6.
This manner of aequiuocating is against the authority of most ancient and
chief Theologers or Divines (meaning the Schoole-Diuines) and none before
Gabriel (a Schooleman) taught it. Is this to confess a generallitie? Or, could
it be called then universal, when but one man set it first abroch? Other
testimonies of Genesius against Equiuocating P. R. did seriously examine, and
nimbly ouerskip this.

95 Again, I never said that all Romish Priests were guilty of this part of
perfidious doctrine of mental Aequiuocation: but proved, that not above 400
years since mental Equivocation was heard of even in Romish schools, and
that the first that is read of to have defended it was Gabriel Biel a lewd
Sophister, after it was entertained by Syluester and Angelus, and some other
few such Glozers, but was not then general among them. We see therefore that P.
R. his consequent is from a confession of a few particulars to infer a
general conclusion* All Divines, All Casuists, etc. The lamenesse of this
consequent I shall make appear by a like example, P. R. confuted by a Simile.
thus: Let me affirm with some Historians, that not above an hundred years
ago (or thereabout) the Neapolitane disease, commonly called the French pocks,
took possession in Christendom, since which time some parties have been
miserably afflicted therewith. Upon this Assertion, by the consequent of our
Mitigator, it must follow, That since these hundred years have all Cities,
Towns, Villages, Schools, People, Priests in Christendom, yea even our
Mitigatour himself, become such a kind of Neapolitanes. And why may not this
example fit? Sure I am, that mental Equiuocating, whomsoever it infecteth, is
nothing else than a pocke and pestilence in the soul. We leave this falsehood
taken from consequent, and seek out a more sensible proof of his palpable
falsitie than this.

P. R. his Aequiuocation proved a lie, and himself a Falsifier, by the
confessions of three Jesuits.
96 The second falsitie is in his plain asseueration, That mental
aequiuocation (for hereupon only we dispute) has been universally received
of all Prelates and People in Christendom, and not contradicted by any. Let us
first understand what kind of aequiuocation P. R. does defend. Treatise Mitig.
cap. 12. number. 3. page 484.
Mental aequiuocation is when any speech has or may have a double sense, not
by any double signification or composition of words themselves, but only by
some reservation in the speaker, whereby his meaning is made different from
that sense, which the words that are uttered do bear without that reservation.
This kind of aequiuocation P. R. imbraceth, and thereunto he says, There has
been no one which has made contradiction.

The first witness conuincing this Mitigation of falsehood is Azorius a learned
Jesuit.
97 This Azorius a great Casuist, in his book of Moral Institution, printed
at Rome Anno 1600 by license of his Superiors ( as the title signifies) does
discuss this point of aequiuocation, and his resolution is, That Meo tamen
iudicio illi regulam ad plura extendunt, and trahunt, quam par sit, and quam
Nauarrus, Syluester, and Angelus voluerint. Nihil n. tam falsum esse potest,
quod non queat ab omni mendacio liberari, si aliquid arbitratu nostro mente
tacitu^ retineamus. Possemus enim quicquid a nobis petitur, quamuis id apud nos
habeamus, diffiteri nos habere, intelligentes, vt demus: quicquid fecerimus,
quicquid viderimus, quicquid cogitauerimus, decreuerimus, de eo rogati,
possemus absque mendacio dicere, Non fecimus, non vidimus, non cogitauimus, non
decreuimus, eo nimirum sensu, vt tibi dicamus, vel, quod tibi dicere debeamus.
Quare mihi aliud videtur, quod quibusdam regulis subiectis breuiter
perstringam. Az^r. Jes. Insti. Moral. part. 1. lib. 11. cap. 4. Meo tamen. page
1335. Romae cum priuilegio. Anno 1600. Superiorum permissu.
there is nothing so false ( says he) which may not be freed from a lie if we
may keep something secret in our minds, for by this means when any thing is
asked of us, we may deny that we have it (although indeed we have it)
understanding in our minds [that we may give it.] Whatsoever we have done,
seen, thought, or decreed, being demanded thereof, we may by this means
answer without a lie that we have not done, nor seen, nor thought, nor
decreed, namely, in that sense [that we may tell it unto you.] But I am of
another opinion, which I will manifest by certain rules. His fifth rule does
hit the nail on the head, which is this. Quinta regula: Si reuera verba,
quibus vtimur, significatione sua and communi hominum vsu ambigua non sunt, nec
habent nisi vnum tantummodo sensum, ea vsurpare debemus eo sensu, quem reddu^t,
nec licet nobis, etiam si contra ius fasque omne interrogemur, aliquid mentis
cogitatione concipiendo in aliud detorquere; nunquam enim fas est mentiri: at
is mentitur, qui verba aliter accipit, atque ipsa significant. Azor. Jes. quo
supra, in fine cap.
The fifth rule: If the words we use are not according to their common
signification among men, ambiguous or doubtful, and have only one sense, we
ought to use them in that sense which they have in themselves: neither is it
lawful for us, although we be examined against right and justice, to detort or
turn our speech by our inward conceit of mind, because it is not lawful for
us to lie: but he does lie who understands his speeches otherwise than they
do signify in themselves. The difference between our Mitigator and this Jesuit
is no more than this: First, P. R. defends an aequiuocation which is when the
speech has no double sense in the outward words themselves, but only in some
secret reservation in the mind of the speaker. But Azorius says, That we
ought not to use any sense of speech which is not in the words themselves, but
only in the inward thought of him that speaks. Secondly, P. R. mainteineth,
That his mental reservation is a truth: but Azorius concludes, That it is a
lie. And can there be a greater contradiction than this? How then could our
Mitigator affirm, That mental aequiuocation is defended of Casuists and
Doctors, and contradicted by none? Has he any shadow of excuse by ignorance of
the Author and place? No, for he has Treatise Mitigat. page 355. and 420. and
429. and 450.
alleged this Author, upon this question of aequiuocation, four times; and the
place was particularly objected in my Confutation thereof: or else be helped by
difference of Translation or Edition? He will not pretend this; therefore can no
evasion serve him, except he will answer, That he thought good in citing
Authors for defense of aequiuocation to aequiuocate. Whence any may discern
what credit such wretched Aequiuocators may deserve.

A second witness conuincing P. R. of falsehood.
98 When I had Satisf. part. 1. ca. 26. in the beginning.
objected against the Romanists that popish Priests (yet not saying that all of
them held this opinion) are guilty of this perfidiousnesse of violating an oath
by mental equivocation: my first Adversary, called the Moderate Answerer, that
he might a little qualify the hatefulness of that equiuocating sect: did tell
us that Mod. Answ. cap. 10.
A Jesuit famous amongst the Casuists, Emanuel Sa in his Aphorisms writes of
this matter in these words: Quidam dicunt, etc. Some there be who say that he
who is not bound to answer unto the intention of the examiner, may answer by
reservation of some thing in his own mind, to wit, [that it is not so, viz.
that I must tell it unto you] although others do not admit this manner of
answering, and peradventure upon better reason than the former. Whereby it is
manifest (says that Moderate Answerer) that all Catholics do not allow of
aequiuocation. Thus far he: confessing hereby that diverse Catholic
Authors have contradicted this equiuocating forgerie, which P. R. has
avouched no Catholic writer did ever contradict. Is it possible that my
Adversary can free himself from a falsitie corroding the conscience? The
Edition is but one, the translation is the same, the place was well known,
being objected by the Moderate Answerer, whom he has commended as a learned
performer and is furthermore repeated in my book of Part. 1. c. 27. page 89.
Satisfaction, which he has labored to confute. Say then Sir Mitigatour,
will you think this Moderate Answer to be true or no; A dilemma.
take heed what you say, you have a Woolfe by the ears (according to the
proverb) if you hold him, he will bite your hands, if you let him go he
will fly in your face. Say therefore: was that answer of your fellow true,
wherein it is said, that diverse Catholics do not allow of this doctrine of
aequiuocation? Then are you a false Proctor, for this your wilful assertion,
to wit, Not one Catholic Doctor does contradict it. Or will you say that
Answer was untrue? then must you be judged a false sycophant, for approouing
that for A just and Moderate Answer, wherein the Author has acquitted himself
learnedly, and yet do think it to be untrue.

The third witness conuincing P. R. of falsehood.
99 Maldonat a principal Jesuit and Casuist resolves thus; Maldonat. co^. in
Luc. vlt. verse. 28.
Whosoever does endeavor by faining to deceive another, although he intend to
signify something else, yet, doubtless, he lies. This testimony Satisf.
part. 3 cap. 4. pa. 59.
I used for confutation of this vile art. Which P. R. could not be ignorant of,
because Treat. Mitig. ca. 14. nu^. 4. pa. 409. 510.
he endeavored to satisfy other testimonies, as of Genesius and Sotus. But
this Author Maldonat specified in the same place, P. R. (as a weaker Adversary
will do his ouermatch) did willingly pretermit. But what now will follow of
all this? what will P. R. object? Let us but hear what has been said, and
then he shall know what may be said. He claimed an universal approbation of
mental Equivocation from the consent of all Universities, Divines and
Casuists, etc. no one contradicting that doctrine. He has also said, that
Treat. Mitig. ca. 1. number. 38. page 74.
A general Proposition is such, that if any one instance may be given to the
contrary, the whole is overthrown. Now have I instanced unto his general of
All Universities, all Prelates, all Casuists, all people, in three famous
Iesuists and Casuists, Azorius, Sa, Maldonate, and in the confession of his
fellow the Moderate Answerer, acknowledging that diverse Catholics do not
approve their mental reservation: all from direct testimonies of these
Authors certainly known unto this Mitigator. And therefore must conclude,
that seeing any one known instance may overthrow a whole general, our
Mitigator by these four several known instances is to be accounted a
fourfold falsificator. I have exceeded the proportion of our Mitigators
demand, who has required but two or three instances in any, though in himself,
of vnsatisfiable falsehoods, I have offered him thirteen, as many as I could
well bundle up in this brief Preamble, reserving the rest for the exact
Encounter, when I doubt not, but upon the discovery of his unconscionable
deprauations he will wish that his brains had been a-sleepe, when he framed
this Mitigation, rather than his fraudulent and malicious disposition should be
discovered. Whereof there will be yet more proof in his calumniations
following: whereunto I now addressemy Satisfaction in

An Answer to the Accusations of falsehood, which the Mitigator has objected to
his Adversary Th. Morton, singling out of many, not such which might seem unto
me most easily answered: but those which P. R. has most vehemently pressed
and urged, as by his insolent insultations will appear.

18.
100. ALthough the discovered calumnious spirit of P. R. might so prejudice the
credit of his other taxations, that, in the opinion of any religious Reader, I
might seem to be absolved even before I be accused; yet considering that in
slander, as in a bodily hurt Etsi vulnus sanetur, cicatrix manet tamen Though
the wound be cured, yet the scarre does remain: and that it was no sufficient
justification for the one thief upon the Cross to tell his fellow, saying:
Luc. 23.
Thou also art in the same condemnation: Therefore do I willingly address my
Apology and defense against his calumniations, especially such wherein he
insisteth and insulteth most; whereunto I shall give (I hope) such satisfaction,
as that not only the wound of slander may be cured, but even also the
suspicious scarre of imputation may be wiped away.

The first objected falsification, whereupon he makes this insultation: It is
a malicious lie of the Minister, having neither simplicity nor truth, but of a
lost conscience by manifest and malicious calumniations.

101 P. R. begins thus: Treatise Mitig. epist. dedic. number. 18. and 19.
He ( Tho. Morton) lays before his Majesty a certain observation about Popes
names, as full fraught with malice and deceitfulness, as the former with
vanity: and he lays the observation upon Polydore Virgil, though citing no
place for it. Polydore observes (says he) that the Popes a long time in
their election had their names changed by Antiphrasis, viz. the elected if he
were by natural disposition fearful, was named Leo, if cruel, Clement, if
uncivil Vrbanus, if wicked Pius, if covetous Bonifacius, if in all behauior
intolerable, Innocentius. And with this he thinks to have laid down an
observation of importance. But why had he not adioined also, that if he were
careless of his flock, then Gregory must be his name, which imports a
vigilant Pastor? But now let the judicious Reader observe the malice and
falsehood of this observation, and thereby judge whether the Author thereof be
a Minister of simple truth, or no. Polydore says only that sometimes Popes as
other Princes in like manner have had names that have been different, or rather
contrary to their nature and manners, which is an ordinary case, if we examine
the signification of men and women's names; but that Popes names were changed of
purpose by Antiphrasis, or contrary speech to cover their defects, as here is
set down, this is a malicious lie of the Minister, and has neither simplicity
nor truth in it: for that all these names here mentioned of Leo, Clemens,
Vrbanus, Pius, Bonifacius, Innocentius and Gregory were chosen by the Popes
that took them for the great reverence and estimation they had of certain
excellent men of that name, that went before them, as also for the good
abodement of their future government, and to be stirred up the more by the
memory of those names to the virtues signified by them: but especially for the
honor and imitation of the first Popes that bare those names.

The Answer.
102 The first note of falsehood he intimates to be, because I laid my
observation upon Polydore, citing no place for it. Would not his preiudicate
Reader now think that I had fraudulently suggested a testimony in the name of
Polydore, which cannot be found; and in the guiltiness hereof to have cited
no place? But here I make a Nouerint vniuersi, to give every Reader to
understand, that the sentence which I reported upon my memory is certainly
extant in the ancient Editions of Polydore, lib. 4. Invent. ca. 10. in these
words, Primus honos, etc. which sentence because it does not a little offend
the superstitious Romanists, therefore An. Dom. 1572. by the authority of Pope
Pius Quin. it is commanded in these words [ Ind. Expurg. Belg. page 195.
Vsque ad, aliud sibi nomen aptaret, Deleatur] that is, fair and clean to be
blotted out. Can then this be ought but a transcendent impudency to blame me
for not citing that testimony, which his Pope, lest it should be cited has
utterly razed out? He sees his Pope pulling out a man's tongue, and then would
compel me to look whether I can find it in his mouth: but although they have
made Polydore by their Index expurgatorius, almost in every page dumb, not
suffering him to bear witness against the pride of Popes, the licentiousness
of Monks, the superstitions of their Church, the novelties of their manifold
traditions and inventions; yet our ancient Polydore now dwelling amongst
Protestants (Printed An. 1570. Basileae) has a tongue which will tell tales,
saying plainly that, Primus honos Romano Pontifici habetur, vt si minus
pulchro honestetur no mine, e^statim creato liceat illud mutare Verbi gratia,
non extra iocum dictu^ sit, Si homo maleficus antea forte fuerit, vt Bonifacius
appelletur: si timidus, Leo: si rusticus, Vrbanus: si improbus, Innocentus: si
ferox, Clemens: si male audiuerit, Benedictus: vt saltem nomine Pontifex
orname^to sit dignitati. Eius autem rei auctor fuisse dicitur Sergius secundus,
cui cum Os porci diceretur, ad obscoen^ nominis vocem tollenda^, datum est, vt
aliud sibi nome^ aptaret. Polyd. lib. 4. de Inu. reru^, c. 10.
This is the first honor which is given unto the Pope of Rome, that if
peradventure his name (before election) be somewhat unseemly, he may change it
as soon as he is created. As for example, (which may not be spoken without a
jest) if peradventure he had been before (his creation) a wicked man, that
then he should be called Bonifacius, that is, a good doer: if fearful, then
Leo, that is, a Lion: if rusticall, then Vrbanus, that is, civil: if ungodly,
then Innocentius, that is, innocent: if furious, then Clemens, that is, gentle:
if infamous, then Benedictus, that is, a man of a good report, should be his
name. The first Author of this change of names (which was Anno 1052.) was Pope
Sergius Secundus, whose proper name was Hogs-face: who, that he might avoid the
ignominy of his own name, was permitted to choose another.

103 Observe now what I have reported from Polydore, viz. that Popes names were
changed by antiphrase, or contrary speech, to cover their defects. And this is
no whit different from the testimony of Polydore, who says, that If the Pope
were before his creation wicked, he did take the name of godly upon him: if
rigorous, then gentle, etc. Which kind of alteration of names is not unlike a
Gregorian, (as some call it) or artificial cover for a baldhead. Let therefore
the judicious Reader judge from what spirit, whether of ignorance or malice,
have proceeded these slanderous inuectiues, calling my true relation malice and
falsehood: and again, a malicious lie of the Minister, which has neither
simplicity nor truth in it. It is no rare thing for women of suspected
conversation, lest they should be called by their proper names, to miscall
honest Matrons first. Peradventure P. R. uses the same art in naming me a
Liar. But I had rather interpret his meaning in the best part, to imagine that
he might mean by his own open and false detraction to prove me his
Adversary, to be A Minister of simple truth.

A second objection of falsehood, whereupon he insulteth thus: This false Lad
sets down his own fiction: and is not this perfidious dealing? can any
excuse him from falsehood and malice in so open treachery?

104 P. R. grows yet hotter, and casts coals about him, thus; Treatise
Mitig. ca. 2. n. 46. pa. 79.
He ( viz. Tho. Morton) has these words: Pope Adrian being guilty of like
seditious practice against the Emperor Henry the Second, was choked with a
^lie. And in his quotation cites Nauclerus for it, Generatione 139. which
should be 39. for that Nauclerus has nothing near so many generations in
that part; and in stead of Henry the Second, he should have said Frederick
the First of that name, for that Henry the Second was before the time of our
conquest, and almost two hundred years before Adrian the fourth our English
Pope, of whom we now speak, who lived in the time of King Stephen and King
Henry the Second of England, and was an holy man, and accounted the Apostle of
Noruegia for converting the same unto our Christian faith, before he was Pope,
and all Authors do write honorably of him* and so does Nauclerus affirm: and
therefore though he make mention of such a fable related by Vrspergensis that
was a schismatic writer in those days (who also does not absolutely avouch
it, but with this temperament, vt fertur, as the report goes) yet does the
same Nauclerus reject the same as false, and confuteth it by the testimonies of
all other writers, especially of Italy that lived with him, and thereby knew
best both his life and death. And yet all this notwithstanding will this false
Lad T. M. needs set down this history as true, affirming it for such, and
never so much as giving his Reader to understand, that any other denied the
same, or that the only Author himself of this fiction doubted thereof. And is
not this perfidious dealing? or can any man excuse him from falsehood and malice
in this open treachery?

The Answer.
105 Not so Sir, both because (as I truly protest) I did not write this out of
the Author himself, which I had never seen, but from collection out of some
other book: yet in the relation it self there appears no shadow of
malicious falsehood. First, there could not be malice in misquotation of the
Generation, as an 139. for 39. His Cavil compared.
which neither added nor detracted anything from the matter it self, no more
than to say Peter is 10. or an 100. years of age does convince a man of fraud
who intends only to prove that Peter is a man. And whosoever shall object
error of quotation, he may be quoted for one that is ignorant either what it is
to write, or transcribe, or to print; for all these are subject unto
misquotations. Now if there be a fault in a piece of cloth, must we
necessarily judge that the spinner was to blame?

Secondly, what skilleth it whether it was Henry an Emperor, or Frederick an
Emperor, that was excommunicated by the Pope, when as the intended conclusion
was only this, that Adrian the Pope did excommunicate an Emperor, and
conspired against him? no more than if, when one should be examined of murder,
the accuser should say that the mortal wound was given with the right hand;
and the party accused should gainesay it, proouing it was done with the left
hand; could this difference be of any moment, when the maine question is,
whether this man committed the murder, or no? in all this there is error (I
confess) but yet no falsehood.

Thirdly, if where one only witness is required, I should say unto N. you told
me (I think) that A. did conspire against F. and died miserably. No (quoth N.)
I did not: but here is my brother V. that said something to this purpose. In
all this we discern only an error in misciting the Author ( N) but no
falsehood for want of a witness. So here, where V. that is, the Abbat of
Vrspurg was ready to say that which N. that is, Nauclerus was unwilling to
affirm, concerning the conspiracy of A. that is, the Pope Adrian against F.
that is Frederick the Emperor. O but Abbas Vrspurgensis did say only,
fertur, that is, It is so reported: and this a man may say of a fable. But I
pray you Sir, what is there in Historiographers of after times but only case of
report? So that whosoever shall cite any Historian who was not (...), that is,
an eie-witnesse himself of that which he writes; does in citing him confess
that he speaks but upon report: yet even this word [fertur] that is, [It is
so said, or, It is reported, or, The same is, etc.] does not necessarily
betoken doubtfulnesse in him that utters it: which your own Jesuit Posterior
Caietani coniectura, quia Gregor. magnus in homilia de amissa dram non fuit
aufus hos libros B. Dionysij asserere, and tantum ambigue loquitur vte^s voce
[fertur:] respo^deo sic loqui non quia ipse dubitauerat qui in Graecia eius
libros legerat, etc. Del Rio vi^d. Areopa. cap. 6.. Posterior. page 29.
Del Rio would have his Reader to observe in a certain sentence of S. Gregory.

106 The only color of just exception he can bring, is this: Because (says
he) Nauclerus rejects it to be false, and confuteth it by all writers,
especially of Italy. And what then? Notwithstanding will this false Lad T. M.
needs set it down as true. If age make diseases desperate, it is better be a
lad then (that I may so say) a dad in falsehood; for by how much more any is a
father in lying, the more near he is in degree of kindred unto the father of
lies, in which line of descent I fear P. R. will appear to be. For Nauclerus
ends his censure thus: Verum cum multi Itali nullam de hoc mentionem faciunt,
etc. hec and alia ambiguum me reddunt quid potius eligendum quidque credendu^
sit. Scribimus enim res gestas affectu nonnunquam plus quam veritatis amore
ducti. He says not that Italians denied this manner of death, but that they
make no mention of it: neither can Nauclerus be said to have confuted that
which he left as doubtful, saying, I know not whether part to believe. As for
the truth of the story (for this is it which we should contend for) we oppose
the Abbat Vrspergensis unto Nauclerus. But it is objected, Vrspergensis was an
enemy to the Pope. Well; and it may be answered, that the Monk Nauclerus was
a friend to the Pope. And therefore we may know that as the bodily sight may
be hindered as well by hot rheum as by cold, so falls it out in passions of
the mind, that love may beget as blind commendation as hatred may a blind
detraction.

107 But why should it be thought a matter incredible that such a dismal, and
as it were disastrous end should befall a Pope? For, I fear, this is the only
thing which so greatly offends the choleric old man. Wherefore I entreat his
patience (if yet there can be patience in so extreme malignity) to understand
what his own Doctors have written concerning the death of diverse Popes. Joan.
de turre (...). lib. de sum. Eccles. de Anastati^. Ide^ habet Platina:
Supplementum Cronicho. and liber Pontificalis in decret. Anastasi secundi.
Been legitur Anastasium diuino nutu percussum interijsse: that Anastasius was
struck with the hand of God and perished. Their last Chronologer Binius,
highly privileged, tells us, that Binius in tom. 3. conc. page 1054. anno
Dom. 912. Binius quo supra page 160.
Ioannes decimus, quem infamis foemina infami opere in solium Petri intrusit,
per impudicam Theodorae filiam ceruiciali suffocatus obijt: that is, Pope John
the tenth, whom an infamous woman by a l^wd practice, did thrust into Peter's
chair, afterward by the unchaste daughter of Theodora he was choked or
strangled with a pillow. Again, of John the twelfth, he cites one whom he
calls an Adversary to this Pope, reporting The dismal ends of diverse Popes.
Ioannem duodecimum quadam nocte, dum se cum alterius vxore oblectaret, in
temporibus a diabolo percussum and inter paucos dies mortuum esse: huius
historiae veritatem non controuerto: How this Pope one night in the midst of
his dalliance with another man's wife was stroke in the head by the Devil and
shortly after died. A little after; I do not contend about the truth of this
question. What is now awanting but that an example of one Pope be produced,
upon whom the vengeance of God seized because of his rebellious opposition
against temporal Lords? This Binius cir^. Ann. Domin. 1198. pa. 1441.
Vrbanus Tertius (inquit Abbas Vrspergeniss) quem multi Turbanum appellabant,
eo quod in odium Imperatoris turbaret Ecclesiam, nutu Dei percussus interijt:
Pope Vrbane the third, (says Abbas Vrspergensis) commonly called Turbane,
because in hatred of the Emperor he troubled the Church, was struck by God
and perished. So little cause could I have to wound my Adversaries with forged
inventions, being thus sufficiently furnished and prepared to confound them
with true and plain confessed testimonies.

A third objection of falsehood, whereupon he thus insulteth: With such we are
forced to deal, that have no conscience at all in cosenage.

108 P. R. does further charge me thus; Treatise Mitig. ca. 2. n. 47. p. 80.
And another like trick he plaieth some few pages before this, again citing
out of Doctor Bouchiers book De iusta abdicatione, these words: Tyrannum
occidere honestum est, quod cuiuis impune facere permittitur; quod excommuni
consensu dico: and then he Englisheth the same thus: Any man may lawfully
murder a tyrant; which I defend, says he, by common consent. But he that
shall read the place in the Author himself shall find that he holds the
very contrary, to wit, that a private man may not kill a tyrant that is not
first judged and declared to be a public enemy by the Commonwealth: and he
proves the same at large: first out of Scriptures, and by the decree of the
general Council of Constance: his words be these: Neque vero eo iure quod ad
regnum habet nisi per publicum iudicium spoliari potest, etc. Neither can a
tyrant be deprived of that right which he has to a kingdom but only by
public judgment: yea further also, so long as that right of kingdom
remains, his person must be held for sacred; whereof ensues, that no right
remains to any private man against his life: and albeit any private man
should bring forth never so many private injuries done by the said tyrant
against him; as that he had whipped him with iron rods, oppressed him,
afflicted him, yet in this case must he have patience, according to the
admonition of S. Peter 1. 2. That we must be obedient not only unto good and
modest lords, but also unto those that be disorderly, and that this is grace
when a man for Gods cause does sustain and bear with patience injuries
unjustly done unto him, etc. And a little after P. R. thus Mitig. ib. n. 48.
pa. 81.
Let the Reader consider the malicious falsehood of this Minister T. M. who in
alleging that little sentence before mentioned, about killing of a tyrant,
stroke out the words of most importance: quem hostem Respub. iudicauerit; whom
the commonwealth shall judge for a public enemy: and adding that other
clause, which I say by common consent, which is not there to be found. And with
such people we are forced to deal, that have no conscience at all in cosenage,
etc. So. P. R.

The Answer.
110 The Accusation is grievous, viz. Malicious cosenage; the Matter is
heinous, viz. Killing of Kings; my Adversary is serious and urgent, saying,
Consider etc. and the issue important: which will be either a branding me for a
notorious Slanderer, or else my Adversary for a toxicall and pestilent
Mitigator. In thy examination and censure hereof (Christian Reader) I require
only justice. Bouchier lib. 3. de Abdicat. Hen. 3. cap. 16. page 267.
Bouchier in the place controuerted, does make a double consideration of a
Tyrant; one is, as he does injury unto any private man [Qui iusta potestate ad
priuatorum iniurias abutitur.] In this case he resolves, That a priuato occidi
propterea non licet: That is, It is not lawful for any private man to kill
him. The second consideration of a Tyrant is, as he does commit any public
injury, whether the case concern Religion or the civil State, whereof he
does determine thus: Qui inreligionem ac patriam tyrannidem exerceat, hunc
occidere respub. possit etc. That is, The Commonwealth may kill him, who shall
tyrannize and injury the religion, and the country: it is so manifest that
none can doubt of it, but such as are destitute of common sense: for if the
people may arm themselves against any noisome beast, which may endanger the
common safety; then much more against such a Tyrant, who is worse than any
beast. But who may attempt the execution hereof? It follows in the place by
me formerly alleged: Priuato cuiuis Tyrannum, quem hostem Resp. iudicauerit,
occidere licitum est. That is, It is lawful for every private man to kill him,
whom the Commonwealth shall judge to be a Tyrant. We see now that Bouchier
has defended, both that No private man may kill a Tyrant for injury against
private men, and also, that Any private man may kill a Tyrant for common
injuries.

111 I have alleged the latter, P. R. has opposed the former; both of us have
affirmed a truth: where then is the falsehood? This must be imputed to him who
reports a truth, but not truly, that is, to a false purpose: whereof our
Reader may easily judge: for I have objected the testimony of Bouchier,
affirming, that in the case of common injuries, whether in matter of Religion
or State, every private man is licensed to kill a Tyrant: and Bouchiers words
avouch no less. P. R. opposes the other negative testimony of Bouchier,
denying, that in private injuries any private man may murder a Tyrant: and does
he thereby convince me of falsehood? Nay rather does he not seek to injury me
with falsehood? For my whole Treatise of Discovery intends only the public,
and never medleth with private occasions.

112 This will be plain by example. The common rule of humanity teaches,
that the Father, being but an Esquire, may in private conuents and meetings
have place above his son, though a Knight; but in places of public resort,
the Knight, P. R. con^uted by a Simile.
though a son, is preferred before his Father. Here be two considerations of
the son and the father; the one is in respect of private, the other in regard
of public occasions. This Assertion of ciuility standing thus: Suppose my
first Adversary the Moderate Answerer should auerre that T. M. says that any
son, being a Knight, may take place of his father, being but an Esquire: then
my second Adversary P. R. hearing this, should oppose and say, It is false
which thou allegest, for T. M. says the contrary, viz. That any Father, being
an Esquire, may privately take place of his son, though he be a Knight. Can
this his taxation of falsehood be thought true? It is not altogether
impertinent? For the assertions of T. M. were two: the first, That any such
son must be preferred in public: the second, That any such father must be
preferred in private. And are these contrary? Are they not both true? And can
one truth shoulder out another? The falsehood therefore rests in the Pleader,
who said, That the allegation was false.

We read in the Gospel this command of our Savior: Matthew 23 2.
The Scribes and Pharisees sit in Moses chair: whatsoever they bid you
observe, that observe and do: but after their works do not, etc. Here we
hear us charged To do, and Not to do as the Pharisees. And are these contrary?
No: for the [Doe] is a commanding to follow their godly doctrine; the [Doe not]
is a forbidding to imitate their ungodly life.

113 A second crime is in adding (as he says) of this clause [Which I say by
common consent.] Look in the Cha. 15. where the ground of this Position is
laid, That it is lawful to kill a Tyrant, he affirms it, saying, Mirum est
quam magnum affirmando consen^um habeat. That is, It is marvelous what a great
consent this has. Then come to the 16. Chap. upon the point now in question,
he has said, He that denies this, is distitute of common sense. If therefore
marvelous consent according to common sense may be thought more than
equivalent unto a common consent, then is my Adversary unconscionably
contentious to accuse me, as saying too much, where I had warrant to have said
more.

114 It may be, that the striking out of the words of importance Whom the
Commonwealth shall judge to be a public enemie] may somewhat prejudice my
conscience. None can imagine this, but he that is not acquainted with the
Author, In publicis notorij^que criminibus tanto aliter id fieri debet, qua^to
damnata ea per se publico praeconio, ac naturae sensu esse solent, vt August.
de Cain and Abel, Euidentia criminis non eget clamore accusationis. Si
latrones, si bestiae, cum irruu^t, omni iure expugnantur, cur non tyra^nus
quouis latrone and bestia deterior? Duplex poenae genus, positiuae vnu^,
priuatiuae alterum: quaepositiua est, formulam expectare debet; in priuatiua
certe aliter se res habet, quod pertecto scelere, vele tra nonum iudicium vim
habere inter Theologos confessam sit. Then cap. 3. Praeueniri iudic um
Ecclesiae posse specialis probatio, vt Deuteronomy. 13. Statim interficies, ac sit
primum manus tua supra eum, vt Phinees scortum, Number. 25. ari epto pugione
consodit. Sic Mattathias se gessit aduersus Israelitam idololatram, 1. Machab.
2. Tales alij Israelitis liberatores Othoniel, Aiod, Barach. And a little after
would prove this out of the Council of Lateran, out of the Decree of Pop.
Gelasius. And in the former Chap. Ecclesiae iudicium non est, nisi celebri illo
Apostolicae fedis theatro, nec reipnisi in plenis and liberis comitijs esse
potest. In the end of the Chapter after Chap. 5. Expectandi iudicij causas
omnes in Henrico praeclusas esse. After in Chap. 23. Frater Iacobus Clemens,
non ita pridem Sacerdos factus -- post celebratu^ Missae sacrificium Henricum
cultello, vt Aeglonem Moabitem alter Aiod im^ etiam fortiter in abdomine
traijcit. Nihil iam vt fit quod Iudithae Holopherne^, aut Dauidis Goliathum
obtruncantis, aut Samsonis maxilia Asini mill viros inter ficientis historias
admiremur, quia maiora his vidimus, and clamore merito debeamus, Dextra Domini
fecit virtutem, etc. Thus much Bouchier.
who spends a whole Chapter in proving this Position; Praeuenire iudicum
vrgente negotio posse. That is, That the case may be so urgent, that the
public judgment (against such a public tyrant) need not be expected, because
where the crime is notorious, it is sufficiently condemned without further
judgment: for if thieves and beasts (says he) when they suddenly assault us,
may be resisted without judicial proceeding; then much more a tyrant, who is
worse than any beast. And this doctrine he assumeth to prove necessary both
in case Temporal, when the King does injury the Country, and in
Ecclesiastical transgression, when he offends publicly against Religion:
particularly instancing in Henry 3. King of France, who was murdered by Jacob
Clemens a Friar, before any public judgment of the Kingdom, which he
ascribes to a Parliament, or else of the Church, which he attributes to the
Popes Consistory. And yet he magnifieth the murderer (a private man) and
extolleth him above those who are recorded in holy Writ, not upon their private
spirit, but by divine inspiration to have accomplished noble attempts. Here,
here is matter indeed, whereby to decypher my Adversary to be no better than
a painted Sepulcher, who is outwardly gaily adorned with the titles of
Moderation and Mitigation: but inwardly (by holding Boucheirs doctrine) full of
dead men's bones, I mean the dead bodies of Protestants: But how dead? Even (as
S. Hierome speaks in the like case) Voto occidunt, cum gladio nequ^ant. That
is, They wish them to be killed, whom they can not kill as they wish. But this
I reserve unto my Encounter. I proceed to the next.

A fourth Objection of falsehood, wherein he insulteth thus: This testimony is
egregiously abused, etc.

115 Treatise Mitig. cap. 2. number. 26. page 68.
His fourth and last place is out of M. William Reinolds in his book De iusta
Reip. auctoritate, etc. whom he abuses ^gregiously, both in ascribing to him
that which is not his, and in delivering the same corruptedly: and by a little
you may learn much, Ex vngue leonem His words he cites thus: Rex humana
creatura est, quia ab hominibus constituta: and Englisheth in this manner: A
King is but a creature of man's creation. Where you see first, that in the
translation he adds [but] and [mans creation] of himself: for that the
Latin has no such but, nor creation, but constitution. Secondly, these words
are not the words of M. Reinolds, but only cited by him out of S. Peter. And
thirdly, they are alleged here by T. M. to a quite contrary sense from the
whole discourse and meaning of the Author, which was to exalt and magnify the
authority of Princes, as descending from God; and not to debase the same, as
he is calumniated. For proof hereof whosoever will look upon the book and
place it self, before mentioned, shall find that M. Reinolds purpose therein
is to prove, That albeit earthly principality, power and authority, be
called by the Apostle, humana creatura: yet that it is originally from God, and
by his commandment to be obeyed. His words are these: Hinc enim est, etc.
Hence it is, that albeit the Apostle do call all earthly principality a
humane creature, for that it is placed in certain men (from the beginning) by
suffrages of the people, yet election of Princes does flow from the law of
nature, which God created; and from the use of reason, which God powered into
man, and which is a little beam of divine light drawn from that infinite
brightness of Almighty God: therefore does the Apostle S. Paul pronounce, That
there is no power but from God, and that he which resists this power,
resists God himself. So M. Reinolds.

The Answer.
116 This Allegation is, of all which yet I have found, most obnoxious and
alliable unto taxation; which (God knows that I lie not) I received from
suggestion, as the Author thereof R. C. can witness. For at that time I had
not that Rosaeus, alias Reinolds, neither by that present importunity of
occasions could seek after him: which, I confess, is greatly exorbitant: for
I received it as a testimony debasing the authority of Kings: Upon which
presumption (if true) it could be no falsehood in me to insert the particle But,
especially being acquainted with the doctrine of Card. Bellarmine, who, that he
may disable the authority of a King in comparison of the dignity of a Pope,
does defend, That Kings, being chosen by men, are not immediately created by
God: and yet, The Pope, elected by Cardinals, has his authority immediately
from God. What is this else, but in a certain degree to distinguish the
creation of a King and creation of a Pope, the one as man's immediate creature,
the other as Gods? And may it not be lawful for any thus to repeat this
comparison of Bellarmine, saying thus: Kings (after the doctrine of Bellarmine)
have their authority immediately But from man, and that the Pope has his
immediately from God? Is the Interiection But in this repetition like a thief
by the way to seduce and rob, and is not rather as a true man to direct thee?

117 Let P. R. imagine, P. R. reproved by a Simile.
that a boy in any of their Colleges should be so refractary, as knowing
himself to descend from gentry, he should deny obedience to his Superior,
because he thinks him but of base parentage: the boy is brought before P. R.
his Accuser allegeth, That he had gloried in his own gentilitie, and said
that his Superior was But basely borne. Will he think the accusation is
false, because of the addition of But? No verily, but is by it made more plain
and true, which is general in all speeches of abasement: the But is (as I may
so say) a Butte which has infixed in it the mark and scope of the whole
speech. Thus much for my addition But.

118 Furthermore, this I dare adventure to say in behalf of my Suggestor, That
though that place alleged do not agree unto the collection, yet the scope of
that Chapter and the next following does imply as much, proouing that a King
may be deposed by the people. Which doctrine he there applies unto our
English State, and by name to our late Sovereign Q. Elizabeth: which indeed is
to account a King naught else but an humane creature.

119 I know that P. R. may possibly insist, That he cited the text of S. Peter,
1. Pet. 2. who calls a King or Governor constituted by man, Humanam
creaturam, An humane creature. And then how could these words be reprehensible
in M. R. which are warrantable by S. Peter? We must understand, That the same
speech may differ from it self by the diverse intention of the speakers. The
faithful Disciples of our Savior did often salute Christ with Hail Master:
we read also of the malicious Jews saying likewise Hail Master: but the
Disciples in reverence, the Jews to scorn him. Look to the words, here is
not (...), nothing can be more the same; look to the sense and intention it is
(...), nothing can be more repugnant. Simon Peter makes this confession of
Christ: Matthew. 16.
Thou art Christ the Son of the living God. The Devil likewise makes this
confession of Christ, Marc. 5. 7.
Thou art the Son of the Most High. The same confession in the sense of
words, but not in the intention of the speakers: for Peter confessed, that he
might confirm others in the faith; and the Devil did it, that he being
priuileged to preach, might seduce me^ from the truth. And so it might have
been presumed, that M. Reinolds used S. Peter's words, but not in S. Peter's
sense; which was to dignifie such an humane creature, as to teach the orde^er
man in all temporal condition [subditi estote] to be subject: but in his own
sense which follows in the next Chapter, to abase that humane ordinance,
teaching Subjects to depose their Princes. What is the difference? The general
scope of S. Peter is subjection, the aim of M. Reinolds is rebellion. This is
hereby most plain, because S. Peter writ his sentence in the days of Nero a
most cruel and savage Tyrant, and notwithstanding does not incite Christian
people or others to betake themselves unto arms to depose Nero. But M.
Reinolds holds it to be Reinolds in his Rosaeo. cap. 2. page 62. speaking of
such Tyrants not as are inuaders of a country, but those who have been justly
possessed of their Kingdoms.
naturam generosiorem,. i. a more generous and noble disposition, to kill
Tyrants. Amongst whom he recounteth for England, K. Page 135. Traitorous
doctrine.
Henry the Eight. By all which it may appear, that though not the place
alleged, yet the scope of his whole book does convince him of rebellious
doctrine: as will more largely appear in the Encounter. In the interim, let
every Christian learn, that that Governor whom S. Peter calls a creature of
man, S. Paul calls Romans 13. Apostolical doctrine of subjection.
the ordinance of God: and both of them, after that Kings be once established
by consent of the Commonwealth, do require in all temporal causes an
unviolable subjection unto them without violent resistance, teaching that they
are more than man's creatures, because he that resists them resists the
ordinance of God.

The fifth objection of falsehood, whereupon he insulteth thus: Consider, I pray
you, how may frauds and falsehoods there be in one little quotation.

120 P. R. prefers another indictment against me, thus; Treatise Mitig.
cap. 2. number 49. page 82.
But will you hear a case or two more out of the Canon law, how dexterous Sir
Tho* is in corrupting that which he loves not, nor seems well to understand.
You may read in the 4. page of this his pamphlet ( the Discovery) an ancient
decree (for so he calls it) alleged by him out of Gratian in the gloss,
determining that though a man have sworn to pay money to one that is
excommunicated, yet is he not bound to pay the same, and he allegeth the Latin
text thus: Si iuraui me soluturum alicui pecuniam, qui excommunicatur, non
teneor ei soluere: If I have sworn to pay money to any man that is
excommunicated, I am not bound to pay it, adding this reason: Quia qualiter
cunque possumus, debemus vexare malos, vt cessent a malo: We ought to vex evil
me^ by what means so ever we may, to the end they may cease from doing evil.
In the allegation of which little text, a man would hardly believe how many
false tricks there be, to make Catholic doctrine to seem odious and absurd.
For first, these words not being found in any text of law or decision of any
Pope or Council, but only in the gloss or Commentary, they make not any
ancient or modern decree, as the Minister falsely avouches, but rather show the
opinion of him who writes the Commentary: if his words were, as here they are
alleged. The causes. First, the words of the gloss contain only an objection
in these words: What if I have sworn to pay money to any person, or have
promised the same under some forfeiture, and in the mean space he, to whom I
made the promise, be excommunicated, am I bound to pay the same, or not? This
is his question, and then he argues it on both sides: but his resolution is in
these words, I do believe the truer opinion to be, that albeit he that is so
excommunicated, do leese the right to demand his money, yet is the other bound
to pay it him. And for this he cites diverse laws and reasons. So here our
Minister not of ignorance, but of falsehood takes the objection for the
resolution. The second deceit is wilful leaving out of the first words of the
Author, Sed quid dices si iuraui? which plainly show an objection. Thirdly he
allegeth, Quia qualitercunque etc. for a reason of the resolution, which is
made against that reason. Fourthly the true resolution of the Commentator is
utterly concealed, and the contrary determination put down for an ancient
decree. Consider, I pray you, how many frauds and falsehoods there be in one
little quotation.

The Answer.
121 My Adversary P. R. may satisfy himself for me, who a little after
concerning this same allegation of this Author has said that Mitig. pa. 84.
number. 52.
, It may seem to import that he (T. M.) scarce read the books themselves,
but cited the same out of some other man's notes. Here, we see, in his vehement
crimination of malicious falsehood, he has inserted a charitable and true
divination of my integrity. I am glad to see in the mingling of a pound of
worme-wood, and ten ounces of gall, he had the grace to let fall this dram of
sugar, and that so seasonably: For the truth is that I took up these
allegations of Gratian upon credit, and therefore return these pieces unto
him, of whom I received them: who is to prove them current, and to satisfy
for himself.

122 Thus then he: M. Stock, a learned Preacher in London answers for
himself.
This allegation, with some others, I Ric. St. brought unto the Author of the
Discovery, which P. R. challenges to be maliciously cited, partly for that the
words of the gloss were only set down, when the decree is mentioned: wherein
I conceive P. R. complains no otherwise, than one, who being smitten with the
scabbard, should complain that he was not struck with the sword: So he,
because T. M. talked of the decree, and urged only the gloss. For the decree
is far more plain against them than the gloss, Nos sanctorum praedestinatorum
statuta tenentes, eos, qui excommunicatis fidelitate aut Sacramento constricti
sunt, apostolica authoritate a iuramento absoluimus: and ne sibi fidelitatem
obseruent, omnibus modis prohibemus, quousque ipsi ad satisfactionem veniant.
This is the decree, which in the general carries as much or more, as is set
down by him, and so cleereth him from any malice in this point. Besides, in
the very gloss it self, (though it was not so fully brought to his hand) is
set down not by way of objection, but of a resolute conclusion. For after the
objection and answer the conclusion is: Probabiliter dici potest, quod
excommunicato non sit soluendum, cum nemo debeat participare cum eo. Yea and
further, that in this he was not led by malice, is proved thus: because he
left out another more weighty allegation which was delivered him with this,
namely, out of Greg. Decret. lib. 5. Tit. c. 16. Absolutos se nouerint a debito
fidelitatis, dominij, and totius obsequij, quicunque lapsus manifest in
haeresin aliquo pacto quacunque firmitate vallato tenebantur astricti. Now the
gloss particularly and expressly for the present purpose has it thus: Ergo si
sub poena aliquis tenetur soluere certa die, and non soluat, non incidit in
poenam: and eodem modo si per iuramentum, quod and verum est argumentum quod
Papa potest absoluere laicum a iuramento fidelitatis, quoniam ad ipsum spectat
interpretatio iuramenti: in illa autem obligatione and iuramento tacit
subintelligitur, si talis permanserit, cui communicare liceat. Which decree and
Gloss does a great deal more strongly smell of that impiety, teaching that a
man is not bound in such a case to pay his debt: and yielding to the Pope a
power of absoluing men from such like obligations. Thus far R. S.

123 By which Answer of R. S. we may perceive that the tenor of the Popes
Canon in the outward letter does deny the payment of debts: and the gloss it
self concludes a probability of non payment, which being applied by Romish
Priests unto Protestants in the name of Excommunicats, it is but an hazard
whether Protestants (except it be by the vigor of law) shall recover their
debts. Which I proved in the next testimony out of their Cardinal Tollet,
expounding the form Canon. I proved that their ordinary Tenet is in that
case, Non tenentur reddere re^ verbis contractam. Card. Tollet lib 1. Instruct.
Sacerd. ca. 13. Sextus in his last edition. An undoubted argument of the Autors
sincerity.
Not to pay any debt, which consists only in promise. Wherein my Reader may
discern an argument of my sincerity, because I would not allege the Canons in
their generality of not paying any debt, though it might have made my
Aduersaies more odious; but chose rather the Comment. of Tollet, in the
restraint and limitation for not paying debt of only promise. This my entire,
and in a manner partial dealing in behalf of my Adversaries, P. R. could not
be ignorant of, and yet spared not to spot me with his common note of
maliciousnes. There follows*

A sixth objection of falsehood, with this insultation: Let the judicious Reader
consider how many false tricks and corruptions this crafty Minister has used.

124. P. R. has another Article against me, thus; Mitig. cap. ^. number. 52* 53.
54. 55* 56. 57. page 84.
In the sixth page of his Discovery he has this grievous accusatione out of the
C^^on law against us. Haeretici^^ly (...) dicuntur, sed in (...) legem, (...)
super eos, vt ^und^^ fanguinem ipsorum. And then he quoteth thus: apud Great.
gloss. in decret. li^^. (...) ex De^re^. Gregor. 9. cause. 22. q. and cap. Legi.
Which distructed kind of quotation; s^parating the first and last words, that
should have (...) together, (...) to import that he (...) the book as
themselves, but (...) the same out of so^e other (...); but that fault were
easily pardoned, if he used no greater fraud in the thing it self. For first
he Englisheth the words in th^^^ manner: Heretics may not be termed either
(...), or kindred, but according to the old law, thy hand must be against them
to spill their blood. And then in the margi^ h^^ sets down this special
printed note. The professed bloody massacre against the Protestants, without
distinction of ^ixe or kindred. And what can be more (...) urged than this? Now
then let us see how many false tricks and shifts fit for a Protestant
Minister, do lie lurking in this short citation. First this gloss or
Commentary of the Canon law, is upon a Canon beginning. Si quis, which Canon is
taken out of the third Council of Carthage, etc. Secondly, he has left out
the beginning of the gloss. Thirdly, he adds these words, vt fundas
sanguinem, which the gloss has not. And now let the judicious Reader consider
how many corruptions this crafty Minister has used to bring forth to his
purpose this one little distracted text for proof of professed bloody
massacres intended by us against Protestants. Wherein lastly he peruerteth the
very words of God himself in the Law, by translating, us fundas fanguinem
ipsorum, spill their blood, instead of, slied their blood: as though God were a
blood-spill^^, or (...) the (...) to be unjustly done by others. By this one
(of (...) but one) you (...) etc. Thus far P. R.

The Answer.
125 To the allegation of this place of Gratiam, R. S. does owe you an answer,
which he has performed in these words: M. Stock.
This second place also I brought ( says he) unto T. M. the whole being no
otherwise distractedly quoted, then the gloss, whence I had it, warranted by
me: So that of P. R. reprove me, he must chocke his glossary: for when the
gloss had set down the first part, he quoted for the latter, causa 23. q. 8.
cap. legi, meaning in the decrees where it is, Sit manus tua super eos, vt
fundas sanguinem ipsorum.

126 So has he satisfied for his allegation. It remains that I likewise
justify both my collection and translation. For the first, I would demand of
P. R. if, Romish ones applying this Canon of Murdering their kindred, etc.
against Protestants, when the Pope shall iudicially denounce them Heretics,
whether it may be called a massacre, or no? I have now my Mitigator upon a
Logic ^acke, either he must say that it is no bloody massacre, A dile^ma.
but Catholic justice: and then what shall his Reader think upon his
Mitigation otherwise than a Judas his lips in be traying his Master? If he
shall hold it an execrable mischief, then how shall he justify the
application of this canon, when the Pope shall extend it against Protestants?
He cannot answer directly, but he must manifest himself either a Traitor to
his Country, or a preuaricator to his cause.

127 His other censure is upon my interpretation, Vt fundas sanguinem, to spill
their blood, in stead (says he) of shed their blood. Why so? because
otherwise, (the man may seem to have some pious and religious devotion in him)
God should be said to be a blood-spiller. And must it therefore be rather
translated, shed? why, so God should be said to be a blood-shedder. I marvel
what new Dictionary (for he is altogether verbal) P. R. does follow. I hope
that so profound a Clerk will not want a reason of his subtilty: let us hear
him. To spill blood (says he) does signify an unjust deed. Is this it? as
though shedding of blood might not likewise signify an unjust deed. Let him
consult with their own Remish translation, Romans 3. 15. Their feet (viz. of the
wicked) are swift to shed blood. And Act. 22. 20. When the blood of the Martyr
Stephen was shed. And Apoc. 16. 6. They have shed the blood of the Saints,
therefore have thou given them blood to drink. And Luc. 11. 50. That the blood
of the Prophets shed from the beginning of the world may be required of this
generation. P. R. his babish foolery.
Will P. R. have the face to say, that the blood of the Martyr Stephen, and of
the Prophets by the Jews, or of the blood of Saints by the Heathen was shed
justly? Again, the Rhemists Mark. 2. 22. No man puts new wine into old
bottles, otherwise; the wine breaks the bottles, and the wine will be shed.
This is spoken of the wine, which being shed perishes. So is it vulgarly used,
[drinke is spilt, and drink is shed.] Now then what a notable Critic have I
met withal, whom every goodwife is able to convince of idle dottage? But this
is a man privileged to send me to the University to make a Syllogism, whom I
may more justly send unto an Alehouse to learn English.

128 The last point, which is obseruable in our Mitigator, is, that he
affirms this Canon to have been decreed in the 3. Council of Carthage,
Read Surius upon that Council. tom. 1. Conc.
where no such thing can be found. Therefore must his own terms of falsehood,
fraud, treachery, reuerberate upon himself. And yet again we may consider
how zealous P. R. is in authorizing that Canon, and in urging the text of
Scripture, saying, If thy brother; or friend, or wife will go about to destroy
the truth, let thy hand be upon him. To what end must all this be, but that
Protestants, being in their opinion heretics, may have all the penalties which
are awarded against heretics executed upon them (as Bouchier and others
defend) before, or at least (as P. R. holds) after denunciation of sentence?
And consequently Protestants may be, by these Romishones, without exception of
sex, or kindred, or friendship, as it was by execution in the cruel Massacre
in See Thuanus hist. lib. 52.
France, and by intention in the Powder Treason, utterly consumed at once.
Which being performed, the This I shall prove in the Encounter out of Bouchier.
Conspiracy shall be called an holy League the Actour a zealous Ahod, the Act a
Sacrifice. All which proceeds from a false and perfidious application both of
the Scripture, and of the Canon. For the law of Deuteronomy mentions such
transgressions, Who shall entice thee, saying, Let us go and serve other gods,
which thou have not known, nor thy fathers before thee. And the Canon was
directed only against such heretics, who did ruinate the foundation of
Christian faith. But Protestants are so far from idolatry, that for fear
thereof, they have (in the days of Q. Marie) yielded their bodies to the fire;
so far from heresy, that they are ready to seal every fundamental Article
of faith with their blood.

A seventh objection of falsehood, wherein he insulteth, saying: Seeing he has
corrupted a text of Scripture, you may think what liberty he will take
afterward thorowout his whole book.

129 I See above. 5. page 12.
have already answered unto this calumniation, showing, that both the English
text, the Latin Commentaries, the Hebrew Original, and the confession of
their own Doctor do free me from all suspicion of corruption: wherein our
Reader may imagine, whether P. R. by obiecting the Hebrew text, has not
deserved the title of an ebrition.

An eighth objection of falsehood, wherein he insulteth in this manner: Thus much
for his variety of corruptions in this little sentence.

130 P. R. pretermitting (as his manner is) such points wherein he saw the
Romish Arguments most forcibly confuted, insisteth only upon such, wherein he
thinks his ability will serve to make some sensible resistance. Therefore
he says: Treatise Mitig. cha. 5. number. 43. page 174. Extr^^. com. de may. and
obed. vna^ Sanctam.
To the end you may see his Talent ( in deducing proofs out of Romish Writers)
we shall examine only the third Reason in this place, which he declares in
these words: Except, says the Romish pretense, there were a way of deposing
Apostata Princes, God had not provided sufficiently for his Church. And for
this he cites the Constitution extrauagant of Pope Bonifacius, and says, This
objection is in your extrauagants, and so it may be called, because it rangeth
extra, that is, without the bonds of Gods ordinance, etc. But as in all his
other citations generally he is never lightly true and sincere in all points,
no not thrice (I think verily) thorowout all this lying book of his, so
neither here: and it would require a great volume alone to examine only some
part of his leaves about this point of his shifts and corruptions, they are so
many and thick, and craftily huddled up together. As for example here: First,
this sentence is not in the Popes Extrauagant at all, but only in a certain
addition to the ordinary Gloss or Commentary of Io. Picard, which addition
was made by Petrus Bertrandus a late Writer. Secondly, this Comment says
nothing of deposing of Apostata Princes, but only affirming the foresaid
opinion of Canonists to be true, That Christ was Lord absolutely in this life
over all, not only in spiritual authority, but in temporal also: he infers
thereby, That Christ should not have sufficiently provided for the government
of his Church and Kingdom upon earth, Addit. ad Com. Extra. de Man. in c. 1.
ad fine^.
Nisi vnicum post setalem Vicarium reliquisset, qui haec omnia posset: except
he had left some such one Substitute or Vicar after him, as should be able to
perform all these things, to wit, as belong both to spiritual and temporal
power, according as necessity shall require. Which latter clause you see that
T. M. has cut off, as he added the other of Apostata Princes. And thus much
for his variety of corruptions in this little sentence. Now to the thing it
self. So far P. R.

The Answer.
131 If I had not purposed to set down little sentences, I am sure my
Adversary his sentences and censures could not have been so great: where
breuity (which I thought would be most grateful to any judicious Reader) is
inuerted upon me by a calumnious Adversary as most prejudicial to my cause.
First, for citing the Extrauagants of the Pope, whereby an ingenuous Reader
would have understood a figure Synecdoche, where the part is put for the whole;
as when we say, This man shall not come under my roof; meaning by roof,
which is but a part of the house, the whole house it self: So here by
Extrauagant might have been meant the whole body of these Constitutions, which
contain both Extrauagants and Glosses: which is herein, found to be most
consonant, because Pope Gregor. 13. ad futura^ rei memoriam. Reliquum est vt
eiusde^ Decreti vna cum Annotationibus praedictis tam absque Glossis, quam
ipsum totum cum Glossis, Sextumque and Clementinas simul and extrauagantes a
dilecto filies S. F. recognoscenda omnia and approbanda etc. imprimi and
impressa diuulgari iusse^imus, ac ad maiorem Christi fidelium vbique
commo^antium commoditatem, hoc (...) Canonici corpus fideliter and incorrup^^
(...) exemplar Rom^^ (...), imprimi possit. Nos opportune prouidere volentes,
vt hoc ius Canonicum sic expurgatum ad omnes vbique Christi fideles sartum
tectum perueniat, ac ne cuiquam liceat e^dem operi quicquam addere, vel
immutare, aut inuertere, nullaue interpretamenta adiungere, etc.
Gregory 13. has ratified the foresaid Gloss and Annotations with privilege
and authority equivalent and answerable to the authority of the Decretat^ and
Extrauagants themselves. If, hearing one of P. R. his scholars make a
Syllogism, like that which P. R. himself framed, which has neither mood not
figure, and this likewise had been approved by him, some should presently say
to the boy, Sir, this is P. R. his Syllogism; I do not think that P. R.
would call him a lier.

132 To the second P. R. might have answered for me, That the words, Apostata
Princes, were not my Addition, but the objections of my Adversary the Moderate
Answerer, as may appear by P. R. his own relation. And when I said, That the
same objection was in the extrauagants, I could not think that any Adversary
ever could have been either by reason of ignorance so sottish, or by malice so
perverse, as to exact, that the objection be found in the place (...) for so
there should be no end of cauilling, but be contented to find it in the true
sense: which sense even this my Accuser does plainly acknowledge, laying (as we
have heard) this same Extrauagant as the ground of Gods providence in the Pope
(his supposed Vicar of Christ) by whose power spiritual and temporal, any
Prince, extirpating Christian religion, may be removed: which is no more than
I said was contained in the Extrauagants. But such is the malignity of this
Mitigator, that he will not allow in his Adversary, which he practices
Treatise Mitig. ca. 2. n. 55. page 86.
himself: and not he only, but even the known canons of his Popes are guilty
(if it be a guilt) of the same, citing the text of Deuteronomy. ^3. 6. (...): If thy
brother, or friend, or wife go about to depra^^ (...) thy hand be upon him*
Whereas the text is, If they entice thee saying, P. R. his accusation redounding
upon his Popes.
let us go serve strange Gods, etc. But these words, Deprave the truth, etc.
are not to be found; yet because they contain the true sense I should think
it impiety either in another or in my self, to note (as he does me) his
Canons, and consequently his Popes of lying shifts and corruptions.

133 The last shift he finds fault with, is for cutting off the clause, Nisi
vnicum. What needed any addition of that which was sufficiently expressed in my
Adversaries objection, and by me acknowledged to be contained in the
Extrauagants, as we have heard? If there be any shift in my citation, I must
confess it thus: viz. the not adding these words of that gloss, Jesus de iure
naturali in Imperatorem, and quascunque alios depositionis sententiam far
potuisset, and damnationis, and quascunque alias, etc. and eadem ratione
vicarius eius potest. That is, As Jesus by his natural right might enter into
judgment, and pronounce sentence of deposing an Emperor, or any other person:
So may (meaning the Pope) Christ's vicar also. This is the Popish gloss, and
the ground of those Romish and rebellious positions, which I did discover, and
which proves our Mitigatour an excellent shifter, who says that here was
nothing said of deposing Apostata Princes, A fond cavil.
to the end his Reader might conceive my Answer to have been altogether
impertinent. But I pray you P. R. can Apostata Princes be excepted, where All
Princes and Emperonrs are included? But I will not urge against my self the
former omission of the foresaid sentence of the gloss. I know P. R. will too
easily pardon me this fault.

A ninth objection of falsehood, therein insulting thus: A witting and a
manifest lie, and cosenage. His Latin words were perfidiously alleged.

134 P. R. obiecteth thus: Treatise Mitig. cap. 6. number. 55. page 231.
He ( Thomas Morton) allegeth the words of Bellarmine thus: Dum rem ipsam
excutio, non facile audeo pronunciare illos in errore fuisse, While I do
examine well the thing it self, I dare not presume to pronounce them to have
been in error, to wit, Calvin and Beza; whereas Bellarmines words are, Dum rem
ipsam excutio, and Caluini sententias diligenter considero, non facile audeo
pronuntiare illum in hoc errore fuisse. While I examine the matter it self,
and diligently consider Caluins opinions, I do not easily presume to pronounce
him to have been in this error: to wit, in the particular error or heresy of
the Autotheans, set down and confuted by ^^enebrard, and in his sense
condemned expressly by the ancient Catholic Church, for denying Christ to be
and to have his essence from the Father: but yet though in some sense it
seems to Bellarmine, that Calvin may be excused in this private and
particular meaning of his, yet not absolutely, as T. M. would have his Reader
to think, by striking out cunningly the particle hoc (this error) and leaving
the word Error in common, as though Bellarmine had excused him from all kind
of error, which is most false, for that presently after he both impugneth of
purpose, and confuteth by many arguments his manner of speech as heretical in
this behalf. And again. So is his cosenage herein in striking out hoc out of
Bellarmines words: so, for the same purpose he turns illum into illos: which
he could not do but wittingly and of purpose, and yet the man forsooth will not
equivocate for the world, and yet will he lie for much less, as you see. Thus
P. R.

The Answer.
135 He would not wittingly lie for all the world, who would not for all the
world equivocate, lest he might he, as I fear he does, who calls this lapse
of words [Errore and illos] a perfidious cosenage. For if I had been of so
devilish a disposition as to seek to cosen my Reader, then sure (according to
the malice of the Devil, who seeks whom he may devour, that is, to devour
all) I should not have left that Latin sentence untranslated, but would have
Englished it, that by the Latin and English as by a double net my cosenage
might have been, for the number of the seduced, far more succesfull: which
considerations, I hope, may free me from wilful falsehood.

136 That there is also no falsehood at all, the matter it self will show. For
our dispute was only concerning this one suspected error of (...), which many
Jesuits and others, condemned as a Paradox, a blasphemy, an atheism: against
whom I opposed Bellarmine to acquit Calvin ab errore, that is, A stupid cavil.
from error, (which is all one as if I had said This error) which is the proper
and only matter in question. Let P. R. procure a suspected fellow to be
arraigned at the bar, whom the Judge knows to be a drunkard, a profane
swearer, and a person adulterous: but the indictment preferred against him is
only concerning felony: the witnesses are brought forth all circumstances are
examined: in the end the Judge perceiving the presumptions to be frivolous,
shall give this judgment, saying, Now that I have heard the matter examined, I
find no fault in the man. By and by P. R. shall stand up, saying, O Judge thou
know him to be a drunkard, a blasphemer and a lewd liver, and can thou
find no fault with him? thou should have said, I find not this fault of
felony in him; and therefore thou have delivered a perfidious and a cosening
sentence. Again, when our Savior Christ said to his Disciples, Matt. 26. 42.
Pray, etc. for the spirit is willing, but the flesh is weak; would the
Divinity of P. R. correct the speech, and say, though it be spoken of mankind,
yet it is too generally delivered, because there is a flesh of beasts, and a
spirit of Devils: and therefore should be more expressly set down, This kind of
flesh, and this kind of spirit? P. R. sits at his table, and when he sees
two sorts of bread, fine manchet, and courser; and expressing that he desires
rather the meaner kind, should say to one of his seruitors a Sophister, Sir,
give me the courses bread: would he (for want of mentioning This bread no the
Table) allow his Sophister to run into the stable, and bring him an horse
loaf? Would he not rather whip him, for his insolency, if he would not; or for
his folly, if he could not perceive that when a man speaks of This kind of
bread, which is before his face, it is all one as if he had said, of this
bread? Such is my case, concerning which (as I profess) I could not be so
absurdly subtle, as willingly to conceal hoc, so am I persuaded, that no
adversary (I only except P. R.) could be so peruersly gross, as to exact a
particle Hoc, i. This, knowing that the matter in question was particularly de
hoc e^none, of this only error.

137 Although this last taxation be very idle, Another frivolous cavil.
yet this second is (if I may so say) more frivolous, illos for illum, that is,
them in steed of him. If Bellarmine justify Calvin for this opinion of
Autotheos, does he not likewise therein justify all other Protestants, which
are of the same opinion? For if I condemn P. R. for a graceless Sophister,
because of his defense of mental equivocation, do I not therein condemn all
others, who are professed Aequiuocators? This is true, will P. R. say, yet the
Authors word illum, should not have been changed into illos. This Adversary,
we see, is rigorous, I will appeal therefore unto another Adversary, whom I
find more ingenuous, even Bellarmine himself; who in the place alleged, after
that he had said of Calvin, I dare not say that he was in this error does in
the same Chapter justify Beza also, and more expressly Simlerus, another
Protestant, saying, Non video cur haec sententia Catholica dicenda non sit,
that is, I see no cause why this sentence should not be thought Catholicall:
justifying not only illum, that is, Calvin, but also Beza and Simlerus, which
will make illos, even in that opinion, which Campian, the Rhemists, their
Genebrard, and others have calumniously and wickedly called a Paradox, an
Heresy, a Blasphemy, an Atheism. Such is the blindness of their malice,
which (God willing) I shall show more fully in the Encounter.

A tenth objection of falsehood, with this insultation: Is not this rather
falsehood than folly? where is his naked innocence? where is his upright
conscience? where is his simplicity in Christ Jesus?

138 The matter is only for changing a title of the book of Carerius, and
altering the word vero into vere: but trifles (says P. R.) yet such as bewray
a guilty mind and meaning. But I have See above. 6. page 1^.
showed evidently, that I neither altered the title, nor the text, so that P.
R. stands chargeable to his Reader to satisfy for his own mind and meaning,
which must have been either giddily rash, or gracelesly false.

An eleventh objection of falsehood, with this insultation: How can this
malicious cauilling Minister expect to be trusted hereafter? or how may any
think, that he writes from his conscience, seeing him use such gross shifts
and falsehoods in so important a matter?

139 I See above. 7. page 22. nu^. 23. 24. 25. etc.
have discussed this objection already: the point is concerning the testimony
of Doleman, because it was not cited in the very literal words, although (as I
have manifestly euinced) it was delivered according to the real and
demonstratiue sense. And if such accusations might prevail, then might P. R.
(but I hope he will not be so blasphemous) accuse the divine Oracles of God, An
impious cavil.
the holy Scriptures, where the Apostles citing the testimonies of the old
Testament, do not commonly allege the words, but the sense: As Ephesians. 5. 14.
Wherefore he says, Awake thou that sleep, and arise from the dead, and
Christ shall give thee light. The words [He saith] signify God speaking in
Scripture, yet not by manifestation of words, but by collection and
comprehension of sense. There be many such like places, as Heb. 1. 1. Heb. 3.
5. Act. 10. 43. Nay himself and their own Popish Canon (as See a little
before in this. number. 132.
has been shown) have alleged the text of Deuteronomie, but not according to
express words, although not disagreeable from the true sense. And may Popes
thus presume in alleging of Gods truth, and may not man make as bold with man's
testimony, so that still there be no deprauation of the true sense?

A twelfth objection of falsehood, whereupon he thus insulteth: Consider how
falsely and calumniously this Makebate does reason: will he not be ashamed to
see himself condemned of so great ouerlashing?

140 The question is about the hinderance of the due succession of a Protestant
prince unto his crown: This P. R. endeavored to condemn by a triple instance,
and See above. 7. page 19. nu^. 21, etc.
has himself been confuted both by his own Doctors, and also by a triple
instance taken from himself.

A thirteenth objection of falsehood, with this spightfull insultation: He
allegeth Frisingensis quite contrary to his own meaning. Is this the assurance
of his upright conscience, whereof he braggeth so much?

141 In this cavil about the testimony of Frisingensis P. R. has played
four treacherous parts, that he might (though falsely) convince me of one: as
has been already See above. 8.
proved. Yet in this, together with that which follows, he triumphs more
than of any taxation he has in the whole book.

A foureteenth and most rigorous objection of falsehood, with this insultation:
It is a fraud and impudency, or rather impudent impiety, a slandrous
objection, shameless dealing. Will ever any man credit T. M. hereafter?

142 I am ready to hear this grand crimination of P. R. who begins thus:
Treat. Mitig. ca 6. number 37. page 215.
But the next fraud or impudency, or rather impudent impiety, is that which
insueth within four lines after, in these words: Pope Gregory the seventh
(says your Chronologer) was excommunicate of the Bishops of Italy, for that
he had defamed the Apostolic See by Symonie, and other capital crimes. And
then cites for proof hereof, Lambertus Scaffnaburg. Anno 1077. As if this
our Chronographer had related this as a thing of truth, or that it were
approved by him, and not rather a slanderous objection cast out by his
Adversaries that followed the part of Henry the Emper^r. Let any man read the
place and year here cited, and if he be a modest man he will blush at such
shameless dealing. For that no Author of that time does more earnestly defend
the cause and virtuous life of Pope Hildebrand, La. S^aff. hist Germ. ann.
1077. sub fin.
then this man, whose words are: Sed apud omnes sanum aliquid sapientes luce
clarius constabat falsa esse quae dicebantur: Nam and Papa tam eximie tamque
Apostolice vitam instituebat, etc. But with all men of sound wisdom it was
more clear then the Sun, that the things which were spoken against Pope
Hildebrand were false, for that th Pope did lead an excellent and Apostolic
life, as the sublimitie of his conversation did admit no least spot of wicked
rumor against him, he li^ing in that great city and open concourse of men, it
could not have been hidden, if he had committed any unlawful thing in his
life: and moreover the signs and miracles, which by his prayers were
oftentimes done, and his most fervent zeal for God in defense of
Ecclesiastical laws did sufficiently defend him against the poisoned tongues
of his detractors. And again: Hildebrandi constantia and inuictus aduersus
auaritiam animus omnia excludebat argumenta humanae fallaciae: The constancy
of Pope Hildebrand and his invincible mind against the corruption of avarice,
did exclude all arguments of humane fallacy and deceit. So Lambertus. And now
let the reader consider with what conscience and fidelity T. M. has cited him
for condemnation of Pope Hildebrand. He relates indeed what certain
noblemen, captains, and others, that came with the Emperor to the castle of
Canusium, and would not have had him made peace with the Pope in that place,
said in their rage afterward, for that against their counsel he had
submitted himself unto the said Pope: and when a certain Bishop named Eppo
was sent to their camp by the Pope and Emperor to inform them of the
agreement and submission made; Lamb. vbi^sup.
Fremere omnes (says this story) and insanire, verbis and manibus coeperunt,
Apostolicae legationi irrisorijs exclamationibus obstrepere, conuicia and
maledicta turpissima quaecunque furor suggessisset, irrogare. All of them began
to fret and wax fierce both in words and casting their hands, and with
scornful outcries to contradict this holy Apostolical legation sent unto
them, and to cast upon the Pope all the most foul reproaches and maledictions
that fury could suggest unto them. Thus says Lambertus, and sets down the
particular slanderous reproaches here cited by T. M. which he approoueth not,
but condemns, as you have heard, and highly commends not only the virtue
but also the sanctity of the Pope. And will ever any man credit T. M. any more
in any thing that he alleges, when this consciencelesse falsification is once
discovered in him? yea though it were but once thorowout his whole book, it
were sufficient to prove that he deals not out of any faith or conscience at
all. If an enemy would discredit both Christ, and Christian religion, and say,
your own Evangelists do recount foul things against him (as here this
Minister says our Historiographer does of Pope Gregory) and namely that he
was accused by the Scribes and Pharisees for casting out Devils by the power of
Beelzebub, for deceiving the people, for denying tribute to be paid to Caesar,
for moving sedition, and other like crimes, which our Evangelists do recount
indeed, but do condemn them as false and calumnious; were not this as good and
as faithful a manner of reasoning, as this other of Thomas Morton out of
Lambertus and Frisingensis against Pope Hildebrand, who is by them both most
highly commended as you heard, and his adversaries condemned? Truly if any man
can show me out of all the Catholic writers that be extant, English or other,
that ever any of them used this shameful fraud in writing, where no excuse can
free them from malicious and witting falsehood, then will I grant that this is
not proper to the Protestant spirit alone. Hitherto I must confess that I
never found it in any, and if I should, though it were but once, I should hold
it for a sufficient argument not to believe him ever after. And this shall
suffice for a taste only of M. Mortons manner of proceeding, for that to
prosecute all particulars would require a whole volume, and by this few you may
guess at the man's vein and spirit in writing. Hitherto P. R.

The Answer.
143 Thou see (Christian Reader) I have had patience to hear my indictment
delivered unto the full, and suffered my Adversary without any interruption to
say so much in this accusation, as that by this time he may seem to have run
himself out of breath. For what could either the dexterity of Art, or the
violence of passion force more, then to note his Adversary of so shameless
falsehood, as to be without comparison maliciously fraudulent, and utterly
unworthy to be credited ever any more in any thing that he alleges? Now
therefore I turn my self unto thee (good Reader) as to my Judge, who may
seem by this time to exact of me an Answer; and of whom I must desire and
expect a just censure. Vouchsafe therefore (I pray thee) an intentive
examination, and I dare presume thou will acknowledge this Accusation to be
both so false and foolish, and unfortunate to his cause, and indeed
blasphemous, as though he had studied to be either faithless, or fond, or
unlucky, or impious.

I. The falsitie of this crimination.
144 In the beginning I am charged with impudent impiety for citing Lambert
Scaffnaburg to affirm that The Bishops of Italy did excommunicate Pope
Gregory for capital crimes. But why is this impudency? As if (says P. R.)
this our Chronographer had related this as a thing of truth, or that it were
approved of him, and not rather as a slanderous objection cast out by his
Adversaries that followed the part of Henry the Emperor, etc. The point now in
question is, whether this Author Lambertus Scaffnaburg did think that those
Bishops of Italy had condemned this Pope Gregory (for whether they did it
justly or unjustly is the second question) for such crimes or no; I have
affirmed that Lambertus Scaffnaburg was of this opinion: but P. R. denies it,
calling my assertion an impudent impiety. Let us be judged by the evidence of
the Author himself: who in the place alleged has these words: Postquamper
Italiam fama percrebuisset, etc. After that the fame was spread abroad thorowout
Italy, that K. Henry had set his foot in their coasts; [certatim omnes Italiae
Episcopi, etc] All the Bishops of Italy did flock by troops unto him,
receiving him with all honor worthy the magnificence of such a person, and
within a few days after an army of an infinite multitude was gathered unto
him: for from the first time that he was King, they longed for his coming into
Italy, because at this time Italy was pestered with theeuery. And what else? It
follows a little after. Besides, they (viz. the Bishops and people) did
congratulate his coming, because it was reported that he came with a resolute
courage to depose (Gregory) the Pope. Here we see it granted by Lambert that
All the Bishops of Italy were desirous to have this Pope Gregory deposed. But
after all this the Emperor goes to Rome, seeks absolution of the Pope,
returns back again, and the Bishop Eppo is sent after to signify to the
Italians this submission to the Pope. What now? Now follows the testimony
which was alleged: Qui cum causam Italis exposuisset, etc. When Eppo had told
his message to the Italians, all of them began to rage and fret, etc. casting
upon the Pope all opprobrious reproaches, whom all the Bishops of Italy had
before justly excommunicated, because by Simonie he had defiled the sea
Apostolic. Could this Chronologer but acknowledge that the Pope had been
excommunicated by the Bishops of Italy, who (as he confessed in the beginning)
did rejoice at the coming of the Emperor, because he came with a resolution
to depose the Pope? Which is a thing so notoriously known, that never Author
did deny it: Insomuch that Bimus their last and best authorized Compiler of
the Councels, an Author wholly devoted to that Sea of Rome, confesses that
Binius tom. 3. Conc. page 1281.
Anno 1076. (viz. the year before this happened, which has been related out
of Lambert) In the Council of Papia, a city in Italy, the Bishops gathered
themselves together, and excommunicated the Pope. Although he call that
Council, Conciliabulum, and the Bishops Schismaticos, Schismatikes, as
peradventure Lambert also did esteem them; yet this truth is acknowledged of
all, that The Bishops of Italy did excommunicate this Pope. Which is all that
either has, or needed to have been said. And could this deserve so rigorous a
censure of impudent impiety, and whatsoever bitterness the gall of this man
could vent out? I proceed to the second point, which is

II. The foolishness of his Accusation.
145 That being granted, which never any Historian did deny, that The Bishops
of Italy did excommunicate Gregory, alias Hildebrand, and sought by the power
of the Emperor Henry to have him deposed: the sottishness of the second
objection will bewray it self at the first hearing, to wit, The Author
Lambertus condemns such proceedings against the Pope, and highly commends
not only the virtue, but also the sanctity of the Pope: And therefore will any
man credit T. M. any more? Yes, I hope, any who shall rightly discern the
reason of my allegation. For my proof, taken from the testimony of this
Lambertus, consists not in his censure of commending, or of discommending the
proceedings of the Italian Bishops against the Pope, but in the judgment of
those Italian Bishops, who all (as Lambertus confesses) wished that that Pope
might be deposed. A collection used of all men in the citing of all
Chronologers, knowing that the proper office of an Historian is to be a
witness of things done, and not a Judge. For if any favorite of my Mitigator
should report, saying thus, That P. R. (I do but suppose this) was expelled
out of a College of Oxford by the Fellows, who did censure him for some
misdemeanour; but yet I think (says his favorite) that the Fellows did him
wrong: For I have heard him to have been accounted by others of very
commendable conversation. Then presently some by-stander should make bold to
give out that the Fellows of a College in Oxford did so censure P. R. and name
his Author; could any say that he had abused that testimony, because he gave
more credit to the wisdom of those Fellows who expelled him, than to the
contrary conjecture of the reporter? Shall that by-stander be therefore
thought ever after unworthy of all credit?

146 Whosoever of his faction shall read the late Catholic Apology (as it is
entitled) out of Protestant writers, he will wish P. R. had been a newly
professed Pythagorean, to whom a five years silence had been inioined: for
Protestant Authors are there cited, as confessing (but how truly we are not
here to dispute) that some Fathers 400. years after Christ have held some
Romish positions: notwithstanding the same Protestant Authors do condemn
those positions as utterly superstitious. In which allegations the Apologists
are contented to receive from Protestants a confession of so much antiquity of
some Romish Doctrine; and yet oftentimes do not acknowledge or regard the
judgment of the cited Authors in condemning such opinions. Will now P. R.
permit us to answer these Apologists after his example, saying, o impudent
impiety, and malicious falsehood! Will you cite Protestants for confessing such
Doctrines as ancient, which they condemn to have been superstitious? I would
wish P. R. to call his five wits into one Senate, and after due deliberation to
shape me an answer* I fear he will be driven to a non plus: For either must he
teach us to confute their Apologists, and to note them to have been fraudulent
disputers; or else confess himself to have played the part of an idle,
impudent, and an intolerable accuser.

III. The vnfortunatenesse of this his declamatorie calumniation.
147 P. R. will not have his Reader to count otherwise of this Pope Gregory,
alias Hildebrand, than of a man commendable, not only for virtue, but also for
sanctity: as if he had said, not only for a good man, but also for a godly:
wherein it may be that P. R. has been not only not acute, but also absurd:
For as easily may godliness be separated from goodness, as sanctity from any
perfect virtue. But to the matter. As it is written, Oportet haereses esse,
there must be heresies, so is it implied that there must be contradictions, but
to this end, that the truth may be victorious; which I hope will be verified in
this present example of Pope Gregory, who may be unto us (if we believe the
Romish historians) a mirror of all impiety.

First, Cardinal Benno living in his time, set forth his life, and writes
that Benno hist. de vita Greg.
He entered into the Popedom by force: that he suborned a man to murder the
Emperor, when he was at divine service: that he cast the Eucharist into the
fire: that he was a Necromancer; and a contemner of religion.

Secondly, the Abbat Vrspergensis writes, Vrsperg. an. 1080.
That he was an usurper of the sea of Rome, not appointed by God, but intruded
by fraud and money; a disturber of the Empire; a subuerter of the Church.

Thirdly, Sigebertus Gimblacensis, a Monk, writes that Sigeb An. 1074. and
anno 1085.
Hildebrand troubled the States of Christendom; raised up the Saxons against
their liege Prince; discharged subjects from their oath of fidelity; and caused
Rodulph the Duke of Burgundy to proclaim himself Emperor. After reporting
from a writing found after his death in exile thus; We give you to wit who have
the care of souls, that Pope Hildebrand, alias Gregory, being at the point of
death, called unto him one of the Cardinals, whom he did specially affect,
confessing to him that he had greatly offended God and his Church in the abuse
of his pastoral charge, and by the persuasion of the Devil raised hatred and
wrath against mankind. If three witnesses be not sufficient against a Pope, of
whom one is a Monk, an other an Abbat, the third a Cardinal, let us further
understand that

Fourthly, Seuerinus Binius in his new editions of the Councels, Binius conc.
tom. 3. page 1281. and page 1191. Although he call them not Concilia but
Conciliabula.
confesses that the Bishops in a Council At Woormes, Anno 1076. declared that
Gregory was to be deposed: And that The Council at Papia Anno 1076. did
excommunicate him: And that The Council of Bishops at Brixia did depose him:
the Acts of which Council, as they are recited by Vrspergensis, show these
causes; See a little before out of the testimony of Vrsper. lit. z.
Because he was an usurper of the Sea, etc. And The Council at Mentz Anno
1085. declared him to be justly deposed. Thus we see that P. R. by denying one
Council of Bishops of Italy in Papia to have opposed themselves against this
Gregory, has, contrary to his desire, gained with that one of Papia three
other Councels, one of Brixia, another of Woormes, the last of Mentz. So
unlucky has he been (to use his own Simile) in a lost game to see the last
man borne. I must yield him therefore the privilege of a loser, which is to
fret, and rage, and rail, and to call me malicious. The matter were less
heinous in him to have been only slanderous against man, if he were not also,
in a sort, blasphemous against the Gospel of Christ.

IIII. His blasphemy.
148 If any man (says he) would discredit both Christ and Christian Religion,
and say our Evangelists did recount foul things against him (as here this
Minister says our Historiographer does of Pope Gregory) and namely that he
was accused of the Scribes and Phariseis for casting out Devils by the power of
Beelzebub, for deceiving the people, for moving sedition, etc. and the like
crimes, which our Evangelists do recount indeed, but do condemn them also as
false and calumnious: were not this as good a manner of reasoning as this of
Tho. Mortons out of Lambertus against Pope Hildebrand, who is by them so highly
commended, as you have heard, and his adversaries condemned? Thus P. R. Thomas
Morton will tell you that your manner of reasoning is not so good. For suppose
that T. M. in his reasoning had been guilty of some error, yet this your
comparison cannot be free from blasphemy; the consequence whereof is this: It
is like impiety in T. M. in citing the witness of Lambert, concerning the
opposition of the Bishops of Italy, which Lambert condemned; and to give more
credit unto them condemning the Pope, than unto Lambert condemning those
Bishops: As it is for a man reading the Gospel, where it is recorded that the
Scribes and Phariseis opposed themselves against Christ, to believe rather
those Scribes and Phariseis, condemning Christ, than to give credit unto the
Evangelists, condemning the Phariseis. Whosoever shall exactly examine the
Analogy of this comparison, must needs acknowledge it to be in a manner
blasphemous. For either must Christ the son of God be compared with Pope
Gregory, a sinful man, and (as some judge) the man of sin, as though it
were a like impudency to say that Gregory, a sinner, might no more justly be
condemned of the Italian Bishops, than Christ, who was righteousness it self,
of the Scribes and Phariseis, which in the school of Christianity must
necessarily be judged a blasphemy. Or else the likeness consists in the
comparison of the reporters, matching the holy Evangelists and their Monks
Frisingensis and Lambertus together, to think it no less impiety not to
believe rather these two Monks condemning the Italian Bishops (who they say
were adversaries to the Pope) than those Bishops, though condemned by the
Monks; then it is not to believe rather the Evangelists condemning the Scribes
and Phariseis (who were enemies unto Christ) than the same Scribes and
Phariseis, though condemned by the Evangelists. But to compare in like belief
the holy Evangelists who were Calami Spiritus sancti (as S. Hierome calls
them) that is, The pens of the holy Ghost, and could not err, and the reports
of superstitious Monks, who, almost, could not but err, is an inference
altogether impious.

146 But if P. R. (as I hope he will) wish his consequent to be rather proved
ridiculous than so sacrilegious, then let him understand the dissimilitude and
unlikeness of his comparison. For first the judgment of those
Historiographers, Frisingensis and Lambertus, two Monks, in condemning those
Italian Bishops is different from the judgment of Sigebert a Monk, of
Vrspergensis an Abbat, of Benno a Cardinal: but the Evangelical
Historiographers do all of them fully consent together; therefore he not
acknowledging the Evangelists condemnation of the Scribes and Pharisees, and
that Lambertus his condemnation of the Italian Bishops, are nothing alike.

Secondly the Pharisees were of different profession unto the Evangelists, the
Italian Bishops were of the same religion with the objected Historians:
therefore to credit the Pharisees against the Evangelists, and to credit
Bishops against Monks, cannot be proportionable, But why do I trouble my
self with these my Adversaries madling conceits? I hasten, for conclusion to

A challenge against P. R. the Mitigator.

19.
150 THe challenge which P. R. has made is peremptory; vz. Treat. of Mitig. 1.
cap. 3. number. 4. page 92.
The Reply of T. M. is full of words, without substance: of flourish, without
truth: of fraud without real dealing. But what if this vaunt be but the wind
of a swollen bladder, the fancy of an idle brain, the Rhetoric of a voluble
and lavish tongue, whereby T. M. is calumniously traduced? what amends will P.
R. make? Treat. Mitiga. cap. 3. number. 3. page 92.
If I prove not (says P. R.) that T. M. has dealt fraudulently against his
conscience, by multiplicity of examples, let me be thought to have done him
injury. This is an excellent and Priestly discharge, he will exact of his
injurious Adversaries, I doubt not, a satisfaction real; or if not that, yet a
verbal confession: or at least the contritio^ of the heart. But you see what
amends I may expect from his fatherhood, viz. when he has iniuried me, he will
be content to be thought to have done me an injury; hereby affoording me only
the comfort to think, that being iniuried, I may be thought to be iniuried.
This man when he has offended, is like to prove a devout penitent, who is
lame of his hands, not yielding any real satisfaction; dumb in speech, not
making any confession; yea and even, in a manner, dead also without all sense
of sin by contrition, not so much as thinking upon the fault himself, will
only be content by others to be thought to have done an injury. By this
profession P. R. may defraud a whole College by false accounts, and discharge
himself, saying; My Masters, be it known unto you, I may be lawfully thought
to have deceived you. Is this a Catholic Mitigation?

151 As for the integrity of my conscience, I do auow, that if I have not in
the jealousy of mine infirmity done that, which no one (to my knowledge) has
done this many ages, to wit, reuiewed some of mine own books, and examined
them, not as an Author, but as a censurer, discovering such my escapes, as I
could at any time find, and publishing them in print with open Animaduersions,
to the end that mine own correction might be my Readers direction:

If I have not earnestly desired, and, by the law of Love, challenged of my
friends strict justice, in nothing such deprauations, as might any where occur,
and (lest they should suspect their reprehensions to become less acceptable
unto me) if I have not professed it to be my greatest offense, not to be in
that manner offended: If I have been ever so peruersly obstinate, as not
willing to be reformed by any Adversary:

Again, although I cannot but choose to be struck rather of a friend who
wounds, that he may heal, than of an enemy who intends only to hurt; a
friendly animaduersion being as an antidote, which is a reprehending of me,
lest that I might be reprehensible: and the taxation of an enemy being as a
toxicum calu^niously poisoning whatsoever deserved good: yet, if I have ever
been so wickedly perverse, as not, (whenever justly) to be willingly
reproved by any Adversary, turning, as venom into treacle, his deformation
into reformation:

If in my ordinary course of life any can charge me with a bent to this vice
of falsifying, although it were for hope of whatsoever advantage: Then (not to
add, If it be not almost impossible for any man citing four or five hundred
testimonies, as factors in their accounts, by chance to err in some
particulars, without note of fraud or cosenage) then, I say, I will confess my
self worthy of all the criminations of frauds, tricks, deceits, cosenages,
and whatsoever opprobrious imputations P. R. either has or can fasten upon me.

152 Concerning the disposition of my Adversary. If he be not manifested to
have so behaved himself in terms so despightfully malignant, as if the
capital letters of his name P. R. did justly betoken Princeps Rabularum:

If not so dotingly vain in ostentation of his own wit and learning, as if P.
R. did truly signify Phormio Romanista:

If not in defense of his cause, in both the questions of Rebellion and
Aequiuocation, so dissolute, as if P. R. might be worthily interpreted
Praeuaricator Rasus:

If not in his criminations and objections of falsifications so unconscionably
and impudently unjust, as if P. R. might certainly deserve the interpretation
of Perfidiae Reus; as partly in this Preamble, and more in the Encounter may be
observed: Then will I assume all his odious attributes, as proper unto my self:

153 Lastly, for the cause. If I do not avouch the discovery of Romish
positions and practices of Rebellion to be just:

If I prove not the Treatise of Mitig. to be like an Apothecaries box of
poison, with the outward inscription of Antidote:

If I manifest not his specious and glozing reasons for defense of their
Mental aequiuocation, to be no better than the apples of Sodom, which vanish
into ashes at the first touch:

If, lastly, I show not that the chiefest advantage of Romish Adversaries, does
consist in falsifications; all which this Preamble has but touched, and the
Encounter (God willing) must handle: Then let my Treatises be purged with fire,
and my self challenged to a recantation. But these things being, by Gods
grace, directly performed, the fruit thereof will be (Christian Reader) to
establish thee both in truth of speech, and dutiful allegiance, and to put my
Adversary P. R. (I hope) unto silence, I pray God, to repentance.

Gloria Deo.

