A SERMON PREACHED Before the KINGS most Excellent MAJESTY, in the Cathedral
Church of DURHAM. Upon Sunday, being the fifth day of May. 1639. By the Right
Reverend Father in God, THOMAS Lord Bishop of DURESME.

Published by his Majesty's special command.

Imprinted at London by ROBERT BARKER, Printer to the Kings most Excellent
Majesty: And by the Assigns of JOHN BILL. 1639.

ROMANS XIII. I. Let every soul be subject to the higher POWERS, etc.
THis argument of Subjection is the subject matter of the Epistle read this
day, 1. Pet. 2. which I have transferred to this Text of S. Paul, only for more
apt method and manifestation sake; which how seasonable it is for the occasions
of this unseasonable and dismal time, alas! it is too evident: a Time, I say,
wherein the seditious Faction professes forcible Resistance against
Sovereignty for defense of Religion. Now therefore this text being a divine
Canon of Christian Subjection, it will be easy hereby (through Gods
assistance) to pull off the vizard of pretense of Religion from the visage and
face of Rebellion it self. I propound to my self this Theme to be discussed, to
wit, That arms are not to be taken up by Subjects, for defense of Religion: for
the Canon it self teaches us, 1. Who is the Subject; [Let EVERY SOUL be
Subject.] 2. To whom; [To the higher POWERS.] 3. The why, [For there is no
power but of GOD, and the powers that be, are of GOD.] Next, because
Contraries, being compared together, illustrate each other, the Apostle uses
this art; for having prescribed Subjection, he delivers the Contrary, which
he calls Resistance, [Whosoever resists.] This he shows what it is, both
in the heinousness of the Crime, [He resists the Ordinance of GOD:] and also
in the dreadfulnesse of the Judgment, [He shall receive to himself DAMNATION.]
These are the five stages of our future proceeding, which I therefore so name,
because my purpose is (God willing) to hasten through them with all convenient
speed

I. Part, Who, [ Every soul.]
EVery soul.] By Soul understanding (by a Senechdoche, as all know) the whole
person of man, as often elsewhere in holy Writ. But what, Every soul subject?
Not I, says the Pope, and so all Popes of aftertimes, for we have power over
all Powers, be they Emperors themselves, to kick off their Crowns with our
feet; to depose their persons, and to dispose of their kingdoms. Nor we, say
the Popish Clergy, for our function is spiritual, and therefore does in it
self, in all cases, challenge Exemption. Nor we, say the seditious
Conspirators, in the case of defense of our religion.

I have therefore joined the Romish, and these other Factious together, that it
may be known, that although the Romish, and the Church of Scotland, whereof
these Conspirators would be members, do dissent in Religion, no less then
Antiquity and Novelty (for those points, whereof the new Roman Church have
made a new Creed of mo then XII. new Articles of Faith) and differ also as much
in some parts of Gods worship, as Religious from Superstitious and Idolatrous:
notwithstanding they agree in this one Conclusion of professing violent
Resistance, for defense of Religion; and in the most Principles which have been
collected out of the Books of the Romish sect, and papers of the Conspirators,
received from an authentic hand of an honorable Lord in Scotland, and
entitled, The times require that the points following be pressed upon the
people, etc.
Principles conducing thereunto: insomuch that the Conspirators, who otherwise
hate our Church Ceremonies (albeit most Indifferent, and in use Laudable) even
because they seem to them Papisticall; do nevertheless, for confirming their
seditious Conclusions, allege; saying in these very terms* The Papists are
witnesses, etc.

Howbeit this Canon does, in effect, give them both the lie, because the word
Soul signifies the whole man; and seeing there is no man either so Spiritual,
or Secular, but he has an immortal Soul, incorporate in a mortal body; it
must follow that every man is obliged both body and soul to subject himself to
the Higher Powers. And what Powers these are, the Context points out by their
Symbol and Ensign, namely of him that carries the sword, even the temporal
Magistrate.

And that this doctrine was both professed and practiced thorowout the whole
Christian Church for above 600. years, is manifoldly manifested by Evidences
registered in all Ecclesiastical Records, whether they concern the Greek or
Roman Church. But we, at this present, may content our selves with two kinds,
one from the Greeks, even in their Chrysostom. and after him, Theod. Euthem.
Oecum. Theoph.
Commentaries upon this Text [ Let every soul, etc.] That is, say they, Every
Apostle, Evangelist, Prophet, etc If every apostle must be subject, then Peter,
then his Successor, (every Pope) then every Popish Ecclesiastic. As for the
Secular, it follows in Chrysostom, (...), etc. Every other whosoever, etc.
Which is an acknowledged truth even of their own Espensaeus, saying, Apostolus
docet omnes credentes mundi Potest^ibus esse subjectos, nempe, sive Apostolus,
etc. -- ut tenet Chrysostom. Euthem. Theod. and qui non Graeci? Espen. in Tit. 3.
1. digress. 10. page 5. 13. Paris Anno 1568.
What Greek authors did not hold, that the apostle hereby taught, that all the
faithful were to be subject to worldly Governors?

II. Concerning the Roman Church, what need more then the Epistles, which are
recorded by B^nius, as of Pope Leo the first, Epist. 26. and 35. of Simplicius
the first, Ep. 4. of Felix the third, Ep. 2. of Anastasius the first, Ep 78. of
Pelagius the first* 1 p 16. These before Gregory, and after him Martinus the
first, Ep 3. Agatho the first, 1 p. ad Heraclium, Hadrian the first. Ep. ad
Constant. Anno 770.
epistles of ancient Popes, yet extant, which they writ to the Emperors of
their several ages for above 700 years, all As is to be seen in my book
entitled, Causa Regia.
agreeable to the style of Pope Gregory the first, surnamed the Great, in his
Epistle unto the Emperor Mauritius, one somewhat vexatious unto him, after
this tenor, Greg. lib. 2 Epi. 21.
Ego indignus famulus tuus Jussioni tuae subjectus. i. I your unworthy servant
am subject to your command. Here you hear his profession, will you see it in
his practice? The same holy Pope being commanded by the same Emperor to
proclaim an Edict, which although Gregory thought it to be unlawful in it
self, yet held it necessary for himself to publish it thorowout his Diocese;
that done, he renders the Emperor this his account, Idem ibid. Ep. 32.
Serenissimis Iussionibus tuis obedientiam praebui. i. I have obeyed your
Majesty's commands.

As for the other Roman, both People and Clergy, one would think that the
dedication of this Epistle [ To the Romanes] might instruct them to know their
duties, thus, Romans 1. 7
To all that are at Rome, beloved of God, called Saints. What? (even this Canon
as well as any of the Epistle else) [ Let every soul be subject to the higher
Powers.] Thus, Then, but contrarily Now; and therefore so much is the Church of
Rome, in point of Subjection, degenerated from it self, so far as that
(diverse hundred years after this Pope Gregory) when the Archbishop of Sens in
France challenged the privilege of Immunitie from all subjection to the King,
he was encountered by S. Bernard, and arrested by virtue of this Canon of [
Omnis ^^ima] saying, Forget you what is written? Let every soul be subject
Bern. Ep. ad Epi. Senonensem.
to the higher powers. [Qui te tentat excipere, (...) decip^re.] i. He that
seeks to exempt, does but labor to delude and seduce you. Finally, whenas the
Pastors of the Church Catholic performed Subjection themselves, for more then
^00. years after Christ, it can be no question but they catechized their people
in the same Canon and Article of Christian loyalty. This case being so plain,
that any man may understand the necessitiy of subjection in Everyman, our next
Quaere must be, To Whom? and the Canon says in the next,

II. Part. [ To the higher Powers.]
THere were almost in all ages of the world diverse kinds of Powers and
Governments, which I need not rehearse, but the principal ever was the
Monarchical; whether it were by Conquest, Election, Inheritance (as the
firmest) or otherwise: and in the Monarchical have always been diverse degrees
of Powers yet so, that one was Supreme, and the other Subordinate; which S.
Peter does distinctly exexpresse, * Be ye subject to the King (...) 1. Pet. 2.
13
as to the Supreme: And to (his) Governors, as them that are sent of him. I
should now proceed, but the Conspiratours do interrupt me, saying, That a
difference would be put between private persons, taking arms for Resistance,
and inferior Magistrates, Judges, Counselors, Nobles, Peers of the land,
Barons, Burgesses, etc. where they confess, that the Magistrates, Judges,
Nobles, etc. are all Inferior to the King: and yet argue, from the Combination
of all these, for Resistance by arms. Now hearken we to the Canon, [ Let Every
soul be subject to the Higher Powers] but Inferiors are under the Monarch, as
the Higher, and so are they confounded out of their own mouths. But they and
the Romish descend yet lower, as we shall find, in discussing the Reason Why
we ought to be subject to the Higher powers, which is the next Point, And*

III. Part, [ For there is no Power but of God: the Powers that be are ordained
of God.]
THerefore it is plain (say we) God requires a loyal Subjection. Here again
both the Romish Seducers, and these Conspirators conspire together in defense
of another Principle, to wit, When they have no power of Resistance in
themselves, then to envenome and intoxicate the brains of the people with an
opinion that the Power is in them to Resist by violence, when there shall be
Occasion. So say the Romish, but why? because, forsooth, Persons in his Dolman,
the French Jes. Lib. de jure Abdicationis; Majestas regni sita est magis in
populo* quam in persona Regis. Page 36. Didymus Non populus in Principum
gratiam factus, sed Principes in populi gratiam creati. Rainoldus de justa
Authoritate; Rex humana Creatura est, quia ab hominibus constituta. The
moderate Answer to Doctor Morton; People made election of Kings, etc.
Majesty is seated in the people, because the Princes are made by consent of
the People, and because St. Peter calls them Humane Creatures. Accordingly
the Conspirators, as if they meant to be the disciples of Papists; their words
are these: The people originally make the Magistrate, and not the Magistrate
the people. And (all this being supposed) their conclusion is, for Defense of
Religion against Magistrates by the power of the People. Then which there could
not be uttered a more fo^d, false or pernicious Conclusion, as the Canon it
self will show from point to point.

I. Fond, for what says the Canon? The powers that be are (...), ordained of
God, that is, orderly constituted: but if, when the People have constituted a
Ruler over them, there remains in them a power dormant, upon Occasion, to
overruled, and un-king, and un-make him, to whom they are Subjects; this were
as unorderly and ougly a confusednes, in the Body politic, as it would be in
the body natural to stand on it is head with the heels upwards* Their other
Objection is out of S. Peter, for calling Magistracy an Humane creature,
because of the Choice of the People; as if therefore by it the same humane and
popular liberty might be dissolved: it is frivolous, because S. Peter adds
there, Be ye subject unto (the ^* Pet. ^* 13.
same) humane Creature, for the Lords sake.

II. If the Doctrine be fond, it must needs be false* and that more evidently
by that which shall be opposed against it in the Canon, which says, (...), The
powers that be are of God* [Powers that be] Are they then once established?
then whatsoever the Government be, they are of God, God owneth them, they may
not be disturbed. For as silver, whilst it is mere Plate, if it be tendered for
exchange, may be either taken, or not, by the party to whom it is offered: but
if it once receive the Kings stamp, and be coined, it is current money, and
may not be refused. Or as Acts of Parliament, whilst they are but voted, are
but only Consents, but after they have the Kings Royal assent, they become
Statutes, which may not be transgressed. So is it in governments; as soon as
any is (...) created by man (as S. Peter calls it) it becomes (thus Saint
Paul) (...) Gods ordinance, and may not be Resisted.

This Lesson our Savior Christ taught all Christians, by his own example, who
although he were Lord of lords, and King of kings; yet making himself (as man)
subject to higher Powers, he would acknowledge them, both in the Supreme
Magistrate, and therefore he paid Matt* 17* 27.
Tribute to Caesar: and in his Deputy Pilate, as Subordinate, to whom he gives
testimony of his divine right, that he had his Power Joh. 19. 11*
from above, namely from God. Which thing is so evident, that some Royard in
dom. in 1. Advent. Rege constitute, non potest populus jugum Subjectionis
repellere* Et Cunerus lib* de Offic.. Princip^^* Sive electione, sive
postulatione, vel successione, vel belli jure Princeps fiat, Principi tamen
facto divinitus potestas adest.
Popish Divines could not but perceive it.

Lastly here is made visible the Pernitiousnesse of this Infatuation by the
(...) in the fourth verse, [ He carries the sword,] to wit, One chief
Governor, but One sword: for albeit there be Governors under Governors, more
or fewer, yet because the Subordinate are dependant, All upon the chief One,
and do execute capital punishment in the name and authority of the Highest,
All are accounted but One Sword; and Subalterna non contradicunt. But when as
the people shall be making forceable Resistance, there must be clashing of
Sword against Sword. Nay, and by this their learning, which we now hear, the
Sword is wrested out of the hand of the King, and put into the power of the
People, that is, into the hand of a Mad man. I have said this, and have good
warrant for it; for when King David, in the like case, -- (like Case? nay never
was the like Case heard of, namely, that a King was so injuriously cheated of a
Kingdom) when King David, I say, was delivered from the Contradiction of his
people, he gives thanks to God, that as he Psalm. 65. 7.
Stilled the raging waves of the Sea, so he repressed the Tumults of the
People. Comparing hereby the Tumultuousnesse of the People to the Raging waves
of the Sea; and is therefore translated in our Church-book more emphatically,
The madness of the People. O merciful, and powerful God! grant, we beseech
thee, the like experience of thy deliverance, out of the outrageous
Contradiction of the people, unto our gracious Sovereign, that He may likewise
praise thee, the Lord of hosts, in the great Congregation! I proceed unto the
Contrariety to Loyal Subjection, which is called Resistance in the

IV. Part of this Canon; [Whosoever therefore resists the Power, resists
the Ordinance of God.]
IN these words you may perceive an Act, Which is Resistance of Magistracy,
and the Crime therein, which is Resisting the ordinance of God. It is not, He
that obeys not, but, [ He that resists:] for there may be a lawful, yea
and a necessary not-Obeying, as whenever the immortal God shall Command any
thing, and any power on earth shall give it a Countermand, then must the Law of
the earthen and mortal God be rejected justly. To this purpose the Example of
Daniel is registered in holy writ. A law was signed by king Darius, that none
should make any Petition to God, for certain Dan. 6.
days. Daniel disobeyeth this law, he is cast to the lions to be devoured, he
is delivered by Gods Angel: Darius congratulateth his deliverance, and Daniel
justifies his former Disobedience, saying, Unto thee, O King, have I done no
hurt. Kings are not to think it any injury, or derogation to their Royalty,
that the King of Kings be rather obeyed.

King Solomon saw the Equity hereof, when distinguishing of Heights of powers
(in the case of oppression of the people by unjust Judges) he said, There is
higher then they: meaning the Eccles. 5 8.
King, whom in that respect also he calls The Highest on earth, to whom the
Subject might appeal: but if the King will not, then to know that there is one
Higher then the Highest, even God. Thereby teaching Inferiors that they must
still vail to the Highest. And our Canon, which will have us subject to the
Higher Powers, before the lower among men, does by Analogy instruct us
principally to be Subject to that Higher Power, by whom these Powers are,
namely (as says the Canon) By the Ordinance of God. A case clearly resolved
long since by the Apostles; for Christ had commanded his Disciples, to go, and
teach in his Name; the Jewish Sanhedrin inhibiteth them, saying, Act. 4. 18, 19.
Teach no more in that name: they rejoyne, Whether it be better to obey God or
Man, judge you. An answer so Rational, Conscionable, and Irrefragable, by
referring it to the Judgment and Conscience of whatsoever Adversary, that had
any knowledge of God, as that it was an impregnable convincement. But we never
read of a lawful Resistance to Governors, whereof the Canon here speake^^*
for it is called a Resistance of Powers, and therefore it intimates and
withal condemns a Powerful violent Resistance, whether it be made by
Persons invaded, or else by Persons invading; for these two are to be
differenced.

The Conspirators (whatsoever else they might inwardly intend) do openly
profess not to use any violence by Arms, until they shall be invaded: and
therefore it is, that they palliate this their Opposition with the name of a
Defensive Resistance; repeating again and again the word, Defense. Hereupon I
am compelled to take up that Outcry of Tully against Tubero, for bringing men
into the field, armed with Spears and Swords, Quis sensus armorum? (says he.)
What other meaning can mortal weapons have then mortal wounds? except the
Conspirators would have us think, that there is more mercy in Muskets and
Canons, then there could be in Swords and Spears: or that, if our King should
be constrained (which God forbid!) to dispute his Right by Arms, they would
defend themselves without blows and bloodshed. It will be no excuse for them,
that there is a Generation more rebellious then they, who invade before they be
invaded, and that also in pretense of Religion.

These I need not name, they are to all the world so visible, both by public
Invasions, and treacherous Assassinations. For it is needless to reckon up
unto you the Romish often machinations to raise public Insurrections: the
Curse of God upon the last Northern Rebellion is felt of this Country
Inhabitants even at this Day. As for Assassinates, by Popish and Jesuiticall
Suggesters, the miseries of France, and horror at the sight of their Kings,
wallowing in their gore-blood; the joy of England, for Gods manifold and
miraculous Deliverances to our last Queen, and King of blessed memory,
together with the whole State of this Kingdom, do fully proclaim. O that both
these Spirits of Rebelliousnesse would now at the last abhor the mischief of
all violent Resistance, by Consideration of the Grievousnesse of the Crime!
which in the next place is to be spoken of, [ He that resists the Power,]
what?

[ Resists the Ordinance of God] That is, Resists God himself.
WHence we collect a Condemnation both of Actual Resistance, and an Habitual
Purpose of Resisting. Touching the former, both the Romish Seducers and the
Conspirators oppose, affirming and teaching, viz* If that Kings shall prove
either Tyrants to their own people, or else Persecuters of the Professors* of
Religion, then Subjects may arm themselves, and make hostile Resistance. This
Doctrine is most notorious in the Romish Schools. The Conspirators, inspired
with the same Spirit, will needs be thought to have an advantage from the
verses following, because the Subjection, here required, is prescribed in
behalf of Governors; who are said to be such Rulers, who are not a Terror to
Good workers, but to Evil: who are Ministers of God for Good, and Revengers to
execute vengeance on them that do Evil. Hence the Conspirators; But Tyranny
and unjust violence (say they) is not the Ordinance of God, and be that
resists it, resists not the Ordinance of God: for such Rulers are a Terror
to good Workers, but not to Evil. And the whole course of the Apostles
Argument runs against Resistance of lawful power, commanding things good. We
must therefore acknowledge Tyranny to be the Ordinance of God, and for good, or
extrude it from the Apostles argument. Thus we see the Ministers among the
Conspirators, as Drummers in the Camp, strike up their Alarm to war and
violence, and bewitch men's souls with that Sophistication, which is called
Ignoratio El^nchi. And this Poison likewise they have sucked out of the quils of
Romish Sophisters. That this may appear to very Novices in Religion, I shall
give to our Adversaries their four Objections four punctual Answers.

The first is, That the Powers, to whom Subjection is required, by this Canon,
were indeed Tyrants to their own Subjects, and Persecuters of the Christian
Professors. For were not these Powers heathen Governors? were not the most of
them cruel Tyrants? were they not all professed enemies to the Christian
faith? and Persecuters of the Professors thereof? This cannot be denied; but if
any man's ignorance should gainsay it, we might instance in the Emperor Nero,
who was the highest Power in the world at this time. He, after the fifth year
of his Empire, became so bloody a Tyrant, even to his own heathenish people,
that they branded him with the black mark of a Monster. And he was so vile
and violent an Opposer of Christian Religion, that his Reign has been
registered ever since by Christians to have been their First fiery
persecution; whereof the holy Penman of this Epistle felt some sparkles: for
Ephesians. 3. he displayeth himself, saying, I Paul a Prisoner of Jesus Christ.
Whence was that Epistle written? the Subscription thereof says, From Rome. And
the like we read in the Epistle to Philemon. All this notwithstanding, S. Paul
requires Subjection to this, and to all Other never so Tyrannous Governors.
With what front or face then could these Romish, and other Seducers distort
this Text, for proof of a Rebellious Conclusion?

Their second Ignorance (if yet it may be called Ignorance) is, that they
discern not this their inconsequence, viz. The Canon exacteth subjection to
Governors that are no Terror to good Workers. Ergo, To those that are a
Terror to good Workers, they owe no Subjection. Just as if, in Chatechizing
Children in their duty to their Parents, they should instruct them, saying,
Divine Scripture commands you to reverence your Parents, who bring you up in
the fear of the Lord: Ergo if your Parents shall vex you, in your good
Doings, you must not yield any Reverence unto them.

Thirdly, they will not see, that there is a temporal Good redounding unto
Subjects, even under most tyrannous Governors. I say again, They will not see
it, who name Calvin, as standing for them: but only name him, alleging no
place. Now, will any doubt but that when they argued from this Text, they did
consult with Calvin upon it, then whom (upon this place) they could not have a
greater Adversary? He says, indeed, that the Text requires Subjection to
Governors, for the Goodsake that Government brings: but does he contrarily
conclude a no subjection, if they shall peradventure degenerate and turn
Tyrants? His words are, Calvin in locum.
Et ^amsi non raro degenerant, qui Principatum tenent, nihilominus deferenda
est eis Obedien^ia, que principibus debetur. That is, Although they should
degenerate from the office of good Magistrates, yet is the Obedience due unto
Princes to be performed to them. But our Conspirators acknowledge no Good in
the Government of any Tyrant; notwithstanding that, Calvin instructs his
Reader in this point also, Ibid.
Quanquam ne sic quidem abutuntur potestate sua Principes, bonos innocentesque
vexando, ut non aliquando ex part speciem aliquam justae dominationis
retineant. Nulla ergo Tyrannis esse potest, quae non aliqua ex part subsidio
sit, ad tuendam hominum Societatem. This his judgment is worth the
translating. Nevertheless (says he) Princes, in vexing good and innocent
Subjects* do not so far abuse their authority, but that they preserve some
part of just Government. Therefore there can be no Tyranny, which may not in
some degree be an Help and Aid to the Commonweal.

So Peter Martyr, commenting upon the same Text, has these words; Nisi Tyranni
saevissimi aliquam habeant rationem juris, potentiam illam suam retinere non
possent. And it is very true; for if Tyrants should not uphold the public
Justice and Peace, in some degree, they themselves could not subsist or support
themselves. He instanceth in Nero, Cum ipse Imperio suo opprimeret orbem
terrarum, tamen jus dicebatur, nec vis legum funditus eversa erat e rebus
humanis. The difference therefore, in this Case, between the Incendiaries and
Calvin, is no more nor less then this; They say that the Argument of the
Apostle Extrudeth (it is their own word) Subjection to Tyrannous Governors:
But He denies this. And they reject the said Governors, as if they were void
of all public Justice: But He says, there was never any such Tyranny heard of.

A fourth Crotchet they have, namely, that If we be Subject to Tyrants, then
must we confess that Tyranny is the Ordinance of God. So they collect, for
want of Spectacles, for so may we call a Distinction; Ordinatio Commissionis
and Permissionis; one and the same man having Both. N^r^ a King, by Gods
Ordinance of Commission; the same Nero a Tyrant, by Gods Permission; yet
Permission not Speculative only, but Ordinative, which uses a Tyrant for to
be his Flagellum, A whip for scourging the Wicked* as Scripture teaches* and
as God himself avoucheth of himself, by his Prophet, saying; Os^ 13. 11.
I gave them a King in my wrath. Take you, for instance, unjust Pilate* (of
whom you have heard) who albeit, by Gods Permission, an unjust Governor, yet
is acknowledged to be, by Gods Commission and Ordinance, a Governor, as one
Joh. 19 11.
having his power from Above. And thus is the maine Fort and Bulwark of both
the Romish and Seditious Conspirators utterly demolished, touching Actual
Resistance, even against Tyrants themselves; how much more against the Nursing
Father of our Church, who is no way liable to so wicked an Imputation? as will
hereafter appear. The second kind of Resistance is that which we called
Habitual, in a purpose of Resisting; of which now.

This I note, because of another notorious Principle, held by both our
Conspirators. For the Romish, They allow their Professors sometime to perform
Subjection to Protestant Princes, but it is under this Parenthesis of only Sit
Cautio ad^ibenda, ut vires (...)nt ad ^oc idon^a^ s^bd^^^, alioqu^ in
^eli^ion^^ Catholicae praej^^i^tum ^^d(...). Cr^^well in his Philopater.
^gaine, Sub^^^^ Obe^i^n^ ^am s^am praeb^ant R^^i^ae pro praesent^ ^^^u^ statu.
Ibid. Modo vi^^s ^is s^pp^^unt. Bannes in Thom. 2. qu 12. Art. 2. So also
others of them.
The Case thus standing: and, Until there be force to Resist. Which Lesson the
Conspirators may seem to have learned, who, whilst they wanted force, stood
upon good terms of peace and Subjection: but no sooner were they furnished
with Arms, but they began to threat; which is as wild and vile a piece of
Learning as the former, and comes now to be Confuted both by Text and
Context.

The Text says (Omnis Anima) Let every Soul be subject: the Reason why the
Denomination of the whole man is given ( Animae) to the Soul, (as Aquinas
glosseth) is, Because Subjection should be ex animo. Secondly, It is called the
Ordinance of God, who is the searcher of the Heart, because he says,
concerning Obedience to himself, Give me thy Heart. And that he will have as
due Subjection to cruel Governors, as Obedience of Servants to their froward
Masters, none will make question. But concerning the du^y of Servants toward
their Masters; Saint Peter enjoyneth them to be 1 Pet. ^. 1^.
Obedient ((...)) to their froward and perverse Masters. And S. Paul, That they
Ephesians. 6. 6.
serve not only the eye of the Master, but in singleness of heart, as unto
Christ: For otherwise it is but brutish, like to the service of Psalm. 32. ^0.
Horse and Mule, whose mouth must be holden with bit* and bridle. Lastly, the
Context acknowledges, concerning Subjects; It is necessary you be subject,
not for Fear only (namely, of the Temporal sword) but for Conscience* sake
also: that is, for fear of Gods vengeance, which this Canon denounces against
obstinate Resistants, as is now to be unfolded in the last Part of this* Canon.

V. Part. They that resist shall receive to themselves DAMNATION.
THe Transgression being so heinous, the Judgment must needs be grievous; and
so (indeed) it is thrice-dreadfull: Once, as being Intolerable, signified in
the word Damnation; wherein are comprised the two Extremities of Punishment:
one of Pain, which in Scripture is shadowed under the Metaphor of Fire; the
other the Extremity of Continuance, for Time* expressed in the Epithe^
Everlasting. Next is the Unavoidablenesse thereof, as it is in the Canon,
(shall Receive Damnation.) To wit, Although such Resistants shall escape the
Edge of mortal Powers, yet if Giant-like they will needs ((...)) Resist God,
he will at length be too hard for them, They shall in^allibly Receive
Damnation. Lastly, the Judgment will be most just, to make them inexcusable,
for so says the Canon, (They shall receive damnation to themselves.) That is
to say, they shall be found guilty of their own Danmation, be their Pretenses
in this life never so specious, as indeed they are.

For both the Romish and the Conspiratours hold (respectively) that They, who
shall die in their quarrels, are in the state of Martyrs. Their Principles
likewise agree, first, because they fight for Conscience Sake. But why this*
Because it is in ordine ad Deum. Yet why thus? because in the Defense of
Religion. So they* And so their many Deductions are so many Seductions and
Delusions, as the Canon will particularly and plainly discover. 1. To pretend
Conscience for Resistance, albeit the Apostle here in ver. 5. teaches, that it
is Necessary to be subject even for Conscience Sake. 2. In ordine ad Deum, that
is, In zeal to Gods glory: as if that could be called ( In ordine ad Deum)
which (as the Canon has it) is a Resistance against the Ordinance of God.
Lastly, to say that they Resist for Religion-sake, knowing that Religion is in
adherence to the revealed will of God, and that there can be nothing more
revealed then this Canon of a general Subjection to the Highest Powers: as
also the reason against Resistance, in respect of the Crime, which is,
Resisting Gods Ordinance: and much more in regard of the Judgment, which is
Damnation it self. And therefore can such Resistants, dying in their
Rebellious quarrels, be but Black-Saints or Martyrs: even as diverse in the
Church of Rome have been, whom (notwithstanding) their Writers doubt not to
Beatifie in their Books at large, even in these our times. One I dare be bold
to name, Garnet the Jesuit, whom I knew at his Arraignment to confess, that
he heard of the Powder Treason out of Confession* and therefore was worthy of
Judgment; and at his death he publicly exhorted the Romish Professors to
avoid all Acts of Treason.

Now therefore it being confessed on all sides, that it is not Poena, but Causa
that Canonizeth a Martyr; we see by this one Instance how prone the Romish
Professors are to adopt for Martyrs, as dying for Conscience Sake, those who
confessed themselves to die for guilt against their Conscience: except, in so
Confessing, they do but Aequivocate; and if so, then but Aequivocall Martyrs.

But to come to the determination of the present Cause, by two Positions
against as well the entitled Romish holy-Leaguers, as the Religious
Covenanters. The first is, that the Soldier of Christ his fight, for Religion,
must not be by Worldly force. The Word Sacrament originally among the Romans
was a Military term, signifying the Sacred Oath taken by the Soldier, to be
faithful in his service under his General; and after translated, to notify
our Sacred Mysteries: as, at first, our holy Vow in Baptism, for professing of
our faith in Christ, by holiness of life, in imitation of our General, Christ
Jesus. He in general proclaims, saying, Joh. 1^. ^6.
My Kingdom is not of this world, else would my servants fight: which was
spoken in relation of himself to his Disciples; and therefore we see he
would not have them fight, no not for himself. But would any of his Servants
seek to destroy Any for his sake? Yes, the Boanerges (sons of Thunder) would
have done so for his honor, when they desired fire from heaven to destroy the
Samaritans, for their Contempt against their Master; because of his Religion,
for that he seemed to them to have set his face toward Jerusalem; that is, to
have a purpose to go up to the feast, there to solemnize the worship of the
true God; but notwithstanding were corrected by our General, saying, Luke 9.
55 56.
Ye know not of what spirit ye are of; I came not to destroy*

And what then shall the Romish answer for their Boanerges* sons of Powder,
who not asking for, but acting and working a Furnace of fire in a hollow vault,
as from Hell, to consume at once the King, and the whole Representative state
of this Kingdom with a blast* * A Treason Thuanus anno Dom. 1605
(says one of their own Historians) of all other which either in our, or in
any former age, has been recorded: for Immanity most monstrous, no age ever
hatched the like. So he* Or what will they answer for the Patron of all
Assassinates, Pope Urbane the second, (called by the Nickname of Turbane) who
made a Public Edict against those who should be excommunicated by the R^^ish
Church, (^^ Bulla Caenae. Nos excommunicamus omnes Lu^herano^, H^g^notto^,
Zu^ngl^^nos, etc.
all Protestants are at this day) authorizing Private Persons to murder them,
saying, Urban 2. Papa R^sc^^pt. de Occiso^i^us Excommunicatorum, ad God^^ idum:
extat ap^d ^vonem.
Non enim eos Homicidas arbitramur, quos adversus Excommunicatos, zelo
Catholicae matris ardentes, eorum quoslibet trucidasse contigerit, etc. Another
servant of Christ, to rescue his Master, would needs draw his Sword, strike and
wound an Officer of the Jews, but was rebuked thus; Man. 26. 5^.
Put up thy Sword, for All that take the Sword, shall perish by the Sword: that
is, ought to perish by it.

The second Position may be this, That Christians ought, in defense of their
Christian profession, to imitate Christ their General in Passive Obedience, in
resisting the wicked world, by dying for the Christian Faith and Religion,
whenever the Alarm for Martyrdom shall be ^eard. That one Instruction of
Saint Peter may alone suffice for this point: 1 Pet. 2. 21.
If ye suffer for well doing, happy are ye, for hereunto are ye called,
because Christ suffered for us, leaving us an Example, that we should follow
his steps. Here is as much as need be said: Our Vocation whereunto we are
called, is to be Soldiers of Christ; our Warfare is by suffering; our Example
is our General, who suffered for us; our Victory is, as his was, the
conquering of the world by an innocent death; our end is Blessedness, for so
it is said, Happy are ye, etc. Upon which Contemplation we are bold to affirm,
that we have all this by the Covenant of Baptism, (the Epitome of Christian
Religion) which appears to differ as much from the Covenant of violent
Resistance, for Religion, as Doing Resistance, and Suffering; as Vocation and
Transgression; as Happiness and Damnation.

It will be worth the while, to consider the Good of Persecution, for the
profession of the true Christian Religion. The first is that Miraculous Good,
which experience of the sufferings of the Primitive Martyrs has brought forth,
according to that saying, Sanguis Martyrum semen Ecclesiae; when the more the
Christians were Massacred, the more they increased: and to work a
Multiplication of Christians, out of the destruction of Christians, is not this
Miraculous?

Another Good, wrought by God through Persecution, is a virtuous and spiritual
Good, not only by way of Purging the Soul, but even by a Spiritual power of
Christian Warfare; Saint Peter speaks of the first, when he compares
Persecution to 1 P^^* 1. 7.
Trial by fire, and the operation thereof to a Purging, as gold is purged. And
thus we may say, that thereby the ^oule of a Christian is purged from the
dross of Hypocrisy, and of carnal Security. But our Discourse is of a
Spiritual Warfare, and such are our enemies, (...)
We fight not against flesh and blood, but against, etc. And such are our
weapons, (...)
The weapons of our warfare are not carnal. And such our fight, 2 (...) 4. 7.
I have fought a good fight, speaking of his manifold Afflictions. And such is
our Victory against all worldly force, even in suffering for the faith of
Christ, as is signified by that saying of S. John, ^ (...). ^. 4.
This is the victory which has overcome the world, even your faith. And indeed
this particular virtue and Spiritual Good is graphically set out by the
Apostle, Ephesians. 6. in the Panoplie and spiritual furniture of a Christian
Soldier: for, without that, the luster of Spiritual Graces could not be
glorious; not the Girdle of verity, which we profess, nor the Breast plate of
righteousness, and sincerity of a good Conscience; nor the Sword of the
Spirit, which is an Animositie in professing the same Truth; nor the Shield of
faith, which without persecution seems outwardly conspicuous sometime in an
Hypocrite; not the Helmet of salvation, which is Hope, by a constant endurance
of death in despite of the world, which is Christian Conquest it self.

Let not the Conspirators say now (as they have done) that They who will not
now take up Corporal Arms, for defense of their Religion, they endanger their
own Souls: and they are but worldly men; they are Gallio's, not caring for
these things; they are like Festus, holding difference of Religion to be but
certain questions, etc. For I shall ask them but two Questions, One, whether
They, who preach Suffering for Religion, rather then to Rebel against
Soveraigntie; or They that cry, Arma virumque, to preserve their bodies, be the
more Spiritual, and Consequently more Religious?

Next, I demand, If that Primitive Christians (who were innumerable) had turned
worldly Soldiers, how should they have become those Soldiers of Christ, in
remembrance of whom the Church glories in her prai^e^, and glorifying of
Christ, chanting and singing, The noble Army of Martyrs praise thee! For, I
hope, they will not dare to put on the Rom^sh face, as to say they of the
Primitive Church Resisted not, because they wanted Force; whereof something is
to be said by and by.

In the Interim, I would be rightly understood in this Discourse; My Theme is
directly against their pretense of hostile weapons for Defense of Religion: For
though (to speak in the General) it be lawful for one Kingdom to defend it
self from the Invasion of another Kingdom, for Religion-sake, where they are
paris juris* yet not here, where the Condition of Subjects to the Higher Powers
is considered. Again, If such a Case (as has been known) be propounded, when
the King or State shall give Forts and Castles to some Subjects, for to defend
and secure their profession of Religion; I may say, these Cautions fight not at
all with my former Conclusion, grounded upon the divine Canon of [ Omnis
Anima.] I cannot sufficiently discharge my Task, except I may be permitted to
deliver three Briefs (that I may so call them.) 1. A Brief Confirmation of the
former Doctrine by Antiquity. 2. A Brief Contestation, in behalf of
Protestants. 3 A Brief Application to the Person, who is now principally
engaged.

1. The ancient Catholic Church, and Mother of all Churches Christian, ought
also to be acknowledged our blessed Nurse, from whom we may suck the most pure
and wholesome milk, which the innumerable multitudes of Martyrs, Confessors,
and Professors did; who, notwithstanding the 300 years persecution for
Religion, never used, or professed any forcible defense.

To this our Romish Adversaries, in behalf of their Parricides, shape us a
brief Answer, to wit, that the Martyrs, who suffered for Christ, did want
force of arms to resist; which their Answer they B^ll^r. l. 5. d^ Po^ti^. ^.
^. and ^. Alan ^^ his moderate defense, and others commonly.
themselves knew to be as false, as they would have it seem to be true:
because they could not be ignorant that diverse Apologies were then made, in the
name of all Christians* unto those persecuting Emperors, to remove from them
all jealousy and suspicion of disloyalty, principally by this Reason, that
they having warlike power enough, yet held it a part of Christian Religion not
to make any forcible resistance. T^rt. Apol. 37.
Tertullian in his Apology begins with an Absit! God forbid (says he) that
the Christian profession should revenge it self by humane force, although there
can be no war made against us but we are fit and sufficient for it, if we would
seek revenge of our Persecutors: nor should we suffer our selves to be slain,
unless that our Christian discipline and profession, were rather to be slain
than to slay. So He. Saint Cyprian expressed the same Christian profession;
(...)
Not to seek revenge against unjust violence, but to leave that to God:
Although (says he) our people be excessive in number, etc. Greg. Nazianz.
expostulateth thus against the persecuting Heathen, (...)
Who is there of you all, whose life any of our people have endangered, albeit
otherwise boiling with heat and anguish. Saint Ambrose, when the Emperor
invaded his Kyrk, and the people were ready to make rescue, so far as that
the Invaders could not have sustained their force; Ambr^^ lib. 5. ^pist. ^^
Auxent.
I restrained them (says Saint Ambrose,) for prayers and tears are my Armor,
and I neither ought nor may make other resistance. In a word, the universal
Christian Resolution was proclaimed in these words; Precamur, Auguste, non
resistimus; which Resolution of not-Resisting our Savior confirmed, when he
allowed his Disciples not so much as any outward Buckler, excepting only (...)
10. ^3.
[Fuga] Flight from one City to another: which is, by consequence, Fly; and
therefore, not Resist and Fight.

And, for the integrity of Subjection and true Loyalty, Arnobius was bold to
prefer Christians before all the heathen Subjects, even in the days of
Persecution, in the name of the Catholic Church of Christ, in the point of
true Loyalty; Vos conscios timetis, Nos conscientiam. A^^ob. con. G^^te^.
That is, in true sense, You Gentiles perform your subjection, only for fear
your disloyalty should be known of others, but we Christians fear lest our
Conscience should accuse us before God.

We may seal up this truth with the Confession of three learned Romanists.
B^^^laius lib. 3. contra Monarchom. c. 5.
The Christians (says one) did not abstain from violence against their
Persecutors, because they wanted force. Another, Tol^ssanu^ lib. 26. de r^p^b.
cap. 7.
It is not to be read, for two hundred years after Christ, that Christians used
any forcible Resistance against their persecuting Emperors, though they were
equal in strength* Yea, Christians then held, that hereby they did prove their
religion to excel all others in the world, and thought themselves therefore to
be called Christians of Christ, whose doctrine this was, to obey Magistrates. A
third, and Cunerus de offic* p^ine c. 7.
so I have done. Christian Martyrs (says he) when, for multitude, they might
easily have conspired against their cruel Persecutors, yet bore such honor to
Kings and higher Powers, that they chose rather to dye then to resist. And the
Consequence will hold, that if there were an obligation in Christians, to
profess subjection to Heathenish Powers, then are they tied much more to be
subject to Christian Magistrates, seeing that (as the Aco^ta J^s. de Indor.
salut. lib. 2. cap. 7.
Romish Jesuit Acosta confesses) Omnes fatemur, and est per se certum,
etiamsi Barbari ad Christum converta^tur, eos tamen non Iure suo excidere.

The brief of Contestation, in behalf of Protestants, is an Additionall,
which the Importunity of the Conspirators compel me unto, who See his
Majesty's large Declaration; where the Confessions of all the Reformed Churches
are alleged against them: Page 4. and Page 75. where the Profession of the
present Reformed Churches of Gen^^^, (...), and others, is avouched, ^^ (...)
dislike of this Scottish Covenant, as being to them Offensive, and Scandalous,
and of dangerous Consequence to Religion.
think they have the Right hand of fellowship, in this their sinister cause,
with those who are accounted amongst Protestants, Stellae primae magnitudinis
inter suos; Luther, Calvin, Beza. Concerning Calvin, I shall desire any
Covenanter to answer but this one Question, Whether they think it any-way
lawful for any Subjects to make Resistance against such their Tyrannous
Governors? And we may hear Calvin answer, that ^^b. 4. Just. ca. 20 sect. 22.
The Word of God teaches, that howsoever it is that Governors be established,
yet being once constituted, they are to be obeyed, although they do nothing
less then that which appertains to their office? and are to be held in the
same honor and dignity (in respect of public obedience) as if they were of
the Best, So he, and, for example, he instanceth in Nabuchodonosor, whom God
commanded his people to obey, albeit he was a most wicked and cruel Tyrant.
Then applying this to all after times, he admonishes all Subjects, to have
always this Example in their remembrance, to the end, that they may thereby
extrude all seditious fancies out of their minds. And, for a better
impression; This reverend and pious affection (says he) we are continually to
bear to them, whatsoever they themselves be; because (which I do (says he)
again and again repeat) they carry that person upon them by the will of God,
whereon God has imprinted and engraven an inviolable Majesty, So he. As for
Luther, methinks the Conspirators should stand to their own Collection out of
Luther, in his determination of this Question; Whether it were lawful for the
Germans to resist the unjust violence of the Emperor? And his Resolution is,
They may* but mark his Reason; Because his authority is limited by a joint
power of the Princes Electors: Wherein (says Luther) it differs from the
Monarchical Government, such as is that of France and England. And will any
Scottish have Scotland go for less? Beza also teaches it to be The duty of
every man to suffer injury, and to know that there is no other remedy for those
that are subject unto Tyrants, but prayers and tears, and amendment of life.
Adding, that in this Case, A privatis Lominibus non multum absunt inferiores
Magistratus. Beza Confess. fidei.


III. A brief Application.
THe necessity of the matter exacteth of me the Heads, which are to be
mentioned, and the proportion of a Sermon commands me not to exceed. Cankred
jealousy, the Stepdame of Unity and Verity, has so transported these
Conspirators, that they have all this while labored, by Arguments taken from
the Condition of Impious, Irreligious, and Tyrannous Kings, to justify their
Rebelliousnesse against the Mirror of Moral Vertuousnesse, the Lamp of
Religiousnesse, and Miracle of Clemency and Patience: besides, (in Morality)
his Wisdom, Temperance, Charity, Justice, Conjugall fidelity. Each of which
radiant and excellent Virtues, if they were in any one eminently, would greatly
enoble him in the estimation of all good men. Now all these being conspicuous
in this One, what but black malice can cast a Cloud upon such brightness? But
to return to the Points in question.

The principal Oppositions they here make, are an Empeachment of their Liberty
and Religion. Where could ever that Exclamation more justly have place, Prob
hominum fidem! They will grant (I dare say) that his Royal Father, our late
gracious Sovereign King JAMES of blessed memory, did deserve, before any other
Prince, in his time, the title and sweetest of Posies, REX PACIFICUS; of which
the Orator said, Dulce quidem nomen Pacis, res vero ipsa long jucundissima.
But our King, having inherited this his Fathers Virtue, has so improved it by
his Clemency* in publishing a late Proclamation, with such conditions of Peace
and Graciousnesse toward these Conspirators, as may (if Comparison should be
made) put all former ages to silence, and be an astonishment to all Posterity.

2. We have referred the Contemplation of Religion to the last place, to the
end it may be more lasting in the memory of the Hearer, concerning a Prince so
Religious in himself, that if we shall call him The most Religious of Kings,
what King could take exception? And then so favorable toward the Conspirators
themselves, as to yield unto them whatsoever They have called Religion,
excepting only the extruding of Episcopacy; which nothing but Ignorance,
Irreligiousnesse, and Heresy can condemn, as Unlawful. Volumes might be
written in the Justification of it; I will Epitomize all that I might say
hereof in one sentence of S. Hierome (a Father who wrote sparingly of the
dignity thereof) who speaking of the Apostles times, says, that it was then
instituted, Hieron*
Vt capite constituto Schismata tollerentur. That is, That a Bishop being made
an Head in his Diocese, Schisms, which are engendered in Parity, might be
removed for the time past, and prevented for the future. But how now?
Episcopacy by these Conspirators must be taken away, although two most
pernicious Vipers shall take life by this their Resistance, Schism in the
Church, and Sedition in the Commonwealth.

The God and Lord of Hosts, who has in his hands the hearts of Kings and
Subjects, still incline our Sovereign to Love and Graciousnesse; and Those his
Subjects to Remorse and Thankfulness; and crown this his Expedition with an
honorable, dry, and peaceable Victory, for his Son Jesus Christ's sake! To
whom be all glory, praise and thanksgiving, now, and for ever.

Amen.
FINIS.

