THE GRAND IMPOSTVRE OF THE ( now) CHVRCH OF ROME: Manifested in this one
Article of the new Roman Creed, viz:

The Holy, Catholic, and Apostolic Roman Church, Mother and Mistress of all
other Churches, without which there is no Salvation.

Proved to be a New, False, Sacrilegious, Scandalous, Schismatic,
Heretical, and Blasphemous Article (respectively) and every way Damnable.

The Last Chapter contains a Determination of the whole Question, concerning
the Separation of Protestants from the present Church of Rome: whereby may be
discerned whether Side is to be accounted Schismatic, or may more justly
plead SOVLES SALVATION.

By the B. of Couentrie and Lichfield.

LONDON, Printed by George Miller, for ROBERT MYLBOVRNE.

TO THE HIGH And Mighty PRINCE, CHARLES By the Grace of God, King of Great
Britain, France, and Ireland, Defender of the FAITH, etc.
YOur Majesty may be pleased (most gracious Sovereign) to call to mind the
Dedicatory Preface of Saint Luke, by him prefixed before the Gospel of Christ,
and directed to a Lay-Magistrate, in these words; Luke 1.3.
I thought good to write unto thee, most excellent Theophilus. Where, the name
THEOPHILUS, signifying a Lover of God, manifests the interest that every
Devout Christian, as well Laick as Ecclesiastic, has in the Gospel of
Christ, to read, and enjoy the comfort thereof, as the foundation of his Faith,
and divine Charter of his Salvation. And the Attribute of [(...)] Act. 23.26.
and Act. 24.3.
MOST EXCELLENT, being ascribed to Temporal Governors, points out his
Magistracy; to note the Obligation, that binds every Christian Governor to
profess the same Gospel; and, according to his power, to promote and protect
it. As soon therefore as I thought to find a Parallel to this so honorable
an Example, no-one appeared in this age of Christianity either more Worthy,
for religious Devotion, of the name of THEOPILVS; or, for Protecting the
Gospel of Christ, more deserving the Attribute of MOST EXCELLENT, than your
Sacred Majesty.

For I could not conceive where to find a more faithful Professor among (I
say, not only Princes, but) even Persons Christians, than Him, who, in a time
of Iealouzie and greatest extremity, resolved to resign his dearest Choice,
his inheritance of a Regal Scepter, yea and life it self, rather than to
inthrall his precious Soul to Romish Superstition. And as for the protection
of the same Gospel of Faith, to none can this be more proper than to Him, who
(not to question the first beginning thereof) most justly possesses the Royal
Title of DEFENDER OF THE FAITH. Now having said thus much of this Right, I
beseech your Majesty graciously to vouchsafe a brief, yet clear
Representation thereof.

The same ( Gal. 3.23.
THE FAITH) so called by the Apostle, is taken by way of Excellency, to
signify only that Profession of Christianity, which contains all things
Necessary to Salvation; even as he calls it 1 Cor. 9.18. and 23.
The Gospel of Faith. And this Faith, which is called but Ephesians. 4.5.
One, Saint Jude in his Catholic Epistle will have known to be only that,
which was (when he writ) but [(...)] S. Jude ver. 3.
Once delivered unto the Saints. Which one particle (Once) must necessarily
condemn every diverse After- Faith for ever. For Saint Paul, against all other
Gospels, Gal. 1.8, 9.
Besides that, which then had been Preached, is peremptory, pronouncing Every
one, (be he Man, or Angel,) that should suggest or teach it, Anathema and
Accursed. To which Apostolical Censure Ancient Fathers, against the Heretics
of their times, have All subscribed; according to that Comment, made by one of
them upon the same words of the Apostle, thus; Annuntiare quid, etc. Lirinens.
To deliver any thing among Christians, BESIDES that which was once received,
neither was, nor is lawful, nor yet ever will be. This one speculation may be
as good as a thousand, to discern which kind of Professors, at this day, may
most properly be said to profess THE FAITH. The (now) Church of Rome has
composed a new Roman Creed and Faith, Bulla Pij Quarti.
consisting, by exact disquisition, of more than twenty Articles; each one of
which is prescribed to be beeleeued upon Necessity of Salvation. Among which
are mentioned Transubstantiation, Worship of Images, Indulgences, and the like;
notwithstanding they be as newly-old as were the Josh. 9.
Gibeonites pretenses of torne-shooes, and mouldy-bread, by which they feined
themselves to have come from far. For Some of these doctrines were not
Delivered until five or six hundred, and some not till more than a Thousand
years after that Once-prescribed Time of the holy Apostles, as diverse Doctors
of the same Church are ready to confess, from point to point. And although
Some few of Them had obtained an opinion of Probability in the days of
antiquity; yet can it not be showed that any one of them had stamped on it the
opinion of Necessity of Belief, upon loss of Salvation. Which is a Character
as proper to the Gospel of Christ, as was to Caesar's coin the Image of
Caesar. Wherefore, every new Article of Faith (by S. Paul's Anathema) being no
better than a new Heresy, although the Romish Opposites dart against our
Professors (as they did in the Council of Trent) their many Anathema's and
Curses, yet stand we secure, knowing that as the Exodus 7.
Serpent of Aaron devoured the Serpents of the Magitians in Egypt; even so
That one Anathema of S. Paul must needs condemn all the Anathema's which they
denounce in Defense of That, which is not THE FAITH once delivered to the
Saints, in the days of the Apostles.

But because, as the first mooueable Sphere above turns by it is rapture all
the inferior Orbs daily about the world; so one Romish Article, to wit, The
Catholic, ROMAN, Mother, and Mistress Church, without which there is no
Salvation, carries and makes current, by the violence thereof, all other
Romish Articles, albeit otherwise never so New, False, Idolatrous, or
Pernicious: and for that this One is found by Experience to be, in that
Profession, their strongest Enchantment; This this ARTICLE therefore have I
selected to be the Subject of this Treatise. Proouing her Addition of the word
(ROMAN) to the CATHOLIC or Universal CHVRCH, to be (by many confessed
Propositions) the Deprauation of that our Christian Article in the Apostles
Creed, viz. THE CATHOLIC CHVRCH: Her pretense of an Universal Motherhood, to
all Catholic Churches, to be a manifest Derogation to diverse ancient Churches
(among others, the Church of Britain) which are confessed to have been, before
that ever Rome had so much as any face or name of a Church: and her Challenge
of Universal Mistrisship and Dominion thorow-out all Christendom to be, in
effect, a blasphemous Condemnation of most godly General Councels, Churches,
and Bishops of Primitive ages (diverse whereof are by name Registered for Saints
and Martyrs in the Calendar of the, now, Church of Rome it self:) who, as is
Confessed, have consented Some to impose Laws upon the Roman Church, Some to
contemn her Excommunications, and All to have denied absolute Subjection unto
Her, even in the times of her purest Integrity.

And because all Temporal Estates at this day are included in the same Romish
Article of Universal Dominion, therefore both Regal Supremacy over
Ecclesiastiques is in this Treatise defended, by the confessed Examples of the
first and best Christian Emperors; and also the Civil Subjection of the
Clergy unto Them is justified, by the Confessed Obedience performed by the
first and best Popes of the same Times.

After this Survey thus taken of the Churches Christian, in the Primitive ages,
follows a Contemplation of the State of Christendom, as it is at this
present: wherein appears a world of Christian Churches of remote Nations,
reduced to these General appellations, to wit, Grecians, Assyrians,
Aethiopians, Egyptians, Armenians, Russians, with diverse other particular
Churches, for Time as ancient, for Faith as fundamental, for Succession as
Continual, and for the Profession thereof (because daily suffering grievous
pressures and afflictions for the name of Christ) as much, or rather, in that
respect, more constant than the Romanists have been for many ages: All which
(notwithstanding the Roman Article of The Catholic Roman Church, without
which there is no Salvation) stand as opposite to the Church of Rome;
contemning her Excommunications, and abhorring Subjection unto her, as they
ever did. A perfect Argument of the Falsity, Nullity, and Impiety of that
Romish Article, which we now impugn.

In the last place is presented the Separation of all Protestant Churches from
the Church of Rome, proouing from the Testimonies of diverse Romish Writers,
the Beginning thereof to have been Just, and the Continuance Necessary. Nor can
they say, that their Arguments, for defense of that Roman Article (although
most specious) are not answered; which herein are justly retorted upon them. As
to call for the Names of any Protestants before LVTHER; whose names they
themselves could relate in Martyring of them: As to Challenge those to have
broken their Vow, in Departing from that Church (namely, a superstitious Vow)
which they did, to preserve their Christian Vow in Baptism, which requires
sincerity in the Faith^ As to object Schism, upon that Article of Necessary
Subjection to the Roman Sea; by which she her self (dividing her self from
all Christian Churches in the world, and all others from her self) is proved
to be, of all other, the most Schismatic: As to impute unto us the guilt of
Damning all our Forefathers, by reason of that her former Article, whereby are
necessarily Damned most of the Christian Fathers, Confessors, and Martyrs of
Primitive Times; besides the Innumerable professed Christians of Remote Nations
(as has been said) yea and many Thousands more, who, though otherwise Romish,
yet do not believe all her Tridentine faith; (Not to speak of infinite numbers
of PROTESTANTS far, more sincerely Professed in the Christian Faith than
They:) Finally, as to assume a Privilege to her Roman See of not- Erring;
albeit that Church is proved to be, of all Others, most subject to Error: and
her Seat, which is ROME, to be the only City prophesied off by the Spirit of
God, in Scripture, (accordingly as her own Jesuits, from the testimonies of
Antiquity, and the light of Gods word acknowledge themselves bound to believe,
and profess) is to become the Seat of ANTICHRIST.

The Manifestation of all which Points (Most Renoumed Sovereign) I do subject
to your gracious Patronage, not in any spirit of Malignancie, to make the
Schism and breach, which is now between Rome and Us, bigger; which I intend
to persuade against thorrow-out this Treatise, by reueiling and remoouing the
only Bar and Partition Wall, which is her Doctrine of Necessary Belief of the
(now) Tridentine Creed, and Article of Necessary Subjection to the Roman See;
the only Hinderance of a free General Council. An Impiety and
Perniciousnesse, which was the very Cordolium of the most Judicious of Kings,
your Majesty's late Father, and our Sovereign Lord and King JAMES, of ever
blessed and suruiuing Memory* in whose heart God had first imprinted that
Blessed Motto of Christ, BEATI PACIFICI, before it was stamped in his Coin;
being ever desirous to keep Civil Union, Commerce, and Contracts with Them
with whom naythelesse (the Case so standing) Epist. ad Front. Ducaeum.
He held it Impossible to have any Spiritual Reconciliation.

Thus not doubting but that the Father's religious heart dwells in the Sons
breast, I pray GOD so still to protect your Majesty, in the Defense of that THE
FAITH, whereby your Throne may be established upon earth, and your Soul
everlastingly blessed in heaven.

Your Majesty's most Humble Subject, and Chaplain, THO. COVEN. and LICH^.

TO ALL ROMISH PRIESTS, WHETHER Jesuits or Others, of the English Seminaries
where-soeuer; Mercy, Truth, and Peace in CHRIST JESUS.
AS some of weak and queazie stomachs abhor to receive any Wholesome Potion,
because the very name of Physic is loathsome unto them; so might I doubt that
this Salutation, wishing you Mercy, Truth, and Peace in Christ (whereby I do
inuit you to the Reading of this ensewing Treatise) may be rejected by you,
because the Title thereof may seem odious unto you: but that I have Considered,
that I write not unto your Laics, men commonly of weak Apprehension, and
void of the Infusion of so much as necessary knowledge of Christianity; but
unto your selves, called to the Order of Priesthood, and professed Advocates
for defense of the Roman Church, [qua ROMAN.] And now having said but thus
much, I seem to hear Some of you inueighing against me, and saying; This is a
bold Assumption, or rather an impudent and impious Presumption of this
Heretic, so to charge our Roman Church with an Imposture, in this
Arch-Article of her Roman Faith: which Church all the world knows to be (as
the Fathers of the Council of Trent not long since defined) for birth and
breeding the Mother, and for Direction and Dominion the Mistress of all other
Churches Christian. Nevertheless dares this busy Undertaker attempt to
persuade us, that the Church of Rome is Schismatic; and her Article,
concerning the Universality of the same Church, Imposterous: never considering
that ancient and Catholic Theoreme, He has not God for his Father, who has
not the Church for his Mother. How then can this Perswader make good his
Assertion?

I were certainly Witless, if, after I had professed so much, I should not
expect such broad language from Some of you, which I have formerly received:
And as faithless should I be both to God and you, if endeavoring (as I am
Commanded) To have compassion of some, pulling them out of the fire; S. Jude v.
23.
I should not patiently suffer words of disgust and disaffection from you,
which I ought willingly to suffer for you, and your ^pirituall good. Or else,
if because some are fierce (I had almost said furious) in oppugning the Truth,
I should therefore be more remiss to defend it: especially seeing that (which
was the saying of an Ancient and holy Leo.
Pope) Qui alterum ab errore non reuocat, Seipsum errare demonstrat. Neither
yet can I conceive how you can justly decline the Reading of this Tractate, by
reason of a fowerfold Obligation that lies upon you. The first is that divine
Direction, given especially to judicious Professors, 1 Thessalonians. 5.21.
To try all things, and retain that which is good, that is to say, True. For
if Truth were not good, no Goodness could be True. Next is the Bond of your
Profession, who will be thought to be the only Catholics, that is the
Professors of the Catholic Faith, and possessors of that Fold of Christ, which
in the Apostles Creed is called the CATHOLIC CHVRCH; the defense of which
(truly called) Catholic Church, without which there no Salvation, is the
Subject of this whole Treatise. Wherein you may find that your Roman Church
(qua Roman) is excluded from the Prerogative of The Catholic Mother Church,
as by the Judgment of the Catholic Church it self, so also by the same
Catholic Theoreme, which you so Commonly object and glory in, viz. HE HAS
NOT GOD FOR HIS FATHER, WHO HAS NOT THE CHVRCH FOR HIS MOTHER; according to
the plain and evident Sense of that Catholic Cyprian. See Chap. 9. Sect. 6.
of this Treatise.
Father, who was the first Author thereof. A Third Obligation arises from your
own Practice, who are so urgent, vehement, and (in a sort) violent in
defending a Necessary Union with the Roman Church, and in inueighing against
our Separation from it, as against a deadly and damnable Schism. Wherefore it
were in you a perfidious Tergiuersation to hear (as has been partly Epist.
Dedicatory.
pointed at) your Answers refuted, and your Objections retorted upon you; and
not to make Trial whether you have been able to stand unto your Defense and
Defiance, or no.

Lastly, in your asking HOW this Assertion can be made good? your own
Interrogatorie exacteth of you a Diligence, to understand the Answer to the
same HOW? Whereunto (for this Present) I shall Answer but in a Generality, to
wit; that I have endeavored to Insist, 1. Concerning the Antecedents, upon
Grounds immoouable, such as are the Common Rules of Faith, and good Conscience;
2. Upon Consequences undeniable, such as are your own Principles and
Conclusions; 3. For Testification of both the former, upon Witnesses least
partial to usward, such as are (for the most part) your own Writers; and 4.
Concerning the Credit which you may require, in alleging your Authors, upon
such an oculata fides, as whereunto you will take no Exception: and although
some of them may happen to be urged Iudicio errante; yet sure I am, animo
reluctante not One. But What needs more Prefacing? These and the like
Questions, which may appertain to the Article in hand, may be more
particularly satisfied in the Discourse it self: which I shall desire you to
accept with the same Right Hand of Christian Affection, wherewith it is offered
unto you: and that if Any shall address an Answer thereunto, that then he
judge and censure it upon the same Caution and Condition, wherewith it is
written and tendered unto him; even as (for his Sayings, or Gain-Sayings) he
will answer God at the day of Judgment. Fare-you well.

Yours, still a Debtor unto you in Christ Jesus, THO. COVEN. and LICHF.

A SVMMARIE OF THE several CHAPTERS.
CHAP. I.
THe Profession of the Romish Article, viz. The Catholic Roman Church, etc.
imposed by the Roman Popes, confessed by their Councels, Catechismes, and
Jesuits. Sect. 1.2.3.4. etc.
CHAP. II.
OUR FIRST CONSIDERATION is of the General Foundation of our Confutation of
that Roman Article, by proving it to be a sacrilegious Deprauation of the
Common Article of our Christian Creed [THE CATHOLIC CHVRCH.] Sect. 1.2.3. I.
Argument. Because the Word [ROMANE] excludes that part of the Catholic
Church, which is called the Triumphant. Confessed. Sect. 4. II. In respect of
the Essential Parts of the Church Militant, by comprizing in it those that are
but Excrements, and no true Members thereof. Confessed. Sect. 5. III. In
respect as the Church Catholic is Visible; by Excluding the Essential Members
thereof, viz. faithful Catechumenists, and unjustly Excommunicated Persons.
Confessed. Sect. 6. IV. Because the Article of Catholic Roman Church, as
[ROMANE] is void of all Catholic foundation, which is, Divine authority.
Confessed. Sect. 7. V. In respect of the Time Past; because the Catholic
Church was long before there was so much as a Roman Church Confessed. Sect. 8.
VI. In respect of the Time to Come, because the Church Roman, as it is
[ROMANE] may possibly be altered from the Catholic Church. Confessed. Sect. 9.
VII. In respect of any Time Present; because always uncertain of her true
Roman Head. Confessed. Sect. 10. VIII. Because this Roman Article is to all
that Believe it Necessarily a matter of Heresy; and of Perjury to All that
(which all Romish Priests are compelled unto) swear unto it. Sect. 11.

CHAP. III.
A SECOND CONSIDERATION of the Catholic Church is by observing a Second
general Head of Confutation; from the Judgment of several Councels, Churches,
and Fathers, in a Different Respect of Time. Sect. 1. I. In Respect of the Time
Before the foundation of the Church of Rome, that Church is falsely called the
Mother Church of all Others. Sect. 2. 1. Proof, from the rottennes of the
foundation of her Mother-hood; which is the false Pretense of Peter his
Ordaining all other Apostles to be Pastors. Confessed. Sect. 3. 2. Proof, by
Instancing in the Examples of Churches, which were Mother-Churches before Rome,
and some also to Rome. Sect. 4. As Jerusalem. Sect. 5. Caesarea. Sect. 6.
Antioch. Sect. 7. etc. The Greek Church in General. Sect. 8. And the Church
of Britain. Sect. 9.


CHAP. IV.
II. IN Respect of the Time (about) When the Church of Rome was first founded:
because, 1. The Roman Article of the Catholic Roman Church is Contrary to
the faith of Saint Peter, the pretended Founder of that Church. Sect. 1. to
Sect. 8. 2. Contrary to the Faith of Saint Paul the supposed Co-founder of the
same Church with Saint Peter. Sect. 8.9.10. His account of the Roman Church.
Sect. 11.12.13.14. 3. Contrary to the Faith of Saint John, who taught that the
City of Rome was to be the Seat of Antichrist, before the second Coming of
Christ. Sect. 15. And because he could not be accounted Subject to the Pope..
16.

CHAP V.
III. IN Respect of the Time, When the Church of Rome was first founded, the
same Article is found Contrary to the faith of the Church of Christ. Sect. 1.
An Argument from the Tyrannous Domineering of the Church of Rome, by Two
Instances. Sect. 2.3.
CHAP. VI.
IIII. IN Respest of the Time After the foundation of the Roman Church. Sect.
1. First in the Primitive age, Proving that the now Roman Article, viz. The
Catholic Roman Church, etc. is Contrary to the Judgment of Antiquity. Sect.
2. I. Argument, from the Contrary ancient Sense of the Word [Catholike Church]
Sect. 3. By the judgment of Saint Augustine. Sect. 4. of Saint Hierome. Sect.
5. of S. Gregory. Sect. 6
CHAP. VII.
II. ARgument is taken from the Comparisons between the other Churches and
Bishops with the Church of Rome and her Bishops; by the judgment of Irenaeus,
Tertullian, Athanasius, Vinc. Lyrinensis. Sect. 1. The same Comparisons proved
by ancient Councels and Churches. Sect. 2.
CHAP. VIII.
III. ARgument is taken from the Judgment of the Catholic Church it self, in
her General Councels. Sect. 1. Proouing that the (now) Roman Article falsely
damneth the Fathers of the Council of Nice, Sect. 2. The Fathers of the first
Council of Constantinople. Sect. 3. The Fathers of the Council of Ephesus.
Sect. 4. The Fathers of the Council of Chalcedon. Sect. 5. The Fathers of the
second Council of Constantinople. Sect. 6. The Fathers of the Sixth and
Seventh General Councels, which condemned Pope Honorius for an Heretic.
Sect. 7. The Fathers of the Eighth General Council. Sect. 8.
CHAP. IX.
IV. ARgument is taken from the judgment of Particular ancient and godly
Churches, which were opposite to the pretended Jurisdiction of Rome (and
concerning her Excommunication) by diverse Instances,. 1. 1. Instance, Proouing
that she, by her (now) Roman Article, falsely damneth the Churches of Asia,
and their Catholic Bishops, in the days of Pope Victor. Sect. 2. 2. Falsely
damneth the Catholic Churches of Afric, Numidia, and Mauritania, in the
days of Saint Cyprian. Sect. 3. Yea and Saint Cyprian himself. Sect. 4.5.6.7.
3. Falsely damneth the Churches of Afric, in the days of S. Augustine; yea
and Saint Augustine himself. Sect. 8.9.10.11.12. 4. Falsely damneth the
Catholic Church of Britain with the Scottish, Irish, etc. in the days of S.
Gregory. Sect. 15.16.

CHAP. X.
V. A Argument is, because by this (now) Roman Article are falsely Damned the
most Catholic Emperors, who anciently opposed the (now) pretended Papal
Dominion. Confessed. Sect. 1. Instances in the Confessed Oppositions of
Constantine the Great, Theodosius the elder, Theodosius the younger, and
Justinian. Sect. 2.3. etc. The due estimation of these Emperors. Sect. 4.

CHAP. XI.
VI. ARgument, because the same Roman Article falsely damneth the First and
Best, and indeed most Catholic Popes of Rome, who acknowledged Subjection to
the Emperors of their Times, as well Ethnikes as Christian. Sect. 1.2.3.4.5.
CHAP. XII.
VII. ARgument, because the same Roman Article falsely Damneth the most worthy
Servants of God, whose names are Registered for Martyrs and Saints in the (now)
Calendar of the Church of Rome, or in the Roman Martyrologe, viz. S.
Polycarpus. Sect. 1. S. Cyprian. Sect. 2. S. Athanasius. Sect. 3. S. Basil.
Sect. 4. S. Hilary of Poictou. Sect. 5. Saint Hierome. Sect. 6. S. Ambrose.
Sect. 7. S. August.. 8. S. Hilary of Arles.. 9.
CHAP. XIII.
VIII. ARgument, because of the Vanity of the Roman Defense, in the behalf of
their Roman Article of Catholic Jurisdiction; Discovered by Parallels. 1. The
Romish Pretense from Titles, anciently attributed to the Roman Chair by
Councels; Confuted by Equiualences. Sect. 1. 2. From the Titles attributed by
ancient Fathers; Confuted first by Equiualences. Sect. 2.3. Next by their own
Contradictions. Sect. 4. Thirdly by the Blasphemousnesse of sundry Titles
attributed to the Pope. Sect. 5. 3. The Romish Pretense of Supreme
Jurisdiction, from the Sentences of ancient Greek Fathers. Sect. 6. Among
Others are the memorable Examples of Theophilus, and S. Cyril Patriarks of
Alexandria, Atticus and Acatius Patriarchs of Constantinople, All neglecting
the Popes Excommunieation. Sect. 7. The same from the Latin Fathers, Confuted.
Sect. 8.9. A General Confutation of the former Falsehood. Sect. 10. 4. The same
Romish Pretense of supreme Jurisdiction from the Authority of ancient Popes.
Confuted Sect. 11.12.13. As also from their Acts. Sect. 14. The same Pretense,
first taken from the Council of Sardis, for Right of Appeals to Rome.
Confuted. Sect. 15. The same opposed by Examples of Antiquity: And secondly
confuted by an Argument taken from the Council of Chalcedon. Sect. 16. Thirdly
from S. Cyprian. Sect. 17. Fourthly from Pope Damasus. Sect. 18. Fifthly from
the Council of Mileuis Sect. 19. Sixthly, from S. Augustine. Sect. 20.

CHAP. XIV.
THE THIRD CONSIDERATION of the Church Catholic is in respect of the latter
ages of the world, Confuting the (now) Roman Article of the Catholic Church,
by Instances of three kinds. First of Remote Nations. 1. Because it falsely
damneth the Greek Church from age to age. Sect. 1. Notwithstanding that it
continued still a true Christian Church. Sect. 2.3.4. And be (now) in extent
wonderful spacious; and for multitudes innumerable. Sect. 5 The extremity of
the Romish Article. Sect. 6. A Particular Instance in Ignatius Patriarch of
Constantinople, neglecting the Popes Excommunication. Sect. 7. 2. Because it
falsely damneth the Churches of the Assyrians. Sect. 8. 3. Because it falsely
damneth the Churches of other remote Nations, Egyptians, Aethiopians,
Armenians, etc. Sect. 9.
Secondly in Churches more near. Because it as falsely damneth all Protestant
Churches, although more Orthodox than Rome it self, and for number infinite.
Sect. 10. Third Instance in the Church of Rome it self. Because it condemns
the Church of Rome it self, in the latter ages thereof; proouing either Pope
or Church of Rome Schismatic in themselves. Sect. 11.12. Proved by manifold
and inevitable Necessities, as having sometimes been a Church Head-les. Sect.
13. Sometimes with a false Head. Sect. 14. Sometimes with many Heads. Sect. 15.
Sometimes Counter-Headed. Sect. 16. Sometimes doubtfully Headed. Sect. 17, 18,
19, 20.

CHAP. XV.
THe Determination of the whole Question, concerning the Separation of
Protestants from the Roman Church, to discern whether Side is to be accounted
Schismatic, or may more justly plead Souls Salvation; Discussed by
certain Theses, and consisting of four Parts. Sect. 1. The first Part
consisting of VII. Theses. I. Thesis. An absolute decay of the whole Catholic
Church was never defended by any Protestant. Sect. 2. II. Thesis. The Church
Symbolical, properly called Catholic, cannot err in Faith. Sect. 3. III.
Thesis. How the Church Representative (improperly called Catholic) may be said
to be subject to error. Sect. 4. IV. Protestants hold not any greater
Inuisibility, or rather Obscurity of the Church Catholic, than that which the
Romanists themselves a^e forced to confess. Sect. 5. V. Thesis. All Particular
Churches are not to be forsaken for every unsoundness, either in manners,
worship, or doctrine. Sect. 6. VI. Thesis. Some unsound Churches are
necessarily to be avoided, and just Causes why. Sect. 7. VII. No unjust
Excommunication out of a true Church can prejudice the Salvation of the
Excommunicate. Sect. 8.
The second Part is concerning Departure from the Church of Rome, comparing the
Church of Rome with other Churches. I. Thesis. The Cburch of Rome is as subject
to error as any other Church. Sect. 9. II. Thesis. The Church of Rome is more
subject to Error then any other Church Christian. Sect. 10. III. Thesis. There
is not in all Scripture any Prophecy of the fall of any Christian Church, but
only of the Church of Rome; from which it may sometime be necessary to depart.
Sect. 11. IV. Thesis. The Church of Rome has long been and still is the most
Schismatic Church of all other Christian Churches, that carry in them a
Visible face of a Church.. 12.
The third Part of this Determination, concerns the Departure of Protestants
from the Church of Rome, occasioned by M. Luther. I. Thesis. Luther was
unjustly Excommunicated out of the Roman Church. Sect. 15. II. Thesis. Luther
had necessary Cause to depart from the Church of Rome. Sect. 15. III. Thesis.
Luther and his Followers are far more safe for their Souls state, in that
Separation from the Church of Rome; and less Schismatikes than They, whom they
forsook. Sect. 16. IV. Thesis. The Romish Objections, urged against the
Separation of Luther, are notably frivolous. Sect. 17. V. Thesis. Their first
Oiection, in respect of Luthers former Vow to the Pope or Church of Rome, is
vain and idle. Sect. 18. VI. Thesis. The second and most Popular Objection
against Luther (in his Opposition to the Roman Church) urging him to prove
his Doctrine by immediate Succession, and by naming his Teachers before him; is
as fond as the other. Sect. 19. VII. Thesis. The Objection, That all Changes of
Doctrines have been notorious in the Persons, and Places of their Beginnings,
is false. Sect. 20. VIII. Thesis. The last Objection, Of Continual and
personal Succession in all ages, is frustrate. Sect. 21.
The fourth and last Part of this Determination concerns the state of the
Churches of Protestants, after the days of Luther; and their more just Cause
of continuing this Separation from the Church of Rome. Sect. 22. I. Thesis.
Protestants are Generally Excommunicated by the Church of Rome. Sect. 23. II.
Thesis. Protestants are unjustly Excommunicated. Sect. 24. III. Thesis. In the
Continuance of this Separation Papists are rather Schismatikes than
Protestants; and consequently in the Heresy of the Donatists. Sect. 25. IV.
Thesis. In the Continuance of this Separation, the Union of the Protestants
with the Catholic Church is both more true, and more Universal tha^ is the
Union of the Romanists.. 26 V. Thesis. The Protestants granting it possible for
some to be saved within the Church of Rome; and the Papists denying that any
can be saved, in the Churches of the Protestants; is but a Sophistical proof,
that there is more safety in the Roman Church. Sect. 27 VI. Your common
Objection (what is then become of the souls of our Forefathers?) more
justifies the Protestants Separation from Papists, than it can the Separation
of Papists from Protestants. Sect. 28. VII. The Protestants, at this day, stand
more Justifiable in their Separation from Rome, than did either the ancient
Primitive Churches in her Excommunicating of Them, or yet Luther and his
Followers in their Departure from Her. Sect. 29.

THE GRAND IMPOSTVRE Of the ( now) Church of Rome, Manifested in this ARTICLE
of the (new) Roman Creed, Viz. The Catholic Roman Church, etc. Without which
there is no SALVATION.
THat this is the fundamental ARTICLE of your Roman Church (as it is called
Roman) We cannot be better informed than by the Bishops of Rome, Heads of the
same Church: than by the Body thereof, which is the Church of Rome it self,
in her Council of Trent: together with the Confirmation of the same by Pope
Pius the IV: than by your public Catechism, ratified by the like authority:
Lastly, than by her principal Doctors and Divines, in their most approved and
priuileged Books, written upon this Argument of THE CATHOLIC CHVRCH. All which
you may read in their own express words.

CHAP. I. The express Profession of the (now) Church of Rome, concerning this
her Article, vz. The Catholic Roman Church, etc. without Subjection whereunto
there is no Salvation, is absolutely and peremptorily proclaimed by the
Authority of the Popes.
SECT. 1.
IT will be a good Decorum, that in this case we begin to consult with the Heads
of your Church, the Popes of Rome themselves. Gregory the VII. in the year
1073 decreed thus: Romana Ecclesia a solo Deo fundata, etc. Lib. 2. Epist. 55.
Apud Binium Tom. 3. Conc. page 1196.
The Church of Rome (says he) was founded only by God, and the Pope thereof is
rightly styled, The universal Bishop: insomuch, that whosoever consents not
with the Church of Rome cannot be a Catholic. After him in the year 1192.
Pope Innocent the 3. distinguishing of the Word Catholic or Universal,
decreed as follows; Dicitur vniuersalis Ecclesia, quae de vniuersis constat
Ecclesijs, quae Graeco vocabulo Catholica nominatur, and secu^dum hanc
acceptionem vocabuli, Ecclesia Romana non est vniuersalis Ecclesia, sed pars
uniuersalis Ecclesiae prima sc. and praecipua, velut caput in corpore, quoniam
in ea plenitudo potestatis existit. -- Et dicitur vniuersalis Ecclesia illa
vna, quae sub se co^tin^t Ecclesias vniuersas, and secundum hanc nominis
rationem Romana tantum Ecclesia vniuersalis nuncupatur, quoniam ipsa sola
singularis priuilegio dignitatis caeteris est praelata: sicut and Deus
v^iuersalis Dominus appellatur, -- quoniam vniuersa sub eius domino
continentur. Jnnocent. Papa 3. apud Bzo^ium Annal. 1199
If the Church (says he) be called Catholic, as a company consisting of al
Christian Churches, so the Church of Rome is not to be termed The Catholic
Church, but a part thereof: but take the word, Catholic, a^ God is called
universal Lord, because al things are under his dominion so we say that the
Church of Rome only has al other Churches universally subject unto it. So he.
More than an hundred years after him, Boniface the 8. would needs be heard,
not speak, but roar and thunder, by peremptory decree, in this tenor, viz.
Subesse Romano Pontifici omni humanae creaturae dec^aramus, dicimus, definimus,
and pronunciamus omnino esse de necessitate salutis. -- Datum Lateran. Anno
Pontifica^us nostri octauo. Extrau. Cap. vnam Sanctam. de mayor. and ^bed. col.
212.
We declare, define, and pronounce, that it is Necessary for every one that is
to be saved to be subject to the Pope of Rome. Thus much for the testimonies of
the Popes.

The judgment of the late Roman Church. SECT. 2.
SInce those times, the Church of Rome her self, in her Council of Trent, and
by the Bull of Pope Pius the IV. set forth for the Confirmation of the same
Council, in the year 1556. did impose upon her Professors a new CREED,
consisting of more than twenty If they were exactly examined, they would
amount unto many Scores.
Articles of the now Roman Faith; which she has prescribed unto you, and all
other Ecclesiastical persons, of what denomination or Title soever, to be
professed under the tenor and form of an Oath; to wit. Ego N. firma fide credo
and affirmo -- Sanctam Catholicam and Apostolicam Romanam Ecclesiam, omnium
Ecclesiarum matrem and magistram; -- Romanoque Pontifici B. Petri successori ac
Jesus Christi Vicario veram obedientiam spondeo ac iuro. -- Hanc veram and
Catholicam fidem teneo, extra quam nemo saluus esse potest.

Bulla Pij Quarti pro formae iurame^ti professionis fidei. Dat. Romae, Anno.
1564.


I N. do firmly believe, swear, and profess, that the Catholic and
Apostolic Roman Church is the Mother and Mistress of all Churches: and I
do vow, promise, and swear true obedience to the Pope of Rome the Vicar of
Christ, Successor of S. Peter, etc. And this I hold to be the true Catholic
Faith, which whosoever believes not, cannot be saved. So your new Creed.

The now Roman Catechism. SECT. 3.
Upon this ground was founded that, which you call the Roman Catechism, and
published by the authority of the same Pope Pius, and his Council of Trent,
whereby yours, as well as other Catechumenists, are instructed to believe, that
Ecclesia Cathoca, etc. Catechis. Romans in hunc Artic. number. 10.11. and 13.
The Catholic Church is One, both because of one Faith, and also for that it
is subject to one invisible Governor, which is Christ, and to one visible
Head, the Pope. So your Catechism.

The judgment of Roman Doctors, of singular Note. SECT. 4.
IN the last place we are to consult with your public Readers in Schools,
where, by the testimonies of Three, you may judge of the faith of the rest;
especially these being as fully accomplished with all furniture of learning as
any other. The first thus. Ecclesia Romana, non vt est particularis dioecesis
seu Episcopatus, sed vt comprehe^dit omnes credentes in Christum, sub
obedientia Episcopi Romani, haec est Ecclesia Catholica.

Suarez. Ies. trip. virt. Theol. disp. 5. Sect. 6. number. 2. and lib. 1. con.
Ang. sectae errores, c. 12. number. 9.


The Church of Rome is the universal Catholic Church, not as it is a
particular Bishopprick, but as it comprehends all Believers under the
subjection of the Bishop of Rome. And again; Catholica fide tenendum est, hanc
certa^ ac indiuiduam congregationem, quae Romana^ fidem profitetur, and cum
Romans Pontifice coniuncta est, esse veram Christi Ecclesiam Catholicam.
Probatur, primo ex Symbolo Apostolorum constat teneri nos ad credendum veram
Christi Ecclesiam Catholicam; quod autem satis non sit eam confuse and universe
crede^e, sed oportet determinate and in indiuiduo, etc. Idem. ibid. disp. 9.
Sect. 9. number. 13.
We must (says he) hold it as a point of our Catholic Faith, that this
individual Congregation, which professes the Roman Faith, and is united to
the Pope of Rome, is the true Catholic Church; which I prove first by the
Apostles Creed, etc. The Second thus; Ecclesia^ veram asse^imus esse coetum
eorum hominum, qui Romans Pontifici pro tempore existenti parent. Greg. de
Valent. Analys. l. 6. cap. 1. Dico solam Romanam Ecclesiam esse Catholicam and
Apostolicam. Ibidem. and deinceps, lib. 6. cap. 10. and 12.
We define (says he) the Church to be a Company of men obedient to the Bishop
of Rome, for the time being: and we affirm the Church of Rome to be alone the
Catholic and Apostolic Church. The Third and last, thus, Nullus cum Ecclesia
communicate, qui non subest Pontfici, licet alioqui fidem Catholicam
profiteatur. Bellar. de Eccles. milit. l. 3. c. 5. Vnio enim cum Capite est
nota Ecclesiae. Id. de notis Eccl. lib. 4. cap. 10.
None does communicate (says he) with the Catholic Church, except he subject
himself unto the Pope; yea, although otherwise he profess the Catholic
Faith: For union with the Head is a note of the Church. So stands the now
Article of your Roman Faith.

Four remarkable Points, more distinctly to be observed in your former Roman
Profession, concerning the Article of The Catholic Roman Church. SECT. 5.
FIrst, observe that the word [ROMANE] is not added only for distinction-sake,
to discern it from other Churches, which, in respect of the Catholic doctrine
of Faith professed in them, have equally had that Addition, as to be called
the Catholic Corinthian, or the Catholic Ephesian, the Catholic
Thessalonian, or (as we now) the Catholic English Church; because so it could
be no more Catholic, than other particular Churches, as your Quanquam etiam
particulares Ecclesiae soleant Catholicae vocari, vt constat ex modo loquendi
Augustini, Paciani, Cyrilli, and ex communi vsu; sicut and quilibet fidelis
vocatur Catholicus, vel ex professione fidei, vel quia est pars Catholicae
Ecclesiae. Ergo multo magis quaeuis particularis Ecclesia; sic etiam Romana.
Paulo supra. At vt accipitur pro vniuersa^i Ecclesia, quae Pontifici Romano,
tanquam universally Christi Vicario obedit, iure ac merito Catholicae nomen sibi
vendicat. Suarez. Iesuita Defensi. fidei aduersus Anglican. errores. lib. 1.
cap. 1^. number. 19.
Jesuit confesses; and consequently there could be no matter of controversy.
But now the word [ROMANE] is added to the Article of the Catholic Church by
way of Transcendencie, and (as the same Jesuit resolves) supreamly
comprehending all other Churches professing the Catholic faith, under the
obedience of the Pope of Rome, as the universal Vicar of Christ. So that this
Article is become not only one point of Controversy, but indeed the chief
Head of all the Controversies, which are between the said Roman Church and all
other Churches at this day.

Secondly, you conceive this Appropriation to be Diuini Iuris in a strict
sense, ordained by Christ himself, and not only by Ecclesiastical
Institution. Thirdly, upon this pretended Ordinance, you exact from all other
Churches Christian a Necessity of Union with your Church of Rome and the
Bishop thereof, both in Faith and Subjection. Fourthly, this Necessity of
Subjection you believe to be Absolute, as to exclude from hope of Salvation not
only all them that shall refuse to be subject to the Roman Primacie, but even
all them also that See above, Sect. 2. letter. d.
do not believe every soul of man to be utterly Damned, that is not subject
thereunto.

The GENERAL CHALLENGE, against this your former Roman Profession; and the
Sum of our contrary Defense. SECT. 6.
IF therefore we may give credit unto your now Roman Church, to your later
Roman Bishops, to your Roman Councels, and Creed, to your selves and other
sworn Professors of the same Roman faith; then must we believe all the
several points, and (as it were) the Particles of this one Article, viz. The
Catholic Roman Church, without subjection whereunto there is no salvation.
Which notwithstanding we hold and believe to be (respectively) False,
Unconscionable, Scandalous, Schismatic, Heretical, Blasphemous, and every
way Damnable. And this we co^fidently hope (God assisting us) to prove from
such your own Grounds, and from so manifest Demonstrations, as that you shall
fully perceive us to plead not so much our own Cause, as the Cause of the holy
Apostles; of the renowned Martyrs, and Confessors of Christ; of the most
Orthodoxe Christian Professors of the holy Faith, even in the Primitive Times;
of other innumerable Churches of Christendo^e, still partakers of the Common
Salvation; yea and of the Catholic and Universal Church of Christ it self.
Our proofs, for the maintaining of this Challenge, may be reduced unto two
heads. The first is the Consideration of the common Article of our Christian
faith, to wit, The holy Catholic Church: The second from the state of the
Visible Church of Christ it self, as well Primitive as Successiue.

CHAP. II. The first General Foundation of our CHALLENGE is taken from the
Article in the Apostles Creed, viz. The Catholic Church.
SECT. 1.
WE lay the first ground of our Challenge upon the Apostles Creed and Symbol,
so called (you know) as being Apostoli Christianae fidei formulam componendam
censuerunt quam Symbolum appellarunt. Catechis. Trid part. 1. ca. 1. de Symbolo.
A form of Faith composed by the Apostles: Nam esse hoc Symbolum ab Apostolis
compositum affirmant communiter antiqui Ecclesiae Patres, nempe Clemens 1.
Epist. 1. Irenaeus l. 1. c. 2. Tert. in praescript. Ambros. epist. 81. ad
Syriciu^. Ruffin. in exp. Symb. Hier. Epist. ad Pammach. de erroribus Iohannis
Hieros. Chrysostom. hom. 1 and 2. in Symb. Aug. Sermon. 125. and 180. de Temp. Leo
Sermon. 11. de passione Domini. Et Epist. 13. ad Pulcheriam. Greg. de Valent.
Comm. theol. in 2. 2. D. Thom. Tom. 3. disp. 1. qu. 1 de obiecto fidei. puncto.
5.
accordingly as the ancient Fathers have commonly taught. Which the Scholars
of Christ ought to get by heart, as a watchword in our Christian discipline,
whereby the faithful Professors, as by a perfect Shibboleth, may be
distinguished from the Jewish and Heretical. Which Christian Symbol although
it be called the Apostles Creed, yet it is so termed, not because they were
Deuisers, but only Collectors thereof, by reducing the fundamental Articles
into one Brief: even as a posie is called his, that gathered and trimmed it;
not that he created the flowers, but because he composed the bundle: and like
as the writers of the Gospel were not Inuentors and Dictators, but only
Penmen of the holy Ghost, and Scribes of Christ (as the Fathers use to speak.)
Which the Evangelists themselves do sufficiently teach, by inscribing their
work, Mark. 1.1.
The Gospel of Jesus Christ. And accordingly all the Apostles, in receiving
the doctrine of salvation, are called Matthew. 28.16. and 20.
Disciples, not Doctors, or Masters, in respect of Christ. So then, we have in
this posie a brief Collection of those flowers of saving truth, which spring
in the Paradise of God, the Gospel of Jesus Christ.

That the Church has no power to ordain any new Article of faith. SECT. 2.
HE only can make an Article of faith, as necessarily belonging unto the
salvation of souls, who can create a soul; and after make a Gospel or
Testament, to save this soul; and then give unto that soul the gift of faith,
to believe this Gospel; and next institute a Sacrament, for confirmation of
that faith; and in the end bestow salvation upon the same faithful believer.
This we should prove from Scriptures, and from the constant judgment of the
Fathers, if it were not a doctrine acknowledged in your own Thomas Waldensis
lib. 2. doctrinae fidei. cap. 22 recte probat Ecclesiam non posse nouum
Articulum proponere. Atque etiam Canus lib. 2. de locis cap. 7. and lib. 4.
cap. 4. Et Alfonsus a Castro in summa sua l. 1. c. 8. and alij recte negant
expectandam iam esse nouam religionem veritatis incognitae Apostolis, etc.
Greg. de Valen. quo sup. punct. 6.
Schools, and professed by all Christians. I proceed to that which follows.

That the false Additions to the Creed are new Articles. SECT. 3.
THere are two kinds of additions unto the Apostolical Creed, the one is of
Explication, the other is of Deprauation. The addition only of Explication is
justifiable, as appears by the addition of the words [(...),]
Consubstantiall, [filioque] which have been set down in Declaratiue Creeds,
composed by ancient Councels, for the clearer understanding of the great
mystery of the Trinity. In which case those additions may be truly called (as
Lirinensis says of the like) Non noua, sed noue dicta. But the Addition of
Deprauation of the sense of the Creed, in any essential and fundamental part
thereof, which is to be believed as necessary to salvation, must needs be a new
Article; and every such new Article, in true construction, a new Heresy.

Now what one Professor is there in the Roman Church, who whenever he
repeateth that one Article of our Christian Creed, The Catholic Church, does
not understand thereby the Roman only? And again, what one is there among
you, that hearing mention made of the Roman Catholic Church, does not take
the addition of the word, ROMAN, to be a Declaration and exposition of the
said Article, viz. The Catholic Church? As if Roman Church, and Catholic
Church were univocal and conuertible terms, equally betokening one and the
same Universal Church.

That the Addition of the word, ROMAN, unto the Article of the Catholic
Church, is no true Exposition and Declaration, but a notorious Alteration and
deprauation thereof; proved by diverse Arguments.
The first Argument, in respect of the Church Triumphant. SECT. 4.
CHurch Catholic, or Universal, as it is prescribed in the Apostles Creed, is
a comprehension of all the members of the mystical body of Christ, which is
his Church. Now in your Roman Catechism, authorized both by the Decree of
your Council of Trent, and the Bull of Pius then Pope, there are acknowledged
Ecclesiae duae potissimum sunt parts, quarum altera triumphans, altera
militans vocatur, etc. Catechis. Romans part. 1. cap. 10
Two parts of the Catholic Church, the one called Triumphant in heaven, the
other Militant here on earth. Accordingly S. Augustine; Ecclesia, quae tota hic
accipienda est, non solum ex part, quae peregrinatur in terris, -- sed etiam
ex illa, quae in coelis, etc. Aug. Enchirid. ad Laurent. cap. 56.
The whole Church of Christ (says he) is here understood to be not only that
part which is in pilgrimage here upon earth; but that part also which is in
heaven. Which sense of this Article is grounded upon divine foundation, where
it is written, Ephesians. 5.27.
Christ loved his Church, that he might present it to himself a glorious
Church without spot or wrinckle. Where, by the word, CHVRCH, to understand
only the Church militant, was the heresy of the Pelagians, who perverting the
meaning of this text, concluded that the Church of Christ, here upon earth,
does consist of them that are Perfect in this state of mortality: that is, of
such, who in this mortal life are not tainted with sin. To whom S. Augustine
(as you know) replied, Quasi non sit Christi Eccl. sia, quae in toto orb
terrarum clamat ad Deum [Dimitte nobis debita nostra.] Verba Augustini in
libello de Haeres. test Stapletono de vera Eccles. Contr. 1. lib. 1. c. ^.
As though (says he) the Church of Christ throughout the world does not pray
and cry, [Forgiue us our sins.]

Therefore must this Text be understood of the Triumphant part of the Church,
whether alone, as Saint Augustine (you know) and Saint Hierom Locus hic
Apostoli intelligitur de Ecclesia triumphante (test Hieronymo and Augustino)
Sal. in Epist. ad Romans Part. 2. disp. 1. Et vere, nam in Eccesia militante
nullum membrum est, quod non inficiatur macula venialis peccati. Idem in Ephesians.
5. locum citatum. p. 257. col. 1.
have expounded it: or jointly with the Militant, according to the
interpretation of the profoundest Doctors in your Roman schools, saying, that
Ecclesia immaculata, hic per gratiam, in futuro per gloriam. Aquinas in Ephesians.
5.
The Catholic Church is indeed without spot or wrinkle within the Militant
part thereof, by grace; and in the part Triumphant by glory. So undoubted a
truth it is, that the Article of Catholic Church, as it is prescribed in the
Apostles Creed, does comprize as well the Triumphant, as the Militant part
thereof.

CHALLENGE.
THat then which comprehends not as well the Triumphant as the Militant part
of the Church, cannot be a Declaration of the Catholic Church, as it is
contained in the Apostles Creed; because no one part can express the whole.
But in the Romish Article, (viz. The Catholic Roman Church, without
subjection whereunto there is no salvation) the word, ROMAN, utterly excludes
the part Triumphant. Therefore it cannot possibly be a Declaration or
exposition of the word, Catholic, as it is understood in the Apostles Creed:
except some of you shall be so blasphemous, as to subject Saints, which are the
members Triumphant, and Conquerors now in bliss, to the members Militant and
mortal here below; Saint Peter to your Pope; and heaven unto earth.

Wherefore every Christian man, who does as seriously study the Celestial
sphere of the Saints in heaven, as others do the Terrestrial globe of this
corruptible earth, must call (in this your Article [ The Catholic Roman
Church) the word, ROMAN, a false deprauation of the Article of our
Apostolical Creed. From the Triumphant part of the Catholic Church, we
descend to the Militant.

The second Argument, to prove that the Addition of the word, ROMAN, cannot
be any Declaration, but rather a Deprauation of the Article in our Creed; in
respect of the Church Militant. SECT. 5.
A Double consideration is to be had of the Catholic Church Militant, one in
respect of her essential estate, as she is said to have being: the other in
respect of her accidental estate, as she is said to be outwardly Visible, be
it in more or less degree of Visibilitie. In the first respect, when
Protestants say that the Catholic Church does essentially consist only of
persons regenerate in this life, and predestinate to life everlasting; They do
not (as they are by Some slandered to do) make two Churches, but one Church in
a different habitude, relation, and consideration. For as Christ when he was on
earth, although he commonly appeared evidently visible unto men, yet sometimes
he is said, after a sort, to have vanished inuisibly out of men's sights;
notwithstanding, in that his Inuisibilitie was he still the same Christ;
because usual Visibilitie and Inuisibilitie are but outward accidents: so
Christ his mystical body, which is his Church, being considered in her
Essential estate, is Invisible, and the object of Faith, and not of Sense.

According to which Consideration, we affirm this Article in the Apostles
Creed, I believe the Catholic Church, to be more peculiarly understood. And
this we prove first by the nature of Faith it self, which (as the Apostle
has defined it) H^b. 11.1.
Is the demonstration of things not seen. Next, by the whole tenor of the
Apostles Creed, wherein the object of every Article of that Symbol (from
belief in God unto belief of life everlasting) is unto us invisible; and, so
far as it is believed, is without compass of Sense, as may be observed in
the faith of John 20.29.
Thomas the Apostle; to whom albeit Christ said, Thomas, because thou have
seen me, thou have believed, yet the sense of Thomas saw only the Visible
humanity of Christ: but his faith, which was his souls sight, beheld Christ's
Godhead. So that Thomas could no more properly be said to have believed that
which he saw, than to have seen that which he believed,

Lastly, divine Scripture, in positive doctrine, does manifest thus much; as
namely (to omit many others) in that speech of Christ to Saint Peter, Mat.
16.19. Upon this Rock will I build my Church; and the gates of hell shall not
prevail against it. Where the word, CHVRCH (by the judgment of Saint
Augustine, and the accordance of your own Doctors) does signify Congregatio
fidelium, qui charitate praediti sunt. Ca^etan. Card. in eum locum. Ecclesia
secundum spiritum, quae solos Electos complectitur. Ferus in ^um locum.
Ecclesia eorum, qui nulla tentatione separantur, vt B. Paulus ait, Quis nos
s^pabit? etc. Stella in Luc. 6. Soli Boni supra Petram. Aug. Test Salmer. Jes.
in 1. Tim. 3. disp. 12. Tom 15.
Only the number of Predestinate. And good reason, because the godless and
graceless are so far from being the true members of the Church, against
which the gates of hell shall not prevail, that those Infernal gates stand
continually wide open, as being desirous, and justly appointed to devour them.

The same may be said of the Church, as it is called the flock of Christ, John
10. My sheep hear my voice: where, by Sheep, are only meant The sanctified
elect of God, as the testimonies of your own Sine dubio propter
Praedestinatos, qui infallibiliter saluabu^tur, vt ex verbis co^stat, and vt
A^g. and Chrysostom. and omnes exponunt. Suarez Ies. l. 3. de auxilijs gratiae c.
16. nu. 18. Vera haec sententia Tole^ Ies. in eum locum, and Bellarm. l. 3. de
verbo Dei, c. 10.
Jesuits, the judgment of Saint Augustine, and Saint Chrysostom do
confirm. A third Scripture we find, Romans 8.9. where the Apostle says, He
that has not the spirit of Christ, the same is not his. Which shows, that
none is truly a Christian, but as he is regenerated by ^he Spirit of Christ.
And so your Divines, as well Jesuits as others, both ancient and modern have
determined, that Qui spiritum Christi non habet. potest esse flegma, pituita,
sanies, saliua, sanguis abundans, and excrementum corporis Christi; ista enim
viuentis hominis neque membra sunt neque parts, and tamen non sunt extra
corpus humanum, sed ad superfluos humores referuntur, qui suo tempore vbi
maturi fuerint cum stercoribus egeruntur. Coster. Ies. Apol. pro part 3
Enchirid. c. 12. Qui non p. 631. Ioh Turrecremata dicit, Impios, qui sunt in
Eccesia, non esse membra corporis Christi mystici nisi a^quiuoce: idque probat
ex Alex Hal. Hugone, B Thom. item Petrus a Soto Melch. Canus and alij. Test
Bellar. de Eccles. milit l. 3. c. 9. p. 935. Haereticum occultum non esse vere
Christianum (aut vere membrum Christi) Patres communiter docent, Athanas. sermon.
7. con. Arium, Cyprian. l. 4. Epist. 2 Tert. de pudicitia. Aug. de Gratia.
Test Suaer. de trip. virt. theol. disp. 9. Sect. 1. nu. 24.
All that are not sanctified with the holy Spirit of Christ, although outwardly
never so seeming members of the Catholic Church, yet are they no true and
proper, but only equivocal and titularie members of Christ's Church; like as
spittle, phlegm, and other excrementall humors are said to be in the body of a
man, whereof notwithstanding they are no essential parts.

All this agrees with the Doctrine of ancient Fathers, among whom Saint
Ambrose. Omnes qui sunt in Ecclesia Dei, etc. Ambr. l. 1, Epist. 4. ad sinem.
All that are in the Church (says he) fight for Christ; intimating, that the
wicked fight against Christ. Likewise Saint Augustine. Matter. Cathol. etc. Aug.
de Genesis ad literam cap. 2. Tom 3.
The Catholic Church (says he) is so called, because it is in every part
perfect. And again. Praedestinati diuidi ab Ecclesia nullo modo possunt. Idem
Tom. 10 Sermon. de Temp. 181 Et in lib de Ciuit. Dei per totum, praecipue lib.
20. c. 8. Nunquam ab illo Ecclesia seducetur Praedestinatorum and Electa, etc.
Only the Predestinate cannot be divided from this body. Whereunto the
aboue-cited testimonies of Hierome and Chrysostom do consent. And in this
Harmony Clemens Alexandrinus will be known to bear a part, calling the Ex
his manifestu^ esse existimo, vnam esse veram Ecclesiam eam, quae vere est
antiqua, in cuius Catalogum referuntur ij, qui sunt iusti secundum propositum
-- Ecclesiam sola^ esse dicimus, quam etiam antiquam and Catholicam in vnius
fidei -- vnitatem Dei voluntate, per Dominum congregat eos, qui iam sunt
ordinati, quos praedestinauit Deus, cum eos iustos cognouisset ante mundi
constitutionem Clemens Alexandrinus Strom. li. 7. fe. 157. in fine. Item.
Electorum congregationem appello Ecclesiam melius. etc Ib. fol. 147.
Catholic Church a Catalogue of just men, according to the purpose of God; and
a Congregation of the Predestinate. Of which Church of Christ, as his Spouse,
S. Bernard arguing from the Apostle infers, as a thing Ephesians 1. [Qui
praedestinauit nos in adoptionem filiorum per Christum Iesum.] -- Nec dubiom
est, quin voce omnium Electorum ista dicantur, and ipsi Ecclesia sint Bern. in
Cant. Sermon. 78.
without doubt, that the Elect are the Church of Christ. Lastly (lest that we
may seem to neglect the judgment of the Fathers of the Roman Church, and the
Bishops of Rome) Pope Gregory, for his singular wisdom and devotion cal^ed
The Great, observing a proportion betwixt Christ the Head, and his Mystical
Body, called the Catholic Church: Sicut Christus, qui est caput Ecclesiae, de
spiritu sancto conceptus est; sic eius Ecclesia, quae est eius corpus, eodem
spiritu repletur vt viuat. Greg. in Psalm. 5. Poenit. Again; Intra has mensuras
sunt omnes Electi, extra has omnes Reprobi, etiamsi intia fidei limits esse
videantur. Idem lib. 28. Moral. cap. 9. Sanctam Ecclesiam de Sanctis in
aeternum permansuris st^uxit. Idem in Cant.
As Christ (says he) was conceived by the holy Ghost, so is his Church, which
is his body, replenished with the same spirit: and adds, that All the Elect
are within the compass of this Church, and all Reprobates without it. The very
same doctrine, for which John Husse was condemned in the Vnica est Sancta
Ecclesia vniuersalis, quae est Praedestinato^um vniuersitas. Conc. Constant.
Sess. 15. Art. 1. ap. Surium.
Council of Constance. So that Augustine, Chrysostom, Ambrose, Bernard, yea
and Pope Gregory himself may seem to have been condemned and burned with
him.

Thus much be said in Thesi, to prove that the Catholic Church (as it is
considered in the essence thereof) is an invisible Object of Faith, and not a
visible Object of Sense.

CHALLENGE.
AN Addition, which has no other consideration of the Church, than as it is
Visible, cannot be a Declaration of a Church, which is in the essence thereof
considered as Invisible. But the Addition of the word, ROMAN, is used only in
consideration of the Church, as it is Visible, that is, consisting of a number
of persons visibly known and discerned to profess the Christian Faith, and
subject to a Visible Roman Pope, as the visible and essential Head of the
same Church. So as (to use the words of your Cardinal Bellarmine) A multis
solet concedi, malos non esse membra vera, nec simpliciter corporis Ecclesiae,
sed tantum secundum quid and aequiuoce. -- At si ita est, sequitur Pontificem
malum non esse Caput Ecclesiae. Bellarmin. lib. 3. de Ecclesia Militante Cap.
9.. Ad vltimum. and. Atsi.
If wicked and carnal Professors are not to be esteemed properly, but
equiuocally, and only in name, the members of the Catholic Church, then must
it follow (What? Hear, I beseech you, the Consequence of your Cardinal) that
a wicked Pope cannot be the Head of the Church. So he. But that all carnal
Professors of the Catholic Faith are no essential members of the Catholic
Church, mentioned in the Apostles Creed, you have heard it already proved by
plain places of Scriptures; by the express judgment of ancient Fathers; by
your own Confessions; by the nature of Faith, which believes that which it
sees not; yea, and by the tenure of the Apostles Creed, which teaches us to
believe, with a divine Faith, only Them to be infallibly the members of this
Church, who (as it is in the Creed) can Believe, according to the Article, to
obtain Remission of sins in this life, and after death Life everlasting.

Whilst that therefore you do discern the Catholic Church by the eye, so
far only as it is visible, Subject to one visible Head the Pope, who may
happen to be (as All of you will confess) as wicked and monstrous in his life,
as any in the line of Caiphas; as desperate in his death as Judas; and after as
damned in hell, as that Glutton in the Gospel, who cried out, Luke 16.24.
I am tormented in this flame: and seeing that the profession of the Church, as
it is only Visible, and an object of sense, can be no true Declaration or
Exposition of an Article, signifying the Church of Christ, as it is also (and
that more principally) Invisible: it plainly appears from these Premises,
that your word ROMAN, depraueth the Article of the Apostles Creed, by
incorporating the limbs of Satan together with the vital members of Christ,
in that one mystical body, which is his Catholic Church: and consequently,
that you have forfeited your Head of the Roman Church, in every damned Pope,
that has at any time professed that Roman Chair.

The third Argument, to prove that the Addition of the word, ROMAN, cannot be
any Declaration of the Catholic Church, mentioned in the Apostles Creed, is in
respect of the visible parts of the same. SECT. 6.
TWo sorts of persons there are within your Roman Church, which you your
selves deny to be any visible members thereof: one is of them you call
Catechumenists, who (as it falls out in the Conversion of Heathen and Jews)
before they can be baptized, are exercised in learning the principles and
rudiments of Faith. The other are Excommunicates, who by the public censure of
your Church happen to be unjustly Anathematized, and disioyned from all
Communion therewith. Of the Catechumenists, who are instructed in the Catholic
Faith, and bring forth the fruits of Repentance, and yet depart this life
without Baptism, you pronounce, saying, that Quod in Ecclesia non sint, docent
Catechismus Romans Waldens. and probatur. Bellar. l. 3. de Eccles. milit. cap. 6.
initio. Ex Ecclesia excluduntur Catechumeni, quia no^ participant Sacramenta.
Idem ibid. cap. 20.. Ratione. Tamen cum contritione and voto Baptismi
saluantur. Tolet. Ies. Instruct. Sacerd. lib. 2. c. 21. ante fine^, and Bell.
quo supra c. 3.
They are saved, albeit they are not in the Church. In like manner have you
resolved concerning such kind of Excommunicates, who may happen to be unjustly
Excommunicated, saying, that Iudex Ecclesiae in Excommunicatione falli potest,
quia potest iustus conuinci per falsos testes, and sic potest Iudex falli. --
and sic apud Ecclesia^ militantem Excommunicatus, non tamen est Excommunicatus
apud Triumphantem. Abulens. Epis. Defensor. part. 2. cap. 32. p. 46. In foro
exteriori and contentioso multi sunt Excommunicati, quoad Deum, qui non sunt
quoad Ecclesiam: and e contra, multi Excommunicati quoad Ecclesiam, qui. non
sunt quoad deum, quia Ecclesia non iudicat de occultis. Cosmus Philiarch. de
offic. Sacerd. Tom. 1. lib. 3. c. 4 p, 89.
Because the Church cannot judge of things that are secret, it may happen that
some are unjustly Excommunicated, and excluded out of the visible Church, and
nevertheless received of God, and certainly saved. So you.

We cannot but approve of both your Positions, as having Instances in both: for
in the number of Catechumenists is reckoned that Christian Emperor
Valentinian, a zealous Professor and Patron of the Catholic Faith, who died
unexpectedly, before he was baptized: whose Exequies and funerals
notwithstanding Saint Ambrose did solemnize, and in his Sermon did honor the
memory of that renoumed Emperor, as one who had been (as the same Father
speaks) Sed audio vos dolere, quod non accepit Sacrame^ra baptismatis; dicite
mihi, quid aliud in vobis est nisi voluntas, nisi petitio? -- non habet igitur
gratiam, quam desiderauit? -- certe accepit, quia poposcit, qui habuit Spiritum
tuum [Sancte Pater] quomodo non accepit gratiam tuam?

Ambros. de obitu Valent. Tom. 3 p. 9. And before; vita iam fruitur aeterna.


Indewed with the spirit of God in his lifetime, and now after his death
advanced unto joys eternal.

Touching Excommunicates, we read in the Gospel of the Ioh 19.
Blind man healed by Christ, and, by the malice of the Priests against Christ,
Cast out of their Synagogue; whom nevertheless Christ did visit, and take into
his grace, protection, and Salvation. Tell us now, if your Roman Church be
that Catholic Church, without which (as you believe) none can be saved, how
then it comes to pass, that these two sorts of Christians are saved, albeit
they be without the said Roman Church? Your Jesuits do answer, that
Respoudeo, Talem esse Ecclesia animo and desiderio, quod sufficit illi ad
salute^ non tamen esse corpore, sieve externa communicatione, quae proprie facit
hominem esse de Ecclesia visibili, quae est in terris. Bellar. lib. 3. de
Eccles. milit cap. 6.. Resp. autem. and cap. 3.. Denique Sic Toletus de
Instruct. Sacerd. l. 2. c. 21. ante finem, and Greg Valent. in 3. Tom. Disp. 1.
q 1 punct. 5. Tom. 3.
Such Excommunicates, although they are not of the Communion, which makes a
man to be properly of the Visible Church, yet nevertheless they are saved by
their desire to be united with the Church. So they, which is full enough for
your fuller conviction.

CHALLENGE.
IF without the Roman Church some may be actually saved, then the Addition of
the word ROMAN caonot be a Declaration of The Catholic Church, without which
there is no Salvation. But the Roman Church is such, without which (as you
confess) some may be actually saved. Ergo, the Addition of the word, ROMAN,
to the Catholic Church cannot be a Declaration thereof. For although All
agree in this (as your selves confess) that Cum haec res apud omnes sit in
co^fesso, Ecclesiam Catholicam eam esse, extra quam nulla est salus. Greg
Valent. quo iam sup. punct. 7.. 16. Jtem. Est and illud in Ecclesiae Catholicae
prae^ogatiuis vel maximum, quod -- extra ipsa^ nemini patet salus. Quae ratio
est cur B. Petrus Ecclesiam cum Arca Noe rectissime compararit Analys. fidei
lib. ^. cap. 4.
Without the Catholic Church there is no salvation: yet have you confessed two
sorts of Christian Professors, namely Excommunicates, and Catechumenists, to
be actually saved, albeit no Members of your Roman Church.

As for being Saved only by Desire, or V^we of being in your Church, it is but
a wild and extrauagant piece of learning, in the judgment of your own Mihi
non placet, si dicatur ad salute^ satis esse votum and desiderium existendi in
Ecclesia, si alias absolute quispiam manet extra Ecclesiam. Suarez Tract. de
trip. virt. Theol. disp 9. de Eccles. milit. Sect. 1. number. 18.
Jesuit. But we will reason the matter with you. Know you not that the Church
Catholic is compared by Saint Petor to the 1 Pet. 3.20.
Arc of Noah? that as all which were within that Arc were saved, all without
it were drowned (although they Desired never so much to have been admitted into
the Arc:) so it is in the Church Catholic; whosoever are essential members
thereof cannot possibly perish: and contrarily, whoseuer is not a real and
vital member therein Vt qui extra Arcam Noe^, sic qui, extra Ecclesiam
Christi. Cyprian. de Simplicitate Praelat^rum. Cap. 5.
cannot but perish.

The fourth Argument, to prove that the Addition of the word ROMAN, cannot be
a Declaration of the Catholic Church, mentioned in the Apostles Creed; In
respect of the Divine Authority of the Article. SECT. 7.
IT has always been the Profession of the Catholic Church it self, not to
esteem any Doctrine an Article of Faith, which is not constituted, and (to
speak with better Emphasis) Created by Divine authority. This being a Truth
universally consented unto you (if you will make good the Addition of the word,
ROMAN, to the Article of the Catholic Church) are justly challengable, either
to prove that the Roman Church (as it is the Roman Church) was constituted by
divine Authority to be, rather than any other, transcendently THE Catholic
Church; or else to confess your Article of Roman Church, without which there
is no Salvation, to be but new, and consequently a Doctrine rather of fancy
than of Faith. The necessity of this Consequence was well foreseen of those
your Popes, who were the first Authors and Patrons of this Article, and
therefore have published in their writings and decrees, that See above, Chap.
1. Sect. 1.
The Roman Church was by Divine Authority ordained to be the Catholic Church.

This Question depends upon the reason of the Pope of Rome his succession to
Saint Peter, to wit; whether it were allotted to the Bishop of Rome to succed
Saint Peter, as Head of the Catholic Church, by the institution of Christ; or
else by the fact of Saint Peter himself. For if it were by command and
appointment of Christ, then it must be allowed as a Divine Ordinance: but if it
issued only from the fact of Saint Peter, then (by your own Confessions) it
is no doctrine of Faith. This being the state of the Question, as it is
propounded by Bellar. l. 2. de Pon. cap. 12. and Azor. Ies. Moral. part. 2. l.
4. cap. 11.
your selves, hereunto we desire to receive your own Resolutions. To this
purpose when we consult with your choicest An haec annexio principatus Petri
ad sedem Romanam ita sit eius authoritate constituta, an vero Petrus ex Christi
praecepto id egerit, de hac nihil fide certum habemus. Suarez de trip. virt.
disp. 10.. 3. number. 9. -- Opinio prima est -- esse eam tantum ex iure humano.
Sic Soto, Paludanus, Armachanus, and alij quidam. Test Suar. ibid. Soto
Cordubens. Bannes, Aug. Triumphus and ante Sotum Waldensis dicu^t. non diuino
jure, sed ex facto and morte Petri contigisse, vt Romanus Pontifex Pe^o
succederet. Test Azor. Ies. quo supra,. Alterum est. Vt Pontifex Romans qua
Romanus, potius quam aliquis alius succederet, ex facto Petri ortum habuit. --
Non est improbabile, Dominum iussisse Petrum Romae sedem figere. Bellar. quo
sup. lit. g.
Doctors, as namely Bellarmine, Suarez, Soto, Paludanus, Bannes, Augustinus
Triumphus, Cordubensis, Armachanus* Waldensis, and Others; they that speak
more ingenuously, do freely grant, that the pretended Pontifical Dignity
Roman, as it is Roman, is not from divine authority, because only from the
fact of Peter. They that are more affectionate to the Roman See, although they
attribute it to the Institution of Christ, yet dare they not say, that this is
to be believed upon certainty of Faith but only as a matter Probable and
Coniecturall.

Nay, if you shall have but a little patience, until we descend to that point,
you shall perceive, by the judgment of the Catholic Church it self, in a
general Council of primative Antiquity, that The Prerogative, which the
Church of Rome then had, was but from See below,. 9.
Humane authority.

CHALLENGE.
AN Addition, standing only upon Probability and Conjecture, cannot be
infallibly a Declaration of an Article of Faith, founded upon Divine and
Infallible authority. But your Addition of the word, ROMAN, stands (as you
confess) upon probability and Conjecture only. Ergo it cannot be an
infallible Declaration of the Apostolical Article, The Catholic Church,
without which there is no salvation. And consequently, your word, ROMAN, added
to the Christian Creed, thereby to make the Roman Church The Catholic Church,
without which there is no salvation, must necessarily be judged Antichristian.

The fifth Argument, to prove, that the Addition of the word, ROMAN, cannot be
a Declaration of the Article, [The Catholic Church] as it is Visible, in
respect of the Time past, whereunto the word, CATHOLIC, has relation, even
before Rome was founded a Church. SECT. 8.
WHo knows not that your Addition of the word, ROMAN, unto the Apostolical
Article of [ The Catholic Church] is to infuse an opinion into the minds of
Christians, that Catholic and Roman are terms univocal and conuertible:
which is as much as to say, that whenever there was a Roman Church, it was
The Catholic Church; and whenever there was a Catholic Church, it was
Roman. Scarce shall you find any Romish Professor, especially among the
vulgar, who have not this conceit of that Article of Christian Faith.
Notwithstanding your more learned Doctors are not ignorant, that this
Apostolical Article, The Catholic Church, was published before that in Rome
was founded a Church: and that the Apostolical Church it self was Catholic,
before the Article of the Catholic Church was proclaimed. Which name,
CATHOLIC, or universal was first attributed to the Church Christian,
Catholica, i. e. vniuersalis Ecclesia dicitur, in quo primum differt a
Synagoga, quae certis locis, and populi limi^ibus circumscribitur, at nunc non
alligata vlli loco. Salmeron Ies. Prolog. in Comment. Epist. ad Romans par. 2. p.
176.
To distinguishit (as you know) from the Synagogue of the Jews, which was
circumscribed and confined to one only nation; whereas the Church Catholic is
not limited to any one place; but is as broad in succession of place, as is the
whole world.

Now concerning the Catholic Church, in the time of the Apostles, Card.
Baronius (whose History you honor as an Possiuinus apparat. Sest. 3. c. 35.
heavenly Lamp, or torch) tells you, that Hoc tempore gentibus ostio aperto,
Apostoli Catholicae fidei consulturi, Canones, quibus vniuersam fidem
firmarent, constituerunt, quos Ecclesia proprio nomine Symbolum Apostolicum
appellare consueuit. Baronius Anno Chri. 44. number. 15.
The Creed of the Apostles (wherein is the Article of The Catholic Church) was
composed by them in the year of Christ XLIV; and that the Catholic Church was
extant sometime, before this Article was put into the tenor of the Creed. Which
he demonstrateth from the act of Saint Peter, who in the year of our Savior
XXXIX is found Jdem Anno. 39^ Hoc tempore pertransit prouincias, and inuisit
Ecclesias, etc. The Churches which S. Peter visited Anno 39. he reckons to
have been -- In Ponto, Galatia, Cappadocia, Asia, silicet minori, and
Bithynia, quas S. Petrus erexit. Anno 45. number. 15.
Visiting the Churches in Pontus, Galatia, Cappadocia, Asia, etc. That the same
Apostle Saint Peter Dicimus Ecclesia^ Antiochenam hoc potissimum Anno a sancto
Petro instituta^ fuisse, eundem septem Annis eidem praefuisse, quousque sancta^
Romanam Ecclesiam erigens vna cum persona omne suum Pontificium ius in eam
transtulit. Idem Anno 39. number. 23.
Constituted the Church of Antioch in the same year, and after that he had
governed the Sea of Antioch seven years, he in the year XLV translated his
See from Antioch to Rome. Your other Chronologer Apostoli post Ascensionem
Symbolu^ constituerunt Genebrard. Chron. Anno D. 32, lib. 3. p. 370. Petrus
primum Romam venit, atque ibi se Pontificem gessit. Idem Anno 44. lib. 2. page
219.
Genebrard yields unto us eleven years, between the Composing of the
Apostles Creed, and the first foundation of the Church of Rome by the Apostle
Saint Peter.

We add; that S. Paul, whom all the Romanists teach to have been a Co-founder
with Saint Peter of the Church of Rome, had been before that time 1 Cor. 15.9.
and Philip. 3.6.
A Persecuter of the Church of Christ, as he himself confesses; when Saint
Steven suffered Martyrdom. But the Church of Christ, as it is called
Catholic, comprehends (say Ecclesia Catholica complectitur omniatempora and
loca. Bellar. lib. 4. de notis Eccles cap. 7.. Quarta.
you) all times.

CHALLENGE.
THe addition of a word, which betokens only a part of Time, of the Churches
being, cannot be a Declaration of the Church, which is called Catholic, on
respect of the whole and universal Time of the being of the Church: But the
addition of the word, ROMAN, does betoken but a part of Time of the being of
the Church, namely after the first constitution of the Church of Christ
Catholic. Ergo, It cannot be any true Explication of the Article properly
called the Catholic Church, except you will exclude out of the Church of
Christ (without which there is no salvation) S. Stephen the first Christian
Martyr, and all other blessed primitive Martyrs and Confessors, who died the
faithful members of Christ, before the Church of Rome had received her first
life or breath.

Wherefore the word, ROMAN, cannot be added to our Christian Creed, as a
Declaration of that Article, The Catholic Church, without which there is no
salvation, without intolerable blasphemy against Apostles, Martyrs, and other
Confessors, and blessed Saints of God, under the persecution of Saul,
afterward Paul: who because they were before the Church of Rome (and
consequently without it) must be judged by your Article to have been at that
time without the state of Grace. Of whom notwithstanding our Savior Christ
gave testimony by this voice from heaven, saying to Saul, in their behalf,
Act. 9.4.
Why persecutest thou Me? So false and impious is your Addition of the word,
ROMAN, to that Catholic Church mentioned in the Apostles Creed.

The sixth Argument, to prove, that the Addition of the word, ROMAN, cannot be
a Declaration of that Article in the Apostles Creed, The Catholic Church; In
respect of the Time to come. SECT. 9.
Again, the word Catholic, or universal, mentioned in the Apostles Creed, as
it comprehends (as you have said) the Time past, so does it (you know) implie
Dicitur quoque Ecclesia Catholica a temporis vniuersitate, nam ad finem vsque
mundi perseue rabit, vt Scriptura docet, Mat 16. Portae inferi non praeualebunt
aduersus eam: and Mat. 28. Ero vobiscum vsque ad consummationem seculi. and
Ephesians. 4. Donec occurrimus omnes in vnitate fidei in virum perfectum. Greg. de
Valent. in 3. Thom. disp. 1. q. 1. punct. 7.. 16. Tom. 3.
The time to come, until the ends of the world, according to the promise of
Christ, Mat. 28.20. Where^ore our next Question must be, whether the Church of
Rome, which will needs be the Catholic Church, can infallibly profess a
Prerogative of continuing the the same pretended Catholic Church, until the
ends of the world; and whether her own principles do not utterly confute this
usurpation?

It is a general principle of your Doctors, as well Jesuits as others, that
Refert non parum hoc scire. -- Nam si solum ex iure humano Ecclesiastico ratio
haec successionis cum Romanae Dioecesis Episcopatu coniuncta sit, possit fieri
-- vt is, qui vniuersalis Ecclesiae pater est, non idem sit ^omanae Dioecesis
Episcopus, sed vel alterius dioecesis, vt cum Petrus Antiochiae sedebat. -- Sin
autem diuino iure constitutum est, vt non alius praeterquam Romanus Pontifiex
sit Petri successor, non erit in Ecclesiae potestate id institutum mutare. --
Ex hac quaestione pendet, -- quomodo illud Ecclesia Romans priuilegium
intelligendum sit, cum dici solet recta and Apostolica fides, non posse a
Romana Ecclesia deficere* sicut jam defecit (exempli causa) ab Ecclesia
Constantinop. Greg de Valent. quo supra. 38.
If the succession in the government of the Catholic Church were not allotted
to the Bishop of Rome, by divine authority, then the same government may be
transported from the same Bishop, and the Church of Rome may depart from the
Faith, as well as other Churches, (and by name the Church of Constantinople)
have done. This Consequence being so universally received and approved in your
own Schools, our next endeavor will be to prove that it cannot appear
infallibly that the Church of Rome has a Privilege of continuing The
Catholic Church to the end of the world, by any divine authority. This See
above, Sect. 7
has been briefly touched already, but here is the place to handle it more at
large.

Your Canus with some Others (lest they should be compelled to confess, that
the Church of Rome may possibly Apostate in future times) have contended to
defend, that Canus, Driedo, Turrecr^mata, and alij communiter sine dubitatione
affirmant, ex Christi Domini institutione Romanum Episcopum constitutum fuisse
Petri Successorem in cura vniuersalis Ecclesiae: -- atque ita Romanam sedem
habere priuilegium, vt sit peculiariter Apostolica seeds, a qua fides recta
nequeat deficere. Valent. quo iam supra. Atque huic parti idem se Valent.
adiungit.
It was constituted the Catholic Church by the Institution of Christ. Which if
it were true, then would there appear some evidence thereof, either before, or
else after the Ascension of Christ. But Quod ante ascensionem Domini --
Christus nihil de hoc ordinauerit patet, tum quia nihil tale vel ex Scripturis,
vel ex Traditione habemus, -- tum quod Petrus fixit suam sedem primo in vna
Ecclesia, postmodum in altera. Suarez. de Trip virt theol. disp 10. 3. nu. 10.
Before the Ascension of Christ, says your Jesuit Suarez) Nothing appears
of any such Ordinance, either in Scripture, or from Tradition. And that which
is commonly alleged, out of Egesippus, of Christ his appearance after his
Ascension unto Peter, Quod vero attiner ad illam historiam ex Ege sippo; licet
Christus Dominus praeceperit tunc Petro, vt Romae maneret vsque ad mortem, inde
tamen no^ necessario sequi, praecepisse etiam eum vt Successor illius in cura
Ecclesiae universally esset perpetuo Romans Po^tifex. Vale^t. quo supra. col. 218.
Commanding him to fix his seat at Rome until his death (in the judgment of
your Jesuit Valentianus) is of no force to prove that the Roman Church was to
continue Catholic. We draw nearer our mark. Non est omnino de fide, a Romans
Ecclesia non posse separari Apostolicam sedem: Patet, quia nec Scriptura, nec
Traditio habet, ita sedem Apostolicam fixam Romae esse, vt inde auferri non
possit. Bellar. l 4 de Pont. c. 4.. At secundum. Item Suarez Jes. vide supra,
Sect. 7. lit h.
There is no certainty of faith (says Bellarmine, with whom the Jesuit
Suarez consents) that the Sea Apostolic is so fixed at Rome, as that it
cannot be separated and removed from that Church; because there is neither
Scripture nor Tradition to prove this. Nor these only, but Sotus with diverse
other Schoolmen directly and peremptorily consent, that Sotus, Cordubensis,
and quidam Iuniores Theologi, inter quos Bannes, Aug Triumphus, and Waldens.
ante Sotum, non Diuino Iure, sed ex facto Petri, quod Romae ei obire contigit,
factum esse dicunt, vt Episcopus Romans Petro succederet. Azor. Ies. Just. Mor.
part. 2. lib 4. cap. 11. Et eiu^dem sententiae videtur esse Paludanus,
Armachanus, and quidam alij. Test Suar. de Trip. virt. disp. 10. 3. number. 9.
The Privilege, which Rome does challenge, is only by the ordinance of Saint
Peter, and therefore from humane authority. Yea, and Some yield not so much as
the Institution by S. Peter, but by the Church; so far, that -- Quare si per
possibile Treuirensis Archiepiscopus per Ecclesia^ congregatam pro Praeside and
Capite eligeretur, ille proprie plus Successor S. Petri in Principatu foret,
quam Romans Episcopus: Licet credendum fit Romans Pontificem sicut locum Petri, ita
and principatum nunquam perdituru^. -- Nec cessaret ille Principatus in
Ecclesia, etiamsi Romans vrbis ^edes Episcopalis deficeret. Card. Cusan. Concord.
Ca^h. l. 2. c. 34. ^d finem: where he labors to prove that the B of
Rom^^^^th his Primacie from the consent of the Church.
If the Church, in a Council, should choose the Archbishop of Treuers, or of
any other place, to be Head of the Church, he should be rather the Successor of
Peter, than the Bishop of Rome. Furthermore, we reserve unto it is due place
your Confession, that See hereafter, Chap. 5. Sect. 1.
The City of Rome shall undoubtedly be the Seat of Antichrist.

CHALLENGE.
AN Addition, which notifieth a Church that may possibly be translated
else-whither, and depart from the Faith, cannot be a Declaration of that
Article, in our Christian Creed, which signifies a Church infallibly
continuing in the Faith, to the end of the world. But the word, ROMAN, (as it
signifies the Roman Church) betokens a Church, which may possibly be
Translated, and depart from the Faith. Ergo, it cannot be a Declaration of the
Catholic Church, mentioned in the Apostles Creed. So then, to make the word,
Catholic, hereditarie to that Roman Church, which possibly may be as truly
Antichristian, as Rome it self is sure to be (by your own Confessions) The
Seat of Antichrist, does plainly discover an Article New, False,
Antichristian, and Blasphemous.

The seventh Argument, to prove that the Addition of the word, ROMAN, to the
Catholic Church, cannot be a Declaration of the Christian Faith, mentioned in
the Apostles Creed; in respect of any Present Time. SECT. 10.
THe Certainty, whatsoever it is, of your Article, The Catholic Roman Church,
is built upon this foundation, that the Pope of Rome is the Catholic and
Universal Bishop of the Church of Christ, as the Popes themselves See above,
Chap. Sect. 1.
have formerly defined. Now, because no structure can be more firm, than is
the foundation upon which it is built; we make bold to demand, with what faith
any of you can believe any Pope (whatsoever he be that is elected) to be the
True Pope, that is, (as you call him) The Catholic Bishop of Rome, without
which the Church of Rome cannot be acknowledged The Catholic Church.

This Consequence Two of your Jesuits did truly discern, which made Them
resolve thus: Sicut Ecclesia Christi visibilis est hoc numero, ita habere posse
hoc numero visibile caput; atque adeo de fide est, hunc hominem, qui co^muni
Ecclesiae co^sensione acceptus est, vt caput Ecclesiae, cui ipsa tenetur
obedire, esse verum Ecclesiae Pontificem, Petri Successorem. -- Alioqui
Constare non potest, hoc esse verum Concilium. Suar. Jes. de Trip. virt. disp.
10. Sect. 5. nu. 2.
As the visible Church (says the one) is this individual Church, so the
visible Head thereof must needs be this visible Pope, who by the common consent
is so ordained, unto whom we owe obedience, as to the true Successor of Peter;
or otherwise we could not know that this is a true Council, and justly
confirmed by the Pope, etc. But with what degree of Faith do you believe this?
Fides diuina est, qua credimus Iesum, -- eadem credimus hunc Paulum 4.
Pontificem esse; -- no^ tantum humana fide, cui subesse possit falsum. Salmeron
Jes. in epist. Pauli in Genesis part. 3. disp. 2. page 183.
With that Divine Faith (says the Other) wherewith we believe Jesus Christ,
with the same ought we to believe this Paul the IV. to be the true Pope, and
not with any humane Faith, which is subject to be deceived.

Behold a Jesuitical Faith! both grossly false, and also wickedly blasphemous:
because, that there cannot be an Infallibility in the Election of any Pope, is
manifest by two confessed and uncontrollable Consequences, taken from two
possible defects; the one in the Popes Ordination, the second in his Election.
First for his Ordination, your Council of Florence defines, Omnia Sacramenta
ex intention ministri pendere, etc. Conc. Florent. Decret. Eugenij PP. ad.
Binium.
That the truth of every Sacrament depends upon the intention of the
Minister. But, Nullus certus esse potest certitudine fidei, se percipere verum
Sacramentum, cum Sacramentum sine intention Ministri non conficitur. Bellar.
l. 3. de Iustif. cap. 8.. Dicent.
None can be sure by certainty of Faith (says Bellarmine) that any such
received the Sacrament of Ordination, because none infallibly knows the
intention of him that Ordains. And Vega more vehemently. Nemini potest ex
fide constare, se recepisse Sacramentu^, esseque hoc ita certum ex fide, ac
clarum est nos viuere. Vega de Justif. l. 9. cap. 17.
It is as certain (says he) that we are not infallibly certain of the
receiving of any Sacrament, as it is certain that we now live. Thus of the
Popes Ordination.

Alphonsus a Castro is as bold with the Pope, about his Election. Quamuis
credere tenemur ex fide, verum Petri Successorem esse supremum totius Ecclesiae
Pastorem, non tamen tenemur eadem fide credere Leonem, aut Clementem esse verum
Petri Successorem, quoniam non tenemur ex fide Catholica credere eorum
quemlibet rite and Canonice fuisse electum. Alphonsus a Castro. lib. 1. de
Haeres. c. 9.
Which, because it may not be Canonical, we are not to believe it (says he)
with a Catholic Faith: Whereof your Cardinal Respondeo, Stephanum 6. and
Sergium 3. errasse in quaestione facti, vtrum Formosus legitimus Papa fuisset.
Bellar. l. 4. de Pont. cap. 12.
gives some Examples. In which two respects many of your School Doctors have
concluded, that Aliqui ex Catholicis moralem tantum certitudinem tenent, quam
sufficere dicunt -- ad credendum res, quas de fide Papa definiuerit. Hi-sunt
Turrecremata, Albertin. Caiet. Bannes, Canus, Vega, Cordub. Castro. Test Suar.
de Trip. virt. disp. 10. 5. nu. ^.
In the knowledge of this man, to be a true Pope, you have no more but a moral
certitude. Whereof we shall speak more hereafter.

CHALLENGE.
THat Addition, the belief whereof is only humane, moral, and fallible,
cannot be a Declaration of an Article of Divine and Infallible faith, such as
is that of the Catholic Church, mentioned in the Apostles Creed. But the word,
ROMAN, is an Addition, the Belief whereof is only humane, moral, and
fallible. Ergo, the Addition of the word ROMAN, to the Catholic Church,
cannot be a proper Declaration of that Article in the Creed. So vain and
unjust is your appropriation of the word, Catholic, to your Roman Church.

The eight Argument, to prove that the Addition of the word, ROMAN, can be no
Declaration of the Article of The Catholic Church, mentioned in the Apostles
Creed; because it makes all perjured that do profess it upon Oath; besides the
heresy and blasphemy thereof. SECT. 11.
THat in your profession of the Catholic Roman Church, the word, Roman, is
an Article of Faith, challenging thereby a necessary subjection to the Bishop
of Rome, we have heard already, both in the Sea above, Chap. 1. Sect. 1. and 2.
Decrees of Popes, and also in that Bulla Pij quarti. See above, Chap. 1. Sect.
1.2. etc.
Form of an Oath, which every Ecclesiastical person in your Church, of what
condition soever he be, is enjoined to take, swearing that The Roman Church is
the Catholic Mother and Mistress Church; vowing Obedience to the Bishop
thereof: and in the same Oath, that this Roman Article, with others, is The
Catholic faith, without which there is none can be saved, which is the proper
tenor of an essential Article of faith.

Now in as much as the word [CREDO] in the Apostles Creed does import CREDO in
hoc loco non significat opinari, aut existima^e, sed vt docent sacrae literae,
certissimae assensionis vim habet, qua men's Deo sua mysteria aperienti firm
constanterque assentitur. Quamobrem is credit, -- cui aliquid sine vlla
haesitatione certum and persuasum est. Catechis. Romans in hanc vocem Symboli,
Credo, page 11.
A constant and infallible persuasion of the Christian Believer, as your own
Roman Catechism does truly instruct you; and because (to speak in the words
of your own Bozius:) Quae in Symbolo sunt and credenda proponuntur, -- sunt
principia eorum omnium, quibus fides est habenda. Principia autem semper and ex
omni part vera, alioqui principia haud forent, quorum veritas est dubia.
Bozius Tom. 1. de signis Eccles lib. 3. cap. 10. p. 223.
These things which are propounded in the Creed, are the Principles or
foundations of all other things that are to be believed, and ought at all times
to be in themselves infallibly true in every part, otherwise they should be no
Principles, in as much as their truth is but doubtful: We (by this your
appropriating of the Article, The Church, without which none can be saved) are
constrained to pronounce you guilty of a new Heresy in your faith; Perjury
in your Oath; and Blasphemy in your excluding out of the state of Salvation
the most undoubted members of the mystical body of Christ, which is his Church.

I. CHALLENGE.
EVery new Article of Faith (that is to say, new Doctrine made necessary to
salvation) is an Heresy, as you your selves will confess: But this Article [
The Catholic Roman Church, without which there is no Saluation] is a new
Article, as has been amply proved; because it is repugnant to the Article of
The Catholic Church, professed in the Apostolic Creed; as has been made
manifest in the Premises by many Arguments. Therefore your Article of The
Catholic Roman Church, without which there is no salvation, must needs be
esteemed Heretical.

II. CHALLENGE.
EVery one bound to believe, and to avouch upon Oath any Doctrine, as necessary
to Salvation, which is not of an infallible truth, is thereby made guilty of
Perjury. But every Romish Priest (by the Sea above, Chap. 1. Sect. 2.
Bull of Pope Pius 4.) is bound to believe upon Oath, that the Roman Church is
the Catholic Church, without which there is no salvation. Albeit you
yourselues have confessed at large, that this your doctrine stands not upon
any infallible grounds of truth, either in respect of Time past, at the
founding of the Church of Rome, which was not instituted by any Divine
Ordinance; or in respect of the Time present, wherein you have no full
assurance of your Catholic Head, the Pope: or yet in respect of the Time to
come, when as you Confess a Possibility that the Catholic Church may cease
to be Roman, because it may possibly be translated to another place. Therefore
are all Romish Priests necessarily inuolued in the crime of Perjury, by
swearing that to be a necessary Article of Faith, which is in so many respects
defective, and comes short of all the Essential grounds of Faith.

III. CHALLENGE.
THat Article, which excludes from Salvation the undoubtedly essential and
lively members of the Mystical body of Christ, which is his Church, that is a
doctrine undoubtedly Blasphemous. But your Article, The Roman Church, without
which there is no salvation, does exclude from Salvation both those, which
(before the Church of Rome was a Catholic Church) suffered bonds,
imprisonment, and Martyrdom it self, for the profession of Christ; next all
Catechumenists, and persons unjustly Excommunicated, albeit departing this life
in true faith and repentance: and lastly all them, who in the days of
Antichrist, when the Church, as it is Roman (as you say, may peradventure;
but, as we think, will Apostate from the Faith) shall persist the constant and
glorious Martyrs of Christ Jesus, etc. Therefore this Article cannot but be
manifestly Blasphemous. Thus much concerning our Proofs, taken from the
Consideration of the Article of Christian Faith, in the Apostles Creed, viz. [
The Catholic Church.] By which we have euicted your Addition of the word,
ROMAN (to make an Article of Faith) to be New, False, Scandalous, Pernicious,
Heretical, and Blasphemous, respectively.

CHAP. III. A Second general Head of Confutation of the former Article, is
from the Consideration of the Judgment of the Church; by Examples of several
Churches, Councels, and Fathers.
SECT. 1.
AFter our Proof, that the now Roman Article, The Catholic Roman Church,
without Union and Subjection whereunto there is no Salvation, is New,
Imposterous, Scandalous, etc. taken from the tenor and sense of the
Apostolical Article, The Catholic Church, expressed in our Catholic Creed;
We proceed to confirm our former Proof, by like evidence from current
Examples, taken from the Catholic Church it self. And, for our more expedite
Method and passage herein, We shall proportion our Treatise according to three
Distinctions of Time; the Time before, the Time when, and the Time after that
the Church of Rome had her first foundation and being.

I. Of the Time before the Church of Rome was founded. First setting down the
Roman Article, intituling the Church of Rome [The Mother Church.] SECT. 2.
WE need not tell you, that it is an Article in your Church, to believe that
the Church of Rome is The Mother and Mistress Church of all other Churches
(where, by Mother, you understand her ancient Prerogative of spiritual
Generation: and, by Mistress, her Jurisdiction and Supreme Authority of
directing all other Churches, as Members of the Church Catholic) seeing that
the Fathers of the Synod. Trid. Sess. 7. de Baptis. Can. 3. Ecclesia Romana
omniu^ Ecclesiaru^ matter and magistra. Et Sess. 14. cap. 3. Et Sess. 22. cap.
8. and 25. Decret. de delectu ciborum. And again, Sess. 18. Decreto de
librorum delectu. Matrem communem in terris agnoscentes, quae nos peperit,
obliuisci non potest.
Council of Trent, in their Canons and Decrees, have five times published the
same Article in express words, calling her The Common Mother on earth, which
cannot forget whom she has begotten; As if all the Faithful on earth were
her offspring. Instantly upon this Decree of the Council, the Father of all
these Trent-Fathers, Pope Pius the 4. for Confirmation of that Council,
enjoined every Ecclesiasticke to profess, among other points, the same Roman
Article upon Oath, thus: I N. swear, that I acknowledge the Church of Rome to
be the Mother and Mistress of all other Churches; without which faith none can
be saved. So then this Article is become as Catholic among you, as is your
Church. Which opinion of her Universal Motherhood has been the greatest
fascination and witcherie that of long time has blinded the eyes of most of
her Professors; Forma Iurame^ti a Pio 4. edita. Sanctam Ecclesiam Catholicam
Romanam omnium Ecclesiarum matrem and magistram agnosco. -- Extra quam fidem
nemo salnus esse potest.
and which we shall prove to be no better than a False and Imposterous
enchantment, void of all light of truth, and repugnant unto the confessed
Examples of illustrious Churches more ancient than her self.

The first Confutation of that Article of Roman Mother-hood, is taken from the
rottenness of the Foundation thereof. SECT. 3.
IF there be any sound ground of truth in the Article, viz. that The Church of
Rome is Mother of all other Churches, sure we are that your two Cardinals, for
learning and devotion toward that Church most Eminent, (viz. Baronius and
Bellarmine) will be most able and willing to express it, especially where they
professedly determine the very point. Baronius teaching that Saint Peter, being
constituted by Christ the ordinary Pastor of the whole Church, did fix his
seat at Rome, does thereupon resolve, saying, Romana Ecclesia, cum Petri
peculiaris erat -- qui totius Ecclesiae Caput a Christo institutus erat, -- ita
ipsa merito Matter omnium diceretur Ecclesiarum. Baron. An. 58. number. 50.
Hence it is that the Roman Church is called the Mother Church of all others.
And lest any might deny this Consequence, as being (that which it is indeed)
fond and absurd, Bellarmine adds the reason thereof. Passim docent vete^es,
Romans Ecclesiam esse matrem omnium Ecclesiarum, and ab ea omnes Episcopo^
habuisse -- consecrationem and dignitate^ suam, Quod non videtur esse verum,
nisi eo sensu quia Petrus, qui Episcopus f^it Romanus, omnes Apostolos,
Omnesque alios Episcopos vel per se, vel per alios ordinauit. Alioqui enim cum
omnes Apostoli plurimos Episcopos in varijs locis constituerunt, si Apostoli
ipsi non sunt facti Episcopi a Petro; certe maxima pars Episcoporum non deducet
originem suam a Petro Bellar. lib. 1. de Romans Pont cap. 23. Vbi addit,
The Church of Rome (says he) could not be called the Mother Church, except
that all the Apostles had had their ordination of Pastorship from Saint Peter.
And, for proof hereof, the Cardinal refers us to the Epistles of Pope
Anacletus, witnessing that Anacletus Epist. 1. dicit In nouo Testame^to post
Christum a Petro Sacerdotalis coepit ordo. Vbi non loqui potest de ordine
Presbyterorum; nam constat Apostolos in vltima coena simul omnes ordinatos
Sacerdotes. Loquitur ergo de ordine Episcoporum, qui a Petro non recte dicitur
incepisse, si omnes Apostoli immediate a Christo ordinati fuerunt Episcopi.
Jdem ibid. All this is but Coniecturall.
The order of Priesthood had its' beginning from Peter. So he, whereas
notwithstanding Sacerdotall Order does but coniecturally infer the
Episcopal. Howsoever these testimonies from the Epistles of Anacletus, (which
your Cardinal Ego has Epistolas Apoch^yphas esse credo. Cusan Card. Concord.
Cathol. c. 34. p. 771
Cusanus believes to be Apocryphal, and unworthy of belief) Two of your most
priuileged Jesuits, Omnes Apostoli a Christo Domino ordinati sunt Episcopi,
and potestatem non solum ordinis, sed etiam iurisdictionis acceperunt -- quia
omnes Apostoli sunt a Christo electi, vt ex Euangelio co^stat, ita ipse Paulus
aperte tradit, Gal. 1. and 2. Se non esse ab hominibus, neque per hominem, sed
per Christum Apostolum institutum. Matthias item, non erat ab Apostolis, sed a
Deo creatus. At Apostolica potestas continebat in se non solum ordinis, sed and
Iurisdictionis potestatem, and ideo Apostoli vbique terrarum Episcopos and
Presbyteros constituebant -- and omnibus plenissima iurisdictio data est, Mat.
18. illis verbis, quaecunque alligaueritis, etc. Omnibus etiam dictum est,
Euntes in vniuersum mundum praedicate. Et de Judah dictum est, Episcopatum eius
accipiet alter. Azor. ^es. Inst moral. part. 2. l. 4. c. 11.. Altera opinio.
Azorius, and Vt verum sit -- Petri Cathedram matrem esse and radicem omnium
Ecclesiarum, and a Romans Eeclesia omnem consecratione^ and dignitatem Episco
pale^ promanasse -- Turrecremata conatur probare solum Petrum ordinatum a
Christo Episcopum, and ipsum reliquos Apostolos consecrasse. -- Alij tenent
alios omnes Apostolos ordinatos immediate a Christo: Sic Glossa and multi
Theologi, videturque expressa sententia August. lib quaest. vet. and noui
Testamenti 97. -- nam si Christus immediate Apostolos omnes ordinauit
Sacerdotes, cur non Episcopos? -- nam Presbyteri aequales sunt in ordine.
Suarez. Ies. Tract. de Trip. virt. Theol. disp. 10. Sect. 1. number. 5. and 7.
Jtem Cosmus Philiarch. Tom. 2. page.. 93.
Suarez deny, That the other Apostles received their Episcopal Ordination
from Saint Peter. Which they maintain upon better grounds, than the
Counterfeit Epistles of a Pope can be, even upon the Oracles of God's Word,
where it appears (say they) that Matthias had his Ordination to the
Bishopprick which Judas lost, not by the hands of Peter, but by lot,
immediately from God: and Saint Paul his, not by Saint Peter, but by a voice
from heaven, even immediately from Christ. They add other Reasons, and in the
end adioyne the Consent of S. Augustine, and of many other Divines.

Yet were it admitted, that Peter, as ordinary Pastor of the Catholic Church,
had ordained other Apostles Bishops, and by their Ministry begotten those
innumerable Churches, which the same Apostles (as you See in the following
Sections.
Confess) constituted seven years before the Church of Rome was erected; yet
were it a mad point of Genealogizing, to conclude that Rome must be Mother to
those daughters of Saint Peter, which were begotten seven years before she
was borne: whereas she could be to them but a Sister at the most, and that but
a younger Sister too.

CHALLENGE.
Give us leave to dispute from your own Confessions, thus. If all the other
Apostles were not ordained Bishops by Saint Peter, there can be no apparent
reason, why the Church of Rome should be called the Mother Church. Thus
Bellarmine. But all the other Apostles were not ordained Bishops by Saint
Peter. Thus your Jesuits out of direct Scriptures, accompanied with the
Consent of Saint Augustine, and many other Divines. Ergo there is not
sufficient ground, to call the Church of Rome the Mother of al other Churches.
Twice miserable therefore is the state of your Priests, both because they are
tied periuriously to swear That to be an Article of Faith, which is a manifest
false-hood; as also for that they, and all that Sect, being entangled in this
error of believing the Roman Church to be the Mother of all other Churches,
are thereby consequently entangled in all other her errors and Idolatries.

The second Confutation of the same Article arises from the Respect of many
illustrious Mother-Churches, more ancient than Rome. SECT. 4.
WE furthermore endeavor to impugn your former infatuation, in believing the
Universal Mother-hood of the Church of Rome, by the faith of Fathers of
Primitive times, far more Reverend for antiquity, and more credible for
impartiality than were your Fathers, or rather Step-Fathers of Trent. Not but
that we as willingly, as worthily, do acknowledge the Ancient Church of Rome
to have been in former times an happy Mother of many renouned Christian
Churches in the world; and we accordingly bless the womb of that sincere
Faith and Piety, which then brought forth so innumerable an offspring of so
many holy Professors: which notwithstanding, she might content her self to
have deserved the Title of a Mother Church, as other ancient Churches were, and
not of THE MOTHER-CHVRCH OF ALL OTHERS. For we are verily persuaded, that no
reasonable man can allow any child so to honor his Mother, as that he must
necessarily thereby disparage all others his honorable Progenitresses, and
(that we may so speak) his own Grandmother and Great-grand-mother, together
with others of his kindred more ancient than She. Such was the state of the
Church of Rome, in respect of other Churches, as by several Instances will
clearly appear.

The first Instance of Mother-hood, before Rome, is in the most ancient Church
of Jerusalem. SECT. 5.
EVe was not more truly named the Mother of all living, than the Church of
Jerusalem may be said to have been the Mother of all Churches believing. In
which respect the whole Christian world has given unto her the due and
honorable Title of Mother-hood. For almost a thousand and 300 years ago, an
hundred and fifty Orthodoxe Fathers, assembled in a Council at
Constantinople, acknowledged (as you know) that Conc. Constantinopolit.
Oecumenicu^ de Co^secratione Cyrilli. Porro Ecclesiae Hierosolymitanae quae est
aliarum omnium Matter, Cyrillum Episcopum vobis ostendimus. Test Baronio Anno
382. number. 15 p. 571.
Jerusalem was the first Church, which (to use the words of Saint Ex Sion lex
exibit, and verbum Domini ex Jerusalem.] In Jerusalem primum fundata Ecclesia
totius orbis Ecclesias seminauit. Hiero. in ill^m locum. Isa. 2.
Hierome) engendered all the Churches of the world.

After, in the days of Saint Augustine, when certain Heretics refused to
have Communion with Jerusalem, because our Lord Christ was Crucified in that
City, that learned Father did both wisely and wittily confute them: Act. 1.
Incipiens ab Jerusalem.] Nemo dubitat de Ecclesia -- quia ab Jerusalem
coepit, and omnes gentes impleuit. -- Cum ijs dicimus, -- Communicate cum illis
Ecclesijs, vnde Euangelium toto orb disfunditur. -- Illi de Jerusalem
respondent, Non communicamus illi ciuitati, vbi occisus est Dominus noster. --
Pij homines and misery ordes! -- Neque mirum, si praecisi oderunt radicem, --
vbi inchoata est Ecclesia, missus de coelo Spiritus Sanctus. Aug. in Epist.
Ioh. Tract. 2.
No marvel (says he) if you are cut off from the Church, who hate that root
Jerusalem, where the Church had her original, and whither the holy Ghost was
first sent. Another time the same Father, being opposed by Petilian a Donatist,
and asked Whence first he had his Communion? Quaeris (Petiliane) vnde communio
mea sumat exordium? Dominus Christus ipse dixit, -- Coepit praedicari ab
Jerusalem. Inde diffundens Ecclesiam quam tenemus. Collatio Carthag. Cathol.
cum Donatistis par. 3. number. 230. Which is joined with Optatus.
Answers, that he had it originally from Jerusalem. Could Saint Augustine in
this Question, about the Mother Church, against an Heretic, have so
negligently passed by Rome, without sacrilege, if the Faith of the Church of
Christ, in his days, had been to believe that Roman Church to have been
then the sole Sovereign Mother Church over all Churches in the world, as your
Council of Trent has so often decreed?

The second Instance of Mother-hood is in the Church of Caesarea. SECT. 6.
THe Church of Jerusalem did bear, as her first daughter, the Church of
Caesarea, the Metropolis of Palestina, which afterward was made the
Patriarchall Seat within that Province. The Motherhood of which Church S.
Basil, and S. Nazianzene did both proclaim and prefer before Rome, as by
their own testimonies may appear. We must have ample estimation Cujussibet
Ecclesiae, tanquam corporis Christi, habenda est ratio, maxim vero nostrae
(speaking of the Church of Caesarea) quae prope Matter omnium Ecclesiarum, and
fuit ab initio and nunc quoque est, and nominatur. -- Quam Christiana Resp.
veluti centrum suum circulus, vndique obseruat Apud Basil. Tom. 2. Epist. 30.
Greg. Nazian. De eadem Ciuitate Basilius Magnus. A nostris locis exortum
Euangelium regni, in totum orbem egressum est. Tom. 2. Epist. 70.
(say They) of every Church, as the body of Christ, but especially of this our
Church of Caesarea, which the Christian Commonweal does observe, as the
Circumference does a center. From which place (meaning, after Jerusalem) the
Gospel first arose, and passed through the World. So they. What greater
Encomium would you (if you could) pass upon your Church of Rome, than by
instiling her the Mother Church, to account her as the Center, and call all
other Churches as her Circumferences? Which Attributes those Orthodoxe Fathers
would not have ascribed to Caesarea, if in their Faith the Church of Rome had,
in their days, had the Prerogative of the Mother Church over all other
Churches in the world.

The third Instance of Mother-hood, before Rome, is in the Church of Antioch.
SECT. 7.
ANtioch was a Church (by your own Confessions) diverse years, when as yet the
Church of Rome was without note or name, a mere non-ens in Christianity. Of
which Church of Antioch Saint Chrysostom, out of the Act. 11.26.
Acts; Ciuitatum omnium nostra Christo optatissima est, tum propter
Progenitorum, tum etiam propter vestram virtutem. Et sicut Pe trus inter
Apostolos primus praedicabat, sic inter civitates, sicut dixi, haec prima
tanquam corona^ quandam admirabilem Christianorum tulit appellationem.
Chrysostom. de Ecclesia Antiochena Tom. 5. Orat. ad pop. Antioch. hom. 3. plura
habet Ibid. Hom. 17.
This our City of Antioch (says he) is most dear to Christ, for its'
Progenitors: where Saint Peter did first preach, which first received, as an
admirable Crown, the name of CHISTIANS. So he. Whether therefore you shall be
pleased to call the Church of Antioch Mother, or (because the name of
Christians was first derived from her) God-Mother to all other Churches after
her, sure it is that she may justly claim the Birthright before Rome. Which
Saint Chrysostom defended now, even when the Church of Rome (and that
worthily) was famous and renouned in the world.

The fourth Instance of Mother-hood, before Rome, is in the Greek Church in
General. SECT. 8.
THe Eastern Greek Churches themselves challenged this Prerogative in their
Letters to Pope Julius, to wit, that Orientales in Responsis fuis ad Iulium
Papam Romans (...) Sozom. hist. lib. 3. cap. 7.
They came from the East that first brought Christian Religion to Rome. But
none need require a more prompt or large acknowledgement of the antiquity of
the Greek Church, in respect of the Latin, than that which was publicly
pronounced by your own Bishop of Bitontum, in a solemn assembly of Bishops,
even in your Council of Trent, briefly thus; Eia igitur Graecia matter nostra,
cui totum id debet quod habet Latina Ecclesia. Bitom. Episc. orat. in Conc.
Trid. habita, vid. lib. de Actis eius Conc. page 18. Eia Hispania, cujus
conseruatae religionis perpetua gratulatio. Ib. Serio loquitur.
O Greece, our Mother (says he) to whom the Latin Church owes all that she
has. So he. We read of the Cross of Christ, that it had an Inscription
written on it in Hebrew, Greek and Latin. The same order may we observe in
the principal propagation of Churches in the Christian world: the Hebrew
Church before the Greek, and the Greek Church constituted before the Latin;
Jerusalem before Antioch, and Antioch with others before Rome. Wherefore that
you should make Rome the Mother Church over all others, which owes to the
Greek Church no less than All that she has, is in true apprehension a
wonderful Imposture.

The fifth Instance of Mother-hood, before Rome, is in the Britain Church.
SECT. 9.
YOur Church is in the next place to be provoked and convinced by a remote
Nation of Britain, which, by your own accounts, received the Gospel
(Cardinal Anno Christi 35. and Anno Tiberij Imp. 19. Comitem fuisse eiusdem
discriminis Iosephum ab Arimathea nobilem Decurionem, quem tradunt ex Gallia in
Britanniam nauigasse, illicque post praedicatum Euangelium diem clausisse
extremum. Baronius An. 35. number. 5. Addit in Marg. Manuscript hist. Angl. quae
habetur in Bibliotheca Vaticana. Anno Christi. 39. and primo Anno Ca^j
Ecclesiam Antiochenam a Petro institutam, eundem septem Annis eidem praefuisse,
quousque se, Romans Ecclesiam erigens vna cum persona omne summi Pontificij jus
in eam transtulit. Baron. Anno 39. number. 23.
Baronius, and your Jesuit Interea glaciali frigore rigent Insulae, tempore,
vt scimus, summo Tiberij Caesaris radios suos primus indulget, id est, fua
praecepta Christus; quae licet ab Incolis tepide suscepta sunt, apud quosdam
tamen integre, etc. Gildas in Epist. and Polyd. Virgil. Hist. Angl. lib. 1.
Quibus assentitur Suarez Ies. lib. 1. cap. 1. con. Ang. Eccles. error.
Britanniam ab initio orti Euangelij Christianam recepisse religionem etc. and
Couarruvias more largely. Venerat olim in Britania^, quae nunc Anglia est,
Joseph ille ab Arimathaea civitate oriundus, atque in eo loco tam ipse, quam
eius socij cum de Euangelio praedicarent, dogma Christi sedulo docerent, multi
per haec ad veram pietatem traducti salutiferaque fruge imbuti baptizati sunt.
Isti deinde cum a rege Arvirago parum terrae ad habitandum proxime Welliam Op.
accepissent, ibi novae rel^gionis prima jecerunt fundamenta. -- Haec pietatis
in Britannia extitere primordia, quam deinde Lucius Rex pro^e extinctam
mirabiliter adauxit. Couarrum vias Episc. in Praefat. ad Philipp. Hispan. Regem
ante lit. Quaest. Practic. Also, Bozius de signis Ecclesiae lib. 4. cap. 1. Ex
Papyrio Massonio lib. 2. de vita Caroli Simplicis, Et Polydoro Virg. lib. 2.
Hist. Anglorum.
Suarez, acknowledging thus much out of most ancient Records) By the preaching
of Joseph of Arimathea, in the 35 year of Christ, two years before Peter did
found the Church of Antioch, where he was seated seven years before he
founded the Church of Rome. That is to say, in Britain was planted a Church
nine years before Rome, and is hereby so much her elder Sister.

CHALLENGE.
THus much being granted by the most zealous Advocates for your Roman Church,
give us leave to reason the matter with you in few words. You still defend that
the Church of Rome is the Mother Church of all other Churches of Christ, and
that not as a Case of probability, but as an Article of Faith: nor this in any
implicit belief, but such, without which none can be saved: nor yet in the
ordinary manner of Profession, but (by your Priests and Ecclesiastikes) under
the Form of an oath. Ought you not therefore to have stood upon infallible
principles, for the making good of this Conclusion, than which you have not any
one more vulgar, pressing, and binding, among all the Tenants in your Roman
Church? And yet behold an opinion of Peter's Ordaining the other Apostles
Bishops, impugned by your own most judicious Divines, and this grounded upon a
bastard Epistle of Anacletus. Next, that the inference from the same opinion is
a Consequence, which must prove the Sister Rome to have begotten her Sisters
(or rather indeed her Mothers and Aunts) namely the Churches of Jerusalem,
Caesarea, Antioch, whole Greece, together with our Isle of Britain. And all
this against the confessed evidence of Scripture, and the express testimony
of Reverend Antiquity, which attributed that Mother-hood to the forenamed
Churches, before Rome. Wherefore we can do no less than hiss at your
illogicall Consequences; blush at the impudence of your Advocates; abhor the
perjury of your Priests, Jesuits, and all Ecclesiastikes; and pity the
miserable thraldom of your Professors, who are kept hood-winck't in the
belief of so Imposterous, Schismatic, and Damnable an Article: by which all
the Churches, begot by the preaching of Saint Peter, and all the other Apostles
in the compass of seven years, before the begetting of Rome, must be judged
Damned for not believing the Roman Church (as you teach) to have been the
Catholic Mother Church, without which Faith there is no salvation. Thus much
in respect of the Time, BEFORE Rome was a Church.

CHAP. IV. Of the Time about when the Church of Rome had her Foundation:
Arguing from the Faith of three Apostles, Saint Peter, S. Paul, and S. John;
and of the Apostolical Churches in their days.
SECT. I.
THese three Apostles! than whom what witnesses can be more competent in this
case? We appeal to your selves. Pontifices Romani tam Petrum quam Paulum
Praedecessorem and Parentem suum agnoscunt, siquidem vterque Apostolus Romans
Ecclesiam fundauit and gubernauit, vt praeter alios testatur Irenaeus. l. 3.
cap. 3. Sic Bellar. l. 1. de Romans Pont cap. 27.. Tamen.
The Popes of Rome (say you) acknowledge both Peter and Paul for their
Predecessors, because both of them did found and govern the Roman Church. And
as for Saint John, his long continuance in the Church Militant will Minister
some matter of resolution herein.

I. That Saint Peter, the conceived founder of the Church of Rome, was not of
the now Roman Faith, concerning the Article of the Catholic Roman Church.
SECT. 2.
WE (not to interrupt you, by questioning the truth of Saint Peter's residence
in that See, as Bishop thereof) do punctually inquire whether it entered into
his Faith to Believe the same Roman Church to be The Catholic Church without
which there is no salvation: nothing doubting, but that you will think that
He, of all others, would have plainly unfolded thus much, whom your Popes
assume to have been the Founder of that Church, together with Saint Paul. And
because all the pretended Sovereignty of the Roman Mother Church is
(according to See above, Chap. 1. Sect. 2. and 3. etc.
your faith) derived from the supreme Father-hood of your Roman Pope, and this
is as originally descended from the transcendent ordinary Pastorship of S.
Peter over all the other Apostles; we begin to enquire into the faith of S.
Peter.

Whatsoever Prerogative Saint Peter might challenge over all the other
Apostles, must appear either by some promise made singularly to him by Christ,
or else by some practice of Saint Peter himself, in the exercise and execution
of such his Jurisdiction. The due examination of both these would easily clear
the Cause.

That the Faith of Saint Peter did not conceive any Monarchical or supreme
Jurisdiction promised unto himself by Christ, in the most pretended speech of
Christ, saying, Matthew. 16. Upon this Rock will I build my Church. SECT. 3.
THis, this Scripture, and in it the word, ROCK, you have still objected, as
the rock and fortress of your now Roman Faith, concerning the Article of
your Roman Catholic Church: because Ex hoc loco probatur Monarchia Petri,
etc. Bellar. l. 1. de Pont. c. 10. initio. Greg. de Valent. Analys. l. 7. c. 2.
Maldon. Jes. in eum locum.
From hence (say your Jesuits) is proved that Monarchy of S. Peter. Insomuch
as that when Luther, Calvin, and others adventured to expound this of Christ,
and Faith in him, as the Son of God; your two grand Cardinals oppose, the One
his own passion, calling it an Per Petram Petrum -- Hanc sententiam Nouatores
destruere volentes, eo amentiae prouecti sunt, vt dicere non erubescant, eam
non intelligendam esse de Petro, sed de Christo. Baron. Anno 33. nu. 21.
Impudent madness in Protestants to expound the Rock to signify Christ: The
other obtrudeth the Consent of your own School, saying, Communis Catholicoru^
sententia est, Petram esse Petrum, id est, illam personam, non vt est
particularis, sed vt est Pastor Ecclesiae. Bellar. ibid.. De prima.
That by Rock, is meant Peter, it is the Common opinion of all Catholics. An
Exposition approved by your Bishop, and that not without some insultation,
saying, Adsis tu, Luthere, aduersus vos stat veritas inuicta, quae triumphabit,
per Petram Petrum intelligi apertissime constat. Roffens. Episcopus Art. 25.
con. Luth.
In this, Truth triumphs: as if it were as clear as the Sun, which
Sunneshine (as some call it) we Protestants (alas our blindness!) cannot
discern, but rather judge that it has been, and is mistaken by you for
Moone-shine; through some defect in your faculties or instruments of sight. A
large Library (I suppose) would scarce contain the books that have been
written upon this Text, whereas the brief of all, that need be said, may far
more easily than Homers Iliads, be comprised within the shell of a wallnut.

The Protestants Exposition upon this Scripture avouched by many excellent
Witnesses in the Roman Church; yea even by the Popes themselves. SECT. 4.
Our Exposition has ever been to understand that, by ROCK, is meant the
Confession of Peter, when he said of the Godhead of Christ, Thou art Christ,
the Son of the living God; and consequently signified (by a metonymie) Christ
himself. Where, we mean not the Confession of Peter in Concreto, as you would
have it understood, Qui dicit Confessionem fidei a Petro prolatam esse, Petram
non absolute eam intelligunt, sed cum relatione ad Petrum confitentem. Bellar.
de Pont. l. 1. cap. 10. Valent. Anal. l. 7. c. 2.. Vt autem. Stapleton. Cont.
2. l. 6. cap. 2. Maldon. in Matthew. 16.

Hilar. l. 6. de Trinit. Chrysostom. hom. 55. in Mat. 16. Cyril. Alex. dial 4. de
Trin. Author in Epist. ad Gal. c. 4. qui Ambrosio tribuitur. Aug. in Ioh. 27.
Maldon. Jes. in hunc locum.


With relation unto Peter: but as the said Confession of the Godhead of Christ
may be the Confession of every Christian, to which truth many of your own
Authors will bear witness.

To which purpose we allege, among your Preachers, Ferus saying; Super
Confessionem, -- non super Petrum, aut quemuis alium hominem. Ferus l. 3.
Comment. in Mat. 16. p. 24.
Upon this Rock,] That is, the Confession of Peter, and not upon Peter. Among
your Glossers, the Roman Gloss it self, saying, Super illo Articulo fidei:
ita super se Dominus fundauit Ecclesiam. Glossa decret. part. 1. did. 19. in
Ca. Ita Dominus noster.
That is, upon the Article then Confessed, concerning Christ: and so our Lord
Christ built it upon himself. Among your Friars, Lyranus; Supra Christum.
Lyranus in Matthew. 16.
Upon the Rock, Christ. Among your Jesuits, Pererius. Christus est Petra,
supra quam fundata est Ecclesia. Pererius Ies. Com. in Dan. lib. 2. super illa
verba; Abscissus est lapis, etc. Vbi citatur locus, Mat. 16.
Christ is the Rock, upon which the Church is builded. Among your Bishops,
Abulensis; Non Petrus, sed, vt melius alij, Christus* imo super Confessionem
ipsam, etc. Abulensis in Matthew. 16. Petrus defecit a fide. Idem quast. 67.
Not upon Peter, but upon his Confession; and he speaks absolutely of the
Confession it self, in Abstracto, without relation to Peter, and gives this
reason, because after this Confession thus made, Peter himself failed in his
faith, by denying his Lord. Among your Cardinals, Petra, seu fundamentum
Christus. Hugo. Card. i^ Matthew. 16.
Hugo, and Per Petram intelligimus Christum, quem confessus est Petrus. Cusan.
Card. l. 2. Concord. Cath.
Cusanus; By the Rock is signified Christ. Among your Councels, the last
Council of Trent, speaking of the Nicene Christian Creed, and pointing in the
margent at this Text, it says, that Symbolum illud ( nempe Nicaenum)
fundamentum vnicum, contra quod ( in marg. designat ipsiss. locum Mat. 16.)
Portae inferi non praeualebunt. Declarat. Conc. Trid. Sess. 3. Decret. de
Symbolo fidei.
It is the foundation, against which the gates of Hell shall not prevail.
Therefore faith in Christ, in Abstracto is the foundation, for there is in that
Creed no mention of Peter. Lastly and chiefly among your Popes (for now we are
clymed up to the pinnacle of your Temple) no fewer than Per Petram
intellexerunt confessionem Petri -- apud quosdam Pontifices Leo primus, Agatho,
Nicolaus primus, Adrianus primus in suis Decret. Stapletonus de doctrine.
Princip. Controu. 2. lib. 6. cap. 2.
Four, Leo the first, Agatho the first, Nicolaus the first, and Adrian the
first, all of them Firsts, and therefore more ancient than all others of their
names, have (as your selves witness) expounded the Rock to mean the
Confession of Saint Peter, in acknowledging Christ to be the Son of God.

I. CHALLENGE, from the judgments of the forecited Authors.
IN these former Allegations although most of the Testimonies themselves do
sufficiently show, that (by ROCK) is meant the Confession delivered by Saint
Peter, really in it self, and not personally, as it had Relation to him; yet
for the better clearing of your judgments, you may take these Confirmations.
I. None will deny but that there was meant in Peter's Confession, that matter
which he confessed: but Peter confessed not himself, but Christ, saying, Thou
art the Son of the living God. Ergo, his Confession had Relation to Christ,
and not to himself. II. You grant, that Saint Peter confessed no more than
that which he knew, Dicendum est, caeteros Apostolos idem credidisse quod
Petrus; and si sigillatim eodem voto peteret Christus, idem responderent.
Abulens. Explic. cap. 16. Matthew. q. 57. p. 286. Pergit idem Author, and probat
1. Quia Christus interrogabat omnes [Quid vos? etc.] 2. Quia dicitur, Mar. 8.
and Luc. 9. Quod Christus comminatus Discipulis, ne cui dicerent se esse
Christum. Et paulo ante. -- Praeuenit alios Petrus, and vt os totius collegij
respondit. Cyril. Tes^e Abulens. Episc. ibidem.
The other Disciples to have believed, before he spoke; because Christ's
question being general, What say ye? He answered, as the mouth of the rest.
True, (as may fully appear in our Mr. Isaac Casaubon has exactly proved
this, Exercit. 14. and 15. in Baron. from the Authors following, viz. Cassian.
de Incarnat. l. 3. Idem habuit eius responsio, quod habet fides omnium. Ambros.
Petrus prae coeteris, imo pro coeteris respondet. Aug. Vnus pro multis, vnitas
in multis. Chrysostom. Petrus sermonem (...). Hier. Petrus erat lingua omnium.
Cyril. in Ioh. lib. 4. Responsionem illi Christus committebat, qui ordine
mayor. Glossae ordinariae Author, Petrus, tanquam Principalis inter alios, pro
alijs dat responsum. Dionys. Richel, and Carthus. Petrus osomnium. Sic
Iansenius. Et confirmatur ex ipsius Petri testimonio, qui Joh. 6. ver. 69. ante
hanc Confessionem, de communi omnium fide fassus est, dicens, [(...)] Credimus
and cognoscimus Te esse Christum silium Dei.
Margent.) But the Apostles, before he spoke, believed Christ confessed, and
not Peter confessing.

III. ROCK is that Confession, whereupon Christ says he will build his
Church, and members thereof: but whosoever shall truly believe that which S.
Peter confessed, to wit, Christ the Son of the living God, is accordingly
built upon the Rock, albeit he should never have heard so much as the name of
Peter. Ergo, the Confession rightly understood had Relation to Christ, and not
to the person of Saint Peter. IV. The thing, which Christ spoke of, was called
the ROCK, (as Fathers, Authors, and Professors on all sides do witness,) to
signify that which is Immovable, Impreinable, and Eternal; such as is
Christ, and his Truth. But Peter found his Confession (as it proceeded from
himself) to be moveable, and shaken, at one time thrice denying this
Confession of his Lord, when as also he knew himself to be mortal: Ergo, he
did not think this Confession, which Christ calls the Rock, to have
Relation to himself, but only to Christ. So impossible it is, that Saint
Peter, in his Confession, should apprehend the ground of your now Roman Faith.
Whence you cannot but observe, with what modesty your forecited Advocates,
Baronius, Bellarmine, and Roffensis could object unto Protestants Impudency,
Singularity, and Blindness, for defending an Exposition of the word, ROCK,
so copiously and evidently warranted by all sorts of Witnesses, even within the
Romish Church it self.

II. CHALLENGE: From the judgment of the ancient Fathers.
IN venerable Antiquity we find some Fathers distinguishing between Petra the
Rock, and Peter; as plainly as between Petrus a Petra, vt Christianus a
Christo. Aug. de verbis Domini secundum Matthew. Sermon. 13. Ambros. Sermon. 47.
Hieron. and alij multi; Petrus nominatus a Petra.
Christ and a Christian: Some as directly noting Christ to be the Rock, as
Saint John did ever point him out to be The Lamb of God, where they say, Petra
est Christus. Ambros. in Luc. c. 9. Hieron ad Eustoch. and in Isaiam. 28. Aug.
Tract. 124 in Ioh. Ans^lmus in Matthew. Beda, and Alij. Non super Petrum, sed
super Christum. Chrysostom. Sermon. de Pentecost. Non super te, Petre. Aug. Ser.
13. de verbis Domini, init. Petra, quam confessus est Petrus.
This Rock was Christ: Some, that Peter made his Confession, Cyril. See above.
at q.
As the mouth of the other Disciples: And that Vna haec fidei Petra. Petriore
confessa, [Tues filius Dei. Hilar. (...) Epiphan. Haer. 59. and Chrysostom. hom.
55. in Matthew Greg Nissen in Test. ca. vlt. Hilar. de Trin. lib. 6. Ambros. in
ca. 2. ad Ephesians.
The Faith confessed was the Rock: Some by way of Diminution, Quod si super
vnum Petrum, quid de Iohanne? an aduersus vnum Petrum non praeualiturae portae
Inferorum? Orig. in Mat. 16. Tract. 1.
Not Peter alone, more than others: Some exclusiuely, Non me supet te, Petre,
sed te super me. Aug. de verbis Domini Sermon. 13. Non dixit Christus, super hunc
Petrum. Chrysostom. Sermon. de Pentecost. Petra, a qua Petrus sortitus est nomen.
Hier. in Matt. c. 7.
Not Peter. And though Some (for we may not dissemble thus much) do expound, by
Rock, Peter; yet do they mean either a Primacie of Order, or Honor in Peter;
not of authority, and dominion: or else a priority of Confession, because he
uttered the words first. And so all the Apostles and Prophets are called
Foundations: by which is not meant their persons or dominions, but their
doctrines. Else show us, where ever any Prophet had any Ecclesiastical
jurisdiction in the Church of the Jews.

And whereas you are urgent in obiecting the Testimony of Saint Brereley
August. Relig. Eligat Lector. etc August.
Augustine, as though he would make the Case indifferent, yet are you taught by
your own Bishop, that Augustine. Retract. Tom. 1. lib. 1. c. 21. ait, Harum
duarum sententiarum, quae sit probabilior, eligat Lector. Hoc tamen dicit
Augustinus ( says Abulensis) vt non videatur supra contradicere, quasi vtraque
sit sustentabilis sententia: and tamen ipse secundam tenet, quod patet ex
propositis Verbis eius; Nam primam dicit se tenuisse in quodam loco, secundam
autem dicit se saepissime posuisse; and hic istam tenet ipse; and est verior.
Abulens. in Mat. 16. qu. 67.
Augustine, in that place, rather held that by Rock was meant Christ. Albeit
that, to make this Exposition indifferent, which you lay down as a ground of
your Faith, would be the utter destruction of your own Cause: For Faith must
stand upon Infallibility, and not upon an Indifferency of Choosing whether.
So inconsiderate and precipitant was that your Author, in his Objection.

Now whatsoever may seem to be wanting in this second Challenge, it is
plentifully supplied by One, whose judgment ought to be as acceptable, as his
learning was admirable. Cast your eye on the Jsaac Casaub. Exercitat. upon
Baron. observes 3. Expositions of the word Rock in the Fathers. The 1. making
Christ the Rock, and distinguishing Petrum, a Petra, as a deriuatiue from the
Primative, as Christianus a Christo. Petrum a Petra denominatum crediderunt
Aug. Ambros. Eusebius. Emissen. and alij. Casaub. Exercit. 13. Again. Ambrosius
and Augustinus; Vt a Christo Christianus, (...). Orig. in Mat. Petra
vnusquisque imitator Christi. Exercit. 15. And, by an elegant Simily, he
shows how Christ might have meant himself; Vt si Leo Imperator diceret Leoni
militi, Tu es Leo, and in hoc Leone sita est spes omnis praemij. The 2
Exposition, by Rock to signify the Confession of Saint Peter, or Christ
confessed, he opposes against Baronius, who imputes impudent madness to
Protestants for so expounding it. Sic ( says Casaub.) ex Catholicorum albo
expungendi sunt Ambros. Chrysostom. Aug. Basil. Seleusiens. Theodorit. Theophyl.
Lyranus, and Glossae ordinariae Author Suidas. The 3. Exposition. Per Petram
intelligunt Petrum. -- Alij per plusquam puerilem errorem (...) a (...) quod
est caput; vt Optatus and Innocent. 3. Papa. lib. 1. myster. c. 8. Contra ipsum
Euangelistam Iohannem, [Cephas, cuius est interpretatio Petrus, Ioh. 1.43.]
Alij ita tamen, vt per Petram intelligerent aliquam Petrae proprietatem,
quatenus symbolum est fortitudinis and soliditatis in fide, Ambros. Cyprian.
Sed nullus omnium propter Dominium. Sic Baronius; Latin dicendum, Tu es Petra,
and super hanc Petram. Mira licentia factum Tridenti authenticum corrigit. Haec
Casaubonus loc. supra citas.
Margent, where you shall perceive how many Fathers Interpreted the ROCK to
signify either Christ confessed by Peter, or else the Confession of Peter: so
that your Cardinal, censuring the interpretation of Protestants not to be the
Exposition of Catholics, does in effect thereby wipe out of the number of
Catholics, Ambrose, Chrysostom, Augustine, and diverse other ancient Fathers.
Next, that the Expounding, by Rock, Peter does nothing advantage the Romish
Conclusion, which is from Rock, to infer Saint Peter's Monarchy and absolute
Jurisdiction over all other Apostles: because Rock can be but a Symbol or
sign of such properties as are belonging to a Rock, as Soliditie and
Vnmouablenesse in the faith, but not of Dominion. Finally, he notes in your
Cardinal a bold licentiousness, who being a Romanist (to make Saint Peter the
Rock) durst correct the Vulgar Translation, which has been pronounced
Authentical by the Council of Trent.

III. CHALLENGE.
BY this time you see, that your faith of Peter's Monarchy, which you bear the
world in hand to be infallibly built upon the word ROCK, mentioned by Christ
unto Peter, is according to the judgment of the Fathers, Confessions of your
own Divines, and irresistible demonstrations of truth it self merely built
upon the sands. How then shall any conscience of man believe you in your
Expositions of Scripture, seeing you to be so egregiously overtaken in that,
which you, in all your disputes concerning this Cause, object as if not the
sole, yet the most solid Rock of your belief?

As for any other place of Scripture, which can be alleged in this Cause, it
were altogether superfluous to discuss in this place; both because the
evidence, which you have received from this one Text, may sufficiently warn
you, not to presume of the learning and judgment, whereof your grand-Leadears
make such boasts; as also because all other Objections have been fully
satisfied Videat Lecto^ Apologiae nostrae partem secundam.
elsewhere. Where the acknowledgement of Cardinal Cusanus, sometimes the Popes
Legate, excellently studied in the Fathers, and primarily exercised in the
Council of Basil, is made good; who, in debating the question of the Popes
Jurisdiction, with the assent of that Council, did publicly auerre that Sed
scimus quod Petrus nihil plus potestatis accepit, alijs Apostolis, etc. Nam.
etc. Cusan. Card. Concord. Cathol. l. 2. cap. 13.
Peter received from Christ no greater authority than did the other Apostles:
nothing was said to him, which was not spoken to them. He proceeds further,
particularly insisting upon the objected Scriptures, and concludes that the
other Apostles were equally called Stones; had equally the Keys of the
Kingdom of heaven delivered unto them; equally received the charge of
teaching, that is, Feeding of the whole flock of Christ. As yet then you have
no foundation for your pretended Monarchy of Peter, by any promise of Christ
made unto him. In the next place we are to examine whether any ground appear
thereof by any Monarchical or Iuridicall Act of Saint Peter, through out the
whole course of his Apostleship, over all, or any one of the other Apostles.

II. That Saint Peter never exercised any Act of Jurisdiction, as properly
belonging to himself over the other Apostles, whereby to testify that he had
any Dominion over them, as the Monarch and Head of the Catholic Church. SECT.
5.
TOuching Saint Peter's practice and conversation among the other Apostles; we
suppose that the testimony of your Salmeron (one of the first in the foundation
of the Society of Jesuits, and throughout all his Volumes, which are
sixteen, upon all occasions everywhere a zealous Proctor, for the proving and
promoting of Saint Peter's Monarchy) may as well satisfy your selves, as it
does us. He therefore, in answer to the Question, why the pretended Monarchy
of Saint Peter is not demonstrable by any public Act of Peter? tells us (and
his words are worthy of observation) that Petrus in Pastoratu suo, in quo erat
Coryphaeus and Iudex aliorum, ita se gessit, vt videretur quodammodo Pastoratum
negligere; and cum caeteris Apostolis tanquam frat^em and aequalem se gerere
elegit, non autem vt maiorem, and ipsorum caput and Rectorem. -- Nam si Petrus
vt Romans Pontifex, and ipse Vicarius Christi scripsisset, videretur in suis
scriptis ius Ecclesiasticum, seu, quod idem est, Pontificium dictasse potius
quam Diuinum. Salmeron Ies. in. 1 Pet. 1. Disp. 1. Tom. 16.
Peter, although he were Head and Judge over the other Apostles, yet he so
behaved himself among them, that he might seem, in a manner, to have
neglected his Pastorship, by carrying himself as a Brother and Equal with
them; and not as either Head, or Rector over them. So he. And he gives you a
Reason hereof, for If Peter (says he) had written as a Pope, then might he be
thought to have published rather Pontifical, than Divine Laws, etc. Which is
no more in effect, but that which a French Lawyer has said before him; namely,
that Franciscus Duaren. de Ecclesiae Minist. and Benefic. lib. 3. cap. 2.
In the Apostles time, as often as any was ordained Bishop or Deacon, or any
thing was to be decreed, which appertained to the Church, Peter never took
that upon himself, but permitted it to the whole Church. So he.

How then shall any imagine, that you can truly object any one act of Peter,
which might but probably prove his Dominion and Jurisdiction over the other
Apostles, as the Pope challenges to do over all other Bishops, seeing that
you are constrained to grant, that he made himself Equal with them so far,
as that he might seem in a sort to have neglected his Pastorship. Although,
indeed, this could not Saint Peter do, without exceeding injury to his place
and Government (if he had any such) because it belongs to every one, in his
degree, to maintain and magnify the dignity of his Ministry; as Saint Paul
teaches saying, Romans 9.13.
I will magnify my office, inasmuch as I am Doctor of the Gentiles. Upon which
Text Pope Gregory collecteth a general lesson, for the defense of his own
Jurisdiction. Ita docet Apostolus humilitate^ tenere in mente, vt tamen ordinis
nostri dignitatem seruemus in honor. Greg. l. 4. Epist. 36. initio.
The Apostle (says he) teaches us so to carry humility in our heart, that
we do keep and preserve the dignity of that order, whereunto we are called.
So he.

CHALLENGE.
WHat shall we say then? will you have us believe that Peter held his whole
Monarchy (for so you call it) which he had over the Apostles for the space of
fifteen years, without any expression of any of those Notes of Catholic
Jurisdiction, which you account to be proper unto Papal Monarchy over all
Bishops and Pastors? As for Example: Not the Durand. Rational. l. 3. cap. 13.
Crown upon his head, to show his Empire: nor the Miter, to show his Pastoral
Dominion over the other Apostles: No Legate a latere, to carry his Mandates:
no person admitted (a pride which Saint Peter In his Answer to the Centurion.
Acts 10. Commended by Polydore Virg. Jnuent. l. 4. c. 13. impress. Lugdu^.
1558. Yet by the Pope exacted as proper to himself. Solius Papae pedes
Principes omnes exoscula^tur. Lorin. Ies. in Act. 10. and Suar. de trip. virt.
disp. 10.. 2.
abhorred) to kiss his feet: No one Canon of directing them: No Claim, or yet
Admittance of any Appeal from them: No Reservation of any great Case, as by
special Prerogative proper to himself, such as you attribute to the Pope;
These Appeals and Reseruations are recorded as proper to the Pope by Azorius
Ies. Inst. Moral. part. 2. lib 4. cap 35.
to wit, of Admitting any out of the Dioces of another; of Absoluing those that
are Excommunicate by another; of Canonizing Saints; of Confirming Synods; of
Granting plenarie Indulgences; of Pardoning Simonie, and almost an hundred the
like sins? Teach us this, when you can persuade your selves that there ever
was Temporal Monarch, diligent in the Execution of his office, that would
never be distinguished from his Nobles either by his Guard, or Coin, or Habit,
or Commands, or public Edicts and Constitutions, or at least by some one Note
and Character of Imperial eminency and Authority.

I only add, making bold to ask you a Question. If that the Addition of the
word, ROMAN, to the article of the Catholic Church, be so necessary for the
directing of the faith of Christians, to the acknowledgement of the Seat of
Saint Peter at Rome, as the infallible ground of their faith, and center of
their Salvation, why within the whole seven years, during which time (as See
above Chap. 3. Sect. 9.
you say) Saint Peter had his Seat at Antioch, before it was translated to
Rome, cannot you find in all Antiquity the Addition of the word ANTIOCHIAN,
and the like Article of The Antiochian Catholic Church, without union and
subjection whereunto there is no salvation? Far be it from us to think, that
the blessed Apostle Saint Peter (who was caught of our Lord, that The Catholic
Church, wheresoever for Place, or whenever for Time, was built upon the Rock
of the Confession of Christ the Son of God) should ever have entertained such
a fancy of confining the supreme residence of Gods infallible spirit to any
one singular Place. Thus much of Saint Peter himself. We proceed to the Pope.

That Saint Peter never believed the Privileges, which he received from Christ,
by the objected Scriptures, to be derived from himself, and conferred upon any
Pope. SECT. 6.
Never had we heard you allege any of these Scriptures, to make Peter such a
Rock, as must signify a predominancie over all other Apostles, except you had
sought out of that Rock to carue a Pope, who should likewise have a
transcendent power over all other Bishops. But seeing that (as has been
proved) the primitive Peter had no such Prerogative, surely your deriuatiue
Peter must needs prove a Nullity. But to the point.

The first Scripture, Luke 22.
CHRIST said, indeed, directly to S. Peter, I have prayed for thee, that thy
Faith fail not, wherefore thou being converted, strengthen thy Brethren. Which
we confess, does signify as great a privilege granted to S. Peter, as any
mortal man can desire to enjoy, namely an infalllible assurance of saving
grace in this world, and of salvation it self after his departure out of this
life. Matter (we say) of Salvation, nothing of Dominion; and that also proper
to the primitive person of Saint Peter, but making nothing for any person
deriuatiue, and Successor of his, be he Pope, or whosoever. If you could prove
this, we should need no more for our satisfaction. Duo priuilegia, etc. Bellar.
lib. 4. de Pont. cap. 3.. Est igitur. -- Primu^ fortasse non manauit, etc. --
Alteru^. si^e dubio. Ibi^.
Christ (says your Cardinal) obtained two Privileges for S. Peter, in
promising that his Faith should not fail; and that he should never depart from
the true Faith, in himself: the second, that he should not teach others any
thing contrary to the true Faith. Thus of Saint Peter. How can you derive any
part of this from Saint Peter to the Pope? The first of these (says he)
peradventure does not; but the second without all doubt redoundeth to his
Successors. So he. Which is so undoubtedly an unconscionable Answer, that it is
subject to a threefold Confutation: the first is by retorting the Cardinal's
own Assertion upon himself: for whereas your Parisian Doctors will have
Peter, in his answer to Crist, to have been the figure of the Church of
Christ, and not the sole Governor thereof himself, the same your Cardinal
will needs confute that Gloss in this manner. Quia Dominus vna^ tantum
persona^ de signa, vit. -- etc, Bellar ibid.. Quae Expositio.
Because Christ (says he) did express one singular person, saying, Simon,
Simon, adding the Pronoune of the second person, in these words, I have prayed
for [THEE] that [THY] Faith fail not; and therefore [THOV] being converted,
strengthen [THY] Brethren: Surely if he had spoken of the whole Church, he
would have said, I have prayed for YOU, that YOUR Faith fail not. So he. Which
is a true and sound Collection indeed, and by the Law of Retorsion confirms
our defense, that this Scripture does not intend any other Prerogative, than
that which was only proper to that, Thou Simon, and I have prayed for Thee,
that is, for Peter himself. But, the now Pope (you know) is not Simon, but
Clemens, or Vrbane, or the like: and Christ his prayer was for one person, and
not for a whole body of Successors, for then it should have been said for
You, or for Thee, and Thine. Nor has every Pope a Privilege (as you All grant)
that falling into Temptation, he must rise again.

Our second Confutation is taken from the nature of a Privilege: Priuilegiu
personale singular, quod individuae personae indiuiduo tantum conceditur,
expresso ejus nomine -- and hoc in iure absolute vocatur personale. -- tale non
transgreditur persona^. Salas de leg. qu. 9^. Tract. 14.. 2. disp. 17. Cum
persona extinguitur. Ibidem.
A personal and singular Privilege (says your Jesuit, is that which is
granted unto an Individual person, with expression of his name; and this
Privilege does not extend to any other, but dies with the person to whom it is
granted. So he. The Case then is plain. You therefore must first raise up
Saint Peter from death, and place him again in the Roman Chair, before you
can challenge the Privilege of Peter.

Our third Confutation arises from the Law of true exposition. The Privilege,
granted unto Saint Peter, whatsoever it was, delivered it was in one tenure of
words, namely, that his Faith fail not, without any note of distinction: and
it is the Law of all Laws, Non distinguendum, vbi lex non distinguit. So that
whereas you ascribe two Privileges conferred upon Saint Peter, by the words of
Christ, one not to err from the Faith, which was In himself, as a private
Doctor: the other not to err publicly, to seduce Others, you are necessarily
chargeable either to claim both these Privileges, in the behalf of your
Popes, or else to confess that he has no more interest in the second (that
is, not to err, as Pope, in his public Conclusions, to the seducing of
Others) then he has in the first, which is, as a private Doctor, not to err
in himself: the Cardinal himself confessing, that Conueniunt omnes Catholici
-- in haec, quod Pontifex, vt priuatus Doctor, possit errare etiam in
quaestionibus juris vniuersalibus tam fidei quam moru^, idque ex ignorantia, vt
alijs Doctoribus interdum accidit. Bellar. l. 4. de Pont. c. 2.. His notatis.
The Pope, as a private Doctor, may err in Questions concerning as well Faith
as manners, as well as other Doctors; and that this has sometime happened to
your Pope. And this you call an opinion, wherein All Catholics do consent.
And therefore your Jesuit does reprove those, who write against this Papam
quemlibet -- vt priuatam personam, errare posse, and a fide deficere; etsi noui
Scriptores aliud defendere tentauerint, praeter communem sensum Doctorum, etc.
Salmeron Ies. Com. in Gal. 2. disp. 24.. Excusabilius. page 107.
Common Consent.

CHALLENGE.
ONe would marvel that learned men, for the defense of a periurious Paradoxe
of the Popes Primacie, as The Catholic Bishop; and the Sovereignty and
Infallibility of his See, as the Catholic Church; should entangle themselves
in so gross assertions, as are so easily confuted by the Common Laws of the
exposition of Scriptures, by the nature of a Privilege, and by their own
palpable Contradictions: but that it is the wisdom of God to prove the
wisdom of a man, against God, to be no better than errant folly.

The Second Scripture objected, for the Deriuatiue Primacie and Jurisdiction of
the Pope, from Saint Peter, is Matthew. 16. SECT. 7.
WE have heard of this Text already, as it concerns Peter himself, when
Christ said unto him [ Blessed art thou Simon. -- Thou art Peter, and upon this
Rock will I build my Church, and the gates of hell shall not prevail against
it.] Wherein, again, we see Peter, but where shall we see the Pope? The
Rhemists by their Marginall note upon this Text, as it were by a forefinger,
point him out unto us, willing us to observe that this Text Rhemists upon the
place.
Is the Gospel upon the Creation and Coronation of the Pope, and on the
Anniuersary thereof. So they. As though it were as true as the Gospel, that
what was here spoken to Peter does accordingly belong to the Pope, by the
right of Succession. Which being the same error, that was committed in your
expounding of the former Scripture, is now refelled by the same Confutations:
but especially by your own exposition upon this place, wherein (as your Bishop
truly commenteth) Petrus Beatus dicitur ex certitudine beatitudinis futurae,
per reuelationem, de qua dubitare non poterat. Et hoc fuit magnum donum.
Abulens. Episc. in Matthew. 16.
There was granted to Saint Peter an infallible certainty of his souls
eternal blessedness, which is an excellent Privilege. So he. Which also the
other words do more Emphatically import, where Christ says that The gates of
hell shall not prevail against it. Where, by gates of hell, are meant (you
know) Per Portas Inferorum, intelligitur absque omni restrictione omnis Diaboli
potentia, sieve per haereses, vel per alia vitia, vel per persecutiones. Maldon.
Ies. in Matthew. 16.
Temptations of Satan, Vices, Heresies, and Persecutions. So you.

CHALLENGE.
SO then it should have concerned your Doctors, if they had been men of either
Faith or Front, to have made good the Jurisdiction of your Popes deriuatiuely
from Saint Peter, and not thus to have been void of both conscience and
modesty, in violating the sacred Writ. For say (we pray you) are all your
Popes, by virtue of their Succession from Saint Peter, so blessed now in their
hopes, as to be infallibly persuaded that no Temptation of Satan shall prevail
against their persons? But that they shall be blessed everlastingly? Will you
have us to be thus persuaded of those, who either have been, or may be
desperately wicked in their lives, Heretics, Apostates, Atheists, and the
damned limbs of Satan? Them, we say, of whom your Massonius witnesses thus:
In Pontificibus nemo hodie sanctitatem requi^it: Optimi putantur, si vel
leuiter boni sunt, vel minus mali quam caeteri mortales esse soleant. Massonius
de vitis Pont. in Iulio 3.
Now a days none requires Sanctity in Popes, who are then held to be the best
Popes, when either there is a little goodness in them, or else when they are
not worse than other sorts of men are usually. Or of whom your Cardinal
Baronius; Intrusos fuisse in Cathedram Petri homines monstrosos, vita
turpissimos, moribus perditissimos. Baron. Anno Domini 897. nu. 4.
There have been intruded into Saint Peter's Throne monstrous and most beastly
men, and of most desperate condition. Or of whom your Genebrard thus: Per annos
fere 150. Pontifices circiter 50. a virtute Maiorum deficientes, Apotacticos,
Apostaticosve potius quam Apostolicos fuisse. Genebrar. Chron. Anno Christi
901. page 553.
For an hundred and fifty years space have 50 Popes been, rather
Apostaticall than Apostolical. Or of whom Cardinal Bellarmine thus; Johannes
23. tam dissolutae vitae, vt vulgus hominum existimaret eum negare vitam
aeternam. Bellar. lib. 4. de Pont. c. 14.. Itaque iste.
Pope John the 23 was of so dissolute a life, that common people conceived,
that he thought there was no life eternal. Or of whom your Jesuit Costerus
thus: -- Quia fieri potest vt Papa idola colat, and Diabolicis artibus operam
nauet. Coster. Ies. Enchirid. de Summo Pont. cap. 3.. Fatemur.
We confess it possible (says he) that Popes may become Idolatrous, and give
themselves to Diabolical arts. So they. We have not urged you with the proofs
of Protestants, but with the plain Confessions of the most zealous Proctors
and Advocates of the Roman Church. Thus much of the Faith of Saint Peter, who
being ioynt-founder of the Church with S. Paul, may not be thought disioyned in
belief from him: Of whom we are now to treat.

That Saint Paul, the Co-founder of the Church of Rome with Saint Peter, was
not of the now Roman Faith, either concerning the Father-hood, or Mother-hood,
which is now pretended, thereof. SECT. 8.
Always you are to remember, that you have not attributed to the Church of
Rome the title of Catholic and Universal Mother, further than that the Pope
(as Catholic Father) is to be acknowledged the Successor unto S. Peter in the
ordinary Pastorship and jurisdiction over the Catholic and Universal Church
of Christ. Our Assertion is, that Saint Paul had no such Belief, concerning
either the pretended Dominion of Peter, (and consequently of your Roman Pope)
or of the Universal power of the Roman Church above all others: or yet of the
absolute Continuance thereof in the faith of Christ.

That Saint Paul believed not the supreme Pastorship of Saint Peter, above
himself; proved by his comparing of S. Peter with himself. SECT. 9.
AT what time as Saint Paul was vexed with false Apostles, who (as Saint
Hierome, Hieron. Praef. in epist. ad Gal. -- Pseudapostoli asserebant Petrum
and Iacobum and totas Iudaeae Ecclesias Euangelium Christi cum lege veteri
miscuisse. Deinde Pauli authoritatem prae illis i^m nominatis Apostolis
huiusmodi sermonibus eleuare studebant; Non Paulus hic ferendus, nam hic
Apostolorum discipulus, illi Jesus Christi, etc. Ederus partit. Theol. p. 451.
in Epist. ad Gal.
you know, commenteth) Affirmed, that Peter, James, and all the Churches of the
Jews did mingle the Ceremonial Law and Gospel together; and all to this end,
that they might lessen and vilify the authority of S. Paul in respect of
them, as though they had been the Disciples of Christ, and he the Disciple of
the Apostles: Hereupon Saint Paul, who was otherwise the most humble among men,
(in so much that he standing upon comparison, would be held the 1. Cor. 15.
Greatest, but yet of sinners, and The least of all the Apostles:)
notwithstanding, when it stood him upon to maintain his Calling, which he had
from Christ, against all malicious Detractors, he professes, saying, Romans
11.13.
In as much as I am an Apostle of the Gentiles [(...)] I magnify mine office.
So that upon a Compulsarie comparison, provoked by the Calumniation of others,
he esteemed it no arrogancy, but direct justice, to avouch his own
worthiness, for the advancing of the work of his Ministry.

A long time after the exercise of his Apostleship, he would not Gal. 1.17.
Go to Jerusalem to Peter, or any of the Apostles, lest he might have seemed
to have been authorized by them; yet three years after that he takes a
journey thither, Jb. verse 18.
To see Peter; doubtless for honor sake, as one in order of Apostleship most
eminent: but this he did voluntarily, in discretion and brotherly communion;
and not in subjection, as the Context shows. Fourteen years also after
this, he makes a second voyage to Jerusalem, where he meets with Peter and
others. What then? Gal. 2.2.
I conferred, [or, communicated] unto them (says he) that Gospel which I
preached. Aliud est confe^re, aliud discere. Inter conferentes aequalitas est,
discens a docente minor, ait Hieron. Test Salmeron Ies. in hunc locu^. Tanquam
cum Amicis and paribus. Aquinas in hunc locum.
It is one thing to confer (says Saint Hierome) another thing to learn: for
among them that confer there is Equality. We hear not, as yet, of any
authotitie which he received either from Peter alone, or jointly together with
the College of the other Apostles, or of any thing that might betoken his
subjection: No, he utterly disclaimeth this; for, speaking of the Chiefest, he
says, Gal. 2.6.
Those who seemed to be somewhat, in conference added nothing unto me.
[NOTHING,] namely, Nihil doctrinae, aut potestatis. Aquinas.
Neither concerning doctrine, nor authority, as very well says Aquinas. In a
word, 2. Cor. 11.5.
I (says Saint Paul) am not inferior unto the chief of the Apostles. What
then obtained Paul of Peter, and of the other chief Apostles? Hear S. Paul
himself; Gal. 2.9.
They gave unto me the right hand of fellowship: which was only a testimony
of Communion in one Profession and Apostleship; no imposition of
subministration or subjection.

Hitherto we have kept in the Negative, of his not Inferioritie; but Saint Paul
does further instance in the Affirmative, of his Equality: Gal. 2.7.
They saw that the Gospel of the uncircumcision was committed unto me, as the
Gospel of the Circumcision was unto Peter. Where, to seek no further than
your Rhemists Notes, Rhemists upon this place.
It is plain by this place and others, that to them (that is, Peter and Paul)
as the most renouned Apostles, the charge of all Nations was given, as divided
into two parts, that is, Jews and Gentiles. So they. Their Dioces therefore
was divided, yet not exclusiuely, for the authority of the Apostles was Go and
teach all Nations. Mat. 2^.19.
unlimited, and often did as well Peter (notwithstanding this division) preach
to the Gentiles, as S. Paul to the Jews; but yet differently, namely so, that
the ordinary course of their Ministration was distinguished, Peter to the
Jews, and Paul to the Gentiles; which was of infinite extent larger than the
other. In which respect Saint Chrysostom does not stick to say, that Cui
omnis praedicatio, cui res orbis, mysteria cuncta, vniuersaque dispensatio a
Deo creditur, Chrysostom. Hom. 18. in epist. ad Romans
The Universal dispensation was committed to Saint Paul.

I. CHALLENGE, from Reason.
IN all this we see not in Saint Paul any acknowledgement of Subjection, or
Substitution to Saint Peter, but a plain Plea of Equality: or else tell us,
what Pope, since Gregory the first, would not hold it a Derogation from his
Popedom to hear any Bishop in the Church stand in Contestation, and say that
The Pope could add nothing to his authority; nor that he was any whit
inferior to the chief of all the Bishops in Rome, among whom the Pope
himself was one? What boldness, and indeed contumely would this be judged,
not only to make many Chiefes with your Monarch; but also to account himself
Nothing inferior to the Chief of them? Add hereunto his next Assumption, that
he had as good and absolute right in his Dioces, as the Pope had in his. Your
Jesuit Azorius says, that Olim duo erant Imperatores, vnus in Orient, alter
in Occidente summa potestate potiti: hac ratione neuter ius habet in alterum,
ita vt vterque in solidum (...) esset: sic quoque vtriusque potestas minuitur
ex part, nec vnus alteri praeest. Azor. Jes. Tom. 2. l. 4. c. 12.. Tribus
modis.
When there were two Emperors, one in the East, the other in the West, both of
them holding equal authority throughout the whole Empire, it could not be but
the authority of the one must needs diminish the authority of the other in
some part, and yet neither should be subject to the other. So he. And indeed it
could not otherwise be. Never was there heard of Monarch (as you instile the
Pope) in Imperio Diuiso, that is, in an Empire divided, in an equality with
any other. For Division and Equality is of more, whereas Monarchy can be but
of one. So impossible it is, that Saint Paul should have been of the now Roman
Faith, concerning Subjection to the Pastor of the Roman Church.

II. CHALLENGE, from the Fathers.
MVch time need not be spent, in collecting the Testimonies of Antiquity,
among whom Saint Ambrose says, that Paulus tempore, non dignitate minor.
Ambros. in 2. Cor. cap. 12.
Paul was not less in dignity than Peter. Saint Maximus, that Quis cui
praeponatur incertum est admitti. Sanctus Maximus Sermon vlt. de sanctis Petro
and Paulo.
Whether Paul or Peter were to be preferred, it is uncertain. Chrysostom
says, (...) (sc. Petro) (...) etc. Chrysostom. in Epist. ad Galat. 1.18.
Paul (that I say no more) was equal to Peter: Saint Hierome; [Tituli
Apostolorum aequales,] Principes Ecclesiae. Hiero. in Psalm. 44.
The titles of these two Apostles are equal, (says he) they are Chief of the
Church. S. Basil; Columnae Ecclesiae, Basil. in Epist.
They are the Pillars of the Church. Duo Christianorum Principes. Eucherius
Lugdun. vt citatur a Casaub. Exercit. 16. in Baron.. 145.
Eucherius; Peter and Paul, two Princes of the Christians. You will not (we
presume) so much prejudice these Fathers, as to think that they could not
discern between a Monarch (such as you held Saint Peter to have been over all
the other Apostles) and a Subject; or so unjust, as to have thus equalled these
Two, if they had believed All the Apostles to have been subject to the Dominion
and Jurisdiction of Saint Peter: much less could they have attributed to S.
Paul Titles of so great eminence, as to instile him One, To whom was committed
the administration of the whole Church: (...). Chrysostom. Hom. 18. in Epist. ad
Romanos.
and One Paulus obtinuit totius Ecclesiae principatu^. Greg. in 1. Reg. l. 4.
c. ^. Et effectus est Caput nationum. Ibidem.
obeying the government of the Church Universal: and One made the Head of
Nations.

Saint Paul's Comparison of Others with S. Peter, against the pretended Primacie
of Peter his Jurisdiction over the other Apostles. SECT. 10.
FIrst Saint Paul distinguishes James, Peter, and John from the other
Disciples, and joins them in one Chiefedome among themselves, saying; Gal. 2.2
I conferred with them of reputation: and again in the title, Jb. ver. 9.
They that seemed to be Pillars: and yet again, 2. Cor. 11.5. [(...).]
They that were Chief of the Apostles: Lastly, his last vale with them; They
gave to me the right hand of society and fellowship. Ergo, he accounted them
Equal in authority (which ancient Chrysostom. Ambros. Oecumen.
Fathers have collected from thence) yet so, as in alleging their names,
James, Peter, and John, he prefers James before Peter. Do you ask why? You
can answer your selves. Praemittitur Iacobus, quia erat Episc.
Hierosolymitanus. Aquinas, Rhemists, Salmeron Ies. in hunc locum Lorinus Ies.
in Act. 1. page 38. vbi adiungit Anselmum.
Because (say you) James was Bishop of Jerusalem, where the Apostles were at
this time, when S. Paul writ. Be it so, It must then follow that James was, in
that respect, superior to Peter.

Lastly, whiles Paul is earnest in vindicating the dignity of his Pastorship,
even then, when he would stop the mouths of false Apostles, who objected that
he had no sufficient Commission to preach, as not having been authorized by the
other Apostles; he answers, that he had received his Calling Gal. 1.1.
Not of men, neither by man, but immediately from and by Jesus Christ. And for
proof hereof he adds a reason, saying, of the time when he was at Jerusalem:
Ib. ver. 18, 19. (...), etc.
I indeed saw Peter, but other of the Apostles saw I none, save James the Lords
brother. His Consequent is; Ergo he received not any authority of his
Ministration from the Apostles. Which had been a seely, and indeed a
senseless Reason, if the spirit of Papistry had reigned in those days,
because his Adversaries might readily have replied, What is that you say? Saw
you none but Peter? as though Peter were not sufficient in himself to
authorize you, seeing that Peter, being the Vicar of Christ, and the Ordinary
and Universal Pastor of his Church, is All in all, because the Governor of all
others, without exception. But Saint Paul, we know, spoke by the Spirit of God,
the Author and Fountain of Divine reason, and could not therefore argue
absurdly: yet notwithstanding he answered saying, I saw none but Peter, except
James. Plainly signifying, that Peter, at that time, could not challenge
Jurisdiction over the College of all the other Apostles.

I. CHALLENGE.
SEt before your eyes any Bishop, (as for example the Bishop of Toledo,) who
should defend that he was a Bishop extraordinary, and needed not at all to be
authorized from Rome: and when it should thereupon be objected, that he had
been at Rome with the Pope, and other Bishops and Cardinals there, and
therefore it must needs be thought that he was established in his Calling by
them; then the Bishop of Toledo should answer semblably, as did Saint Paul,
saying; I confess indeed that I went to Rome, to visit the Pope, and abode
with him certain days, but other of the Bishops or Cardinals there I saw
none, except the Bishop of Cullen; and therefore you may not object unto me,
that I received any authority from the Conclaue and College at Rome. Can you
conceive that any answer could more derogate from the now Popedom, than to
BUT, and except against his authority, in ordaining or establishing that
Bishop of Cullen? Yet such like was the Answer and Apology of Saint Paul for
himself.

II. CHALLENGE.
THe Cause is weighty, and may require a further application, as thus; whiles
you give to the Pope an absolute Jurisdiction, cum plenitudine potestatis, over
all other Bishops, how can you suffer him to be mated or equalled with other
Bishops, as Paul did Peter, by joining in society with him Gal. 2.9.
James and John? Much less would you permit, that the name of the Bishop of
Cullen should be preferred before the name of the Bishop of Rome, (whose Dioces
you extend Bellar. Vide Refutat. in nostra Causa Regia, cap. 4. Sect. 7.
To the ends of the world,) as to marshall them thus, viz. The Bishop of
Cullen, the Bishop of Rome, and the Bishop of Millan: as Saint Paul did, in
alleging the name of James before Peter. For, for you to say, that this was
done See above in this Chap. Sect. 11.
In respect that James was Bishop of Jerusalem, and the Cause had relation to
his Dioces, is as much as to feign that the Archbishop of Auignon, whilst
the Pope resided there, had been put in Catalogue before the Pope himself; or
that the name of some King must be placed before the name of the Emperor,
even within his own Empire. Next, to talk that the Bishop of Toledo, or any
other Bishop came to visit the Pope, and was dismissed by receiving from him,
Gal. 2.9.
The right hand of fellowship, as Paul did of Peter, how (if perhaps the phrase
had such a literal sense) would you think this good manners in a Bishop,
since you do tutor and instruct your Kings and Emperors to do homage to the
Pope, Bellar. and alij. Videat Lector Co^futat. in nostra Causa Regia, per
totum.
In kissing his foot? But especially to hear any Bishop, with a BUT, to
intimate the No-authoritie of the Pope in his Creation and Ordination, (as S.
Paul did of Peter) might this seem tolerable unto you, who still honor him
with the supreme Titles of n The Universal Father, The Catholic Bishop, and
Pastor over the whole Christian world?

III. CHALLENGE.
WIllingly shall we pass by other Objections, taken from the comparison of
Paul, or other Apostles with Saint Peter: although we know, that if Saint Peter
had given sentence in the Apostolical Synod at Jerusalem, as Act. 15.13.
James did in his presence: If Peter had been a Sender of any of the Apostles,
as he was himself, one that was Act. 8.14.
Sent by others: If Peter had Io. 13.23.
leaned on Christ his breast, as John did, and had therefore been solicited by
John to ask a question of secrecy, as John was by Peter: If Peter had been
called by a voice from heaven, as Saint Act. 9.4.
Paul was: If Peter had made as bold with Paul, as Paul did with Peter, by
Reproving him publicly [(...)] Gal. 2.14.
before them all: which far differs from the Papal Prerogative set down in
the Canon Law, saying, Non est qui audeat dicere, cur sic facis? Part. 1. Did.
40. Si Papa.
If the Pope be negligent, etc. So as thereby innumerable are led to Hell, yet
is there none that may say, Why do you so? If Peter alone (as did Saint Paul)
had written Romans 1.
To the Romans: If it had been said of Peter's ship, as it was of that,
wherein S. Paul was, Act. 27.24.
God has given unto thee all them that Sail with thee; And, Ib. ver. 31.
Except those remain in the ship you cannot be saved: Finally and principally,
if Saint Peter had written of himself, as Saint Paul did, saying, 2. Cor.
11.28.
I have the care of all the Churches: This one (to omit the rest) would have
seemed to you a firmer Foundation than the word ROCK; and have caused you to
lay down your former io paean, and insultation, raised from the depraved sense
of those Scriptures, [ Blessed art thou Simon,] or [ I have prayed for thee,]
or, Feed thou my Flocke] or any other the like, whereby you labor to erect a
Monarch of Peter, and (by your Consequence) upon the Pope, over all Churches in
the world. Wherein we challenge you of prejudice and rashness.

Hitherto we have spoken of the Faith of Saint Paul, concerning the authority
of Saint Peter, and but consequently of the Roman Bishop. We are in the next
place to try S. Paul's Faith, directly, concerning the Roman Church it self.

That Saint Paul was not of the now Roman Faith, concerning the former
Article, viz. The Catholic Roman Church, etc. as may appear by his own
Account of the Roman Church. Our first Proof. SECT. 11.
GReat was the estimation, doubtless, which Saint Paul had of the Christian
Professors of his time in the Church of Rome; yet not so great, by far, as
you would make the world believe. For first, we have heard your vaunting of the
Preheheminence of Rome, because See above Chap. 4. Sect. 1.
It was founded both by Peter and Paul, the two most renouned among the
Apostles: which boast is as easily blown away, by propounding a confessed
Parallel out of your Bozius, from Ecclesiastical Records, showing that
Dionysius Episcopus Corinthiorum scribens ad Romanos: Petrus and Paulus ambo,
cum and nostram Corinthi, and vestra^ Romae Ecclesiam fundassent, etc. Apud
Eusebius. Hist. lib. 2. c. 24. Test Bozio de signis Eccles. lib. 4. cap. 1. page
241.
Peter and Paul both founded the Church of Corinth. Yet was Corinth never
known to have pre-eminence above Alexandria, or other Churches of Asia, or
elsewhere.

Oh! but there is a second place, which will stop all mouths of Contradiction,
in the Epistle of Saint Paul to the Romans, Chap. 1. ver. 8. I thank my God,
through Jesus Christ, for you all, that your Faith is published through-out the
World. Upon this Commendation of the Faith of those Romans, the Bozius ib.
lib. 3. cap. vls pa. 225. and Rhemists Annot. in hunc locum. and Baron. An. 58.
number. 48.
Professors of the (now) Roman Faith use in a manner to triumph, as though
that Encomium, with the same Faith, were hereditary to that Church: or as if,
at that day, CATHOLIC and ROMAN had been all one. An Obiction now-adaies
breathed into the mouth of every Vulgar Papist. Whereas first, if you will
permit your own Cardinal Tolet, and your Jesuit Sa to be our Expositors, both
will say, that These words, [ through-out the world] are to be taken as
Hyperbole. Tolet. and Eman. Sa Ies. in eum locum.
Hyperbolically spoken, and by way of excess. Yea One of them resolves, that
by the words [ Your Faith] is not, meant, Fides vestra:] Non quam vos creditis
annunciatur, sed vos credidisse in toto mundo vulgatur. Tolet in bunc locum.
Annot. 16.
What the Romans believed, but only, That they believed; their Faith being
now published through-out the World. So that it appears not by this that the
Faith then was held Catholic, because the Romans believed it; but that it was
now a common fame through out the whole World, that the Romans had received the
Christian Faith. And no marvel, seeing that Rome was then the public stage of
the World, by reason of the Imperial Seat there: whither all sorts of people
under that vast Empire had recourse, for the discharge of Tributes, and
Accounts for their Offices, and the like: So that it was not possible that
things done publicly in Rome should not be known to the whole visible World,
as your own Jesuit Pererius Neque enim fieri poterat, vt quae Romae
eueniebant, ea illos, qui in toto erant terrarum orb, laterent. In illa enim
vrbe Romanoru^ Imperatores Regiam suam habebant. etc. Theodoret. Test Pererio
Ies. in Romans 1. Disput. 4.
does observe. Easily therefore might that news be spread abroad through-out
all quarters, that the Romans had received the Faith. This is all.

Secondly, your former Insultation is easily checked with a Parallel of the
like, if not of a larger Commendation of the same Apostle unto the Church of
Thessalonica, 1 Thessalonians. 1.2. We give thanks always to God for you all, making
mention of you in our prayers, Remembering without ceasing your work of Faith.
And again, ver. 8. From you (says he) sounded out the Word of the Lord, not
only in Macedonia and Achaia, but also in every place your Faith to Godward
is spread abroad, etc.

And least you may peradventure think, that Rome having had the pre-eminence
of Commendation before Thessalonica, therefore the Church of Thessalonica
received their Faith from the Romans; this Objection will rebound upon the
Authors themselves: for although the Epistle to the Romans have the first
place, by the Ordinance of the Church, it is not because of the Dignity of the
Church of Rome, but for the excellency and necessity of the matter and
Argument of the Epistle it self, which is the Doctrine of Justification. For
if we consider the order of times, wherein the Apostle Saint Paul Writ his
Epistles, your own Authors willingly consent to the judgment of Theodoret,
that Epistolaru^ Paulinarum, vt ab ipso Paulo prius scriptae sunt, Theodoreto
test, primo 1. ad Thessal. secundo, 2. ad eosdem; terto 1. ad Corinth. quarto,
2. ad eosdem: quinto 3. ad Timoth. Sexto Epistola ad Titu^, Septimo ad Romanos,
etc. Ederus partit. Theol. lib. 4. p. 426. and Salmeron Jes. To. 13. Tract. 3.
and 4. in Epist. Pauli in genesis Disp. 4. Ex Theodoret. part, 2. in princip. 1 Thessalonians. 3.
According to the order observed by Saint Paul, first were published the I. and
II. Epistles to the Thessalonians; after them, the I. and II. Epistles to the
Corinthians, etc. and the Epistle to the Romans come not in till your seventh
place: or rather (according to your Onuphrius exactly collecteth and
accompteth. 1. Erat 1. ad These 2.2. ad These. 3. ad Gal. 4. Prior ad Cor. 5.
Prior ad Tim 6. Posterior ad Cor 7. ad Ephesians 8. Posterior ad Tim. 9. ad Philip.
10. ad ^oloss. 11. ad Philem. 12. ad Hebraeos. 13. ad Titum; 14. ad Romanos.
Onuphrius de Primati^ Petri part 3. Dissuasio. 5.
Onuphrius his computation,) not until the last.

CHALLENGE.
SEeing that the Commendation of the Faith of the Thessalolonians, and the
Encomium of the Faith of the Romans are both, almost, in words and in sense
fully the same, as your own Cardinal and Jesuit Non quod Romani credebant
annunciatum dicit in vniuerso mundo, sed ipsos fidem recepisse and credidisse,
sicut illud ad Thessalonicenses Cap. 1. A vobis, etc. Tolet. in Romans 1. page
30. quo supra.
Tolet does tell you; this shows the vanity of your objections, from point to
point. For first to argue, Ergo the Faith of the Romans was first, it is
crossed by the Church of Thessalonica, which had priority in Saint Paul's
Commendation. Secondly, to argue; Ergo, Roman Faith, and the Catholic or
Universal Faith, (in respect of Universality of Place) was then conuertible
and al one; this is likewise Conttadicted by the like Commendations of the
Thessalonians: because by the same Argument you must grant, that before that,
the Thessalonike Faith, and Catholic Faith, in the like respect, was also all
one. Thirdly, to argue, that therefore the Faith of Rome shall perpetually
continue in that City, this in like manner is confuted by the former Instance
in Thessalonica, which having long since lost her Faith, does warn Rome not to
presume of any privilege of Time or Place. But we are to Consult further with
Saint Paul, to know what account he had of Rome at this time, when he wrote
this Epistle?

Our second Proof of Saint Paul's Account of the then Roman Church. SECT. 12.
AS often as we hear of your Article, The Roman Catholic Church, without which
there is no salvation, We (if we should believe this to be true) should expect
that S. Paul writing to the Romans, especially now when with so divine
Oratorie he insinuates himself into their affections, by commending of their
Faith so published through the World, should yield some such, albeit but
implicit, Note of the eminence of that Church over others, which you
your-selues do usually attribute unto it. But if it shall appear, that he
does not call it The Catholic Church above others, nor a Church having any
Prerogative before others, no nor yet at all so much as a Church, as he does
others, but rather the Contrary: then may we have more reason to suspect your
Cause, and you less to ostentate.

First then your Rhemists to this Question, why the Epistles of Saint Paul are
not enstiled Catholic Epistles, as well as the Epistles of Saint James, Peter,
Jude, and John are, do answer, Rhemists in their Argument of the Epistles in
General.
Because Saint Paul (say they) writes not any Epistle at all (howbeit every
one of them is for all the Church) but to some particular Churches, as to the
Galathians, Romans, etc. So they. Which Reason is insufficient, because the
first Catholic Epistle of Peter is directed expressly to the Churches in
Pontus, Galatia, etc. and two of the Catholic Epistles of Saint John are
inscribed to particular persons, The Elect Lady, and Gaius. Howbeit in this
Answer of the Rhemists we find Rome to be but a Particular Church; when
surely, if the Apostle had been possessed with the spirit of the now Bishop of
Rome, he would have instiled it The Catholic Church, and inscribed his
Epistle CATHOLIC.

Secondly, the Inscription of that Epistle stands thus; To all that are at
Rome, the Beloved of GOD, Saints by calling, etc. Wherein we cannot discern
so much as one Syllable of the word, Church; as we find in his Prefaces to
the Corinthians, To the Church that is at Corinth: To the Galathians, To the
Churches of Galatia: to the Thessalonians, To the Church of the Thessalonians:
But in this Epistle he says only, To them at Rome, Saints by calling; to
wit, the same tenure which he used in his Epistles to the Ephesia^^,
Philippians, and Colossians. Whereunto your Iesuit^ Salmeron gives this answer.
Possit commode dici, Paulu^ Romanos Ecclesiam non vocasse, quod in ea inter
Iudaeos and Gentiles essent conte^tiones and factiones. Nam Gentes Iudaeis
probro dabant turpem crucis necem Messiae illatam: contra Iudaei Ge^tibus
obijciebant sordes Idololatriae. -- Er eo t^mpore Petrus ex vrbe expulsus
Ecclesiae Romans Pastor, ita vt Roma eo te^pore vix Ecclesiae formam haberet. (
Tu^ allata alia solutione, ad hanc redit, decens,) -- Sed prima solutio
solidior est meo iudicio. Salmeron Ies. Tom. 13. in Romans 1. Disp. 7. p. 2^9.
There was at this time (says he) Factions in Rome between Jews and Gentiles
(both Christians) when Peter the Pastor thereof was expelled out of Rome, so
that it had scarce the form of a Church: and therefore may it fitly be said,
that Paul forbore to call the Romans a Church. If this were the meaning of
Saint Paul, then are we sure that he who would not vouchsafe to call it a
Church, did think Rome to be (as other Churches) subject to the alterations
and Changes of Schisms and Factions, so far, as not to deserve the name of a
Church, how much less of The Catholic Church?

Now bethink your selves what the Apostle would have called your Rome of
aftertimes, when not only your Professors among themselves but also Popes and
Antipopes were distracted into tedious and pernicious Schisms and Factions one
against another, so that the true Pope sometimes could not be known. Which
thing your own devout Doctors have greatly deplored, One reckoning the number
of these Schisms to have been Schismata viginti Stapleton de doct. Princip.
lib. 13. cap. 15.
Twenty; Another accounting the Continuance of one of them to have endured Vnum
Schisma erat quinquaginta Sex annorum. Onuphrius in vita Benedicti.
Fifty years; when as the Pope, quitting the City of Rome for many years
together, kept his residence at Auignon in France.

Our third Proof of Saint Paul's indifferent estimation of the Church of Rome.
SECT. 13.
THe third point concerns the Prerogative, which you assume to your Roman
Church before others. We shall desire you to consult once again with Saint
Paul in the same Epistle, Chap. 1. Ver. 13. saying, I have oftentimes purposed
to come unto you (Romans) -- that I might have some fruit among you ^lso
[(...)] even as also among other Gentiles, That one wor^ [(...)] even as also
among Others] must needs prove a prick in your eye, who can look upon nothing
that can more equal the condition of other Churches with the Church of Rome,
than that word does, by the confession of your Cardinal Tolet; and he would
have you to Mark it (and we also pray you to Mark what he says:) Perpende
Eua^gelij indifferentiam, quamuis enim Romani inter coeteras gentes eminerent,
and primatu^ tenerent, tamen in praedicatione Euangelij and salutis negotio
pares eos facit: [In vobis, inquit, sicut in coeteris.] Non enim apud Deum est
distinctio Iudaei, Graeci, Romani, aut vlloru^ hominum conditionum, omnes
peccatores inuenit, pro omniu^salute mortuus est. T^let. Jes. in eum locum
Pauli ad Romans 11. Annot. 22.
MARRKE (says he) the indifferency of the Gospel, because although the
Romans were far more eminent than other Nations, and had the Primacie,
nevertheless in the preaching of the Word, and soules-businesse belonging to
salvation, the Apostle makes Others equal with the Romans; Among you (says
the Apostle) as also among other Gentiles, of what Nation soever. So he. Here
your Cardinal (not to dissemble) makes the Comparison to stand between the
Romans and the Grecians, as they were before their calling unto Christianity,
namely, in the equality of Sin, not any one deserving to be partaker of
Grace; by the Gospel, more than another.

Nevertheless, if you shall Mark a little better, nothing can be more clear,
than that the Apostle compares these Romans, as they were Christians, with
other Christian Gentiles converted to the Faith: because, of the same Romans,
to whom he said (Ver. 6.) You are called of Jesus Christ; and Ver. 8. You,
whose Faith is spoken of through-out the World; and (Ver. 11.) I long to see
you, that I may impart unto you some spiritual gift to the end you may be
established: of the Same he says (here in this 13 Verse) That I might have
some fruit among you: these, you know, could not be other than Christians,
whom he thus commended, as already called to the Faith: therefore in the next
words [(...)]- as of other Gentiles he meant the Churches of the Gentiles
committed unto Christ: Those (says Quibus sc. praedicasset. Aquinas in ^um
locum.
Aquinas) unto whom he had preached. So that the labor of the Apostle was
impartial unto the Churches of Christ, further than they should bring forth
the Fruits of the Gospel of Christ,

CHALLENGE.
TWo things there are, by which the estimation, which Writers have of Persons,
or Incorporations to whom they Dedicate their Epistles, may be discerned, to
wit, Inscriptions and Comparisons. The Apostle, by the Inscription of his
Epistle to the Romans, has given us just presumption to think, that he held
not the Church of Rome then The Catholic Church, which as then he had cause to
forbear to call so much as a Church: and that the said Church (by Comparison)
is subject to alteration as well as Others. And so much the rather, because the
Indifferency of the Gospel is such, as is not to be tied to one place or
people more than to another, but [(...)] equal to all Churches, so far forth
as they shall walk worthy of the same Gospel of Christ: accordingly as we
have been directed by the Epistle of Saint Paul to the Romans.

The Confirmation of the same Faith of Saint Paul, by your own Confessions,
equalling Saint Paul and Saint Peter in their diverse Relations to the Church of
Rome. SECT. 14.
WHat shall we say to your own free grants? 1. That Saint Peter and Saint Paul
were both See above Chap. 4.. 1.
Co-founders of the Roman Church; 2. That both were called Epiphanius Haeres
17. Vocat Petrum and Paulum Episcopos Romanos. Lorinus Ies. in Act. Apost. vlt.
ver vlt. That which he adds, is confuted in the next Testimony, and in the
Challenge following.
Bishops of the same Church, by Epiphanius; 3. That the Bulla Pauli 3. and Pij
4. in Council. Trident. Petri and Pauli Authoritate, qua fungimur, Ordinamus,
etc.
Authority of Both is cited in the Popes Breeues, for Confirmation of Papal
Ordinances; 4. That both have their Objicitur in antiquis sigillis, quibus
diplomata summi Pontificis obsignabantur, inueniri imagines Petri and Pauli,
sed huius a Dextris, illius a sinistris, etc. -- Potest responderi hoc non
fuisse perpetuum, nam in non paucioribus Paulus cernitur ad sinistram. Bellar.
lib. 1. de Romans Pont. Cap. 27. Adding; Et olim obseruabatur vt senior, and
honoratiora^ laeuam esset. But where, except only among the Persians? as the
next Testimony proves.
Images engraven in your Popes Bulls; yea and that in such sort that Paul
sometime has the right hand of Peter, as well as other while Peter of Paul.
Thus far your Popes and Jesuits.

CHALLENGE.
WHich being so, how may it not persuade you, that your Popes anciently judged,
that Saint Paul did not believe himself subject to the Jurisdiction of Saint
Peter, and his Roman See? except you will think it possible to extract a
Primacy of Authority out of Aequalitie, as well of Titles, as of Ordinances;
or else to conceive one to be subject unto him, of whom he has the vpper-hand;
especially knowing, that to be placed on the Denique, collocari ad dextram est
Argumentum maioris honoris, quanquam apud Persas contrarius mos est. Pererius
in Genesis cap. 48. disp. 1.
Right hand, was held an Argument of greater honor among all people, the
Persians only excepted. If your Popes at this day should see any Bishops
picture stamped jointly on his Seal (that we may appeal to your selves in
this Case) guess (we pray you) whether he could behold any other matched in
such an equipage with himself, without high indignation, and extreme Cause of
Anathematization. So justly is your new Faith of your now Popes condemned by
ancient Attributes, Authorities, and Seals. Thus far of the faith of Saint
Paul, your supposed Co-founder of the Church of Rome, about the time when it
was first erected.

That Saint John his Faith did not conceive the same Article of Subjection to
the Catholic Roman Church, etc. SECT. 15.
NOt long after the same Time of the foundation of the Church of Rome, did
Saint John write his Book of Revelation, wherein he reuealeth that the City
of Rome is Babylon, according to the general consent of your own Babylon
Apocalyptica est Roma. Bellar. l. 3. de Pont. ca. 13. and l. 2. c. 2. Ribera,
and Viega Ies. in Apoc. 14. Et est consensus omnium. -- Probat Ribera ex
Victorino Martyr, and Hieron. locis plurimis, Tertulliano, Ambrosio ( postquam
negasset) ex Doctoribus Pontificijs, ex septem montibus, quos nominat, ex Apoc.
quia dicitur Ciuitas illa magna, quae habet regnum super Reges terrae, etc. Quo
supra in cap. 14.
Jesuits, and other Divines; directed not only by the judgment of Ancient
Fathers, but especially and inuincibly by Saint John in the clearenesse of that
Scripture. So just Cause had the most judicious of Kings Christian, K. James
Premouit. pa. 309.310
JAMES our late Sovereign of famous memory, to auerre, saying; This place
(viz. Revel. chapp. 17. and 18. ( does clearly and undeniably declare that
Rome is, or shall be the seat of that Antichrist. For no Papist now denies
that by Babylon, here, Rome is directly meant, etc.

Next, that it signifies Rome, not only as it was Ethnicall Rome, in the
days of heathenish Emperors (by which mist many of your Doctors a long time
gulled and deceived their Disciples, lest your Papal Rome might have come
within their ken) but also notes Rome* as it shall be in the later age of the
World, the Seat of Antichrist. And not thus only, but that the same City
shall be burnt with fire.

A Truth so evident, that your Rhemists (who otherwise, of all others, are most
bleare-eyd at the sight of any light, that may any way make against Rome) do
thus far grant, as to say, Rhemists Annot. in Apoc. 17.5.
The great Antichrist shall have his seat at Rome, as it may well be thought:
but others think Jerusalem rather shall be his seat. But your Jesuits Quod
aliquando a fide defectura Roma seeds Antichristi, Probatur ex Apoc. 14.
Cecidit Babylon, etc. Roma in sine seculi futura. -- Diuinare me dicet
quispiam, sed hunc ego orabo, vt praeiudicium deponat, rem toram apud se maturo
iudicio examinet, ne plus mihi credat, quam Ratio and veritas persuaserint. --
Conflagraturam esse, non tantum propter praeterita scelera, sed and propter
illa quae in extremis temp. commissura est, ex huius Apoc. verbis adeo
perspicue cognoscimus, vt ne Stultissimus quidem negare possit. -- Nam cap. 18
vbi de eius incendio est sermo, hoc scriptum est, Flebunt qui cum ea fornicati
sunt, cum viderint fumum incendij eius. -- Vae, vae, ciuitas magna Babylon,
venit vna hora iudicium tuum. -- Vtrum illi lugebunt, qui ante mill and multo
plures annos mortiui sunt? an qui nunc viuent and videbunt fumum incendij eius?
-- vnde de persecutione illius temporis loquens, Cap. 18. Exite ex illa, ne
Participes sitis delictorum. Quoniam igitur dubium non est, Babylonem omnis
Idololatriae, and omnium scelerum officinam esse, si fidem fecimus Babylonem
Romam dici, dubitari non potest eam -- a fide and ab obedientia Pontificis
defecturam. -- Post, ex Sibyllarum vaticinijs -- (...) -- (...) -- (...). Haec
and alia multa in hanc sententiam Ribera Ies. quo supra.
Ribera and Sequitur hunc Blasius Viega, and atque eisdem rati^nibus, Comment.
in Apoc. 18. and Concludit, -- Ex hoc loco ( inquit) manifest colligitur Romam
extremis mundi temporibus, postquam a fide defecerit, etc. -- Et vbi dicitur,
Exire ex illa populus meus, etc. Cum enim fidelibus praecipitur, vt ex illa
exeant, ne simul eius calamitate inuoluantur profecto ostenditur sermonem esse
non de illa Roma antiqua, cum nulli in ea fideles erant, sed de illa quae
conflagrabit extremo mundi tempore. Haec ille in Apoc. 18.
Viega, both of them Spanish Doctors, and public Professors, do confidently
auerre that They dare hold him for A MOST NOTABLE FOOL, that shall deny it,
as being a matter without all doubt. So say they; nor so only, but also prove
it by conuincing Arguments. 1 Because that the Text says expressly of this
Babylon, that It shall be burned. 2 They that shall then live, shall see the
smoke of her fire, and lament her destruction. 3 Because the spirit warns all
them that are in her to depart; Come out of her, my people, that ye receive
not of her plagues. But there were then n^ Faithful in the heathenish Rome; or
if any were, yet are they commanded to Come out of her, for fear of being
consumed with fire. And lastly they add, to the evidence of the text, the
Oracles of Sibyl, as it were, a torch unto the Sun, viz. that

The seauen-hild Rome shall be destroyed with fire. Thus far your own
Authors, not once questioned for this doctrine; and although professing it in
the fiery Region of the Spanish Inquisition, yet not so much as an heir of
their beards scorched therefore: yea, these their books are publicly allowed
by the judgment of (besides others) the Commentarium Viegae tanquam in re
nulla Orthodoxae fidei repugnantem, Approbarunt Eman. Coecho, Alphontus de
Melto Archiepis. Eborens Christoferus Gouea Praepositus societatis
Prouin^^alis, Ferdinandus Academiae Eborens. Cancellarius. Riberam Ies.
Approbarunt Gil. Gonzales, Alphonsus Curiel; etiam Posseuinus Ies. in Apparat.
Provincial of the Jesuits.

Marry, yet the foresaid Authors (lest they might hereby seem to yield any
matter of insultation to us Heretics (as they call us) or hereby prejudice the
Church of Rome, they do again and again admonish their Readers, that this
Prophecy, although it point out the destruction of the City of Rome, for her
Apostacy from the faith, by her Idolatry; yet aims it not at the Church of
Rome, or the Bishop thereof, because the Apostacy shall be (say they) from the
faith of that Church, and, Obedience to that Bishop: Pontifex, licet eiectus,
tamen semper Ecclesia^ est habiturus, at que hic vbicunque sit, Episcopus Romae
erit, etiamsi illa penitus excis^ sit. Riberaquo supra.
Who though he abandon Rome, and Rome it self be destroid, yet is he still
Bishop of Rome. So they.

I. CHALLENGE.
GOD himself, by his own example, in his first days work, taught us to
divide the light from the darkness. Thus then. That the people of the City of
Rome, in the later age of the world, must generally depart from the faith, that
whatsoever faithful remaining must Depart out of the City, that the City her
self, for her wickedness and Idolatry, must be consumed by fire, seems now
at length, even to our Romish Adversaries themselves, a truth as clear as the
day, and that justly, as has bin showed. But that, to free their Church and
Pope of Rome from the prejudice of defection and revolt from the faith, we
must forsooth believe that The Pope, when all Christian people are departed out
of the City, and the City it self utterly extinct, shall still remain the
Bishop of Rome: this we take to be as dark as darkness it self. We shall
therefore call for a Torch (for so you See above Chapter 2. Sect. 8.
call Baronius his writings) to discover this darkness.

He shows that Secundo Claudij Romana Ecclesia a Petro instituiur, and seeds
ei erigitur. Baron. An. 45. number. 1. Ipsa prima Pontificia seeds Petri Cathedra
lignea erat. -- In more Maiorum erat, Episcopis seeds in Ecclesia posuerunt
egregie ornatas, -- quibus illi, cum sacras synaxes agerent, insiderent. Jb.
number. 11.
The Church of Rome was constituted first by Peter at Rome, where (says he)
his Pontifical seat, or chair, was made of wood. Then he shows the ancient
custom of Erecting Chaires or Seats for Bishops, in their Churches, placing
them aloft, and adorning them with ornaments, where they did sit, etc. This was
the original of Episcopal Chaires and Seats: so that Patriarks and Bishops
had their denominations from the Churches wherein they took possession, and
where they had their first Chaires, or seats. Hence came the distinct
Appellations of the Patriarcal Church or seat of Antioch, the Seat of
Constantinople, and this now specified (as they say) the Pontifical Seat of
Rome. Albeit therefore that it cannot be denied that the Bishop of Rome, being
excluded from his Church and Seat, is notwithstanding to b^ accounted the
Bishop of that people and place; yet when he is so departed from them, that
they are also departed from him, so as there shall be no people in Rome
professing his faith; nor yet that Seat, which is the City of Rome, extant at
all, but wholly consumed with fire: then to be called the Bishop of the Church,
or Seat of Rome, is but a man in the moon, and Titulus sine re: namely, as it
is written of Jerusalem, Jsa. 1.21.
How is that faithful City become a whore? The City is called faithful not
as being now faithful, but only because it had bin so.

Saint Paul, in his Inscriptions to diverse Churches, takes their denominations
from the places, where the faithful Professors were, thus: Gal. 1.
To the Churches of Galatia: 1 Cor. 1.
To the Church of God in Corinth, and elsewhere: (to show, that the Church
rather does consist in the Professors, then in the places) and omitting the
name of Church, he does mention only the Persons, Col. 1.
To the Saints at Colosse, and faithful brethren in Christ: Phil. 1.
To all the Saints in Christ at Philippi: and also for Rome, Romans 1.
To them at Rome, beloved of God, called Saints. And must we notwithstanding
conceit of a Bishop of a Church of Rome, wherein there is neither people
professing, nor place of profession? As if they should call one the Shepherd
of Vtopia, where there is neither Sheep in the Country, nor Country for
Sheep: except (...) should be the Shepherd, and they speak the language of
Babel, where (...).
None shall hear Nothing of Nobody at all.

That which we now contend for, in the Popes of Rome, may be cleared by an
example of him that is called Emperor of Rome, who because he has neither a
foot of possession in Rome, nor in the Territories thereof, nor yet any
professed Subject inhabiting therein, but the whole Princedome is belonging to
the Pope; your own Divines hold it a kind of Soloecisme to name any at this
day The Roman Emperor. Therefore (to allege a few, of many that may be
produced) Lyra; Iam a multis Annis imperium illud caruit Imperatore. Lyra in 2 Thessalonians. 2.
The Empire of Rome (says he) has for a long time been without an Emperor.
Faber; Quam, obsecro, Roma suo Regi, suo Monarchae praebet obedientiam? nescio
quibus temporibus mayor potuit defectio apparere. Faber Stapulens. in 2 Thessalonians.
3.
What obedience, I pray you (says he) does Rome yield to her Monarch? meaning
the Emperor. So to; Temporale Romanae vrbis imperium iam cessauit. Domin. a
Soto, Test Viega Jes. in Apoc. 13. Sect. 17.
Now (says he) is that temporal Dominion of the City of Rome ceased: and
your Jesuit Salmeron, Imperium Rom, iamdiu euersum est. Salmeron Ies. in 2 Thessalonians. 2.
The Roman Emperor (says he) was overthrown long ago.

II. CHALLENGE.
THe Romish Babylon then, by the Revelation of Saint John, is that City of
Rome, whose place and people must be destroyed. No people can be called Roman,
without they have relation to Rome; nor any people called The Church of Rome,
except they be Professors of the faith in Rome. Therefore Saint John,
prophesying of these things, could not but believe, that before the end of the
world that Church, which is now called The Church of Rome, shall depart from
the faith; even because this Departure must be from the sincere doctrine and
worship of God, unto error and Idolatry. Oh! that this were not, at this day,
a just Cause to challenge every one to Come out of Babylon. Both which we shall
be ready in due time to prove by as true grounds, as any have hitherto been
delivered.

That Saint John's faith did not conceive the now pretended Monarchy of the
Pope, above all other Bishops and Pastors in the Catholic Church. SECT. 16.
WHat that Papal Monarchy is in your faith, and how it is derived, we have
See above Chap. 1.
heard, namely that because Saint Peter was the Vicar of Christ upon earth, as
his ordinary Pastor over all the other Apostles, therefore the Successors of
Saint Peter in the same See are of the same authority and Jurisdiction over
the whole Church of Christ, and every member thereof. Hence issues the Article
of your now Roman faith; that See above Cha. 1. Sect. 2. and 3.
Without obedience and subjection to the Pope, as the Catholic Bishop of the
Catholic Church, None can be saved. The meditation upon this Article begets
a Problem, viz. whether Saint John the Evangelist, who lived 20. years after
Saint Peter, were indeed subordinate and subject to the Jurisdiction of Linus,
or Cletus, the immediate Successors of Saint Peter. Either Saint John was
subject to the Pope, or he was not. What say you? An Apostoli, qui Petro
super-vixerant, fuerint vere subditi Episc. Romano (de qua re nihil apud
Authors me legisse memini) -- videtur tamen extitisse inferiores
Jurisdiction, atque adeo Iurisdictioni Pontificis Romans subiectos -- quia
potestas Romans Pontificis semper fuit ordinaria and perpetuo in Ecclesia
mansura. Suarez Ies. lib. de trip. virt. theol. disp. 10. Sect. 1. number. 28.
It seems unto me (says your Jesuit) that the Apostles, who suruiued
Peter, were subject to the Pope, because the power of the Pope was always
ordinary, and to continue in the Church. Have you any ground for this? I cannot
remember (says he) that I have read in any Author any thing of this point. So
he.

CHALLENGE.
SAint Paul (as See above Cha. 4. Sect. 11.
has been proved) reckoned these Three, Peter, James, and John equally
Columnas, that is, The Pillars, and (as it were) equally the three Chief
Worthies among the Disciples: who, concerning the offices of their Apostleship,
received from Christ (as your Cardinal Cusanus See above Chap. 4. Sect. 4.
lit. A. prope finem.
has taught you) Every way an equal charge. And without Controversy, the
faith of John and Paul was both the same. Is it then possible for a Christian
man to think, that John being that Apostle, who was immediately chosen by
Christ, and equal to Peter, should think himself subject to Linus Baron.
Ann. 80.
the Successor of Peter? that he, who for his sublimitie of knowledge in the
mysteries of Christ, was called The Divine; who was made the Penman of the
holy Ghost, in writing the Gospel; and one, for whose infallibility in the
truth Christ offered up prayers to his Father; ought he now to submit his
judgment unto Linus, one of the line of those Popes, whereof Some have been
by General Councels, and by Popes themselves judged for See hereafter Chap. 8.
Sect. 7.
Heretics?

And again, that John, who at the time of the Supper of our Lord, leaned upon
the breast of our Savior, when Peter ( Christus Iohannem in sinu habuit, cui
Petrus erat proximus. Baron Ann. 34. number. 40.
you know) was but next after John, should now prostrate himself before Linus,
the Successor of Peter, and (if this Ceremony had been so old) to do him the
honor as to See Above, Chapter 4.. 5 Hereafter, Cha. 10.. 4.
Kiss his feet? And not this only, but to believe this Article of due
Subjection to the Pope, Without which none can be saved? which, indeed, is
more than to Kiss the feet, or to lick the dust of the feet of Saint Peter's
Successor. Sure we are, See hereafter, cap. 9. Sect. 2.
that the Disciples of Saint John, to wit, the Christians of the Eastern
Church, were not of your belief, who, to adhere to the orders of Saint John,
refused to observe the Easter of the Latin Church: which they would not have
done, if they had believed Saint John to have been subject to those Roman
Bishops, or yet to Peter himself.

Before we can conclude, you are to be exhorted to observe the Jesuitical
front of Suarez, who in a matter of this nature, concerning Salvation, durst
make this Conclusion of the Apostles Subjection and subordination under a Pope;
namely (as you have heard him confess) without any Author, besides himself.
Whereby you may discern, with what untempered mortar these men daube up the
Consciences of their Followers.

CHAP. V. That the Catholic and Apostolic Church of Christ it self, at or
about the Time of the foundation of the Church of Rome, had no such Article of
faith, viz. The Catholic Roman Church, without union wherewith there is no
Salvation.
SECT. 1.
THe Churches unto which Saint Paul writ (for we name not the Romans, of whom
we have entreated before) were the Corinthians, Galatians, Ephesians,
Philippians, Thessalonians, and the dispersed Hebrews. As for the other
Apostles, James, Peter, John and Jude, each one writ to Diverse those their
Epistles, which are entitled Catholic Epistles. And the seven Churches of
Asia were they, to whom the book of the Apoealips, or Revelation was directed.
Among these the Apostles are instant and urgent, in inueying 1 against the
Heresies of Iudaisme. Gal. 1.8. Coloss. 2.
Iudaisme, Saducisme, denying the Resurrection. 1 Cor. 15.
Saducisme, Worship of Angels. Coloss. 2.
of worshipping Angels. 2 Against Apostasy. 2 These. 2. and 2 Timothy 4.3. and
Jude.
Apostasy, and Antichristianitie 2 These. 2. 1 Ioh. 2.24. Apoc. 13. etc.
Antichristianitie. 3 Against Dissentions and Schisms, 1 Cor. 11 and
Concerning Orders Ecclesiastical, Romans 12. Ephesians. 4.11. 1 Cor. 12.
Divisions and Schisms in the Church, and abuse of Ecclesiastical Orders
therein: And yet in all these there appears not any one Syllable or Iota to
prove your Article of The Catholic Roman Church, without union and subjection
whereunto, and to the Head thereof, there is no salvation. No, nor yet so much
as to intimate any one of the particles of this Article: as first, not to
signify that the Church of Rome was a Catholic, much less THE Catholic
Church,, as being in right (which you say) The Mother and Mistress of all
others. Not to note, that, in the conuincing of Heretics, Christians ought to
look (as to their Cynosura) to the Faith of the Roman Church: nor that (for
the discovering and avoiding of Antichrist) Christians ought to subject
themselves to the Pope of Rome, as the Vicar of Christ. Finally, nor yet that,
for the preventing of dissentions and Schisms in the Church, Christians ought
to adhere and to be united to the same Monarchical Head of the same Roman
Church. All which those holy Apostles, the faithful Ambassadors of our Lord
Christ, without Controversy ought, and would have done, if (according to the
now Roman Faith) either the name, CATHOLIC, had been then Antonomastically to
be appropriated to Rome; or the Infallibility of Faith to be ascribed to the
judgment of her Bishop; or that the Necessity of Union and Subjection to the
authority of the same Head had been so necessary, as without which no
Christian could be saved.

To begin at the word [CATHOLIKE.] We desire to understand, why the Epistles of
James, and John, and Jude were called Catholic, or Universal, as well as the
two Epistles of Peter, if the word [ Catholike] were so proper to the Roman
Chair? Seeing that the Epistle of Saint James (and so of the rest) was no more
sent to, or from Rome, nor had any relation to Peter there, than the Epistles
of Peter had to James at Jerusalem. Secondly, why Paul was so sole, as of
himself to Anathemize the false Apostles, saying, Gal. 1. ver. 8. and 9.
If we, or an Angel from heaven preach any other Gospel unto you, let him be
accursed: or in admonishing the Irresolute, saying, Gal. 5.
Behold, I Paul tell you, and I testify again unto you. And that no otherwise
than he did, in absoluing the penitent Incestuous, saying, 1. Cor. 2.10.
I have pardoned him in the person of Christ: that is to say, As the Vicar of
Christ, as your Rhemists observe, in their Annotations upon this place; If so
(as you Pontificem Romanum succedere Petto in Ecclesiae Monarchia, ex iure
Diuino, and ratione successionis probatur. Bellar. l. 2. de Pont. cap. 12.
Probatur ex nominibus, quae Romans Pontifici tribui solent. -- Sextum est
Vicarius Christi. Ib. Cap. 31.
pretend) The name of Vicar of Christ be wholly belonging to the Pope, as an
argument of his Succession from Saint Peter, in the Monarchy over the whole
Church.

But principally does Saint Paul show himself, in preventing and repressing of
Schisms, once among the people, whom he will not have to adhere to any one
man, no more to 1. Cor. 1.12.
Cephas, (that is, Peter) than to Paul or Apollos. Whereas your Roman Cephas
would have taught Saint Paul a contrary lesson, saying, that They, who adhere
unto Cephas, cannot be called Schismatikes, as those who hold of Apollos:
because Cephas was that ROCK, whereupon the Church was built, and such a
Visible Head is now as necessary on earth to avoid Schism, as to believe on
Christ, the invisible Head, now glorious in heaven.

Again, among the Ecclesiastical Orders twice, first to the Corinthians,
where he alleges them thus: 1. Cor. 12.
First Apostles, then Prophets, after Doctors: and accordingly to the
Ephesians, Ephesians. 4.11.
He gave some Apostles, and some Prophets, and some Evangelists, etc. Here we
should have had good reason to have expected the mention of Saint Peter, as the
visible Head among the Apostles, if we had been of your Faith, to believe that
the Pope of Rome, as Successor of Saint Peter, is the Head of the visible
Church; and that therefore Vnio cum Pontifice Rom vt cum Capite, est nota
Ecclesiae. Bellar. l. de Notis Eccles. c. 10.
The union with the Bishop of Rome, as the Head thereof, is a true Note of the
Church: Whereby it may be infallibly discerned, whether or no a Christian man
be a member of the Catholic Church, without which there is no Salvation. Which
what were it, but to call into question the judgment of Saint Paul, the most
profoundest Disputant that ever writ? as though he had been ignorant of the
maine and only Argument, for the confuting of Schismatikes, and avoiding of
Schism, by keeping, forsooth, the Union with the Pope, and Church of Rome.

As for the Seven Churches in Asia, unto whom Saint John writ, concerning the
days of Antichrist, when the great Departure from the sincere Faith of Christ
must be: herein notwithstanding you could never yet find one particle, to
prove either the Right of Monarchy in the Pope; or Infallibility of his
judgment; or Necessity that the Faithful be United and Subjected unto him.
But many Characters may you find, at least of an Antichrist, as well of his
person in the Pope, as you have done of his particular Seat, confessing
ingenuously, that it must be at Rome.

Saint Peter in his Catholic Epistle 1. Pet. 5.1.
To the dispersed Christians in Pontus, Galatia, Cappadocia, Asia, Bithynia,
exhorting the Presbyters (whom he after calls [(...), Superintendents, or
Byshops] says; The Elders which are among you I exhort, who am also an Elder,
-- Feed the flock of God, -- not [(...)] domineiring over Gods heritage, --
that when our chief Shepherd shall appear, etc. What may be inferred from
hence, you may understand in the third Challenge.

I. CHALLENGE.
NOne will make doubt, but that the Churches, to whom the Apostles have
written, were of the same faith with their Teachers, the holy Apostles: and
that therefore in the point of Heresy it was not more requisite that the
Church of Thessalonica should subscribe to the Faith of the Church of Rome,
than that the Romans should be guided by the Faith of the Thessalonians: or
that, in the point of Schism, the Church of Corinth should be compelled to
keep Union with the Church Roman, more than the Roman with the Colossian: or
yet that among the Churches, to whom the Catholic Epistles of Peter, Jude,
John, and James were directed, some should be thought to owe more Subjection to
the Letters of Peter, than to the other of James, or John. Else would some
Items have been given out, to signify your pretended respects due to the
Roman Church, especially every one of them being required in your Faith, upon
Necessity of salvation.

All men would wonder (for example sake) that the Bishops of Italy, being al
within the Roman Jurisdiction, should write letters far and near, upon all
occasion of Heresy and Schism, to diverse Churches within the same Roman
Dioces, and yet never make mention, nay nor so much as give intimation of the
necessary dependence they have and ought to acknowledge themselves to have of
the Pope, and Sea of Rome.

II. CHALLENGE.
IF it had been as manifestly revealed by Saint John, that England was
Prophesied off, to be the Seat of Antichrist in the latter times, as
(according to your Jesuits See above, Chap. 4. Sect. 14.
Expositions and Demonstrations) he did of Rome, in the word, Babylon, from
whence all the faithful are commanded to depart, except they will be Partakers
of her plagues: sure we are, that your Jesuits and Professors would need no
severity of Laws to quit England, and to abhor it; especially now, when the
Controversy, whether Antichrist be already come, is so daily and duly debated.

III. CHALLENGE.
SAint Peter, albeit an Apostle of Jesus Christ, yet in the exercise of his
Jurisdiction, in the ordaining the Bishops of Pontus, Cappadocia, and other
Churches does entitle himself A (...).
Fellow-Priest, or Bishop; a style not to be found in your Popes Breues. For we
speak not now of terms of Humiliation, as that of SERVVS SERVORVM; but of
Office and Function, such as is Priest, or Bishop. And in what term? [I
BESEECH] not but that he had authority to command, as an Apostle of Christ,
like as Saint Paul, and every Apostle had: yet now taking upon him the person
of an Elder to Elders, he does not use that which (you know) is the proper and
ordinary style of the Bishop of Rome, WE WILL, AND COMMAND.

The matter of his Beseeching is hortatiue, and dehortatiue; for he exhorts
them to Feed their flock: thus he, whom Christ charged upon all loves, to
Simon, love thou me, feed my flock. Joh. 21.
Feed his flock. But not so He, who for the space of many hundred years is
not known to have preached at all, even your See hereafter, Chap. 13. Sect. 5.
Bishop of Rome. The dehortatiue part is in beseeching them Not to domineire
over the heritage of God. What means this? Rhemists Annot. on this place,
[(...).]
The Greek word signifies Tyrannical rule, whereas meekness and moderation
is required in Ecclesiastical Officers. So your Rhemists. And they say true,
and therefore Saint Peter's words we think, do justly condeme your Romish
Tyranny, especially in two points.

The first Instance of Tyrannous Romish Cruelty. SECT. 2.
THe first is your Romish Inquisition, wherein there is imprisonment,
famishment, torment and ropes to strangle your prisoners, and all in tenebris,
works of darkness; against all Bulla Coenae.
Believers, Receivers, Defenders, and Favorers of Heretics. This word,
[FAVOVRERS also] has a great latitude; it may be, if they chance to commend
their learning, wit, zeal, constancy, or simplicity, which any Christian may
do in a Pagan. And how they proceed in the Inquisition, it is known best to
your selves. This we find Confessed, that Haereticorum Inquisitores, quorum
Iurisdictio cum tota in Theologicis traditionibus, and sacris paginis fundata
esse debeat, ipsi tamen han^ omnem ex iure Canonico and Pontificum Decretis
crudelissime exercent: Ipsam sacram Scripturam veluti mortuam literam a tergo
relinquentes, qui eam vt Haereticis (vt aiunt) scutum and propugnaculum
rejiciunt. -- sed vnam Romans Ecclesiam, quae (vt dicunt) errate non potest,
praefigunt sibi fidei scopum, cui Papa caput est. Non aliud expostulantes, quam
si in Romans Ecclesiam credant. -- Quodsi Inquisitus conetur opinionem suam
Scripturae testimonijs, alijsque rationibus tueri, -- iratis ^uccis dicunt, non
esse illi negotium cum Scholaribus, sed cum Iudicibus ad tribunal: -- ideo
simpliciter esse respondendum, si velit stare Decreto Romans Ecclesiae: -- sin
minus fasciculos and ignes ostendunt, dicentes, cum Haereticis non Argumentis
and Scripturis, sed facsiculis and ignibus decertandum. Agrippa de vanit.
scient. cap. 96.
The Inquisitors of Heretics deal most cruelly, whilst they relinquish all
means of trial by Tradition or Scripture, which they reject as a dead letter,
which, say they, the Heretics use as their bulwark: whereas they themselves
object and prefixe, as the shield of their faith, only the Church of Rome,
which they hold cannot err in the faith, whose Head is the Pope. And if the
party examined shall offer to prove his opinion by Scripture, and other
Reasons, then with swelling and angry cheeks they tell him, that he is not now
to deal with Scholars in their Schools, but with Judges before their
tribunal: and therefore he must answer directly, whether he will stand to the
Decrees of the Roman Church, or not. If he refuse, then they conclude, saying,
that they are not to dispute with him by Arguments and Scripture, but (and then
they show them) with fire and faggot. So he. And is not this a barbarous
cruelty? Notwithstanding Pope Paulus Tertius Pont. Anno 1559. senio effoetus
-- Cardinales in cubiculum accersi iussit, -- deinde ipsos hortatus est, vt in
optimo Successore deligendo vota coniungerent. Postremo vt illud sanctissimum
(sic illud vocabat) Inquisitionis officium, quo vno S. S. authoritatem niti
affirmabat, commendatum haberent. Thuanus Hist. Tom. 2. lib. 16. An. 1559.
Paul the III. (and no marvel) when he was going out of the world, Left this
Inquisition as a Legacy to his Successor, Anno 1559. when (as your Thuanus
storieth) Calling unto him his Cardinals, he exhorted them in the last place to
entertain (as he called it) the most Sacred Office of Inquisition, whereby
only, said he, the Authority of his Holiness was supported. So he. And so
now you see that vast house standing only upon one pillar, which is founded
upon cruelty and blood.

The second Instance of Barbarous Romish Cruelty. SECT. 3.
IT happens sometime that a man, after he has Abiured Heresy before a
Judge, may relapse into the same again; which may be (say you) Relapsus est,
qui postquam in iudicium vocatus, and ob haeresin accusatus and conuictus, eam
abiurauit, and rursus in ea^dem haeresim incurrit. Azor. Jes. Inst. Moral.
part. 1. lib. 8. c. 14. Qui si, post Abiurationem haeresis, deinde Haereticos
alloquitur, reveretur, inuisir, se illis adiungit, eos muneribus afficit,
laudat, praedicat, commendat, vt testa^ur Simanc. Azor. ibid. -- Quod si rursus
Haereticis adhaeret, eos comitatur, honor prosequitur, Relapsus censeatur. Sic
Archidiac. Andraeas, and alij; Azor. ib. Relapsis, quamuis acta poenitentia,
spes omnis veniae denegatur, -- and deinde eos Iudici seculari tradit Ecclesia,
vt in eos secundum leges animaduertat. -- Qui si pertinaces sunt, v^ui igne
comburuntur, si vero pertinaces non sunt, prius strangulari solent, and postea
comburi. Quare ante Relapsum, vtitur Ecclesia misericordia, cum redeuntibus ab
Haeresi, vitam eis concedendo, poena mortis in poenam carceris perpetui
commutata, publicatis tamen bonis. -- Post relapsum tamen vtitur Ecclesia
seuero Iure, etiam spe veniae denegata, etiamsi eos sui peccati poeniteat. --
Ob. Sol. Respondet Glossa, Ecclesiam gremium suum redeuntibus non claudere,
quia quamuis illis bona and vitam eripiat, non tamen denegat Sacramenta
poenitentiae and Eucharistiae. -- Ob. Communem naturam subleuandam esse, nec
peccatores deserendos vnquam. Sol. Subleuatur natura subsidijs ad animae
salutem necessarijs: vel dicendum est. legem supra citatam tunc temporis editam
fuisse, quando omnes in vniuersum Haereticos ad saniorem mentem reversos
recipiebat Ecclesia. [ Paulo post quaeritur,] vtrum lata semel sententia,
recipi in gremium possint, si ad saniorem mentem redierint? and resoluitur per
et^am, and non. Azor. Ies. quo supra. Etiam Suarez Ies. Relapsi, etiamsi vere
poenitentes, poena mortis afficiendi, absque vlla remissione, Ex Iure Cononico
express probat. -- Ratio est quia censentur incorrigibiles, and moraliter
loquendo, etc. Lib. de Trip. virt. theol. disp. 23. Sect. 2. nu. 7.
By talking with an Heretic, or doing him reverence, or visiting him, or
giving him a reward, or else by commending him, etc. The question is, how your
Church ought to proceed with this man? Your general resolution is, To condemn
him of Heresy, and to deliver him to the Secular Magistrate, without all hope
of pardon: yet so, that if the party shall continue Obstinate, he shall be
immediately burnt: but if he do repent, then shall he be first strangled, and
afterward burnt. And whereas it may be objected, that no Penitent Child ought
to be kept out of the Bosom of the Church; your answer is, that The Church
does admit them into her bosom, because though they must be burned, and loose
their goods, yet are they allowed the Sacraments of Absolution, and the
Eucharist. But is this reasonable? Yes (say you) because They, by their
relapse, are held morally as Persons incorrigible.

What shall we say of this Church? what? Namely, that never Bubalus was so
stupid, as to judge them Morally incorrigible, which do repent so, as to make
themselves Capable of Absolution. Nor ever was there any Rhadamanthus so
extreme, as at once to pardon, and kill. Therefore Cursed be her mercy, for it
is cruel. If the Sons of thunder were rebuked by Christ, as not knowing what
spirit they were of, for calling for fire from heaven, to consume obstinate
sinners; how far worse are these Spirits, that will needs destroy their
Penitents with fire? A practice, by your own Confession, not heard of in
Antiquity. Thus have we finished the second Part, concerning the Time at, and
about which the Church of Rome was first founded.

CHAP. VI. Of the TIME, AFTER the Church of Rome had her first foundation.
SECT. 1.
FRom the Consideration of the Article of our Christian Creed, viz. The
Catholic Church; and, Of the Catholic and Apostolic Church it self, as well
Before, as At the Time, when the Church of Rome was first founded, has been
discovered and refuted that Article of The Roman Catholic Church, without
Union and Subjection whereunto there is no Salvation: By proouing it False
Heretical, Schismatic, etc. Which we are now to confirm from other
Evidences, taken from the Profession of the Catholic Church it self, SINCE
the foundation of the Roman Church.

Of the more Primitive Times, AFTER the foundation of the Roman Church. SECT.
2.
Our easiest Course, in the disquisition and discussion of this great Mystery
of Popedom, by the judgment of the Church Catholic, will be to follow the
several tracts of Times, beginning at the more ancient, and proceeding to
Successiue and later Times, until we come to the last Ages of the Church.

Our first Argument is taken from the ancient Sense of this Article, The
Catholic Church, condemning the now Romish Article, viz. The Roman Catholic
Church. SECT. 3.
OFten have we pleaded Logic with you about this Term, [ Catholic Roman
Church] desiring to know of you (seeing it is Roman, that is, a Particular
Church) how it can be called Catholic, that is, Universal, or the whole
Church? And if it be the whole Church, how can it be a Particular Church,
distinct from the Church of Greece, or Church of France? Will you make us
believe that the thumb of the hand can be the whole body? Pope Innocent the
third, as though he had foreseen this Objection, does preocupate (as you See
above, Chap. 1. Sect. 3.
have heard) saying; If the Church be called Catholic, as Consisting of all
Christian Churches, so the Church of Rome is not the Catholic Church, but a
part thereof: but in respect of the authority, which she has (as an Head over
the body) over the whole Church, so is she called Universal, because of her
Dominion. Answerable hereunto your Jesuit Suarez; See in the same place.
The Church of Rome, (says he) not as a particular Dioces or Bishopric, is
called the Catholic Church, but as it comprehends and contains all
Believers in Christ, under the obedience of the Pope of Rome. So they. This
counterfeit Gloss upon these terms, The Catholic Church, as under the
Obedience of the Pope, as Catholic and Universal Head, we shall bring to the
Test of the Ancient Faith, by the witness of more than three Fathers.

I. The judgment of Saint Augustine. SECT. 8.
WHat was meant by the [ Catholic Church,] in the Sense of Antiquity, Saint
Augustine may be unto us herein as the mouth of the whole Church, seeing that
he had more occasions to discuss this Article than any Other; especially,
because in his time the Donatists did no less falsely than arrogantly
appropriate the name of the Whole Church unto their Church in Afric, even as
you (although in a different Sense) hold it proper to the Church of Rome, at
this day. But Saint Augustine: Quod Graece (...) dicitur, Latin totum vel
vniuersum interpretatur: per totum ergo, sieve, secundum totum est (...), vnde
Catholicum nuncupatur. Aug. Tom. 7. l. 3. con Gaudent. post princip. (...) non
est vnum sed totum, and (...) secundum Totum, [ vnde Catholica nomen accepit.]
Idem Tom. 7. con. Epist. Petil. c. 2.
The word in Greek (says he) is [(...)] in Latin [Totum] aut Universal,]
that is, whole or universal: [(...)] is not one, but the whole, whence the
word, [(...),] or Catholic is derived. Thus, by distinguishing Whole Church
from One Church, he shows, that it is as inconceivable that the Catholic,
Universal, or Whole should be but one One part, as it is impossible for one
part to be the Whole. Which is your Paradoxe, to call the Head the whole Body,
whilst as in your Article you make, ROMAN (as the Head) The Catholic and
Universal Church it self.

Thus have we heard Saint Augustine: will you now see him? Then behold Rem
gestam. For when, by that busy fellow Petilian the Donatist, a public
Conference was held at Carthage, between seven Orthodoxe Bishops on the one
part and seven Donatists on the other, concerning the Catholic Church: Saint
Augustine was singled out by the Disputer and posed in these words; Whence art
thou? Who is thy Father? Is the Bishop Caecilian he? This was the Objection,
challenging Augustine to answer, whence he received his Religion, and upon
whom he depended? Hear now his answer. Coepit ista praedicario ab Jerusalem,
inde se ab illustrissimo exordio diffudit, diffundens Ecclesiam, quam tenemus,
primo per vicinia, deinde per longinqua etiam in Asricam venit. In hanc oculos
aperuimus, hanc in diuinis eloquijs and testimonijs, sicut ipsum Dominum and
Redemptorem comperimns. Ab illo Deo Patre, ab hac Ecclesia matre nullius me
hominis crimina, nullius calumniae separabunt, Collat. Carthag. 3. number. 230. It
is joined with Optatus.
My communion (says he) began first at Jerusalem, and from remote places came
nearer, until it entered into Afric, and so dispersed it self through-out all
the World. From this my Father, God, and my Mother Church will I never be
separated for the calumnies of any man.

CHALLENGE.
SAy now, if either Petilian the Heretic could have questioned Saint
Augustine, professing himself a Catholic, whether he had his dependence upon
CAECILIAN Bishop of Carthage, as his spiritual Father; if it had been a
current profession among the Churches of those times, to have held the Bishop
of Rome The Catholic Father; or the Church of Rome The Catholic
Mother Church, without which there is no salvation? Or whether it could have
stood with the Conscience of Saint Augustine (if he had been of your now
Romish Faith) in a question about the Father-hood, What Bishop; and
Mother-hood, what Church he professed; for to (passing by all mention of the B.
of Rome) acknowledge no Head but Christ? and neglecting the Roman Church,
adhere to the Whole Church, dispersed throughout the whole Christian World, as
indeed the properly called Mother Church? How should not Saint Augustine
(although never so admirable a Saint) have been held a Schismatike and
Heretic, if he had lived in these days, either for his ignorance, or Contempt
of the now Romish resolution of Faith in all such Questions, to wit; that the
Spiritual Father of the Church is the Pope of Rome, and the Church of Rome is
the Catholic Church is self, because Head of all the rest?

As for the prime Mother Church, by spiritual procreation, we see that Saint
Augustine acknowledges no other than Jerusalem, which verefieth that, which
See above Chap. 3. Sect. 3. etc.
has been largely proved, to wit; that although the ancient Roman Church
might, in many respects, be called A Mother Church of many other Churches in
Christendom, especially in respect of her admirable care, for the preservation
of divine truth and peace in the Christian world: Yet now, since, first by
usurping an Original Prerogative of the Universal Mother, she is become the
Mother of Arrogance and Falsehood. 2. By preiudicing the Birthright of other
Churches, more ancient than her self, She may be called the Mother of Schism.
3. By excluding All from hope of Salvation, that believe her not to be the
Mother Church, she may justly be judged the Mother of damnable Heresy. Of
Saint Augustines judgment, more hereafter.

II. The Judgment of Saint Hierome, concerning the Church Catholic. SECT. 5.
SAint Hierome was a professed and devout Child of the Church of Rome, when
Rome was yet a true and natural Mother, and no Step-dame, who notwithstanding,
when the Custom of Rome was objected against him (in a Case of difference
between Deacon and Priest) calling the Adverse part Quod sen^it Romae Diaconos
Presbyteris anteferri. Quid mihi profers, ait, vrbis consuetudinem? quid
paucitate^, de qua ortum est supercilium? Et paulo ante, -- si authoritas
quaeratur, orbis major est quam vrbis. Hier. Tom. 2. ad Euagr, p. 329.
An arrogant paucity, he makes an answer full of indignity; As though (says
he) there were more authority [in Vrbe quam in Orbe] that is, in one City (the
Seat of the Bishop of Rome) than in the whole Catholic Church besides.

This is the Testimony of Saint Hierome, wherein the Fathers of the Council
of Basil did in a manner triumph, in opposition to the Papal Claim, saying;
Quid ais, Hieronyme? an magnus est Papa quia Romanae praeest Ecclesiae? major
autem vniuersalis, quae non vrbe^ duntaxat, sed totu^ complectitur orbem.
Aenaeas Syluius de gestis, Conc. Basil. fol. 5.
O Hierome, what mean you! Is there therefore greatness in the Pope, because he
governs the Church? His authority is great; indeed, but not so great as the
authority of the Catholic Church, which is not contained in one City, but
comprehends in it self the whole World.

CHALLENGE.
APply you to this former sentence of Saint Hierome, if you can, your former
distinction; namely, that the Church of Rome is a Particular Church in it
self, but Catholic, as the Head, having Universal Dominion over the whole
Church; and see whether it will abide the test of Saint Hierome, who, speaking
of the Customs of the Church of Rome, calls the Custom of that Church, [
Vrbem] meaning the custom but of one Particular Church, whose seat is at
Rome: and opposes unto it the Custom of the Catholic Church, which he
calls [ Orbem,] the whole world. Showing thereby (with whom also does accord
the judgment of the Fathers of the Council of Basil) that the Authority of
the Church Catholic, and of the Church of Rome are not equivalent, much less
the same: for in Identity there can be no opposition, or comparison. None can
compare a man's head with it self. And what furthermore Saint Hierome did
conceive hereof, will afterward appear in due Place.

III. The Judgment of Saint Gregory Bishop of Rome, Concerning the Head
Catholic, In denying the Title of Universal Bishop; as did likewise Pelagius
and Leo, both Bishops of the same See. SECT. 6.
ALthough it can be no sufficient Argument, for concluding a Papal authority,
to object unto us the testimonies of Popes (which is your ordinary guize) in
their own Cause: yet will it be unto us Armor of Proof, to oppose against
you the authority, albeit but of one Pope disclayming that your pretended
Universal Head-ship, in that Article, which you call, The Catholic Roman
Church.

He who, being Head and Bishop of the Church of Rome, shall deny the Title of
Vnum ex nominibus, ex quibus colligitur Primatus Romans Pontificis, est
Vniuersalis Episcopus quod Romans Pontifici tribui solet. Bellar. l. 2. de Po^t.
c. 31. initio.
Universal or Catholic Bishop to be properly belonging to himself, does
Consequently deny that his Church of Rome can properly be called The
Catholic, B. Gregorius vitae meritis honorandus, and in moralibus
assertionibus cunctis praeferendus, in Sacrarum Scripturarum intellige^tia
pollens. Canus Jes. ante Catechis. Conc. Trid. de Encom. Patrum.
that is to say, The Universal Church. This is a Consequence, in your own
judgment, so undeniable, that your Cardinal Bellarmine, the great Achilles in
this Cause, is in nothing more studious, zealous, or instant than in the
defense of this Head, and this Title of Universal Bishop; as proper to the
Pope, and a special Note of Papal Primacie, over the whole Church of Christ.
Which your Faith, or rather infatuation, comes now to be confuted by the
judgment of Saint Gregory, worthily commended by your selves for a man
Excellent in Moral Positions, and in the Understanding of the holy Scriptures.
This being so honorable a Witness, we call upon him to testify two points;
first, the Novelty; secondly, the Iniquity of this Title of Universal Bishop
within the Church. In the first place he expressly calls this Title of
Universal Bishop Vocabulum nouum. Greg. l. 4. Epist. 32. Nullis
Praedecessornm, etc. Epist. 36.
A new Title; which (says he) None of my Predecessors ever used. It is but
idle and impertinent to object unto us, that Leo Papa vniuersalis inscribitur
in Conc. Chalced. Bellar. l. 2. de Pont. c. 31.
Leo Pope, before him, was inscribed Universal in the Council of Chalcedon;
because it was not absolutely there ascribed to Pope Leo, but with a grand
Restriction, as thus; Universally Archiepiscopo magnae Romae. Conc. Chalced.
Act. 3.
Universal (to wit) of Great Rome: which is as much as to deny him to be the
Bishop of the Universal Chuch: even as when you shall instile your now Roman
Emperor thus, The Universal Emperor of Rome, you thereby distinguish him
from the Emperor of Turkey, the Emperor of Persia, the Emperor of Mosco, and
others; and consequently deny him to be Emperor of the whole world.

As vain, and indeed ridiculous is it now, after a thousand, and two hundred
years, to pretend that Episcopus vniuersalis Ecclesiae, etc. Binius Annot. in
Conc. Chalced. Act. 3. ex Baronio.
The Title was by that Council set down at large, The Bishop of the Universal
Church; because it is so read in the Epistle of Pope Leo, but was altered by
the Greek Scribe, in envy to the Church of Rome. This you should allege to
them that can be persuaded, that any private man could, or durst alter the
style of a public and General Council, against the dignity of the Pope,
where the Popes Legates were present. And not rather, that some Latin Scribe
has added that Inscription to the Epistle of Pope Leo, in honor of the Church
of Rome, as is Confessed to have been done unto the This Causanus confesses
of the Epistle of Anacletus; and Baronius of the Epistle of Pope Boniface.
Epistles of other Popes; and by three See hereafter Chap. 9. Sect. 9. and 10.
Popes themselves unto the Council of Nice. As for the point in question, we
stand to the joint testimonies of Pelagius and Gregory, both Popes, who have
witnessed to all Posterity (as your own Jesuit confesses) that Hi duo
contendebant, nullum Ecclesiarum Antistitem, imo nec Romanum, sibi hoc nomen
assumpsisse Azor. Ies. Inst. Moral. part. 2. lib. 4. cap. 4.
No Bishop of Rome before them had ever used the Title of Universal Bishop:
Which notwithstanding scarce any one Pope, since the age of Saint Gregory,
has not assumed as proper to himself. But how justly, we shall understand by
the said Pope Gregory: who, after the branding of this Title with the note of
Nouelty, does further discover the Impiety thereof.

This he expresses first, by bidding this Title of Universal Bishop Absit,
etc. lib. 4. Epist. 32.
AVAUNT! as being Nomen vanitatis. Epist. 32.
Vain, Vocabulum prophanum. Ibid. and Ep. 36.
Profane, q Hainously wicked, and Scelestum and nefandum. Ep. 38. and 39.
Blasphemous. Words of high indignation and detestation. When any of you shall
answer this Objection, without either manifest falsehood, or else intolerable
injury to Pope Gregory, then may you brag, that Saint Gregory was that
thing, Nome^ blasphemiae. Ep. 32.
which you call a Pope. Some of your Doctors (who are said to be Multi, etc.
Azor. Ies. quo supra.
Many) would shift off this matter, as though it were but a Verbal skirmish
and contention only about words. But this were to make Pope Gregory, Pelagius,
and Leo the Ninth, three Popes very childish, Si sic, tunc nec Pelagius
secu^dus, nec Gregorius, nec post eum Leo nonus tam acriter huic rei
restitissent, Azor. Ibid.
who did earnestly gainsay this Title, a^ your Jesuit confesses: who might
from the mouth of Gregory himself have stopped these other Many mouths, were
they never so wide. For when the Emperor Mauritius, in the behalf of the
Bishop of Constantinople (who used this Title Universal) was offended with
Gregory for being so vehement, Pro appellatione friuoli nominis scandalum, etc.
Verba Mauritij a Greg. repetita, l. 6. Ep. 30. ad Mauritiu^ Imper.
In taking a scandal at the Appellation of so frivolous a Name; Gregory
himself made answer, that Valde friuolu^, sed nimis periculosum. Ibid.

Quisquis se vniuersalem sacerdotem vocari desiderat, in elatione sua
Antichristum prae currit, qui a superbiendo se co^teris praeponit. Greg. Ibid.


It was very frivolous, but withal too too pernicious; and that he who desired
to be called Universal Priest, did, by so advancing himself above others,
show himself to be the forerunner of ANTICHRIST. Yea, and so wicked he
judged it to be, that he would have all the world to know, that neither He,
nor any of his Predecessors else had ever assumed the same.

Yea, but this was not (says your Cardinal) for that Gregory might not have
used this Title, but because he would not use it. And why? In humility,
forsooth! Illud recusauit, quamuis sibi in aliquo sensu conueniret, ad melius
and facilius comprimendam superbiam Episc. Constantinopolitani, etc. Bellar. de
Pont. lib. 1. cap. vlt.
That he might hereby more easily repress the insolency of John, Bishop of
Constantinople, who at that time unjustly usurped the same. Thus he. Which is
as much as to say, that a King would renounce his Royal Title of Sovereignty;
to the end that some notorious Rebel, challenging it, might thereby the more
willingly disclaim it. Were not this a profound piece of policy, trow you, if
not rather gross foppery? We choose rather to believe Gregory himself, who
professes Ita humilitatem tenemus in me^te, vt tamen ordinis nostri dignitatem
teneamus in honor. Greg. l. 4. Ep. 36.
To be humble in mind, but still so, as to preserve the honor and dignity of
his place. So far was he from disclaiming any right that belonged to his
Chair. Again, for Gregory in word to abhor ( with an [Absit) that Title as
impious and blasphemous, which he thought might notwithstanding be justly used
by him, what would you call this otherwise than an egregious Hypocrisy?

A Third answer you have, which you should as much shame to utter, as we loath
to hear: to wit, that Gregory did abhor the Title of Universal Bishop, but
only in the same sense, wherein it was then used by the Bishop of
Constantinople. How we beseech you? Vt sic intelligatur Vniuersalis, vt solus
Episcopus aliorum, vt alij no^ sint Episcopi, sed Vicarij. Bellar. de Pont. l.
2. cap. 31.
So to be called Universal Bishop over others (say you) as to be sole
Bishop, and to make all others under him to be no Bishops, but only Vicars
unto him. Where, by Vicars, you mean such as have no Order or Jurisdiction
proper to Bishops at all. Which is so incredible a figment, that it is
confuted by all those Bishops (who are very many) which submitted themselves
unto this Bishop of Constantinople, and approved his Title; yet
notwithstanding held and exercised their ancient Jurisdictions of their
several Archiepiscopall Sees. Who, doubtless, would never have allowed the
Title of Universality to that Patriarch of Constantinople (as you Dices
Episcopu^ Constantinopolitanum, etc. -- Esto -- etc. -- Azor. Ies. Jnst. par.
2. l. 4. c. 4.
know they did) if that thereupon they should have been compelled, of Bishops,
to become plain Vicars, and cast out of the Parlour into the Kitchen.

The true and undoubted Sense then of Gregory is that, which your Cardinal
Cusan, even one of the Popes eyes, has seen and acknowledged, that Dicit
Gregorius, nullum Episcopum ita principatum gerere, vt omnia membra fint ei
subjecta. Card. Cusanus Conc. Eccles. l. 2. c. 34. And so, indeed, are the
words of Greg. in his Epist. ad Iohannem Constantinop. Omnibus praeesse, nulli
subesse vis, etc.
Gregory (by impugning the Title of universal Bishop) would have no Bishop so
principal, as to make all other members subject unto him: So he. Than which
what can be more apposite, in this Cause, and opposite unto the now Roman
Profession, concerning the Title of Universal Roman Bishop, the Foundation of
the sense of your own Article, viz. The Catholic Roman Church.

Yet this is not all, but we furthermore auerre, that Gregory condemned the
Title of Universal Bishop, then used by the Patriarch of Constantinople, in no
other sense, than it was after the days of Gregory assumed, and used by your
Roman Popes: whereunto such of your own Historians (who are very many) bear
full witness. For they record, that Pope Bonifacius tertius a Phoca Imp.
obtinuit, vt seeds Petri, sicut est caput omnium Ecclesiarum, ita diceretur and
haberetur: Quem quidem locum Ecclesia Consta^tinop. sibi vendicare conabatur.
Platina in vita Bonifacij, and Balbus de coronat. Obtinuit a Phoca, vt Romans
seeds omnino and absolute prima diceretur, ^este Paulo Diacono, qui circa illa
tempora vixit: -- cum prius Constantinopolitana se primum omnium Ecclesiarum
diceret. Masson. in vita Bonifa^. 3. and Polyd. Virg. l. 4. Iuuent. c. 9 Etiam
citantur ab alijs Rhegino, Anastas. Herman. Contract. Marianus Scotus,
Sabellicus, Otto Frisingens.
Boniface (the next Successor to Gregory, save one) did obtain of the
Emperor Phocas, that Rome should have the same Title of Head-ship over all
other Churches, which the Bishop of Constantinople had challenged to his See.
The only difference will be this, that the Head of the Popes universal
Jurisdiction, under that Title, as it were under a poisoned Miter, has grown
far more loathsome by impostumes, and swollen with tyranny, than it could
possibly be, at the first usurpation thereof; being become no less
intolerable, than was that Emperor Phocas, of whom Pope Boniface with much
importunity received that Title. Which Emperor your Cardinal Baronius notes
to have been Baron. Anno 603. number. 9.
A bloody Tyrant. So then we see, that this Title of Universal Bishop was
abandoned by Gregory, as extremely Impious. But some peradventure would be
willing to know his reason hereof. Saint Gregory will satisfy any one, that
shall be desirous to understand the mischief hereof: Vniuersa Ecclesia
corruit, quando is, qui vniuersalis appellatur, cadit. Greg. l. 4. Epist. 32.
Because the Universal Church (says he) must needs go to ruin, whenever
he, that is the Universal Bishop thereof, shall chance to fall. Which
Assertion of Saint Gregory does brand your Church with Two black Notes of In
isto scelesto vocabulo consentire, est nihil aliud quam fidem perdere. I^* Ep.
39.
Apostasy, and See above, lit. y.
Antichristianitie.

CHALLENGE.
Catholic, or Universal Church, and Universal Bishop of the same Church,
are, in your doctrine, as truly Relatiues as Master and Servant; the one
cannot be denied without the other. Go too now then, blazon your Papal
Inscription in the highest style that you can invent; more than Universal it
cannot be: and animate it with the perfectest spirit, that can be infused into
it; more absolute none can expect, than that which you ascribe unto your Pope
of Rome, which is, that Pontifex in definiendo infallibiliter iudicat -- qui si
posset vt persona publica in definendo e^rare contra fidem, and teneretur
Ecclesia tota eam sequi, ita fieret vt Ecclesia vniuersa posset errare: quod
est Haere sis intolerabilis. Greg. de Valent. Analys. fid. l. 8. c. 3. and
alibi sapius.
The Popes judgment is infallible, in defining of any doctrine of faith. But
why? Because (say you) if he, as a public person and Judge of the Church,
should err, by concluding any thing against faith, then the universal Church,
which is bound to follow him, should likewise err. So he.

This is your Roman Profession, which may be unto us a perfect Argument of
your Apostasy from the ancient Roman faith, maintained in the days of Saint
Gregory: as thus. The now Roman Article is to believe, that the Pope of Rome
is the Universal Bishop of the Church Catholic, and therefore cannot err in
any doctrine of faith: insomuch that the Church, subject to this Roman Bishop,
must be accounted the Only Church on earth, without which there is no
salvation. But the faith of Saint Gregory contrarily stands thus: Whatsoever
Bishop he be (Roman, or other) that professes himself the Universal Bishop,
or Head, is subject to Error. Therefore none ought to assent to any such
Assumption, lest that, that one erring, the whole Church of Christ should err
with him. So then you, forsooth, see an Infallibility in the usurpation of that
Title, as proper to the Pope, wherein Saint Gregory did foresee the baine of
an Universal Erring and falling from the faith. To conclude, Saint Gregory
held the title, which betokens an Universal Dominion over the whole Church,
to be so direfully pernicious, that he consequently condemned the Universal
Subjection unto one Bishop (the now Article of the Roman Church) as Pernicious
and Antichristian. To whom also your Jesuits See above in this Chap. Sect. 6.
have taught you to add two other Popes, Pelagius and Leo, who in like manner
condemned and disclaimed that Title.

CHAP. VII. Our second Argument, against the Article of necessity of
Subjection to the Roman Church and Pope, is taken from Comparisons made
between the Bishop and Church of Rome with other Bishops and Churches, by the
ancient Fathers.
SECT. 1.
AGainst an Article of an usurped Dominion of one Church over all other, there
can be no better Argument than from the Comparison of other Churches with that
one, which pretends her self to be the Mother and Mistress of all the rest.
Upon this consideration you have been urged by One, who for learning and
judgment in Antiquity was hardly to be seconded by any. He posed you from the
testimonies of the writings of Dionysius Areopagita, and Ignatius, the most
ancient of Fathers. Where, supposing That Dionysius to be as truly that great
Areopagita, and as worthy an Author as you would have him to be, he spurreth
you a necessary question: Quaero igitur, vnde Dionys^j huius silentium de
^apite visibili Ecclesiae in terris Romae regnante, etc. -- Petrus supremus
dicitur [(...)] quod apud Graecos honoris excellentiam denotat, non dominij. In
qua voce Maximus and Pachymeres duo Interpretes Dionysij eruditiss. ac
diligentiss. nullam dominationem inueniunt. Casaub. Exercit. 16. in Baron. ad
finem. scil. Anno. 34. number 209.
Why Dionysius was so utterly silent, in not mentioning the Universal visible
Head of the Church, reigning at Rome, if at that time there had been any such
Monarchical Head there; especially seeing he professedly writ of the
Ecclesiastical Hie^archie and government? or is it credible, and not rather
monstrous that he writing of the mystical rites of the Church should omit all
mention of this chief mystery of one supreme Head and Monarch of the Church
at Rome, being so pertinently invited thereunto by that matter subject, which
he had there in hand, to wit, by the Hierarchy of the Church, if this
doctrine had been of faith in that age? This (says he) remoueth your
frivolous Objection. By the same reason he Idem dicimus de Epistolis Ignatij
Martyris and Episcopi Antiocheni -- Hic in singulis fere Epistolis dignitatem
Episcopalem miro studio asserit, and totum ordinem Ecclesiasticum in illis
epistolis est inuenire -- De Monarchia autem vel Petri, vel Romani Pontificis
vir hic sanctus (...). -- Ob. Sol. Epistolam eius ad Romanos (...) esse, Graece
periti numquam sinent se persuaderi. Casaub. ibid.
obiecteth against you the Epistles of Ignatius, the most ancient Martyr and
Bishop of Antioch, that he being frequent in setting forth the Order
Ecclesiastical and dignity of Bishops, upon diverse occasions, should forbear
all mention of the Monarchy of Saint Peter, or any Roman Pope.

But we return to our own Observations out of Antiquity, by equal
Comparisons of other Bishops with the Bishop of Rome, beginning at the same
Ignatius.

1 He writing to the Church of Trallis, and exhorting them unto obedience to
Bishops, as to the Apostles, (...): -- (...), etc. Ignat. Epist. ad Trallens.
instanceth equally in Timothy, Saint Paul's Scholar, as in Anacletus
Successor to Saint Peter.

2 Irenaeus lived next to the Apostles times, who Discite ab Apostolicis
Ecclesijs, Habetis Romae Linum, -- and Polycarpum Smyrnae ab Apostolis edoctum,
etc. Iren. lib. 3. cap. 3. p. 140.142. As for the words [Propter
Principalitatem] they are answered hereafter.
refers his Reader for direction, in the right of Traditions, as well to
Polycarpus Bishop of Smyrna in the East, as to Linus Bishop of Rome in the West.

3 Tertullian, to secure Christians in the Doctrine of the Apostles, Constat
omnem doctrinam, quae cum Matricibus and Originalibus Ecclesijs conspirat,
veri^ati deputandam. Tert. Praescript. p. 76. Sicut Smyrnaeorum Ecclesia habens
Polycarpum a Iohanne collocatum refert, sicut Romanorum Clementem a Petro
ordinatum edit: proinde vtique, etc. p. 80. Percurre Ecclesias Apostolicas --
proxima est tibi Achaia, habes Corinthum. etc. p. 82. In Italia Romani. etc.
prescribes unto them that they consult with the Mother-Churches immediately
founded by the Apostles, naming as well Ephesus in Asia, and Corinth in Achaia,
as Rome in Italy. And again for the persons, mentioning to the same purpose,
as well See the Testimony next before, Sicut Smyrnaeorum etc.
Polycarpus ordained by Saint John, as Clemens by Peter. We shall not need to
make any Notes or Comments upon the words of Tert. your own Beatus Rhenanus
has Tertullianus Ecclesiam vnam Apostolicam nulli loco affigit -- Romanam
Ecclesiam or^at magnificae laudis elogio, -- non tamen tantam illam facit,
quantam hodie fieri videmus: nam Apostolicis Ecclesijs illam numerat, non solam
facit Apostolicam. Videamus quod Lac a Paulo Corinthij hauserint. Si superesset
Tertullianus, non impune illud diceret. Rhenanus Argum. in Tert. de Praescrip.
and alibi. Jmpress. Basil. 1521.
published as much as we can require. Tertullian (says he) does not confine
the Catholic and Apostolic Church to one place: and although he give an
honorable testimony to the Church of Rome, yet did he not esteem her so
highly, as we see her accounted of at this day. He reckons her with other
Churches, yet does not make her the only Church, but admonishes his Readers
as well to enquire what milk the Church of Corinth gave, as Rome. So Rhenanus,
who adds, that If Tertullian were now alive, and should say so much, he
could not escape without punishment. Thus your Rhenanus, whiles that he had
the use of his tongue, but since you have Gagged him, by your Index Expurg.
Belg. p. 78. Deleantur, etc.
Index Ezpurgatorius (a Book which we may call the Martyrologe of many
innocent books.) But no marvel, for this testimony of Rhenanus was as a
poyniard, sticking fast in the very bowels of this Cause. Notwithstanding,
Tertullian will be Tertullian still; whom whosoever shall read, he will be
able to avouch as much as Rhenanus has observed, namely that Tertullian, even
whilst he was a true child of the Church, never allowed the Apostolic
(which we commonly call the Catholic) Church to be appropriated unto any one
place; nor had he further respect to Rome, than he had to Corinth and other
Apostolical Churches, which he calls Matrices and Originales. Tert. lib. de
Praescript. Cap. 21.
Original Mother-Churches; for directing of Christians in the Apostolic faith.

4 Athanasius reckons up, to the Emperor Constantine, the Churches that
consented to the Council of Nice, thus: Huic ( nempe Canoni Nicaenae Synods)
omnes Ecclesiae assensae sunt Hispaniae, Britanniae, Galliae, Italiae totius,
Dalmatiae. Athanas. and reliqui Episcopi Aegypti ad Imperat. test^ Theodoret.
Hist. l. 4. c. 3.
The Churches of Spain, of Britain, of France, of whole Italy, of Dalmatia;
without any precise mention of Rome, otherwise than it was comprised in whole
Italy. A great Contempt, doubtless, if your Article had been then hatched,
because the Consent of Rome only had been more perswasiue to the Emperor than
all the rest.

5 Vincentius Lirinensis likewise, an ancient Father, and greatly approved on
all sides, in his book written in defense of the Catholic Truth, against all
profane Novelties, In Ephesina Synodo Petrus Alexandrinus -- sed nec sola
Graecia and oriens tantum, verum etiam occidentalis and Latinus o^bis ita
sensisse approbetur. Lectae sunt -- Epistolae Felicis and Iulij vrbis Romae
Episcoporum. etc. Lyrinen. cap 42.
advises Christians to try the Truth equally by the joint consent as well of
the East as of the West-Church: and to consult as well with Petrus Alexandrinus
and Athanasius in the one Church, as with Felix and Julius Bishops of Rome in
the other. Concerning whom, more hereafter.

6 Saint Augustine against Julian the Pelagian, in the question of Baptism,
speaking of Chrysostom the Bishop of Constantinople, says; Absit vt
Constantinopolitanus Johannes de parvulorum liberatione per Christum tot ac
tantis Coepiscopis suis, maximeque Romano Innocentio, Carthaginensi Cypriano,
Cappadoci Basilio, Gregorio Nazianzeno, Gallo Hilario, Mediolanensi Ambrosio
resistat. Aug. cont. Julian. Pelag. l. 1. cap 2.
Far be it from him that he should dissent from his fellow-Bishops,
Innocentius Bishop of Rome, Cyprian Bishop of Carthage, Basil Bishop of
Cappadocia, Gregory Bishop of Nazianzum, Hilary a French Bishop, and Ambrose
Bishop of Milan. Is it possible that these orthodoxe Fathers should in this
manner, and upon such occasions have given the Bishop of Rome so many Mates, in
equalizing others with him, if your Article of Monarchical Dominion had entered
into their breasts or brains?

The same comparisons proved by ancient Churches. SECT. 2.
THe general Council of Constantinople in the East, to make known their
Consent in the Faith with the Church in the West, do endite an Epistle, and
inscribe it thus; Dominis honoratissimis, and cum-primis Reuerendis fra^ribus
and collegis Damaso, Ambrosio, Brittoni, etc. Apud Theodoret. hist. l. 5 cap. 9.
To their Reverend brethren and fellows, as well to Damasus of Rome, as to
Ambrose of Milan, and others.

The Church of Egypt gathered in Council, in their letters unto the Emperor
Leo, profess Epist. Aegypti Epis. ad Leonem Augustum. Consentimus vnanimiter
cum vniuersis totius orbis Christi sacerdotibus, and prae omnibus cum summis
Sanctis Episcopis, i. e. Romano Leone, Regiae Constantinopolis Anatolio,
Antiocheno Basilio, and Iuuenale Hierosolymorum. Test Binio Tom. 2. inter
Epist. illustrium personarum, p 147.
Their Consent in the Catholic faith with the chief Priests in the Christian
world; naming as well Anatolius Bishop of Constantinople, Basil Bishop of
Antioch, Iuuenall Bishop of Jerusalem, as Leo Bishop of Rome.

The Decree of the Church of Carthage, in her third Council stands thus:
Conc. Catthag. 3. cap 48. Placuit vt consulamus fratres consacerdotes nostros
Sy^ici^um and Simplicianum ( de infantibus qui baptizantur.) Apud Surium. Tom.
1. Conc.
It is decreed that we consult hereupon with our brethren, Syricius (viz.
Bishop of Rome) and Simplician, viz. Bishop of Milane. Not to omit how you
confess, that Post Photium Patriarcham Constantinopol. Romany Pontificibus
conniuentibus, illud vsurpari coeptum est, vt ambo Episcopi, Romanus sc. and
Constantinopolitanus a Graecis Oecumenici. i. Vniversals dicerentur, hic
quidem in Orient Oecumenicus, ille Oecumenicus in Occidente. Azor. Ies. Moral.
Inst part, 2. l. 4. c. 4.
The Bishops of Constantinople did sometime enjoy the title of Universal
Bishops equally with the Bishops of Rome: but this they did (say you) by
permission of the Bishops of Rome, and upon conniuence. Tell you this to them,
who know not that (Majesty brooking no Corriuall) the Monarchy of Popes would
never dispense, or continue at any One, usurping equal Title of Monarchical
Jurisdiction, which is as much as to snatch their Papal Miters from of their
heads.

CHALLENGE.
THe distinction of East and West is not more familiarly known to every vulgar
man, than is the distinction of East and West-Church, by every babe in
Historical learning: understanding thereby, that they were anciently held as
two general parts of the Catholic Church, and not as one subordinate to
another; as will afterward more plainly appear. Again, unless you shall
except against the most ancient and universally approved Instructors and guides
of the Catholic Church, we must conclude, that the East part of the world is
not more opposite unto the West, than is your now Roman Article, to wit, The
Catholic Roman Church, contrary to Catholic Antiquity. Insomuch that as
when Protestants are controlled, condemned, tormented, or put to death for
renouncing this your Article, Ignatius, Ireneus (to omit the authority of
Councels, and Others) Tertullian, Athanasius, Vinc. Lirinensis, and Augustine
may seem to suffer in them: because it may be said of the rest, which your
Rhenanus spoke of one, saying; Tertullian, if he were alive, should not escape
unpunished, for such his Praescriptions. So False and Imposterous is your
Article, viz. The Catholic Roman Church, as having Dominion over all Others.

CHAP. VIII. Our third Argument, taken from the judgment of the Catholic
Church it self, in the first Six General Councels after the Apostles: Besides
a Seventh and Eight Council, in Your estimation, General.
SECT. 1.
EVery true General Council you will esteem to be the Representative Church
Catholic; than which, after the evidence of divine Scriptures, the Oracles of
God, no better proof can be required by the Professors of the Christian faith.
For this cause we hold it our duty, for your better satisfaction, to give you
Instances in the first Six General Councels, beginning at the first General
Council of Nice.

I. That the Belief of the Romish Article, viz. The Catholic Roman Church,
without which etc. damneth all the Catholic Fathers of the Council of Nice,
and their Believers. SECT. 2.
THe first General Council in Christianity, after the Synod of the Acts 15.
Apostles, was that famous first Council of Nice, consisting of CCCXVIII.
Bishops, by whom were made two Decrees utterly prejudicial to the now Article
of the Dominion of the Roman Church, and Pope, above all other Churches and
their Bishops. One is against the Appeals of persons Excommunicate in any
Dioces unto remote Churches: which the Bishops of the Church of Afric, in
their Council (wherein Saint Augustine was an Actor) did absolutely deny, by
virtue of the Vt non ad communionem vestram a nobis excommunicatos vltravelitis
arripere, quia hoc Niceno Concilio definitum facile aduertet venerabilitas tua.
Apud Surium Tom. 1. Conc. African. Epist. ad Coelest. c. 105.
Canon of the Council of Nice. The second Instance in the sixth Canon of the
same Nicene Synod, decreeing thus; Mos antiquus perdurat in Aegypto, vel Lybia,
and Pentapoli, vt Alexandrinus Episcopus horum omnium habeat potestatem,
quoniam quidem and Episcopo Romans parilis mos est. Binius Tom. 1. in Conc. Nic.
1. Can. 6.
That the Bishops of Alexandria should have the Government over Egypt, Lybia,
and Pentapolis [(...) -- as it is in the Greek] because also the Bishop of Rome
has [(...)] the same custom: thereby distinguishing and limiting their
Provinces; so as the Bishop of Alexandria may still have government within his
Provinces, As also the Bishop of Rome has in his. And that because of
prescription of Custom [(...), say they, that is] LET THE ANCIENT COURSE HOLD;
and add, As also let Antioch and other Provinces hold their ancient
Privileges, etc. Which takes away all Subordination of the authority of
Alexandria to Rome.

This was the current sense of this Canon, in the days of Antiquity, until
the boldness of your Authors, thinking to carry the matter by out-facing,
devised a strange Answer. Sensus est, quia ita Pontifex Romans consueuit
permittere. Bellar. l. 2. de Pot. c. 13.. Quarta.
The sense is (says Bellarmine) that the Bishop of Alexandria should have
these Provinces there mentioned, because the Bishop of Rome was accustomed to
permit it so to be. So he. As though they were not words of Comparison, that
the Bishop of Alexandria should enjoy his Privileges, accordingly as the Bishop
of Rome held anciently his: but that the Prerogative, forsooth, of the Bishop
of Rome was and had been then to Permit, or dispose of the Provinces of the
Patriarchs of Alexandria and Antioch, and of other Bishops at his own
pleasure. A Gloss both senseless and shameless. Senseless, for that it
carries with it a Confluence of Absurdities. First, because it had been an
impiety for the Accusers to have called the Case of the Bishop of Alexandria
and Antioch into question, to be determined in that Council, if it had been
the Catholic faith then to believe, that it was in the power of the Bishop of
Rome to order all such matters of Jurisdiction, of other Patriarks, as he
should think good. Next, the Council had been guilty of unpardonable
remissness, when they heard a Case, so prejudicial to the Authority of the
Monarch of the Church, the Pope of Rome, and yet would not severely rebuke the
Accusers, as scandalous and Schismatic fellows; nor reject the Case it
self with indignation and detestation, as that which they could not take upon
them to decide, without the danger of their souls, against the Ordinance of
Christ, in the Bishop of Rome: But much more for determining contrarily (as
they did) saying, LET ANCIENT CUSTOMS HOLD; whereas they should rather have
expressly acknowledged, in the Bishop of Rome, the Ordinance of Christ, as the
life and soul of every Custom, which comprehends any matter of Faith
necessary to Salvation.

And that this Answer is also shameless, is proved by the Sunshine light of
story: For that those words, [ Because also the Bishop of Rome has the same
Custome] are words of Comparison, betwixt the Churches of Alexandria and Rome,
in the point of maintaining their ancient Privileges. Which not only the words
(...) -- quoniam etiam, etc. vid. supra. a^ b.
[(...)] Because also,] do plainly prove, (As when one shall say, I will give
this man a Crown, because also I gave a Crown to his fellow) but furthermore
the three Editions, now set down in the body of your Councels, by your Binius,
wherein the words are; Because the Church of Rome has the like Custom,
without any word of Permission. Yet were all this but a kind of Modesty, if you
did not know, that the Fathers of the Council of Chalcedon, upon the same
ground, (namely, that it was but matter of Custom, and no Divine Ordinance)
did, against the will of the Bishop of Rome, advance the Prerogative of the
Bishop of See hereafter.
Constantinople. If you did not know, that three of your Popes of Rome, for the
giving of an high point of Dominion, (even the Prerogative of Appeals to Rome
from other Provinces) alleged, though See below, Chap. 9. Sect. 9. and 10.
forgedly and fraudulently, the authority of the Council of Nice. And if you
did not further know it Confessed by a Cardinal of far more ancient note,
and greater ingenuity than his fellows, that the direct Sense of the Nicene
Canon is, that Quoniam parilis mos est.] Id est, sicut Romanus habet omnium
suorum Episcoporum potestatem, ita and Alexandrinus ex more habet per Aegyptum,
etc. Card. Cusan. Conterd. Cath. l. 2. cap. 12.
As the Bishop of Rome had power and authority over all his Bishops, so the
Bishop of Alexandria, according to Custom, should have thorow-out Lybia, etc.
The same Cardinal proceeds, in showing how much Rome has since encroached
beyond her ancient limits: Videmus quantum Romans Pontifex vltra antiquas
obseruationes ex vsu and consuetudine subiectionalis obedientiae hodie
acquisiuit. Cusan. ib.
We see (says he) how much the Bishop of Rome, by use and custom of
Subiectionall Obedience, has at this day got, beyond the ancient Constitutions.

But how shall we expect good conscience from your Bellarmine, in acknowledging
the true judgment of the Council of Nice, who, when it is objected (against
the latter Roman Councels, to prove them bastardly and illegitimate) that it
is required as a necessary Condition in a Council, in all Divine
Constitutions, to stand upon Divine grounds, the holy Scriptures only;
Conditio iniqua -- Bellar. l. 1. de Conc. c. 21.. 4. Conditio.
answers that This is no equal condition. And notwithstanding that the
thrice-renoumed Emperor Constantine the GREAT required in this Synod of Nice,
that Euangelici and Apostolici libri plane instruunt nos quid de rebus diuinis
sentiendum sit: proinde omni hostili discordia posita, ex verbis diuinitus
inspiratis sumamus quaestionu^ explicationes. Theodoret. lib. 1. c. 7
Because the books of the Apostles do plainly instruct us in Divine matters,
therefore we ought to make our Determinations upon questions, from words which
are so divinely inspired; yet answers the same Bellarmine thus: Magnus
Imperator Constantinus, sed non magnus Ecclesiae Doctor, etc. Bellar. l. 4 de
verbo Dei. c. 11.. Respondeo.
Constantine (says he) was a great Emperor indeed, but yet no great Doctor
of the Church, who was yet unbaptized, and therefore understood not the
mysteries of Religion. Thus does this your Cardinal twit and taunt the
judgment of that godly Emperor, witnessed by Theodoret; where expressing his
testimony, and citing the place, yet (as the Steward in the Gospel) unjustly
concealeth from his Reader that which follows in Theodoret, namely, that
Ista, aliaque de eodem genere, dum doctrinae Apostolicae consensum stabilite
moliretur, [Constantinus] tanquam filius Patris amantiss. Episcopis and
Sacerdotibus proposuit: Et maxima pars Concilij verbis eius obtempe^auit.
Theod. quo supra.
The greater part of that Council of Nice obeyed the voice of Constantine, and
Concluded matters accordingly. So little regard have the now Romanists to the
authority of the Council of Nice, which has been ever since worthily
honorable in the memory of all true worshippers of Christ Jesus. By which
notwithstanding we see two Articles of Popery quite overthrown; One of the
pretended Papal Dominion over the whole Church: the other, the Equalling of
Traditions with Scriptures, for the deciding of matters of Faith.

CHALLENGE.
THe Canons of those CCCXVIII. Fathers of that General Council of Nice, who
have thus infirmed your Article of Universal Subjection to the Roman Church,
found belief with all the sincere Professors throughout the Christian world.
Whether therefore you will have your Article to damn so many Catholic
Bishops, the admirable lights of Gods Church; or rather to esteem your Roman
Article Damnable and blasphemous in it self, judge you.

II. That the belief of the Romish Article, The Catholic Roman Church, etc.
Damneth the CL. Catholic Bishops in the second General Council, being the
first at Constantinople, Anno 380. SECT. 3.
WE present before you the CL. Catholic Bishops in the second General
Council of Constantinople, whereunto it may seem that both you and we do
willingly refer our selves. First then we shall hear

Your Objections.
Secundu^ Conc. generale in Epist. ad Damasum, quae extat apud Theod. l. 5.
hist. c. 9. dicit se conuenisse apud vrbem Constantinop. ex mandato literarum
Pontificis per Imperatorem ad se missa^u^. Et. ibidem fatetur Romans Ecclesiam
caput esse, se autem membra. Bellar. l. 2. de Pont c. 13.. Secundum.
The second General Council (says your Cardinal) in their Epistle to Pope
Damasus say, that they were gathered by the Mandate of Pope Damasus: and
confess also that the Church of Rome is the Head, and they the members. So he.
And this is all that is objected, but upon a mistake; the Cardinal himself
confessing, that Sed postea animaduerti, eam Epistolam non esse secundae Synodi
generalis, sed Episcoporu^ qui in eo Synodo interfuerant, and sequente
Annoiterum Constantinopoli conuenerant. -- Congregatam tamen fuisse ex mandato
Damasi, satis probatur ex Conc. 6. Act, 18. Bell. Recog. p. 46. in hoc Conc.
It was not the Epistle of the Council, but of certain Bishops that had been
at the Council. And therefore, for the first part of the Popes Mandate, he
refers himself to another Council; against the Universal Current of
Histories, which with general consent set down the Mandates of Emperors, as
the supreme and first compulsarie Causes for the collecting of Councels. But
that which he loses, in mis-citing his true Authors, he studieth to gain by
mis-interpreting of the testimony of Theodoret. For whereas Theodoret says,
(...) ^.e. Anno praeterito, vel proxime elapso; vt (...), frumentum Anni
superioris: Et apud Xenoph. (...). Iidem nunc sumus, qui ante hoc tempus.
(...), which is, letters the year past, He (against all Lex^cons) reads,
The Mandate of letters. Is not this fine art, trow ye? For take your own
Translation of 2. Cor. 8. ver. 10. (whether the vulgar Latin, or the English)
This is profitable for you, who have begun not only to do, but also to be
willing [Gr. (...), Vulg. Ab anno superiori; Rhemists English,] from the year
past. If any should translate [ the year past] into Mandate, might it not be
suspected that the man's wits were now in the waine? as being ignorant of the
common Proverb, (...), Last year the better; to signify the more and more
worthy. Is there here any sound of a Commander?

As for the Similitude of the Head and Members, it has no more color of
Superiority, than that which we have always acknowledged, namely of Order,
that is of Priority of Place, of Voice, and the like; but never of Dominion.
That which the Inscription of the Epistle does confute, which was not to
Damasus alone, but jointly to others, thus: Synodicae Epistolae Inscriptio.
Dominis honoratissimis and cum primis Reuerendis fratribus and Collegis Damaso,
Ambrosio, Britoni, etc. Vt nos vobis propria membra ostenderemus, -- ne vos
sine nobis ^egnaretis, and nos vobiscum (...). Theod. loco supra citato.
Most honorable and Reverend Brethren, and Colleagues. This is the
Inscription, and the Epistle it self is of the same thread; We declare (say
they) our selves to be your proper members; but how? that your reigning, we may
reign with you. Members therefore of Colleagueship, as Cor-regnants. We have
heard your Pretense, be you as ready to hear our contrary proof.

Our Opposition.
The said General Council of Constantinople in the second Canon, decrees
thus: Binnius Tom. 1. in Conc. Constan. Can. 2. Noua Roma, seu junior Roma.
The Bishop of the City of Constantinople ought to have the honor of Primacie
next after the Bishop of Rome, because it is new Rome. Yielding to Rome her
birthright of Primacie; which whatsoever it was, they judge to have been
established not by any Divine Ordinance, but by occasion of the Imperial
Seat, which was at first the City of Rome, as your Binius acknowledges to be
collected from that ground. Who therefore cannot digest this Canon, but why?
Hunc Canonem ab Ecclesia Romans minime receptum fuisse constat, etc. Binius in
Notis super idem Conc.
This Canon (says he, out of Baronius) was not received by the Church of Rome.
Truly it were more then marvel that the Church of Rome should admit any
Canon, that may any way derogate from her presumption: Albeit your own
Cardinal Cusanus See above, Sect. 2. lit. c.
has confessed her former Encroachments. But to proceed punctually. Which of
the Fathers, for the space of 60. years after, opposed against this Canon?
what one Bishop before Pope Leo thought it not most equal? Albeit there were
present, in that Council, Cyril Bishop of Jerusalem, Timothy Bishop of
Alexandria, and Miletus Bishop of Antioch, Bishops of three several
Patriarchall Seas, who consented unto it, notwithstanding that they themselves
received some prejudice by that Decree.

This Canon, you know, is of great force, to beat down your whole bul-warke,
which is your Article of Romane-Catholike and Universal Dominion over the
whole Church, and therefore we must expect some Objection against it. One we
find, and that a foul one too, that namely, Canon hic inter Acta Concilij
furtiue relatus, Baron. Anno 381. nu. 35. etc.
This is a surreptitious Canon, without the general consent of that Synod.
Which we shall then confess, as soon as you shall persuade any reasonable man
to think that to be a Supposititious and forged Canon, purposely against the
dignity of the Church of Rome; which the Bishops of Rome themselves, when they
oppugned it, as being unequal* yet never excepted against, as Surreptitious
and false: Not Leo, not Gelasius, not Gregory, although that they took the
Sanction of that Canon indignely. Or that the Conc. Chalced. Act. 16.
Legates of the Pope in the Council of Chalcedon (stiffly opposing against the
subject matter of this Canon) would not have branded it with the Note of
Forgerie, when they made express mention of it, if they had so conceived
thereof. Or (which is beyond all that can be opposed) that the Fathers of the
Council of Chalcedon, in their letters to Leo Pope of Rome, would be there
known unto him, that they with mutual consent Conc. Chalced. Act. 16. Relatio
sanctae Synodi ad Papam Leonem. Confirmauimus autem centum and quinquaginta
sanctorum Patrum, qui in Constantinopoli congregati sunt, regulam -- quae
praecepit, post vestram sanctissimam and Apostolicam sedem, honorem habere
Consta^tinopolitanam, quae secunda est ordinata. -- Qui locum vestrae
Sanctitatis obtinent -- Paschasinus and Lucentius -- ijs ita constitutis
vehementer resistere tentauerunt. Apud Biniu^ Tom. 2. Act. 16.
Confirmed the Rule and Canon of the CL. Bishops in the Council of
Constantinople, notwithstanding standing that his Bishops and Legates
Paschasinus and Lucentius did dissent therefrom; if they had not judged the
said Canon to be absolutely true. So false is your objection of Falsehood
against that Canon of the Council of Constantinople.

CHALLENGE.
A Canon, then, you see of a General Council, albeit never received (as you
say) by the Church of Rome, because prejudicial thereunto; which is an evident
argument of their No- Subjection to the Bishop of Rome. Execrable therefore is
your Article of The Catholic Roman Church, without subjection whereunto there
is no Salvation: whereby C L. Bishops, accounted Catholics throughout the
Christian world, must be necessarily excluded from Salvation.

That the belief of the Article, viz. The Catholic Roman Church, without
subjection whereunto there is no Salvation, damneth the C C. Bishops in the
third General Council at Ephesus. Anno 434. SECT. 4.
IN this General Council CC. Bishops at Ephesus, some things there are, which
you object; and some things which you must have the patience to have objected
unto you.

Your Objections.
You would prove out of this Council an acknowledgement of Concilium dicit, se
Nestorium deponere ex mandato literarum Pontificis. -- Et in Epist. ad
Celestinum scribit, se Iohannis Antiocheni Patriarchae causam non fuisse ausum
iudicare, sed reseruasse Iudicio ipsius Celestini. Quae omnia perspicue
indicant supremam Romans Pontificis authoritatem. Bellar^ de Pont lib. 2. cap.
13. Tertium.
The supreme authority of the Popes, above them: but how? first. They
confessed that they deposed Nestorius by the command of Pope Celestine. False,
there is not the word, Command, used by the Council. If that word had been
used, you should have proved it out of the Popes own Letters themselves, which
we should not have needed to put you to, if any such word could appear in the
Council objected. No, you well know, that to Command was not the style of
Popes, in primitive and ancient times. Saint Gregory Bishop of Rome, about an C
L. years after Celestine, did utterly abhor it. Hoc verbum Iussionis a meo
auditu remouete. Ego non Iussi. Greg. lib. 7. Epist. 30.
I COMMAND? (says he) away with the word, COMMAND, I have not commanded. Yet
thus you labor to frame and fashion your old Popes after the models of your
new, to the end your new ones may not seem to have degenerated from the old.
Yet something there is in the words of the Council, namely, that Cum partim ex
ipsius Epistolis and libris, a nobis perlectis, partim ex verbis ab eo in hac
vrbe recitatis, eum impie sensisse deprehenderimus, tum Ecclesiae Canonibus,
tum Epistola sanctss. Patris nostri and Collegae Celestini Episcopi Romans
Ecclesiae compulsi, ad sententiam contra eum pronunciandam venimus. Verba
Concilij de Nestorio apud Euag. lib. 1. cap. 4.
They were moved and compelled by his letters: meaning, by the persuasions of
that Orthodoxe Bishop, and that but only [ tum, tum] in part; for so they say,
Both by the Canons, and also by your letters: and both these had relation to
another part of Reasons and inducements premised in that place. And is not this
then sly Sophistry, to conclude an whole from a Part? Yea but the same
Council say, that See above, lit. ^.
They durst not judge John the Bishop of Antioch, and therefore reserved him to
the judgment of Pope Celestine: which plainly shows the supreme authority of
the Pope. So you. What signify these words, that They durst not judge John of
Antioch? why, they do plainly relate, in the same Epistle, that they had
already deposed him. Epistola Synodalis, post acta Conc. ad Celestinum. Vbi
dicit Conciliu^ se Iohannem Antiochenum Celestino reseruasse: dicit tamen se
illum prius excommunicasse, and omni potestate Sacerdotali exuisse. Cur ergo
Celestino eum amandauit? Concilium se explicat; vt illius temeritatem animi
lenitate vinceremus. Id est, vt experiretur Celestinus, si qua ratione ad
saniorem mentem eum reddere queat, vt deinde in gratiam reciperetur. Haec apud
Binium Tom. 1. page 806.
We have (say they) deuested him of all his Sacerdotall power. So, after this
referring him to the judgment of the Pope, That (for so they say) they might
with lenity overcome his rashness. This was not to prefer him to another
Censure, for there had been no lenity in that, but to the advice of Celestine,
that by his persuasion he might be first reclaimed from error, and afterward
restored to his place.

For a further discovery of the Eclipse of the Conscience in your Cardinal,
let us consider what Supreme authority he would insinuate, to wit, that if the
Bellar. lib. 2. de Conc. cap. 17.
Council could not depose Nestorius Patriarch of Constantinople, without the
Popes Mandate; nor durst depose John Patriarch of Antioch, but referred the
Cause to the judgment of the Pope, the issue hereof must be directly this,
viz. That the Pope is absolutely above a General Council, as the Cardinal
defends elsewhere. This were a Supreme authority indeed: but in truth it is
a falsehood, and long since condemned (as you Pertinaciter Haereticum. Council.
Basil. Sess. 33. vbi etiam mentio facta est Conc. Constant.
know) by your own Councels of Constance and Basil, for a flat Heresy: Which
your Doctors of Paris have always disclaimed, as contrary to antiquity: and
which no Council, since the beginning of the Christian Faith, did as yet
expressly decree, as your Doctor Stapleton, a great Champion in this Cause, does
not deny; and therefore betaketh himself to the Quamuis nullo Decreto
publico, tamen tacito Doctorum consensu definita, etc. Stapleton. doctrine.
princip. l. 13. c. 15.
Late tacit and silent consent of the Doctors of your Church. Was not this then
more than boldness in your Cardinal, to infer this Supreme authority out of
this Council?

Our Opposition.
First, this Council called Celestine Bishop of Rome (...), Comminister.
Epist. Synod. suprae object. in tit.
Fellow-Minister, and did (as you have heard) Excommunicate and depose the
Patriarch of Antioch, before they made any Relation thereof unto Celestine the
Bishop of Rome. Ergo, It did not acknowledge the now pretended Supreme
authority and privilege of the Pope; which is, to have Cases of that nature
soly Reserved to his own Est casus reseruatus (secundum doctrinam Casuistarum)
crimen grave, cuius absolutio inferioribus interdicta, dumque reseruatur Papae.
Stephanus d' Aluin. de Episc. Abbat, etc. cap. 31.
Determination. Secondly, look into the Council it self, and into the
Epistle alleged, wherein (concerning the points which Pope Celestine had
constituted) Ea quae Celestinus depositione Pelagij, aliorumque constituit, in
Synodo perlecta Iudicauimus and nos (inquiunt) firma and solida permanere
debere: quare and nos idem sentientes, itidem and eos pro depositis habemus.
Epist. Synod. Apud Binium quo supra.
We (say they) have judged them to stand firm: wherefore we agree with you in
one sentence, and do hold them (meaning Pelagius, and others) to be deposed.
Ergo, Consent to the Confirmation of the Popes sentence does gainsay his
Supreme authority.

But principally we oppose the Acts of this Council of Ephesus, in decreeing,
that Zenon Episeopus Curij Cypri dixit: A sanctis Apostolis numquam possunt
ostendere, quod affuerit Antiochenus, and ordinaueri^, vel communicauerit
vnquam Insulae ordinationis gratiam, neque alius quispiam. -- Synodus Sancta
dixit, -- In Cypro Praesules, secundum Canones Sanctorum Patrum ( namely at
Nice) and veterem consuetudinem per seipsos ordinationes pientissimorum
Episcoporum faciant. Apud Binium Tom. 2. Act. Conc. Ephesians. Append. 1. cap. 4.
page 768.
Neither the Patriarch of Antioch, who made claim, Nor any other should assume
authority of ordaining any Bishop within the Isle of Cyprus. The Arguments and
Reasons, whereupon the Synod made this Decree, show, that as well the Authority
of the Bishop of Rome, as of any other, is thereby excluded. And they add more
peremptorily; Istud autem etiam in alijs dioecesibus, and in omnibus prouincijs
seruetur, vt nullus Episcopus aliam p^ouinciam, quae non antea, and ab initio
fuit sua, sub suam manum trahat. -- ne sacerdotij pr^^textu, mundanae
potestatis fastum subintroducat. Jdem Ibidem.
It is to be observed (say they) in all Provinces and Dioces, that no Bishop
draw under his subjection any Province, which was not his from the beginning,
lest that under pretense of Priesthood he bring into the Church Arrogance and
Pride. The very selfsame disease, which Saint Basil and Saint Augustine, with
the whole Council of Afric, See hereafter Chap. 9.. 8. and 9. etc.
have both expressly noted, and openly detested in the Roman Popes, even of
their times.

CHALLENGE.
NOne of you ever doubted, that this Council of Ephesus was General, and the
Bishops therein truly Catholics: wherein notwithstanding you see diverse
Arguments, although not of disunion, yet of no Subjection. And therefore You
(except you will condemn CC. holy Bishops) must needs judge your Roman
Article to be damnably false.

IV. That the Belief of the Roman Article of The Catholic Roman Church,
without subjection whereunto there is no salvation, Damneth above CCCC.
Catholic Bishops in the fourth General Council of Chalcedon. SECT. 5.
Four hundred and thirty Bishops were assembled in this Council of Chalcedon,
with whom we are to aduize concerning your Article of Necessary Subjection to
the Bishop of Rome and his Church. But first we are ready to answer, and then
to reply.

Your Objection.
THis Council (says your Cardinal) said that Conc Chalcedon. Act. 1.2. and
3. dicit, Pontifici Romans a Deo ipso vineae. i e. Eeclesiae vniuersae custodiam
commissam esse. Bellar. de Pont. l. 2. cap. 13.
The custody of the Vine, that is, of the Catholic Church, is committed to
the Pope, by God. It says so, and so does that godly primitive Pope
Eleutherius say to the Bishops in France (as Eleutherij Papae Decretal. ad
Galliae prouincias, ad finem Hujus rei gratia, vniuersalis vobis a Christo Jesus
commissa est Ecclesia, vt pro omnibus laboretis, and cunctis open far non
negligatis. Apud Binium Tom. 1. Ep. Decret. Eleuther.
you know) that The whole Catholic Church is committed by Christ unto them.
Were They therefore, think you, all Popes? What say you? Id est, Dum Haeretici
vniuersam Ecclesiam oppugnarunt, non modo Episcopis, sed vnicuique Christiano
eius defendendae cura and studium dema^data sunt. Binius Annot. Ibid.
The meaning of Eleutherius is (say you) that for as much as Heretics do
oppugn the Catholic and Universal Church, it belongs unto every Bishop to
have an universal care to defend and support it. And this is a true Answer
indeed, else must you grant that Saint Paul was a Pope over Saint Peter,
because he took upon him 2 Cor. 11.28.
The cure, or care of the whole Church: and that Athanasius Bishop of
Alexandria was Pope above the then Bishop of Rome, because Gregory Nazianzene
says of him, that Greg. Nazian. de Athanasio. Cui creditur populi Alexandrini
praesidentia, quod per inde est (inquit) ac si dicam totius orbis praefectura.
Id est, sic praefuit, vt vniuersis praeesset, etc. Salmeron. Ies. Tom. 16. in.
1 Pet. 5. disp. 8. page 102.
He having the presidence of the Church of Alexandria, may be said thereby to
have the Government of the whole Christian World. By these Evidences we are
compelled to ask, with what Conscience you could make such Objections, in good
earnest, to busy your Adversaries, and seduce your Disciples with all,
whereunto you-your-selues could so easily make answer. But thus Catchitiue have
you been at the shadow; let us try whether we can apprehend the substantial
Truth.

Our Opposition.
For what is that which you will say belongs really to the Supreme and
Papal Dominion of the Bishop of Rome? Canones and Decreta Concilij, quae ad
jus humanum spectant, Potest Pontifex Ro^. ex toto, vel ex part delcre aut
mutare. Haec est Theologorum and Canonistarum communis opinio. Ratio enim est,
quoniam supremam gubernandi Ecclesiam potestatem habet Azor. Ies. Just. Moral.
par. 2. l. 5. c. 14.. Q^rrto quaeritur.
Because (say you, with common consent) the Pope has supreme authority in
governing the Church, therefore can he change the Canons and decrees of
General Councels. So you. But what then say you to the equalling of other
Patriarchall Seats with Rome? Patres hujus Synodi (nempe Chalcedonensis)
priuilegia aequalia Constantinopolitanae sedi dederunt cum Roma, propter
imperium ciuitatis, -- Huic post Leo Papa restitit. Bellar. l. 2. de Pont c. 18.
The Fathers of the Council of Chalcedon (say you) did give Privileges to the
Patriarkeship of Constantinople, equal to the Church of Rome: but Pope Leo did
oppose against the Decree of the Council, and disclaimed it. You say true: but
yet let us come to the ground of belief, as well of the Fathers of that
Council, in opposing your pretended Papal dignity and authority; as of your
Doctors, in contradicting them. Secondly therefore, Romans Pontifice^ succedere
Petro in Ecclesiasti^^ Monarchia Ecclesiae, probatur jure diuino. Bellar. Jb.
cap. 12.
The Pope of Rome (say you) has his Monarchy and sole government of the
Church from divine right: And, Sciendum est, tempore Nicolai secundi, Petrum
Damiani -- a Pontifice Romans Legatum missum fuisse, -- and in Ecclesia
Mediolanensi, conuocato populo, -- Quae (inquit) prouincia in terris a
Pontificis ditione libera? -- Ecclesiam Romans a deo ipso fundatam esse, etc.
Test Azor Ies. Instit. par. 2 l 4. c. 17.
The Roman Church was founded by God; What Province then in the world is free
from her Jurisdiction? So you, and such is your now Roman Faith. But the
Fathers of the General Council of Chalcedon were of a contrary belief,
because their reason of withstanding the Pope was (as you know) Supponit hoc
Concilium, quod Romans seeds tunc non diuino, sed humano jure primatum haberet.
Binius Annot in Act. 15. Conc. Chalced.
For that they held, that the Sea of Rome was founded by humane authority:
Senserunt Romans Ecclesiam Primatum habuisse, eo quod ea ciuitas impetio orbis
terrae potiretur. Bellar. lib. 2. de Pont c. 17.. Alterum.
Thinking that the Church of Rome got the Primacie (namely of Order) by reason
only that it was the chief Imperial Seat. So you.

We have heard of Oppositions enough. Gladly would we understand, how you can
reconcile these odds, so that we may not justly condemn your now Roman
Faith of Nouelty, by the judgment of a General Council? Decretum illud magni
Concilij, sed non legitime factum, absentibus Romanae sedis legatis, and postea
reclamantibus. Bellar. Ibid.. Quare. Nam Leo Papa scribit, se Concilium illud
approbasse, solum quantum ad explicationem fidei. Epist. 59. Sic Bellar. l. 2.
de Pont. c. 22.. Secundo.
This was indeed (say you) the Decree of a great Council, but the Decree was
not lawfully proceeded in, because the Legates of the Pope were absent, and
afterward protested against it. And Pope Leo himself would not approve it,
saying that he did allow only those Decrees and Canons in that Synod, which
concerned matters of Faith. So you. And now upon this Evidence hear our
Verdict.

CHALLENGE.
IN these Premises we find a Council, in your own opinion, and in the
Judgment of the Christian World, lawful and General, consisting of more than
400 Fathers, without exception Catholic and Orthodoxe: These have opposed your
Article of the Necessity of Subjection to the Pope, razing the very foundation
thereof, by believing that his Primacie is not by divine Authority. Upon this
belief they easily cast down the roof of your Papal building, denying the
Popes power of gaine-saying the Positive and humane Decrees and Canons of
General Councels; and by erecting a Patriarch, whom They adorn with a
Privilege of power (excepting priority of Order, in taking place, giving voice,
etc.) Equal to the Bishop of Rome. What is, if this be not, to ruinate your
Roman Article?

Yet much more stand you entangled in your own Answers. For if that so many,
and so Reverend Fathers determined against the pretended Prerogative of Rome,
notwithstanding the Contrary protestation of the Popes Legates; they teach us
thereby another cross point to your Article, viz. that the voice of the Pope,
by his Legates, is of no more virtue in a Synod, than the suffrage of any other
Bishop. And what though the Legates of the Pope were absent at the making of
this Act in the Council, because they would not be present; and were
notwithstanding present the next day, and disclaimed the Act, yet could nothing
prevail? And again, what was the nullity of authority, in the Popes Legates,
whenever they contended against the Mayor part of a Synod?

But Pope Leo (say you) gainesaid the former Decree of that Council, albeit he
did approve of all Canons in the same, so far as concerned marters of Faith.
This Answer also proves you faithless in all your defense, even by the
judgment of Pope Leo. For if he therefore opposed the Decree of that Synod,
which oppugneth the Papal Primacie and Dominion, because it was no matter of
Faith, he thereby plainly confesses your Article, which maintains the
Dominion of the Roman Church, without which there is no salvation, not to be
at all an Article of Faith. We conclude. Therefore either must those 430 godly
and most Reverend Fathers, together with Leo the Pope himself, be damned by
your Roman Article, or else must your Article be condemned by their contrary
judgment and Decree. Which, (notwithstanding the Popes Contradiction) was
afterward sufficiently confirmed in other parts of Christendom, by the use
thereof, which (as you confess) Sed ita vsus obtinuit longo tempore. Cusan.
Card. Concord. Cath. lib. 1. c. 16.
Continued a long time. So large and long a false-hood is that, which your
Article of Necessary Subjection to Rome does exact of the whole Church of
Christ.

V. That the belief of the Article of an Universal Subjection to Rome, as the
Catholic Church, damneth the 165 Fathers of the first General Council at
Constantinople; being the second of that name, Anno 553. SECT. 6.
LEt your own most priuileged, albeit most partial Authors, Baronius and
Binius, relate the whole Cause. 1. Concerning the authority of this Council,
whether it deserve the Title of Universal Council, or no? They answer that
Hoc quintum Concilium universal fuisse, attestatur Nicaenum Conc. 2. Act. 1.
Papa Pelagius approbauit. -- De quo Greg. primus Epist. 24. ad Ioh.
Constantinop. ait, Quintum quoque Concilium veneror. -- Nec Gregorius tantum,
cu^ Praedecessoribus Romany Pontificibus, sed and successores omnes hanc
Quintam Synodu^ receperunt. Baron. Anno. 553. number. Tom. 2. Notis ad 224, etc.
Binius Conc. Constant. 5.
It was a General Council, and so approved by all Popes, Predecessors and
Successors to Saint Gregory: and by himself saying, I do reverence the fifth
Council of Constantinople. Now come we to the relation of the Cause. First, of
Pope Agapetus. Anthimii causa ab Agapeto Papa condemnata. Biniu^ Tom. ^. p.
416. Post in Synodo Constantinopol. ventilata. Idem in Not. Conc. Constant: sub
Menna.
The cause of Anthimius, which he had condemned, was afterward ventilated in
the Council of Constantinople. This argues the No-Dominion of the Pope over
that Council, which will take upon them to examine that cause, which the Pope
had before condemned. After Agapetus succeeds Vigilius; In quo Concilio
Vigilius Synodali sententiae de condemnandis tribus Capitulis plane
contradicebat. -- Post finem Conc. Iustinianus Vigilium relegabat. -- Post
exilium Pontifex Synodum hanc, de condemnatione trium Capp. authoritate sua
confirmabat. -- Post absolutum Con^. Oecumenicum ab exilio solutus ab Imp.
acerrimo trium Capitulorum host, in Italiam redire permissus est. -- Ne quis
tamen de hac causa Vigilio sedique Apostolicae errorem vel turpitudinis maculam
impingere possit, sciendum est, in his Disputationibus, test Greg. l. 3 Epist
37 de tribus Capp. non fuisse quaestionem vllam de fide, sed tantummodo de
personis. Cum igitur Schismatis euitandi gratia Vigilius pro defensione trium
Capp. constitutum ederet, cuius virtute Orientales vnirentur. -- Cum vero post
finem hujus Conc. Q^inti Ecclesia grauiori damno afficeretur, Imperator
co^tradicentes Synodali decreto persequereretur, totusque Oriens a Romans atque
occidentali Ecclesia diuidendus atque separandus metueretur, si non Ro^.
Pontisex Quintam Synodum approbaret, idcirco Vigilius nouis emergentibus causis
jure meritoque priorem sententiam mutauit. Baron. Anno. 553. number. 223. Binius
Tom. 2. Conc. Not in Conc. quint. Oecumen.
At what time In the Council of Constantinople, that which they called [Tria
Capitula] was condemned. The sum of their Answer is this. Pope Vigilius,
before this General Council of Constantinople, defended the Cause of the
[Tria Capitula] which the Council being gathered together condemned: The Pope
resisted the Decree of the Council; the Council ends. Pope Vigilius, for
not consenting to this Council, is banished by the Emperor Justinian. After
that this Council had so concluded, Vigilius confirmed the sentence of the
Council of Constantinople, and was thereupon released out of Banishment by the
Emperor. In all this (say you) the Popes change of his mind cannot be
prejudicial to him or his See, for that (the cause being no matter of Faith,
but only of Persons) he did it upon just reason, least the East Church and the
the West should fall into Schism, and be rent in sunder. Thus far your
Authors.

CHALLENGE.
BE the Cause matter of Faith, or only of Fact, or Persons, it mattereth not,
nor to what end it was done. We are not to inquire into the doctrines, but the
dispositions of this Council: nor to respect the point of Union of Churches,
but that which you have created for a new Article of Faith, the point of
Necessary subjection to the Roman Church, and Bishop thereof. First, by your
own Confession, the Pope defends that, which afterward the Council
gain-sayeth: Next, the Pope contradicts the Decree of the Council, to wit,
of the same Council, determinately concluding and persisting in their Sentence
against the same Pope, even to his Banishment for the same Cause. Yet in the
end he is glad (for Unions sake) to yield unto the former Decree of the
Council. So They, who in their Annotations conceal that, which the Text
expressly delivers; Facta a nobis condemnatione contra Haereticos, and eorum
impietaem, nec non contra eos qui defenderunt, vel defendunt tria Capitula, Sic
ipsum Conc. ad finem eius, ante Subscriptiones. Collat. 8. apud Biniu^. Tria
Capitula erant Theodorus, Mopsuestenus, Epistola Ibae, and Scripta Theodoreti
aduersus Cyrillum. Binius Jbid. Tom. 2. Annot. in in id. Council. 5. Oecumen.
We condemn (say they) all that have defended Tria Capitula. But Vigilius (say
you) had before this Council defended those, Tria Capitula. Therefore was your
Pope also condemned by this Council.

Behold now, forsooth, your Roman Faith! Behold your Monarch! Behold his
Dominion! Behold the necessary Subjection of his Subjects! If it be called
Dominion to Command, and be glad to yield: or accounted Subjection of that
Council, to prescribe Decrees against the sentence of your Pope: or esteemed
Faith of your Article of Necessary subjection to the Roman Church, upon loss
of Salvation, to persist in dissenting from the Pope, and his Apostolical See
in this whole Cause; and not thus only, but in condemning him also. It must
therefore follow, that these 165 Bishops of this General Council, and the
Catholic Church in them, not only in not believing this Article, but also in
withstanding it, were damned; or el^e that your Article, and the defenders
thereof are justly damnable.

Consider, we pray you, in what a snare of Heresy and Blasphemy you are
entangled, seeing that you cannot but see, that your own Article, viz. The
Catholic Roman Church, without subjection whereunto there is no salvation, is
Contradicted by the truly Catholic Church it self, in her purer and more
primitive age of the first 500 years: by those five General Councels, the
first four whereof Saint Gregory himself professed Quatuor Synodos Sanctae
Vniuersalis Ecclesiae, veluti quatuor libros Sancti Eua^gelij, recipimus. Greg.
l. 1. Epist. 24.
To embrace, as the booke^ of the Gospel: See above. lit. x.
And the Fifth (says he) I also reverence. Idle therefore, and vain is your
Objection, out of that Synod, from one word Haec Synodus per Menam Patriarcham
Concilij Praesidem ita loquitur: Nos, inquit, Apostolicam sedem sequimur, and
obedimus, etc. Si totum Conc. Apostolicae sedi obedire se profitetur, certe
Apostolica seeds toti Ecclesiae cum authoritate praeest. Bellar. l. 2. de Pont.
c. 13
Obedience, which they professed to the Catholic See; by not discerning
between a Logical and a Moral Obedience. For they promised Obedience to that
See, in all her Orthodoxe and reasonable Persuasions; but not to her peremptory
Commands and Conclusions. For you may Obey Saint Augustine, by subscribing to
his judgment, without submitting to his Jurisdiction. If you know not this,
then may Sciunt Graecae linguae periti, verbum (...), and (...) nullam vt
plurimum Dominatio nis habere signisicationem: nam (...) saepe dicitur a
Graecis, cum vel par, vel etiam inferior superiorem alloquitur. Sic (...) de eo
vsurpa^ur, qui suadentis and monentis consiliu^ probat and sequitur, vt aeger
Medici. Jsaac. Casaub. Exercit 16. number. 161.
you learn it; namely, that a Superior may be said to obey his Inferior, when
he yields to his reasonable persuasion, As a sick man to the Physician.

VI. That the belief of the Article, viz. The Catholic Roman Church, without
subjection whereunto there is no salvation, does damn all the Fathers of the
Sixth, Seventh, and Eighth Councels, in your own estimation, General. SECT. 7.
THese three Councels, which you call General, and which do contain above
the compass of 300 years more, give us just Cause to judge this your Roman
Article to be Imposterous. We instance, first, in the first Two.

The Sixth and Seventh Councels, in the Cause of Pope Honorius, condemning him
for an Heretic.
Sexta Synodus Vniuersalis Constantinopoli celebrata Anno 685. Episcoporum 289.
in qua damnata est Haeresis eoru^, qui vnam tantum in Christo voluntatem esse
volebant. Bellar. l. 1. de Conc. c. 5.. Sexta. Septima ad Nicaeam, An. 781.
Episcoporum 350. Bellar. Jbid.. Septima.
THe Sixth universal Synod (says your Cardinal) was in the year 681 (or
according to others, 685) Celebrated at Constantinople by 289 Bishops. The
Seventh Universal Council was held at Nice, in the year 781, wherein were 350
Bishops. So he. Well, in both these was Honorius Pope of Rome condemned for an
Heretic. How will you free your Pope from being a Monothelite? Namely, Patres
Sextae Synodi, qui Honorium damnanarunt, fuerunt decepti. -- Decepti septimae
Synodi Patres, qui Sextae Synodi sententiam confirmabant. Deceptus Adrianus
Papa, qui Honorium Haereticum fuisse putabat. Deceptus Leo secundus, qui Papam
Honorium vt Haereticum execratus est. Na^ accidere potest, vt Conc. Generale
erret in materia facti, non fidei. Bellar. l. 4. de Pont. cap. 11. per totum.
The Fathers of both these General Councels (say you) were deceived, as they
might easily be in a matter of Fact (to judge whether Honorius were a
Monothelite) not in a matter of Faith. So your Cardinal. Is it a matter of
Fact then? and were these Fathers deceived therein? Who can say so? Why,
Cardinal Bellarmine does affirm it. Good God! The rare modesty of this man,
who will have us to believe, that one Bellarmine, living now a 1000 years since
that matter was in agitation, should judge better by his Conjectures of the
Circumstances of a matter of Fact, than could 639 Bishops (for so many there
were in all) in their public Synods, [iam flagrante crimine,] when as yet the
Cause was fresh, and green, their Witnesses living, and all Circumstances
(which are the perfect Intelligencers) visibly before their eyes.

This Condemnation of Pope Honorius by two Councels does undermine the
Fox-hole, wherein your great Clerks commonly lurk, by telling us, that Popes
may be Heretics, as Greg. de Valent. Ies. Anal. fidei. lib. 8. cap. 2. and
Bellar. de Pont.
Private Doctors, but not in their public Persons, as Popes. An Answer most
frivolous. 1. Because those Bishops condemning Him in their public Council,
did judge him according to his public person. 2. Because they Condemned
Honorius Bishop of Rome in the same tenor, wherein (upon the same Heresy) they
condemned Sergius Bishop of Constantinople; Cum his simul proijci a Sancta Dei
Ecclesia simulque An athematizari praeuidimus Honorium, qui fuerat Papa
antiquae Romae, eo quod inuenimus per scripta, quae ab eo facta sunt ad
Sergium, quod eius mentem per omnia secutus est, and im pia dogmata
confirmabat. Surius Tom. 2. Conc in Synod. 6. Constant. Act. 13. p. 992. etc.
Idem habe^ de Sergio.
Anathematizing them both for their Heresy of Monothelitisme.

It would much better have become your Cardinal, to have Confessed, in the
spirit of Ingenuitie, as your Canus has done, that Honorium quomodo ab errore
vindicabir? quem Haereticum fuisse tradit Psellus, Tharasius, Epiphaniu^, Beda,
totaque donique Septima Synodus. -- Adrianus, Agatho Haereticum esse
iudicabant. Canus loc. theol. lib. 6. c. 8. page 213.
Howsoever other Popes may be excused from Heresy, yet I see not (says he)
how Honorius can be vindicated and freed from this guilt, whom Psellus,
Tharasius, Epiphanius, Beda; whom Adrian, and Agatho, both Popes; whom the
seventh (he might See above lit ^.
have also alleged the VI.) General Council has branded with the Note of
Haeresie. So he.

CHALLENGE.
CALL this (as you do) but a matter of Fact, if you will, which caused those
Councels to condemn Pope Honorius for an Heretic, after his death; yet does
this plainly and ineuitably tell us, that they were of this belief, that the
Pope of Rome may be an Heretic; and that They, who would excommunicate that
Bishop of Rome, being dead, would not have Communicated with him, if
(persisting an Heretic) he had been alive; no more than they would with his
fellow- Heretic, Sergius Bishop of Constantinople. And if they would deny
union with him, certainly they would not have acknowledged spiritual
Subjection unto him. Which flatly gain-sayeth your Article of believing The
Catholic Roman Church and the Bishop thereof, without subjection unto whom
there is no salvation, Therefore all those 639. Bishops, besides two Popes, and
all their Believers, must necessarily be damned, or else your Romish Article,
as a most execrable Paradox, must utterly be abandoned.

VII. That the Belief of the Article, viz. The Catholic Roman Church,
without subjection whereunto there is no Salvation, damneth the Eighth
Council, which you call Octauum Conc. Generale est Constantinopolitanum
quartum Anno 870. Epis. cop. 383. ap. Bin. Tom. 3. p. 143.
General, consisting of 383. Bishops, in the year 870. SECT. 8.
WHat was done in this fourth Synod of Constantinople, you may understand from
your own Men. These Bishops (says your Binius) condemned a Custom of the
Sabboth-fast in Lent, then used in the Church of Rome: and thereupon made they
a Canon, inhibiting the Church of Rome from keeping that Custom any longer.
Their words are these: Quoniam intelleximus Romanam ciuitatem in Sanctis
Quadragesimae ieinnijs in eius Sabbatis jeiunare, praeter Ecclesiae traditam
consuetudinem, -- Sanctae Synodo visum est, vt in Romanorum Ecclesia Canon
inconfuse vires habeat. Biniu Tom. 3. page 149.
We will, that this Canon be constantly observed in the Church of Rome. Would
the Church of Rome swallow and digest such an hot morsel at this day? we
trow not: for Hic quoque Canon 55. quia Matrem Eceesiarum omnium Romans
Ecclesiam repraehendit, non recipitur. Surius Tom. 2. in Conc. Constant. 6. p.
1048 ad Canon. 65. in No^. Bin.
This Canon (says your Surius) is not received, because it reprehendeth the
Church of Rome; the MOTHER-CHVRCH of all other Churches. So he.

CHALLENGE.
YEa rather it condemns your presumption, in calling the Church of Rome the
CATHOLIC MOTHER-CHVRCH above all others: As though a General Council were
not rather to be called the Catholic Church, than She. So then those 383.
Bishops prescribe a Canon, and impose it upon her, and thereby sufficiently
disclaim all Subjection unto her; as Any, albeit but halfe-witted, may easily
discern. Where again we are constrained to judge your foresaid Article
Execrable, rather than to give those 383. Bishops over for damned souls.

Our general CHALLENGES, concerning the formerly cited Eight General Councels.
Remember by this your Article, See above, Cha. 1. Sect. 2. etc.
The Catholic Roman Church, without subjection whereunto there is no
Salvation, and without the belief whereof none can be saved, are damned not
only all those, that shall oppose themselves against the Church of Rome, but
also all they that do not believe the same, as an Article of faith. Now we
have proved by your own Witnesses (as by your own eyes) that above 2280.
Bishops, in their VIII. General Councels (and every General Council you call
the Catholic Church) have opposed your Article of pretended Subjection. The
first by proportioning as well the limits of the Roman Dioces, as of other
Patriarks. The second, by judging the Roman Primacie not to stand upon any
Divine authority, and setting up a Patriarch of Constantinople, contrary to
the Popes will. The third, by inhibiting any Bishop whatsoever from Ordaining
Bishops within the Isle of Cyprus. The fourth, by advancing the Bishops of
Constantinople, and establishing them in equal Privileges with the Bishops of
Rome, notwitstanding the Popes earnest opposition against it. The fifth, in
Condemning the Sentence of Pope Vigilius, albeit one extremely vehement in
that Cause. The Sixth and Seventh, in condemning Pope Honorius of Heresy. And
the Eighth, by imposing a Canon upon the Church of Rome, and challenging
Obedience thereunto. Any man therefore, although destitute of good Conscience,
if but endued with common ingenuitie, will judge and confess that this
Article, which thus Condemns above 2280. Bishops of the first Eighth General
Councels (whereof most were as Catholic as they were ancient and learned)
together with all their Believers, for the space of above 540. years
Professors of the Christian faith, is justly to be condemned as Scandalous,
Schismatic, Heretical, Blasphemous (Respectively) and every way damnable.

CHAP. IX. Our fourth Argument, taken from the Examples of particular Churches
Catholic, which contemning the Excommunication of the Bishop of Rome, were
notwithstanding acknowledged to be in the state of Salvation.
SECT. 1.
THree things there are, which your new Roman See above, Chap. 1. Sect. 1.3.
etc.
Article requires as Necessary to Salvation of Christians throughout the
World. I. Is to have Union with the Church of Rome, and Head thereof. II.
Because there are two kinds of Unions (one in Equality, as is between the
Members of the same Body; and another in an Inequality, like as is between
the Head and the Body) your Article exacteth Union of subjection also. The III.
is the Necessity of faith, concerning both these; as namely that every
Christian do believe the truth of the Article in both, to wit, that they are
indeed Necessary to Salvation. Therefore have we singled out Examples of
ancient Churches, which you your selves note as Excommunicate by the Popo;
which notwithstanding all the Christian world have held to have been in the
state of Salvation.

Our first Instance is in the ancient Churches of Asia, which notwithstanding
the Excommunication of Pope Victor, were in the state of Salvation. SECT. 2.
YOur own Authors boastingly relate, that in the year 197. Victor Papa
Ecclesias omnes orientales ob Paschae diem Excommunicabat. Bellar. l. 3. de
verbo Dei. c. 6.. Secundo. Salmeron Jes. Com. in Gal. 4. disp. 29. Binius Tom.
1. Conc. p. 131. Quod Victor sententiam suam mutauerit, nunquam legitur.
Bellar. l. 2. de Pont. cap. 19.. Resp. Qui autem in hoc schismate avulsi sunt
ab Ecclesia, permanserunt in eo, and quidem in longum tempus. Baron. Ann. 198.
number. 17.
Pope Victor did excommunicate all the Eastern Churches, for not observing the
feast of Easter upon the Lords day: which Excommunication (say they) is not
found to have been afterward revoked, or retracted; wherein notwithstanding
those that were auerse continued a long time. So they. A story certainly
worthy your double consideration, whereof you cannot be ignorant, it being
recorded by Eusebius at large; that namely Eusebius. Hist. Eccles. lib. 5. ca. 23.
and 24.
Polycrates Bishop of Ephesus in Asia pleaded the Cause of the Churches of
Asia, against the Excommunication of Victor, in that his Epistle, whereunto the
other Bishops in Asia gave their Consent: Proving, that their Custom, contrary
to the Roman, was received from Saint John, who leaned upon our Lords breast:
that it was practiced by Philip the Apostle, who died in Asia: that it was
continued by Saint Polycarpus Martyr and Bishop of Smyrna; by Thraseas Bishop
and Martyr; by Sagonius Bishop and Martyr: and that then Polycrates being
animated by these so worthy Examples, and the unanimous Consent of their
Bishops in Asia, stood in defiance with that Pope Victor, and contemned his
Excommunications, saying; I who have now lived sixty five years in the Lord,
and have had communion in the faith with all the Brethren dispersed [(...)]
throughout the world, and nothing moved with these terrors (meaning, of
Ezcommunication) which are urged against us. Thus far the Ecclesiastical
Story, wherein appears this Conclusion as manifest, as if it had been
delivered in express terms, viz. That a Christian may have Communion
generally with the Catholic Church elsewhere throughout the world,
notwithstanding the Excommunication of the Pope and See of Rome: and therefore
cannot the Roman Church be called the Catholic Church, as the Head, whereunto
all others ought to profess Union, and yield Subjection.

Yea, but your Question will be, whether these Asian Churches, being thus
Excommunicate by the Pope of Rome, and so without the Union of your Church,
could therefore be said to be without the state of Salvation? This is the maine
point, for satisfaction whereunto, first (if you will respect the faith of
those Churches) it is plain, that they believed that the Excommunication of
the Bishop of Rome had no further power, than to separate them from his own
Roman Society and Communion; but extended not to the Church Catholic, and
Separation from it. And this will appear to be true by better testimonies,
from the same known Story it self, where you may read that Eusebius. lib. 5.
cap. 24.25.
This Act of Victor did not well please all other Bishops, who did greatly
reprove him for troubling the peace of the Church. And, among others, Father
Irenaeus, in the person of his Brethren in France, wrote Letters to Pope
Victor, Dehorting him from his purpose. This is enough, to prove that Pope
Victor was the Schismatike, that troubled the peace of the Church: and not the
Asian Bishops, whom these other holy Bishops did so far justify, as not to
deserve Excommunication.

But (to appeal to your own Consciences) show unto us, in all your reading,
if you can, that Polycrates and other Asian Bishops, so Excommunicate by Pope
Victor, were held by any other Catholic Bishops of those times, to be thereby
without the state of Salvation. For this, you know, is the very soul of your
Article, viz. The Catholic Roman Church, without which there is no Salvation.
Nay, but you full well know, that Contrarily Saint Hierome, in his Catalogue of
Ecclesiastical Writers, numbered Polycrates among those, who did advance the
Catholic faith. And again (relating this his opposition against Victor) Hier.
Tom. 1. Catal. in Tit. Polycrates.
This I therefore mention (says he) to make known what was his (meaning
Polycrates) Authority. And yet again, Reporting the behaui^ur of Irenaeus and
other Bishops, in the same Case, Idem ibid. Tit. Irenaeus.
These (says he) albeit they differed in opinion from the Asian Bishops, yet
did they not consent to Pope Victor in the act of Excommunication. So he.
Where, Not Consenting to the Popes Excommunication, does plainly infer their
inward Communion with the Bishops of Asia.

CHALLENGE.
THis one Case, if there were no other, were enough to strangle your Roman
faith, in that Article, viz. The Roman Church, without union wherewith there
is no Salvation. Wherein we find the Bishops and Churches of Asia
Excommunicated by the Roman Bishop, and so separated from the Communion of his
See: and yet notwithstanding were reputed still, in the Church of Christ,
Catholic Bishops; and so far in the Communion of the Church Catholic, that
many godly Bishops in the Latin Church would not sever themselves from their
Communion. Yet Bishop Christopherson, that you might believe the
Excommunication of Pope Victor to be of an universal power and extent,
translateth the Greek sentence of Eusebius thus: Irenaeus hortabatur Victorem,
ne tam multas Ecclesias a corpore vniuersae Ecclesiae Christi penitus ampure^.
Joh. Christoph. interp. Eusebius. Hist. l. 5. cap. ^4.
Irenaeus exhorted Pope Victor not utterly to cut off so many Churches from the
body of the universal Church of Christ. Which Interpretation, if true, might
seem to make the Church of Rome the Catholic Church. But, as it became a
sworn Scribe for the Pope, he peruerts the Text, which is to be rendered thus;
(...). Eusebius. ib.
Irenaeus exhorted Pope Victor not to cut off whole Churches of God, without
any mention of the Body of the Church: Ergo it cannot import an
Excommunication from the Universal body of the Church, but only from the
Church of Rome, as from a particular member of that universal, as has been
proved.

What then may be thought of your new Article; but as of a barbarous and
Antichristian Paradox, which separateth from all hope of life all the
Christians of the Easterly parts of Asia, who Master Brerewood in his Inquiry
of diverse Religions, out of Jacob. a Vitriac. de Hist. Orient. page 73.
In multitude exceeded the Christians of the Greek, and Latin Churches. But
God be thanked that, by the doctrine of those Primitive times, the
Excommunication of the Roman Church made no mortal wound: for the Asian
Bishops esteemed no better of it than of a Brutum Fulmen.

And if you will suffer us to be somewhat more equally minded to Victor Bishop
of Rome, than you your selves can be, we may persuade our selves that he did
not by this his Excommunication intend to show or arrogate any Jurisdiction
over the Greek Churches, as Pastor over his flock, but only to deny
participation of brotherly Communion with them, as they might (if they had
been so forward) have dealt with him; this being an Act of Division Inter
Pares: which likewise does conclude the no-absolute Necessity of Union with
the Roman Church.

Our Second Instance is in the Churches of Afric, Numidia, and Mauritania, in
the days of Saint Cyprian by 87. Bishops in the Council of Carthage, Anno
256. Who (notwithstanding the Excommunication of the Pope of Rome) were ever
held, by the Catholic Church, the Essential members thereof, and in state of
Salvation. SECT. 3.
WHen the Case of Basilides and Martial was on foot, concerning Appeals from
the Church of Carthage to Rome, and the Quaestion of Rebaptization of those
persons, that had renounced their Haeresies, was in agitation between Stephen
Bishop of Rome, and Cyprian Bishop of Carthage; The Church of Afric, and
others of that Primitive age, gave so infallible testimonies of denying the
Popes Catholic Jurisdiction over other Churches, and of despising his (now)
pretended Catholic power of Excommunication, as may s^ffice for the full
determination of this whole Cause, in confutation of your new Article, to wit,
The Catholic Roman Church, without which there is no salvation. This Case
therefore being so pertinent and pregnant, we will proceed therein
methodically.

I. The full Opposition of Saint Cyprian, and other Bishops, against Stephen
then Bishop of Rome. SECT. 4.
SVch was the Opposition of Saint Cyprian and others against Stephen Bishop of
Rome, that even by your own Confessions, Cum igitur vidisset Cyprianus
Stephanum obnitentem ijs, quae in Concilio Africano de Baptismate Haereticorum
statuta fuerant, haud cunctatus est maiore numero Episcoporum Carthagine aliud
Co^cilium celebrare. Conuocatis igitur ex Africa, Numidia, Mauritania Episcopis
87. -- Cyprianus [ Stephano Papae Romano aliter definienti opposuit.] Baronius
anno 238. number. 47.
Cyprian gathered a Council of 87. Bishops, out of Afric, Numidia, and
Mauritania, which concluded contrary to the Pope and his Council celebrated in
Italy. Secondly, such, that Constat. Corn^lium Papam, cum nationali Synodo
omnium Episcoporum Italiae, statuisse non debere Haereticos rebaptizari, and
eandem sententiam ^ostea approbasse Stephanum Papam. Bellar. lib. 2. de
Concilijs. ca^. 5. Sed Cyprianus in Concilio 80. Episcoporum definit Haereticos
esse rebaptizandos; putauit enim Pontificem pernitiose errasse, and Stephano
Papae serio praecipienti parere noluit: sed verba contumeliosa protulit, vocans
eum superbum, imperitum, and caecae mentis Bellar. lib. 4. de Romans Pontifice.
cap. 7.. Tertio Ratio, etc. Ex Eusebio lib. 7. cap. 2.
Cyprian judged the same Pope to err proudly, ignorantly, and blindly.
Thirdly, such, that he impugned the Popes pretended power of Appeals to Rome,
accompting the Appellants, to wit, Basilides and Martial, Sciunt quo
reuertuntur. Nam cum statutum sit omnibus nobis vt -- causa illic audiatur, vbi
est crimen admissum, -- oporter eos quibus praesumus non circum-cursare, --
nisi si paucis desperatis and perditis minor videtur esse auctoritas
Episcoporum in Africa constitutorum, etc. -- Iam causa eo^um cognita est, iam
de ijs dicta sententia est. Cyprianus Epistola 55. ad Cornel.
Renegados, and desperate Delinquents; challenging his right of Judicature, for
the proceeding against those notoriously wicked Companions, who therefore ought
to be sent back again, (says he) to be censured by their own Bishop.
Fourthly, such, that this Council of Carthage did deny to any whomsoever the
Title of Concilium Carthaginense sub Cypriano Episcopo. Superest vt hac ipsa de
re, quid singuli sentiamus, proferamus; neminem iudicantes, aut a iure
communionis aliquem, si diuersum senserit, amouentes. Neque enim quisquam
nostrum Episcopum se esse Episcoporum constituit, aut Tyrannico terrore, ad
obsequendi necessitatem collegas suas adigit, quando habeat omnis Episcopus,
pro licentia libertatis and potestatis suae, arbitrium proprium, tanquam
iudicari ab alio non possit, cum n^c ipse possit alium iudicare. Sed expectemus
vniuersi iudicium Domini nostri Jesus Christi, qui solus habet potestatem -- de
actu nostro iudicandi. Apud Surium Tom. 1. Council. in Conc. Carthag. Alludit ad
Decretum Stephani Papae -- qui aliter sentientibus poenam Excommunicationis
acriter comminatus est. Binius Tom. 1. Notis in hoc Concilium, ex Baronio.
Bishop of Bishops. Fifthly, such, that Cyprian would not acknowledge the name
of POPE, per Antonomasiam, that is, By way of Excellency, to be proper to the
Bishop of Rome, as you teach: Bellarm. lib. 2 de Romans Pont. cap. 31. in initio.
Per Antonomasiam Papa, etc.
Insomuch, that at the instant, when as Cyprian was to lay down his life to
Martyrdom, for the profession of the holy Faith, In eius Passione, Proconsuli
quaerenti ab eo, An tu is es, quem Christiani suum Papam vocant? respondit
Cyprianus, Ego. Pontius de Passione Cypriani, an^e opera eiu^. Non se^us
Baronius: Proconsul dixit, Is ne tu es, qui hominibus ^e Papam praebuisti?
Cyprianus, Ego. Anno 261. number. 30.
Being demanded of the Pro-Consull (who then had charge to put him to death)
saying, Art thou He, who showed thy self POPE among the Christians? He
answered I am. Which may be enough to dash that (...), which you appropriate
unto the Bishop of Rome, by the name of Pope. Great therefore was the
Opposition of Cyprian against Stephen, namely; Bishop against Bishop, Chair
against Chair, Council against Council, as flat Diameter, as possibly might
be.

II. That Saint Cyprian and Others were Excommunicated by Pope Stephen. SECT. 5.
IT were frivolous to stand upon presumptions, when we have your own
Confessions. You Baronius, Anno 258. nu. 14. and 15. Ex Epistolis Firmiliani,
apud Cyprianum Epist. 75. and ex Eusebio lib. 7. cap. 4. Orientis Episcopos ex
Cappadocia, Cicilia, Galatia omnes in ea sententia persistentes communione
priuabat.
grant that at the same time, when Saint Cyprian did contend with Stephen
Bishop of Rome, the same Pope Excommunicated the Eastern Bishops of
Cappadocia, Cilicia, and Galatia, for the same cause of Rebaptization.
Secondly, that th'aforesaid Pope Stephen Cum Stephanus Episcopus Romae vrbis
Cyprianum, quod in ipso erat, repelleret, and Episcopos ad ipsum ex Africa
legatos, nec ad sermonem communis colloquij admitteret, and praeciperet
vniuersae fraternitati, -- vt venientibus non solum pax and communio, sed and
tectum and hospitium negaretur: insuper and Cyprianum ipsum Pseudo-Christum and
dolosum operarium diceret. Haec scribit Firmilianus Episcopus e Cappadocia ad
Cyprianum; cuius Firmiani meminit Eusebius Hist. li. 6. ca. 25. and l. 7. ca.
13^ Ad quem Stephanus scripsit, non esse communicandum ijs, qui ad Haereticos
transeuntes rebaptizant. Cassander. Consult. Art. 7.
did also, as much as lay in him, cast off Cyprian, insomuch that He would not
admit unto his speech them that were sent from Cyprian unto him: Nor this
only, but also commanded them that were of his own profession not to have any
peace or communion with them, nor yet to allow them so much as houseroome, or
lodging. Yea and Pope Stephen signified by writing, that no Communion was to be
held with them that did rebaptize. Not to insist upon the Popes lavish and
reproachful speech, in calling Cyprian a Counterfeit Christ, and a deceitful
worker. All which are proved out of the Epistle of Firmilianus Bishop of
Caesara in Cappadocea; which almost in every point does manifest the
Excommunication of Saint Cyprian.

CHALLENGE.
FOR what better proof of the Excommunication of Saint Cyprian and other
Bishops of his Fraternity, than denying by writing All communion with them,
that were of the same Opinion with Cyprian; and after in Act, Forbidding all
communion: First, by speech and conference: Secondly, by conversation and
company: Thirdly, by eating, or hospitality? Each one of these being (according
to your Excommunicatio mayor private omnibus contentis sub hoc versiculo [Os,
orare, vale, communio, mensa negetur] per Os intelligitur participatio
colloquij; per co^munionem, simul conuersari: per mensam, participatio
comedendo Nauarr. Vol. 2 Tom. 3. c. 27.. Quid operatur.
own positive Conclusions) a proper Character of that which is called The
Greater Excommunication; and consequently, in your sense, a Separation from the
Body of the Roman Church.

III. That Saint Cyprian held not the Excommunication of the Pope to be an^
valid Separation from the Catholic Church, or hazardous to the state of
Salvation. SECT. 6.
NOne ever was more Christianly affected to the Catholic Church, than was
Saint Cyprian, nor more firmly believed that the Union with the Catholic
Church is necessary to salvation, whose profession was this: Etsi occisu^
propter nomen Christi, post-modum fuerit extra Ecclesiam constitutus, and ab
Vnitate and charitate diuisus, coronari morte non poterit. Cyprian. lib. 4.
Epist. 2.
Although a man (says he) were slain for the name of Christ, yet if he be
without the Union of the Church, he cannot be crowned with Martyrdom after his
death. Again, this was that Father of Saint Cyprian, who first uttered that
excellent saying, Non habet Deu^ Patrem, qui non habet Ecclesiam matrem.
Cyprian. lib. de Simplicitate Praelatorum.
No man has God for his Father, who has not the Church for his Mother; a
speech twice used (and that worthily) by the same Father, Saint Cyprian.

Hardly can a Protestant change three words with any of you, in Conference,
concerning the Church of Rome, but you Costerus Jes. part. 3. Praefatione. De
Vnitate Ecclesiae, seu simplicitate Praelatorum. Sic etiam Bellarminus and alij.
are ready to usurp, urge, and inculcate this Sentence of Saint Cyprian, as a
full Conviction in it self, thereby to prove and conclude all Protestants to
be therefore without God, because they acknowledge not the Church of Rome to be
(according to your now Roman Article) The Catholic Mother Church. Which
Objection has been already proved, from the general voice of Antiquity, and
many Examples from thence, to be as far from Truth, as Antiquity is from
Novelty, and plain dealing from mere Sophistication and iugling.

But now are we to try what is the sense of this Sentence, from Saint Cyprian
himself, the first Author thereof. The question then will be, whether by
MOTHER Church, without which none can have God for a Father, he meant the
Church of Rome, or not; or rather, whether he spoke it not then in Opposition
to the Church of Rome. The due examination hereof may be unto us an absolute
decision of this whole. Cause, concerning the pretended Motherhood of the
Church of Rome. Saint Cyprian then at the second time, when he made use of
this speech; He has not God for his Father, that has not the Church for his
Mother, wrote to Pompeius, in reprehension of Pope Stephen, for endeavoring (as
Cyprianus in Epistola ad Pompeium. Stephanus Haereticorum causam contra
Ecclesiam Dei asserere conatur. -- quomodo potest habere Deum patrem, qui non
habet Eccesiam matrem? Et paulo post. Cur tantum Stephani nostri dura
obstinatio prorupit?
he says) to defend the cause of Heretics; wherein the same Stephen
threatened Excommunication against Cyprian, which occasioned him to say, What
means our Stephen to break out into so vengible an obstinacy?

As for the Excommunication threatened by Pope Stephen against Cyprian, and
Others that were of a contrary opinion, he does contemn it, yea and condemn
it too, when, Alluding (as Alludit etc. Nemo nostrum, etc. See above lit. d.
your selves confess) unto the same Decree of the Pope, he said, None of all
us Bishops (in Afric) does compel any of his fellows, that are contrary
minded, with any tyrannical terror.

Often was the Opposition of Saint Cyprian against Stephen objected against
Sainst Augustine by the Donatists, for patronage of their own opinion, who
taught, that the Catholic Church, as it is Visible, consists only of perfect
and sanctified men: Saint Augustine so argues with the those Donatists, as if
He, Cyprian, and Pope Stephen had been united together: but this he did in
such manner, that we may say with your Baronius, (speaking of the same
contention between Cyprian and Stephen) Laudabili tergi uersatione vtens, ea
relinquere maluit obuoluta silentio. Baronius anno 258. number. 40.
He used a kind of laudable evasion, or escape, being willing to conceal
their iarres. For indeed Saint Augustine elsewhere (albeit enclinable enough to
suppose that Cyprian did recant his error of Rebaptization before his death)
confesses in direct terms, that Correxisse autem istam sententiam non
inuenitur. August. Epist. 48. Et lib. 1. de Baptismo. cap. 18.
It is no where found, that Cyprian did ever change his opinion.

For our better satisfaction herein, we should advise in this case rather with
Firmilianus a Bishop living in the days of Saint Cyprian, than with Saint
Augustine, who came some hundred and fifty years after. This ancient Father
Firmilianus, being of the same judgment with Saint Cyprian, speaking of the
above named Excommunication given out by Pope Stephen, concludes not Cyprian
but Pope Stephen to be the Schismatike in this contention, because The Pope
hereby (says Jnter Epistolas Cypriani 75. Peccatum vero quam magnum tibi
exaggerasti, quando te a tot gregibus scidisti? De Stephano Papa loquitur. Hoc
est seruasse spiritum vnitatis in vniculo pacis, abscindere se a charitatis
Union? Ibidem.
he) cutteth himself off from the flock of Christ. As for Saint Cyprian,
although he (notwithstanding the Excommunication) held for his part a Christian
and brotherly affection to the Church of Rome, yet did he still persist in his
contrary opinion; nevertheless so, as holding it See above.
unlawful for either side to Excommunicate the other for this question. I
pass over your other Objections, as a vain presumption, and so it is
Obijciunt Baronius and Pamelius Epistolam Dionysij Alexandrini apud Eusebium
lib. 7. cap. 4. qua scribit ad Stephanum Papam, persecutionis fluctibus
sedatis, omnes Orientales Ecclesias, noua and peruersa Nouati Haeresi
repudiata, pacem inter se co^ciliasse, ad concordiam esse redactos, and inter
alios Ecclesiae Doctores -- Firmiliani meminit. Respondet noster Reuittus,
Annotat in Cyprian. Inter se reconciliati dicuntur, non autem cum Pontifice and
Occidentalibus; aut Haeresin Nouati eiurantes, propterea alterum Decretum de
Rebaptizando antiquasse. Nam illam secundam controuersiam de Rebaptizando
nondum fuisse sublatam ostendit idem Dionysius, ibidem loci, in Epistola ad
Xistum Stephani Successorem, qui cum eodem Xisto adhuc viuente in illum adhuc
inclinaret, rogaretque vt attenta cogitatione rei magnitudinem contemplaretur,
audire enim se Decreta in maximis Episcoporum Concilijs facta fuisse, vt qui ab
Haeresis impietate recedunt, debeant primum fide institui, deinde veteris and
impuri fermenti eluuie ac sordibus ablui. His add, quod Basilius ad
Amphilochium scribens, de hac ipsa controuersia quid sentiret, de Firmiliano
ita loquitur, ac si in illa sententia mortuus sit. Haec noster Reuittus in suo
Crit. Sacr. cap. 7.
proved to be.

CHALLENGE.
HEre again we appeal to your own consciences, to judge whether Saint
Cyprian, when he contended against Pope Stephen, and in a Council both
renounced his Decree, and contemned his Excommunication, and at the same time
held it impossible for any to have God to his Father, for Salvation, who had
not the Church to his Mother, for Direction; could possibly by Mother Church
understand the Church of Rome, by which all of his opinion were Excommunicated:
except you would make Cyprian so utterly forlorn of grace, as wilfully to
damn himself, by an obstinate Separation from the Church of Rome. So
infallible it is, that the Church of Rome, in those times, was held to be only
a Member of the Catholic Church, and not The Catholic Mother Church it self.

IV. That Saint Cyprian has been ever since his death esteemed a blessed Saint
and Martyr, notwithstanding his continual Opposition to the Pope of Rome.
SECT. 7.
ALthough it could be supposed that Cyprian did recant his opinion before his
death, yet would not this any way prop or support that your Roman Claim,
except it might further appear that he sought the Absolution of the Church of
Rome for his error. Neither yet would this suffice, unless you could prove it
an Absolution of Jurisdiction, and not of Charity; even as contrarily the
Excommunication was held by Firmilianus and Cyprian, to be an Excommunication
proceeding rather from Pride, than good discretion. Nor were this enough, for
if you will make Cyprian a Saint, you are further to prove, that he
acknowledged Subjection of his Church of Carthage to the Church or Pope of
Rome, in case of Appeals; in which cause Saint Augustine did take part with
Saint Cyprian, against your Roman Church. We conclude therefore from your
Confessions, that Cyprianus semper est habitus in numero Catholicorum. Bellar.
l. 2. de Concilijs. cap. 5.. 1.
Cyprian was always reckoned in the number of Catholics: as also that he is
still instiled Praeclarissimus Doctor (vt ait Augustinus) and Martyr
gloriosissimus. Canisius Ies. Catechis. in init. Encom. Patrum.
A most glorious Martyr; yea and registered in your Roman Calendar by the Title
of Septembris die 26.
Cyprian Saint and Martyr, notwithstanding his continual Opposition against
the Roman Church.

CHALLENGE.
THis blessed man of God Saint Cyprian, who for his exceeding learning, care,
diligence, and power in preserving the Faith of Christ and peace of his Church
Did (say Cyprianus non solum Ecclesiae Africanae, vt ait Nazianzenus, sed etiam
toti Occidenti praefuit, immo Orienti fere ipsi, and Meridiei and Septentrioni.
Salmeron. Ies. Comment. in 1. Pet. 5. disp. 8.. Et dicendo.
you) as witnesses Saint Nazianzene, govern not only Afric, but also the
East, yea and West Churches of Christendom himself; who was so happy at his
death, as that he was crowned with the glorious Diadem of Martyrdom, for his
Testimony of our Lord Jesus; who was so honorable in his memory, as to be
accounted, throughout the Christian world, an excellent Saint of God, may be
lawfully, yea laudably produced for an excellent Patron against the titular
tyranny of Popedom. Whose example, in his Opposition against the Pope of
Rome, may be unto us as a sharp axe, to cut off by the very neck the now
usurped Fatherhood, or Headship, and Motherhood of the Pope and Church of Rome:
because (if you shall remember the Premises) you may perceive, that (...)
Opposition of Cyprian and other Churches of Christ, the Bishop of Rome, in
those days, was not esteemed to be The Catholic or Universal Pope, not The
Catholic Bishop of Bishops; his Jurisdiction not to have any Catholic or
Universal Right; for Appeals; his Judgment not to be a Catholic Rule of
Faith; his Church not to be The Catholic Mother Church; his Excommunication
not to be a Separation from the properly called Catholic Church, and much
less a Catholic and Universal Separation from the state of life.

So damnable is your Article of The Catholic Roman Mother Church, without
subjection whereunto (as you say) there is no Salvation; whereby with one
breath you damn not only Cyprian, that glorious Saint of Christ, but also all
other his Associates and Colleagues Bishops in Africa, Numidia, and Mauritania:
of whom some were Martyrs, some Confessors, all Professors of the true Faith of
Christ, against the persecuting Infidels of those times. It would nothing now
avail you to object that Cyprian, in his Contention against Pope Stephen, was
in an Error in the Question of Rebaptization; because every error is not
eradicant, to root out or cut off a Member from the Body of the Church
Catholic: else what shall we think of Pope Stephen himself, who was in an
error, in the other Question, concerning the usurpation of the Right of
Appeals to Rome? which not only Cyprian in his Council of Carthage, but
Augustine also, in the Council of Afric, resolutely withstood. But what need
many words? Cyprian (say See above, at u.
you) was always held a Catholic.

We add, that if this Objection were of force, it would much more fortify
the Cause of Protestants. For if Cyprian being Excommunicated by the Pope, for
an error, was notwithstanding still held for a Catholic, (as has been
confessed) and has ever since been Registered for a Saint: then doubtless
Protestants stand much more secure, who are excommunicate for withstanding not
only the gross Idolatry, but also as many Heresies of that Church of Rome, as
she has new Articles of Faith; among which this, to wit, The Catholic Roman
Church, without Union whereunto there is no Salvation, (...) not be held the
least; being (as you see) so Imposterous, Schismatic, and Execrable, as
every Instance yet given does manifestly convince.

Our third Instance in the Churches of Afric, in the days of Saint
Augustine, in two Councels fully prejudicial to this now Article, viz. The
Roman Catholic Church, without which there is no Salvation. SECT. 8.
THE first Council was that of Mileuis, Binius.
Anno 402. concluding against the pretended Prerogative of Appeals to Rome.
This Case is handled at large See after, cap. 13. 21.
afterward. The sum of all is: This Council, wherein Saint Augustine was
present, consisted of threescore Bishops, which had been esteemed always
Orthodoxe in the Catholic Church; albeit that their conclusion of denying any
Right of Appeals from Afric, to the Church of Rome; which Jurisdiction of
Appeals is held to be a principal part of the Article, viz. The Roman
Catholic Church, in the Church of Rome at this day. Which one Article,
consisting of four points of Necessity, (first, Necessity of Union with the
Church of Rome; secondly, Necessity of Subjection unto it; thirdly, Necessity
of Belief of both the former; fourthly, Necessity of Salvation in them All,)
is now rent in pieces by that one Prohibition of that Council, which denying
any Right of Appeals from Afric to Rome, did thereby deny the pretended
Catholic Subjection to the Roman Chair. Secondly, decreeing Excommunication
against those African Priests, that should dare to Appeal to Rome, thereby
they deny an absolute Necessity of Union with Rome. Thirdly, this
Excommunication being to be extended against them that should Think it
necessary to Appeal to Rome, they thereby deny Necessity of Belief of the
Prerogative of Rome. And lastly, condemning this Belief among themselves, they
thereby deny it to be an Universal Right necessary to be believed of all
Others. All this is evidently proved in the place alleged.

The second Instance in the Churches of Afric, in the days of Saint
Augustine, was the African Council by name, against the Church of Rome, in the
Case of Appeals: concerning which, for methods sake, we are to lay open,
first, the Occasion of Opposition between the Churches of Afric and Rome:
secondly, the Discussion thereof: thirdly, the Separation of the Church of
Afrike from Rome: fourthly, the honorable estimation had of the African
Bishops, as of the Saints of God, notwithstanding their not acknowledging of
Subjection to the Roman Church.

I. The Occasion of the Opposition by Saint Augustine and the Africans, against
the Jurisdiction of the Church of Rome, in the supreme Case of Appeals. SECT.
9.
COnsult you with your own Chronologers, in the body of the Councels of old,
and you shall find that the Case stands thus. One Apiarius a lewd Priest, and
(as you Council. ex Episcopis 217. Suriu^ Tom. 1. Council. Scandalum non leave,
immania flagitia, turpitudines nefandas. Item Binius Tom. 1. Council. Carthag.
6. in Not.. Causa. and. De modo.
know) of a scandalous, flagitious, and abominable life, being Excommunicated
by the Bishops of Afric, flees to Rome, and as it were takes Sanctuary
there, by Appealing to Pope Boniface then Bishop of that Sea. The Pope sought
by his own Authority to have this infamous Priest restored again, auouching,
for the ground of his Authority, the Canon of the Council of Nice, which (as
he pretended) declared the power due to the Bishop of Rome, to take hold of all
Appeals made unto the Pope, from all other Christian Churches and Provinces,
and to order matters according to his own wisdom.

II. The Discussion of the Cause. SECT. 10.
THE Bishops of Afric, (and among them Saint Augustine) having read the Popes
Claim of Appeal, by virtue (as was alleged) of a Canon of the Council of
Nice, fell first to demurre with themselves, suspecting that the Pope had
suggested a false pretense, and therefore sought first to satisfy themselves
by sight of the Copies of the Council of Nice, before they would return the
Pope any full answer; and after diligent search into all the ancient Copies,
which they could find, they yielded this Answer to the Bishop of Rome: Quamuis
enim plurimos codices legerem us, tamen nunqua^ in Nicaeno Concilio in latinis
codicibus, in nullo Graeco Codice ea potuimus inuenire. Surius Tom. 1. Council.
page 589.
We have read (say they) many Copies of the Canons of Nice, both Greek and
Latin, and yet find we among them no such Canon (for Appeals to Rome) as you
allege.

In this case of doubt it was agreed on both sides, that messengers should be
sent unto Cyrill Patriarch of Alexandria, and unto Atticus Patriarch of
Constantinople, to the end that, upon search of their Records, they might be
certified of the Truth of this matter. These two Patriarchs send them faithful
Transcripts, which they themselves did avouch to be Epistola Cyrilli
Alexandrini. Exemplaria Authentica Epist. Attici Patriarchae Constantinop.
verissimos Canones. Surius Tom. 1. Conc. Ibid.
The most true and authentical Copies, wherein that Canon, which Three Popes,
to wit, Boniface, Zozimus, and Caelestinus successively had alleged, as their
only evidence for their right of Appeals, could not be found, nor any
syllable thereof. Upon this Answer of those grave Patriarchs, these Africane
Bishops, in number 217, perceiving the falsehood of the Popes Allegation, and
finding that no such Canon appeared in those ancient Copies of the Council of
Nice, which could advantage that their pretense of Appeals to Rome from
Carthage, but rather that there was a Canon to control it, they descended in
the end to a flat and peremptory resolution. Yet before we set down their
Conclusion, feign would we know how your Advocates can quit and free your three
Popes from forgery of a Canon of Nice. They tell us, first, that the Two Greek
Patriarchs were deceived, by giving credit unto their Greek Copies, which were
Sic Bellar. lib. 2. de Pontif. Romans Cap. 25.. Respondemus.
Corrupted by Heretics. Next, that the Popes themselves were deceived, in
alleging the Council of Nice instead of the Council of Sardis, wherein
(says your Baronius Anno 347, number. 34. and 99. Bellar. quo supra and Binius
Annotat. in Conc. Sard.
Cardinal) The Canon was extant. And lastly that the Bishops of Afric were
deceived, in not acknowleging any General and Catholic Council of Sardis by
name, S. Augustine affirming that Augustinus non agnoscit alium Concilium
Sardicense, quam quoddam Haereticum Orientaliu^. -- Catholicum nullum vidit.
Bellar. lib. 2. de Romans Pont. Cap 25.. Add.
He knew no Sardican Council, which was not Heretical.

I. CHALLENGE.
WHich Answer of your Cardinals imports thus much, to wit, that we are to
believe that two hundred and seventeen Bishops, two Reverend Patriarchs, and
three ancient Popes erred in their ignorance of a General Council of Sardis,
in those days, wherein the matter was advisedly and exactly discussed; rather
than these Two Cardinals, which are but of yesterdaies birth, in their
coniecturall presumptions: which is in effect as much as to tell us, that those
Archers cannot discern so well of a true aim, who are an hundred and fifty
paces distant from the mark, as they who are of a thousand and two hundred:
for such was the difference betw^ene the years of those ancient Fathers, and
of these Cardinals, from the time of the Council of Nice. Which Answer we
have elsewhere proved to be no solution, but a fiction rather, and mere
Illusion. Yet that we may deal liberally with you, so as not only to suppose,
but (if you will) to confess also that there was a General Council called
Sardican, as such your Vt patet ex Athanasio Apol. 2. Magnum Concilium.
Socrates lib. 2. Cap. 16. Concilium generale. Su^pitius Seuerus Epist. lib. 2.
Imperator iubet apud Sardicam, Concilium congregari. Justinian in Edicto contra
Triae Capi^ula vocat Universal Concilium. Et Conciliu^ Chalcedonense mentionem
facit Sardicensis. Numerus Episcoporum 344. Primum Concilium Carthaginense
tempore Iulij, de quo Grantianus. Sic decretum est in Sanctissimo Sardicensi
Concilio.
Testimonies delare; and therefore to yield so far to Baronius Anno 347. number.
97.
Baronius, and Binnius Annotat. in Concilium Sardicense. page 439.
Binius, as to think, that Augustine and the Africane Bishops could not be
ignorant of the Sardican Council, which Saint Augustine himself calls
[Plenarium vniuersae Ecclesiae Concilium,] An Universal Council:
Nevertheless hereupon must we likewise make bold to tell you, that the Canons
which you cite for your Appeals must be judged fictions, because else the
African Bishops, with Saint Augustine, could not have answered your Pope, that
In nulla patrum Synodo inuenimus constitutum. Conc. Afric. c. 105. Apud Sur.
No Synod had ordained that any might come from his Holiness to order these
matters. Nor could those Popes have omitted the mention of such a Canon, if any
such had been, when now it so much stood them upon, both for keeping themselves
free from crime of forging a false Canon of the Council of Nice, and also for
aduantaging their pretended Claim of Appeals, by virtue of a Canon of Sardis.
Howsoever, let us proceed to that which follows.

III. The decision and peremptory resolution of the Africans, in Opposition
against the Papal Claim of Appeals. SECT. II.
FIrst 217 Bishops (Saint Augustine being a principal one) do address their
letters to the Pope of Rome, showing the false-hood of the Claim of Appeals,
made by your Three Popes, Zozimus, Boniface, and Celestinus; that it had no
Patronage from the Council of Nice; but rather that there was in that Council
another Canon, making much against such Appeals; by determining that Popes,
being so far remote from Africa, could not be so competent Judges in such
Causes: l Except (say the Africans) Some will think that God will inspire some
One singular man with Justice, and deny that grace to innumerable persons
assembled together in one Synod. And therefore in plain terms they desire the
Pope not to admit hereafter of any such Appeal; and in conclusion they call
that Papal presumption a Smoakie secular arrogance, which (say they) we will
not endure.

Furthermore, the same Council of Africa made Two Canons, by the one as it
were taking the Crown of Pope-dome from the Head of your Bishop of Rome; by
the other piercing and wounding the Papal Primacie to the very heart. For what
fairer Crown can you put upon that Head, than the Supreme title of Papa
Monarcha Ecclesiae. Sanderus lib. de visibili Monarchia. Bellarmin lib. 1. de
Romans Pont. cap. 5. Costerus Jes. Enchirid. de Religione: Tract. de Pontif..
Quaestio porro.
Monarch over the whole Church? or of Sacerdos magnus, seu Pontifex Maximus est
honorificentissimum nomen. Bellar. lib. de Officio Principis Christ. page 35.
Attamen Baroni^s: Pontifex Maximus quinto in loco est positus, -- is potest
habere alios sibi aequales; ideo Pontificis Maximi amplitudini jure junctus est
titulus, Episcopus Episcoporum. Baron. Tom. 2. Anno 2.6. number. 11.
Chief Priest, and Bishop of Bishops? wherewith you professedly adorn, and in
a manner adore your Roman Pope. But these African Fathers, upon occasion of
this contention with your Popes, decreed Vt Primae sedis Episcopus non
appelletur Princeps Sacerdotum, aut Summus Sacerdos, aut aliquid hujusmodi, sed
tantum Primae sedis Episcopus. Concilium Africanum, Canon 6. Apud Surium Tom.
1. Conc.
That the Bishop of the Primary Sea should not be called the Head of Bishops,
or chief Priest, but only the Bishop of the Primary Sea.

Secondly, what greater Prerogative or higher token of Monarchy could your
Popes covet, than that which you challeng, as Cuncta ( ex Gelasio habetur) per
mundum nouit Ecclesia, quod ad Sanctam Romanam Ecclesia^ de qualibet part
mundi appellandum. Egidius probat nemini licere a Papa appellare, quia credere
omnem creaturem subesse Romans Pontifici est de necessitate salutis, vt in Extra.
C. Vnam Sanctam. Azorius Instit. Moral. lib. 5. part. 2. cap. 13. Valentianus
probat primatum ex Appellat. lib. 1. cap. 11. and Bellar. lib. 2. de. Rom Pont.
Cap. 21.
A matter known to the Catholic Church, which is, that Appeals are to be
made to Rome from all the coasts of the world: against which the same holy
Bishops made this peremptory decree, viz. Si quis ex Presbyteris ad transmarina
putauerit esse appellandum, a nullo intra Africam in communionem suscipatur.
Canon. 92. Apud Surium Tom. 1. Conc. Aphric.
If any Priest shall think that he ought to Appeal beyond the Sea, (meaning
to Rome) let him not be received any longer into the Communion of the Church
of Africa. So they.

All that your Cardinals can say, to help your Popes at a dead lift, is; that
the former pretended Canon of Nice insisted upon See above at e
was to be found in the Council of Sardis; which Antiquity has denied. And
yet if that were granted, your Monarchy stands still upon humane Authority,
For that Synod of Sardis shows plainly, that their grant of Appeals to
Julius Pope of Rome was but upon favor, and not upon duty; being not an old
Custom, but a new Constitution. Council. Sardic. Cap. 3. Si vobis placet vt
Sancti Petri Memoriam honoremus, vt Julius Pontifex, etc. -- Si hoc omnibus
vobis placet: Synodus respondet, Placet. Apud Surium Tom. 1. Conc.
If it please you (say they) so much to honor the memory of Peter, let us
write to Julius Bishop of Rome, etc. And again, If you all be pleased; whence
nothing can be gathered, but that the same pretended Grant was no more than Ad
placitum, and might by the same Authority be as easily repealed. We add, that
albeit you challenge a right that Omnes majores causae ad sede^ Apostolicam
referuntur, -- quae spectant ad Articulos fidei intelligendos. -- Secundum,
causae Episcoporum omniu^ and Antistitum in jure ab eo dirimuutur, [ Cum alijs
priuilegijs octoginta nouem] Azorius Instit. Moral. part. 2. lib. 4. cap. 35..
Quintum, and Secundum.
All causes of great moment (among which these of Appeals is a principal one)
should be Reserved to the Bishop of Rome, you notwithstanding confess that
Tempore Cypriani non erant casus peculiares reseruati conscie^tiae Pontificis,
proindc quisque poterat quae alij in sua Dioecesi, and ob eam causam parte^ sui
Episcopatus in solidum tenebat. Salmeron. Ies. in 1. Pet. 5. disp. 8. Et
dicendo.
In the days of Saint Cyprian there was no Reservation of any such Cases in
use.

II. CHALLENGE.
HEre have we a fair and clear glass, wherein any one that does not wilfully
close his eyes may see the full face of the usurped and conunterfeit Monarchy
of the Church of Rome. For in your Roman profession, your latter Popes
proclaimed the Papal Monarchy to be founded upon Roman profession. See
above Cap. 1.. 1.
Divine Authority: Whereas your ancient Roman Popes, at the time of the
African Council, when (if ever) they were to make good, Appeals from all the
parts of Christendom to Rome, their principal part of Supreme power; they
themselves notwithstanding argued not from any divine Law, but only from the
humane decree of the Canon of Nice; which the Fathers of that Council
discovered to be notoriously false. For if the then Popes had thought that they
could for this Papal pretension draw a sharp two-edged sword ex iure diuino,
what needed they to have fought with this wooden dagger of humane Constitution,
which, because of the false pretense thereof, was shattered in pieces with the
very drawing thereof?

IV. That the Bishops of Africa were in the state of Salvation, notwihstanding
either their not- Union with the Pope of Rome (by reason of his
Excommunication) or of their no- Subjection unto him, by reason of their diverse
Oppositions against him. First of their not- Union. SECT. 12.
IN the Body of your Councels there is extant the Epistle of Pope Boniface the
Second, wherein about the year 606, the same Pope complains that Epistola
Bonifaecij 2. quae est ad Alexandrum Episcopum. Aurelius Carthaginensis
Ecclesiae olim Episcopus cum collegis suis, instigante Diabolo, superbire,
temporibus Praedecessorum nostrorum Bonifacij and Celestini, contra Romanam
Ecclesiam coepit: sed videns se modo peccatis Aurelij Eulalius a Romans Ecclesiae
communione segregatu^, humilians recognouit se and communionem Romanae
Ecclesiae petens, -- damnauit Scripturas, quae aduersus Ecclesiae Romanae
priuilegia factae fuerant. Apud Surium. Tom. 2. Conc. page 384.
Aurelius and his fellow Bishops of Africa (with whom Saint Augustine did
consent) had by the instigation of Satan (for so the Epistle speaks) been
separated from the Church of Rome, until that now after an hundred years
space Eulalius (Bishop of Carthage) acknowledging his offense, seeks and
desires to be reconciled to the Church of Rome. Thus far the Epistle of your
Pope.

Do you believe this Epistle, concerning the Excommunication of the Churches
of Africa? Then had you best stand aside a while, for fear of knockes: for
behold there are at hand children of the Tribe of Dan, angry fellows, that lay
about them. 1. Bellarmine: Respondeo, valde mihi eas Epistolas esse suspectas.
Bellar. lib 2. de Pont. Rom cap. 25.. Respondeo primo, and. Sed si.
I greatly suspect (says he) that this Epistle is counterfeit. 2. Quis
impostura and fraud non dicat Epistolam hanc plenissimam esse, qua scribitur
Africanam Ecclesiam vltra centum Annos Schismaticam fuisse? Binnius Tom. 1.
Conc. Annot. in hanc Epistolam sc. Bonifac. 2. ad Eulalium.
It is full of fraud, says Binius. 3. Quid improbe improbus finxit Impostor?
-- Quae Epistola nisi falsa esse conuinci posset, plane ex Ecclesiae Catholicae
Albo expungenda fuissent Sanctorum Africanorum agmina Martyrum -- qui
persecutione Vandalica -- consequunti sunt Martyrij palmam: deludique pariter
forent clarissimi Confessores, qui in illo spatio centum annorum in Africana
Ecclesia, doctrina and vita claruere conspicui. Baronius Tom. 5. Anno 419. number.
92.93.
Which (says Baronius) some wicked Impostor has fained, because if this
Epistle go for current, then must we blot out of the Table or Book of
Monuments whole Troops and Armies of Martyrs within the Church of Africa,
together suffering persecution within the space of an hundred years, under
those bloody Vandalls, all which were crowned with Martyrdom; and in like
manner must we wipe out the memory of famous and godly professors of the same
time. So he.

But do you not believe that Epistle of Boniface to be true, and that these
holy Martyrs stood so long Excommunicate, and separated from the Church of
Rome? Then hearken first to your Lindanus: Coeterum have Bonifacij 2. Epistolam
esse genuinam and minime supposititiam, satis superque arguit, quod ante Annos
500 talis indubitato credebatur, quam Antonius Florentinus testatur esse long
verissimam. -- at Africanos circiter centum annos sacrilega defectione se
subduxisse -- quare qui in hanc vt fictitiam ride^t, quid quaeso nobis, imo
sibi relinquent saluum, ex omni Eccles. Antiquitatis Historia? etc. Lindamus
Panopl. Euang. lib. 4. cap. 89.
That this Epistle is not supposititious, but true (says he) this may be a
sufficient argument, that 500 years since it was held and believed to be true,
as Antonius of Florence does witness: which if it should be counterfeit, then
can we not have confidence in the truth of any History of Antiquity. So he.

Your Costerus and Turrian, both Jesuits, and also Master Harding do greatly
magnify your Popes for Recte and pro officio fecerunt Romani Pontifices, male
autem Africani, qui etiam vt testatur Bonifacius 2. ( citatur haec Epistola in
mar gine) meditati videbantur defectionem a Romana sede. Costerus Enchirid.
Tract. de Pontifice.. Recte. Sol. 10. and Turrianus vt citatur a Sadaele Resp.
ad Repet. Turriani p. 430. and Harding contra Iuellum Art. 4. diuisio. 28.
Discharging their office, in excommunicating the Bishops of Afric, and
allege this Epistle for their ground. Your Jesuit Salmeron, and Sanders do
confidently hold that A tempore Cypriani coeperunt Africani separati ab
Ecclesia, tempore Au^elij Carthaginensis Episcopi: -- exacerbato animo erant
erga Ecclesiam Romanam, donce tempore Bonifacij 2. reconciliati sunt Salmeron
Ies. Tom. 12. Tract. 68.. Ad Canonem. Etiam Sanderus de visibili Monarch. lib.
7. number. 411. page 368.
All the African Bishops were severed from the Church of Rome, from the days
of Saint Cyprian, until the time of the said Boniface, the Author of this
Epistle.

III. CHALLENGE.
WE doubt not but you stand half aghast, to hear the Contradictory spirits of
your own Authors, as well Cardinals as Jesuits, in a matter of so great
moment: The one side (rather than the aforesaid Bishops of Afric should seem
to perish, by their Separation from the Church of Rome) will suffer all the
Epistles of ancient Popes, set down in the body of the Councels, to incur
(as Counterfeits) the suspicion of forgery. The other part, rather than that
one Epistle of the Pope (which so much aduanceth the authrity of the Popedom
in Excommunicating other Churches, and illustrateth the necesity of Union with
the Church of Rome, upon danger of damnation) should want Authority, care not
although (as your Baronius calls them) whole Troops and armies of holy
Martyrs and godly Confessors do damnably perish.

But pacify your selves, my good friends; the matte^, upon on due
consideration, will not prove worth your iarring. For if (as the one part will
have it) these and all other Bishops of Afric, for the space of an hundred
years, were excommunicate by the Pope for their Opposition against the Church
of Rome; And that (as the other side is constrained to confess) these foresaid
Bishops and others made up whole Troops and Armies of Martyrs and holy
Professors, then this intestine Bellum Haereticorum pax Ecclesiae Hierom.
War among your selves has made this peace among us, to believe that the
Popes Excommunication could infer no mortal danger of Separation. Take unto
you this This Syllogism to ruminate upon.

No true Christian Martyrs dye out of the state of Salvation. Diverse true
Christian Martyrs dye out of obedience to the Roman Church.

Ergo. Diverse dying out of obedience to the Roman Church, dye not out of the
state of Salvation.

Thus ought your grand Clerks to have framed their Argument, for the
stablishing of a true Conclusion, and not by their coniecturall Opination to
lay the forgerie upon that Papal Epistle, which in truth is to be laid upon
the Papal usurpation it self. Thus much concerning the no-necessitie of Union
with the Church of Rome.

Secondly, of their no- Subjection. SECT. 13.
Whatsoever that Union was, which the Bishops of Afric, and Professors among
them had with the Church of Rome, sure we are that by denying Appeals to
Rome, they denied that Subjection, without which your Church will acknowledge
no Union, and consequently no Salvation: except you shall imagine that the Pope
of Rome, whom you entitle Monarch of the Church Catholic, and Bishop of
Bishops (to whose absolute Jurisdiction you swear Forma Iuramenti Pij 5. Ego
obedientiam Pontifici Romano spondeo, and hanc veram fidem esse, extra quam
nemo saluus esse potest.
Obedience; as an Article of Faith, without which none can be saved) would
accept it as a matter of Subjection for Protestants, with Saint Augustine and
those other African Bishops, to deny that any ought to be called Bishop of
Bishops; and not to yield to his demands in point of Jurisdiction, upon any
pretense of Divine Law, but to exact of him proof by a Canon of an ancient
Council; to gainsay his challenge of Right of Appeals to Rome from remote
Nations, calling this A smoakie secular pride; to inhibit their Clergy from
Appealing to the Roman See, and to denounce Excommunication against them, if
they should transgress in that Case.

IV. CHALLENGE.
WHerefore if any (as some of your Church have been) shall be so impudent as
to adiudge these Bishops and Professors in the Churches of Afric (which is a
part of the world, Master Brerewood in his Book of Religions. pa. 68.
Thrice as great as Europe) to have been without the state of salvation, we
can say no less, than that which your Cardinal Baronius has already put in
our mouths, to wit, See above at a.
Then must we blot out of the Table and books of Monuments whole Troops and
Armies of Martyrs, within the Church of Afric, for the space of an Hundred
years (we might have said many more) suffering persecution for the faith of
Christ: and in like manner must we wipe out the memory of famous and godly
Professors of the same time. This Collection you must grant to be infallibly
true; which does as justly and irrefragably teach us that your Papall-Article,
which seuereth all from Salvation, that profess not Subjection to the Pope and
Church of Rome, is New, False, Scandalous, and Schismatic; for which Article
whosoever shall dye, may be indeed called the Popes Martyr, but no ways the
Martyr of Christ. You may not forget the Council of Mileuis, and the
Threescore universally reputed Orthodox Bishops therein, denouncing
Excommunication against all African Priests, which should so much as hold it
lawful for them to Appeal to Rome. They that were thus bold to Excommunicate
them that should believe any such Roman Jurisdiction, did plainly profess
their contempt of the Papal Excommunication against themselves, in such a
case; and consequently their no belief of necessary Subjection or Union to the
Roman Chair. Except therefore all these, so many, so learned and Orthodox, so
godly and constant professors of Christ Jesus were damned, this Article, The
Roman Catholic Church, without subjection whereunto there is no Salvation, is
justly to be condemned as most false and pernicious.

Our Fourth Instance is in the Ancient Church of Britain. SECT. 14.
MVch ado have you made about this your Article, viz. The Catholic Roman
Mother Church, as though the Church of Rome had this prerogative, above and
before all others; which we have proved to be a mere delusion, by many
Examples out of the Catholic and Apostolic Churches more ancient than Rome,
and among others we gave Instance in this Isle of the Church of See above Cap.
3.. 8.
Britain: and now we proceed to the liberty of the Britane Churches.

That the Britains and Scots, although separated anciently from the Church of
Rome, were notwithstanding accounted truly Religious, and holy men. First of
their Separation. SECT. 15.
Cardinal Baronius comes on roundly, saying, Brittanni a Communione
Catholicae Ecclesiae diro Schismate diuisi -- and plane vides Brittannorum
Episcoporum eorundem Schismaticorum animum refractarium ab Vnitate Ecclesiae
Catholicae resilientem. Baronius Anno 605. Number. 55. and 60. Eadem plane qua
Britanni pariter and Scoti erant Schismatis
Both Britains and Scots were schismatically and obstinately separated from
the Church of Rome. You say Schismatically, not Haeretically, for you cannot
impute unto them any error in Faith; who (as Brerely in his fuligine tincti,
ac discessionis a Romana Ecclaesia rei. Baronius Anno 604. Number. 65. Catholic
Apology, the First Chapter.
One of your selves has written) Did not differ from the Church of Rome in
those days, but only in matters of smaller importance. For how could they be
called Haeretikes for following the Jewish Rite, in the observation of Easter,
without the Jewish opinion, more than the Romanists themselves, who together
with us observe the Feast of Pentecost, yet not Iewishly? for, as your
Genebrard. in Psalm. page 341.
Genebrard answers, Iudaei Pentecostam typice, nos mystice and vere
celebramus. How much more Orthodoxally the Britain Church, which followed the
steps of Saint John's Disciples, and kept the Pasche of the Eastern Churches
(whence it is, as One says, that the name of our Easter is probably derived)
rather upon custom, than upon any conceit of Mystery, much less in an
opinion of Jewish servitude. Yet (as your Cardinal Baronius has truly said)
they were separated from the Subjection of the Church of Rome; the necessity
of which Subjection you have since made an Article of faith.

The right Estimation that ought to be had of the aforesaid Britain, Scottish,
yea and Irish Churches, notwithstanding their Separation from Rome. SECT. 16.
BE it that these Scottish and British Churches were Schismatikes, as you call
them, because not subject to the Roman Church, will you therefore have no
better estimation of them, than of souls separated from the Catholic and
Universal Church, and consequently deprived of Salvation? So charitable
indeed is your Britanni and Scoti erant Discessionis ab Ecclesia Romans rei, ob
idque feris Barbaris traditi, Anglis sc. and Saxonibus. Quare dicit Hier. cap.
5. Quia reliquisti me, and seruiisti dijs alienis etc. -- Deos plane alienos
colere omnes Schismatici con^incuntur. Baronius An. 604. Number. 56.
Baronius in his censure against the Britanes: But Galfridus Monumetens. Hist.
Britt. li. 11. ca. 12. and 13. cited by the Centurists, Cent. 6. cap. 3.
Religio sissimis Praesulibus muniti -- omnes labor manuum suarum viuentes. --
Abbas eorum Dinoth vocabatur, mire liberalibus artibus eruditus -- diuersis
monstrauit Argumentis ipsos Augustino [ a Gregorio Pp. Misso] nullam
subiectionem debere. -- Edelbertus ergo -- Edelfridum Regem Nortdan-humbrorum
instimulauit, -- vt Abbatem Dinoth and caeteros Clericos perditum iret, -- qui
collecto mirabili exercitu etc. mill ducenti eorum ea ipsa die Martyrio
decorati regni caelestis adepti sunt sedem. -- Duces Britonum Edelfridum
vulneratum in fugam propulerunt, and december millia sexaginta sex perierunt. Haec
Galfridus ci^ant. Cent. quo supra. Tit. de Tranquillitate and persecutione sub
Mauritio Sacerdote. page 37.
Galfridus gives us better hopes of them, calling the Praelates then in Wales,
in the time of Augustine the Monk, Most religious Bishops; telling us of Two
thousand Monks, under the Abbot Dinoth, who getting their living with their
own hands, stood out, with others, and denied subjection to the Church of
Rome: of which number A thousand two hundred died under the bloody hands of
Pagans, and were thereby (says he) crowned with Martyrdom, and made
inhabitants of the kingdom of heaven.

As for the Scots, your Baronius will plead for them, because (says Scotorum
Ecclesia, licet diuerso tempore -- a communi ritu Catholicae Ecclesiae Pascha
celebraret, non tamen ob id a communione sedis Apostolicae separatam fuisse --
quia etsi non Romano, neque tamen Iudaico more Pascha celebrarent. etc.
Baronius Tom. 8. Anno 634. Number. 11.
he) Although they did not celebrate the Feast of Easter at the time observed
by the Church of Rome, yet did they not keep that Feast at the time used by
the Jews, and therefore were not separated from the communion of the Church of
Rome. With as good reason might he have justified the Britains, who though
they did celebrate Easter after the manner of the Jews, in respect of the day;
yet did they it not with the same mind and Faith of the Jews, as thinking it
necessary. But the Cardinal regards not what he says, being herein
contradicted by Beda, who witnesses that the Scots were in Opposition against
Rome herein; and also contradicting himself, in that he has already called
the Scots Schismatikes. As forbid, he reckons among other Scots, the
Bishop Aidanus, and although Nequaquam laudans quod de Paschae obseruatione
minus perfect sapiebat, imo haec multum detestans. Beda Hist. Anglic. lib. 1.
cap. 17.
Condemning and detesting his Opposition against the Church of Rome, in the
point of Celebration of Easter; yet notwithstanding he testifies of him, that
Erat Episcopus multum misericors. Beda Hist. Angl. lib. 3. c. 14. Vir Dei
Spiritu Prophetiae praedicens tempestatem futuram, and virtute eiusdem spiritus
sopiuit eam. Cap. 15. Miraculis post mortem celebris. Ca. 17
He was a merciful Bishop, endued with the spirit of Prophecy, and famous
for his miracles done after his death. So he.

You may read of the like Opposition of the Irish Bishops against the Sea of
Rome, about the same time, in the very same Question of Easter, in a late
Treatise set out by a learned Doctor Usher L. Primate of Armagh. Tract. of the
Religion of Jreland.
Servant of God, excellently verst and professed in the Mysteries of Antiquity.

CHALLENGE.
IVstly therefore may we conclude, that no Doctrine or Article can be more
Scandalous, than this, to tax so infinite souls truly professing the Faith
of Christ; nor more Schismatic, than to hold them Schismatikes, who being
united to the Church Catholic, were only not subject to the Church of Rome;
nor more Damnable, than to condemn them, whom all Christians are to honor in
their memories, as the holy and blessed Saints of God.

CHAP. X. Our Fifth Argument is, because that the Belief of this Article, viz.
The Catholic Roman Church, without which there is no Salvation, damneth the
souls of the most ancient and godly Emperors, whom Christianity has always
honored.
SECT. 1.
LET us in the next place join the First General Councels together with those
ancient Christian Emperors, by whose command the said Councels were gathered;
so shall we fight with Two weapons, Spiritual and Temporal, yet both
Christian. These, in respect of the Analogy of times, are set down by your
selves. For, concerning the Bellarmin l. 1. de Council. c. 5. Generalia
approbata Concilia, etc.
Approved General Councels, you observe that the First General Council of
Nice was under the Emperor Constantine: The Second, called the First General
Constantinople Council, was under the Emperrur Theodosius the Elder: The Third
General Council at Ephesus was under the Emperor Theodosius the Younger: The
Fourth General Council of Chalcedon was under the said Emperor Theodosius,
and Martianus: The Fifth General Council, called the Second of
Constantinople, was under the Emperor Justinian. From these few we shall
easily understand, what value your Article can be of in all the rest, after
that we have discussed these three points. First, what Subjection it is, that
you would hold due from Emperors to your Popes and Church: Secondly, whether
the same godly Emperors have held themselves bound to perform such duties:
Thirdly, whether, notwithstanding their Opposition against your Tenure of
Subjection, they have not deserved the estimation of Catholic Emperors in the
Church of Christ, as those that stood in the state of Salvation.

The Subiestion required by you from Emperors to the Bishop of Rome. SECT. 2.
MAny words of Introduction need not; your Conclusions are as follows; That
Principes seculares non habent Ecclesiae regimen, nec debent Ecclesiastica
negotia tractare. Bellar. lib. 1. de Pont. Cap. 7.
Princes, and whatsoever Potentates are not to meddle in Ecclesiastical
affairs: They Principum secularium authoritate nec possunt nec debent
Generalia Concilia congregari. -- Quod munus proprie ad Po^tificem pertinet.
Bellar. lib. 1. de Council. c. 12
May not gather Councels by their own Authority: They Praesidentia and
praecedentia ab Imperatoribus Pontifici debetur. Bellar. Lib. de Officio
Principis Christiani, per totum.
Ought to yield Prioritie of Place, especially to the Pope: And Reuerentiam
etiam debent, quod certe est superioris. Ibid. p. 40. Haec est causa cur reges
Christiani Pontificibus per legatos reuerentiam and obseruantiam promittunt.
Ib. p. 26.27.
To profess Reverence (this being a sign of Superiority) and also Obedience
unto him. But how far must this Reverence extend, if you your selves may
prescribe? namely (saving your Reverence) to the Rex Hispaniae and Franciae
(quod vidimus) Pontificis pedes exosculati sunt. Bellar lib. contra Apolog. de
Triplici Nodo. cap 2.
Kissing of the Popes feet: which in your judgment is Peccaret Pontifex si
honores ^^tos non admitteret. Bozius de signis Ecclesi^e, lib. 11. cap. 10.
Inter praecipua Romani Pontificis priuilegia Nono loco recenset Greg. 7. Solius
Papae pedes a Principibus exosculari. Epist. 51. dictat. 9. Apud Lorinum Ies.
in Act. 10. verse. 25.
An honor, which the Pope may not refuse; and which Pope Gregory the Seventh
reckons in the Ninth place of those Privileges, which he challenged as
properly belonging to him as Pope of Rome. Not to insist upon the barbarous
boast, which you make of your Popes Henricum quartum non admissum a Pontifice
Gregorio septimo, nisi nudis pedibus ad se venientem, nec Fredericum
Barbarossam, nisi collum pedibus Alexandri 3. Pontificis submittentem. Primum
Testimonium habet Baronius Anno 1077. Alterum Massonius in vita Alexand.
In not admitting of two Emperors to their presence, without an extreme kind
of Submission; the one by approaching upon his bare feet, the other by
subiecting his neck unto the Popes feet: While-as the Popes Ox may brag of
more favor than the first, and his Ass than the second.

Much more might be added out of the last work of Bellarmin, entitled
Bellarmin. lib. de Officio Principis Christiani.
The Duty of a Christian Prince, wherein such is the spirit of that Cardinal,
that whatsoever any example of honor he could rake out of the ashes of
Princes, Kings, or Emperors, yielded to either Popes, Bishops, or Priests in
the superlatiue excess of their humility, zeal, and devotion, that does he
violently wrest, to make of it a General Rule of Office and Duty; even to the
Dedignifying and abasing of Princes, to the yielding of praeeminence to Bishops
and inferior Priests in Precedence, and going first; in Presidence and sitting
above; yea and they exact also (very soberly, I wisse) a Prebibition and
drinking before them. A Doctrine wherein that old Cardinal has Vid. Librum
nostrum qui inscribitur, Causa Regia.
been sufficiently (I hope) convinced of extreme dotage.

The Opposition of the former Emperors, against the pretended Subjection.
SECT. 3.
THe First point of their Opposition may be discerned in their Interesting
themselves in Ecclesiastical affairs. The Emperor Constantine (as Saint
Augustine August. Tom. 2. Epist. 16^. Quod postea quam factum est, praesente
Caeciliano, etc.
witnesses at large) committed the Cause of Caecilian Bishop of Carthage unto
Pope Meltiades. Observe, Ergo it was by the Emperors Commission, and not to him
alone, but to him with others, who are called in that Commission, the Popes
Colleagues. Secondly, Observe, Ergo the Pope was not Monarch, or sole Actor
herein: nay, after that the Pope had given his judgment, the same Emperor
referred the same Cause, to be more diligently examined and ended, to the
Augustine. quo supra. Jtem Epist. 66.
Bishops of Arles. Thirdly, Observe; Ergo, the Judgment of the Pope will
suffer an higher Appeal: for after, in the Case of Athanasius, the same
Emperor charge all the Bishops of the Province of Tire, what to do? Vt
omnes qui ad Concilium Tyri conuenistis e vestigio ad castra nostra
maturaretis, reque ipsa vestrum iudicium aequum syncerum-commonstraretis, me
audiente: Quem ingenuum dei famulum esse vos ipsi inficias non iueritis.
Socrates Hist. lib. 1. cap. 22.
To appear before me (says he) without delay, and to show how sincerely and
truly you have given your judgments. And not thus only, but when the Cause
Ecclesiastical requires, he proceeds to denounce Sin autem quisquam eas
Ecclesiae pestes ( loquitur de Theoguide, and Eusebio) vel memori^, vel
laudibus celebrare aggrediatur, confestim -- paenas suae in^citiae dabit.
Theodoret. Hist lib. 1. cap. 20.
punishment (by his own Authority) against whomsoever that shall honor the
memory of those Bishops, Theognis and Eusebius. Other the like Demonstrations
might be brought of Constantne his Authority in Causes Ecclesiastical.

Of the Emperor Theodosius we read, that he gave to the Bishop Dioscorus
Authority and Superiority of place, to moderate Causes in a Council. Can this
consist (think you) with your pretended Subjection? No, The odosius dat quod
non habet, nisi ex vsurpata potestate, ex Imperitia Ecclesiastici Canonis.

Binius Tom. 2. Conc. Chalced. Act. 1. in Marg. Ius sibi arrogat and vsurpat.
Baronius Anno 449. nu. 27.


He gives (say you) that which he has not to give, but does it out of
Ignorance of the Canon, usurping that Authority. Oh you are angry! and no
marvel though men fancy not that fruit, which sets their teeth on edge:
But we cannot be sparing in this kind; For Theodosius the younger, and
Honorius, both Emperors, Say (as you know) that the Patriarch of
Constantinople has the same right over those in subjection under him, Glossa
apud Gratianum Decret. Distinct. 22. C. Renouantes. Honorius and Theodosius
Imperator dicunt quod Patriarcha Constantinopolitanus habet idem ius in suis
subditis, quod Papa habet in fuis.
which the Pope has over his. Where diverse Subjects must needs argue different
Subiections; and equality of Right must as nessarily dissolve Monarchy, which
can be but of One.

And Justinian the Emperor will hardly please you, with whom you quarrel at
the first hearing. He authorized, under his own hand, The Code, or Books of
Constitutions, and Pandects, for the Regulating of the Clergy, as well as of
the Laity. Whereat you fret not a little. Quod frequentissimae sunt leges de
rebus sacris, Ecclesiasticisque personis a Iustiniano Imperatore sancitae, non
immerito arguitur, quasi rerum diuinarum inuasor, dum diuinis se miscuit, qui
humanis tantum praefectus esset rebus. Baronius Tom. 7. Anno 528 number. 1.
Herein he is (say you) justly reproved of many, as one inuading upon, and
intruding into the Office of divine causes. The same Emperor takes upon him
the Confirmation of the Election of the Bishop of Rome; and behold again, you
brand him with the note of an Iustinianus sacrilege hoc in loco Confirmationem
and abrogationem Pontificis Romani vsurpat. Binius Tom. 2. Council. Arroganter
assumpsit. Jd. ibid. p. 635.
Usurper. Finally, in general, you shape us this Answer; Potestatis suae
limits egressi sunt. Bellar. aduersus Marsilium, de Statu Veneto. Vide librum
qui inscribitur Controuersiae memorabiles, page 261.
These Emperors have passed the bounds of their Authority.

You furthermore told us of another Character of due Subjection, which is the
yielding unto the Pope the Prerogative of gathering General Councels; albeit
nothing is more obuious to Any, conversant in Ecclesiastical reading, than
that which your own Cardinal Cusanus has confessed long since; Octo Concilia
generalia erant ab Imperatoribus congregata, non per Papam: Vt vnum, per
Theodosium Imperatorem, a quo Leo Papa, licet multa supplicatione, tamen vt
Concilium celebraretur intra Italiam non obtinuit. Card. Cusanu^ Concord.
Cathol. lib. 2. cap. 25.
The first eight general Councels (says he) were gathered by Authority of
Emperors, and not of Popes; insomuch that Pope Leo was glad to entreat the
Emperor Theodosius the younger, for the gathering of a Council in Italy, and
could not obtain it.

But can we forget your next Prerogative of Subjection, viz. the Popes
Precedence, and Priority of place, above even Emperors themselves? Surely if
he had any ancient claim hereunto, it should have been in that, wherein he
challenges the greatest praeeminence, to wit, in a General Council: But when
we ask the Question, why no one of your Popes were ever personally present in
any of the first Generll Councels, (if he must be thought to be the sole Head
of the Church, and he alone to have an infallible judgment in himself,) no
not though they were in the same City (as was Vigilius) where the Council was
celebrated? You answer, that the reason, why the Popes would not present
themselves in these Councels, was this; Quaestio cur Papa nunquam interfuit in
Concilijs Orientalibus, per se, nec Constantinopoli, cum tame^ in Ciuitate
Vigilius fuit, quod erat quintu^ Concilium Generale. -- Altera ratio est, quia
in Conciliis Orientalibus semper interfuit Imperator, aut eius Legatur; Graeci
autem Imperatorem in summo loco collocabant, hoc tolerandum non est, vt
Imperator ante summum Pontifi^em sederet, vel ^umultus excitaretur. Ideo non
ibat ad Concilia, sed tame^ Legatos mittebat. Bellar. lib. 1. de Conc. cap. 19.
Because the Greek Bishops, who were in those Eastern Councels, wherein also
the Emperors were present, would have preferred the Emperors in place above
the Popes. So you. And we cannot but believe you, and thereupon make bold to
convince your new Doctors of egregious impudency, who dare extend the height of
the praeeminency of Popes above Emperors, even in defiance as it were, of all
Antiquity, and of the Consent of all those Catholic Bishops in General
Councels.

As for your last and basest point of Subjection, of Kissing the Popes feet, it
tastes so ranckly of Luciferian pride, in the now Popes, that we think it an
exceeding injury to the memory of holy Popes of the Primitive times, to believe
that they could affect, or would admit such an homage and honor (a less than
which Saint Act. 10.26.
Peter refused, as too much) if it had been offered unto them. Much less can
we be persuaded, that the first Catholic Emperors (albeit otherwise most godly
and humble) were known to perform it. If it had been so, then would not your
Massonius, when he sought to show the Antiquity of it, send you to seek it Qui
mos an ^it antiquissimus nescio, non enim omnia legi. Massonius in vita
Benedicti 12.
He knows not where: much less would your great Antiquary Polydore abhor
this as Si been multi hodie se homine^ esse perpenderent, qui quia Sacerdotio
praediti. imperiosissimos dominos se praebent -- ita vsuvenit, vt nos
Pontificum nostrorum pedes exosculamur, illudque institutum a Romany
Pontificibus dixerim. Polydor. Virgil. lib. 4. c. 13. Lugduni. Anno 1558.
A new and naughty custom of Imperiousness, devised first by the Popes
themselves. But, of all others, your Bozius (one so transported with zeal
toward the Pope, and this his honor, that he held it an See below in the next
Chap. at y. 2.
Injustice in the Pope to refuse this kind of Submission from any Christian
whomsoever) will give you the best and worst satisfaction, touching the
practice of ancient Emperors; where speaking of this Ceremony of Kissing the
Popes feet, and answering this doubt, why in those Ages all sorts of Bishops
gave greater honor unto Kings and Emperors, than they received from them?
Neque Reges and Imperatores, nondum been rebus Christianis constitutis, nimio
fastu inflati and adhuc Gentium superbiam spirantes, externa honoris
denegatione irritari debebant. Bozius de signis Ecclesiae. lib. 20. cap. 5.
Then (says he) whilst that the affairs of Christianity were not as yet
established, Kings and Emperors swelling with Arrogance, and as yet breathing
the Pride of Gentiles, were not to be provoked by Bishops, by denying them
outward honor. Can you have a better Answer, for confirming the Ancient
practice of Emperors, in receiving honor? or a worse satisfaction than is
this his saucy and malepart boldness, in blurring the estimation of those
Emperors (which were first as in time, so in excellency of all virtues) with
the false imputation of Pride, for receiving Honor from all others, as an
homage due to their state, and so prescribed by God, as Saint Peter and Saint
Paul do both witness? Honora Regem. 1. Pet. 2.17.


The Estimation of those forenamed Christian Emperors. SECT. 4. Honorem, cui
honor. Romans 13.7.

MVch need not be spoken, in the commendation of the former Emperors, whom
your own Nunquam Catholici Principes ex animo Deo adhaeserunt, quin facilime
de hostibus triumpharent. -- Vt in Testamento nouo Constantinus magnus, qui
primus public ex Imperatoribus Ecclesiam defendit. De Theodosio seniore
August. lib. 5. de Ciuitate Dei cap. 26. eum vere pium and Catholicum fuisse.
Honorius etiam plane Catholicus, and Theodosius junior; etiam Iustinianus
senior, donec Catholicus fuit, foelicissime imperauit. Bellar. lib. de. No^i^
Ecclesiae. cap. 18.
Cardinal produces both for Examples of Godliness, and Catholic Belief,
and also as Monuments of Gods miraculous Protection upon them, for their
Catholic profession sake; even Because they did heartily and sincerely cleave
unto God. The Emperors, whom he names, are Constantine the Great, Theodosius
the elder, Honorius, Theodosius the younger, and Justinian. But the last with
some detraction. Prosperous was the Emperor Justinian (says he) so long as he
was a Catholic. Also Bozius; Iustinianus primis december annis been de rebus
diuinis sensit, secundis maxim rebus est vsus: mox impias manus in Papam
Syluerium Vigiliumque iniecit: denique in Haeresin Apthartodocitaru^ incidit;
post illatam vim Syluerio and Vigilio nullo non calamitatis genere perculsus.
Bozius Tom. 2. lib, 23. cap. 4.
The Emperor Justinian (says he) was of a sound judgment in the Doctrine of
Christianity, for his first ten years, and was so long prosperous: but
forthwith he handled two Popes (viz. Syluerius and Vigilius) so roughly, that
after he was afflicted with all kind of calamities, and in the end fell into
the Heresy of the Apthartodocites. How long Justinian was both a Catholic in
his Faith, and Prosperous in his affairs (notwithstanding his withstanding
your now Romish Subjection, required of Popes of later times from their
Emperors) we shall willingly commit to the report of your own Cardinal, by
whom you may understand that the Emperor Justinian began his Reign in the
year after Christ his Incarnation Baronius Tom. 7. Anno 528.
528: whom, until ten years after, Bozius himself acknowledges to have been
a glorious Catholic. Within which compass of years we read, concerning
Justinian, of nothing but of Baronius Anno 521. Codicem absolutum confirmat
Anno 530. Idololatras ad fidem conuertit, templa multa construit. Anno 533.
Resistit Haereticis, and libros Institutionum edidit. Anno 534. Plures
Ecclesias Carthagine erexit. Anno 536. Constitutio aduersus Haereticos.
Building of Churches, conuersions of Idolaters, Constitutions against
Heretics, Edicts for the Faith, and (whereunto you have taken such exceptions)
his book of the Code, and Paudects: wherein, because he medleth with
Ecclesiastical business, he has therefore been censured by you for an
Intruder, Inuader, and Usurper of an Authority superior unto his own.
Notwithstanding, whatsoever Decrees and Constitutions Justinian published
concerning the Catholic Faith, and Ecclesiastical discipline (if we may
believe your Par est credere quotquot de fide Catholica and disciplina
Ecclesiastica latae sunt Iustiniani Sanctiones, tot esse ipsorum duorum
Constantinopolitanorum Antistitum decreta. Baronius Anno 528. number. 2.
Baronius) they were made by the advice and counsel of Two Bishops and
Patriarchs of Constantinople.

Now are we come to the Tenth year of his Empire, being the 538. year of our
Lord Christ: wherein Syluerium Papam in exilium mittit. Baronius Anno 538. number.
8.
Justinian sent Pope Syluerius into Exile. Between which time, and his exiling
of Pope Vigilius, are sixteen years; in all which space is registered
Justinian his Iustiniani recta Confessio fidei a Vigilio Papa laudata. Anno
540. number. 15. Vindex and tutor vetustatis. Anno 541. number. 12. Sanctio aduersus
Haereticos. Jbidem number. 25. Contestatio aduersus Haereticos. Anno 546. number. 37.
Confession of Faith, commended by Pope Vigilius, his Patronage of Antiquity,
and his Sanctions and Contestations against Heretics. Then comes in the
Mandatur Vigilius in exilium. Anno 551.
Banishment of Vigilius, before the time of Justinian his Heresy, containing
the space of five years, in which Interim is reported unto us Justinian his A
Iustiniano pacem petit Vigilius: Iustinianus ei cedit. Anno 552. Iustinianus
instaurat Basilicam; rursus redit in gratiam Vigilius. Anno 554. Iustinianus
instaurat Templum Sophiae. An^^ 557. Sacram mensam fecit pulcherrimam. Ibid.
Insidiae aduersus eum deteguntur. Anno 561. number. 2.
Peace with Vigilius, his Reparation of the Temple of Sophia, his Erecting a
most goodly communion Table, and his Discovery of treasons that were plotted
against him. And now at length Justinian falls into an Heresy, which
although it may be some exception to his person, yet can it be none to our
Cause, who dispute from the Acts and Constitutions of Justinian, whilst he
was a Catholic.

Nevertheless, we may not let pass the Testimonies of Such as give us better
hope of him, than to think that he died an Heretic, who (by your own
Confessions) after this Emperors death esteemed otherwise of him; as namely
Patres sextae Synodi elogio homine Catholico digno, and titulo Pietatis
reperiuntur eius memoriam prosequi. Gregorious Pap^ eum piae memoriae
Iustinianum appellat. lib. 2. Epist. 10. Accipe de eodem Imperatore in Synodo
Romans ab Agathone Papa pronunciatum praeconiu^, extat Epist. in Synod. 6. Act.
4. Iustiniani ab omnibus gentibus memoria religiosa veneratione digna censetur,
cuius fidei rectitudo, per augustissima eius Edicta in toto orb diffusa
laudatur. Haec Baronius Tom. 7. Anno 565. number. 3.
The Fathers of the sixth General Council, honoring his memory with the title
of PIETY: So Pope Gregory, accordingly calling him an Emperor of holy memory:
And Agatho the Pope, accompting his name to be still Worthy of all religious
reverence, famous unto all for the truth so largely dispersed by his Edicts
throughout the world. We may conclude with your own Spanish writer, who upon
like proofs has concluded thus; Constat igitur ex his, audiendos non esse
eos, qui haereticum unjust appellant Eum ( loquitur de Iustiniano.) Fernandus
de Cordoua, Didascal. multiplex. page 166.
It is now evident by that which has been said, that they are not to be
hearkened unto, who unjustly call Justinian the Emperor an Heretic. So he. If
any desire to see a just and full Confutation of all the Objections, made
against the Faith and piety of Justinian, he may thoroughly satisfy himself by
reading of two worthy See Doctor Crackenthorp his Defense of Justinian against
Baronius: and a late Treatise of Doctor Riues, the Kings Advocate, styled,
Imperatoris Iustiniani Defensio, contra Alemannum.
Authors, who have lately written both copiously and learnedly of this Subject.

CHALLENGE.
SO many tokens of no- Subjection from so famously-pious and Catholic
Emperors, in so high a degree of Usurpation, and Invasion (as you call it)
upon the Jurisdiction of Bishops and Popes, in Gathering of Councels, in
prescribing them Laws, in Commanding their Presence, in arresting and Exiling
their persons, and all this in times so ancient, and in so admirably-glorious
state of the Church of Christ, when so many hundreds of most learned and godly
Fathers and illustrious Lights of the Church Catholic chiefly flourished, and
prevailed in General Councels, for the determining of the Doctrine of Faith;
All these, we say, do sufficiently exclaim against the falsehood, arrogance,
and iniquity of your Romish claim by an Article, by force whereof all the
aforesaid pious and Catholic Emperors, Constantine the Great, Theodosius the
Elder, Theodosius the Younger, and Justinian, with such others, must needs
forfait their salvation.

Is it credible, if this your Article, viz. The Catholic Roman Church and
Pope, without Subjection whereunto, and belief of the same Subjection, there
is no Salvation, had been then of Faith, that no one of all those Catholic
Bishops would have Catechized their godly Disciples, and taught them not to
Invade and Intrude upon the Pope his Jurisdiction? Or that no Meltiades, no
Julius, no Liberius, nor any one of those twenty Popes, who lived within the
circuit of twhose two hundred and eighteen years, would appear in General
Councels, to make claim for their right of Gathering General Councels, of
Praesidency in the same Councels, and (if peradventure the Emperor had been
prepossessed of the highest place) to have Lordly commanded him, saying,
Friend, here is a more honorable person than thy self, whose feet thou
ought to kiss, therefore sit down lower; and so the Emperor with shame
should take the lower room? But where? where, but (according as your later
Popes determined) Seeds Imperatoris parabitur iuxta sedem Papae, sed non tantae
longitudinis aut latitudinis. -- -- Et aduertendum, quod locus vbi sed and
Impater non sit altior loco vbi tenet pedes Pontifex. Lib. 1. Ritual. sieve
Cerimonial. Sect. 14.
Next to the Popes seat? yet with this Prouiso, That the seat where the
Emperor sittteth is to be no higher than the place, where the Pope sets his
feet.

But especially when we consider the personal Summoning, Condemning, and
Banishing of your Popes by the Emperor; and no Boniface the eight, nor Gregory
the seventh, alias Hildebrand, nor Alexander the sixth, Father of Borgias, nor
any one Pope, Papally inspired, to cast firebrands of Curses, to the dethroning
and destroying of them: we are then in good hope that you will lessen your
Faith and Belief of an Article so false, and pernicious.

CHAP. XI. Our sixth Argument is, because the former Article, of Necessary
Subjection to the Catholic Roman Church and Pope, does damn the First and
best Popes, and most Catholic Bishops of Rome.
SVbiection is either Ecclesiastical, or Civil; your Article does require
both: therefore must we enquire more diligently into both.

The Popes Challenge, of the Civil Subjection of Princes unto them, examined
by the Examples of Ancient Popes. SECT. 1.
POpes of after ages have challenged an absolute power Papam habere potestatem
plenissimam in vniuersum orbem terrarum Iure Diuino in rebus Ecclesiasticis and
Politicis, Communis est Theologoru^ sententia ( enumerat authors viginti
duos.) Eadem est Canonistarum sententia, quae sumitur ex C. Solitae. De mayor.
and obedientia Carerius de potestate Pontificis Romani. lib. 2. cap. 9.10. and
12.
Directly, or See after at k.
Indirectly, over all Secular Princedome, not only of Christian, but also of
Ethnicke and heathen Emperors; as well by Corporal, as by Spiritual
punishments, even to the depriving them of their kingdoms and lives. And that
they may seem to exact this plenitude of Authority by Divine Law, Pope
Innocent the third makes his Papal Decree, concluding C. Solitae de mayor.
and obedientia. Ibi Innocentius tertius: Deus creauit duo lumina in coelo,
Solemn and Lunam. Id est, Duas instituit dignitates, quae sunt Pontificalis and
Regalis, vt quanta sit inter Solemn and Lunam, tanta inter Papam and Imperatorem
cognoscatur differentia: vt optime explicat Pontifex. -- Igitur Imperatoris
potentia a Papa dependet, Carerius quo iam supra.
The Emperors to be subject to the Popes, because it is written, God made two
Great lights, the Sun to rule the Day, and the Moon to govern the Night.
Upon which Gloss the Divines and Canonists, the Popes Parats, and Parasites
conclude, that See lit. g and h
Every Emperor borrows his power from the Pope, as does the Moon her light
from the Sun, be the Emperor Christian or Ethnicos quoad Temporalia,
Ecclesiae subijci docent Innocentius, Andreas, -- caeterique Doctores
Canonistae; eosque puniri posse affirmant -- poena temporali direct Bozius
lib. 1. de Temporal. Ecles. Monarch. cap. 2.
Ethnicke; and therefore is to submit himself to the Pope; and that Habet Papa
Temporalem Potestatem principalem, etsi non Direct, tamen Indirecte in ordine
ad bonum spirituale. Bellar. lib. 5. de Pont. Romans Cap. 6. Deinde neque hoc
habet propter ordinem charitatis, sed propter subiectionem and subordinationem
ad deponendos Reges, and disponendum de Regnis. Jbid. Cap. 7.
Not by order of Charity, but by duty of Subordination and Subjection; which
again the Popes exact of them, (when they mean to dispossess them of their
kingdoms, or deprive them of their lives) from Scripture, alleging in their
Bulls, for their warrant, that saying of the Prophet, Paulus Episcopus Seruus
seruorum Dei, etc. Nos in iustitiae sede constituti iuxta Prophetae Vaticinium
dicentis; Ecce te constituti super gentes and regna, vt euellas, destruas,
plants, aedifices. Bulla Pauli 3. aduersus Henricum Octauum Angliae Regem.
Pius Episcopus, etc cui data est omnis potestas in coelis and in terris, quem
super omnes gentes, and regna omnia constituit deus, vt euellat, destruat,
dissipat, disperdat, etc. Bulla Pij 5. in Elizabetham Angliae Reginam. Propheta
iu persona Christi ad Romanum Pontificem loquitur. Carerius de potestate
Pontifices Romans lib 2. cap: 3.
Behold I have constituted thee above Nations and Kingdoms, to plant, and to
root out, to build, and to destroy. Ier. 1. So they. Whereunto also accords
the Decree of Pope Extrauag de Mayor. and Obed. Vnam Sanctam.
Boniface the eight.

Good God! that the world should be so bewitched by them, as to account them
Pastors of the Church, who feed their people with thorns, swords, daggers,
and pistols. For what else mean these Glosses, whereby the Word of God is so
notoriously profaned, for patronizing of Rebellions, and Murders? Whereas the
Text has no other meaning, than the Prophetical Function, by Planting of
Virtue, and Rooting out Vice, by Preaching, as Tantum de denunciando eas esse
destruendas Lyranus in eum locum.
Lyranus one of your Friars; and one of your best Popes Hieremias nisi prius
peruersa destrueret, aedificare vtiliter recta non posset, quia nisi ab
auditorum suorum cordibus spinas vani amoris auelleret, nimirum frustra in ijs
sanctae praedicationis verba plantaret. Greg Pastoral. Cur. part. 3. Admonit 35.
Gregory the Great do confess: and herein Saint Bernard durst condemn the
Papal Gloss, as it were, to the Popes own face, writing to Pope Eugenius in
these words; Vt euellas, etc. Quid horum fastum sonat? Rusticani magis sudoris
schemate labor spiritualis expressus o^t, -- vt nos etiam sentiamus magis esse
nobis impositum ministerium, non dominium datum, -- Esto Propheta; sed nunquid
plus quam Propheta? Sisapis, eris contentus mensura quam tibi mensus est Deus;
Nam quod amplus est a malo est. Bernard. lib. 2. Consid. ad Eugenium. Cap. 6.
What is there in this Text, concerning pulling up, rooting out, and
destroying, that sounds of such pride? Wherein, under the figurative speech
of rural sweat, is expressed the spiritual labor; wherein there is a
signification of Ministration, not of Dominion. Wherefore be you (speaking to
the Pope) a Prophet, but will you be more than a Prophet? If you be wise, then
you will be content with the measure that God has measured unto you:
whatsoever is more, is from evil. So that Saint; showing thereby, that your
Popes might have proved, for their advantage, out of that Text, rather a right
to become Gardeners and Carpenters, for rooting out weeds, and destroying of
buildings; than Generals of Hoasts, for conquest and Subjection of Kingdoms.

Nevertheless, some Popes have not been idle, but have put their positions in
practice, deposing Kings, and Emperors, as was (say Zacharias Childericum
deponit; Gregorius sept. Henricum tertium Imperatorem: Clemens sextus Ludouicum
4. Imperatorem. Bellar. lib. 5. de Romans Pont. Cap. 8.
you) Childricke King of France by Pope Zachary; the Emperor Henry the Third,
by Pope Gregory the Seventh; the Emperor Otho the Fourth, by Innocentius the
Third; and the Emperor Lodowicke the Fourth, by Pope Clemens the Sixth. And
thus did Popes sport themselves with tossing the Crowns from the heads of
Kings and Emperors. Now then we see the Subjection that is, by this Article,
required by these latter Popes: let us try whether this insolency be not
condemned by the Submission of ancient Popes unto the Emperors, of their times.

The Submission of Ancient Popes unto Emperors as well Ethnickes, as
Christians, in the Primitive ages of the Catholic Church. First to Ethnic
Emperors. SECT. 2.
IN the time of the Ethnicke Emperors, the Church Catholic Militant gave for
her Ensign the Red-Crosse, dyed in the blood of holy Martyrs, that laid down
their lives for the profession of the Faith of Christ; among which innumerable
number, we shall not envy the praise, which you give unto the ancient Popes of
those times, when you say, that Haec vna Vrbs potest stare aduersus impios
omnes a vero Christi cultu alienos, sic in eius Pontificibus amplissime
resplenduit, nulla namque seeds tot Martyrs Episcopos produxit, vt Romana,
quae viginti septem suorum Pontificum pro cultu Christi interfectorum num^^um
recenset. Bozius de Signi^ Ecclesiae. Tom. 1. lib. 7. cap. 5.. 5.
No Episcopal See brought forth so many Martyrs as the Sea of Rome, wherein
Seven and Twenty Popes were slain for the worship of Christ. So you; Which we
accordingly confess, and say, Blessed be the memory of those glorious Saints
and Martyrs!

But what of these Martyrs? Did they ever detract from the royalty of Heathen
Kings and Emperors? Or so much as touch their heads, to set their Crowns
never so little awry? Heaarken you (among your own Doctors) unto one, who
Testis est ipse Deus, nihil me voluisse, cogitasse, aut scripsisse, quod vel
minima ex part possit Decretis S S. Catholicae Ecclesiae Religionis and fidei
direct vel per obliquum retorqueri, vel in odium, vel inuidiam alicuius
potestatis Spiritualis, aut Te^poralis, Greg. Tolossanus I.V. Doctor ante
libros suos de Republica.
Calls God to witness, that he will say nothing that shall either directly
or indirectly cross the Decrees of the Catholic Church or Faith, nor yet
prejudice any power, whether Spiritual or Temporal. So he; Signifying, that
he meant not to derogate from any just right of eitheir Estate. Can then
either side desire a more indifferent Moderator, than he professes himself
to be? But what? A Christo passo, per interuallum trecentorum annorum, etsi
crudelia tormenta Christiani passi fuerint, and clades atrocissimas, -- nusquam
tamen legitur eos aduersus Reges rebellasse -- sed hoc fere Argumento
ostenderunt se suamque Religionem omnibus anteferri debere, -- quod in ea
sententia ita pertinaciter and obnixe perdurant, vt vnico amore Dei, and diuini
cultus, se ab eo dicerent Christianos appellari, cuius fuit hoc piissimum
dog^a, vt Magistratibus pareant. Jdem lib. 26. de Repub. Cap. vlt. number. 10.
From the time of Christ his passion (says he) for the space of three hundred
years, although Christians then endured most grievous torment, and calamities,
yet do we not read in any story that an^ of them rebelled against their
Kings; No no, for by this they then proved the Christian Religion to excel all
other professions, even by suffering constantly whatsoever miseries, only for
the love of God and his worship; taking their names of Christians from him, who
delivered this pious doctrine of Obedience to Magistrates. So he.

I. CHALLENGE.
Never shall we deny the truth of Their Martyrdom, namely of those ancient
Bishops of Rome, who (we are assured) dyed for the same Truth, which we
profess, as in other points of Religion, and divine worship, so also most
apparently for this our particular defense of not exacting Temporal Subjection
of Kings and Emperors: wherein we find a vast gulf of difference betwixt
This your, and That their Roman Faith. For they (as you have heard) would
rather be killed, than trouble States, and violate Temporal Powers and
Authorities: but your Popes, in their Bulls, proclaim that their Professors
and Believers ought rather to kill, and be killed, than not resist. The
determination of this point will be (according to the sense of your Roman
Article) a requiring, (upon loss of salvation) a belief of Temporal
Subjection from all Kings and Emperors, to your Popes: whereby all these 27.
godly Popes, the faithful Martyrs of Christ, are damned, who (as is testified)
professed Obedience and Subjection unto them, even to death; Whom therefore we
contrarily produce, as so many Martyrs, (that is, Witnesses by their blood)
that your now Article of Subjection, in the Popish sense thereof, is justly to
be condemned; and those whom you call Martyrs, for dying in defense thereof,
may be your Popes Martyrs, but nothing less than the Martyrs of Christ.

A Memorial, concerning all Christian Emperors, which have received Baptism,
the badge and Character of Christianity. SECT. 3.
Pass we from gazing upon the flagge with the Red-Crosse, dyed in the blood of
Martyrs, to the Ensign with the Cross partly bloody Red, as before, (as in
the days of Julian the Apostate) partly Black, through the ignominies, which
Popes and other holy Professors sustained by Emperors, whether Heretical, or
Orthodoxe; and partly white, through the peace of Emperors every way
Catholic. What will your Article, concerning Subjection, determine against all
these? You distinguish them either into Pontifici vt Pastori necessaria est
Potestas, circa Hereticos, tanquam circa Lupos, arcendi omni ratione qua
possit. Bella. lib. 5. de Romans Pont. Cap. 7.
Woolues, such you call all Emperors, which of Catholics turn either
Apostates, or Heretics; of these you conclude, that your Pope has power to
drive them away by all means possible: Or else into Altera potestas necessaria
Pontifici circa furiosos, velut Arietes, cogendo eos per omnes commodas
rations. Jbidem.
Rams, signifying such Kings and Emperors, who notwithstanding they be in
profession true Catholics, yet do any way oppress or destroy the Church; of
whom you determine that your Pope, As Shepherd by his power ought to compel
these as furious Rams, by all means convenient. And what you hold Convenient
means, we See above at q
have learned already by your objected practices, in dispossessing of Kings and
Emperors, by force of Arms, as namely these, Childericke King of France, the
Emperor Henry the Third, the Emperor Otho the Fourth, and the Emperor
Lodowicke the Fourth; not for any note of Heresy, but only for not Subiecting
themselves to the Popes Dignity and Dominion. For we are now to confute the
double presumption of your now Popes; the one is their Violence against
Emperors, the other their not Reverence unto them, as unto their Superiors;
and that by the Examples of godly Pop^^ of former Ages.

I. Examples of no-Violence used by Ancient Popes aagainst Kings and Emperors.
SECT. 4.
WE are to speak of those times, when their reigned among Christians, not
only Tigers, such as were Heathenish Tyrants, but Woolues, as Constantius and
Valens, both persecuting Hertikes and Julian the Apostate, who raised the
Twelfth persecution; besides Justinian, who (as you have heard) dealt so hardly
with your Two Popes, Syluerius, and Vigilius; to omit others of the like
boldness, whom you may reckon among your Rams: In which cases Pope Boniface
the Eighth requires In eius Potestate duos esse gladios, Spiritualem viz. and
Temporale^. -- Opertet autem gladium esse sub gladio, Temporalem sub
Spirituale. Bonifacius Octauus, Extrau. Vnam Sanctam.
Both swords, viz. Temporal and Spiritual Authority to be in his own power,
so that the Temporal be subject to the Spiritual. As though the Churh could
not possibly subsist without such a predominant power Ecclesiastical over
whatsoever Temporal Ordinance, that shall any way afflict her, or any of her
members. We are now in a Question of Fact, and find that as then in particular
Syluerius and Vigilius, both Popes, being sent into See above. Chap. 10.. 4.
Banishment by the Emperor Justinian, did not make resistance, but petitioned
for favor and peace; so now generally, that (as is confessed) No Pope, in all
the Succession of Peter, did Lego and relego Regum and Impeperatorum res
gestas, and Gregorius Septimus primus erat, qui Excommunicauit and deposuit
Imperatorem. Otho Frsingensis, lib. 6. Chronic. Cap. 35. Vt refert Tolossanus
lib. 26. de Repub. Cap. 5.
Depose any Emperor, before Pope Gregory the Seventh, that is, not until a
Thousand and Sixty years after Christ. We feign would know what Answer you
can make to this, to quit your latter Popes from an inexcusable Innovation, and
intolerable Usurpation, and Invasion upon the Jurisdiction of Princes, whether
Ethnickes, or Christians; and of these, whether Heretics, or Catholics; and
of these, whether Peaceable, or Turbulent and obnoxious: and the only
satisfaction your Cardinal will afford us is this: Quod si Ch^istiani olim
non deposuerunt Dioclesianum, Iulianum, Valentem, and alios, id fuit, quia
deerant vires Temporales Christianis, Bellar. lib. 5. de Romans Pont. Cap. 4, and
7.
If Christians (says he) in ancient times did not depose Dioclesian (an
Heathen Emperor) Julian (an Apostate) Valens (an Heretic) and others,
(meaning, Disturbers of the Church, which were otherwise Catholics) the reason
was, because they wanted force and power. So h^ ^han which Answer (for we must
think your Cardinal was greatly learned) none could be more unconscionable;
all Antiquity proving it to be agregiously false. Tertullian and Cyprian, two
ancient Fathers, being under the persecution of Heathen Emperors, do make
their Apologies in the behalf of the Christian and Catholic Church,
Tertullian thus: Absit vt virtute humana vindicetur Christiana secta, aut
doleat pati, in quo probatur. Si enim hosts extraneos, no^ tantum occultos
vindices agere vellemus, deesset nobis vis numerorum aut copiarum? -- cui bello
non idonei, non prompti fuissemus? -- si non apud istam disciplinam magis
occidi liceret, quam occidere. Tertul. Apol. Contra Gentes Cap. 37.
God forbid that our Christian Profession should be revenged by humane power,
or should grieve to suffer that, whereby we are tried: albeit if we would
become either secret or else open Reuengers of our own wrongs, could we want
either number or power? What War is there that we are not fit for, yea and
ready also to undertake, if that our Religion taught us not rather to be
killed, than to kill, for the profession thereof? Accordingly Saint Cyprian;
Nemo nostrum, quam vis apprehenditur, se aduersus iniustam violentiam, quamuis
nimius, and copiosus sit noster populus, vlciscitur. Cyrian ad Demetr.. 14. cum
Annot. Pamelij. page 328.
Our Professors (says he) do not take revenge against unjust violence, albeit
our people be more in number. Saint Ambrose was vexed under the hand of an
Heretic and slyeth to his weapons; but wot you what? Preces and Lacrymae arma
mea sunt, aliter nec debeo, nec possum resistere. Ambros. Tom. 3. lib. 5. post
Epist. 32. Orat. ad Auxentium.
My prayers and tears (says he) are my weapons; I neither may nor can make
any other resistance. Not (as you Possit Ambrosius arm^s Ecclesiam suam tueri
and vim vi repellere, nec ideo armis abstinuit quod armis esset inferior; ab eo
namque populus stabat, ab eo maxima pars militum. Barkleius lib. 3. Contra
Monarcho. Cap. 5 page 138.
confess) that Ambrose had not power to resist, with whom the people and
greatest part of the Soldiers took part; but because he would not defend
himself by Arms.

A Case so evident, universal, and indeed honorable, that your own Authors do
record it for the credit and glory of the Catholic Church, in those ages,
saying that Christiani nihil mol in contra Rempub. etiam quum pares numero and
viribus fuerunt. Tolossanu^ lib. 26. de Repub. Cap. 7. number. 10.
Christians never plotted against the secular government, no not when they
were equal in strength. Martyrs noui Testamenti, propter multitudinem, facile
contra Tyrannides persequutorum suorum conspirare potuissent; pro obedientia
tamen, quam iussi sunt sublimiori potestati defer, maluerunt pati quam
resistere. Carerius de Officio Principum.
They never conspired against Tyrants, although for multitude they might easily
have made resistance; because they were commanded, (namely in Scripture) to
perform Obedience. And (which is as much as can be said) Sed id grauissimo
Argumento esse debet, quod nemo Sanctorum Patrum vel Scriptorum alioqui
Orthodoxorum per totos mill annos and amplius, licet Ecclesia tunc omnibus
floreret copijs; and impiorum Principum magnus esset numerus, ^ale quid vnquam
vel verbo vel scripto docuisse legitur. Barkleus lib. 6. aduersus Monarc. Cap.
26.
Not one ancient Father (says Another) nor any one Writer, albeit otherwise
Orthodoxe and Catholic, for more than a thousand years space, whilst yet the
Church abounded in power of Arms, was ever read to teach the contrary. So
they.

II. CHALLENGE.
A Thousand years space from Christ, in the whole Church Catholic, wherein no
such Subjection was exacted by Popes from Emperors, is a fair time, we
think, and a strong Argument to Challenge your Church of Heresy, in
prescribing to Christians a new Article of Faith, as necessary to Salvation; by
which you again condemn the Faith of all the Members of the Catholic Church,
as well Popes, as other Bishops, and Christian Doctors and People, who with
universal consent believed and taught Obedience to Civil Magistracy, whereas
you now proclaim Arms, and open resistance.

And what can you now suggest for the modesty of your Cardinal, who blushed
not to say, that Christians anciently wanted force to resist all unbelieving,
tyrannous, and turbulent Emperors? Being so evidently confuted, as well
concerning the open force which latter Popes have maintained, as also
concerning all secret violence, whereof you have given us many Examples. For as
we have heard, touching Emperors of middle age, so have we lately seen, in
our days, your secret practices of Why boastest thou thy self, o Tyrant, that
thou can do mischief? Psalm. 52.1.
Mischief against Kings and Queens, without any open war, by armies or
troops of enemies: If ^he practice of Assassines, and Traitors, by Dagges,
Daggers, Poisons, POVVDER-PLOTS, or your Cardinals, [ Quacunque ratione] that
is, [ by what means soeuer] may make any proof: Who if they can do it, we
have little reason to doubt of their wills, so long as the De occisoribus autem
Schismaticorum Excommunicatorum extat Rescriptum Vrbani Papae 2. ad Godefridum,
apud Iuonem his verbis. Excommunicatorum interfectoribus, prout more^ sanctae
Ecclesiae nosti, secundum ipsorum Intentionem, modum co^gruae satisfactionis
injunge. Non enim eos Homicidas arbitramur, qui aduersus Excommunicatos zelo
Catholicae Matris ardente^, eorum quoslibet trucidasse contigerat, ne tamen
ejusdem Ecclesiae disciplina desaeuiat, tenore quem diximus paenitentiam ijs
iniungito congruentem, quae diuinae simplicitatis oculos aduersum se complacare
perualeant, si forte aliquid duplicitatis pro humana fragilitate ex eodem
flagitio contraxerunt, Apud Baron. Anno 1089. number 11.
Rescript of Pope Urban the Second is in force, concerning them that shall kill
Schismatikes Excommunicate.

For although he command Penance to be enjoined them, because of the doubt that
may be had of the sincerity of their Intentions, whether they did but double,
and only seem to slay them upon zeal for the Catholic Cause, when as
(peradventure) they did it to satisfy their selfe-malice (which Penance it may
be shall amount to no more than coming to Rome, in the days of Iubile, or
else to visit such a next Shrine, and to say a few Aue-Marie's and
Pater-noster's, in honor of such a Saint:) Yet notwithstanding does he acquit
the conscience of every such zealous Killer, saying, If any shall chance to
kill Schismatikes whomsoever, that are Excommunicate, upon an ardent zeal to
their Catholic Mother (meaning, the Church of Rome) we do not judge them to
be Murderers.

Go you now, and complain that you are unjustly persecuted or abandoned by
Protestants out of several Kingdoms, seeing that they are all yearly
Excommunicamus omnes Lutheranos, Hussitas, Caluinistas, Hugonotos, etc. Bullae
Canae.
Excommunicate at Rome for Heretics and Schismatiks, by the Bull of
MAVNDY-THVRSDAY; and consequently made Obnoxious unto the blind devotion of
every Romish bloody Assassine, who may be persuaded that he shall m^rit of God,
by the slaying of those supposed Schismatikes. Thus much of the No-Resistance
of Ancient Popes against Temporal government.

II. Of the Reverence acknowledged by holy Popes unto Kings and Emperors, as
to their Superiors. SECT. 5.
SVbiection, challenged by Popes from Emperors, as their Inferiors, is the
maine Subject your later Popes have insisted upon, as a Material Article of
Faith, even in the point of Outward Reverence, as necessarily due unto them, by
acknowledgment of a personal Subordination and Subjection unto them. But when
we look beyond this middle Region of Aftertimes unto the upper sphere of
Antiquity, we find as great a difference between your later Popes, and those
Ancients, as there is between Up and Down, Then and Now, Deposing of
Emperors, and yielding Reverence unto them.

We seek no other witnesses than your Binius and Baronius, against whom we are
sure you will take no exception: In whom we find Pope Liberius the First
professing Liberius. 1. Sermo pietatis tuae. -- Me quidem. quem patienter omnia
far necesse est, plurimum lacerat -- Ego enim tecum veram pacem requiro. Apud
Binium Tom. 1. Conc. Epist. 2. ad Constantinum.
Patience in suffering indignities from the Emperor, and entreating for
mercy: Pope Simplicius the First promising Simplicius. Principes Christianos
iugi veneratione s^scipio -- Clementiae vestrae Acatius mea vice supplicabit.
Epi. 4. apud Binium Tom. 2
Continual Reverence to Christian Princes, and supplicating the Emperor for
favor, by this Legate: Pope Leo the First making by the Empress a supplication
to the Emperor, Leo Epist. 26. Vt iubeatis Synodum intra Italiam celebrari
Sacerdotes supplicant. Supplicationem nostram pietas vestra apud eum dignetur
asserere. Apud Binium. Tom. 1.
To command a Synod to be celebrated in Italy, and yet he could not obtain it:
Pope Gelasius the First confessing that Gelasius Legibus tuis ipsi quoque
parent Religionis Antistites. Epist. 8. apud Binium. Tom. 2.
Bishops are to obey the Laws of Emperors: Pope Hormisda the First taking
notice of the Emperors Hormisda. Futuram Synodam indicari mandas, cui nos
interesse debere iisdem literis, deo (vt credimus) tibi imperanti, commonuisli.
-- ad literas vestras, respondi. etc. Epist. 5. apud Binium. To. 2.
Command, of gathering a Council, as a motion from God; and further
acknowledging that he had received warning, and that he ought to be present
thereat: Pope Vigilius the First Vigilius. See above, Cap. 10.. 4.
banished by the Emperor, and suing for peace and favor: Pope Pelagius the
First confessing and saying, Pelagius 1. Regibus nos subditos esse sacrae
scripturae praecipiunt. Epist. 10. apud Binium. Tom. 2.
Holy Scripture commands us to be subject unto Kings: Pope Gregory the First
auowing himself to the Emperor, in these words; Gregorius. Quod ad me
attinet, ^erenissimis vestris iussionibus obedientiam praebeo. lib. 4. Epist.
32. Et rursus: Ego iussioni vestrae subiectus. Lib 2. Epist. 62. Apud Binium.
Tom. 2.
As for me, I perform obedience unto your Commands, whereunto I am subject:
Pope Martyn the First praying the Emperor to Martinus. Nos orantes Serenitatem
vestram, vt haec diligenter legere dignetur. Epist. 3. apud Binium. Tom. 2.
Vouchsafe to read his letters: Pope Agatho the First talking of Agatho.
Secundum piissimam missionem vestram, pro obedientia quam debuimus, confamulos
nostros -- curauimus demandare -- pro quibus flexo mentis poplite suppliciter
vestram -- Cleme^tiam deprecamur. Apud Binium Tom. 3. Actio quarta in Conc.
Oecum. 6. sub Agathone.
the bending of the knees of his mind unto the Emperor, by Supplicating his
Clemency for Others. Finally, Pope Adrian the First, Deuoting himself to the
Emperor by Letters, as one in supplication, Adrianus. Tanquam praesentialiter
humo stratus and vest^is vestigiis prouolutus quaero etc. Epist. 1. apud
Binium. To. 3.
Fallen down prostrate at the soles of his feet. So your First Popes.

When we earnestly sought for some, though but shadow of excuse, of these
Popes, for betraying their right of Dominion and Sovereignty over Kings and
Emperors (if any had bin due unto themselves, as is now challenged by your
Popes) at length we light upon your Bozius, who would gladly say something,
but alas! yields not so much as we have sought for, a shadow of excuse; and
yet whatsoever it is, he after his manner cannot deliver it without much
insultation. Quod si quis dicat a Pontificibus summis honores eximios aut
Regibus, aut Imperatoribus delatos, insulse loquetur. Id namque fieri po^uit
aut oportuit quoque olim, cum gentes nondum been agnoscerent, quanti esset
Ecclesia dei, and Antistites ipsius, qui and honores and ignominias ex aequo
far debent, vt ad Christum possint homines producere. etc. Bozius lib. 20. de
Sign. Eccl. cap. 5.
If any Object (says he) that excellent honors have sometimes been yielded
of Popes, unto Kings and Emperors, he speaks absurdly; because these might
and ought then to be performed in those days, when Heathens were ignorant of
the dignity of the Church, and were then by honor and dishonor to be won by
Bishops to the Faith. So he.

III. CHALLENGE.
IS it then absurd to object the Reverence performed by ancient Popes, unto
Emperors of their times? is not rather the Answer, now made, fraught with many
absurdities? First, because we have not insisted only upon Examples of
Heathenish times, but of the times of Christian Emperors also. Secondly,
because the Times, whereof we have alleged examples, were not such, wherein
the dignity of the Church of Rome was so ecclipsed and obscured, that it could
not appear to Infidels, but contained the Ages from the persecuting Emperors,
for the space of 420. years down-ward: within which time the Church of Rome
was in her perfectest luster; concerning which time the same Bozius propounds
(such is his modesty) the Signum 86. est Regum summa reuerentia erga Ecclesiae
nostrae Episcopos. Bozius quo suprae.
Reverence given by Emperors unto the Bishops of the Church of Rome to be a
note of the true Church. Thirdly, humility of Popes, and Subiecting themselves
to the Emperors, was then a Motive and Argument of drawing souls to the
Roman Church: how then shall not their after-Pride be a means to alienate
the hearts of Christians from it? Does the same Tree bring forth Figs and
Thistles? But lastly, and principally, because your Bozius has altogether
forgotten his Catechism, and the Article whereunto he and you are both
sworn, namely, See above, Cap. 1.. 2.
The Church of Rome and Bish^p thereof, without subjection whereunto (according
to your Faith) there is no salvation; nor can any be saved that does not
believe the truth of this Article. If therefore those ancient Popes belief had
bin of a Subjection due unto them from Emperors, in such Causes, wherein they
by their practice of Humility, Reverence, and Obedience denied all such Right;
then should their Fact have betrayed their Faith: a faithlesnesse which we
(you will pardon us) dare not impute unto those holy ancient Popes.

In all these Instances you may observe, that we have alleged only such
Popes, who were the FIRST of their own name, because we would not be found
superfluous: yet these First, because they must be so much the more
aduantagious, to warrant our Conclusion, to wit; that either must your Article
of believing such a Necessity of Subjection damn so many, and (in your own
judgments) excellently godly and learned Popes of Ancient times; or else must
their profession condemn your Article of Novelty, and you consequently of
Haeresie, in believing a Doctrine so Imposterous, Scandalous, Schismatic,
and so manifoldly Blasphemous, against so holy Emperors and Popes.

CHAP. XII. Our Seventh Argument is, because this Article, The Catholic
Roman Church, without belief whereof there is no Salvation, damneth the most
learned Saints and Martyrs, that are placed in the Roman Calendar for Saints
or Martyrs of Christ's Church.
First from Saint Polycarpus. SECT. 1.
POlycarpus Bishop of Smyrna is Registered a Saint in your Roman Mense Ianuarij
die 26. Missal. Romans
Calendar; and indeed he was an excellent Saint, of whom Ecclesiastical
History (you Ribadineira and Grasius de Vitis Sanctorum. Tom. 1. Jan. die 26.
know) gives so notable a Testimony, as showing that he was the Disciple of
John the Evangelist; who being now brought to Martyrdom, by the Proconsull his
persecutor, and being moved to swear Heathenishly, By Caesar, answered saying;
I AM A CHRISTIAN: being then threatened to be cast into the fire, said; This
fire now flameth, and will shortly be extinguished, but there is an eternal
fire prepared for the torment of the wicked, which thou artignorant of: being
burnt in the fire, he yielded a smell as fragrant as the sweetest spices: whom
when the Jews and Gentiles heard professing himself a Christian, they cried
out in their wrath, saying, Eusebius li. 4. Hist. Eccl. cap. 14. Iste est Asiae
[(...)] Iste [(...).]
This is the Doctor of Asia, this is the Father of Christians, etc. Lastly,
this Polycarpus is he, by whose authority Polycrates (in the fury of Pope
Victor, then Excommunicating all the Bishops of Asia, that would not celebrate
Easter according to the Roman Custom) defended and justified himself,
saying, Eusebius lib. 5. Hist. cap. 24.
When Polycarpus came to Rome in the days of Anicetus Bishop of that See, and
fell into dispute about the time of Observation of the Feast of Easter, yet
could not Anicetus persuade Polycarpus to alter his Custom, which he had kept
with Saint John and with other Apostles, with whom he himself had been
conversant, and in the end both Anicetus and Polycarpus (notwithstanding their
dispute about these Rites) did mutually communicate with each other. Thus far
the Ecclesiastical Story.

CHALLENGE.
BY this it appears that Polycarpus and Polycrates were both of the same
spirit, to maintain their old Custom of Easter, notwithstanding whatsoever
Opposition of the Bishop of Rome; because they both took their Resolution from
the same ground, to wit, an Apostolical Custom of their Church: so that Pope
Anicetus could no more prevail with Polycarpus, by persuasion, for Alteration
thereof, than Pope Victor could overcome Polycrates by his Excommunication. The
difference then is not between the Two Asian Bishops, Polycarpus and
Palycrates, for both had the same Resolution; the only difference is between
the Two Popes: viz. Anicetus, notwithstanding this Contrariety, will hold
Communion with Polycarpus; but Victor will needs break out into
Excommunication against Polycrates, and See above C^p. 9.. 2.
was freely reproved for his presumption by godly Fathers of those times.

You will say this was but a Question of Rites, and a matter of small
importance; be it so, But the meaner the matter is they contended about, the
mainer and more forcible is our Consequence, by good Law of Logic; as for
example: your whole claim is, that the Pope is the Bishop of Bishops, and
Spiritual Monarch in the whole Christian world, and over Kings and Monarchs.
You know that, in them, Impetrare est Imperare; their Couetings and desires are
Commands: If therefore Saint Polycarpus would not yield his consent at the much
instancing of Pope Anicetus in (as we may so call it) a trifle, in respect; it
plainly argues, that he ought the same Pope no Canonical Obedience, by Law
of Discipline, much less by Doctrine of Faith, if any of the (now) new Roman
Articles had been imposed upon him; seeing that for all the persuasion, which
the Pope could use, he kept his own Conclusion still.

Nor is it altogether nothing, which you may observe, that when both Jews and
Heathen cried out upon him, calling him in despite The Father of Christians,
as though there were no Bishop in Christianity as Monarch above him, he did
not utter one word in behalf of the Pope and his Supreme Dignity above All
other Bishops: which doubtless he ought to have acknowledged, if that this
kind of Appellation were, as you teach, so proper to the Pope, as to be an
Argumentum sumimus ex nominibus Episcopi Romani, viz. Doctor and Pater omnium
Christianorum, -- and alia ex quibus omnibus and singulis aperte co^ligitur
Primatus Pontificis. Belmarmin. lib. 2. de Romans P^nt. cap. 31.
Argument of his Primacie above all other Christian Bishops.

II. Saint Cyprian was Exoommunicated by Stephen Bishop of Rome, for not
believing the Necessity of Union with him. SECT. 2.
SAint Cyprian is also one of the Saints, enrolled in your Roman Calendar,
Missale Romans Call. Septembris die 16. Cyprianus Confessor and Martyr.
under the title of Confessor and Martyr. This witness you do as vehemently
Object, for defense of your former Roman Article, as we do to impugn and
confute it.

Your Objection answered.
It is an horror to any man of judgment to see the violence, which is offered
by your Doctors unto Saint Cyprian, by racking his sentences, and enforcing him
to say, in defense of Papal Primacy, that which he never meant, nor yet dreamed
of. For that which he spoke of his own only Authority against Schismatikes,
who troubled his Jurisdiction, That sounds in the preoccupation of your
judgments, as though it concerned only the Pope of Rome: and where he makes
One Universal Bishopric, consisting of All Bishops equally one with another,
without any respect to Rome, more than to any other Church, That also ringeth
in your ears the only Monarchy of the Bishop of Rome. All which your futilily
is exactly confuted by an Vide, Lector, nostrum Goulartiu^ in Cyprianum, qui
passim Obiectiones Pamelij infringit* Docte sane and faeliciter.
Author, who will surely satisfy any confcionable Reader.

But Saint Cyprian writing to Pope Cornelius (doubtless a godly Bishop) among
other allurements he inserteth this; Nauigare audent ad -- Petri Cathedram,
nec cogitant eos esse Romanos ad quos non potest perfidia habere accessum.
Cypr. lib. 3. Epist. 3.
Perfidiousnesse (says he) cannot have access to Rome, the chair of Peter.
Ergo (says your Ergo non solum Pontificem, sed etiam Ecclesiam Romanam non
posse errare, asserit inter alios Sanctus Cyprianus. Bellarmin. l. 4. de Romans
Pont. cap. 4.
Cardinal) Cyprian affirmed that neither the Pope nor the Church of Rome could
possibly err. No Father of the Primitive times is more urged by you, for
proof of this Conclusion, than Saint Cyprian; no Epistle more insisted upon,
than this now cited; no words more inculcated, than these, which we have
alleged, and (for we may justly add thus much) no Father, no Epistle, no
Sentence more egregiously abused and perverted.

For first he speaks not of Perfidiousnesse in Doctrine, but only in
Discipline, by the false and perfidious reports of Schismatic fellows, who
being Excommunicated by Cyprian, had notwithstanding their extrauagant recourse
to Rome, seeking there before Cornelius to defame and traduce all the
proceedings which Cyprian had iudiciously against them.

Secondly, we shall earnestly desire you to ponder seriously the Circumstances
of the whole frame of that Epistle, and then tell us whether that Sentence were
not rather spoken Rhetorically, to persuade and move Cornelius what he should
do; than absolutely and asseuerantly, to prove what he could not but do. For
the whole endeavor of Cyprian in that same place is to admonish, encourage, and
fortify the faint and languishing heart of that Pope, and to arm him, least
he should be undermined by the cunning and Perfidiousnesse of those irregular
companions, as his own words do plainly manifest, by exhorting Cornelius
Minis and terroribus eorum commotum -- a vigore and potestate Episcopi alienum
perditorum hominum insidias pertimescere: -- inconcussa virtus contra omnes
impetus oblatrantium fluctuum. Ibid. Cypr.
Not to be moved with the threats and terrors that they could suggest:
reasoning the point; Because (says he) it connot consist with the power and
vigor of any Christian Bishop, to be afraid of the crafty dealings of impious
men, whereas a Bishop ought to be fore-armed with confidence against the
assault and force of all floods of violence whatsoever. So he. No otherwise
than if any of you, writing to a Captain of some Fort, and standing in danger
of being surprised by some Stratagem of the enemy, and reported to be somewhat
amated by apprehension of fear, should reason from the experience of his
former good circumspection, and valor of his men, saying; Be you of good
courage, your care and resolution is known to all men, that no treachery can
have access to your Fort. Who knows not, that this is that piece of Oratory,
which is called of Rhetoricians (...), that is an Admonition by way of praising
insinuated, when we admonish him whom we seem to praise; which is, by praise
of his former worthiness, to premonish him to maintain with constancy so
good a Resolution.

But if you will needs have it Prophetically spoken of the Infallabilitie of
the Pope of Rome, then must you as necessarily make Saint Cyprian a False
Prophet, who in this Epistle commended Pope Cornelius; but in Cyprian Epist. ad
Pompeium.
another Epistle does as much condemn Pope Stephen, a Successor to Cornelius,
even for his rashness, in entertaining these forenamed Perfidious out-lopers;
who by gadding to Rome abused his credulity, and occasioned dissension
between him and Pope Stephen, as has See above, cap. 12.. 2.
bin largely declared. And we wish that Thousands of Examples of like
Perfidiousnesse could not be shown, which for these last Thousand years have
possessed the Roman Chair. Yet (not knowing the appetite of every Reader,
whether he may have a desire to know if there were any the like Example in
Antiquity) we instance in that, which your Cardinal Baronius has related.
Saint Basil (says Basilius Epist. 59. Caueri cupit a Damaso Romano Pontifice,
quod sub Liberio illatum est Ecclesiae Orientali, cum recepisset Eustathium --
and Collegas, eosdem omnes Haereticos, sed dolose professos Nicaenam fidem.
Baeronius Anno 471. Number. 21.
he) writing to Damasus Bishop of Rome, does wish him to take heed, least he
bring that mischief upon the Eastern Church, which Pope Liberius had done, by
admitting of Eustathius and his fellows, being Heretics, but craftily
pretending themselves to believe the Nicene Faith.

Thus have you a fourefold satisfaction: Pope Liberius was deceived by the
Perfidiousnesse of Heretics; Pope Damasus was forewarned by that Example,
lest he should be likewise deceived; Pope Stephen was circumuented by like
craft; and accordingly Pope Cornelius was instantly by many Arguments
persuaded, by Cyprian, to beware of the like delusion by persidious
Schismatikes. Ergo, the Roman Sea is no more privileged from the access of
Impostors, than the Mediterranean Sea is from false Pirates. You have posed us
with the strain of the words of Saint Cyprian, and we shall reply upon you,
with his visible Acts and Deeds.

Our Opposition, from the practice and profession of Saint Cyprian.
If Saint Cyprian his reuiling of the person of Pope Stephen, if his
Contradicting, in his Council, the Popes Decrees enacted in his Council, if
gainsaying the Popes pretended supreme Title, viz. Bishop of Bishops, if
Interdicting the greatest Prerogative of Papal Monarchy, which is Appeals to
Rome, be sufficient Arguments of disclaim of Subjection to the Pope, (all
which have See above, cap. 9.. 3. etc.
been proved from point to point) then are we sure that Saint Cyprian did not
believe the Article of Necessary Subjection to the Sea of Rome. If the
Excommunication of others, who were of Saint Cyprian his opinion; if not
admitting the Legates of Cyprian to his speech; if forbidding all Communication
with them* and hospitality unto them; if despightfull words against Cyprian, as
against an intolerable Adversary, may be held proofs of the Excommunication
of Cyprian, by the Pope, (all which likewise have Ibidem.
been expressly declared) than are we assured, that Cyprian was (so much as lay
in the Popes power) separated from the Church of Rome.

If that Cyprian had this Faith, that None has God for his Father, which has
not the Church for his Mother; if he, notwithstanding the same Faith, was
contented to be Excommunicated by the Pope, and persisted in that his
Opposition (for ought that ever could appear) even to the giving up of his
spirit to God, by Martyrdom (all which have accordingly been confessed) then
may we be bold to assume that Saint Cyprian was not of your Faith, to believe
that Subjection or visible Union with the Pope of Rome is necessary to
salvation.

If lastly Saint Cyprian (as you have said) were always held to be Catholic
in Faith, godly in life, glorious in his death, and even since his death
reckoned in the Calendar of Saints, then stand we secure that the Belief of
your Article of Necessary Union and Subjection to the Roman Sea, is not
necessary to Salvation. So that the more blessed a Saint Cyprian is, the more
cursed and damnable this your Roman Article must needs be.

III. Saint Athanasius, Bishop of Alexandria, believed not the Necessity of
this Roman Article concerning Union and Subjection to the Sea of Rome. SECT. 3.
SAint Athanasius Patriarch of Alexandria must be thought to have been a Saint,
as to all Christian Churches, so to the Church of Rome it self, who (as you
Lippelous in libro qui inscribitur, Vitae Sanctorum. Tom. 2. Maij. 2. Romam
venit -- Athanasius, Symbolum Romae composuit, insigne fidei suae monumentum,
quod hactenus Athanasij nomine in Ecclesia public recitatur. page 436,
know) in his greatest extremities and persecutions by Arian Heretics, found
support and refuge at Rome, by the godly Pope Julius, the Bishop of that Sea;
whose Symbol or Creed, the monument of his Faith, called the ATHANASIAN CREED,
not only Rome but the whole Catholic Church does profess: unto whose honor
Gregorius 13. Pontifex cupidissimus Orientalis Ecclesiae Vnionis and pacis,
templum egregium nomine Athanasij construxit. Jbidem page 464.
Gregory the thirteenth (say you) built a goodly Church, being desirous to draw
the East-Church unto his Union: and whose name is Calendred for a Saint in your
Missale Roman. Call. Meuse Maij, die 2.
Roman Missall at this day. This is the Saint whom we propound unto you, as
one who has taught us, by his example, not to regard the Papal Union, in our
just Cause. But whether? and why did the Pope of Rome Excommunicate such a
Saint?

Saint Athanasius was Excommunicated by Pope Liberius, and notwithstanding
remained a Saint.
The very names of Baronius, and Bellarmine (we know) carry such Authority with
you, that they will preponderate whatsoever can be said against them; who
jointly consent in this that follows. Liberius taedio and inuidia quod aegro
animo ferebat Felicem intrusum ab Arianis Pontificem agere, communionem inijt
cum ijs, quos Haereticos esse minime ignorabat, and consensit in damnationem
Athanasij. Baronius Anno 357. number. 42.46. and Bellarm. lib. 4. de Romans Pont.
cap. 9.
Pope Liberius (say they) through the faction of Arian Heretics, is by the
Authority of Constantius the Emperor sent into banishment: By the same
Heretical Arian Bishops is Felix made Bishop, and placed in the Roman Sea.
When Liberius perceived Felix to be intruded into his Chair, he after two
years Banishment, envying and grieuing hereat, does join communion with those
Heretics, and gave consent to the condemnation of Athanasius. So they. Our
Assumption will be this, that Athanasius neither before nor after the death of
Felix did regard this Excommunication of Liberius.

Immediately after this you Baronius Anno 357. number. 57. Nec dissentit
Bellarminus.
esteem Felix to be the Legitimate Pope, but pronounce Liberius a Schismatike,
and one removed from the society of Catholics, and from his Papal function.
Which your Conclusions, do notably fight against your own Principles. First
this, that Duo Papae simul esse non possunt Bellar. lib. 4. de Romans Pont. c. 9.
Vnius Ecclesiae vnum tantum caput esse oportet, cui si alterum ad das,
horrendum monstrum profecto erit. Baronius Anno 355. nu. 56.
There cannot be two Popes together in one Sea, because this were as horrible a
monster as a body with two heads. One Pope then must be acknowledged. Your next
Principle is, that Papa manifest Haereticus eo ipso est depositus, and desinit
esse Papa. Bellar. lib. 2. de Romans Pont. cap. 30.
No Pope can be deposed, except he appear to be a manifest Heretic, whereby
he ceasseth, ipso facto, to be a Pope, without any other judgment at all. Yet
grant you, concerning Liberius, that Liberius per fuum lapsum Haereticus non
fuit. Bellarm. lib. 4. de Romans Pont. cap. 9. Et Baronius: Liberius semper
constitit in fide Catholicus. Anno 357. number. 55.
He was a Catholic in his inward judgment, notwithstanding his outward
communion with Heretics. Your last Principle is, that Pontifex a nemine in
terris indicati potest, quia Princcps est Eeclesiae totius, and proinde
superiorem in terris non habet Bellar. l. 2. de Romans Pont. cap. 26.
The Pope cannot be judged of any on earth, because he is Prince, and therefore
superior unto the whole Church Catholic throughout the earth. All these
Premises, being reduced into a Logical form, will make up our Conclusion
thus: No Catholic Bishop of Rome can be judged, or deposed.

But Liberius, notwithstanding his consenting to the Condemnation of
Athanasius, and Communicating with Heretics, was a Catholic Bishop.

Ergo, He could not be judged or deposed from his Popedom.



If therefore Athanasius, being Excommunicated by Liberius, never sought (as
you all know) any Union either with him, or yet with Felix, in his stead, it
must follow that he, all that time, contemned his Excommunication.

After the death of Felix, (who was Pope one year, and some few months)
Liberius obtains again your good reputation, for presenly he was accounted
the Legitimate Pope. Why? Constat Liberium (defuncto Felice) Ecclesiam Romanam
scissam vniisse eumque factum pastorem Vnum Ouilis vnius. Baronius Anno 357.
number. 61.
It is evident (says your Cardinal) that Felix being dead, Liberius united
the Church, of Rome, which was then rent and divided into a Schism, and became
one Sheapheard of one sheepefold. So they. Where it will be as evident, that
(during the time of Felix) Athanasius, if he would have sought Union with the
Church of Rome, could not know where to find it, because the Catholic Church
being but One Body, One Spouse, One Sheepfold, how could now the Roman Church
be called the Catholic, which was (as is confessed) rent by a Schism from it
self?

But why stand we wrestling with you for that, which of your own accord you
are ready to grant willingly unto us? Operae pretiu^ est res gestas Liberij
ostendere, quae post Felicis obitum sunt subsequutae. Baron. Anno 357. number. 70.
Post Arimineuse Concilium, quod fuit. anno 357. Nu. 72. Ipsa quae ad Athanasium
scripta est Epistola, ita se habet; Est igitur haec nostra confessio
(optatissime Athanasi) -- cui, si mecum fentis, coram Iudice Deo and Christo,
quaeso, subscribas; vt ego securior efficiar, tuaque mandata inhaesitanter
obeam, etc. Hactenus Liberij professio sequestris, vt apparet, ad disruptam,
quae inte^ eos iniercedebat* commuuionem Catholicam conciliandam. Ibidem uum.
73. And Binius Tom. 1. page 467. cites the same as the undoubted Epistle of
Liberius, because first he takes no exceptions against it, as he does against
diverse others falsely entitled the Epistles of Liberius, and secondly he urges
it as a special ground to prove, as he says; Manifest Liberium ipsum post
obitum Foelicis Sedi Apostolicae restitutum fuisse, and fidei Orthodoxae
Vexillum, Arianorum ictibus labefactatum, integerrime vicissim erexisse.
It is a matter worthy consideration, (says your Cardinal, and so indeed it
is) to know what Liberius did after the death of Felix, about the time of the
Council of Arimine, which happened to be some two years after the departure
of Felix. And what this is he will have us understand from the Epistle of
Liberius unto Athanasius; principally thus: This is our Confession (most wished
Athanasius) wherein if you consent with me, I pray you even before our Judge
God and Christ to subscribe thereunto, that I may be made the more secure
thereby, and readily perform your Command. So the Pope to Athanasius. Which
Profession of Liberius (says your Cardinal) was a solliciter for the
repayring of the rent of that Communion, which had been formerly between them.
So he.

CHALLENGE.
IF therefore you will not regard our Inferences, yet Liberius his own
Epistle, and your Cardinal his Comment must give light to any that shall not
wilfully stupifie and blindfold himself, namely to discern; That there was a
breach of Communion between Pope Liberius and Athanasius; That this continued
two years (for so long it was between the death of Felix and that Council of
Arimine) whilst that Liberius was, throughout the Church of Rome, universally
acknowledged the Ligitimate Pope; That the Seeker for this Communion was not
Athanasius, who had been Excommunicate, but Liberius, who was the
Excommunicator, even now being the true Pope; That the tenor of the same
Epistle is written in all submission, both of his understanding to the judgment
of Athanasius, (if he should happily consent,) and also in the same behalf to
his will, whatsoever he should Command. If the like Epistle had been written by
Athanasius to Liberius, we know how diligently, and exactly, and with what
boldness you would have pressed every syllable thereof: scarce could you
examine any one word, which should not have seemed to weigh the weight of a
Pope.

We conclude; Athanasius being divided from the Communion of the Pope so long
time, and not seeking to be reconciled before he was sought unto by the Pope
himself, does evidently show that he believed not at all your Article of Union
with the Pope of Rome, as with the Head of the Catholic Church, upon Necessity
of Salvation. Must we therefore judge Athanasius therein damned? nay rather
damned be this your Article, as Imposterous, Scandalous, Schismatic, and
Heretical, whereby such a Saint should be damned, who (as your Author
confesses) was so excellent an Organ of Truth, that Lippelous de Vitis
Sanctorum. Tom. 2. Maij 2. Si omnes praestantissimi huius Praesulis lauds quis
simul in vnum congereret: cum nihilo minus impar sit omnis lingua ad recensenda
omnia eius certamina pro fide suscepta; vt nullus alius (fide^ter dicam) possit
inueniri post Apostolos in Ecclesia Dei, qui acerbiora diuturnioraque subiret
praelia pro ea tuenda: quem Gregorius Nazianzenus oculum orbis, Sacerdotum
Antitistitem, ducem, magistru^, fidei columen appellat.
If all the commendations of ancient Fathers should be gathered together, yet
were they not sufficient to set forth the conflicts which this one has had for
defense of the Faith, because no one, (I speak confidently, says your
Lippelous) has after the Apostles undergone more continual and grievous
conflicts for the patronage of Truth, than he, whom Gregory Nazianzene
therefore calls the Eye of the world, the chief Captain and Master of
Priests, and the stay and pillar of Faith. So he. So admirable was his Faith
and Constancy, in impugning their Objections, and enduring their infinite
Calumniations and persecutions.

IV. Saint Basil Bishop of Caesarea believed not the Article of necessary
Subjection to Rome. SECT. 4.
Look again into your Roman Calendar, and you shall read thus: Calend. ante
Missal. Roman. Mensis Iunij die 14. Basilius Episcopus and Confessor.
Saint Basil, Bishop and Confessor. A Saint then he was, without exception, in
whom you will seem to have some Interest, as though he would bear witness to
the Antiquity of your Article of Universal Romish Jurisdiction over all other
Churches of Christ.

Your Objection.
SAint Basil Basilius Epist. 52. ad Athanasium [visum est (inquit) consentaneum
scribere ad Epis. copu^ Romanum, vt videat res nostras, and iudicij Decretum
suum interponat: vt quia difficile est aliquos inde de Concilij sententia
mitti, ipse authoritatem tribuat delectis viris, -- qui prudenti oratione eos
qui a recta ratione deflexerunt moneant, quique acta Ariminensis Concilij secum
serant, ad rescindenda quae illic violenter acta sunt.] Hic Basilius tribuit
Romano Pontifici authoritatem visitandi Ecclesias Orientis, and ex authoritate
Decreta faciendi, and rescindendi Concilia generalia, quale erat Ariminense.
Bellar. lib. 2. de Pont. Romans cap. 15.
writ an Epistle to Saint Athanasius: whence (if we believe your Cardinal) you
may conclude, that Saint Basil attributed unto the Bishop of Rome authority of
visiting the Churches in the East, by whom he pleased, and of making Decrees by
his Authority, and disanulling General Councels, such as was the Council of
Arimine. So he. And why must not this be true, if you will allow your Cardinal
Bellarmine to make this Greek Father to speak what Papal Roman Language he
shall impose, by his Sophistical translation? But your Cardinal Baronius (one
otherwise as partial as any Writer ever was, and catching at every shadow of
proof, for the advancement of Papal Monarchy) has made another
interpretation of the words of Saint Basil, which may be a just confutation of
your other Cardinal, from point to point. For Bellarmine talks of the Popes
Seeing the Eastern Bishops by a Visitation of Jurisdiction; But Baronius
allows no more than a Seeing by Baronius Anno 371. number. 10. [(...),] [Vt quae
hic geruntur co^sideret.]
Consideration of their estate: but every Care and Consideration of other men's
estate does not infer a Jurisdiction over them. Secondly, Bellarmine will
needs have Saint Basil to desire the Popes Decree; another tenure of Papal
Authority: Baronius reads the word Detque Consilium, etc. [(...)] Ibidem.
Council or Advise, which may agree with a Co-equall. Thirdly, Bellarmine
interprets Basil, as though he yielded to the Pope a peremptory power of
Cutting off and disanulling the Acts of General Councels, such as was that of
Arimine; Baronius says that the motion of Basil was, they should Quae Arimini
ad necessariam rerum gestarum solutionem facta sunt. Jbidem.
Bring with them such things as had been done (namely by some Orthodox at
Arimine) which might make for the necessary solution of that Council; which
all Catholics have judged Heretical: But this argues not an Authoritatiue
power, proper to the Pope, of dissoluing of Decrees of any General Council
(which, for the space of six hundred years, he never had) but an Arbitrary
Authority granted unto him, by consent of the Eastern Bishops, to exercise his
fatherly and grave judgment, for the better establishing of the East-Churches,
which were now rent into six several Schisms, through the difference of six
diverse Heresies.

Howsoever, what Authority this was, we may best know from Saint Basil
himself, who deploring the State of the East-Churches, now pestered with
diverse pernicious. Heretics, desires help from the Bishops of the West; how?
Epistola 70. (...). Et Epist. 74. (...).
To comfort the afflicted and to set right and restore those that are broken.
Help then of Confortation it was, not of Dominion. Secondly, showing that he
desires no more help from the Western Bishops, than the Bishops of the East
both ought and would requite in the like case, he calls it Epist. 77.
Omisistis (...). Quasi indignos nos iudicaretis (...) -- (...). Et similia.
A mutual help of loving and brotherly Visitation, or Consideration. Thirdly,
his reason, why he is so importunate to have the help of the Western Bishops,
he expresses to be this: Epist. 74. (...) -- (...), etc. Et Epist. 1.
Obsecramus vt manum. Orientalibus Ecclesijs porrigatis, -- ac viros aliquos
mittatis, qui illas de praemijs admoneant, quae patientiae, ac passionibus pro
Christo toleratis reseruantur. Haud enim tantum habet efficaciae sermo
consuetus, quantu^ vox peregrina, ad consolandum deiectos valet: praesertum si
illa afferantur a viris qui cum primis gratia Dei instructi esse cognoscuntur,
quales vos cunctis mortalibus praedicamini, quod in fide illibate permaneatis,
etc. Apud Baronium Anno 373 nu. 33.
Because that private grudges among the Bishops of the East hindered the fruit
of their doctrine; and therefore the Western Bishops, the farther distant they
were, so much the more Authority would they have with the people: and he
adds, that Accustomed speech is not so preualent, as that which proceeds
from Strangers, chiefly if they were such as were more specially endued with
Gods grace, as you are every where known to be (says Saint Basil, speaking of
the Western Bishops) because you have preserved the Faith in all sincerity
among you.

So Saint Basil, who would never have used so often, so great, and sometimes
indeed so cross and thwarting reasons, to move the Western Bishops to
compassionate their case, and helping them for composing of such and so
pernicious distractions, by reasons taken only from Brotherly love, Mutual
duty, and Facility of effectuating that great good, because of the Remoteness
of their dwelling; and therefore to be esteemed persons more indifferent,
because of their Constancy in preservation of sincere Faith, and consequently
beetter witnesses for the ancient Truth; without any mention at all of the
Prerogative of the Bishop of Rome as their Pope, or of their Church of Rome, as
their Mother and Mistress (as you have pretended) if he had any belief of
this Article. Because this one reason, taken from the Papal and Roman
Jurisdiction and dominion, if it had been a matter of Faith, had been more
perswasiue, and would have been more preualent than whatsoever has hitherto
been mentioned by S. Basil. Besides (which will be worthy your remarking) after
four several Legations and Messages from the Greek Church delivered unto the
Bishops of the Latin Church for their help, the Greeks (as Baronius quo supra.
Baronius is persuaded) never received any Answer.

Now therefore consult with your best judgments, whether the Church of Rome and
her Chief Bishop (whom Saint Basil more than once condemns of See after at s
and t.
Pride; which Pride was also condemned by a Councellin See above, cap. 9.. 3.
Afric under Saint Cyprian, and See above, cap. 9.. 8.
another, wherein Saint Augustine was present, for intruding craftily and
iniustly upon the Jurisdiction of other Churches) would in humility refuse the
offer of Subjection of the whole Greek Church: or he not have exercised his
Visitation over them, if any such authority had been intended by Saint Basil.
For so should Rome have been marked with a greater note of infamy, than was
her Pride, even her deserting of the flock of Christ committed unto her, and
in a manner betraying the Cause of Catholics unto their many and most
mischievous Adversaries, the Sects of Heretics. But we shall show that Saint
Basil was of a flat contrary Faith.

Our Opposition; showing that Saint Basil did not believe your Article of
Necessity of Subjection to the Roman Pope, or Church.
Baronius would you should know that Saint Basil having written diverse letters
and sent many Messages unto Pope Damasus, and to other Western Bishops, yet
receiving no Answer from them, in so vexatious and perilous times, when the
Greek Church seemed as a ship almost split asunder, by the continual billows
of most pestilent Heresies; Sane quidem nonnihil diffidentiae, ne dicam
simultatis and odij -- inter Basilium and Occidentales intercessisse cert^ est.
Baronius, Anno 372. number. 24.
He thereupon fell into distrust, and (if he might so say) hatred with the
Church of Rome. So he. We had rather you should hear Saint Basil expressing
his own Cordolium, and hearts-griefe: Quale nobis auxilium ab Occidentalium
[(...)] supercilio and fastu aderit, qui veritate^ neque norunt, neque [(...),]
( Baronius, Dicere) discere sustinent? -- Ego quidem volebam, ad eor^ [(...)]
Antesignanum scribere, vt litetis significarem (...). Basil Epist. 10. Baronius
Anno 372. number. 25.
What help can we expect (says he) from the supercilious Pride and
haughtiness of the Western Bishops, who neither know the truth themselves,
nor yet will (Baronius negligently rendereth it, Tell) learn it? Again, I
meant to write unto the Chief of them (meanig Pope Damasus) to signify by
letters, that Pride ought not to be accounted a Dignity. And again, the same
holy Father Saint Basil, speaking of the Church of Rome, (as you Et alibi de
romana Ecclesia, Odi fastum illius Ecclesiae. Apud Baroniu^ lb. number. 32.
know) said, I hate the Pride and arrogancy of that Church. Yea, but we hear
him call the Bishop of Rome, CHIEF: True; but with this limitation, their
Chief: And yet if it had been Chief of all others: could this infer a
Popedom and Dominion above others? Then must you confess that Athanasius was
more Pope than Damasus; For Basil, that calls Damasus (...), calls
Athanasius Epist. 52. ad Athanasium. Ad te, (...).
(...), (signifying, The Crown of the Head) The chief of all: We are (says
he) to fly unto thy integrity, as to the [(...)] the Top or Crown of All
others.

CHALLENGE.
SAint Basil Bishop of Caesarea, speaking of the Bishops of the West, says
distinctly, I meant to write unto Their Chief; meaning the Pope of Rome: and
adds, saying, I hate the Pride of That Church, meaning the Church of Rome.
Mark, we pray you, Their Chief, and That Church; are these notes of his
Subjection to the Pope or Church of Rome? Nay are they not direct
demonstrations of his no- Subjection or Subordination to either of both? can
you conceive any to be a true and loyal Subject, who writing to others,
concerning his own King and Sovereign, and his Sovereignty, should say, I
writ to their King, and I hate the pride of that Kingdom? Yet you hear what
Saint Basil writ, concerning the Pope and his Church, and notwithstanding was
he ^hen a real Member of the Catholic Church.

Nor is this all, but he has furthermore imputed (besides the vice of Pride)
Ignorance unto them. Notwithstanding all which, Saint Basil was even then a
Saint Militant, and has been ever since held in God's Church a Saint
Triumphant; who for his excellent learning, judgment, piety, and industry, in
protecting and propagating the Catholic Truth, obtained in the Church of
Christ the attribute of THE GREAT; and in the Elegy of Ephrem, to be called
Ephraem. de Basilio, O felix Basili! Tu vt Aaron summus Sacerdos Domini fuisti.
Lippelous Lib. de vitis Sanctorum.
Chief Priest of the Lord. Which may serve as an instrument, to lance the
Papal Impostume of your Roman Pope, who never hears of any such Adiunct
ascribed unto himself, but he presently swells with Pride, and takes it as
Appropriate to his person, as he is Successor to Saint Peter. Although
therefore we deny not but that, notwithstanding this Opposition made by Saint
Basil against the Roman Church, he held Communion with the Church of Rome,
both in Faith and Charity; because at that time Rome was in her integrity: Yet
that Necessity of Subjection, and the Belief thereof, which your Article
requires of All that shall be saved, is a doctrine (as you see) abandoned by
Saint Basil. We therefore choose rather to abhor your new Article, as
Imposterous and Impious, than to suffer that blessed Father to be razed out of
the number of Saints.

V. Saint Hilary of Poictou did not believe the Roman Article, of Necessity of
Union with the Pope of Rome. SECT. 5.
WHat and how great a Saint this Hilary Bishop of Poictou was, your Roman
Church does show in her Missal. Romanum Men's. Janarij die 14. Sanctus Hilarious
Pictauiensis Episcopus, and Confessor.
Calendar, as it were, in her Church-Booke, wherein is Registered his name as a
Prime Saint; and that worthily. For, as your Lippelous truly says, he for his
learning and Sanctity was Vita Sancti Hilarij Pictauorum Episcopi, qui claruit
maxim a partu virgineo, 356. Temporibus Constantij Imperatoris, and Liberij
Romani po^tificis, -- non Latinis solum, sed and Graecis vir Sanctus extitit
admirandus, Lippelous in vita Hilarij.
Admirable both in the Greek and Latin Churches, living in the year 356, in
the days of the Emperor Constantius, and of Pope Liberius. So he. Well then,
we are to enquire what was his judgment concerning this Pope Liberius, and
the necessity of Communion with him; This being a part of that your Article,
concerning The Catholic Roman Church, to believe that De infallibili iudicio
Summi Pontificis. Bellar. lib. 4. de Romans Pot. Cap. 3.
In matters of Faith the judgment of the Pope is infallible. Saint Hilary no
sooner understood that Pope Liberius (as your Cardinal has confessed) had
subscribed to have communion with the Arian Heretics, but he made bold to
Excommunicate the Pope out of his Communion and fellowship, saying, Hilarij
Fragmenta lib. 4. ^. 47. Anathema tibi a me dictum, and socijs.
I Anathematize thee, Liberius, and thy fellows. This you will think was too
liberally spoken, and will judge it rather not spoken at all. But why? (I pray
you) was it not always lawful for any Catholic Bishop to Excommunicate any
Heretical Bishop; that is, abandon his fellowship and Communion? or had not
Hilarious just cause so to use Liberius at this time? This is that Liberius who
two years after Banishment for his Catholic Faith, became an Heretic Bellar.
See above. 3.
Interpretatiue, says your Cardinal, that is, in the understanding of men,
judging of him by his outward Act of Subscribing to the Condemnation of Saint
Athanasius, and communicating with known Heretics; nor so only, but even
expressly an Heretic: If to be Sensit Liberius cum Arianis. Platina in vita
Liberij: and Alphonsus de Castro lib. 1. Cap. 5.
of opinion with Heretics; If to be Factus Haereticus. Turrecremata lib. 2.
de Ecclesia, Cap. 103.
made an Heretic; If to be Redijt de exilio victus, and consenfit errori, vt
scribit Hieronymus in Chronicis. Card. Cusanus Conc. lib. 2. Cap. 5.
overcome, and to consent unto Arian Heresy, may be Testimonies of an express
Heretic, as your own Platina, Alphonsus de Castro, Cardinal Turrecremata,
and (out of the words of Saint Hierome) Cardinal Cusanus have confessed. Which
was the very cause that moved Saint Hilary also to bid the same Pope Auant!
else could he not have complained of the Heretical Emperor Constantius, for
releasing of the same Liberius out of Banishment, (namely upon such conditions
as that Emperor enjoined the said Pope) saying, Nescio maiore ne impietate
remiseris, quam relegaueris. Hilarious ad Constantium. p. 201.
I know not (O Emperor) whether thou have showed more impiety in Banishing of
Liberius, or in releasing him from his Banishment. What other sense could this
have, than that Liberius was now as full an Heretic in his Releasement, as he
had been before a Catholic in his Banishment.

CHALLENGE.
SCanne you this matter a right, and then you must confess that the Faith of
Saint Hilary was to believe, that a Pope might become an Heretic in his
Public person, as (for example) Pope Liberius did, by his public Subscribing
unto Heresy; and that therefore no Christian is bound to have further Union of
Faith with any Pope, than a Pope does stand in the Union of the true and
Catholic Faith. Which being the belief of all Protestants, and the Cause of
dis- Union from the Pope of Rome at this day, is therefore censured by you, as
a note of Heresy in it self, and (as you think) a sufficient cause of
Separation from all hope of Salvation. As though Saint Hilary, a Father of the
same profession, were no more to be esteemed a Saint. But a Saint you
acknowledge him to be: know then, that he who abandoned the Popes Union, would
never have submitted to his Dominion.

VI. Saint Hierome believed not the now Roman Article, concerning the
Necessity of Subjection to the Roman Church, and Bishop thereof. SECT. 6.
SAint Hierom, whom the Church of Rome has dignified and honored with the
place of a Saint in her Calendar, under the Title of Sancti Hieronymi
Presbyteri, Confesso^is and Doctoris Ecclesiae. Missal. Roman. Call. Men's.
Septe^bris die 30.
Confessor and Doctor of the Church, lived about the year of our Lord, 390,
and was above all the Fathers that we can name of those times the most devout
child of the Church of Rome. Nevertheless dare we, in the examination of this
Fundamental Article of the same, or rather the foundation it self, refer
our selves unto the judgment of this Saint. And we proceed, in this
disquisition according to our former Method of your Objections, and our Answer,
and Reply from the same Father.

Your Objection.
SAint Hierom writing unto the Pope Epist. ad Damasum de nomine Hypostasis. A
pastore praesidiu^ Ouis peto -- Cum successore piscatoris loquor. --
Beatitudini tuae, i.e. Cathedrae Petri Communione consocior, -- super illam
Petram aedificata^ Ecclesiam scio. Quicunque extra hanc domum agnum comederit,
profanus est. Si quis in Arca Noe non fuerit, peribit regnante diluuio. Non
noui Paulinum, etc. Tom. 2. Epist. Quoniam, etc.
Damasus, acknowledges himself his Sheep, although he was under the
Patriarch of Antioch; names the same Pope Successor of Peter; professes
himself to have Communion with the Chair of Peter; mentions, as a reason,
the Rock whereupon the Church of Christ is built, the House, without which
none may eat the Lamb, (that is, Offer Sacrifice) and the Arc of Noah,
without which whosoever is must needs perish. So Saint Hierom. Upon this
Foundation some of your Obserua, Hieronymus qui Presbyter Antioocherius, etc.
Bellar. lib. 2. de Romans Pont. Cap 16. Et Hardingus Contra Iewellum.
Master Builders would erect an Infallibility of the Popes Judgment, an
Universality of his Jurisdiction, and a Necessity of Subordination to his Sea;
as whereunto All other Churches are subject: But all this by a mere fallacy,
in taking the words of Saint Hierom simply and absolutely, which he meant in a
respective and restrained sense, whether you consider Damasus Bishop of Rome,
or the Church of Rome it self.

For first You Object, concerning Pope Damasus, that Saint Hierom calls
himself his Sheep, being notwithstanding under the Jurisdiction of Paulinus
Patriarch of Antioch: As though that he might not be held a Sheep of the
Bishop of Rome, in respect of his Baptism, the sign and, as it were,
eare-marke of Christianity, being (as Adulta aetate Romae Baptizatus est.
Baron. Anno 372. number. 40,
you know) Baptized at Rome in his full age: Or as though, when the Faith of
Paulinus his Bishop was questionable, it were not lawful to submit to the
judgment of another Bishop, of known constancy in the Truth.

Secondly, That Hierom calls Damasus The Successor of Peter. As though every
Successor in Peter's Seat had an hereditary Right to be Successor in Peter's
Faith; which contradicts the judgment of Saint Hierom, who condemned Pope
Liberius (who was as lawful a Successor in the Seat of Peter, as was Damasus)
Fortunatianus Episcopus Liberium Romanae Vrbis Episcopum ad subscriptione^
Haereseos compulit. Hieron. Catolog. Script. Eccles. page 297.
for Consenting unto Heresy.

Thirdly, That Saint Hierom addresseth himself to Pope Damasus alone. As
though Damasus were the only man to resolve him in all the Mysteries of Faith;
whereas in other Doctrines Saint Hierom ingenuously confesses, that he
traveled to remote Countries, as Greece, to Gregory Nazianzene, whom he
calls his Master, Hieron de Script. Eccles. in Greg. Nazian. Gregorius
Nazianzenus, a quo Scripturas explicare didici. p. 301.
Of whom (says he) I learned to interpret the Scriptures. After that he
iourneyed to Alexandria in Egypt, Hieronym. In Alexandriam perrexi, vt viderem
Didymum, vt ab eo, in Scripturis omnibus quae haberem dubia s^scitarer. Tom. 2
Epist. ad Pammach.
To see Didymus, that I might (says he) consult with him, touching the doubts
that I had in all Scriptures. This needed not Saint Hierom to have done, if the
Oracle of all Truth had resided at Rome, and had been personated in Damasus
the Bishop of that See.

Fourthly, Yet that Saint Hierom, in this question concerning the use of the
word [ Hypostasis] sought satisfaction only from Pope Damasus, and relied
only upon his judgment, for the sense of the word. As though Saint Hierom did
not, for his Resolution, join unto Damasus Bishop of Rome, Hieron. Tom. 2.
Epist. 36. Me, cum Damaso and cum Petro ( Alexandrino) co^demne^t.
Peter the Bishop of Alexandria, as depending upon Both, and professing either
to be absolved or else condemned with both. Or as though Pope Damasus, in
points of Divinity, had not more need to be instructed by Hierom, than this
Saint by Pope Damasus. This were to give Pope Damasus himself the lie, who
desired to have conference with Saint Hierom, that so Neque vllam puto
digniorem disputationis nostrae confabulationem fore, quam si de Scripturis
sermocinaremur inter nos. i.e. vt ego interrogem, Tu respondeas. Damasus Epist.
2. Tom. 3.
I may ask questions (says Damasus) and Thou may answer, that is, (as Vt
before disceret. Baronius Anno 378. number. 63.
Baronius confesses) that Hierom might teach, and the Pope learn; yea, and as
though (if you require the sense of this word, Hypostasis) Saint Hierom did not
teach Damasus; yes, he did: So does your Espensaeus confess; Espensaeus in
fine Comment. in 2. ad Tim. Tract. de Vocibus non scriptis. p. 254.
Hieronymus consuluit Damasum? imo consuluit Damaso. That is, He rather
instructed Pope Damasus, than was instructed by him. For he told Damasus that
the word [ Hypostasis] might have a double sense; the one was Catholic, to
signify Persons, the other Heretical, to signify Essential nature. The not
understanding of which word Hypostasis, was the reason that Basil imputed
Ignorance to the Church of Rome, as has been said. You will ask, what then
was the Resolution which Saint Hierom sought from Pope Damasus, concerning the
use of that word, seeing that S. Hierom could not be ignorant of the true
sense? This you may know by the Answer of Pope Damasus, which was (as your
Baronius collecteth) to let Hierom understand that -- Respondisse, vt cum
Paulino co^municaret. Baronius Anno 372. number. 50.
He might lawfully communicate with Paulinus the Bishop of Antioch. So that
your last error is, as though you would conclude that he that could determine
what person was most like to use the word [ Hypostasis] in the Catholic sense,
must therefore be accounted the only Competent Judge of the Catholic sense.

Concerning the Second Subject in this Objection, which is the Church of Rome,
we complain of your Authors for the like Sophistry. For you object, for the
Prerogative of your Church, First these words of S. Hierom; I am united to the
Beatitude, that is, to the Chair of Peter: As though by [ Chaire] he meant the Sea and Bishopric of Rome, and not the true doctrine of Faith then preached
in Rome; even as Christ spoke of the Matthew. 23.
Chair of Moses; that is (says Saint Per Cathedra^ Mosis, doctrinam legis
intelligit. Hieron in eum locum.
Hierom) the Law of Moses.

Secondly, But Hierom says of this Chair, that Christ has built his Church
upon this Rock. As though by [ Rocke] is not meant the same doctrine of Faith,
which was confessed by Saint Peter (as See above Cap. 4,. 3.4, etc.
has been proved) and which was at that time truly and faithfully professed
by Damasus, and the whole Church of Rome: or as though, because that Rome was
then faithful, she therefore had a privilege never to turn Apostate; which
is a pernicious Paradoxe, void of all ground of Faith (as See above Cap. 2.. 9.
has been also largely declared) and which can have no support by this
sentence of Hierom, where by [ Rocke] he means not Rome (says Supra illam
Petram. Non supra Romam, vt arbitor, nam fieri potest vt Roma quoque degeneret,
sed supra eam fidem, quam Petrus professus est. Erasmus.
Erasmus) because Rome may degenerate, but he understands the Faith which
Peter professed. Bring us now this Faith of Saint Peter, and then challenge our
Faith to believe you. This is the Rock upon which Christ (says Hierom) built
his Church. He says not, Built the Church of Rome, but the whole Universal
Church. This we confess, with Saint Hierom, to be The House of God, without
which whosoever eats the Paschall Lamb is profane. This is the Arc of Noah,
within which whosoever is not perishes, as well Roman, as Grecian, as well
Bishop of Rome, as Bishop of Thessaly.

Thus many ways have you depraved the Orthodoxe meaning of Saint Hierome, by
expounding that, which was spoken particularly of Damasus, and of the Church of
Rome, then sound in the Faith, and applying it unto Rome, and all the Bishops
of Rome, from time to time; as though Jsa. 1.21.
Virgin Jerusalem might not at length become an Whore. Secondly, by perverting
his speech, concerning the Rock, and Building, that is, Faith and Church
generally taken; and appropriating it unto the Faith and Church of Rome at all
times, and in all Causes. Which in the next place we are to show to be
diametrally opposite to the judgment of Saint Hierom.

Saint Hierom his Opposition to the pretended Sovereignty and Infallibility of
the Church and Pope of Rome.
What Saint Hierom has taught us to conceive of the Pope, Clergy, and Church
of Rome, we shall show from S. Hierom himself, not sophistically, but plainly
and truly. For when we ask you of what stature every Pope ought to be, for
his dignity and Authority? You answer that he can be no less than a Monarch
and sole Head of the Catholic Church. But Saint Hierom in the same Epistle
that was objected, speaking to Pope Damasus, says, A Pastore praesidium ouis
flagito: facessat inuidia Romani culminis, recedat ambitio. Hieron. Epist. 57.
I desire of you, my Pastor, that you would preserve your sheep: and adds
immediately, as follows; Put away envy, and let the ambition of the Roman
height depart from you. Your Cardinal, who urged the former words, leapt over
these, it may be, because they were not so much for his purpose, as they are
for ours; to prove, that if Saint Hierome had believed the pretended Monarchy
of Popedom in your after Popes, he would not thus have twitted and taunted
Damasus (otherwise an excellent godly Pope) not so much for his own pride, as
for the pride of the Roman Top, or height; namely, the ambition of his Seat.
In which reprehension of Papal pride, the Council of Carthage under Cyprian,
the Council of Afric in the time of Saint Augustine, Saint Basil, yea and
other holy Fathers have See above. 4.
bin most frequent, when as yet the Top thereof was not so high, as has bin
the after-ambition of Popedom, by the one half.

We in the next place desire to know what you believe, concerning the
judgment of the Pope of Rome, in matter of Faith, and we have heard you call
it Infallible: yet did Saint Hierome note Liberius, once Pope of Rome, that See
above, at a.
He was persuaded to subscribe unto Haeresie. Your Cardinal answers that
Liberius indeed consented unto Haeresie, but Respondeo Liberium non express
sed Interpretatiue consensit ad subscriptionem Haereseos. Bellarm. lib. 4. de
Pont. Romans cap. 9.. Respondeo.
He consented thereunto (says he) not Expressly, but Interpretatiuely, because
in Fact he subscribed to the condemnation of Athanasius, whom he knew to be
persecuted for his Catholic Faith. As though this poor ragge were sufficient
to cover that nakedness. No, for you look still upon the Pope, as upon the
Visible Head of the Visible Church. If therefore he Visibly communicated with
Haeretikes (as has been confessed) and so Visibly subscribed unto Haeresie,
Interpretatiuely, that is, so that none could Interpret his Fact otherwise,
than as to think it a plain approbation of Haeresie; then we are persuaded
that that holy Father, who was so zealous of Gods truth, as not to endure an
ambiguous word, which might any way relish of Haeresie, and condemned that Pope
Liberius of an Interpretatiue Haeresie, would not (if he were alive at this
day) suffer such a Deluge of Innouations by your 20. new Articles of the Roman
Faith, never so much as fancied of in his days.

In the next place the same Father expresses his dislike of the Clergy of
Rome, crying out upon them in the words following: Hieron: ad Paulinum in lib.
Didymi de Spir. Sancto Praefat To. 9. ad finem. Cum in Babylone versarer, and
purpuratae Meritricis essem colonus, volui aliquid garr^re de Spiritu Sancto,
and coeptum opusculum eiusdem vrbis Pontificidedicare. Et Ecce Pharisaeorum
conclamauit senatus, and nullus scriba vel doctus, sed omnis quasi sibi indicto
praelio Doctrinarum, aduersus me imperitiae factio coniurauit -- Damasus, qui
me ad hoc opus prius impulerat, iam dormit cum Christo -- Cauticum quod cantare
non potui terra aliena, hic a vobis prouocarus in Iudaea immurmuro.
When I was in Babylon, and lived an inhabitant of that purple Whore, something
I desired to chirpe, concerning the holy Ghost, and to dedicate the Work unto
the Bishop of the same City: And behold, the assembly of Pharisees exclaimed
upon me, among whom there was not any learned Scribe, but the whole faction of
ignorance conspired against me, as if I had proclaimed some Doctrinall war
and strife against them. Damasus, who first moved me to this work, is asleep
in the Lord; so that the song that I could not sing in a strange Country, I
now must murmr, and noise among you here in Iudaea. So S. Hierome. What one
of you is there (if not acquainted with the Books of Saint Hierome) who will
not judge these words to have been the Exclamation and Inuectiue of some
Protestant (in your opinion) Schismatic, and a professed Adversary to the
Church of Rome? to call Rome in indignation and despite Babylon, and Land of
Captivity; to term it a Purple whore, and strange land, wherein it was not
lawful To sing the Lords Song concerning the Holy Ghost: yea to bespot the
whole Clergy of that City with the note of Ignorance: and at last (after the
death of Damasus) to quit ROME, as a Land of Bondage, that he might enjoy his
liberty in Iudaea, among the Christian Jews? Could this be said of a City
privileged with a perpetual Residence of the Holy Ghost, and deserving the
Title of Motherhood over the whole Catholic Church; of the City of the Popes
Holiness, and of the Oracle of Truth?

Pass we from the Clergy of that City, and come we to the Roman Church it
self: there we find a Custom of preferring Deacons, before Priests. Which
Saint Hierome condemns, and aduanceth the dignity of a Presbyter: upon which
occasion he falls into a Comparison of the Church of Rome with the whole
CATHOLIC CHVRCH, and with other Parts thereof: And comparing it with the whole
Church, he says, Hieronym. Epi. ad Euagrium. Si quaeritur authoritas, Orbis
Mayor est quam vrbis. Tom. 2.
The Authority of the whole world is greater than of one City: Meaning that
the Authority of the Church Catholic is more than the Authority of the
Church of ROME. Which (as has bin proved from the judgment of the Fathers in
the Council of Basil) is a perfect demonstration that the Church of ROME
cannot be called The Catholic Church. And least any, by that Example and
Custom of the Church of ROME, should prescribe unto other Churches, as though
(ROME being, as you call her, the Mistress of all others) All others should
subscribe to her, Saint Hierome immediately adds; Quid mihi profers vnius
vrbis consuetudinem? quid paucitatem, de qua ortum est supercilium, in leges
Ecclesiae vendicas? In eadem Epistola de quae vide supra.
Why do you object unto me (says he) the Custom of one City, and
challenge that for a Law, which is done of so few (in respect) whence
haughtiness has sprung? A plain proof, that your now Doctrine of making one
Particular Church to be in Jurisdiction Universal, is an Argument of a
Sacrilegious Pride, and no sound Article of Faith.

The next Comparison is between the Church of Rome, and other particular
Churches, in respect of the Jurisdictions of Bishops in their several
diocesses, according to Divine Law: Vbicunque fuerit Episcopus, sieve Romae,
sieve Eugubij, sieve Constantiopoli, sieve Rhegij, sieve Alexandriae, sieve Tanais,
eiusdem meriti est, and eiusdem Sacerdotij. Hieronym. in eadem Epistola, de qua
supra.
Wheresoever there shall be a Bishop (says he) whether it be at Rome, or at
Eugubium, whether at Constantinople, or at Rhegium, whether at Alexandria, or
at Tanais, he is of the same worthiness and Priesthood. What may be
collected from hence, you may know from him, who, being most conversant in the
writings of Saint Hierome, is best able to diue into his meaning, namely, that
Erasmus Schol. in hanc Epist. Docet Episcopi dignitatem non aestimari
magnitudine ditionis, sed merito, vitae officio -- and aequare videtur omnes
Episcopos inter se, perinde ac si omnes ex aequo Apostolis successerunt.
Saint Hierome hereby seems to equal all Bishops among themselves, as being
equally the Successors of the Apostles, who are therefore not to be measured
by the amplitude of their Diocese, but by the worthiness of their deseruings.
In which comparison Saint Hierome has used singular art, to express his
meaning more Emphatically. For whereas there are Three most famous
Patriarchships, viz. Rome, Constantinople, and Alexandria, he parallelleth the
little Bishoprics, under the same Patriarchships, with the Patriarchall Seats,
as Eugubium in Italy with Rome; Rhegium in Brutia with Constantinople in
Thrace; and Tanais in Egypt, with Alexandria in the same Province. So that
whatsoever Jurisdiction any Metropolitan, Primate, or Patriarch has over
other Bishops, it is from Humane Constitution, and not from Divine Law. So
far then was Saint Hierome, from making Rome the Catholic Bishopric, that
he accounted it as distinct from Eugubium, as is Constantinople from Rhegium,
and Alexandria from Tanais.

After our Comparison of the Church of Rome with others, in the Question of
Jurisdiction, we proceed, with Saint Hierome, to compare her in matter of
Necessary and Catholic Doctrine. But tell you us First, what is that
Prerogative, which is included in your Article of The Catholic Roman Church,
as properly belonging to the Church of Rome, as it is termed Catholic? Your
answer is, that Causae, quae iure Canonico and Diuino sunt Romano Pontifici
reseruatae, -- vt quae spectant ad Articulos fidei intelligendos, and libros
Canonicos discernendos. Azorius Ies. Moral. li. 4. Tom. 2. cap. 35.
Among the Causes, which by Divine Law are referred unto the Pope, one is, to
decree what Scriptures are Canonical. Well then, let this be our First
Question, whether the Church of Rome, in the days of Saint Hierome, decreed
the Epistle of Saint Paul to the Hebrews, to be Canonical? And Saint Hierome
says, that Sic Paulus Apostolus ad Hebraeos, quam Latina consuetudo non
suscipit. Hieronym. in Isaiae c. 6. Et rursus Epist. 29. ad Euagrium. Epistolam
ad Hebraeos non solum in Ecclesiis Orientalibus, sed etiam ab omnibus retro
Ecclesiis, and Graeci sermonis Scriptoribus receptam. Tom. 3.
Although formerly all other Churches in the East did account it Canonical,
yet it was not received as Canonical in the Latin, or Roman Church. In the
Second place it is inquirable, whether upon this difference Saint Hierome will
yield to the judgment of the East and Greek Church, rather than of the West
and Latin Church, in a Cause of so great moment? And Saint Hierome resolves,
saying; Quod filatiua consuetudo non recipit inter Scripturas Canonicas, -- Nos
tamen suscipimus. Hieronym. Jbid.
Although the Latin Church does not admit of this Epistle, as Canonical, we
notwithstanding (says he) do receive it. Say now, was Saint Hierome herein a
Catholic, or not? you must needs grant he was a Catholic, seeing that since
his days your Church Council. Trident. Sess. 4.
has decreed that Epistle to the Hebrews to be held Canonical: whence it
will irresistibly follow, that Saint Hierome, who held herein with the rest of
the Catholic Church, against the Church of Rome, in discerning of a part of
Canonical Scripture, did thereby judge the Church of Rome not to be The
Catholic Church.

We may see the same, concerning the Canon of Scriptures of the Old Testament,
whereof your Church of Rome has decreed in the last Council of Trent, as
follows: Conc. Trid. Sess. ^. Si quis, etc.
If any do not receive as Canonical, the book of Hester, Daniell, Baruch,
Ecclesiasticus, Wisdom, Judith, Tobias, and the Two Books of Maccabees, with
all their parts, as they are in the Vulgar edition, let him be Anathema, and
accursed. But say now, was Saint Hierome of this Faith? did he believe all
those Books, and their parts now mentioned to be Canonical? Nay, did he not
abandon them as Apocrypha, and not properly Divine Scriptures? Yes, says your
Cardinal, Sane Hieronymus in Prologo Galeato omnes istos dicit non esse in
Canone, nec loquitur tantum de Canone Iudaeorum-Admitto Hieronymum in ea
sententia fuisse, excepto libro Judith, quem ille postea recepit. Bellarmin.
lib. 1. de Verbo Dei. cap. 10. Quod Bellarminus excipit librum Judith, errat,
tantum dicit; Nicaena Synodus legitur computasse libru^ Judith in numero
Canonicorum: non quod ita senserit, quia ipse Hieronymus plane reijciebat hunc
librum in Prologo Gal. and ita Hieronymum interpretatur Lyndanus Pa^^pl. lib.
3. ca. 3. A^^sta Ies. lib. 2. de Christo Reuelato, cap. 13. Salmeron Ies. Com.
in Hebr. Disp. 2.
Saint Hierome said of these, that they were not within the Canon of
Scriptures: where he speaks not of the Canon of the Jews only. So he,
meaning that he spoke of the Canon of Christians. If therefore the Church of
Rome at that time were of the opinion of Saint Hierome, then does. That ancient
Church of Rome, in rejecting those Books as Apocrypha, condemn This (now)
Roman Church, which has Canonized them for true Scriptures. And if Saint
Hierome, in judging these Apocrypha Books worthy to be excluded out of the
Canon of Christians, did herein dissent from the Church Rome, in his days,
then did he again believe that the Church of Rome was not The Catholic and
Universal Christian Church.

CHALLENGE.
WHereas your Obiectors have dealt like a sort of Tradesmen, who show not
their wares but in dark lights, whereby their Chapmen are often mistaken in
their Traffic, we contrarily have set before you the best kind of
Illustration, namely the Comparison of things jointly, one with another. As for
Example, 1. Comparing Pope with Pope, as Damasus a true Catholic with Liberius
in appearance an Heretic; We infer Saint Hierome his no-beliefe of Gods
perpetual Assistance, by Divine Direction of the Pope. 2. Comparing Pope with
Bishop, as Damasus with Petrus Bishop of Alexandria in Egypt, upon whom Saint
Hierome jointly relied, in his Opposition against Heretics: We infer that
Saint Hierome believed not a Necessity of a singular Communion with the Pope.
3. Comparing the Pope with Saint Hierome himself, who although he had been a
Scribe to the Pope, and therefore so near to the supposed fountain of
Oracles, yet was glad to take long iournies, and spend much time to Learn the
Interpretation of Scriptures from Gregory of Nazianzum, and Didymus of
Antioch; and not so only, but did also instruct Pope Damasus, in the knowledge
of Scriptures: We infer that Saint Hierome did not believe your now Roman
Principle, which is to refer the last and safest Resolution, for
understanding of the Inter Maiores causas, quae ad sedem Apostolicam
referuntur, vna est ad sensum sacrarum literarum declarandum. Azorius Moral, l.
4. c. 35
Sense of Scriptures, to the judgment of the Pope. 4 Comparing the City of
Rome and his Clergy, with Palestine and hirs, and Hierome not doubting to call
Rome Babylon, purple Whore, strange Land; and her Clergy Factious Ignorants;
and showing his great contentment, which he found elsewhere: We infer that
Rome is not always to contain that School of learning, that Theater of
Sanctity, that Temple of perfect Worship, which you usually boast off. 5
Comparing Bishopric with Bishopric, Saint Hierome equalling the greatest,
as Rome, with the least, as Eugubium, [In honor Sacerdotij] In honor of
Priesthood (And what Saint Hierome means by Sacerdotium, who knows not?)
We infer that Saint Hierome never believed the Prae-potency of the Bishop of
Rome, over other Bishops (which you call Popedom) to be founded upon Divine
Ordinance. 6 Comparing Church with Church, as the Western or Latin Church,
whereof Rome is a chiefest member, with the East or Greek Church, and all
other Churches besides; and Saint Hierome forsaking the Custom and judgment
of the West and Latin Church, and yielding to the East and Greek Churches, in
a Doctrine which is the Foundation of all Fundamental Articles, to wit, the
true Canon of Scriptures, both in the New Testament, and in the Old: We infer
that Saint Hierome did not believe either a Necessity of all Union with the
Roman Church in Doctrine, or yet an absolute Dominion of the Roman Church
above all others. Whatsoever your reply be, you must either expunge your now
Roman Article out of the Canon of Faith, or else raze the name of Saint
Hierome out of your Calendar of Saints.

VII. Saint Ambrose believed not the now Roman Article of Necessity of Union
and Subjection to the Roman Church. SECT. 7.
SAint Ambrose Bishop of Milane is honored by your Memorial of him in your
Roman Sanctus Ambrosius Confessor and Doctor Ecclesiae. Missale Romanum
Decembris die 7.
Calendar, but much more in his own Books, and in the minds of all Orthodox
Christians, in all ages since he lived, for Confessor, and Doctor of the
Church: of whom Saint Augustine could say, Augustine. Contra Iulianum Pelagianum
l. 1. ca. 9. Audi excellentem dei dispensatorem etc. Et mecum non dubitat orbis
praedicare Romanus.
I have had experience of his grave constancy, labors, and perils, for the
Catholic Cause, which the whole Roman world does commend and report as well
as I. This Saint the more excellent he is, the more forcible his Testimony
ought to be, whether it be on your side, or on ours. We are willing first to
understand what you can object.

Your Objection out of Saint Ambrose answered.
Your Cardinal his Argument is this: Cum totus Mundus Dei sit, tamen Dominus
eius Ecclesiae dicitur, cuius hodie Rector est Damasus. Et Orat. in Satyrum.
Percunctatus est Episcopum, si cum Episcopis Catholicis, hoc est cum Romana
Ecclesia consentiret. Haec Ambrosius. Cur quaeso Catholici sunt, nisi quia cum
Romana Ecclesia conueniunt? nisi quia Romana Ecclesia caput est Catholicae
Ecclesiae? Bellarm. l. 2. de Ram. Pont. c. 16.. Tertius.
Ambrose calls Pope Damasus the Rector of the whole Church: and his Brother
Satyrus would not admit of a Bishop, to hear him, before he understood that he
consented with Catholic Bishops: That is (says he) with the Church of Rome.
Ergo, the Church of Rome is the Head of the Church Catholic. Wherein your
Cardinal labors of the same Elench, whiles he mistakes the words
(respectively) spoken to one person Pope Damasus, and circumstantially for one
time; as if they were absolutely so meant for the persons of al Popes, at all
times. Again, if the bare Title of Rector of the Catholic Church, ascribed to
Damasus, must needs argue your Pope to be Head of the Church, then must you
enlarge the Catalogue of your Popes, and inrolle among them as many other.
Bishops as have received Titles equivalent, if not more excellent than that.
For (as you your-selues well know) Canisius Ies. Catech init. in Enco^. Patrum.
Athanasiu Nazianzenus appellat Columen Ecclesiae, and Ecclesiae dei
fundamentum. Basilium Gregorius Nyssenus, Os Ecclesiae.
Athanasius was entitled the Propp, and Foundation of the Church: Saint Basil,
the Mouth of the Church: In vitae Hieronymi Tom. 4. Eusebius Nazianzenum
appellat Columnam auream, and totius Ecclesiae Fundamentum.
Saint Nazianzene, the golden Pillar and Foundation of the whole Church; and
Saint Ambrose himself was commended by the Emperor Theodosius as De Ambrosio
sic Theodosius Ambrosium (...). Senensis Bibliothec. l. 4. Tit. Ambrosius
THE ONLY BISHOP, WHOM HE KNEVV WORTHY THE NAME OF A BISHOP. These few
Parallells may serve to allay your appetite, until we See after, ca. 12.
shall be occasioned to satisfy you in this sort to the full. In which kind
of Ascriptions there is not any acknowledgement of Authority, but a
commendation of their care, and diligence, judgment, and directions in behalf
of the whole Catholic Church.

Concerning the Second, Saint Ambrose adds a reason of his speech (wisely
dissembled by your Cardinal) to wit, The Bishopric of that Bishop was in a
Region divided into diverse Schisms by Heretical Spirits; whereas the Church
of Rome professed constantly the Catholic Faith. No marvel therefore though
Satyrus ask of a Bishop, whose Faith he suspected, whether he believed as
that Church did, whose Faith was known to be truly Catholic. As it sometimes
comes to pass in the Commonwealth, in cases of violent ruptures into many
Factions repugnant each to other, and all to the Loyal and faithful Subjects
of the King; among whom some one City, (as for Example YORK) shall be known
more general than any others to profess loyalty to their Sovereign: if
thereupon an honest man ask of a Soldier, living in one of the factious
Countries, whether he were a true Subject, and consented with the Citizens of
York; would you judge it a Politic Inference to say, that therefore York is
the Head over all other Cities in the Kigdome? And that you may know the due
proportion of this Comparison, remember, we pray you, that even in the same age
of Pope Damasus, and in the time of the same Schisms, many Greek Bishops were
as truly Catholic as was Pope Damasus, and yet were not subject unto his
Jurisdiction, as has been manifestly proved out of Saint Basil, and is
hereafter to be more copiously; yea and Confessedly declared.

Our Opposition, from the Example of Saint Ambrose his Opposing against the
Church of Rome.
Six hundred and seventy years, after the death of Saint Ambrose, his Church
of Milan was visited by Petrus Damianus Legate unto Pope Leo the ninth, assuming
Jurisdiction over them; when the Clergy of Milan withstood the Legate,
alleging that Post diem alter^, factione Clerieorum, repent in popul^ murmur
exoritur, non debere Ambrosianam Ecclesiam Romany legibus subiacere, nullamque
iudicandi vel disponendi Vim Romano Pontifici in illa sede competere. Nimis
indignum, inquiunt, vt quae progenitoribus nostris semper extitit libera, ad
nostrae confusionis opprobriu nunc alteri, quod absit, Ecclesiae sit subiecta.
Apud Baronium, Anno 1059. number. 46.
The Church of Ambrose had been always free in it self, and never was subject
to the laws of the Pope of Rome. The veins of those Clergymen must have
been void of all tincture of blood, in making a most shameless Answer, if that
it had been a known Catholic Article then, that all Churches Christian are
necessarily Subordinate unto the Authority of the Papal and Roman
Jurisdiction. And why did they, in challenging their liberty, call their
Bishopric of Milan Ambrose his Church? but only that they knew that Saint
Ambrose did preserve the liberty thereof, never acknowledging Subjection unto
the Bishop of Rome. Whereof we have more than a presumption in the writings of
Ambrose himself, in the Question touching Washing of the feet of Infants
baptized; which the Church of Rome judged to be superfluous, but contrariwise
Ambrose and the Church of Milan held to be necessary. The same Father, lest the
Authority of that Church might prejudice their custom, pre-occupateth in this
manner; Ambros. lib. 3. de Sacr. Cap. 1. In omnibus cupio sequi Romanam
Ecclesiam, sed tamen and nos homines sensum habemus, id quod alibi rec^ius
seruatur no^ custodimus. Bellar. de Romans Pont. l. 2. c. 16.. Ibid.
I wish in all things (says Ambrose) to follow the Church of Rome, but yet be
it known, that we being Men have sense also, in continuing this Custom, which
is likewise more rightly observed elsewhere.

CHALLENGE.
THis one short sentence is as a Canon full charged, to batter down your great
Bulwark, that we may to call your Article of Papal Monarchy. For first,
Ambrose speaking of his own Church of Milan, in opposition unto the Church of
Rome, and saying, Sed tamen and Nos, etc. BUT YET WE, etc. Ergo, he held not
his Church of Milan to be a member subordinate to the Roman Church, as to the
Head thereof. But wherein is he opposite? Tamen nos homines sensum habemus; But
we men have sense: As if he had said; We in Milan hold this Ceremony necessary,
They of Rome judge it superfluous and ridiculous, as though we were Asses, or
Blocks; but neither so, for we are men; nor so, for we have sense, and hold
that which is more rightly observed. Ergo, Ambrose held no Necessity of
inthralling his judgment to the Pope of Rome; which is a part of your Article
of Faith. And in that he says [ Cupio] I wish to follow the Church of Rome in
all things, yet this [TAMEN,] or Non obstante, does again confirm both our
former Collections; because, by calling it The Church of Rome, he makes it no
Universal Church in essence; and in refusing to follow it, where he thinks
he has just cause so to do, proves that he believed not her judgment to be
Universally and Necessarily Catholic, nor her power and Jurisdiction absolute.

The Proverb is, A Lion is known by his claw. As well may we discern Saint
Ambrose his Faith, by this Clause; who in this one Resolution teaches all
Christian Churches to follow the Church of Rome in nothing, wherein they are
persuaded (as Saint Ambrose was in this Case) that the Church of Rome has
denied to follow the Church of Christ. Now for you to answer, that his meaning
was, Illud [in omnibus ^upio sequi] intelligit de necessarij^. Bellar. lib. 2.
Romans Pont. ^^.16.. Idem.
To follow the Church of Rome in all things necessary, though not in a Rite;
This Answer, as it is false (for Saint Ambrose held this Rite Necessary) so it
is also frivolous: because if it be just to withstand the Church of Rome in a
Rite and Ceremony (as it were, in a Mite) then how much more may it be lawful
not to follow or believe her, in her many new Articles of Faith, whereof among
other this is a Principal, to wit; The Catholic Roman Church, without
Subjection whereunto there is no Salvation? which can never be credible, as
long as Saint Ambrose is believed to have been a Saint.

VIII. Saint Augustine believed not the now Roman Article of Necessary
Subjection to the Church of Rome, and Pope thereof. SECT. 8.
SAint Augustine (as All will confess) deserved to have his memory Registered
not only (as it is in your Augustinus Episcopus and Confessor. Call. Miss. Romans
August. 28.
Roman Calendar) in paper monuments, but in the minds and hearts of all
Christians; so excellent a Saint was He. It is not long since one of your John
Breerly.
Priests published a book, entitled Saint Augustines Religion; wherein he
will needs be thought to have himself collected all the materials of that his
Treatise, out of the writings of Saint Augustine: whereas (poor man!) he owes
his whole work unto your Jesuit Hieronymus Torrensis, who many years since
set out a large volume divided into four Books, containing all the
particulars, which Master Breerly has diuulged, in his own name; without so
much as giving notice of any such Author. But they differ in their Titles;
Hieronymus Torrensis styleth his book Confessio Augustinana, in libros quatuor
distributa, per Hieronymum Torrensem Societatis Jesus Theologum, and Academiae
Dilinganae Professorem. Dilinguae Anno 1567.
Augustines Confessions; Master Breerly his, Augustines Religion: Verifying
herein that saying of Tully, concerning such kind of Plagiaries, that as
Thieves change the notes and marks of stolen stuff, so They, that father
other men's works upon themselves, use to change the names and Titles, as it
were the marks and property thereof. Is it not sufficient that you have dealt
thus with Protestant Authors, but that you must play such parts among your
selves? But I shall have more occasion to put Master Breerly in mind of
himself elsewhere: For at this present we have but one Article of Saint
Augustine in hand, touching the Necessity of Union and Subjection to the Church
of Rome, as The Catholic Church; and are to attend whether either He, or your
Jesuit, or Cardinal can euince so Imposterous a Doctrine out of the Volumes
of Saint Augustine.

Your Objections out of Saint Augustine.
Saint Augustine one-where attributes to the Church of Rome In Romana Ecclesia
semper Apostolicae Cathedrae viguit principatus. August. Epist. 162. Quia se
dominus in sede Apostolica collocauit, talemque nostris temporibus praestitit,
etc. magnis periculis infirmorum membro^um Christi Pastoralem diligentiam
quaesumus adhibere digneris. August. Epist. ad Innocent. 92. Hic non peteret,
vt Innocentius Pastoralem curam adhiberet Ecclesiae, coercendo Pelagianos qui
Palaestinam and Africaminsiciebant, nisi Innocentium Palaestinae and Africae
Pastorem esse crederet. Deinde cur non Hierosolymitano Patriarchae, and alijs
potius scribi^? Et Epist. 157. Iniunxit Zozymu^ Papa, vt Episcopi Africae apud
Caesaream Concilium celebrarent, and Augustinus Zozimo necessario parendu^ esse
existimaui^. Et lib. 1. ad Bonifac. cap. 1. Co^munis, inquit, est omnibus
nobis, qui fungimur Episcopatus officio, quamuis ipse in eo praeemineas
celsiore fastigio specula Pastoralis. Sic Augustinus. Vide ab Augustino omnes
Episcopos subijci celsiori fastigio Romani Pontificis Hactenus Bellarm. lib. 2.
de Romans Pont. Nec dissentit Torrensis quo supra. lib. 1. cap. 9.
A Principality of the Apostolical Sea: Elsewhere he desires of the Pope of
Rome his Pastoral diligence, for the repressing of the Heresy of the
Pelagians in Palaestine and Afric: In the third place he acknowledges A
necessary obedience to the Popes Jurisdictions; and lastly he confesses that
The Pope of Rome is set in a more high Pastoral watchtower, than others. Now
what of all these? Ergo (say you) the Church of Rome is the chief of all
Churches, and the Pope thereof has Jurisdiction over all other Churches, all
other Bishops being subject unto him, upon pain of Damnation. But if these
words, Principality, or Highest Pastoral watchtower, or Charge, or
Apostolical Church, or Power to repress Heretics, or an acknowledgment of
Necessary Obedience must enforce a Jurisdiction of Popedom over all others,
then ought we to admit of many Popedomes. For every Patriarch has a
Principality, and height of a Pastoral watchtower, by reason of the
greatness and dignity of his Patriarchship, above all Metropolitans, and
Bishops whatsoever: and yet have they not over all Bishops power of
Jurisdiction, but only Principality of Order. And look into the Epistle of
John the first, Bishop of Rome, written to an Archbishop, and you shall find
him grant that that Archbishop had as well Johannes 1. ad Zachariam
Archiepiscopum. Vsque ad mortem certa pro veritate: -- huius ^ei gratia vobis
and nobis commissa est Ecclesia, vt cunctis opem far non negligamus. Itaque
tanta vrgente necessitate, summopere vestra Apostolicaque Authoritate, and
reliquos Episcopos oportet reprimere infestos etc, Apud Binium. Tom. 2. page
378.
The charge of the Church committed unto him, for the help of all, in
repressing of Heresies, as to himself. And that also therein there is a
Necessity Rationis, of Cause, and Reason, to perform such Admonitions, namely
as a Patient obeys the Physician, for the preventing of imminent danger; and
not a Necessity Imperij, of Compulsion, by right of Authority; as a soldier
obeys his Captain. And if that the Title of Apostolical Church, could carry
a Monarchical Chiefedome, then was Saint Augustine far wrong, when in the
same Epistle, where he called the Church of Rome The Apostolical Seat, he
called other Churches and Seats also Collegae Apostolicarum Ecclesiarum.
August. Epist. 162. See further of this hereafter.
Apostolical. Lastly, remember but what See above,. 4.
has been proved out of Saint Basil, and you shall not need to question why
the help of the Pope of Rome was sometime desired in some Provinces, rather
than other; showing that the Popes exercising of his Office, in such Cases,
proceeded not from his Coactiue Authority, but from the Arbitrary consent of
other Bishops. In a word, we have received from you, out of Saint Augustine,
nothing but specious colors of words, which we shall recompense with his Acts
and Deeds.

Our Opposition of S. Augustine his no- Subjection, either in Discipline, or in
Doctrine, to the Church of Rome.
Nothing can better illuminate our understandings in this case, than the light
of Comparison. You therefore, whose Article of Faith is to believe, that
although the Church of Rome be a Particular Church, and so a distinct member
from the other Churches Militant; yet in respect of the Universal government,
which it has throughout the Christian world, it is The Catholic and
Universal Church, as is the Head over all other parts of man's body; hearken
to Saint Augustine, comparing the Church of Rome with another Particular
Church. Duo sunt eminentissimarum Ecclesiarum, Romae scilicet and
Carthaginensis Episcopi, diuersa de Baptismo sentientes, Stephanus and
Cyprianus. August, de Vnico Baptismo, contra Petilian. cap. 14.
There are two Bishops (says he) of two most eminent Churches, Stephen of
Rome, and Cyprian of Carthage, being of diverse opinions in the point of
Baptism. Therefore did not Saint Augustine hold the Church of Rome to be the
Catholic Head; for there cannot be properly Two Most Eminents of the Catholic
Church, whereof you say there is but One Head. One may say, that there are Two
Bishops of Two most Eminent Bishoprics in England, George of Canterbury, and
Tobias of York, because these are so distant, that one is not Subordinate or
subject to the other: But to say, there are two Bishops of two most Eminent
Bishoprics, George of Canterbury, and Lancelot of Winchester, were absurd;
because, making the Bishopric of Winchester to be one of the Two most
Eminents, it does abate and pull down the true Eminency of Canterbury, which
is an Arch-Bishopricke, and Metropolitan Seat, and has Jurisdiction over the
other. But Saint Augustine (you know) was judicious, and would not reason
absurdly. Now you, whose Faith requires Union and Subjection unto the Sea of
Rome in all Causes, as well Rituall, as Criminal, or Doctrinall, lend your
attention unto Saint Augustine, in his Comparisons, concerning each one.

In the point of Rites and Ceremonies, the question was whether the Church
should weekly observe a Saturday-fast, or no: The one side which is brought
in, as for the Affirmative part, alleging that Saint James at Jerusalem, Saint
John at Ephesus, and others taught the same, which Saint Peter did at Rome,
viz. that The Saturday-fast is to be kept, but other Countries forsook this
Tradition. The parties for the Negative are supposed to answer, saying, Yea
rather some parts of the West Church, wherein Rome is seated, have not observed
the Tradition of the Apostles, Saint Peter and others, who taught that a Fast
ought not to be kept upon that day. Here you have the East and West-Churches
compared together, and the credit of them both balanced. If we should now ask
you whether Church, East or West, deserves more credit in this Case, you would
abhor the question, as men bound by Oath to believe rather the Western
Church of Rome, than all other Churches in the world, in point of Tradition.
But Saint Augustine, what? Augustine. Epist. 86. Si respondetur, etc. coeteras
terras ab hac doctrina deuiasse: Occidentis potius aliqua loca, in quibus Roma
est, etc. Indeterminabilis est ista quaestio.
This contention (says he) is endless and indeterminable. And Saint
Augustines words [ Aliqua loca, in quibus Roma est] that is, Some places, among
which Rome is, have a sting, which wounds the Papacy. For can the Imperial
Lady of all Churches be thus slightly brought in among the Many? Surely if
S. Augustine had made her the pattern of all other Christian Churches, his
style should have arrayed her otherwise, than by inuoluing her among Loca
Occidentis.

Secondly, in Criminal Causes, you believe that the Supreme Right of Appeal
to the Sea of Rome is a Jurisdiction whereinto the Bishop of Rome is invested,
by virtue of his Succession from Saint Peter; so that all other Churches
Christian ought to acknowledge this Right of Appeal upon all just occasions;
and the Cause being there determined, all parties are utterly precluded, having
no power to Appeal from it, to any Superior Judicature. This is your pretended
Prerogative of the Church of Rome, consisting of two Terms, Appealing to Rome,
and not Appealing from Rome. Will you admit of Saint Augustines determination
in both these? Saint Augustine (as Cap. 9.. 8. etc.
has been confessed) was one of that Council of Afric, which abandoned the
Claim of Right of Appeals from all Churches to Rome, which was then
challenged by three Popes successively, to wit, Zozimus, Boniface, and
Celestine; and yet concluded against them, that it should not be lawful for
any, within the Churches of Afric, to make their Appeal to Rome.

Accordingly, you that would think it an intolerable and sacrilegious
derogation from the Papal Jurisdiction, if in a Criminal Cause, after the
Pope with his whole Consistory of Cardinals had given judgment, any Bishop
within the Roman Jurisdiction should be so audacious, as to Appeal from that
Sentence to an higher Judicature, where you that are my Judges shall be judged,
whether you have given right judgment, or not; remember that Saint Augustine,
concerning the Case of the Bishop Caecilian, which was referred to the
Arbitrament of Pope Julius and others, doubted not to give such a Resolution:
August. Epist. 162. De Collegis i. e. Episcopis agebatur, qui possent aliorum
Collegarum, praesertim Apostolicoru^ iudicio causam suam reseruare. -- Et ecce,
put^mus illos Episcopos, qui Romae iudicarunt, non bonos iudices fuisse,
restabat adhuc plenarium Concilium, vbi etiam cum ipsis Iudicibus causa possit
agitari; vt si male iudicasse conuicti essent, eorum sententiae soluerentur.
I suppose (says he) the Bishops that were at Rome were not good Judges, there
then remained a General Council, where the Cause may be discussed; so that if
it shall appear that those Judges judged wrongfully, their sentence may be
reuersed, and disanulled.

Thirdly, from Criminal we proceed to a Doctrinall point. You that have told
us that it is a peculiar Prerogative belonging to the Church of Rome, as she is
The Catholic Church, to direct all other Churches, which is the true Canon of
Divine Scriptures; and that she by her Concilium Trident. Sess. 4.
Council may pronounce every one Anathema and Accursed, that shall not give
belief to his Decree, touching the right Canon of Scriptures: observe, that
Saint Augustine, perceiving how the Latin or Roman Church did not in those
days constantly hold the Epistle of Saint Paul to the Hebrews to be
Canonical, and of Divine Authority, resolves thus; Augustine. de Peccat.
merit. and Remiss. lib. 1. c. 27. Ad Hebraeos quoque Epistola, quanquam
nonnullis incerta sit, tamen me magis mouet Authoritas Ecclesiarum Orientalium,
quae hanc e^iam intet Canonicas habent. Sic Augustinus. Ego praeoccupo: nec est
quod quis obganniat, Augustinum veteris Testamenti Canonem eundem amplexum, qui
a Conc. Tridentino praescribitur, quia Caietanus iampridem ex Patribus docuit
distinguendum esse inter Canonem morum, and Canonem fidei.
Notwithstanding I (says he) am rather moved by the Authority of the East
Churches. So Saint Augustine: which is so much, that a conscionable man, we
think, should need no more. For now we are in a Doctrinall point, even what,
and which is the Scripture and written Word of God; the Principle and Doctrine
of all other Principles and Doctrines. Whereof when we enquire, we are directed
by Saint Augustine to consult with the Primitive Churches, as well East, as
West, and wherein these do differ in their Customs, therein to yield rather to
the judgment of the Greek and Eastern Churches, (according as Saint See
above, Chap. 12.. 6.
Hierom also determined) than to the Roman in the West. And lest this Decision
of Saint Augustine might seem to proceed from some voluntary inclination to
the Greek Church, rather than to the Latin, he adds that he is so moved by
the Authority of the Eastern Churches. Now how all these particulars will
agree with your Article, viz. The Catholic Roman Church, Mistress of all other
Churches, without full Union and Subjection whereunto there is no Salvation, do
you your-selues deliberate. Sure we are that this Resolution of Saint Augustine
will easily interpret the meaning of his other sentence, so often objected by
you, to wit; I should not have believed the Gospel, except the Authority of
the Church had moved me; that by [ Church] he meant not the (then) present
Church of Rome, as you pretend; which is (as you see) another vanity.

After this discussion of the Doctrinall Cause, we add a Consideration of the
Schismatic state of that Church, according as our judicious Casaubon.
Exercit. aduersus Baronium. 16.. 135. Meminit tot locis Augustinus, in septem
libris de Vno Baptismo and alijs contra Donatistas, eius controuersiae, quae
fuit inter Stephanum Papam and Cyprianum, quo Authore Donatistae errorem suu^
tuebantur, quaero igitur cum nihil sit praetermissum ab Augustino, quod ad rem
faceret, vt Donatistas ad sanam mentem reuocaret, cur nunquam in tot libris de
Monarchia Papae vllum verbum facit? cur tacetur Papae Infallibilitas, quae
hodie very and falsi norma proditur? Cur Vicariatus -- iura silentur? etc.
Casaubon has observed. You, who account it the only note of Schism, to be
divided from the Roman Church, and the Pope thereof, as the only Head of all
Churches; Answer us, Why Saint Augustine who in seven Books, besides many
other places, confuted the Schismatic Donatists, yet never spoke word of the
Monarchy of the Pope, or of the Infallibility of his judgment, whereby to
reduce them to the Unity of the Church and Truth?

Lastly, as for the Title of The Catholic Church, you that appropriate it in
your Article to the Church of Rome, advise again with Saint Augustine, who as
he See above Cap. 1.
has already defined that Catholic is [(...), The whole,] as a Comprehension
of all Parts; and therefore that no Part can be called The Whole: so does he
further illustrate the same, in his Expositions upon those words of the
Psalmist, The Kings daughters were among thine honorable women, upon thy right
hand did stand the Queen in a Vesture of gold of Ophir: Sumus Christiani, non
Petriani, per illum nati, non illi nati. Ecce. Roma, ecce Carthago, ecce aliae
and aliae civitates filiae Regum: ex omnibus fit vna quaedam Regina. August. in
Psalm. 44. Loquitur de Catholica Ecclesia, quam vocat Sponsam. Et paulo post;
Alloquitur Propheta Reginam istam, -- and ad illud corpus pertineamus unity
fide ac spe, etc.
Behold Rome, (says he) behold Carthage, behold other Cities, as Kings
daughters, of all which is made one certain Queen (speaking of the Catholic
Church) whereunto every one ought to be united in Faith and Hope. So he. You
see that in Saint Augustines time, when Rome was indeed Rome, and truly
glorious for Faith and Holiness, yet Behold Rome, what? The Queen, which is
the Catholic Church it self? No, but Behold Rome, a daughter of the King. And
again, Behold Carthage, and other Cities, How? Namely so, and no otherwise
than Rome, and others, all daughters of the King, that is, Particular Churches
professing Christ. But the Catholic Church as Queen, what must she be? any
one of these, be it the Church of Milan, Carthage, or Rome? No, but One
Universal Church consisting of these, and All others.

CHALLENGE.
SEe you now with what obliquity of judgment your Authors have objected these
colorable sayings of Saint Augustine out of his Epistles unto Pope Zozimus,
and Pope Boniface and others? Whereas, when we come to his deeds, he does
freely demonstrate his Faith contrary to your sense: when, Comparing Particular
Bishopric with Bishopric, as Rome with Carthage, he makes them and their
Bishops, both Most Eminent; Comparing Churches with Churches, as Rome with the
Churches of Afric, he defends (even against the forenamed Popes Zozimus and
Boniface) both that it is not lawful for Remote Churches to Appeal to Rome,
and that it is also lawful for Churches, that are subordinate to the Roman
Jurisdiction to Appeal from Rome. By which the very pinnacle of the pretended
Authority of the Roman Jurisdiction is quite overthrown and cast to the
ground.

Again, Saint Augustine comparing the Two Moities of the whole Catholic
Church, commonly divided into the East, otherwise called the Greek Church, and
the West or Latin, wherein the Church of Rome has the greatest preeminence,
He, in the Case of Apostolical Tradition, concerning Rites and Ceremonies,
has made their credit equal; but in the Doctrinall, as namely a Tradition
Apostolical, concerning the true and Canonical Scriptures, he prefers the
Authority of the Greek and East-Churches, and confesses that it shouldereth
out (in this maine Case) the Authority of the Roman.

Lastly, comparing any One part with All Churches, as by name Rome with
Carthage and All others, he proves that Rome can be no more The Universal,
or Catholic Church, than Carthage, No, nor both together: but that the
Catholic Church, as the Queen, is the Whole Church of Christ, by an
Aggregation and Comprehension of All together in One. So direct and absolute a
Doctor was Saint Augustine of the no-Necessity of universal Union or
Subjection unto the same Church, in points of Controversy, whether Rituall, or
Doctrinall; and consequently of the no-Necessity of Belief of either of both,
all which your Article does require and exact: and yet we (notwithstanding your
damning Article) must still believe that Saint Augustine is a blessed Saint.

IX. Saint Hilary Bishop of Arles in France believed not your Article of
Necessary Subjection to the Pope and Church of Rome. SECT. 9.
THis Saint, albeit he have no place in the Roman Calendar of your Mass, will
notwithstanding challenge a place among our honorable Witnesses, because he is
reckoned in your Martyrolog. Roman. Maij. 5.
Martyrologe of Saints. He, in the year 445, seemed to usurp upon the
Jurisdiction of the Province of Vienna, notwithstanding the Inhibition of Pope
Leo, who takes it very haynously that Hilary herein Hilarious Ecclesiarum
statum, and concordiam sacerdotum nouis praesumptionibus turbaturus ex cessit,
ita suae vos cupiens subdere potestati, vt se Beato Apostolo Petro non patiatur
esse subiectum. Leo Papa Epist. 89 ad Episcop. Viennens. Prouinciae, Apud
Binium.
refused to be subject unto him. This Hilarious (as you without any proof would
make us believe) yielded at length unto the Pope, making no further Apology
for the defense of his Cause. Which were it so, it mattereth not: for that will
suffice for his Apology, which is confessed by your Baronius, namely that
Laudatus hic propter vitae sanctitatem a Gennadio and Prospero. -- Satis ad
coronam Hilarij, quod licet pro tuendis (vt sibi videbatur) just iuribus
Ecclesiae Arelatensis, offensam meruit tanti Pontificis, tame^ quod sanctitate
non vulgari claruerit, in publicis etiam Romanae Ecclesiae monumentis titulo
meruit Sa^ctitatis ascribi, anniuersariaque memoria eiusdem vbique locorum dies
natalis coli. Baronius Anno 1445. number 17.18.19. Addit eum tandem conqu^euisse,
nec contrarijs editis Apologijs suam causam defendisse.
Although Hilarious did incur the displeasure of Pope Leo, in the defense (as
he was persuaded) of the Right of his Episcopal Sea, Yet notwithstanding was
he worthy, (says the Cardinal) for his singular sanctity to be registered in
the Roman Martyrologe of Saints.

CHALLENGE.
LEo the then Pope complains against this Saint, for refusing to be Subject
to his judicial determination, the which this Saint did (says your Cardinal)
in presumption, that his cause was just. Yet Gennadius, Prosper, and others
that set down his life, do not note in him any iniquity in this Case. What
need many words? He that in a Question of Ecclesiastical Rites, could not but
doubt of the uniuersall authority of the Pope, could not be of the (now)
Roman Faith. Therefore this Saint Hilary was confidently persuaded that in
some case, it was lawful to deny Subjection to the Pope. Wherefore it will
belong to you, either to renounce this sacrilegious Article, or to vn-hallow,
and vn-saint this holy man.

The General CHALLENGE, concerning the forenamed Saints.
ALl this while that we have labored to confute your former Roman Article,
from the judgments of ancient Fathers and holy Saints, we have insisted only
in them, whose names are celebrated in your Roman Church and recorded in the
public Calendar thereof, or in your Martyrologe of Saints, to wit, Saint
Polycarpus, Saint Cyprian, Saint Athanasius, Saint Basil, Saint Hilary of
Poictou, Saint Hierom, Saint Ambrose, Saint Augustine, and Saint Hilary of
Arles, all of them (in the opinion of all Christians) deserving of the Church
of Christ the most Honorable Title of SAINTS; besides the other Attributes,
which for further Amplification of their worthiness are ascribed unto them, as
adorning Saint Polycarp with the Title of the Doctor of Asia; Cyprian, the most
famous Doctor; Saint Hilary of Arles with the Title of Sanctity. And as for the
rest, you shall need no more than that which your Cardinal Baronius
testifies, in his Dedicatory Epistle unto Pope Clement the Eight: Afferens
Orie^tales Ecclesiae vertices sanctissimos Episcopos -- Magnum Athanasium,
Basilium itidem magnum, -- cumque ijs adducens quatuor Occidentalis Ecclesiae
culmina, fidei columnas, luminaria magna, Orbis Miracula, Hilarium (
Pictauensem sc.) Hieronymum, Ambrosium, and Augustinu^: tantorum patrum corona
cingens thronum tuum. Baronius Epist. ad Clementem Octauum ante Tom. 4. Annal.
I present before you (says he) Athanasius the Great, and Basil the Great, two
Chiefes, or eminent Topps of the East-Church; and Hilary, Hierom, Ambrose, and
Augustine the Four Principalls of the Western Church, Pillars of the Faith,
and Miracles of the World; with this company of so excellent Fathers your
throne is crowned. So he.

What larger Assumption could your Cardinal have made, in Ostentation of the
Papal Monarchy, from the Authority of these Fathers, then to boast unto the
Pope of the establishing of his Throne, by the Testimonies of the same Saints?
Wherefore, seeing we likewise do jointly Appeal unto these holy Fathers, as
unto most impartial witnesses of Truth, you are by your amplifications of
their Learning, Wisdom, Constancy in the Faith, and Sanctity, as by so many
Obligations, bound to stand to their judgments; by which the sinews of your
Roman Article are broken asunder: First, of Necessity of Union with; Secondly,
of Subjection unto the Church and Bishop of Rome, as The Catholic Church and
Bishop; Thirdly, the Belief of the Necessity of both these; And each of those
Three upon loss of Salvation to All them that are not of this Belief.

Recall to mind the former Passages, concerning the behavior of these Saints,
in whom you have seen professed Opposition, in matter of Doctrine, against the
Pope and Church of Rome, by setting Council against Council; by taxing the
Roman Church of Pride and Ignorance; by contempt of the Popes Excommunication;
by condemning his Condemnation; by Anathematizing his person; by preferring the
judgment of the East-Church before hers, in the great Question of the Canon of
Scriptures, as well of the Old, as of the New Testament. Can you desire a more
clear Demonstration of a Belief of no- Necessity of Union with the Pope or
Sea of Rome, than this is?

But because you hold it not sufficient to Salvation, that a man profess Union
in Faith with the Church of Rome, except also he acknowledge an absolute
Subjection in Discipline unto her Jurisdiction: it may not be held superfluous
to repeat unto you the lively Characters of their no- Subjection, by denying
of Conformity with Rome, in so little as in a Rite, whether of a Fast, or of
Washing of Feet; by inhibiting foraine Provinces to Appeal To Rome; and
permitting of Appeals sometimes From Rome to a Council; by equalling other
Bishops with the Bishop of Rome; and making Rome so A Church, that it cannot be
The Catholic Church any more than Carthage, or any other Particular Church is;
and by maintaining of Jurisdiction against the Bishop of Rome.

Lastly, for as much as neither Union in Faith with the Church of Rome, nor
Subjection in Discipline unto her does (by your Roman Article) satisfy,
except a Christian have also belief of the Necessity of both the former, in
every one that shall seek to be saved, ponder with your selves whether these
Fathers, if they were (as both you, and we proclaim them) Saints, could
believe in their hearts and minds that Necessity either of Union with, or
Subjection unto that Church, which they gaine-sayd and renounced in their
writings and deeds. But you will say, Is it possible that the Church of Rome
should honor, for Saints, those who upon due examination are Adversaries to
this her supreme Hierarchy? Yes, why not, as well as it was possible (you
know) for the Sects among the Jews to murder the Prophets, and yet after
their death to build them goodly Sepulchers and Monuments, as Christ says. But
you will pardon us, if we, imabracing their more renowned Monuments, which are
their Writings, profess to imitate them in their doctrine, the chiefest honor
belonging to these Saints, by whom we are taught to condemn your (now) Roman
Article, viz. The Catholic Roman Church, and belief of Necessity of Union
and Subiestion thereunto, without which (say you) there is no Salvation, as
both Imposterous and Impious, because derogating from the judgments of so
admirably holy Saints. If we were to speak of other Saints, not specified in
the Roman Martyrologe, or Catalogue of Saints, we might be infinite: but we
are contented with these, adding in their due places Those who are proved to
have been Excommunicated by the Popes, and notwithstanding acknowledged holy
Bishops after their death; as namely Theophilus Patriarch of Alexandria,
Atticus Patriarch of Constantinople, Cyril, and Acatius Patriarchs of
Alexandria, Of all these Pariarchs, See after. 7.
all little regarding the Popes Excommunication; together with Ignatius, See
after Cap. 14.. 7.
Ignatius Patriarch of Constantinople.

CHAP. XIII. Our Eight and last Argument, to confute this Roman Article of
believing The Cathol^ke Roman Church, and Bishop thereof, etc. is, by
discovering the Falsehood, Vanity, and Nullity of your Defense, in your
Objections from Antiquity.
NOt, but that we willingly confess that your Doctors and defenders of this
Article are, and have been great Scholars, Professors of all Arts, diligent
in the study of Divine knowledge, and conversant in the Volumes of Ancient
Fathers. Notwithstanding have you not heard of a Creature that was Genesis 3. ^.
the wisest of all Beasts; but (alas) wily withal, even to the circumuenting
of all Mankind? Do you not read of a Luke 16.8.
Wise Steward, but yet unjust? And is it not written that there are some Jbidem.
More wise, (but respectively) in their generation, who nevertheless are
Children of darkness? The Authors of the most absurd Paradoxes ought to have
been men of singular wit, were it he that defended that the Snow is black.
But whether your Doctors have any affinity with these, we shall in the end
permit to your judgments. Sure we are, that when Truth shall be manifest,
true Wisdom shall be justified of her children.

Your first kind of Objections, which are taken from Titles attributed to the
Pope, or to his Sea, by Councels: and the falsehood and vanity of the
Consequence thereof discovered by Parallels. SECT. 1.
LAy you down first your General Conclusion what you mean to prove: Romanum
Pontificem succedere Petro in Monarchia Ecclesiastica probatur, etc. Bellar.
lib 2. de Romans Pont. Cap. 12. Hic primatus probatur ex Concilijs. Jdem Cap. 13.
Tum pergit.
That (say you) the Pope of Rome does succeed Saint Peter in the Monarchy (or
Supreme Dominion) of the Church. Now then, seeing you know the mark, look
that you keep true aim, still directing all your Premises to this Conclusion.
One General Council says (say you) that Concilium Nicaenum in initio ante
Canonem 6. (Deest in vulgatis, quod alij repetunt in Graecis) Ecclesia Romana
semper habuit primatum: Vnde Ch^lced. Concilium, Act. 16. Primatum antiquae
Romae reseruari, etc.
The Church of Rome has always had the Primacy: Another, that Concilium 2.
quod est Constantinop. Theod lib. 5. Hist. Cap. 9. Dicit Se co^uenisse ex
mandato literaru^ Damasi Pontificis. -- Et Ecclesiam Romana^ caput esse, se
autem membra. See also after at Lit. (z.) and (h).
They met by the commandment of the Pope of Rome, and that the Church of Rome
is the Head, and they the members: A third, that Conciliu^ Ephesinum dicit se
deponere Nestorium ex ma^dato literarum Coelestini, -- nec iudicare ausum esse,
sed Coelestini iudicio reseruasse. Euagrius l. 1 c. 4.
They deposed a Bishop by the command of the Pope: A fourth calls the Pope
Concilium Chalcedon. vocat Leonem Vniuersalis Ecclesiae Pontificem, -- cui
Vinea domini commissa est custodia.
The Universal Bishop of the Church, to whom is committed the Vineyard of the
Lord: A fifth professes to Synodus quinta Constantinop. sub Menna: sedem
Apostolicam sequimur and obedimus, condemnatos ab ipsa condemnamus.
Obey the Bishop of Rome: A sixth, yields Septima Synodus Nicaena 2. Act. 2.
Petri seeds -- primatum obtinet, -- omniumque Ecclesiarum Dei caput existit.
Haec omnia citantur a Bellarmino quo supra.
Primacy to the Roman Church, and calls it the Head of all other Churches.
So you. Your Enthymeme from hence is this; These Titles have been given by
Counsels unto the Pope and Sea of Rome. Ergo the Pope and Church of Rome have
Monarchical power, that is, sole Dominion over all Others. Your Antecedents
are to be denied, as we shall find just occasion thereunto: but your
Consequences and Arguments we do absolutely renounce, and that most truly and
nec^ssarily, as will be evident from point to point; and that by Parallelling
and comparing other Churches and Bishops, adorned with the equivalent Terms
and Titles, whereby you seem to erect your Papal Monarchy.

Did then the Council mention that they received Mandates from the Popes
(which is indeed an egregious Vid. lit. (t) We have proved this false, by your
te^rming the word [(...)] Yesterdaies letters, into Mandates by letters. See
above cap. 8.. 3. And in the other testimony at the letter (v) the Greek is
[(...)] a legibus Ecclesiasticis: and They add that they were moved by the
Epistles of Calestine, which were not Mandat^ry, but Hortatory.
Falsehood) or did one in the Council say that they did Obey the Apostolic
Sea of Rome? And did not also Pope Liberius (as Liberius in Epistola ad
Athanasium. Vt tua mandata inhaesitanter obeam, etc. Apud Baronium, Anno 357.
number 73.
you know) writing to Bishop Athanasius, say I desire to hear from you, that I
may speedily execute your Mandates and Commands? Ought you not therefore to
have distinguished of terms of Courtesy, familiar in the Latin speech? as
Cicero teaches, in his familiar Epistle to his Brother Quintus, I (says M. T.
Cicero ad Quimum fratrem. Tua mandata persequar diligenter.
he) shall diligently perform your Mandates. Is there any phrase more
frequent in our English Complement, than to show our respects to our friends by
calling our yielding to their good and wholesome admonitions, directions, and
aduises our Obeying; and their requests unto us their Commands? Will you needs
draw an Argum^nt of your Popes Monarchy, out of a bare phrase of courtesy,
ordinarily used among Equals? and not thus only, but (in the rigid and exact
sense thereof) contrary to the discretion of one of the best Popes? For whereas
the Bishop of Alexandria, writing to Pope Gregory, did signify that he had
received his Commands, Verbum Iussionis cupio ab auditu meo remoueri: ego non
iussi. Grego. 1. li. 7. Indict. 1. Epist. 30. ad Eulogium Alexandrin.
I command? (says Gregory) I commanded not: Let not me hear of the word
Command, as proceeding from me. The same Pope acknowledged his Subjection and
Obedience to the Emperor Mauritius; and your Cardinal answers, Quod attinet
ad obedientiam and subiectionem -- ex humilitate -- Neque id abhorret a communi
vsu loquendi, vt obedire nos dicamus, quum facimus quod alter cupit. Bellarmin.
lib. 2. de Romans P^nt. cap. 28.
These (says he) were words of humility, according to the common tenor of
speech, wherein we use to say, we obey, when we perform another man's desire.
So he. Where we are compelled to challenge the conscience of your Cardinal,
who hearing of Obedience to the Pope, extends it to the highest note of
Monarchy; and reading of the Popes Obedience to the Emperor, abaseth it to
the lowest strain of humility: especially seeing that those Councels could
not be said, in exact sense, to have Obeyed the Pope, as Subjects; all which
(as has bin proved) concluded some things prejudicial to this pretended
Monarchy.

Again, Pope Gregory acknowledged his Obedience in the proper sense of
Subjection, and performed it also as much as any Subject possibly could ever
do. As for example; The Emperor commands that holy Pope Gregory to divulge
his Edict and Proclamation, touching a matter, which, in the judgment of the
same Gregory himself, was contrary to the Law of God: the Pope admonishes
the Emperor how repugnant his Law was to the Law of God, but performs the
Emperors Command, in publishing and diuulging his Edict, and hereupon writes
to the Emperor, as follows: Ego indignus famulus vester, vestrae iussioni
subiectus, eandem legem per diuersas terrarum parts transmitti feci. Et quia
lex ipsa Omnipotenti deo minime concordat, ecce per suggestionis meae paginam
serenissimis dominis nunciaui. Vtrobique ergo absolui quod debui, qui and
Imperatori obedientiam praebui, and pro deo quod sensi minime tacui. Gregor. l.
2. Indict. 11. Epist. 62. aut (vt quidam libri habent) 65. Apud Bin. Tom. 2.
I your unworthy servant, subject to your Command, have published your Law, and
caused it to be transferred throughout diverse parts. Wherein I have done that
which I ought, both in performing Obedience to the Emperor (namely by
publishing the Decree) and also to God, by revealing unto you his will. So he.
Hardly shall any find a more express example of direct Subjection and
Obedience from any Subject, than this is, of that holy Pope, unto the Emperor
Mauritius. Nor are all of your side so blind, as not able to discern this
Midday-light, For Gregorius primus, idem and Magnus, l. 2. Epist. 64. ingenue
agnoscebat Imperatori a deo concessum ^acerdotibus dominari. Espensaeus in Tit.
digress. 10. Paris. 1568.
Gregory, called the First and the Great (says your Espencaeus) does
ingenuously acknowledge that Emperors have from God a Dominion over Priests.

Your Second Title is, calling the Sea of Rome HEAD, yea, The Head of all
Churches. Must they therefore mean a Monarchical Head (according to your
Conclusion) over all other Churches, by way of Dominion? If so (to omit your
Additament of For the Council speaks not particularly of the Church of Rome,
but of the whole West-Church, whereas your Article is praecisely of the Church
of Rome.
Falsehood) then was Chrysostom to blame, to call Antioch Chrysostom. Hom. 3.
ad Populum Antiochenum. Nobis consideratio est de infinitis animabus, de totius
orbis Capite.
The Head of the whole World: then was Justinian unjust, to require all to
Justin. Institut. lib. 4. tit. 11.. Quam formam. Cum necesse est omnes
Prouincias caput omnium nostrarum ciuitatum. i. e. hanc reginam vrbem sequi.
Loquitur de Constantinopoli.
Follow Constantinople the regal City, as the Head of all Cities. And so, by
pressing Titles, you see your Monarchy turned into a Triarchie.

A Third Title is the calling of the Pope See above at (^.) These were not the
words of the Council, but of Theodorus a Deacon, and of Ischarion another
Deacon, and of Paschasius the Legate of the Pope. Haec singula in Action 3.
Concilij Chalcedon.
The Bishop of the Universal Church. which though they were not the words of
the Council, but of Two Deacons writing to the Council, and of Paschasius the
Popes Legate in the same Council; which the Council, being content with the
Popes Subscription to their Act, would not question for the form: Yet may you
not make of this an Argument of Monarchical power of the Church and Bishop of
Rome, except you will set more Heads, and Monarchs, than One, upon the
shoulders of the Church: because the Bishops of Syria instiled John, the Bishop
of Constantinople, Domino nostro beatissimo, Patri Patrum, Archiepiscopo, and
Oecumenico Patriarchae Ionanni, and Sanctae Synodo, Episcopi secundae Syriae.
etc. Epist. ad Johan. Patriarch. and Synod. Constantinop. 5. apud. Binium. Tom.
2.
The Universal Patriarch; and the Bishop of Rome also entitled Tharasius Cod.
Authent. Constitut. 3. Tharasium Generalem Patriarcham, (...), etc.
The Universal Patriarch. The whole error lurketh under an Equivocation in
the word Bishop of the Universal Church, which what it may signify, your own
Authors tell you. Episcopus Vniuersalis Ecclesiae habet talem in omnes
Christianos curam, vt singulis tamen praesulibus sua remaneat administratio,
atque officium. Costerus Ies. Euchirid. Tract. de Pontif. Solut. 7. and
Lindanus Panop. lib. 4. cap. 93.
The Bishop of the Universal Church (say you) does signify one possessed with
a Care and study for the good of the Universal Church. So they: which is
common to every Religious Bishop in the Church of Christ, but in a more eminent
degree, and larger extent it belongs to every Patriarch; and this sense we
do approve of. Or else it may signify One having All the Bishops of All other
Churches under his Subjection; which sense is here seriously and zealously
objected by your Cardinal, to prove the Monarchy of the Pope of Rome; and
which has bin by S. Gregory Pope of Rome as earnestly abhorred and detested,
and as much as his godly heart could execrated (for so he See above, ca. 6.. 6.
speaks of it) as a New, naughty, proud, profane, blasphemous, and
Antichristian Title, which (says he) none of my Predecessors ever used.

The next Title attributed unto the Bishop of Rome, by a General Council, is
that The Vineyard of the Lord (which is his Church) is said to be committed
unto him: which serves for another post, to support the ruinous Monarchy of
the Bishop of Rome. But all in vain; For Pope Eleutherius himself, writing to
the Bishops in France, See above, ca. 8.. 5. And as Pope John the First also by
the save Argument moved an Archbishop to repress Haeretikes, See above, p.
196.2.
The Universal Church of Christ (says he) is committed unto you, that you
may labor for the good of all men. It were more than Monstrous, that this your
Monarch should create so many Monarchs over the Church Catholic, as were all
the Bishops of France. No, these kind of Attributes have not other
signification, than the Care that every Bishop should have in wishing, and to
his power endeavoring the Universal good of the whole Church. In which sense
Saint Nazianzene, speaking in the praise of Athanasius; See above, cap. 12.. 3.
To him is committed the Praesidencie of the people of Alexandria, which is as
much as to say (says he) the government of the whole world. So he. How
should not this equal, if not exceed, whatsoever can be ascribed to the Pope
of Rome? and yet this is no universal power of Jurisdiction, but only of
Providence and Care, namely Sic quibusdam praeesse, vt prodesse possit
vniuersis.

The last Title is that, which is set down in the First, and last place; That
the Primacie above all Bishops is yielded unto the Bishop of the Church of
Rome. True; and this Truth was never denied by any Protestant. But what
Primacie? of Monarchy and Dominion? Noe, but of Order, and Honor. For have
you never heard of Two Cities in one Kingdom, Two Sheriffs in one City, Two
Bayliffes in one Borough, one of them being Head, and Chief, and having
Superiority, and Prioritie; that is, Primacie above another, and yet without
any right of Authority and Dominion one over one another?

Our next Answer shall be by Retorsion. Four General Councels have bin
produced by your side to prove the Church of Rome and Bishop thereof to have
Monarchical power over all other Churches and Bishops, in an ambiguitie of
phrases. Albeit not only these Four, but also See above, ca 8.
Four more have notably impugned your pretended Monarchy, as well in the
Ecclesiastical, as in the Temporal power and Prerogative thereof. For you may
remember that the First General Council limited the Dioces as well of Rome,
as of Alexandria: The Second erected a new Patriarkship, with the no good
liking of the Church of Rome: The Third excluded the Pope from all Jurisdiction
in Cyprus: The Fourth established the former Patriarkship, erected by the
Second Council, with privileges equal to Rome; and held the Roman Primacie
not to be founded by any Divine Law: The Fifth condemned Pope Vigilius as
Schismatic: The Sixth, and Seventh condemned Pope Honorius, as Haereticall:
The Eight prescribed a Law to Rome, inioyning her to Observe it. And again,
these Eight General Councels were disposed, at their Assemblies, to prefer
the Emperors (of their Times) in place and throne of dignity, above the Popes
of Rome.

CHALLENGE.
IS then the Popedom of Rome a Monarchy? why? answer us, First is a Monarch
limited of his Subjects? Secondly, does a Monarch suffer others to create
Honors within his kingdom? Thirdly, Will a Monarch endure Corriuals, or
Equals? Fourthly, Can a Monarch, the supreme Judge, be subject to the judgment
and condemnation of his people? Fifthly, Must not a Monarch challenge the
possession of his chief Throne, in his Parliament, and be so acknowledged by
the whole state? If therefore you shall further observe what has bin opposed
against your Titles, you may easily understand that not any one, which has bin
objected, does infer your Conclusion, to prove the Pope of Rome a Monarch:
except you shall acknowledge Athanasius Bishop of Alexandria, Chrysostom
Bishop of Antioch, John Bishop of Constantinople, and All the Bishops of
France, together with all other Bishops, to whom the same Titles were ascribed,
to have bin (which breaks the neck of Monarchy) Monarkes as well as the
Bishop of Rome.

And if in the Second place you consider the Testimonies, which we have
alleged out of twice Four General Councels, directly concluding, not by any
speciousnesse of Words, but by their Acts and Deeds, that Popes anciently were
no Monarks at all; Then will you conclude, that we have just reason to
challenge your Authors of great inconsionableness in their defense; and by
the vanity of their proofs, to persuade your selves of the Truth of our Cause.

Your Second kind of Objections are taken from Titles attributed by Ancient
Fathers, to the Bishop or Church of Rome: The Vanity of the Consequence hereof
discovered, First by Equiualences. SECT. 2.
YOur Cardinal, Bellarmin. li. 2. d^ R^m. P^nt. ^. 12.
to prove his former Conclusion, concerning the Succession of the Pope in the
Ecclesiastical Monarchy, flies again after Titles, as namely such as have
been attributed unto Popes long since, by Ancient Fathers. We are to discover
the falsehood of this Consequence, knowing that the Foundation is too weak to
carry so great a weight as is a Monarchy, and sole Dominion of one Atlas, the
Pope, over all the Catholic Church of Christ, and to answer the most of those
by like Parallels and Equiualences.

First, Bellar. Ibid. ca. 31. vt and in literis marginal. seq. vsque ad (^)
Papa, vt Linus per Ignatium, quod quamuis communiter alijs, -- tamen ex co
colligitur Primatus.
The Popes Primacie is proved (say you) by the word [Papa] that is, Pope, Three
ways: One, because though it had bin given commonly to others, yet was it
attributed to the Bishop of Rome by way of 1. Romano, per Antonomasiam. Conc.
Chalced. Act 16 --
Excellency, thus; THE Pope, Ergo Monarke. False, for it was bestowed as well
upon Saint Cyprian by the way of Excellency: insomuch that at the point of his
Martyrdom, when the Paganish Proconsull asked him, Art thou he, whom Christians
call their Pope? Saint Cyprian answered, yea, In Cypriani passione, Proconsuli
quaerenti, An tu is es, quem Christiani suum Papam vocant? Respondet Cyprianus,
Ego. Pontius de vita Cypriani.
IAME. Next, because (say you) he is also called 2. Quia vocatur Papa
Vniuersalis Ecclesiae.
The Pope of the Universal Church. Ergo, he is a Monarke. False, for
Athanasius also, who is called Dilecte Papa Athanasi. Arsinius in Apologia
Athanasii.
Pope, had his Church called by Constantine See above,
The Universal Church. Lastly, because (say you) 3. Quia a generalibus
Concilijs vocatur Papa; ipse vero neminem vocat Papam vel Patrem, sed omnes
filios, aut frates.
The Bishop of Rome himself calls no other Bishop Pope, but Son, or
Brother: Ergo, he is Monarch. False, for Pope Cornelius likewise (as is
Cornelius Episcopus Romanus Cyprianum Carthaginensem Papam vocat, and Papatem.
On^iphrius initio Tract. obscurarum vocum.
confessed) called Cyprian Pope: yea and Cyprian Cyprianus li. 2. Epistola 8.
called Pope Cornelius Brother, as also Epiphanius (as is further Binius Tom.
2. Conc. pa. 365. a
confessed) called Pope Hormisda Brother; so little does the name of Brother,
or Title of Pope avoid the Equality among See herafter at (o)
Bishops.

The Second name is Pater Patrum, fic Damasus ab Episcopo Cathag.
The Father of Fathers, given to Damasus, Ergo, he was Monarch. False, for if
Others were called Popes (as you have heard) all is one; because, as is Papa,
i. e. Pater Patrum. Salmeron Ies. Tom. 13. in Epist. Pauli* pa. 172. Col. 2.
confessed, Papa, and Pater Patrum, Pope and Father of Fathers is the same. And
also Saint Polycarpus was called See after, as (...). 16. and above cap. 12.. 1.
The Father of Christians.

Thirdly, Fourthly, and Fifthly, the Bishop of Rome (say you) was called
Po^tifex Christianorum (...).
The high Priest of Christians, yea, Summus Pontifex ab Hieronymo, and alijs.
The Chief Priest, yea Princeps Sacerdotum a Valentiniano, and quod Concilium
Carthaginense vetat ne quis sic vocetur, Concilium hoc statuit solum de
Episcopis Africae.
The Prince of Priests; Ergo, Monarch. False, for Basil, who was no Pope, was
called Nazianzenus vocabat Basilium Magnum, Magnum Pontificem Canis. Ies. ex
Nazian. Epist. 38. ad Simplic.
Great Priest: Athanasius also was called See hereafter at the letter s.
The Master of Priests, and you have many in the Church of Rome, under
Monarchs, yea or Bishops, that are called Arch Priests: and whatsoever your
phrase be, it cannot be higher or chiefer than Summus, or Chief, which (by
your own Conf^ssions) has bin communicated to See above ca. 12.. 3.
Non-popes.

Sixthly, the Bishop of Rome (say you) was called Vicarius Christi a Bernardo.
The Vicar of Christ. Ergo Monarch. False, for Pope Eusebius, alluding to that
of the Apostle, concerning all the Apostles, 2 Cor. 5.20.
We are the Ambassadors [in Christi vice] in Christ his stead, and applying
it to Bishops, says Eusebius Papa Epist. 3. apud Bin. Tom. 1. Episcopis
Tusciae and Campaniae ( alluding to that of Saint Paul, Ephesians. 1. and 2. Cor.
5.) Legatione fungimur pro Christo, Caput enim Christus est, Christi autem
Vicarij sunt eius sacerdotes, qui vice Christi, legatione funguntur.
There is one Head of the Church, Christ, but the Vicars of Christ are they,
that in Christ his stead, are Ambassadors for Christ.

Seauenthly, the Bishop of Rome (say you) was called Caput Ecclesiae, a
Concilio Chalced. and a Gregorio Omnium Ecclesiarum Caput seeds Romana.
The Head of the Church; and his Seat, or Church The Head of Churches: Ergo
the Pope is Monarch. False, for Athanasius was likewise called Athanasius
(...). See above, Cap. 12.. 4.
The topp of the Head of all and Cyril in a Council Patres Concilij Ephesini
in Epistola ad Imperatorem, vocant Cyrillum Caput Episcoporum congregatorum.
Bin. Act. Conc. Ephesians. Tom. 4. c. 8.
The Head of the Assembly; and Antioch is called Chrysostom. Hom. 3. ad pop.
Antioch. Antiochia. caput totius orbis. Ibidem de Constantinop. in Epistola ad
Jnnocentium, (...).
The Head of the whole world.

The Eight, and Ninth, The Bishop of Rome is called Fundamentum Ecclesiae ab
Hieronymo.
The Foundation of the Church, and Pastor ouilis Dominici ab Ambrosio.
Pastor of the Lords flock: Ergo, Monarch. False, for Athanasius also is
called Damascenus appellat Athanasium Ecclesiae dei Fundamentum. Test Canisio
Catechis. initio, Encom. Patrum.
The Foundation of the Church of God. And (if you speak De iure) the word
Pastor of the whole flock was proper to the Apostles, who received in their
joint Commission a power and Authority of Mark. 16.15.
Preaching throughout the world to every humane creature, without any
limitation; insomuch, that (as Saint Augustine says Nam and Petrus pastor, and
Paulus Pastor, caeterique Apostoli Pastores. August. Tract 47. in Johan.
Peter was a Pastor, and Paul was a Pastor, and the other Apostles were also
Pastors. But there could not be so many Monarchs over the whole Church. But if
you understand thereby Curam, and Studium, Care, and Study, which by the
Office of Pastorship, every one is bound unto, according to his possibility,
toward the good of the Universal Church, in this, all other Bishops are
Pastors as well as the Pope; as has bin confessed.

The Tenth. The Bishop of Rome (say you) is called Rector Domus ab Ambrosio.
The Rector or Governor of the house of God. Ergo, Monarch. False, for it is
not spoken Universally, but Indefinitely, In materia contingenti, with allusion
to the words of Saint Paul to Timothy, thus; 1 Timothy 3.15.
That thou may know how to converse in the house of God, which is the Church
of the living God: namely, with an universal care over All, but a Particular
power over that his Church of Ephesus, which was his Bishopric: and yet
Timothy was no Monarch.

The Eleventh. The Bishop of Rome (say you) is called Custos vineae a Council.
Chalcedonensi: cui vinea Domini commissa est.
He to whom the Lords Vineyard is committed: Ergo, he is Monarch. False, for
Pope Eleutherius, as you See above, cap. 8.. 4.
know, writ to the Bishops of France, thus; The universal Church (says he)
is committed unto you: yet he meant nothing less than to judge them Spiritual
Monarchs.

The Twelfth. The Bishop of Rome is called (say you) Pater and Do^^or omnium
Christianorum.
The Father, and Doctor of all Christians: Ergo Monarch. False, for the First
of these was Attributed unto Polycarpus a Bishop of Asia, who was called Eusebius.
hist. l. 4. ca. 14. Iste est Pa^er Christianorum.
. The Father of Christians. And because the Second concerns your Faith, and
the judgment of the Bishop of Rome, as an Oracle, for the full determination
of Faith (as being therefore worthy to be held Monarchical) we say that your
Consequence from this Title, The Doctor of Christians, and the like, is as
false as any of the rest, because of the Equiualencie of Attributes given to
other learned and Orthodox Fathers, as follows.

Our second discovery of the falsehood and vanity of your Papal Defense, from
Titles borrowed from Ancient Fathers, by our like Equiualences. SECT. 3.
IF your Consequence from Titles must needs conclude a Monarchical Pope, then
mark (we pray you) how many Monarchs must be acknowledged in the purest times
of Christ his Church, after the Apostles, who notwithstanding never were lifted
in the Catalogue of your Popes; wherein we make bold to call your own Authors
to witness.

First then, to answer you (as Logicians speak) in your very Terms, look
into the 1. Origenes est secundus post Apostolos Ecclesiarum Magister: sic ^
Didymo. Sacrorum omnium expositorum victor, ab Hieronymo. Test Sixto Senensi
Bibl. lib. 4. Tit. Origin.. Sed.
Marginalls and you shall find. (1) Origin called by Didymus, The Master of
the Churches, and by Saint Hierom, Most excellent expounder of Scriptures.
Chrysostomus, de quo Innocentius Papa Epistola ad Arcad. Imperatorem: Eiecisti
a Throno suo magnum totius orbis Doctorem. Test Canisio Ies. initio Catechismi.
Chrysostom called by Pope Innocentius, The Great Doctor of the whole world.
Augustinus, de quo venerabilis. Beda in Chron. Omnium Doctor eximius
Ecclesiarum.
Augustine called The most singular Doctor of all Churches. And Hilarious,
Doctor maximus, Ecclesiae Ca^holicae columna merito habitus. Bellarm. de
Script. Ecclesiast. Tit. Hilarious.
Hilarious by your Cardinal worthily accounted The greatest Doctor and Pillar
of the Catholic Church.

Next, if you would have Metaphorical phrases, of like efficacy and Emphasis,
you may observe; Athanasius egregium Ecclesiae columen, cuius dogmata pro
Orthodoxae fidei lege haberentur. Sic Nazianzenus, in Oratione de laud eius.
Et Ecclesiae Dei columen; sic Damascenus in sermon de Defunctis. Test Canisio
Jes. ante Catechismum.
Athanasius anciently called The stay and foundation of the Church. Basilius
Magnus a Nazianzeno Epistola ad Basilium, Oculus orbis: and a Gregorio Nysseno
in vita Epiph: Os Ecclesiae, Test Canisio, quo supra. Et it^rum a Gregorio
Nazianzeno, Orbis Lumen, Sol inter Sydera, in Oratione ad Basil. Test Baronio,
Anno 371. number. 93.
Basil the mouth of the Church, the eye of the world, the light of the world,
and the Sun among the Stars.

Lastly, if you require a further expression and commendation of the credit and
Authority of the forenamed Fathers, in the Truth of their Doctrines, then may
you happen upon some which will more Emphatically and significantly give your
Papal Monarchs the mate; as namely, that the Doctrines of Athanasius were of
that credit, that they were held for See above at the number 5.
A Rule of the Orthodoxe Faith: Gregorius Nazianzenus, Is in diuino Eloquio
potens, Theologi nomen sortitus est: sic Damascen. sermon. de Defunctis. Test
Canisi^ initio Catechism^, Et de eo Ruffinus; Qui solus sit, de cuius fide ne
dissidentes quidem inter se (vt fieri solet) parts disputare potuerint: quia
and hoc obtinuit apud Deum, and Ecclesias Dei, meriti, vt quicunque ausus
fuerit eius doctrinae in aliquo refragari, ex hoc ipso, quia ipse magis
Haereticus arguitur. Manifestum enim iudicium est, non esse rectae fidei, qui
in fide Gregorio non concordat. Test Posseuino Apparat. Tit. Greg. Nazian.
Nazianzene to have been of so great estimation, for his Doctrine, that he
obtained the surname of Divine, primitiuely ascribed to the Evangelist Saint
John; insomuch that whosoever dissented from him in any point of Doctrine, was
thereupon so much rather judged an Heretic, every one being deemed not to be
sound in the Faith, that accorded not to him in belief. Ambrosius, de quo
Basilius Epist. 55 ad Ambrosium: Commissa sibi magni and praeclari nauigij
Christi, Ecclesiae videlicet Dei, in fide Christi gubernacula accepit. Test
Canisio Ies. quo supra.
Ambrose to have received and governed the helm of the Faith in the ship of
Christ, which is his Church. Augustinus, ad quem Hieronymus Epist. 80.
Ca^holici omnes te vt antiquae rurs^s fidei conditorem venerantur. Test eodem
Canisio.
Augustine to have been honored of all, as the builder again of the ancient
Faith; and Cyrillus Alexandrinus, de quo Niceph Hist. lib. 14. cap. 34. Ex quo
tempore Caelestini Pontificis locum in Synodo obtinuit, fama est, Papae
appellationem, and vt orbis vniuersi I^dex appellaretur, accepisse. Test
Canisio Jes. quo supra.
Cyril of Alexandria to have been called The Judge of the whole world. Thus
much of the twelfth Title.

The Thirteenth. The Bishop of Rome (say you) was called by Saint Augustine
Ecclesiae Apostolicae prasul per Antonomasiam, sine additione Romanae.
The Bishop of the Apostolic Sea, (meaning the Roman) without addition of the
word Roman. Ergo, by way of Excellency it argues him to be Monarch. False,
for so the Bishop of Alexandria was in like manner called by Saint Hierome Quid
facient Ecclesiae orientis, quid Aegypti, and sedis Apostolicae. Hieron.
aduersus Vigilantium. By which are understood the Churches subject to
Alexandria the Patriarchall and Apostolical Seat in Egypt, where Vigilan^ius
lived: even as Saint Augustine called Rome, because it was the only
Apostolical Seat in the West, wherein Augustine lived.
The Bishop of the Apostolical Sea, without any addition of the word
Alexandrian. Yea, but you say, the Bishop of Rome is further said to Et dicitur
Principatum Apostolicae sedis tenere.
hold the Principality or Chiefedome of the Apostolical Sea: Ergo, Monarch.
False, for the Bishop of Antioch also was said to possess Johannes Antiochiae
(...). etc. Theod. lib. 3. cap. 17.
The Primacy of the Apostolic Sea: yea and Age, percurre Ecclesia^ Apostolicas
apud quas Cathedrae Apostolorum suis locis praesidentur; Corinthus, Philippis,
Ephesus, etc. Tert. Praescript. cap. 36.
Others also. Oh but further (say you) the office of the Bishop of Rome is
called an Et per Vicarios Leonis, seeds eius dicitur Apostolatns.
Apostleship, Ergo, Monarch. False, for if this Consequence be extended to the
times of the Apostles, then must Judas Iscariot have been a Monarch, who had an
Apostleship, Act. 1.25. And Matthias after him should have been another
Monarch, who was chosen into the same Apostleship, from which Judas fell. And
if you restrain it to aftertimes, then can no Bishop properly arrogate an
Apostleship, which was an Office, (as your See below at f.
selves confess) Proper unto the immediate Apostles of Christ.

Lastly, the Bishop of Rome (say you) was called Vniuersalis, in Concilio
Chalced. Hactenus Bellarmin.
The Universal Bishop: Ergo Monarch. False; for (as is Azorius Moral. part. 2.
lib. 4. page 423.
confessed) the Popes of Rome by conniuency yielded to the Bishop of
Constantinople, that the Bishop of that Sea should use the same Title of
Universal Bishop, as well as the Bishop of Rome: and yet was he no more
Monarch, than Cyril the now Patriarch of Alexandria, who is instiled (...). In
his letters to George Lord Archbishop of Canterbury.
Pope and Universal Judge at this day.

Our third Discovery of the Falsehood and Vanity of the Papal Defense, from
bare Titles, is by your own Contradictions. SECT. 4.
HItherto have we examined your Titles, given to the Popes of Rome, in the
equal scales of Comparison with other Bishops, and find them all too light,
neither scale being able to carry the weight of a Monarch. We now proceed to a
further Confutation of your Arguments and Consequences, in many of them from
your own Confessions and Reasons. You have first objected the Title of Pope of
Rome, as Antiquissimum Episcopi Romani nomen. Bellar. lib. 2. d^ Romans P^nt.
cap. 31.
The most ancient name of the Bishop of Rome: yet you confess that there was a
time so Ancient, when Antiquitus nec Papae, nec Pontifices, sed tantum Romani
Episcopi vocabantur. Baldus de Coronat.. Haec vero.
Neither the name of Papa, or Pontifex, were attributed to the Bishop of Rome,
but only the bare Title of Bishop of Rome. Again, of this name you have
affirmed, that it was Anciently given to the Bishop of Rome See above at s page
214. and at k page 218.
Per Antonomasiam, by way of Excellence, as proper unto him; and yet you grant
that Papae nomen peculiariter attributum est Romano Pontifici ex Decreto
Gregorij 7. in Synodo Romana, anno 1073. Lorinus Ies. in Act. 16. and Azorius
Ies. Jnstitu^. Moral. part. 2. lib. 2 cap. vlt.
The name of Pope was appropriated only to the Bishop of Rome by the Decree of
Pope Gregory the seventh, in a Council at Rome about the year 1073. Again,
you noted the Bishop of Rome to be called See above at t and u page 214.
Papa Ecclesiae, Father of the Church, as if he were altogether Father, and
could not by any Relation be Filius Ecclesiae, the Child of the Church, or
Subject to a Council. Which bladder of pride was pricked by the Fathers of the
Council of Basil, arguing thus: Si matter omniu^ fidelium est Ecclesia, Romanum
etiam Episcopum filium habet, alias (sicut beatissi^us Augustinus praedicat)
numquam habebit deum patrem, qui non habet Ecclesiam matrem. -- Papa igitur
subesse debet Concilio. Aeneas Syluius Com. de Gestis Conc. Basil. Fol. 5.
If the Church Catholic be the Mother of all the faithful, then the Bishop of
Rome ought to be Child unto her, else (according to that saying of blessed
Augustine) he cannot have God for his Father, that has not the Church for his
Mother. So they. Have you not now, by your propriety of the name Papa, spunne a
fair thread, whereby you strangle your Popes and Popedom it self?

As for the fourth See above at z.
Title of Summus Pontifex, or Chief Priest, you have avouched from thence,
that the Pope of Rome is the only Monareh: And yet yield that there may be
Dico, in vnoquoque genere possunt esse duo Summa, per Negationem, i.e. quoru^
nihil est superius: sed non per Affirmationem, i.e. vt vnumquodque sit omnium
supremum. Azorius Ies. Institut. Moral. lib. 4. cap. 4. part. 2.
Two Chiefes in every kind, namely Negatiuely, as that which has none above
it; although not Affirmatively chief, as that which is above all others. So
then, it is not necessary, that the word Chief should infer a Supremacy;
else Pope Leo was far ouershot, when speaking of Bishops in General, he
called them Haec Praesbyteris non licent, qui Pontificatus Apicem non habent.
Quae omnia solis deberi summis (loquitur de omnibus Episcopis) Pontificibus
authoritate Canonum praecipitur. Leo Papa Epist. 88. de priuilegio
Chorepiscoporum.
Summi Pontifices, Chief Priests: and so making All other Popes, made himself
none at all; because still the Monarchy can be but of One. Nor thus only, but
further you, who by one Cardinal have made these words Pontifex Maximus, and
Sacerdos Summus to be Notes of Monarchy in the Popes, do by another Cardinal
contradict it, saying, that Ne Pontifex Maximus alios super se, vel sibi
aequalem habere videretur -- Pontificis maximi nominis amplitudini iure iunctus
est titulus, Episcopus Episcoporum. Baronius Tom. 2. Annal. Anno 216. number. 11.
The name of Pontifex Maximus may admit of Equality with others, except there
be joined with this another Title of Bishop of Bishops. Which also, as you
know, is insufficient, because Pope Clemens (in the Epistle which you call his)
called the Apostle Saint James Clemens in Epistola ad Jacobum. Clemens Iacobo,
(...), etc.
The Bishop of Bishops, even in the days of Saint Peter.

The ninth Title you contended for, as proper to the Pope, was the name of
Pastor, or Sheapheard of the flock of Christ: Notwithstanding of all other
Bishops in the Christian Church, the Pope has least right to be called Pastor,
except it be Per Antiphrasim, a non pascendo; because you cannot reckon for
some hundreds of years scarce any One Pope that professedly discharged his
Function of Preaching; albeit Preaching be acknowledged more than once by your
Fathers of the Council of Trent, to be Praedicatio est praecipuum munus
Episcopi. Council. Trid. Sess 24. Decret. Reform. cap 4.
The Chief office of a Bishop. If therefore (as your Non meretur nomen
Pastoris, qui non personaliter intendit Gregi suo B^llarm. Admoni^. ad Epis.
Theanens. p. 10. -- Omnes Episcopi, nisi legitime impediuntur, tenentur per se
praedicare, quia dixit Christus, Pasce oues meas; non dixit, cura vt alij
pascant. Ibidem page 22.
Cardinal himself preached) He deserves not the name of a Pastor, who does
not personally attend his flock: and if (as the same Cardinal proceeds,)
Every Bishop ought to preach, except he have lawful impediments, nor is it
sufficient to perform this by others, because (says he) Christ said not to
Peter, have a care that others feed, but feed Thou my sheep. This then your
Cardinals one Reason alone, of it self, does most justly vntitle your Bishop
of Rome of the most proper Attribute of a Bishop; and if no Bishop, then no
Bishop of Bishops, or Chief Bishop; because there cannot be a greater
Soloecisme, than to call one a Chief in any calling, the Chief duty whereof
he chiefly and specially neglects. You will say the Exception, Except he be
lawfully hindered, will excuse him: Nay, but it does accuse him rather, because
we must not imagine that there was not almost any one Pope, for the space of
many hundred years, who could not in his whole life time find just leisure to
study and preach one Sermon.

The thirteenth (which only has been hitherto omitted) is See above at i.
Sponsus Ecclesiae, The Bridegroom of the Church. This likewise you contend
for, as for a Pearl proper to the Crown of a Papal Monarch. Albeit Concilium
Lugdunense, See above.
you know that this was not put into the Popes Miter, until the year 1^00.
And what more? the Pope with you must be (forsooth) The Vicar of Christ, who is
the High Pastor of the Church; and he must be also the Spouse of the same
Church, which is called by Saint John Joh. 3*29.
The Spouse of Christ. How did Saint Bernard like of this Divinity? He writing
to Pope Eugenius admonishes him not to call himself The Bridegroom of the
Church, which is the Spouse of Christ; For Bernard. Epist. 237. ad Papam Eugen.
Nemo committit Sponsam suam Vicario. Vt citat a Bell. loc. seq.
No man (says he) will commit his Spouse to his Vicar. Let your Cardinal
Gloss hereupon (as he does) by distinguishing between Bellarm. lib. 2. de
Romans Pont. c. 31.
Principal and Inferior Bridegroom, and of Intrinsecall, and Extrinsecall
generation: all will not satisfy Saint Bernard his Reprehension of the Popes
abuse of the word. For we demand, did the Pope use the Title aright? why then
needed he this Admonition of Saint Bernard? but did he need this Admonition?
then did he (in the judgment of Saint Bernard) falsely arrogate the Title. We
believe your Jesuit, who says, Pererius in Genesis 29. disp. vlt. Sponsus nisi
Vnicus.
There is but one Bridegroom of the Church: but more S. Bernard; yet neither
of both in respect of Saint John, who says: Joh. 3.
He that has the Bride is the Bridegroom, but the friend of the Bride is he
that stands by and hears. Which dissolueth your former distinction; for
Bride and Bridegroom are Relatiues, the Bride therefore, which is the Church,
is affianced unto the Bridegroom Christ: how? only in Soul? Is she not
betrothed in Body also? Else what means that saying, 1. Cor. 6.20.
Ye are bought with a price, glorify therefore God in your bodies, and in
your souls? Ergo the Relation is both Outward and Inward: every other (were he
the best of Christians) is but a Aquinas Catena aurea in Ioh. cap. 3.
Theophylact: Nullus alius Sponsus nisi solus Christus, omnes namque Doctores
Paranymphi sunt. Et Beda: Sponsum commendauit amico, i.e. Ordini praedicatorum,
qui eam non sibi sed Christo zelare debet.
Paranymph, and a friend of the Bride at the most; as Theophylact and Bid do
both teach.

In the foureteenth, of the name Apostleship, you seem to glory and boast:
notwithstanding you are not ignorant that it could not be properly ascribed
unto him, knowing that there is as much difference between Apostolatus ab
Episcopatu differt, quia ille immediate a Christo vocatur, and certe habet
Spiritum sanctum, and omnium E^clesiarum curam sustinet: immediate vocatus, vni
certae sedi praeest. Espensaeus Comment. ad 1. Tim. 1. in princ.
Apostleship, and Bishopric, as there is between one that has a General
Commission to go where he will, and him that has a Particular Charge, fixed to
a certain place.

As for the last Title of Universal Bishop, which you say was given to the
Pope by a Council, as implying a Monarchy; we answer that there is a falsehood
in the Antecedent: For it was not the Synod, but the Popes own Legates that
vented out that Vanity. And for the Consequence and sense of the word,
betokening a Monarchy over All Others, as Subjects, this has See above cap.
6.. 6.
been proved, from Pope Gregory, to be a detestable and Antichristian falsehood.
And your Gratian has it in express words, as the direct sense of the Council
of Afric, wherein Saint Augustine had his voice, saying; Vniuersalis autem
nec etiam Romanus Pontifex appelletur. Gratian: Decret. part. 1. Distinct. 99.
Primae sedis.
Neither may the Pope of Rome be called Universal.

Our fourth Discovery of the Falsehood and Vanity of the Papal Defense taken
from ancient Titles, by the Blasphemousnesse of some Titles, which have been
newly conferred upon Popes. SECT. 5.
IF your Popes had thought these former Titles sufficient, then questionless
would they not have affected other Attributes far more transcendent, which of
later times are given unto them by their Parasites, and swallowed up of
themselves, as their spirit and vital breath, which you may find in the 1.
Bzouius in libro qui inscribitur Romanus Pontifex. Vbi citatur Abrahamus
Polanus, ex Tigliatio Archiepiscopo ad Junocentium octauu^. Regno and unction
Christus prae pa^ticipibus suis. Heb. 1.9.

2. Ex Barnardin^ Just. Veneto Orat. Paul. 2. Cum cuius coelesti maiestate
nullum Diadema comparetur.

3. Ex Balbo Galliae Orat: Pio 4. Papae: Cuius vox pro Oraculo.

4. Ex Ferdinando Val. Lusitano Oratione ad Innocent. 8. Vniuersalis Ecclesiae
Pastor (iuxta Apostolum) super omnem Potestatem, and Principatum, and omne quod
nominatur, sieve in hoc, sieve in futuro seculo (Ephesians. 1.) a Deo constitutus.
Bzou. page 56.

5. Bellar-Contr. de Romans Pont. in Praefat. Sixto Quinto Pontifici Est lapis
positus in Sion, probatus, pretiosus, angularis, fundamentum summum. Isa.
28.16. And by Justus Baronius lib. 3. Epist. 1.

6. Stapleton Ep. Nuncupat. ad Gregorium 13. ante Princip. Doctrine. Sub cuius
supremi in tertis numinis tutela opus meum in lucem emissum. Et in Glossa edit.
approbat. Greg. Extrauag. verb. Significanti. Tit. 14. cap. 4. Dominus noster
Deus Papa.


Marginals, as I. Pope Innocentius the eight to be called in Royalty and
Unction CHRIST above his fellows; an Attribute proper unto Jesus Christ
himself, Heb. 1.9. II. Pope Paulus the second to be called a Celestial
Majesty; which all know to be proper to God. III. Pope Pius the fourth to be
called The voice and Oracle of Truth, proper also to Christ, who says, I am
the truth, Ioh, 14.6. IV. Again, Pope Innocent the eight to be called One
above all Principalities and powers, and whatsoever is named in this or in the
other world; plainly proper to Christ, Ephesians. 1. V. Pope Sixtus Quintus called
The cornerstone in Sion, proved, precious, and chief foundation; proper to
Christ, Isa. 28.14. and 1. Pet. 2. as is confessed by your own Sixtus Senenfis
Bib. in locum Isaiae. Pintus in Isaiam 28. Aquinas in 1. Cor. 13. and 1. Pet.
2. Salmeron. in 1. Pet. 2. Maldonat. in Mat. 21.41. Perer. in Dan. 2.
Expositors. VI. Pope Gregory the thirteenth (stop your ears) called Power,
Might, or Majesty of God upon earth; and again, Our Lord God the Pope. We
pretermit many the like Blasphemies.

Yea, but (will you say) Others gave unto them those Titles, they required them
not. Then let Herod excuse himself that the people cried aloud in magnifying
his wisdom, and saying, Act. 12.22.
The voice of God and not of man: yet became he in the end but a lowzie god.
Moreover Simon Magus is not read to have required that estimation, as to be
called Act. 8.10.
The mighty power of God. Nor can you deny that these Titles were used of
Authors in their Dedicatory Epistles, and in their personal Orations unto
Popes; and this last authorized by Pope Gregory the thirteenth, in the Papal
Gloss it self. A fifth answer remains, which we shall refer to the
Section next following the Challenge.

CHALLENGE.
THE Fable of the Chough or Daw is not unknown unto you, which plumed himself
with the stolen feathers of other Birds of all sorts: in the end, when all the
other Birds had challenged each one her own feather, and pulled it from her,
she poor and naked Cornicula became a matter of scorn and laughter unto them
all. Semblably this your strange and monstrous creature Papal Monarch have you
adorned and bedecked with fifteen Titles, as it were so many Feathers, which
upon due Examination, by just Parallels, your own Confessions, and Reasons,
are found some of them very new, most of them common to other Bishops as well
as to the Pope, and almost all (in your Papal sense) very unjustifiable:
besides your later additament of other Epithets Transcendent, and (as you see)
notably Blasphemous. Then which what better manifestation can there be of the
vanity and impiety of your Papisticall Defense? Having spoken of the
Attributes, we now come to the Sentences of Ancient Fathers.

Your Objection from Ancient Fathers is taken from their Sentences both Greek
and Latin. First of the Greek Fathers, by discovering the Falsehood and Vanity
of your Papal Defense. SECT. 6.
POpes of Rome in Primitive Times, by their constancy in the Faith, by their
integrity of life, by the Primacy of their place, in their priority of Order,
and by the General estimation which was held of them in each of these
respects, obtained an Authority of credit to help all Bishops and Patriarchs
in their extremities; only they had no Universal Jurisdiction or Dominion
over them. Hence are the Sentences of Fathers Objected in the Bellarmin. lib.
2. de Romans Pont. Cap. 15. Ex patribus Graecis.
Margent, which do appear so notably abused by your Objections; The
absurdities of whose Consequence we choose in this place to discover by
Similitudes, as the Prophet Nathan dealt with David. The Case then stands
thus, as if they would have taught those holy Fathers to have argued Absurdly.
As from the Jgnatius. Ecclesiae sanctificatae quae praesidet in regione
Romanorum. Ergo intelligit Ecclesiam Romanam esse Caput omnium aliarum.
First, namely Ignatius, thus: The Church of York has a Seat of Primacy, in
the Province of York, therefore that Church is the Head of all Churches within
this Kingdom. From the Iraeneus Triae. 1. Necesse esse ad Romanam Ecclesiam
omnem Ecclesiam co^uenire. 2. propter potentiorem principalitatem. 3. In hoc
conseruata est ea, quae ab Apostolis recepta est Traditio. This might have
been spoken of the Imperial power of that City. For although Constantinople
was the place of the Emperors residence, yet the Emperor was at that time
really the Emperor of the Romans: but be it Ecclesiastical power, yet was not
the necessity of r^course unto it absolute and perp^tuall, but occasional for
that time. For Iraenaeus shows that he might have proved his Traditions from
other Churches (Longum esset omnes enumerare Ecclesias, etc.) but for brevity
sake he instanced only in Rome, and the rather for the powerful principality
of that Sea, in the preservation of Original Truth. And remember this Irenaeus
was he, that consented with the Asian Bishop^ that were excommunicated by Pope
Victor. See about. Cap. 9.. 2.
Second, to wit Iraeneus, as if thus: It is now necessary for all sorts of
Tradesmen to have recourse to London for their wares, for the abundant store
which is in that City; therefore this Necessity is absolute, nowhere but at
London; and perpetual, never any where else can it be, but at London. From the
Third, viz. Epiphanius Haeres. 68. Vrsatius and Valens Episcopi -- ad Papam
^ulium prosecti, pro reddenda ratione de suo delicto. Ergo, Papa Romanus
Episcoporum Iudex. The same parties that had columniated Athanasius, and
thereby, as much as lay in them discredited the Pope, who had justified him,
asked pardon for their offense, both of Athanasius and of Pope Julius
Epiphanius, and the Fourth, viz. Athanasius Apolog. 2. Episcopos eosdem a Papa
Iulio Delicti veniam petijsse Et Epistola ad Felicem Papam: Episc^pos Romanos
in summitatis arce constitutos omnium Ecclesiarum Curam habere. Of [Cu^am
habere] see above Cap. 8.. 5.
Athanasius, as if thus: A.R. in the County of Suffolk craved pardon of the
Shiriffe of Middlesex, for a notorious offense done unto him. Ergo he accounted
that Shiriffe to have Authority of a Shiriffe in the County of Suffolk. From
the Dionysius Alexdrinus. Is apud Romanum Pontificem accusatus; Ergo, Papa
communis omnium in lex. It is no extraordinary thing for one Patriarch to be
accused before his fellow-Patriarch, yet not iudicially, but by Confederation,
that the guilty person be deprived of his Communion with whom the Cause is
pleaded.
Fifth, that is, Dionysius Alexandrinus, as if thus: Two Gentlemen (one being
Justice of Peace) agreed to have their difference to be ordered by another
Justice of Peace. Ergo, one of these Justices of Peace has Dominion over the
other. Of the Basilius Epist. 52. ad Athanasiu^; tribuit Romano Episcopo
authoritatem visitandi Ecclesias orientis. See above Capit. 12.. 4. and after
at. 7.
Sixth, which is Basil, much has been said already, somewhat more presently
after. From the Gregorius Nazianzenus in Carmine dicit Romanam Ecclesiam semper
conse^uasse veram de Deo sententi^m, vt decet vrbem quae toti orbi praesidet.
He says not Ecclesia praesidet, but V^bs; meaning the Temporal state of Rome.
Ob Sol. Although the Emperor resided at Constantinople, yet was he styled of
Rome, The Roman Emperor. For Rome was after this time called (...) i.e.
Omnium Ciuitatum facile Princeps. Socrates lib. 2. Cap 11. Theod. lib. 4. Cap.
8.
Seventh, which is Gregory Nazianzene, and the Zomen. lib 3. Cap. 9. Propter
sedis dignitatem cura omnium ad Iulium spectabat, singulis Ecclesiam suam
restituit, nempe Athanasium Alexandrino, and Paulo Constantinopolitano He did
so pro posse suo, but was resisted by the Eastern Bishops, and reviled. Ibid
Where Zozomen is not to be understood to speak these words from his own
judgment, but from the opinion that Pope Julius had of himself. For it
follows in Zozomen, that those East-Bishop^, expostulating the Cause with
Pope Julius, did protest against him, saying that he had no more to do with
restoring Athanasius Excommunicated by them, than they had to restore Nouatus
Excommunicated by himself. And the help that Athanasius had was not in the
Pope absolutely, but in the Synod.
Eight namely Zozomene, as if thus: The Parish within the Tower of London
lives in peace, as becomes that place, which commands the whole City. As
though the word [ Command] in this place did note the Ecclesiastical part,
that is, the Parish to be Commander, and not the Tower it self, Politickely
understood. From the Chrysostom. Epist. 1. ad Innocentium Papam. Obsecro vt
scribas, vt illi qui inique egerunt poenae Ecclesiastic^rum legum subiaceant.
Ergo Papa summus Pontifex etiam Graecorum 2. Agnoscit Papae Paternam
beneuolentiam; Ergo patrem. 3. Orat Papam ne mimicos ejus eijciat. When the
General Canons of Election of a Patriarch were broken, well might Chrysostom
seek help of a Co-Patriarch Innocentius, to defend the Canon, so far as his
Authority would reach, and to punish them by Excommunication, which was but
only a Separation from Communion with his own Church. And Innocentius himself
confesses (Epist. ad Chrysostom.) that he would not restore Chrysostom without
a Synod. See Binius Tom. 1. and when he had done his best, his Authority was
rejected with scorn; yet could Chrysostom do no less than thankefully
acknowledge his Fatherly care, being now no Bishop, but Deposed.
Ninth, to wit Crysostome, as if a King of Poland unjustly deposed by his
people, and flying to the King of Hungary for help, to preserve the Law of
Nations, for the Regality of Kings, and thanking him for his Fatherly love and
care; did thereby acknowledge the King of Hungary to be a King over the King
of Poland. Of the Cyrillus Alexandrinus Epist. 10. ad Nest. and Epist. 11. ad
Clerum et populum Constantinop. Nestorium dicit excommunicandum ab omnibus,
nisi intra terminos a Papa praescriptos se reuocet. Et ad Coelestinum. Number
velit cum Nestorio ad tempus aliquod communicari, petit ab eo. Ergo Is
administer, Papa iudex. Rursus in libro de Thesauro; Debemus capiti nostro
Romano Pontifici adhaerere. See after. 7.
Tenth, to wit, Cyrill of Alexandria, presently after. From the Theodoretus
Episcopus Asianus ad Leonem. Obsecro vt mihi opem feras, iudicium tuum
appellanti. Meaning a Subsidiarie judgment, not absolute. Binius Tom. 2. Annot
in Conc. Chalced. Sess. 8. page 184. Theodoretus Cypri Episcopus depositus, and
tanquam qui Nestorianus esset exulate coactus, ad Romanum Pontificem, aliosque
orientis Epi^copos, hac de re diu multumque conquestus, se vere Catholicum esse
probans literis significauit, -- in hoc consessu ins^iterunt, vt Anathema
Nestorio dicerent, sed in pristiuam fidem est restitutus; namely, by the Synod
of the Bishops in the East.
Eleventh, that is Theodoret, somewhat differing from the former, thus; As if
the Bishop of Arles in France, being deposed by a Synod of his fellow Bishops,
for Heresy, desiring help for his Restitution from the Bishop of Paris, and
also from other Bishops within his own Province, by auouching unto him and
them his Orthodoxe Faith; and being thereupon restored by the same Synod, by
which he was repulsed, did therefore judge the Bishop of Paris the Supreme
Judge of all the other Bishops. From the Acacius in Epist. ad Smplicium.
Solicitudinem omnium Ecclesiarum, secundum Apostolum, circum-ferentes, nos
indesinenter hortamini. Acacius meant not to make the Pope a Monarch by this,
because he alludeth to that saying of the Apostle, (not of Peter, but of Paul)
that said, I have the care of all Churches: and Chrysostom himself; Curam
Vniuersae Ecclesiae gerimus. Hom. 18. in 2. Cor. 11.
Twelfth, who was Acacius, as if one should argue thus: The King of Great
Britain might have been surnamed Pacificus, because he had a Care of the
Peace of all Christendom; therefore he ought to be held Supreme above the
Emperor. Or thus, that Saint Paul, who used the same speech now Objected, of
having the care of all Churches, must therefore be esteemed to have had a
Government above Peter, and all the other Apostles. From the Liberatus de
Episopo Patarensi, in Breuiario Cap. 22. Pontifex Romanus praeest Ecclesiijs
totius mundi. De quo Bellar. lib. 4. de Romans Pont. Cap. 10.. Posset. Possit
dici epistolam illam Vigilij cuius meminit Liberatus, confictam fuisse ab
Haereticis, Liberatum autem credidisse falso rumori, quem Haeretici sparserant.
And would he not be as well deceived in this? 2. This Greek Author must be
taken in the Greek sense, of Primacy or Order. 3. Justinian promised to
restore Syluerius, upon condition that he would clear himself, otherwise to
be confined to one City Patarensis that labored the Release of Syluerius, did
not oppose against this Condition. Baronius, anno 538 number. 13.
Thirteenth, viz. Liberatus, as if thus: Although Liberatus, who was an Author
that had been deceived by Heretics, in giving credit to their false and
forged writings, does thus report, yet we must not distrust him, when he
reports for the Pope. Or else thus: We must believe that of the Bishop of
Patara, which he himself could not believe. The Iustinianus Epistola ad
Iohannem 2, quae habetur, in Codice, in primo Titulo. Quae est Caput omnium
Ecclesiarum. If we should grant you, that that Rescript is not Counterfeit, yet
He means no more, but Primus Episcoporum. As for the word [Caput] you have
heard how common ^^ has been, without any sense of Monarchy.
last, who is Justinian, has been already answered by a Parallel of other
Bishops and Bishoprics, which have been called Heads of all Churches,
without any color of a Crown of Monarchy.

Our Second discovery of the falsehood and Vanity of your former Consequence,
taken from the Testimonies of some of the Ancient Fathers above mentioned.
SECT. 7.
THe Fathers that have been alleged were of the Eastern Church, and
therefore doubtless were of the Faith of those General Councels in the East,
which have See above Cap. 9.
been known to oppose themselves to the pretended Papal Jurisdiction, as often
as they had just Cause so to do. Which one Consideration ought to be your full
satisfaction in this point. Notwithstanding, for a clearer conviction of that
falsehood, which we have been constrained so often to complain of in your
Obiectors, We proceed to a Second Answer, which is by Retorsion, in auouching
your own witnesses against you.

Saint Basil is the Sea after at q.
Sixth Witness which your Cardinal produced: one so adverse to your Cause, as
that he (you See above, Cap. 12.. 4.
know) fell into an extreme distrust of the Church of Rome, which be justly
condemned of Pride and Ignorance; and also accounted Athanasius Bishop of
Antioch to be in his time (in respect of his sound and sincere judgment) The
Chief Head of all others. If now Saint Basil cannot be called a Subject to
your Monarch, the Pope of Rome, then ought you to have patience with
Protestants, who have tenne-fold more just cause aginst the Church of Rome,
than he at that time possibly could have.

Saint Cyrill Patriarch of Alexandria has been cited for the Sea above at t.
Ninth witness; whom (because his Testimony requires a larger discussion) we
have reserved to this place. The Story concerning him (as you may collect out
of your Baronius Anno 412. ^um. 43.
Baronius) consists of Three parts: 1. In behalf of Theophilus, Predecessor
to Cyrill, the 2. Touching Atticus Patriarch of Constantinople, an Admonisher
of Cyrill, the 3. Is acted by Cyrill himself.

Theophilus Patriarch of Alexandria, and Predecessor to Cyrill, was Ibidem number
44. and. 46.
Excommunicated by Pope Innocentius, for not admitting of the name of
Chrysostom (now dead) into the Dyptickes, or Tables of public Commemorations:
in which Excommunication the same Theophilus continued until the last hour of
his death. And how little support you can have for that, which your Cardinal
adds, touching his altering of his opinion at the very point of death, will
appear in handling the Second and Third part.

Secondly therefore Atticus Patriarch of Constantinople, who had run the same
course of Opposition with Theophilus, against the Restoring of the Name of
Chrysostom, now after the death of Theophilus inclines to the other side; and
understanding that Cyrill was chosen Patriarch of Alexandria, in succession of
Theophilus, he writes to Cyril an Epistle, wherein he recompteth Theophilus in
the number of Jbidem number. 47. Theophilus i^ Sanctis.
Saints, and seeks to persuade Cyrill to the Restoring of Chrysostomes name
into the public Records. But will you know by what Reasons? even by the
Conference had with the Emperor Theodosius, and signifying that he was Jbidem
number. 47 Populi concordiae gratia, (necessitate premente) ne Religionis res ex
populi arbitrio penderet. Baronius in the Margent notes: Cogitur Atticus
restituere nomen Iohannis. And Anno 425, number. 19. Ostendimus Atticum coactum
fuisse ab Innocentio Roman^ Pontifice restituere nomen Iohannis. And yet never
produces any place to prove it, but this forenamed in Number 49. which speaks
only of ae Necessity occasioned by the Tumult of the people; as the Precedents
and Consequents of that Parenthesis do plainly show.
Urged unto it by the necessity of the present distraction and tumultuousnesse
of the people: but not so much as in one syllable to have any consideration of
the Popes will and Command, or of the danger of his Excommunication; belike the
stinch of that his Thunderbolt was not so rank and noisome in his days. Nay
contrarily, as ( Ibidem number. 50. Scil. ad -- 412. Quod in Romanam Ecclesiam, a
cuius communione iamdiu rejectus fuerat, esset perinfensus, Paulinum and
Euagrium Episcopos defunctos, qui illi commnunicauerant, Schismaticos vocat.
Baronius will have us to observe) Atticus (even at this time of his yielding
to the restoring of the name of Chrysostom) being extremely displeased with
the Church of Rome, by which he himself had been excommunicated, called other
two Eastern Bishops Schismatickes, even because they had joined in Communion
with her. What? call men Schismatickes, for joining Communion with the Church
of Rome? Then it is plain, that he yields not to the Restoring of
Chrysostom's Name by compulsion of the Pope, as has been fained. And it is
as clear, that Theophilus did not recant his former judgment at the point of
death; else would Atticus have used this as an Argument to persuade Cyrill, in
behalf of Chrysostom; especially making mention of Theophilus in the same
Epistle: and whether rather Atticus, that lived in the same Time with
Theophilus, know better the manner thereof, or a Relator that came many hundred
years after, judge you. But (which is most evident of all) Atticus, although
he did now That which was desired of the Pope of Rome, concerning Chrysostom,
notwithstanding calling those Bishops Schismatickes, who for their respect to
Chrysostom joined Communion with that Excommunicating Church of Rome, and yet
naming Theophilus a Saint; does prove sufficiently that Theophilus, whom the
Pope had Excommunicated, never sought to have Union with him before his death.
Nevertheless this Atticus, Eighteen years after his death, was acknowledged
by Pope Celestinus to have been Baronius anno 432. number. 13. Atticus
reuerendissimae momoriae vi^, and Catholicae fidei propugnator fortissimus. Ex
Epistola Coelestini.
A most strong Champion for the Catholic Faith.

Now enters Cyrill himself to act his own part. He, after he had
professed his defense of the Canon of Nice against Chrysostom, returns this
Answer to Atticus: Idem anno 412. number. 53. Ex quo, etc. Epistola Cyrilli ad
Atticum.
Since the time that you Atticus (says he) have been Bishop in the Sea of
Constantinople, no man resisted your meetings or Synods in the Church, or if
any wilfully separated themselves, yet by the grace of Christ they were
recalled. And who was there among the Magistrates, that was not obedient unto
you? Or what one man for this cause is now without the Church? Surely none. But
you tell me that, since your relenting, much peace has insued in the Churches:
be it so, yet there being so many Churches with us, which stand out against the
restoring of the name of Chrysostom, we may not dissent from them. Thus Saint
Cyrill in his Epistle, as your Cardinal has related. Where he speaks of
the Churches of Constantinople and Antioch: of Constantinople he affirms
that at all times (therefore in the time when Atticus himself the Bishop of
Constantinople was Excommunicated by the Church of Rome, as has been
confessed) both Clergy, Magistrates, and people within those Churches did
(notwithstanding the Papal disunion, and Separation) Communicate with
Atticus. And now concerning his own Patriarchall Church of Alexandria, Cyril
himself professes that he must not dissent from it, and many other Churches
in Greece, that yielded not to the Decree of the Church of Rome: which again
overthrows your Article of absolute Necessity of Subjection to the Roman
Church.

Cyrill proceeds in his Answer to Atticus: Inobedientes. etc Ibid. number. 56.
But we condemn them (says he) that obey not the power of God, using that
saying (of the Prophet,) we have cured Babylon, and she is not healed; let us
forsake her. For we may not (because of the speeches of some, if any such
speeches be) suffer the Canons of the Church to be abolished. So he. By which
words he labors to persuade Atticus again to gainsay the Commemoration of
Chrysostom, which the Pope, by all his means of threats of Excommunications,
and persuasions, sought to effect. But what of all this? will you say. What?
hearken to your Cardinal. Ibidem number. 60. Consideres hic velim, etc.
Reader, I would have thee Consider (says he) that in this bitterness of
contention which Cyrill now had, against the Restitution of the name of
Chrysostom, and against whom he inueigheth in this Epistle, yet for Reverence
sake he durst not say any thing openly and expressly against Pope
Innocentius, who was the Author and chief cause of restoring Chrysostomes name
into the Dyptickes, and revenged himself upon those that withstood it, as did
Theophilus Predecessor to Cyril, whom for that cause the Pope deprived of his
Communion. Thus far reaches your Cardinals Consideration.

From whence you may be pleased to consider with us how slily and smoothly your
Cardinal slydeth over this piece of ice, for fear breaking it, and of falling
in. Cyrill (forsooth) for Reverence durst not say any thing openly against Pope
Innocentius* who authorized the restoring of Chrysostom, etc. As though it
might not be said, Quid verba audiam, cum facta videam? words are but shadows,
deeds are substantialls. And Cyrill did more, and that openly, than your
Cardinal says he durst say. For knowing that Theophilus had been
Excommunicate, for Opposing the Decree of the Pope, yet does Cyrill persist in
the same Opposition: which may be a second Argument unto us, that Theophilus
had not recanted before his death.

Secondly, knowing that Atticus, Patriarch of Constantinople had been likewise
deprived of the Popes Communion, notwithstanding does Cyrill persuade Atticus,
by his letters, to stand in the defense of the same Cause.

Thirdly, knowing that Pope Innocentius did still urge the advancing of the
Memory of Chrysostom, nevertheless does Cyrill actually resist it. Can a man
interpret it a point of Reverence toward a Monarch, to say nothing, and yet
openly to withstand his Monarchy? So false in those days was your Article of
Necessity of Subjection to the Church of Rome, in the judgment of Saint
Cyrill, who indeed deserved of the Church of Christ the Title of a Saint, and
is so acknowledged by Bellar. lib. de Scriptoribus Ecclesiasticis. Tit. Sanctus
Cyrillus Alexandrinus.
your selves.

Gladly would your Baronius Anno 412. number. 69. Vt Nicephorus lib. 14. Cap. 28.
Videre (inquit) visus est Cyrillus se ipsum sacris aedibus expulsum a Ionanne,
comitatu, and diuino, quod circa eum erat, satellitio maxim freto. -- Proinde
Synodum Prouincialem coegit, and Iohannis nomen simul and ipse and reliqui --
in sacro Albo proposuerunt.
Baronius (if it might be) support your Cause by the Testimony of Nicephorus,
who shows that Cyrill reformed his judgment before his death. But if were it
reasonable to believe a Tale of Nicephorus (an Author often reproved by your
selves, for his Fabulousnesse) being made more than Eight hundred year after
the party is dead, yet can it not any whit serve your turn; because he
tells that Cyrill corrected his error, concerning his dis-estimation of
Chrysostom, moved thereunto by a Vision that he had, wherein He thought he
saw Chrysostom expelling him out of the Church; and therefore he assembled a
Provincial Synod, for the restoring of the name of Chrysostom into the
public Tables of the Church. We should have expected, in a Case concerning
your Papal Monarchy, that Cyrill that was thus moved by a Vision of
Chrysostom, to repent the not-restoring of his name, should have much more
been moved by his certain knowledge of the displeasure of your Supreme
Monarch the Pope of Rome, who did nothing but flash and thunder out
Excommunications against all Opposites: and that the Restitution of
Chrysostomes name should have been done simply by Submission to the same Popes
Decree, and not only according to Cyrill his determination, by the consent of
his own Provincial Council: or that the Cause of alteration should have
been (if Nicephorus may deserve any credit) only by virtue of a Vision in a
dream.

The Sea above at x.
Eleventh, and (for we should be two tedious to pursue your Cardinals
inconsionableness in each one) the last, that we shall insist in, is Acacius
Bishop of Constantinople. He is brought in to witness, in his Epistle to Pope
Simplicius, that the same Pope had The Care of all Churches, as if the word,
Universal Care of all Churches, did conclude an Universal power and Monarchy
over them all. The Vanity of which Consequence See above in diverse places.
has been discovered by diverse Instances in Others, to whom the like
Universal Care of all Churches was applied; as unto Saint Paul, in the days
of Peter, to Athanasius in the days of Pope Julius, and to the Bishops of
France, in the days of Pope Eleutherius; in whom you will swear (we know)
there was nothing less intended than a Monarchical Popedom. But that this
sense should be collected out of the words of Acacius, it exceeds all limits
of modesty. For what one Bishop can you name of those times, that ever opposed
himself more against the Jurisdiction of the Pope of Rome, than did this
Patriarch of Constantinople, Acacius?

This you may easily try, by the manifold outcries of Baronius upon him, for
his defense of Peter Mogge, by him established in the Bishopric of
Alexandria, against the will of the same Pope Simplicius, calling him a
Baronius Anno 478. number. 6 Acacius phrenesi abre^tus, aduersus Rom Pontificem
violentus insurgit. Et anno 483. number. 78. Recipit, quos Felix Papa damnauit.
Frantic man violently opposite unto the Bishop of Rome; insomuch that the
Pope did Idem anno 484. number. 17. Papa sententiam Excommunications in Acacium
profert.
Excommunicate him: but he showed his contempt of that Censure sufficiently,
by living and dying therein. Was not this Witness worthily selected by your
Cardinal, trow you? who, in that he says, does nothing advantage Papal
claim; and in that which he publicly works and acts, does quite overthrow
it.

We may not let pass the public Sanction and Decree of the Emperor Leo
Imperator lib. 16. ca. de sacrosancta Eccl. Ijs quae contra haec -- innouata
sunt, tam contra venerabiles Ecclesias, quarum sacerdotium gerit Beatissimus ac
religiocissimus Patriarcha nostrae Pietatis pater Acacius etc. -- Sacrosanctam
quoque religiosissimae huius Ciuitatis Ecclesiam, and Mat^em nostrae pietatis,
and Christianorum O^thodoxae Religionis omnium, and eiusdem regiae vrbis
sanctissimam sedem priuilegia and honores omnes super Episcopo^um creationibus,
and iure ante alios residendi and coetera omnia, quae ante Imperium nostrum,
vel nobis imperantibus habuisse dignoscitur, habere in perpe^uum firmiter
Regiae Vrbis intuitu iudicamus and sancimus. Baronius an. 472. Number. 3.4.
Leo, whereby he authorized and ratified the great dignity of the
Patriarchship of Constantinople, and the Patriarch thereof. For therein he
calls Acacius A most blessed and religious Patriarch: the Church of
Constantinople he names The Mother of all Christians, that profess the
Orthodox Religion: the Privileges of that Church he requires and decrees to
be as ample as ever they at any time had been before, or in the time of his
Empire; and to continue in the same latitude and extent perpetually to all
future ages. This is the effect of this Emperors Decree: and can this accord
with your Romish Monarchy?

Your Ad haec Leonis verba sic Baronius, Anno 47^. number. 4. Haec Leo, sed Acacij
fastu tumentis proculdubio verbis concepta, and stylo superbiae exarata. Haud
enim pij Principis verba illa esse potuerint, quibus dicitur
Constantinopolitanam Ecclesiam Christianorum omnium, and Orthodoxae Religionis
Matrem esse.
Baronius the chief Herald that we can read of, for the blazoning and
magnifying of it, will say No: for he fretteth at the very heart in reading of
it, and therefore upon his own sole conjecture will have his Reader think,
that the frame of this Sanction was styled by Acacius himself, that called the
Church of Constantinople, The Mother of all Christians professing the Orthodox
Faith; and that therefore these were not (says he) the words of that godly
Emperor. So he.

As though the Church of Constantinople, so large in its own Ecclesiastical
Dioces, and by reason of the Imperial Seat in that City, so potent in the
discharge of Patriarchall Function, might not be called the Mother of All
Orthodoxall Churches; although not as Rome falsely and ridiculously styles her
self, as if she were the Procreating Mother of all Churches, since Christ, and
so (for many See above discussed at large Cap. 3.
Churches Christian were planted before Rome) a Mother, before she was borne a
Child: yet a Nursing Mother might Constantinople be then justly named, so
far as her care and endeavor sought and labored the Conservation of all
others in piety and Religion. But, not to stand upon the Style, look upon the
Matter it self, and then will this Godly Emperor prove, as Theodosius, and
other Predecessors before him, a Patron of the Privileges of the Church of
Constantinople, Equal with the Prerogatives of ROME, according to the Decree
of the General Council of See above Cap. 8.. 5.
Chalcedon, notwithstanding the much fuming and fretting of your Popes thereat,
to this day. And who can blame your later and Monarchical Popes, who know
right well that Monarchy brooketh no Aequalitie. Caesar, if he will be
Monarch, must be either Solus, or Nullus; only One, or None at all.

CHALLENGE.
IF the importunity of the Cause had not exacted of us so large a discourse,
we might have spared thus much pains, which we have bestowed in this
disquisition, for the discovery of the Vanity of your Romish Claim, by the
Testimony of the Ancient Fathers in the Greek Church, wherein have bin laid
open so many falsehoods of your Bellarmine.
Proctor, as that he may be justly suspected to have pleaded your Roman Cause
Strenue sane, fervently enough, but (according to the Proverb) Graeca fide.

Your Objections from the Sentences of Latin Fathers for your Papal Defense,
and the Falsehood and Vanity thereof discovered. First from Saint Cyprian.
SECT. 8.
THE First Father, whom your Cardinal produces, for proof that the Church of
ROME and Bishop thereof is sole Monarke over all other Churches and Bishops, is
Cyprian: we say, Cyprian that Pole-starre of true Bishops, and admirable
Martyr of Christ, whom, we have proved, to have been, by his writings, as an
Ecclesiastical Hanniball at the gates of Rome, crying defiance to the presumed
Monarchy thereof. And sooner shall your Cardinal pull the Club of Hercules
out of his hands, than wrest away from Cyprians writings the Patronage, which
Protestants thence have for defense of this present Cause.

The Objection of your Cardinal is only a racking of certain phrases of
Cyprian, as namely Bellar. lib. 2. de Romans Pont. Cap. 16. ex Cypriano de
Vnitate, [Neque Caput quaeritur, -- Ecclesiam vnam in radice.] Ex lib. 1.
Epist. 1. ad Cornelium. [Haereses obortae sunt, quod non sacerdoti Dei
obtemperatur, nec vnus -- ad tempus sacerdos, and iudex -- vice Christi
cogitatur] etc. Vbi intelligit Cornelium. Et lib. 2. Epist. 1^. ad eundem
Cornelium: [Nouatianus contrar^um caput extra Ecclesiam fecit;] nempe
Contratium Cornelio tanquam Capiti Or^hodoxorum. Et lib. 1. Epist. 8 ad plebem
vniuersam. [Deus vnus, vna Ecclesia, and Cathedra vna super Petrum fundata --
vnum Sacerdotium.] Certe intelli^it vnam Cathedram, and Ecclesiam unam numero,
non specie; and Cathedram vnam singularem quae totam Ecclesiam docet. Et lib.
de Vnitate, vbi dicit. [Episcopatus vnus est, etc] vbi Episcopatus vnus
intelligitur vt Ecclesia vna: vt multi rami vna arbor, ratione vnius radicis
seu Capitis. Et cum dicit [Episcopatus vnus est, cuius a singulis in solidum
pars tenetur] sed non aequalis, neque eodem modo. Et Epist. ad Quintum, vbi
dicit [Neminem se facere Episcopum Episcoporum] loquitur de ijs qui erant in
Carthaginensi Ecclesia. Et vbi addit [Episcopum non iudicari nisi a solo Deo]
loquitur de rebus dubijs and occultis. Haec Bellarminus. This last, as well as
the rest, he could not but know to be false, for he spoke it in the Question
concerning Rebap^ization, which he himself believed (his own word) as
Manifest.
One Church, one Root, one Priest in Christ his stead, one Chair, one
Bishopric, one Bishop, etc. Every one of these Ones he expounds to point
out in special the Proper Church of Rome, and not to be either used Generally,
for what soever Church or Bishop else, nor yet particularly for Cyprian
himself, or for the Church of Carthage, whereof he was Bishop. This is the
maine issue of this Cause, concerning the Testimonies of Cyprian.

Two Forms of Answering lie directly before us: First is, that Cyprian may be
expounded by his own Words. Secondly, that his Words may be interpreted by his
Works. Cyprian de Vnitate Ecclesiae. Vnam Cathedram co^stituit, and vnitatis
Originem ab vno incipientem sua authoritate disposuit. Hoc erant vtique and
ceteri Apostoli, quod fuit Petrus, pari consortio praediti, and honoris and
potestatis, sed exordium ab vnitare proficiscitur, vt Eccles^a vna monstretur
Tract. 3. de Simplicit. Praelatorum. Edit. Basil. apud Frob. Anno 1525.
One Chair (says he) beginning at Peter; but to signify that he meant not
the Chair of Jurisdiction in One, but of Union equally in Many, he adds: The
other Apostles were the same with Peter, endued with equal honor and power.
Therefore by [ Chaire] he meant not any particular See of Peter, but the Union
of one Universal Church, governed by an Aristocraticall Equality of many.

We leave the true Peter, and come to the counterfeit, whom you call your Pope,
and see if you can take any better hold either at the word Episcopatus,
Bishopric, or Episcopus, Bishop. Cum sit a Christo Ecclesia vna per totum
mundum in multa membra diuisa, item Episcopatus vnus Episcoporum multorum
concordi numerositate diffusus. Cyprian lib. 4. Epist. 2. ad Antonianum.
There is one Bishopric (says Cyprian) dispersed throughout the world,
consisting of the unanimous multitude of many Bishops. If by One Bishopric
were meant only the Sea of Rome, then should there be so many Bishops of Rome,
as there are Bishops throughout the world. This one Sentence of Cyprian
breaks the neck of your Cardinals conceit, that will have us to understand
by [ Bishopricke] in Cyprian the Individual Bishopric of the Pope of Rome,
and not a general Complexion and Comprehension of All.

But that you may further know that Cyprian himself will challenge a part in
this Bishopric, as well as the Pope, Quam vnitatem firmiter tenere debemus,
qui in Ecclesia praesidemus vt Episcopatum quoque ipsi vnum and indiuisum
probemus. Item. --

Episcopatus vnus est, cuius a singulis in solidum pars tenetur. Cyprian. de
Vnitat. Ecclesi^e.


We (says he) that govern in the Church ought to hold Unity, that so we may
prove the Bishopric to be but one: The Bishopric is but one, a portion
whereof is wholly and fully held of Every Bishop. To signify that, in the
Essential nature of a Bishop, every Bishop is equal, and the Collection of
All does equally make up this One Universal Bishopric. Which can no more
agree (as your Cardinal would have it) to the Particular Bishopric of Rome,
than if he would conclude, that because there is One Manhood, whereof every
man whatsoever in the world has equally a portion, therefore this Manhood is
proper to Clement Pope of Rome.

If your Plea fail in the word One Bishopric, it will never prevail in the
word One Bishop; for Bishopric and Bishop are Relatiues, and infer the same
Consequence. Cyprian writing to Pope Cornelius, says that Vnum E^iscopum in
Catholica Ecclesia esse debere. Cyprian li. 3. Epist. 11.
There ought to be but One Bishop in the Catholic Church: which sounds in
the brains of your Pamelius in eum locum, and Bellarminus.
Teachers, that by Catholic Church is meant the Universal Church of Christ;
and by One Bishop particularly Cornelius the then Bishop of Rome: A Gloss
which neither Cyprian, nor Cornelius himself will admit. Not Cornelius, who
describing the lewd properties of Nouatus, who sought to snatch the Bishopric
of Rome from him, Nouatum omnino praeterijt, scilicet, vnum solum Episcopum
(...) -- in qua tamen non ignorabat Presbyteros esse quadraginta sex, Diaconos
septem, etc. Apud Eusebium. li. 6, cap. 35.
Nouatus (says he) would have us to think forsooth that he did forget that
there ought to be but One Bishop in the Catholic Church, wherein there are six
and forty Priests, and seven Deacons: where the word Catholic Church is not
taken in the proper sense of Universal Church (as you would have it, to make
him an Universal Bishop) but it is taken for a Church professing the Catholic
Faith: in which signification the word Catholic Church does agree as well with
any Orthodox Church, as with the Church of Rome. You discern this as well as
we, for he speaks expressly of a Catholic Church which has but Forty and
six Priests, and but seven Deacons. You are (we think) already ashamed to
hear of such a paucitie of Priests and Deacons within albeit but the Suburbs
of the City of Rome: which to pronounce of the whole and Universal Church
Catholic, throughout the world, seems to be as loud a lie, almost, as can be
in the Universal world, and as little truth then can there be in your
Objections.

We return to Cyprian, who sometimes speaks of One Bishop at large, and
sometimes with Relation to himself. Cyprian lib. 4. Epist. 2. ad Antonianum,
de Nouatiano. Episcopatum autem tenere non posset, etiamsi Episcopus prius
factus a Coepiscorporm suorum Corpore.
Nouatian (says he) could not obtain the Bishopric (meaning of Rome)
although he had bin made Bishop (namely thereof) by his fellow Bishops, that
is to say, Nouatian Bishops. Who then should have the Bishopric? Who, but
Cornelius, who was made Bishop of Rome (for this is implied) by his Orthodox
fellow Bishops? If in this place [ Bishop] must signify One only Bishop, how
comes the Bishop of Rome to have Fellow-Bishops? Do not [ Onely] and [ Also]
make a plain Solecisme? And other Bishops there always were; except when you
make only the Pope the One Bishop, as the only Vicar of Christ, you make all
other Bishops (against your own Conclusions) to be but the Vicars of the Pope.

At the length Cyprian comes to plead his own Cause. Once writing to Pope
Cornelius, Dico dolens, dicoque compulsus, quando Episcopus in locum defuncti
substituitur, quando a pospuli vniuersi sufiragio in pace degitur, quando --
collegis omnibus fideliter iunctus, plebi suae in Episcopatu quadriennio iam
probatus etc. Cypr. l. 1. Epi. 3.
I cannot but speak with grief (says he) and I am constrained to say it,
when a Bishop elected in peace, and approved of his people Four years, etc.
Where, by [ Bishop] he could not understand Cornelius Pope of Rome, who lived
Bishop but Bellar. Chronol. pars 2. Anno 254.
Two years; but meant indeed himself. Again, writing to his Adversary
Pupianus, who sought to ouertop him, Cyprian. l. 4. Ep. 9. ad Pupianum. Vnde
Schismata and Haereses obortae sunt, nisi dum Episeopus, qui Vnus est, and
Ecclesiae praeest, superba quorundam praesumptione contemnitur? -- Etiam sex
annis ( Jronic(...)) nec fraternitas habuerit Episcopum, nec grex Pastorem, --
nec Christus Antistitem, nec deus sacerdotem. -- Tu iudicem te nostri
constitueris.
Hence sprang Schisms and Haeresies (says Cyprian) when that one Bishop, that
governs the Church, is insolently contemned: as who should say, the
Fraternity has not had a Bishop these six years, nor the Flock a
Shepherd, nor God a Priest. Which words, the injury he received of his
Adversary, compelled him to speak of himself; and his own modesty, to
speak in the Third person, as not of himself. Lastly, when he calls the
Church Haec est vna (Ecclesia) quae possidet omnem sui domini potestatem: in
hac praesidemus. Cyprian. ad Iubaianum. Ep. 77. edit. Pamil.
One, which (says he) possesses all the grace of Christ; the spouse of the
Church, wherein (speaking of himself) we have authority and rule: must the
word [ Church] here also Indiuidually point out the Particular Church of Rome?
So should Cyprian be said to have governed the Particular See of Rome, which
whether it were alone, or with Cornelius, it dissolueth his Monarchy?

What shall we say to the sayings of Cyprian? if he had believed your Article
of Papal Monarchy, as a Doctrine of Faith, he that laid down his life, for
the Profession of our true Monarke and Head Christ, the Lord of life, was h^e
either such a Coward, that he durst not plainly profess this Faith? or else
such an Infant as that he could not express it in the proper style of that
Article, concerning the Pope of Rome, the Bishop of Bishops, the Father of
Fathers, the High Priest of Christ, and Monarch of the Universal Church, or at
least some one Syllable to that effect? of which Attributes your Cardinal has
made a fair Diadem, and fitted it only to your Head, the Pope. And so
indeed Cyprian would have instiled Pope Cornelius, if he had bin of your
Faith: For Mat. 12.34.
Out of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaks. Yet what Faith did that
holy mouth of Saint Cyprian utter, in his inscribing of Pope Cornelius? In all
his See his Epistles.
Epistles to that Pope, he saluteth him with only Charissime Frater, Most
dear Brother, and takes his Vale with the same, Most dear Brother, Farewell.
And in his Epistles unto others, falling into mention of the same Pope
Cornelius, whom he indeed both much loved and honored, yet he exceeds not
these Epithets: Lib. 4. Epist. 2. ad Antoni. Coepiscopo nostro Cornelio: --
Fratrem Cornelium -- Collegam nostrum Cornelium, etc. Frater Antoniane. And so
in his Epistles ad Iubaianum, ad Pupianu, and others.
Our fellow-Bishop Cornelius, our Colleague, or fellow in office Cornelius, and
O Brother Antonianus, our Brother Cornelius, etc. Behold this in a secular
glass, and conceive what a despite it were unto a King, to hear his Vassal
salute him with a Farewell fellow Henry. Fie, fie; what will you make of the
Fathers? will you judge them so witless, or senseless as not to have
understood their Morals? Yet so you propound them. For some where they give
glorious Titles to the Popes of Rome, and in every such one, you point out the
Pope, the Monarch of the Church; notwithstanding the same Fathers gave the like
Titles also to See above,
others: Sometime they join more familiarly with Popes, by Terms of
Fellowship and Brotherhood, and yet even then also you will have them to
believe your Pope to be their Monarch. What Solecismes must these be? The
First, as if one should put the Diadem upon the Kings foot: the Second, as if
he should put the Kings shoe upon his head. This is not spoken by us, to note
the holy Fathers of such default (far be it from us) but to condemn your
Authors and Disputers of want of sobriety, that thus reason beyond all reason.
Thus have you heard Cyprian interpret his Words by his own Word.

Will you now hear Cyprian speak by his Acts and Deeds? we shall but be your
remembrancers of that which has bin largely proved already, as namely Cyprian
his See above, cap. 12.. 2.
Reprehending and taunting the person of Stephen the Pope of Rome, and
Successor to Cornelius, contradicting his Decrees, opposing his Roman
Council, disclaiming his claim of Appeals, contemning his threats of
Excommunication. Can you persuade your selves that Cyprian could have escaped
the cruelty of your Romish Inquisition, if he had lived, and so behaved
himself a Bishop among you at this day? All this while we have said nothing of
the Sea our Doctor James Observations, In operibus Cypriani supposititia
Epistola 3. Cleri Romans ad Clerum Carthaginen. Supposititia Epist. 67. Stephano
Fratri.
Corruptions of the writings of Cyprian, which your Papalists feed upon.

Our like Discovery of the like Vanity of your Proofs, out of other the
Latin Fathers. SECT. 9.
THE Second Father is OPTATVS. Concerning whom your Objection makes f^r us a
good Answer. For if Optatus (as he Bellarmin. lib. 2. de Romans Pont. cap. 16.
Optatus Cypriani sententiam sequitur de Vnica Cathedra and singulari non solum
Petri, sed successorum eius, vsque ad Sy^icium. Optatus contra Parmenianum. Vbi
dicit Quinque esse Ecclesiae totius dotes, ac primam esse Vnicam Petri
Cathedram, in qua ab omnibus seruari debet Vnitas.
says) followed the judgment of Cyprian, than it follows that the foresaid
Judgment of Cyprian may resolve us of the Doctrine of Optatus; to wit, that by
One Chair or Church, he meant the whole Universal Church professing the same
Catholic Faith; and that the Particular Church of Rome, as it then stood, was
an excellent Portion thereof, built upon the same Faith of Peter, which all
Christians profess: but only a Portion, because the same Father obiecteth
against the Donatists their want of Union with the Churches of Asia (commended
by Saint John in his Revelation) as well as with Rome. You have no fellowship
(says he) with the seven Angels of Asia: whatsoever is without these Seven
Churches is an alien; namely, from the Catholic Church and Salvation. Which
Doctrine of Optatus is sufficient to prove all Appropriators of an Infallible
and Perpetual Church, Optatus lib. 2. Catholica est Ec^lesia, quae est in ^oto
terrarum orb diffusa, eius iam sunt commemoranda ornamenta -- inter quas
Cathedra est prima -- quae Vnica page 39. But not s^le Roman: For he adds
Page 47. Nullam communionem habere probamini cum septem Angelis, qui sunt apud
socios nostros in Asia. -- Extra septem Ecclesias, quicquid foris est alienum
est.
to only Rome, to be little better then Donatists. If you require a further
Answer, you may receive it from a far more elegant pen, which will tell you
that Optatus in eodem libro Octauo loquitur aperte de Communione vnitatis non
Dominii; paulo post dicit, poterant Apostoli non communicare cum B. Petro, and
recitare verba Christi de Petro negaturo se, and tamen bono vnitatis, etc. Et
in lib. 5. Est ergo in vniuersis seruientibus non Dominium sed obsequium: and
in eodem libro postquam de Cathedra Petri, Liberio (inquit) suc^essit Damasus,
Damaso Syricius, hodie qui noster est Zozimus, cum quo totus orbis commercio
formatarum in vna Communionis societate concordat. Audet Optatus Romanum Papam
Socium simpliciter vocare. Casaubon. Exercit in Baroniu^ 16.. 140.
Optatus, who required a necessary Union with the Roman Chair, yet never
taught any Necessity of Universal Subjection unto it. Nay, so far was he
from acknowledgement of Monarchical Dominion in the Pope, that he calls him
absolutely his Fellow. So he. As for Necessity of Union, it is no more than he
required to be had (as you have heard) unto the Churches of Asia: so that
whenever Rome (as Asia has done) shall depart from the sincerity of the
Apostolical profession, the departure from that must dissolve the Necessity of
Union.

The third Latin Father is Bellarm. quo supra. Tertius est Ambrosius, in 1. ad
Timotheum. cap. 3. Ecclesia Dei domus, cuius Rector est Damasus. Et lib. 3. de
Sacramentis cap. 1. In omnibus cupio sequi Romanam Ecclesiam, etc.
Ambrose, the fourth Quartus est Hieronymus. Epist. ad Ageruchiam: Cum inuarem
Damasum. Et in Epist. ad Damasum de nomine Hypostase(...), etc.
Hierom, the fifth Quintus est Augustinus Epist. 162. In Romana Ecclesia semper
viguit Principatus.
Augustine. If we thought it not an injury unto you to repeat the former
Answers, which have been made to all these Objections, it were an easy matter
for us to be superfluous. When you shall reuiew the places, then we doubt not
but it will seem, as well to you as unto us, an hateful thing to see what
violence your Objections have offered to these witnesses of Antiquity, but much
more to their own consciences, in enforcing these witnesses to speak the
language of Babell, and conspiring together to build the Tower of Papal
Monarchy, which both their words and Acts (as you have Ambrose. See above, cap.
12.. 7. August. Ibid.. 8. Hierom cap. 12.. 6.
already heard) do in a manner confound.

The sixth is Sextus Prosper. Seeds Roma Petri, quae Pastoralis honoris facta
caput mundi, etc. Lib. de Jngratis.
Prosper, whose meaning might have been better known, if he had written in
prose, and not assumed unto him the liberty of a Poet. Yet he, and the
seventh, namely Septimus Victor Vticensis, qui appellat Romanam Ecclesiam
caput omnium Ecclesiarum. Lib. 2. de Persec. Vandal.
Victor Vticensis call the Church of Rome The Head of all Churches. But how? in
power and Jurisdiction? you could never prove this out of any ancient Father:
No, but even as Antioch and Constantinople, with other Churches, See above in
this Chapter.
have been so called in other respects.

The eight is Octauus Vincentius Lyrinensis in suo Commentario. Lectae sunt
Epistolae Felicis and Iulij vrbis Romae Episcopo^u^: and vt non solum caput
orbis, verum etiam latera illi iudicio testimonium perhiberent, adhibitus est a
Meridie Beatus Cyprianus, a Septent^ione Sanctus Ambrosius, etc Vides Romanu^
Pontificem vocari caput orbis terrarum. Bell. quo supra.
Vincentius Lyrinensis, in whose Testimony your Cardinal does first mistake a
mountain for a man, and secondly painting, for person. For Lyrinensis called
not the Popes of Rome, namely Felix and Julius; nor the Church of Rome, but the
City of Rome, The Head of all the world. What is more frequent than Rome to be
called the Head of the Church, Caput orbis, after an Ethnic style, because of
the Civil Dominion thereof over other Nations? He called also Carthage on the
North, and Milan on the South, the Sides, by reason of their situations, only
figuratively. And although he had in like manner called the Bishop of Rome the
Head, and the other two Bishops his Sides, must therefore the Pope of Rome be
truly and absolutely judged to be the Monarchical Head of the Church, in the
meaning of Lyrinensis? Then must you as absolutely believe that Cyprian of
Carthage, and Ambrose of Milan, and their Successors, were always to continue
the Sides of the Catholic Church. Is this good learning, thus to snatch at
advantages of naked Metaphors, and with 1. Sam. 19.
Michol to present unto us an image for a man? But who is there that knows
not how little the Church of Rome is beholden to Vincentius Lyrinensis? who
writing a Book, which you your selves call Opusculum par^um mole, sed virtute
maximum, de profanis vocum nouitatibus. Bell. lib. de Scriptoribus Eccles. Tit.
Vincent. Lyrin.
Little in bulk, but most great in weight and worth, wherein he gives
Resolution to all Catholics how they should discern the True Church; yet
never remembered your Roman Article, of making the Church of Rome the Mother,
Mistress, and Monarch of all the Churches in the world, without Subjection
whereunto (as you say) there is no Salvation. But how should a man remember
that which he never forgot, or forget that which he never learnt? For if this
had been his Faith, his book of Resolutions which you say was so Little, might
have been comprehended in one leaf, and almost in one line, to wit; There is
but one Catholic Church, which is the Roman, which has the Promise of
perpetual infallibility, stand ever to this, and then you cannot but be a good
Catholic. Nay, he matcheth the Eastern Church with the Western, as you See
above, Cap. 7.. 1.
have heard. And in the same Book, entitled Against all profane Innouations,
he does throughout condemn all your new Articles of the now Roman Church, by
one infallible, and inviolable Rule, which is this; that No Article as of Faith
should be admitted into the Church, which was not taught and professed in the
days of the Apostles.

Your last Father, for due Antiquity, is Nonus est Cassiodorus lib. 11. Epist.
2. Bellar. quo supra.
Cassidore, who because he says no more than has been formerly said, we
forbear to answer more, than has been answered: that from Particular Answers,
we may now speedily address our selves to the more General.

Our General Discovery of the Falsehood and Vanity of the former Objections,
out of the Ancient Fathers. SECT. 10.
DIstingue tempora, is a necessary Aphorism and Caution, especially in
historical Observations. Psalm. 87.2.
Right glorious things are spoken of thee, O City of God, says David of
Jerusalem: but when? when the Inhabitants professed the true worship of God.
But as soon as they revolted from God, then Bethel became Bethauen, and the
Virgin Sion an Adulterous whore. So say we; Right admirable commendations have
been often Anciently attributed to the Church and Bishops of Rome, for their
Integrity of life, Constancy in the Faith, Care and Conscience for the
preservation of all Churches in the Christian profession: But not to
distinguish in both these the differences of Times, by [ Was] from [ Is] were
to confound Chastity with Adultery, God with Belial, and Christ with Antichrist.

Apply we this to the point in Question. Take unto you this Position: Cum
dicunt Patres Romanam Ecclesiam non posse errare, vox [posse] non ascribitur
absolute, and simpliciter, sed quamdiu seeds Apostolica ibi manet. Bellar. lib.
4. de Romans Pout. c. 4.
When the Fathers say that the Church of Rome cannot err, the word [Cannot] is
not to be taken absolutely, and simply. How like you this Thesis? Do you
approve of it? Then do all your proofs from Testimonies of Ancient Fathers,
concerning the power, dignity, and integrity of the Ancient Church of Rome,
vanish with their times; because the Church of Rome is long since far
degenerated from her first integrity. But do you not allow it? why, it is the
Confession of Bellarmine, the greatest Champion that your Church has had in
these later Ages. He only adds to the Thesis, this Caution: So long as the
Apostolical Sea continues at Rome; he should have said with us (according to
the General Doctrine of the Fathers) So long as the ancient, and sincere
Faith, and divine worship is preserved at Rome: for it is not Seeds, but Fides
that defines a Church.

And for your further knowledge, that the Commendations, given unto Rome and
other Churches in the days of Antiquity, were not absolutely and simply
understood, call but to mind how See above in diverse places.
often Tertullian, Irenaeus, Augustine, Optatus, and other Fathers (for the
proof of Orthodox Doctrines) did instance in the Churches of Corinth,
Thessaly, Antioch, Asia, and other Churches, as well as in Rome. To give you
one Example for all, in the last of Asia, (because it comes first to hand) it
is that which you received but even now out of Optatus; who speaking of the
Churches of Asia, See above at m.
Whosoever (says he) is without these Churches, (namely concerning the Faith
professed) is an Alien, and without Salvation. This was then as justly said of
Asia, as now it cannot be said thereof: and what one Encomium of Presidence,
(only that of Order excepted) or Judgment, or Sanctity has been ever
exhibited to Ancient Popes, by any Excellency of Titles, which (as you See
above in this Chapter.
have heard, by just Parallells) have not been communicated unto Athanasius,
Basil, Augustine, and some other Fathers?

Yet are we not contented with this Answer (although otherwise most true) but
add, for clearer Demonstration of this Truth, and auerre that the glorious
Phrases, which were anciently ascribed to the Church of Rome and her Bishops,
were not given as absolutely and simply belonging to her, no not in those very
times of Antiquity, when they were more proper unto her. For See above, Chap.
12.. 2.
Cyprian that said in his Epistle to Pope Cornelius, that No perfidiousnesse
could have access to Rome, meant not that this his Commendation should
continue in Succession with their Popes; who himself, in his Epistle to Pope
Stephen (one who a year after the death of Cornelius succeeded in the same
Popedom) did vehemently reprove, yea and reproach him for admitting the very
same kind of Perfidiousnesse before mentioned; even by his allowing of False
and perfidious Excommunicates, and Incorrigible persons, Appealing to his See.
And See above, cap. 12. 6.
Hierom, who accounted every one Profane and execrable, that did not
Communicate with Pope Damasus, would not have so far honored Pope Liberius,
whom he himself brandeth with a black mark of Subscribing to Arian Heresy.
Lastly, Saint See above, Cap. 12.. 8.
Augustine, that magnified Rome in this style, saying, The Principality of the
Roman Chair did always flourish, extended not this to an Absolute Monarchy,
who himself was one of them that, in the Council of Afric, clipped the
wings thereof, by decreeing that Transmarine Appeals should not be made,
meaning to Rome. The speed we make to new matter will not suffer us to multiply
Instances from other former Examples.

I. CHALLENGE.
AS often therefore as you have objected unto us the Encomiasticall speeches of
Ancient Fathers, we may challenge you to observe the difference between your
Objections, and our Retorsions. You urge only the Phrase, and we the Reason of
the speech. Again, you have obtruded the sound of Words of the Fathers, we
have opposed their evident Acts and Deeds, the best Interpreters of their
sayings. From their Acts therefore, we take confidence to argue that (to omit
the great and weightier matters) if S. Polycarpus would not yield to the Church
and Pope of Rome, no not so much as in a Feast Day; Saint Augustine, not so
much as in a Fast; Saint Basil, not so much as in exception against only the
word Hypostasis; Saint Ambrose, not so much as in a Ceremony of Washing of
feet; which are (you will think) in respect but matters of Mint, annise, and
cummin: how shall not our Opposition stand justifiable, who refuse Union and
Subjection unto her, for the great matter of the Law, and word of God? If
vilification of the Sufficiency of his written Testaments, if Mutilation of a
true Sacrament, and (which is worse) the Addition of five false ones, if
babbling in unknown prayer, if forging of new Faiths, and (not to speak of the
daily tyranny upon men's Consciences, by her strange (...), or New
Constitutions) if, in some respects, as absurd as Heathenish Idolatry may
seem unto you just cause of exception against her: wherein our Profession is
justified from point to point by the same Fathers. So damnable is your now
Roman Article of Absolute Necessity of Union and Subjection unto the Church
and Bishop of Rome, as without which there is no Salvation: by which, together
with your Adversaries, you damn those whom every where you assume to have been
your own Ancient Fathers on earth, and now acknowledge them Saints in heaven.

II. CHALLENGE.
A Second Consideration, which is to be had in this point, is to observe the
list of all the Fathers, whom your Cardinal, in the strength of his learning
and judgment, has produced to guard and defend this your Monarchy of the
Church of Rome, or Bishop thereof. The number of the Greek Fathers are but
Thirteen, and of the Latin but Eleven, within the space of the first six
hundred years, which we call the extent of Primitive Antiquity: But he
omitteth Origin, Tertullian, Justin Martyr, Ruffinus, and above fifty Fathers
more, whom he cites in his Bellerm. lib. de Scriptoribus Ecclesiasticis.
Catalogue of Ecclesiastical writers, to have written Books of Apologies,
Prescriptions, and Treatises against the Heretics and Schismatickes of those
former ages.

Now would we but demand of your ingenuitie, whether you can think it a
matter, we say not credible, but even so much as fanciable to think that of
almost an hundred Witnesses of the Truth of Antiquity, so many as have been
omitted (and had as great conflicts with Heretics and Schismatickes) should
say just nothing at all, for the dignifying of the Monarchical Jurisdiction of
Rome, when the very acknowledgement thereof might (if true) have been in their
Time the Decision of the whole Cause, and almost of all other Controversies in
Religion; yea and a Reparation of all Schisms in the Church of Christ. And
that they also, that are alleged, for proof of the same Attributes, should
say nothing more in effect for Rome and her Bishop, than upon the like
occasions they have said of other Orthodox Churches and Bishops; and not thus
only, but that furthermore some of the same Fathers have wrestled and iustled
with that your pretended Monarch, and oftentimes given him the foil. To whom
we might add Tertullian, of whom it has See above, cap. 7.. 1.
been confessed, that in the time of his Catholicisme he did not give that
respect to Rome, as is done at this day, but marshalled her with the Church of
Corinth and Others; insomuch that if he had been now alive, he could not have
escaped unpunished. And after his defection unto Montanisme, he called indeed
the then Pope High Pope, and Bishop of Bishops; but (as is also Te^tullianus
magnus vir profecto quo Beatus Cyprianus vsus est magistro. -- Non fuisse
satis, ^equum Pontifici Romans ex libro de Pudicitia intelligimus, Benedictum
Papam appellans, and Pon^^ficem sc. Maximum Episcopum Episcoporum; quae
Ironic(...) ab eo dicta videntur, seu in Victorem, seu in alium. Massonius de
Episcop. Vrbis Romae. Tit. Victor.
Confessed) by way of Ironie and scorn: so obseruable, even in his days
(which were about the year 217. after Christ) was the Presumption of the
Roman Pope.

III. The last CHALLENGE, concerning the Testimonies of Ancient Fathers.
IT will be Objected, that the Popes of these days do still retain the Places
and Titles, which were of their Predecessors. This we deny not, no more than we
do, that many Noble men's Heirs enjoy the houses, Escucheons, and Robes of
their Ancestors, who have little inheritance in their Fathers virtues. You your
selves can give us Examples in the former, who confess that the Denomination
of your Pope, to instile him thus, [ Your Holinesse] was first given to Pope
Licet haec nomina [Sanctissimus, and Beatissimus] Leoni primo coeperint tribui,
tanquam Praesuli cuidam vitae ac morum dignitate sanctissimo, postea vero
retenta sunt ratione muneris and officij, quod Pontifex gerit. Azorius Ies.
Institut. Moral. par. 2. lib. 2. cap. 4.
Leo about the year 440. for his Holiness sake, and sanctity of life: Yet is
this (you know) continued (if we may believe even your most Bellarmine and
Genebrard. See aaboue.
Popish Authors) to Popes who have been Most wicked, yea sometimes Apostaticall
rather than Apostolical; and retained only in respect of their Functions. Or
if this will not serve, yet have you another Engine, whereby to hook in those
Titles, whiles you teach that Quaerenti number Papa qui turpissimis actionibus
Ecclesiam foedauit, dici potest Pontifex malae memoriae, dic quod non: quia
respiciendum est non ad id quod fecit, sed quod fiere debuit. Glossa apud
Extrauag. lib. 4. cap. Dudum.
A Pope who in his life defiled his Sea with most lewd and beastly actions,
notwithstanding after his death, may not be entitled Pope of bad, but of
BLESSED MEMORY. Why? because hereby (say you) is considered, not what he did,
but what he ought to have done. In which sense we shall as easily yield unto
your Roman Church (in respect of Faith) the Appellation of Catholic, as could
belong to such Popes the Title of Holiness.

Your fourth kind of Objections are taken from the Testimonies of Ancient
Popes, as well from their Titles, as in their Acts and Deeds. First of their
Titles; and a Discovery of the Vanity of this Defense, out of the Testimonies
of Popes of the first three hundred years after Christ. SECT. 11.
OUR Inquisition is concerning the judgment of Antiquity: and Antiquity,
properly so called, may be confined within the Circumference of the first six
hundred years. In the first three hundred years whereof are produced among
the Popes by Bellarm. lib. de Romans Pont. cap. 14.
your Cardinal, for the proof of Papal Monarchy over the Catholic Church,
the names of these Popes, to wit; Clemens, Anacletus, Euaristus, Alexander,
Pius, Anicetus, Victor, Zepherinus, Calixtus, Lucius, Marcellus, Eusebius,
Miltiades, Marcus: somewhat more than the full number of an Inquest of men; it
were well, if it might be said, Good, and true. For although these Popes were
just and holy men in themselves, and blessed Professors of Christ, most of them
sealing their Faith with their blood: Yet seeing that the Epistles, which are
cited in their names, for witnessing your Roman Article, were falsely fathered
upon them, it must needs be confessed that you have not all those Popes, but
only the Names of so many Popes to patronize your Cause. For albeit that Primi
Pontifices Romani Ecclesiae Romans Primatum constanter collegerunt, Clemens,
Anacletus, -- quorum omnium testimonia nec suspecta (cum Haereticis) sed vt
Authentica esse non dubites. Lege Franc. Turrian^ aduersus Mag. haec Stapleton.
de doctrinal Princip. lib. 6. cap 15. Et Canus loc. Theol. lib. 6. cap. 8.
Castro lib. 1. cap. 2.
Stapleton, Turrian, and some other of your late Schoolmen propound these
Epistles and Testimonies as Most authentical, and no-way to be suspected; Yet
your Cardinal, even when he judges them to be most Ancient, shows how
little repose he could have in them, when as he is compelled to grant, saying;
Quamuis aliquos -- errores in eos irrepsisse non negaue^im, nec indubitatas
esse affirmare ausim, certe tamen antiquissimas esse nihil dubito. Bellarm.
lib. 2. de Romans Pont. cap. 14.
I cannot deny but some errors have crept into these Epistles, which I dare
not affirm to have been undoubtedly the Epistles, namely which were written
by those Popes.

In this point a learned man in our Church, one singularly studied in the
disquisition of Antiquity, for discerning of the proper works of Fathers, from
the forged and counterfeit, has given you sufficient Reasons in his Rob. Cocus
noster in Censura Scriptorum.
Censure of Writers, to prove the objected Epistles, which your Cardinal
himself confesses to be Doubtful, to be undoubtedly Bastard, and
adulterate: Partly Anacletus Epist. 3. Clemens Epist. 1. Anicet Epist 1. Test
Bellarm. lib. 2. de Monach. cap. 40.
by the errors that are apparent in them, no less absurd than to turn Cephas
into Caput, a Stone in an Head, and the like: Partly by the Confession of your
own Learned De Epist. 1. Clementis, Adulterina^ esse. Cardinal. Cusanus
Concord Cath. lib. 3. Cap. 2. Comestor Epist. Scholast. in Act. Apost. c. 101.
Card. Turrecremata Sum. lib. 2. cap. 101 Baronius An. 69. number 43. Binius Annot.
in Epist. Anacleti. 3. Cusanus lib. 2. cap. 34. Contius did. 6. qu. 1. cap.
Beatus. Euaristi Omnia istius Decreta videri possunt su^posit^tia. Contius
Annot. in cap. 30.45. Aliter. Calixti Epistolas selecti viri, in emendando
Gratiano, rejecerunt: Test Antonio Augustino de Emendatione Gratiani l. 2.
Deinde de Epistola Clementis, Eusebij, Milti^dis, Bellarminus: Incertu^ est,
vtrum illi authors sunt, quorum nomi a prae se ferunt. lib. 2. de Confirmat.
cap. 7. Haec omnia habentur in Coco nostro, in Censura Scriptor^m.
Authors, accompting diverse of them Suppositions and bastardly false. Thus have
almost all of these, by some of your Doctors, as namely Cardinal Cusanus,
Cardinal Turrecremata, Cardinal Baronius, and (by your leave) Cardinal
Bellarmine himself, together with Contius, Binius, and other learned men,
selected for the correcting of Gratian, been excepted against.

We might add heereunto, that whereas among infinite multitudes of men, each
man is distinguished and discernable from another in face and countenance, in
gesture and voice, yet these Epistles now objected have all the same style, and
(for Stylus est orationis quasi Nasus) as it were the same Nose, and that, (as
you cannot but know) an ^piscopi Obediendi: Peto vt prome orare Debeas: Rigosus
tortor*: Lugere indisciplinitatem: Charitatiue agere: Iugiabiliter stare, etc.
horrid barbarous one too: whereas the Writings of these Popes were doubtless
polished and elegant, as were the works of other Authors, in those days. And
is not this good arguing? Did not the Maid find out Peter to be a Galilean by
his Language, when she said Thy speech betrayeth thee? and did not the
Gileadites discern their enemies the Ephraimites by their defect of
pronouncing Shibboleth, even as the Character of a man is seen by his speech?

CHALLENGE.
IN Examination of these Premises you may find just matter for Challenge of
your own Proctors, and Pleaders for the Popes Primacy, from these Popes, by
reason of their fourefold Injury. First to their Adversaries the Protestants,
whom they traduce as enemies to Antiquity, in not admitting the Testimonies of
so holy Popes of the Primitive age, which all Christians ought to believe and
reverence. But in this clamor they abuse their Readers, by delivering unto
them only the names of Popes Epistles; as is usual in false Certificates,
wherein a man shall read a Catalogue of names of men, whereunto the parties
themselves never yielded their consent: or as in a Stage Play, wherein are
presented Personates, instead of Persons themselves; and to the chins of boys
are fixed the beards of old men. Is not this a theatricall forgery?

Secondly, to your Popes, by urging writings in their name^, which (if they
were theirs) must prove them to have been foolish, false, and barbarous. Our
zeal therefore to those blessed Popes does challenge your Obiectors of extreme
injury to their memory.

Thirdly to the Church of Rome, as well Ancient as Successiue; that when you
boast so much of the truth of your Traditions, as a Nuncupatiue Testament of
Christ, wherein your Chiefest Article is your Doctrine of Papal Monarchy: yet
when we are to consult with the first witnesses, that should testify this
Article in tht Roman Church it self, namely those Ancient Popes, we can have
no better assurance of their Testimonies, than as of such as are confessed to
be, both fraught with Errors, and also falsely imposed upon those Popes. Which
is in effect to condemn your Roman Church of sacrilegious negligence and
unfaithfulness, in not preserving that sacrum Depositum (as you call the
Ancient Tradition of Popes from hand to hand) and consequently must infer a
just suspicion of Falsehood in the Chiefest ground of your Romish Faith, the
pretended Law of Tradition. Is not this also an injury?

But the greatest Injury that we lament is the wrong which your Obiectors do
unto their own Consciences; when some will have all those Epistles to be
Authentical, and worthy of absolute Belief without Exception, and yet are
condemned by the most learned among you, who confess and prove that they are
mixed both with Theological and Chronologicall falsehoods. Some again
(especially your Probatur ex testimonijs summorum Pontificum, etc. Bellar. lib.
2, de Romans Pont. Cap. 14.
Cardinal) obtruding Epistles in the names of Popes, and yet doubting whether
they be truly the Epistles of these Popes or no; and some other-where also
rejecting some of them as Counterfeits. So foolish is his Objection, in
alleging them, for Ancient, who could not be ignorant that there have been
Ancient forgeries, of which stamp your own judicious Authors have noted these
to be. And that which exceeds almost the highest note of (to speak mildely)
Inconsideration, to prove your Doctrine of Romish Primacy from the word [
Primatus] mentioned sometimes by the Bishops of Rome in their Epistles: which
(as your own Contius Annot. in Cap. 6. q. 1. Beatus: Test Coco nostro in
Censura Scriptorum. page 24.
Contius teaches) is an Argument, to judge them not to be so Ancient, because
that that word was not of current stamp in that age. And what great injury
can any man do, than that which he does to his own Conscience?

Finally pardon us, if we cannot impute such a degree of Impiety to those holy
Popes, that they who lived in the times of those bloody Massacres, wherein most
of them, with infinite other godly Professors in the same Church of Rome,
bequeathed their bodies to the sword, for the Faith of Christ, and their souls
and spirits by Martyrdom to his arms of blessedness; should be wholly busyed
in their Epistles, about points of Ordination of Priests, Invention of
Ceremonies, and advancing the Prerogatives of the Roman Church; but never to
utter any syllable of Exhortation, and Consolation, in behalf of the Flock of
Christ, daily in the jaws of the Wooluish Persecutors of these times, as those
Epistles by you objected do make appear.

Your Objections, from the Testimonies of Ancient Popes, of the Second Three
hundred years; and the Vanity thereof discovered. SECT. 12.
FOr the Second Three hundred years are presented before us a Second Jury of
Bellar. lib. 2. de Romans Pont. Cap. 14. Primus sit Julius 1. Epistola ad
Orientales. An ignari estis, etc. His verbis affirmat ad se pertinere ius
omnium Causas iudicandi. 2. Damasus; Sedi Apostolicae Reuerentiam debitam, etc.
Orientales vocat filios. Et alibi, Ad nos tanquam Caput. 3 Syricius: Romana
Ecclesia vt Caput Corporis. 4. Zozimus Quisquis post-habita Apostolicae sedis
authoritate neglexerit, etc. 5. Innocentius ^. Seeds Apostolica caput
Ecclesiaru^. Et iterum, Quem solicitudo manet omnium Ecclesiarum. 6. Leo ad
Episcopos Thessalon: Constantinop. Antiochen, etc. 7. Gelasius: Seeds
Apostolica omnes iudicans, a nullo iudicatur. 8. Johannes 2. Romanae sedis
Reuerentiam: -- omnium Ecclesiarum Caput. 9. Anastasius: Seeds Petri tenet
Principatum. 10. Felix 4. Ad sedem Apostolicam tanquam ad Caput. 11. Pelagius
2. Romana seeds caput est omnium Ecclesiarum. 12. Gregorius 1. ius exercuit in
multos: Constantinopolitanam Ecclesiam Romanae Subiectam: -- Caput Ecclesiae,
etc.
Twelve Popes, to give their Verdicts for proof of the extent of their own
Papal and Monarchical power and Jurisdiction Ecclesiastical, over the whole
Church of Christ throughout the world. Manifold have been the Answers; of Many
to these Testimonies, which the breuity that we have propounded to our selves
in this Treatise, will not suffer us to relate: our Answers shall be no less
plain, and yet more compendious. 1. Almost all of these Testimonies may be
denied in that sense of absolute Monarchy, for the which they are propounded.
As for the first man of the Inquest, viz. Pope Julius, he plainly speaks of
Document and Instruction received from Peter; and not of Dominion, or
Jurisdiction: which may be an Answer to many of the rest 2. Some speak not,
but their Counterfeits, as the last Iurist Pope Gregory, in an Epistle, wherein
Eusebius Bishop of Constantinople is said to have been Greg. lib. 7. Epist 63.
ad Eusebium Constantinopolitanum subiectum.
Subject unto him; when as (as our Doctor In Colloq. cum Harto. Cap. 8.. 5.
Reynolds has proved) there was no Eusebius Bishop of Constantinople, in the
days of Saint Gregory. This trick of corrupting the writings of Ancient
Popes, as you have seen in their Epistles for the first Three hundred years,
give us iuster cause to suspect the Popish Scribes, in the Second Three hundred
years. 3. Some have been already satisfied by Parallels. 4. So Damasus, and
John 2.
Reverence (say some Popes) is due to the Apostolic See; So you know Saint
Peter does require of the Husband, 1. Pet. 3.7. Mariti-mulieri impartientes
ho^orem,
Honor toward his Wife; and Saint Paul of a Bishop, 1. Tim. 5.3. Viduas
honora.
Reverence unto Widows. Reverence therefore, which is nothing else but a due
See above in this Chapter. t. r. (...). Aris Rhet. l. 1. c. 7
estimation of all persons, according to their Order and Degree, may be
exacted without any Note of Dominion. 5. Nine of these Popes call the Church of
Rome and Bishop thereof either Damasus, Sy^icius, Innocentius, Leo, Johannes,
Felix, Pelagius, Gregotius.
Head of all Churches, or One that has the Innocentius.
Care of all Churches, or one having Anastasius.
Principality; Every of which (as See above in diverse places.
you know) were anciently ascribed to other Churches and Bishops, besides the
Roman.

6. Some may be checked by Retorsion, as in the first and last witness. For
the first; if from the words objected out of that Epistle of Julius, you shall
infer that he had Universal Monarchy throughout the Catholic Church; then
may we more justly conclude that the same Pope, being challenged by the
Bishops of the East (whom he calls Most dearly beloved) both for writing to
them Alone, and from his own Authority, and also for transgressing the Canons
of the Church, by admitting men unto his Communion, that had been by them
deposed; and answering to the one that Julius in Epistola supra obiecta. Etsi
solus sim qui sc^ipsi, non tamen meam solus sententiam scripsi, ^ed om^ium
Italorum and omnium Episcoporum: quapropter (Dilectissimi) etsi solus scribo,
tamen communem senten^iam vos scire volo, Coe^piscopos nostros Athanasium and
Martialem in comunionem recepimus. Apud Binium p. 407. They charge him also
with the breach of Canons of the Church in ancient Councels.
Although he wrote alone unto them, yet that he did it by consent of his fellow
Bishops; and to the other standing only upon his justification, in not
transgressing the Canons of Ancient Councels, he was neither accounted of
them, not yet esteemed himself the Universal Pope and Monarch of the Church.

As for the last, to wit Gregory, if in some terms he seem to speak
somewhat loud, as though he were very great, yet by confining himself to the
Greg. lib. 11. Epist. 54. Citans Nouellam Iustiniani, in qua decernitur
Archiepiscopum and Patriarcham Dioecesis finite causas debere, iuxta Canones
Nouellae. 123. Cap. 22
Constitution of Justinian, and disclaiming (as See above Cap. 6.. 6.
you know) the Title of Universal Bishop of the Church as most odious, even in
the now Roman signification of Universal Jurisdiction, he was too little to
become in that Sense a Roman Pope. Again, See above at n
Damasus (say you) called the Eastern Bishops, Sons: belike it was in love.
Yet the same Eastern Bishops called Damasus Apud Theodoretum lib. 5. Cap. 9.
Orientales fratribus and Collegis, Damaso, Ambrosio, etc.
Brother, and Fellow. Lastly, Some may be confuted and indeed confounded by as
Ancient Of all these we have spoken already See above in their places.
Oppositions; as of the Orientalls, against the Authority of Pope Julius; of
the Bishops of Afric, against the pretended Authority of Pope Zozimus; and of
Cyrill against Pope Innocentius.

Our General Discovery of the Vanity of your Proofs of Papal Monarchy, from
the mouths of Popes themseluos, who have been anciently noted of Pride. SECT.
13.
Our Savior Christ observing the equity of humane Law, applied it to himself,
saying, Joh. 5.31.
If I give testimony of my self, my testimony were not true And why then
should not this Consequence, used by Christ, be of force against your
Consequences taken from the testimonies of those Popes, who boast themselves to
be the only Vicars of Christ? Yes verily, because there is such a (...), that
is, Self-love in every man so bewitching him, that he can discern Any sooner
than himself. Yea, and if in all Courts of Pleas greatest exception is taken
against selfe-Testimony, in a man's own Cause, then ought not this our Answer
seem harsh unto you, if we should deny the Assumptions, which the Popes of
Rome, even of more Primitive times, have made for the advantage of their Roman
Jurisdiction: and that so much the less, by how much the more many Popes of
that age are noted to have been taxed for their great Arrogance, Augustinus
Qu. Vet. and Nou. Testam. number. 101. Quidam igitur Flaceidij nomine, duce
stultitia, and Romanae Ciuitatis iactantia, Leuitas Sacerdotibus, and Diaconos
Presbyteris coe^quare contendit.
by the Ancient Fahers of their own Times. Whereupon it is that we have heard
Tertullian de Pudicitia in initio. Pontifex sc. Maxmus, and Episcopus
Episcoporum.
Tertullian girding at the Pope, as if he would be Bishop of Bishops;
Polycrates: (...). Eusebius. lib. 5. Cap. 25.
Polycrates contemning his threats of Excommunication, as Vain Terrors:
Cyprian. Stephanus superbus. -- Nemo nostru^ tyrannico terrore, etc. See above.
chap. 12.. 2.
Cyprian noting the Popes Pride, and scorning his Tyrannical terror: The
Fathers of the Council of Council. Africanum. Appellationis ius, typhus
fumosus. See above Cap. 9.. 8.
Afric (among whom Saint Augustine was one) branding Three Popes with the
note of Smoakie Arrogance; and Saint Augustine himself poynting at the vain
Boasting of Rome: nay even Saint Hieron Recedat Ambitio. See above.
Hierom also durst say, concerning the Ecclesiastical State of that City, Away
with Ambition. And how did Saint Basilius Epist. 10 (...). --
Basil beard the same Church, with the terms of Western superciliousnesse and
Pride? Others likewise (albeit more covertly and closely) 'twitted other Popes;
Cyrill: Non possumus propter sermones quoru^dam permittere Canones violari,
etc. See above.
Cyrill, We may not, (says he) for the speeches of Some (meaning the Pope,
with others) suffer our Canons to be infringed: and Saint Ambros. Nos quoque
ho mines sensum habemus. See above, Cap. 12. 7.
Ambrose, We also have our senses about us; speaking in Opposition to Rome, and
intimating that she conceited too highly of her own Judgment. Thus these holy
Fathers, concerning the Popes, of their days, being otherwise holy Fathers
also. For we forbear to Oppose against you the judgment of Authors of
after-ages, who speak against the Roman Pride as liberally, as did Vigilius
eo insolentiae progressus est, vt Menna^ Constantino politanum Episcopum a
Communione excluserit. Niceph Hist. lib. 17. Cap. 26.
Nicephorus, who condemned Pope Vigilius of Insolency, in Excommunicating
Mennas the Patriarch of Constantinople. Nay, and did not one of your own
Prophets, in defense of the Superiority of the Council above the Pope, say
that Almain See above
Popes do commonly stretch their fringes too much arrogating that to
themselves, which is proper to a Council.

CHALLENGE.
WHat? holy Popes (will you say) and yet proud, arrogant, and challenging
Dominion above others without the limits of their own Jurisdiction? Yes, why
not. They were the holy Disciples of Christ, that ambitiously wished, by the
solicitation of their Mother, that Mark 10.
They might sit, the one on the right hand of Christ, and the other on the left
in his Kingdom: they were also holy Apostles that sought among themselves,
without any Ordinance of their Lord, Luke 22.
Who should be Chief: They were likewise zealously-holy servants of Christ
that beyond their Commission would have had Luke 9.
fire from heaven, upon the Samaritans. And certainly many of the Popes,
especially of the Second Classis and rank, within the compass of the Second
Three hundred years, may be said to have been Successors of those Disciples
and Apostles, as in many virtues, so in these kind of defects also. And if
this may be said of holy and Primitive Popes, what shall we think of those
Popes, who a Thousand years after them have degenerated both from the
holiness, and sincere Religion of their Predecessors? What? but as of Giants,
in respect, whose thumbs of Pride were greater than their Fathers Loins. When
the particulars of these our Answers, together with these more General, are
summed up, and due subtraction made of those Objections, which are satisfied
thereby, you shall find that the Remainder for your advantage will be just
nothing at all. So vain and frivolous is the pretense for your Roman Article
of Universal Jurisdiction over the Church of Christ.

Your Second kind of Objections, from the Testimonies of Popes, is from their
Acts, in exercising of their pretended Papal Authority; and our Discovery of
the Vanity thereof. SECT. 14.
THis Universal Exercise of Papal Authority, your Bellar. lib. 2. de Romans
Pont. Cap. 18. Ex authoritate, quam Pontifices exercuerunt in alios Episcopos
toto orb Institutos, Depositos and Restitutos: quoru^ singula per se
sufficerent ad Primatum eius ostendendum.
Cardinal will have us discern in three points, 1. Of Confirming; 2. Of
Deposing; 3. Of Restoring other Bishops, wheresoever, by his own Authority:
Every which act (says he) may be of it self a sufficient proof of his
Primacy over all other Bishops. You may take for your first Answer, that
anciently Institutions of Metropolitans and Patriarchs were done by
Communicatory letters to the Chief Patriarch, (...) ergo for Order-sake: by
Communicatory Letters, we say; or (as we may call them) Letters of
Correspondence, to show their agreement in the Faith: in which case the Bishop
of Rome sent his Pall, in token of his Assent. So likewise the Popes Deposing
of other Bishops, without the Roman Dioces, was but an Expression of his
Assent to others, that he thought them justly deposed. The same may be said of
his power in Restitution of others, that had been deposed, that it was the
like manifestation of his Consent, to have such and such restored; even as
other Patriarchs often did. So that your Proof fails in Two maine points: 1.
You produce no one Example, wherein it can appear, that the Pope could either
Institute, Confirm, Depose, or Restore any such Bishop by his own Authority
alone, without the help of a Council. 2. That infinite Examples are Recorded
of Bishops, Metropolitans, and Patriarchs, which have been Instituted,
Deposed, and Restored without the Consent of the Bishop of Rome.

Your Cardinal himself foreseeing thus much, seeks to prevent it by a
Second Opposition: Etsi ex Confi^matione etc. Bellarm. Ibid.. Notandum.
Although (says he) the Pope did not himself Confirm all other Remote
Bishops, yet he might allow that power unto other Patriarchs and Primates, as
it seems he did some-where. Mark [ He might] that is to say, peradventure
he did; and [ As it seemeth] which is, as if he had said, It is but probable.
Do you not see with what rotten Timber this your Master Builder frames the
Archpillar of your Roman Faith? and with what untempered mortar he daubeth
it, when he has done? Notwithstanding it be without all Peradventure, that
(if we must believe Pope Conc. Constant. 2. quod erat. 5. Generale anno. 535.
Act. 1. Interpretati^ Epistolae Synoda lis; Literae Agapeti Papae ad Petrum
Episcopum Hierosolymitanum. A temporibus Apostoli nullum alium vnquam (nempe
praeter hunc Mennam Episcopum Constantinop) orientalis Ecclesia suscepit
Episcopum manibus nostrae sedis Ordinatum. Apud Surium Tom. 2. page 431.
Agapet) There was not from the Ascension of Christ, until the year 535. any
one Bishop in all the East ordained by the hands of any Bishop of Rome, before
Mennas who was now so ordained by Agapetus.

Secondly, know that your Cardinal, to prove that the Bishop of Rome exercised
his Authority of Instituting, Deposing, and Restoring of Bishops, within the
Bishoprics of other Patriarchs, gives instance in some Bishops, which the
Did. 11. C. Qui^ nesciat. Enumerantur Prouinciae quae Romano Patriarcha^ui
subiecta sunt. Card. Cusanus Concord. Cath. l. 2. c. 7. Ibi autem numerantur
and nominantur Hispania, Gallia, Africa; And afterward you have Thessaly and
other Provinces; within which also Dalm^tia is comprehended, and Salonia.
Popes themselves have challenged to be within their own Roman Dioces, as
namely the Bishops of Thessaly, of France, of Spain, of Afric, of Salonia,
and some others. If any should take upon him to prove the Bishop of Durham to
be Primate of the Province of York, and to have authority over the Bishop of
Chester, because he exercises his Episcopal Jurisdiction of Instituting,
Admonishing, Suspending, and Restoring Ministers within his own Bishopric of
Durham, were this tolerable arguing trow you?

Thirdly, there is not a greater degree of futilitie (says Tullie) than for
any man to object that, to which, when it shall be retorted upon himself, he
shall not tell what to say: We shall therefore deal with you herein by the Art
of Retorsion. Cyprian, as Primate of the Primates within Afric, did (as Per
omnem Africam Prouinciae Sex -- totidem erant Primates, sieve Primae sedis
Episcopi: ho^um omnium prima erat Episcopus Carthaginensis; apud illum summa
erat potestas in creationibus Episcoporum quos vellet per Africam. Pamelius in
Cyprian. lib. 4. Epist. 8. Jta Salmeron. ex Epist. Leonis. 9. ad P^tr. and Ioh.
African. Tom. 12. tr. 68.. Ad Canonem.
Pamelius witnesses of him) Institute whom he would within the Provinces of
the other Primates. The same Quod factum est in Sabini Collegae nostri
Ordinatione, -- Vt manus ei in locum Basilidis imponeretur. Neque rescindere
Ordinationem iure perfectam potest, quod Basilides post crimina sua detecta --
Romam pergens Stephanum Collegam nostrum veritatis ignarum fefellit. Cyprian
li. 1. Epi. 4. de Martiali, and Basilide.
Cyprian Constituted Sabinus Bishop, instead of Basilides, whom he had
deposed, without the consent of Stephen the Pope of Rome; and after professed
to hold the same Sabinus in his Bishopric, notwithstanding the dislike, and
as it were in despite of the same Pope. Nor thus only, but Cyprian again
will be known to have Retenta a nobis rei veritate, ad comprobandam
Ordinationem tuam, facta authoritate maiore, tum demum scrupulo omni ex
singulorum pectoribus excusso, vt per omnes omnino in Prouincia ista positos
literae fierent, vt te Vniuersi collegae nostri, and commnucationem tuam, i.e.
Catholicae Ecclesiae Vnitatem pariter and Charirat^m probarent firmiter, and
tenerent. Cyp. li. 4. Epist. 8. Cornelio.
Confirmed the Election of Pope Cornelius, whose Communion both he (as
himself speaks) and his Colleagues and Fellow-Bishops gave approbation unto.

Besides, Pope Johannes Diaconus in vita Gregorij, lib. 2. ca. 3. and 4.
Synodicam quoque suam Gregorius secundum priscum praedecessorum suorum morem
Iohanni Constantinopolitano, Eulogio Alexandrino, Gregorio Antiocheno, and
Iohanni Hierosolymitano destinauit: -- Quatuor Concilia ^uscipere and venerari
me fateor, Nicaenum sc. -- Constantinopolitanum -- Ephesinum primum --
Chalcedonense -- Quintum quoque veneror. Haec habentur apud ipsum Gregorium,
lib. 1. Epist. 4. and 24.
Gregory the First, upon his Election, sent his Synodicall and Communicatorie
Letters unto the Four Patriarks, viz. John of Constantinople, Eulogius of
Alexandria, Gregory of Antioch, and John of Jerusalem, with testification of
his Orthodox Faith, in believing the Four First General Councels. And lest
that you may think he was the First Pope, that sought this kind of
Approbation, by such Synodicall and Circular Epistles, you are to observe (with
your Baroniu^ Anno 591. number. 4.
Baronious) how he in express words confesses that he did this According to
the ancient Custom of his Predecessors: as was also observed by the Bishop of
Segouia in the Council of Trent.

As for Excommunicating of Others, this being but a denying to have Communion
with them, other Patriarks and Churches thought it as proper to themselves, to
deny their Communion to the Pope, as the Pope could by dis-uniting himself
from them. Else could not the Eastern Bishops, among whom there were many
Orthodoxe, Sozomen Hist. lib. 3. cap. 7.
Capitulate with Pope Julius to have Communion with him; but upon this
Condition, that he should have Communion with those Bishops, whom they had
ordained: otherwise they professed Contrarily to have no Communion with him.
Not to tell you that Dioscorus Apud Gratianum, did. 11. Jn tantum.
did Excommunicate Pope Leo. Yea, will you say, an Heretic an Or^hodoxe? It is
true, yet did he this upon the known judgment of the East-Church, upon a
Common right and ability in all Churches, to deny their Communion to what
other Churches soever, that they were persuaded to deserve their disunion.
Upon which ground Nicephorus lib. 17. cap. 26.
Mennas Patriarch of Constantinople Excommunicated Vigilius Bishop of Rome:
which though it were in an unjust Cause (such as in the Papal Excommunications
often happen to be) yet does it infer this Truth, that upon a just cause it
was lawful so to do. We leave other Examples of Retorsion, and come to the
last Answer, by Opposition of your own Popes against you, and such as were
most zealous Exactors of all Rights belonging to the Papal Sea.

The matter stands thus. After the period of just Antiquity, which we prefix
about the year Six hundred after Christ, Pope Hadrianus 1. Epist. 1. ad
Constantinum Imperatorem, and Irenem. Apud Binium Tom. 3. part. 1 p. 258.
Poscimus vt oblata and Christianis and concessa Patrimonium Beati Petri, --
nobis restituere dignemini, -- imo and Consecratione^ Episcoporum, and
Archiepiscoporum, sicut olitana constat Traditio, nostrae Dioecesis existentes,
penitus canonice Sanctae Romanae nostrae restituantur Ecclesiae.
Hadrian the First, about the year 777. writing to the Emperor Constantine,
and to his Empress Irene, lays Claim to Two things; First to the Temporal
Patrimony of Saint Peter; Secondly, to an Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, within
some part of the Patriarkship of Constantinople; which he desires them to
restore to the Sea of Rome; and he expresses in his Petition the Consecration
of Bishops, and Archbishops. Fourscore years after him succeeds Pope Etiam
Nicolaus primus Epist. 2. ad Michaelem Jmperatorem. Oportet vestrum Imperiale
decus -- vt Antiquum morem, quem ro^tra Ecclesia habuit, vestris temporibus
restaurate dignemini; quatenus vicem quam nostra seeds per Episcopos vestris in
partibus constitutos habuit, viz. Thessalonicensem, qui Romanae fedis vicem per
Epirum veterem, Epirumque nouum, atque Illyrium, Macedoniam, Thessaliam,
Achaiam, Daciam -- Mysiam, Dardaniam, and Praeualim, B. Petro -- contradicere
nullus praesumat; quae Antecessorum nostrorum temporibus sc. Damasi etc.
Numerat Papas vsque ad Hormisdam. Apud Binium Tom. 3. part. 1. page 647. Et
ibedem paulo ante. Quia Hadrianus sanctissimus Praesul Antecessor noster, etc.
Nicolas the First, who renews the same Claim in his Epistle unto Michael
the Emperor, propounding unto him the Challenge formerly made by his
Predecessor Hadrian; and specially and by name he sets down the
particular Provinces and Dioces, which were withheld, or (as your Iacobus
Syrmundus Ies. Censura de Suburbicarijs Regionibus: Discas a Leone Sapiente in
Diatyposi, auulsos esse a Dioecesi Romana, iamque throno Co^stantinopolitano
subiecto^ Metropolitanos Thessalonicense^, Corinthium, Nicopolitanum,
Atheniensem, Patarensem. Addit Regiones supra-nominatas a Papis, and subiungit:
Docet Papa Nilolaus Antecessores suos omnes illas oras sacris dispositionibus
institutisque temperasse. Cap. 3.
Jesuit out of Leo Sapiens says) had bin pulled away from the Bishopric of
Rome, to wit, the Bishopric of Thessalonica, the Bishop whereof had bin but
the Popes Vicar therein; together with the Regions of Achaia, Mysia, Dardania,
etc. wherein were the Metropolitanes of Thessalie, Corinth, Athens, Nicopolis,
and Patarae.

But to what end makes all this his Plea? namely, that he might exercise
therein, as from his own Authority, the Consecration of Bishops and
Archbishops, and (to use the words of your Jesuit) moderate all things
throughout all those Regions, according to his own Institutions and
Ordinances. And, for further Confirmation of his Right, he pleads the
Ancient possession which his Ancestors had held from the time of Pope Damasus,
unto Pope Hormisda, that is to say, for the term of 154. years: so that now
they had bin above Three hundred years deprived of these Bishoprics.

We now hereupon demand; Do your Popes, after so long process of time,
require a Restitution of Right and power of Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, in
certain Provinces Christian? then doubtless, all this time, was not their
power Universal in All others wheresoever. And furthermore the Patriarcke of
Constantinople, having Jurisdiction over the Metropolitanes of Pontus, Asia,
and Thracia, consisting of Theodoret. Hist. lib. 5. cap. 38.
28. Provinces; and your Popes making claim only unto Eight of those, for the
execution of their Ecclesiastical and Papal power, is it not evident that
they outted themselves from all such Jurisdiction in any of the rest? And what
shall be further said of the other Patriarkships of Alexandria, Antioch, and
Jerusalem? Some of them having Seven, and some Ten Metropolitanes under them,
and were as exempt from the Jurisdiction of the Pope of Rome, as any within the
Patriarkship of Constantinople could be.

CHALLENGE.
NOW from your former Argument, according to the laws of a Syllogism, It must
be thus: What Bishop soever does exercise any Authority over others, to
Institute them by Confirmation of their Election, by Letters Communicatorie, or
otherwise, and to Depose them; he has Ecclesiastical power over them, and
they are under his Jurisdiction. But Popes of Rome have accordingly Instituted,
Deposed, and Restored Bishops in all Provinces in the Christian world.
Therefore are they to be acknowledged the Universal Monarchs therein, and are
not subject to Any, nor are any-way to be equalled with Others. So you.

Now apply the Examples, which have bin granted, and then see how often you
shall vn-Monarke your Popes, and set up many unexpected Anti-popes. First, by
the power exercised by Cyprian, both in Confirming the Popes Election, and in
withstanding dis Restitution: next, by the power assumed by those Patriarks,
which Excommunicated your Popes, but principally by the Testimonies of your
own Popes; Pope Gregory confessing it to have bin an Ancient custom in your
Popes, to submit their Elections to the Approbation of other Patriarks, by
their Synodicall letters, and so to be acknowledged to be in their Communion:
and lastly, by the Claim made by Two Popes, Hadrian and Nicolas, for the
Restoring unto them a power of exercising their Ecclesiastical Functions in
certain Provinces within the Patriarkship of Constantinople.

If A. B. challenge absolute Royalty in Eight Towneships only, within the
Manor of C. D. (that Manor consisting of 28. Towneships) wherein (says A. B.)
my Predecessors have long since had Fishing, Fowling, Waifes, Strayes,
Deodants, and such like Prerogatives, what can be the issue of this Plea, but
that, whatsoever his Right has bin to these Eight, yet his power for Fishing,
Fowling, and the like has not of a long time bin exercised accordingly? and
again, that pleading but for Eight, it is an acknowledgement that he
renounceth all Claim to any of the Twenty besides. So then your Popes
Monarchical Prerogative of Instituting, Deposing, and Restoring of all Bishops
and Patriarchs throughout the Christian World, is now come to be somewhat
abated, being confined within his own Peculiars; as well as A. B. by his Plea
for Fishing and Fowling. To conclude, whatsoever example of the Popes
Confirmation of Bishops of other Dioces can be brought, in such Cases, is not
an Act essential or proper unto him, but accidental and of common Congruitie,
rather than of Necessity.

Your Fifth ground of Objections, taken from a pretended Universal Right of
Appeals to the Church and Pope of Rome, as a Principal part of your Roman
Article. Our first Discovery of the Falsehood and Vanity of the First
Pretenses taken from the Council of Sardice. SECT. 15.
POwer of Appeal in any is indeed (as your Bellarmin li. 2. de Romans Pont. c.
21. Appellatio est certissimum Argumentum Principatus.
Cardinal says) A most certain Argument of Dominion: to wit, if it be right,
and proper; otherwise it is not Power, but Oppression, nor Right, but
Usurpation. There were many Causes, why the Catholic Bishops in the East
should yield great Authority to the Bishops of Rome in the West, before
others, but specially because of the Distractions and Schisms among
themselves, by manifold Heretics; and of the Union which in the Roman Church
had continued and been maintained by the Bishops thereof, with great wisdom
and constancy: besides the advantage that the Sea of Rome had gotten in the
time of the Imperialtie of that City. Notwithstanding, never shall you prove
your Article of Necessity of Subjection to the Church of Rome, upon Necessity
of Salvation, by any Right of Appeal to the Bishop thereof, which is the maine
scope of your Cardinal in this place.

The First Testimony which he propounds is out of the Council of
Bellarmin. li. 2. de Romans Pont. ca. 21. Primo ex Concilio Sardicen. Can. 4. Cum
aliquis. Et Can. 7. Placuit, vt si deiectus confugerit ad Episcopum Romanae
Ecclesiae etc.
Sardis. This Council he produces in this place, as a sound Argument, which
elsewhere he ranketh among those Councels, that are to be Sardicense partim
confirmatum, partim reprobatum. Bellarmin. l. 1. de Concilijs cap. 7.. Primum.
partly allowed, and partly rejected: As if Coin partly mixed and Counterfeit
ought to be taken for good payment. Again, in this he alleges such a Canon,
which another Cardinal questioneth, saying, Verum est ipsos Patres Aphricani
Concilij (in quo and Sanctus interfuit Augustinus) in praefata ad Cescribere
Epistola lestinum hanc Constitutionem, quam Gratianus ascribit Sardicensi
Concilio, nulla Patrum Synodo inuenisse constitutam. Quare satis posset
dubitari, an Sardicensis Concilij constitutio existat. Card. Cusanus lib. 2. de
Concord. Cathol. Cap. 25.
We may lawfully doubt, whether there be any such Constitution extant. And
this again is urged to prove your Article of an Absolute Monarchical power,
and Divine Right thereunto in the Pope of Rome, concerning the Prerogative of
Appeals from all Christian Churches. A doctrine quite overthrown by the same
Witness, whom your Proctor has produced for this Cause, even the Synod of
Sardis it self; and that Two manner of ways (as your Cardinal Fuit autem in
Sardicense Concilio, in honorem memoriae Sancti Petri, statutum -- Romanum
Pontificem praelatum in iudicandis Particularibus Concilijs, non nisi per
formam ibi traditam, si quod ipse potest sententiam approbare, sed non
improbare nisi per Nouam Synodum. Et probat ille textus Administrationem Papae
valde a ^ure positiuo, and consensu Synodico dependere, Cusanus quo supra. cap.
15.
Cusanus will testify) One is, that the same Synod does limit his power,
giving him Authority to approve any thing concluded by a Particular Synod, but
not to disallow it without the assistance of a new Synod: the Other, that the
Right, which the Pope can claim for Appeals, depends Greatly upon humane
Constitutions. He might as truly have said [ Altogether] as we See above the
Conncell of Chalcedon. ca. 8.. 5.
have already proved, and the Tenor of the Council of Sardis it self does
fully purport: Si omnibus placet, statuat: Synodus respondet, Placet. Conc.
Sardic. Can. 4.
If it please you (say they, speaking of a new Constitution) let it be
Ordained, etc. Would it have become Orthodox Fathers so to have spoken, if in
their judgment they had conceived that power of Appeals to Rome to have been
the Ordinance of God?

We confess that the Supreme Right of Appeals is proper to a Monarrh, it
being as Essential a part of his Monarchy to have the Right of Appeals, as
it is for him to be a Monarch. Wherefore bethink your selves, if the Nobles in
any Kingdom should write unto their Sovereign, concerning the Exercising of
his Authority received from his Ancestors (as the Pope pretends to have from
Saint Peter) and should say, We are pleased and contented that Appeals should
be made unto your Majesty: whether this would not imply, in the ears of the
Monarch, as much as Laesa Maiestas; as though he were now to receive an
Authority from their Grant, and benevolence, wherein he was invested and
established by his Primarie Right unto the Crown* By this your Cardinals
beginning, you may guess with what conscience he is like to proceed.

Examine well the Bellarmin. quo supra. 1. Gelasius Papa ad Episcopos
Dardaniae: de qualibet mundi part ad illum Canones appellari voluerunt. 2. Leo
Epist. 89. ad Episcopos Galliae: esse Antiquissimam consuetudinem. 3. Marcion
excommunicatus Roman venit. Epiph. Haeres 42. 4. Fortunatus and Felix a
Cypriano depositi ad Cornelium appellant, and Basilides ad Stephanum. 5.
Athanasius ad Iulium. 6. Chrysostomus ad Innocentium. 7. Hauianus
Constantinopolitanus ad Leonem. 8. Gregorius li. 2. Epist. 6. de Theobano.
Marginals: First, If you remove from his witnesses Parties themselves, many
being the Testimonies of your So at 1. Gelasius: at 2, Leo: at 8. Gregory.
Popes themselves; For if Adoniah say he is King, will Solomon, or any wise
and faithful Counselor of State take his word for it? and yet he was a Kings
Son, whereas the Pope never was either Son or Successor to such a Monarch,
as he faineth to himself. Secondly, If you except the Examples of those who
Appeal to the Bishop of Rome, as being within his So at 7. Dardania: at 8.
Gallia: at 14. Thebanus.
Patriarkship, and therefore rather subject unto him than others; this is as
though a Procter would say, My Client had Tithe in his own Parish, therefore
do the next Parishes adjoining owe their Tithes unto him. Thirdly, If you
pass by Appeals that were notoriously Heretics at 3. Marcion at 4.
Fortunatus, and Felix called by Cyprian Hosts Dei. lib. 1. Epist. 4. and
Basilides Idololatra. Ibid.
Impious, such as were made by Fortunatus, Felix, and Basilides: in this Case
you that plead so much for the Roman Bishop, could not have allowed Romulus to
say thus; Fugitives and Runnagates fly unto me for succor, in Opposition to
their natural Kings and Soueraigns; therefore am I the King of those Kings.
Fourthly, If you omit such holy men, as So Athanasius at 5. Chrysostom at 6.
Flauianus at 7.
addressed their requests to the Bishop of Rome (such as were Theodoret,
Athanasius, Chrysostom, Flauianus) not as to a peremptory Judge, but as to a
Patron and Arbitrary Dais-man, and one upon whose Authority and credit one of
them depending acknowledges in express words his reason, to wit; Of Theodoret
Baronius, Anno 449. number 124. Scribit ad Renatum Presbyterum, vt persuadeat
Papae, propter eius fidei integritatem, Causam suam audiat: sed per Concilium
addit, quae omnia a vobis dicentur his contenti erimus, quaeconque illa
fuerint, vestris iudicijs confisi.
The integrity of the Faith of the Pope, and promising to abide his award,
with the assistance of others, and to be content therewith, whatsoever should
be determined, relying upon their judgments, so Theodoret: (Now whom one
acknowledges to be his Patron and A^bitratour, him he denie^h to be his
Judge.) If, we say, these many Witnesses may be forborne, then is there nothing
at all said for the Necessity of your Roman Article of Papal Dominion, in
respect of Universal Right of Appeal. Nay, Fifthly, if you will but observe
that the Popes, which are most apprehensiue of Appeals to the Church of Rome,
do not plead any Right from Divine Authority, but only from Ecclesiastical
Gelasias Canones, at 1. Leo Consuetudinem at 8. and Stephen. Bellarm. quo
suprae.
Canons and Customs; so then (for the Church can no more create an Article of
Faith, for man's soul to believe, than it can create the soul of man) your
Article cannot be of Faith, which wants Divine Ordinance, the only
Foundation of Faith.

Our second Discovery of the Vanity of your Pretense, for Universal Right of
Appeals to Rome, by an Argument taken from the Council of Chalcedon. SECT. 16.
ONE whole Chapter is spent by your Cardinal, in answering the Objection of
Nilus Archbishop of Thessalonica in Greece, proouing Appeals to have been as
generally allowed unto the Patriarch of Constantinople, as unto the Patriarch
of Rome, because of the Equal Privileges granted by General Councels to the
one with the other. In answer whereunto your Cardinal is so miserably
perplexed, that we shall need no other Reply, than to manifest how manifoldly
he is repugnant unto a General Council, to evident Truths, and oftentimes
unto himself; as may appear by the Bellarm. lib. 2. de Romans Pont. cap. 22. Ad
Object. Nili. 1. Sexta Synodus Episcopo Co^stantinop. paria priuilegia
concessit cum Romano. Resp. hoc suprae confutatum. 2. Conciliu^ Chalced. cap.
9. sic statuit. Si Clericus aduersus Clericu^, ab Episcopo iudicetur, si
aduersus Episcopum ab Archiepiscopo, si aduersus Archiepiscopum, a Primate
Dioeceseos vel ab Episcopo Constantinop. Itaque vltimum iudicium refer^ur
Constantinopolitano. Resp. Nullum per (...) Dioeceseos intelligi posse, nisi
Romanum Quae sententia verior esse videtur tum quia vox Graeca (...) non
proprie Primatem sed Principem significat, Papa autem solus Princeps cuiuslibet
Christianae Dioeceseos. -- 1. Canon significat tantum permissionem
Constantinopolitano Episcopo, at lex generalis est adeundi Romam. 2. Canones
isti non habent robur apud nos, nisi quatenus sunt renouati a Romany
Pontificibus. -- Nec est Canon iste de Appellatione, sed de Primo iudicio. --
Nec enim Chalcedonenses Canones Sardicensibus vllo modo repugnant.
Marginals. The Canon of the Council of Chalcedon, held in the year 451.
stands thus: If any Clerk have a Cause against a Clerk, let him be judged
by a Bishop, if against a Bishop by an Archbishop, if against an Archbishop,
by the Primate, or by the Bishop of Constantinople. The question is what is
meant by (...), translated Primate: He answers, by allowing the Answer of
Pope Nicolas, that by Primate is there meant the Bishop of Rome. False; for the
Canon uses a Climax or Gradation from Clerk to Bishop, from Bishop to
Archbishop, from Archbishop to Primate, or the Bishop of Constantinople:
Therefore does the word [PRIMATE] signify that which is expressed, namely the
Bishop of Constantinople, and not that which is not expressed, viz. the Bishop
of Rome.

Yet be it that it points out the Bishop of Rome, then beware the Popes Head
of Monarchy, because the Bishop of Constantinople in this Gradation, having
the last, (that is the most excellent place) he must be confessed to be judged,
by that Canon, Superior, or at least Equal to the Bishop of Rome. As it does
appear in the like case thus: A common Soldier is subject to a Lieutenant, a
Lieutenant to a Captain, a Captain to a Colonel, or to a General; shall
General, in this place, be inferior to a Colonel? But the word [(...)] (says
he) signifies a Prince, and therefore agrees only with the Pope, who only
is a Prince. False; for the Council of Conc. Carthag. 3. sub Cypriano. Anno
397. Ne quis appelletur (Gr. (...)) Princeps Sacerdotum. Surius Tom. 1. Conc.
Carthag. cap. 26.
Carthage, applying the same word to Priests, forbids that any be called
Prince of Priests. But the Council speaks (says he) of Appellants that were
near to Constantinople. False, for it speaks Generally of In quacunque
Ecclesia, si Clericus, etc. Et (...). Apud Binium. Tom. 2. Conc. Chalced. can.
9.
Every Church; as If a Clerk, If a Bishop, If an Archbishop; not if some
certain, but whosoever. But the Canon (says he) speaks of the First
judgment, and not of the Last, which is by Appeal. Most false; for the Canon
it self denounces peremptorily; Si quis autem contra haec fecerit, Canonicis
poenis subiacebit.
If any whosoever shall do contrary hereunto, let him be subject to Canonical
punishments. Thus far appears your Cardinals repugnancy to the Truth of
the Canon.

This Objection is a Gordian Knot, he could not untie it with his teeth, and
now Alexander-wise he will cut that which he cannot loose. See above at t.
These Canons ^f Chalcedon (says he) Have no force in our Church, until they
shall be confirmed by some Pope. So he. Why, my Masters, was not this Council
one of the First and best General Counsels? Did not your Pope Gregory adore
this, with Three others, as the Oracle of God? Was there ever any ancient
Orthodox Father (the Popes excepted) that took exception unto any Canon of
that Council? Oh! you the Children (forsooth) of Ancient Fathers, who can blow
away three hundred and thirty Reverend Fathers and Bishops with one breath.

But how should he agree with Others, who in the third place will be found at
variance both with Pope Nicolas, and with himself? Bellarm. quo supra. Quae
sententia Nicolai verior, antiquior, doctior.. Quae. Et, Recte exponi a
Nicolao.. His.
Nicolas (says he) expounded the Canon aright, that by Primate was meant the
Pope of Rome: and notwithstanding, for a farewell to this Objection, he says
that Iste Canon Chalced. non est de Appellatione, sed de primo iudicio: quod
Nilus non animaduertit.. Add.
The Canon is to be understood of the First judgment. Which evidently crosses
the Popes Exposition, who granting that Judgment to be there allowed to the
Bishop of Constantinople, Per permissionem, and extraordinarily, which Nicolaus
Epist. ad Michaelem Imperatorem apud Binium, Tom. 3. part. 1. p. 688. Cum dixit
Synodus Primatem, praeceptum dedit, regulamque constituit: Cum vero disiunctiua
eoniunctione addidisser, Aut sedem Constantinopolitanam, hoc secundum
permissionem indulsit.
Per Regulam, and ordinarily he challenged to belong to himself, could not but
understand the Last, and therefore the chiefest judgment; for Nicolas was one
of the first usurping Popes. But your Cardinal that says, Pope Nicolas did
rightly expound it, if he would have him make his Papal Judgment (for in
gradation of Appeals the Last is always the highest, and most excellent) to
be the First, The Popes, we think, would judge him no true Proctor, but a
plain Praeuaricator in their Cause. So easy a matter it is for any, that will
be repugnant to all Others, to be found sometimes contradictory to himself.

Our third Discovery of the Vanity of your Pretense of Right of Appeals, the
Principal part of your Roman Article, out of Saint Cyprian. Anno 256. SECT.
17.
SAint Cyprian has been often an Actor with others in our former Scenes, in
this he enters the stage alone. The Argument of his Epistle unto Pope
Cornelius is. 1. His Expelling Fortunatus and Felicissimus from his Communion;
2. Their Appeal to the Pope; 3. His Prevention by his Letters to the Pope, and
his Reasons to persuade the Pope not to admit of their Complaints. The sum
whereof is comprised in one sentence, which if your Cardinal had set down
sincerely, without pulling our Wi^nes back at the midst of his tale (by
omitting a principal part of his speech) the very Sentence it self would
have, on Cyprianus part, decided the whole Cause, concerning the point of
Appeals to Rome. Nam cum statutum sit omnibus nobis, and aequum sit pariter ac
instum, vt vnius-cuiusque causa illic audiatur, vbi est crimen admissum, and
singulis Pastoribus portio gregis sit asc^ipta, quam regat vnusquisque and
gubernet, rationem sui actus domino redditurus; oportet v^ique eos, quibus
praesumus, non circumcursare, nec Episcoporum concordiam cohoerentem sua
subdola and fallaci temeritate collidere, sed agere illic causam suam, vbi and
accusatores habere, and testes sui criminis possunt: nisi si paucis desperatis
and perditis minor vide^ur esse authoritas Episcoporum in Africa eonstitutorum,
qui iam de illis iudicauerunt, and eorum conscientiam multis delictorum laque^s
vinctam iudicij sui nuper grauitate damnarunt: iam causa eo^um cognita est, iam
de ijs dicta sen^entia est: nec censurae congruit Sacerdotum mobilis atque
inconstantis animi leuitate reprehendi. Cyprian. lib. 1 Epist 3.
For seeing that it is decreed (says Cyprian to Pope Cornelius) of us all, and
it is likewise both equal and just that every man's Cause be heard where the
crime is committed: [And (which words your Cardinal thought good to pretermit)
every Pastor has committed unto him a portion of the flock (of Christ) which
he is to govern, and whereof he is to give an account unto God.] And doubtless
they who are under our government ought not to gad and wander, nor rashly and
cunningly to make a difference between Bishops that are at Unity and Concord:
but they should plead their cause there, where both accusers and witnesses may
be had; except some few desperate and naughty fellows think the Authority of
the Bishops of Afric to be of less power or might, who have judged, and by
the gravity of their judgment have condemned men whose consciences are
fettered in the cords of their own offenses: their cause is already known and
tried, and judgment is given already unto them: nor can it agree with the
censure of Bishops to deserve the reprehension of lightness and inconstancy.
So he. Than which what could be said more to the strangling of your pretended
Right of Appeals to Rome?

Your Cardinals Answers are many, and various: it will be the most expedite
way for us to follow him step by step. Cyprianum aegre tulisse Appellationes,
non omnino sustulisse. Bellar. lib 2 de Romans Pont. cap. 23.
1. Cyprian (says he) albeit he did unwillingly endure, yet did he not
altogether abrogate Appeals. True, if you mean simply the Abrogation of All
Appeals within Afric; but if you understand, that he abrogated not All
Appeals beyond the Seas, and consequently to Rome, then is your Answer most
false.

Secondly, your Cardinal instanceth in an Example of One Appealing from Spain
unto Rome, many hundred miles distant: yet Cyprian writing hereof (says
Basilides in Hispania damnatus ad Stephanum appellauerat. nec enim tam
culpandus est (Stephanus) cui negligenter obreptum est, quam Basilides
execrandus, qui fraudulenter obrepsit. Cyprian. test Bellar. quo supra.
he) said [ Non tam, quam] the Pope was not so much too blame, who was deceived
by the Appellant, as was the Appellant himself that deceived him. As though
this were not a full Reprehension of both. If one say, that he is not so
fellonious that receives stolen goods, as the man that did steal them, your
Non tam quam does distinguish them in the degree of more or less felony, but
makes no difference in their nature and kind; for both are felonies. So then
the Pope was less blameable, Ergo he was blameable: but the other more,
because the Appellant would needs Appeal in the consciousnes of his Crime, but
the Pope entertained it, in a presumption of the man's integrity; and therefore
Both blameable, because (as Cyprian argues) against equity and justice.

Thirdly, but Dico hoc decreto constitui, vt primum iudicium fi^t, vbi carmen
admissum: non tamen prohibiberi, quo minus secundo etiam alibi iudicetur.
Bellar. Ibidem.
The decree which Cyprian speaks of (says your Cardinal) was against the
First judgment, which is to be made in the place where the crime is committed,
but he forbids not Second judgments elsewhere, by way of Appeal. Than
which what can be more false? (I had almost said, faithless) for the Cardinal
himself knows that Cyprian uses this as a Reason against their flying to
Rome for a second Judgment, even Because (says Cyprian) they had been already
judged by me and my Bishops, by whom they were condemned.

Fourthly, but Cyprian (says Cyprianus argumentatur ex hoc Decreto, adiunctis
manifestissimis criminibus. Bellar. quo supra.
he) argues from this Decree, as it implies most notorious and manifest
crimes. What? did your Cardinal mean, by this his Ipse dixit, to infascinate
his Reader, and to deprive him both of reason and sense? For ordinary reason
teaches, in points of Law, first that A man must not distinguish, where the
Law does not distinguish: although then it happened that these Crimes of the
Appellant were indeed notorious, yet in the Decree it self there is no such
Distinction. Secondly, it is a vain thing, to think that any Crime can
appear so Notorious to a Judge, who is many hundred miles off, but one report
will encounter another, and the Appellant will still make fair pretense of
innocence for himself, until the matter be tried. And that we may Appeal to
common sense, in reading of the Canon and Decree it self, it is General,
thus: It is just, that every man's Cause be heard there, where the crime is
committed. It seems then that your Cardinal dreamed of a Cause employed in
this Decree, which could not be any man's Cause, else he would have considered
that where Every man's Cause is expressed, No cause of any man could be excepted.

Fifthly, but Quod si hoc Decreto ipso prohiberentur Appellatio^es,
prohiberetur non solum ad Romanu^ Pontificem, sed etiam ad quemuis alium
iudicem. Bellar. quo supra.
If Cyprian (says he) should here deny Appeals, then should he take away all
Appeals, not only to Rome, but even to every place else: which Answer how
unworthy it is the judgment of any man of learning, you will easily perceive.
Cyprian, (as your See above Cap. 12.
Pamelius notes) was the Chief Primate in Afric, who held a Council of his
Bishops to Excommunicate Fortunatus, and to depose him: the Council
foreseeing the factiousnesse of Fortunatus, that he would seek to Rome, to
trouble the Church of Christ, by working distraction between the Churches of
Rome and Carthage, made the former Decree, expressing the iniquity of any
Appeal to Remote places, where the Cause could not be justly tried. Hereby
the said Council took not away All Appeals within Afric, for it was then
lawful for a Clerk to Appeal from his Bishop to an Archbishop, from a
Metropolitan to a Council: and behold here was a Council of Bishops which put
the Period to all further Appeals; expressly forbidding Appealing to places
so remote as Rome was, which none in Afric could come unto, without
Transmigration over Sea. Your Cardinal's Answer would teach a man to argue
thus; There lies an Appeal from the Bishop of Chester to the Archbishop of
York, and from the Court of York to the Delegates: but the State of England
denies Transalpinari, Appeals from England over the Alps to Rome. Ergo, the
State of England abrogateth all manner of Appeals, whether from Chester to
York, or from York to the Delegates.

Moreover Cyprian, speaking of those Schismatic Appellants, Except (says
he) some few desperate and wretched fellows think the Authority of the Bishop
of Afric less; Insinuating (as we may truly, justly, and according to their
Intention interpret it) than the Authority of the Bishop of Rome; thereby
impairing the power of the Bishop of Rome, in respect of the judgment of a
National Council. No, (says your Quod Cyprianus addit, non esse minoris
Authoritatis Episcopos Africae, illud [Minoris] non refer comparationem ad
Romamanos Pontifices, sed ad causam de qua nunc agebatur: est enim sensus,
Episcopos Africae non esse minoris Authoritatis quam sufficiat ad eam
iudicandam. Bellar. Ibidem.
Cardinal) but the words [lesse Authority] have Relation to the Cause, and not
to the Bishop of Rome, as signifying that the Bishops of Afric had authority
sufficient to judge that Cause. Here again he feigneth Cyprian to have thought
those few desperate and wretched Appellants to have been so absurd, as to
think they could not be judged by a Provincial Council, whereunto they were
subject: An absurdity, which none i^ Christianity could truly imagine.
Besides the words [ Less Authority of them that have iudged] have Relation to
him, whom those Fellows desired to re-iudge their Cause, namely the Pope:
therefore it was as much as if Cyprian had said, Least those few naughty
fellows may think the Bishops of Afric have less Authority than is that,
which they Appeal unto; and their Appeal was to the Bishop of Rome. So
apparent it is, that Cyprian, thus twitting those Few desperate Appellants, did
imply that there were in Afric but few that would so much derogate from the
Authority of the Bishops within that Province.

CHALLENGE.
HItherto have we pursued our Aduersay in his own Tract, who all this while
has been but beating of the air, and (as it were) catching of Butterflies,
as you may perceive. For this matter of Right of Appealing, or Not Right of
Appealing being of that importance, as that it must either make or mar your
Papal Monarch and Roman Article of his Universal Dominion over all Churches;
The Author Saint Cyprian being so ancient in time, living in the 250 year
after Christ; so singular for his learning and judgment; and for his Sanctity
and Constancy in the Faith (even unto death) for the name of Christ, so
admirable a Saint: we shall desire you to take an exact Reuiew of the Case, and
to judge accordingly.

You remember that the Epistle is directed unto Pope Cornelius, a godly Pope,
but yet very timorous, and somewhat dismayed at the threats of Heretics and
Schismatickes; whom therefore Cyprian labors to support and consolidate. The
very scope of the letter, in that part thereof, is to dissuade him from giving
any ear or Admission unto Fortunatus and Felicissimus, both Excommunicate
persons, and already condemned by a Council in Afric, and seeking now, by way
of Appeal, to find redress with the same Pope. His Sentence contains no
less than Eight Arguments, sufficient to confute your pretended Right of
Appeals to Rome, which we may reduce to these Three Heads. The First
concerns the Decree it self, the Second, the Judges, the Third, the
Appellants, and Delinquents.

1. The Decree defines plainly that It is unequal and unjust to have an
Ecclesiastical Cause judged, but where the Crime is committed. But the Crime
was not committed in the Roman Dioces, Therefore it is meant, that they ought
not to Appeal to Rome. 2. A Reason is given for this: Because it is unjust to
judge, where Witnesses and Accusers could not be had: But at Rome out of
Afric (whence all parties must have taken a long journey, both by Land and by
Sea) Accusers and Witnesses could not be had; Therefore Cyprian meant, they
ought not to Appeal to Rome.

Next, here is the Consideration of the Judges that had condemned these
Excommunicates, namely Cyprian and the Bishops of Afric. 1. Cyprian tells
the Pope that Every Bishop in his own Dioces has a por^ion of the flock of
Christ committed unto him: Which being used as a Reason, to dissuade the Pope
from entertaini^g any Appeal, does conclude that therefore the Whole Flock of
Christ is not subject to the Pope, and consequently your pretended Right of
Appeal to Rome is but a Roman Pigment. 2. As the charge over a portion of the
Flock of Christ is upon every Bishop, so in the discharge thereof, Every
Bishop (says Cyprian) is to give account unto God, namely as Supreme. Which
again, being urged as a Motive to withdraw the Pope from intermedling in that
business, does prove that therefore the Pope is not Monarch of the Church, to
call All other Bishops to Account; and Consequently has not the Universal
power of Appeals. 3. The cause of these men (says Cyprian) is already judged,
and we may not incur the reproof of leuity, in giving our Sentence; hereby
intimating unto the Pope, that though he should oppose, they notwithstanding
must be found Constant in withstanding him, which does argue, that although
Appeals from those parts were admitted at Rome, yet might they justly be
opposed against.

The last Head is the Observation of Cyprian his Taxation of the Appellants, or
parties Delinquent, now flying for succor to Rome. 1. He tells the Pope,
Those (says he) whom we rule over, [oportet non circumcursitare,] ought not
thus to gadd about; calling their contumacious forsaking of the judgment of
their Ordinary, and seeking Restitution at Rome, a Gadding and vagrant kind of
wandering: which had been a Contumacy against the Pope, by Cyprian, if
Appeals to Rome had been inherent in the Roman Mitre and Monarchy. 2. He
calls them and their Accomplices, that thus labored an Appeal, A few
desperate Fellows, that thereby undermined the Authority of the Bishops of
Afric over them, being Africans, as Less; meaning (as has been proved)
Less than the Authority of the Bishop of Rome. And would not your now Pope
have held this also a Contumely (if he had thought himself such a Monarch) to
hear one of his underlings to call men Desperate fellows, and A few; for
acknowleging his Sovereignty and Monarchy, by Appealing unto him, and thereby
to signify that there were but Few that would think this power of Appeals to
belong of Right to the Pope of Rome? Lastly, he charge them that by this
their Act, of Appealing thus irregularly to the Bishop of Rome, they did but
thereby go about [ Episcoporum concordiam collidere,] to burst the Union and
concord of Bishops. But the suffering of any one to make his just Appeal could
be no breach of Unity, between a Substitute Bishop and a predominant Bishop,
to whom Appeals do of right appertain: nay it were an injury and sufficient
cause of breach of Concord not to suffer such Appeals to pass, and take
place. Therefore Cyprian, alleging this unto the Pope as a matter of their
just reproof, did not believe that they could justly Appeal unto Rome.

Who is there now but must conclude, that as long as the Article of your Roman
Faith, concerning the Monarchy of the Bishop of Rome, and Appeals unto him, as
the principal note of his Monarchy, shall be examined by the Decree of
Cyprian and the other Bishops of Afric, which thus oppose against Them, who
(as they say) Nauigarunt Romam] sailed to Rome by way of Appeal; your pretense
of so Appealing must needs be split upon the same Decree, as upon a Rock, and
suffer shipwreck.

Our Fourth Discovery of the Vanity of your former Pretonce of Universal Right
of Appeals to Rome, from the Testimony of Pope Damasus. SECT. 18.
ABout the year of our Lord God 367, one offered an Appeal to Damasus Pope of
Rome, and receives this Answer; Damasus Epist. ad Theophilum, quae est Epist.
79. inter Epistolas Ambrosij. Cum huiusmodi fuerit Concilij Capuensis iudicium,
vt finitimi Bonoso, atque eius Accusatoribus iudices tribuerentur, --
aduertimus quod nobis iudicandi forma competere non potest
In as much (says the Pope) as the Council of Capua has so judged this
matter already, that those who were next adjoining should be Judges, both to
Bonosus, and his Accusers, We observe that the form of judging [Nobis
competere non potest,] cannot appertain unto us. Whereby we conceive the Pope
confesses his no Right of admitting an Appeal, after the Sentence, and
Judgment of a Prouniciall Council. And we are answered by your Cardinal,
thus: that Bellar. lib. 2. de Romans Pont Cap. 24. Damasus non dicit se non posse
iudieare, sed post Prouinciale iudicium, non ei conuenire, nempe vt fine causa
iudicaret.
[ Non competere] in this place, is no more than [ Non conuenire,] it is not
convenient; because that when a Provincial Synod had judged a Cause, it could
not be convenient for Damasus to judge it without cause. And this is all the
Answer which Protestants could, by whatsoever importunity, wrest from the
professed Advocate of your Popes; which, say we, fights against all form
and style of Law. For the very word [ Competit,] in the style of the Judicial
Court, signifies one that is Sufficient, as Iudex competens, used by Vlpian, A
Competent Judge, and not only a Convenient Judge.

And for the strict sense of the word, in the point of Appeal, we may justly
Appeal to all Courts to Christendom, whether Ecclesiastical or Civil, which
may challenge any Right of Appeal: Because if (for example) the Judge of the
Audience or Arches should answer an Appellant; Sir, the matter has been
judged by the Court of York, and I know the Chancellor there to be a learned,
and a just man, therefore (to use your Cardinals phrase) It cannot be
^onuenient for me to judge that, which has received a former judgment; might
not the Appellant reioyne? What Sir? Not convenient for you to receive an
Appeal! Why, you are therefore appointed Judge in Cases of Appeal, yea, and
sworn to discharge your Office of Judgment, and not to prejudice any Cause,
by saying you see no cause to admit it, before you have heard it. For be you
assured, that I shall either show just proof of injustice offered unto me, by
my former Judge, or else I must submit my self to the Censure of your Court.
Such an incongruity and absurdity it is, to modifie the word [ Competere] with
the bare sense of, Conueniency, as though it were not Convenient for one to
perform that, which he is bound in Conscience to discharge.

We therefore contend for the strict sense of [ Non Competere] that is to say,
Not appertaining, in the Sentence of Pope Damasus; as may furthermore appear
clearly by the Sentence it self, wherein Damasus will have the man understand
Two things; One is, [ Forma iudicandi non competit, The Form of judging does
not belong unto me;] he says not, [ Causa iudicandi non competit, The Cause
of judging belongs not unto me.] But you know that no true Court of Appeal
can say, that it has not a Form of judging: the Second is the Cause, why he
said [ Non competit,] to wit, because the Cause had been judged by a
Provincial Synod, as by those, who were [ Finitimi,] Near to the parties, as
well Accusers, as Accused: as if he had taken his reason from the very Decree
of the Council of Carthage, set down by Saint Cyprian, whereof you See above,
Cap. 12.. 2.
have heard at large, calling it Unequal, and Unjust, that a Cause should be
judged in Remote Courts, where the parties cannot appear; but especially that
any one Judge should take upon him to re-iudge that, which was preiudged by a
Provincial Council.

Otherwise, how easy a matter had it been for the man, that tendered his
Appeal, to have pushed the Popes Answer away with the horns of a Dilemma,
thus; Eitheir have you a Right of judging in this Case of Appeals, after a
Provincial Council, or you have not: If you have, then do me right and
justice to hear it: If you have not, then it is but a false Delusion in men to
Attribute to the Sea of Rome an Universal power of judging all Judges, as
being the Supreme Monarch over all Bishops, and their Provincial Counsels.
Damasus therefore in this Answering, to wit, The form of Judging [Non potest
nobis competere,] did mean that he could not, in such a Cause, be held a
Competent, sufficient, or lawful Judge. Behold now your Universal Judge!
behold your Monarch! controlled and confuted out of the mouth of your Judge
himself.

Our Fifth Discovery of the Falsehood of your Pretense of Universal Right of
Appeals to Rome, from the Council of Mileuis. SECT. 19.
IN the year of Christ 416, Binius Tom. 1. Conc. page 599.
Threescore Bishops in a Council at Mileuis, (where Saint Augustine was
present) decreed in the words following: Quod si ab ijs ( i.e. Episcopis
vicinis) prouocandum putauerint, non prouocent; nisi ad Africana Concilia, and
ad Primates Prouinciarum suarum. Ad transmarina autem qui putaue^it
appellandum, a nullo intra Africam ad Communionem suscipatur. Conc. Mileuit.
Can. 22.
If Priests or Deacons, or Inferior Clerks shall have complaint against their
Bishops, let their next bordering Bishops hear their Cause and determine it,
but if they shall Appeal from those Bishops, yet let them not Appeal any
whither, but to an African Council, or to the Primates of the Provinces
wherein they are: And whosoever shall think he may Appeal beyond the Seas,
let none within Afric admit him into their Communion. Two points are
considerable in this Inhibition of Appeals: First concerns the Place, the
Second the Persons, Touching the Place, it is at length granted by your great
Advocate in this Cause, to wit, that by those words [ If any Appeal beyond the
Sea, let none in Afric admit him into his communion] is Respondent Aliqui,
etc. -- Nam praecipue propter Romanam Ecclesiam Africani statuerunt, vt non
liceret appellare vltra mare ab Africanis. Bellar. lib. 2. de Romans Pont. Cap.
24.
forbidden Appeals unto Rome. Where, by the way, is to be taxed ^he
impudency of your Gratian, who whereas the Canon was made purposely against
Appeals to Rome, yet shamed he not to add to that Canon of himself this
exception: Addit Gratianus hanc exceptione^: nisi forte ad sedem Apostolicam
appelletur. Bellar. Ibidem.
Except the Appeal be made to the Apostolic See of Rome. Which is, in
Music, Discantus contra punctum; and in your Law, Statuimus, i. e. Abrogamus.

But thus much being granted, how is not this a prohibition against your
pretended Right of Appeals to Rome? Satisfy this point, or else yield the
Cause. Non tamen propositum fuit. nec prohiberi potuit summo Pontifici, ne, si
vellet, eos admitteret. Bell^r. Ibidem.
Although (says your Cardinal) the Council prohibited and forbad that
Priests and inferior Clerks should Appeal to the Bishop of Rome, yet did they
not forbid that the Pope of Rome should admit of Appeals made unto him, nor
had they any power or authority so to do. So he. This being the only Answer,
which, after his perusal of all other Answers, he thought to have any color
of satisfaction in, we take it to be in effect the loss of the cause. For our
Question is, whether the Bishop of Rome have a sole and Sovereign Right, over
the whole Church of Christ, to judge all Causes, by his absolute Prerogative of
Popedom: And an Appeal, being A removing of a Cause from an inferior Judge to
a Superior, we reply that where there lies a Prohibition against Appealing to
a Judge, that Judge is not held a Superior Judge. But this Council granted a
Prohibition against the Appealing of Priests within Afric, unto the Pope of
Rome; therefore was not the Pope of Rome in this Case of Priests held a
Superior Judge, much less the Supreme of all others, as you pretend.

And although that Council could not forbid the Pope (who was in a Transmarine
Province) to admit of such Appeals, yet, in forbidding the Appeals unto the
Pope, they thereby denied that he had lawful power to receive them. As here
in England, the prohibiting of every person to Appeal unto any, without the
Kings Dominions, does by undeniable Consequence show, that none without the
Kings Dominions has just power to admit of any such Appellants. How victorious
then is Truth, in this one Cause, which by the evidence thereof ha^h enforced
her adversary, by necessary Sequel, thus far to profess it? Which Answer of
his notwithstanding he would gladly patch up with an Addition of a mere
falsehood, saying; Zozimus iussit hunc Canonem confirmari, and in praxim redigi.
Bellar. quo supra.
Pope Zozimus did command this Canon of the non-Appeales of Priests to be
confirmed. False, for Pope Zozimus is known, by the whole process of the
Council of Afric, to have admitted of the Appeal of Apiarius a Priest, but
not without a shameful repulse given him by the same Council, for his bold
usurpation: Which your other Cardinal could not dissemble; For Vt plane liquet
Zozimum minime probasse, quod ab Africanis fuerat definitum, ne Presbyte^i
i^dicia transmarina Appellarent. Baroniui Anno. 419. number. 70.
It is evident (says he) that Zozimus did not allow that Decree, concerning
Priests not Appealing unto places beyond the Sea. So triumphant is Truth!

The Second point that your Cardinal insisteth upon is to give us to weet,
that the Decree Canon iste Mil^uitanus loquitur de Presbyteris and Minoribus
Cle^icis, non de Episcopis: vt patet ex Augustino, qui huic Concilio interfuit,
and tamen scribit in Epistpla 162. Licere Episcopis Africanis appellare vltra
mare. Bellar. quo supra.
forbad only the Priests and Inferior sort of the Clergy to Appeal to Rome,
but not the Bishops: this (he says) is proved by Saint Augustine who was
present in this Council, and yet says in one of his Epistles, that it is
lawful for the Bishops of Afric to Appeal beyond the Sea. So he; yet so
still, as though he were scarce able to report a Truth. For Augustine, in the
place alleged, does not justify Appeals beyond the Sea to Rome, but only
speaks of one Case of Cecilian, which was not a Case of Appeal, but of
Delegation (by the Authority of the Emperor) to the Pope, and after to other
Bishops; as our next Discovery will prove. As for Saint Augustine, who was
present in this Synod, he was also present in the African Council at Carthage,
assenting to that which was there concluded by the Fathers of that Council, in
their Epistle to Pope Celestine; wherein grounding their Caution upon the
Council of Nice, Quia hoc etiam Nicaeno Concilio definitum ^acile aduertet
venerabilitas vestra. Nam etsi de inferioribus Clericis, vel Laicis, videtur
ibi praecaueri, quanto magis hoc de Episcopis voluit obseruari, ne in sua
Prouincia communione suspensi, a tua sanctitate vel festinato, vel praepostere,
vel indebite videantur communioni restitui? Apud Binium Tom. 1. Conc. Afric.
Cap. 105. Epist. ^^ Gael^stinu^.
Your Reverence knows right well (say they) that if they have so cautelously
provided and decreed, concerning Clerks of Inferior Orders, how much more
would they have this observed in respect of Bishops?

By this you may discern the Logique taught them at Carthage, by those Fathers
arguing thus: The Bishops of Afric provided for the conueniencie of their
Priests and Inferior Clergy, to hinder them from vexatious courses, and
wastfull expenses, in the point of Appeal, by saving them from: unnecessary
travels beyond the Sea; therefore they intended much more that they themselves
should be freed. Even as an householder that does compound with a Captain, in
behalf of his servant, to free him from being pressed for a Soldier, does
much more intend thereby his own freedom, although he make no express
mention thereof.

CHALLENGE.
THe same Decree that forbids that No Priest, or Deacon shall Appeal to
Rome, out of Afric, awardeth also a penalty of Excommunication upon every
Priest or Deacon that shall transgress herein; saying, Let none within Africa
join in Communion with him. Now then (that we may close with you) those holy
Fathers, who Excommunicated them that should Appeal to Rome, would not have
regarded the Excommunication of the Pope, if he should have Excommunicated them
for denying such Appeals unto Rome. This wounds your Cause to the very
heart. For if those godly Fathers of that Council of Mileuis did deny that,
which you account to be the Principal Character of your Article of Subjection
to the Pope, even his pretended Right of Appeal, (as being Supreme Judge;) if
also by their Decree of the Excommunication of them, that should but Think of
the contrary: they therefore doubtless would have contemned the
Excommunication of the Pope, if peradventure he had returned the Dint of his
Excommunication against them.

Then reuiew again your now Roman Article, viz. The Catholic Roman Church,
and the four pillars of Necessity, whereupon it stands, to wit, 1. Necessity
of Union with it. 2. Necessity of Subjection unto it. 3. Necessity of Faith, to
believe both these: and 4. All these to be Necessary to Salvation; and try
then whether this Council of Mileuis have not vnder-mined and overthrown each
one. For 1. They forbid Appeals to Rome; therefore they acknowledged no
absolute Subjection unto it. 2. They Excommunicate all African Priests
Appealing to Rome; Ergo they held no absolute Necessity of Union with it. 3.
They Excommunicate all such [ Qui put auerint] as should but Think it lawful
to Appeal to Rome; Therefore they had no Necessity of Belief either of
Subjection or Union with that Church. 4. That which they thought just in
themselves to oppose, the same they could not think Necessary for others to
believe. Except therefore we shall condemn at once Threescore Ancient, Godly,
Orthodoxe Bishops, and every way without exception (among whom Saint Augustine
was one) to be deprived of spiritual life, we must conclude that your Roman
Article is most Schismatic and Damnable.

Our Sixth Discovery of the Falsehood of the pretended Universal Right of
Appeals to Rome, by opposing Two other Cases, out of Saint Augustine. SECT. 20.
NE quid nimis, is an Aphorism which ought to take place in every kind of
discourse; for enough is enough: and, Noli actum agere, not to do one thing
twice, is as necessary as the former. You will therefore excuse us, if, to
prevent tediousness, we refer you to that which has been already as
exactly argued from both, as the Cases themselves did require. The first was
the Case of the Bishop See above Chap. 12.. 8.
Cecilian. The Second Case is between the Church of Afric, in a Provincial
Council, and Three Popes successively, in the Cause of See above, Cap. 9.. 8,
etc.
Apiarius. The sum of both is this; that because Appealing (as has been
said) is a Removing of a Cause from an Inferior Court to an Higher; the first
Case, Transferring a Cause, judged by Pope Julius, unto another Judge, by way
of Delegation, proves that the Pope was not by his own place the Supreme
Judge. The Second, Inhibiting Appeals to Rome, proves that, concerning the
Right of Appeals in Afric, the Pope was no Judge at all. Wherefore
(willingly pretermitting many other your Answers, in these kinds of Disputes,
far more frivolous and vain than any of the former) we proceed to that which
follows.

Our General CHALLENGE, concerning your Romish Answers to the Testimonies
objected against your pretended Right of Appeals to Rome.
Universal Right of Appeals is indeed (as you have said) A most strong
Argument, for proof of an Universal Jurisdiction, in any one that is truly
invested there in. And as truly is the No-Vniuersall Right as strong an
Argument of false Usurpation, to prove the No-Vniuersall Jurisdiction of Any
that shall falsely pretend such a Right. For as it is true, that the Sun is
the Universal light of the World, because it gives light unto all other
Stars and Planets: so is it as true, that neither Moon, nor Mercury, nor
any Planet or Star besides can be called such an Universal light, because it
has not that Universal power of giving light to all others. This Universal
Right of Appeal you have appropriated unto your Bishop of Rome and his See,
which all Churches Christian now, not subject to the same See, do as
absolutely gainsay. Now comes in your choice Bellarmine.
Champion, furnished with the Panoply of learning and subtilitie, as well
offensive to object, as defensive to answer whatsoever force of Argument made
against all pretense of that Right.

But you cannot but discern in his Objections, that he could object nothing,
but either the parties themselves, namely the Popes for Witnesses in their own
Cause; or the exorbitant Examples of Factious and Criminal Persons Appellant,
in stead of regular and Conformable; or (in the Examples of some Godly Fathers,
that sought help at the Pope of Rome) a power Arbitrarie, for Iudicatorie; or
a friendly support, issuing from the Estimation and grace that some Popes then
had to persuade, in stead of Authority of Jurisdiction: or lastly, a
restrained power, and that only by humane and Ecclesiastical Canon and
Custom (which is alterable) instead of a pretended, proper, and Divine Right.
Such we have proved to be the vanity of his Proofs.

As easily may you observe that notwithstanding his Answers he furthermore
lies open to manifold Exceptions. For Anno 216. Restraint of Appeals to Rome
was made by the Council of Carthage: Anno 337. a Delogation was made by a
godly Emperor Constantine to Pope Julius, and transferred from him to other
Bishops: Anno 367. Pope Damasus disclaimeth all Right of Appeal to Rome, after
the Judgment of a Provincial Synod: Anno 416. the Council of Mileuis denies
Appeals out of Afric to Rome: and Anno 420. the Council of Afric is as
peremptory against this pretense of Papal Privilege of Appeal. Among which,
Three Councels, to wit, that of Carthage under Cyprian, the other of Mileuis,
and the Third of Afric, all African Councels, are challenged by your Authors
to have bin within the Patriarkship of the Bishop of Rome, and yet they denied
unto him the Prerogative of Right of Appeal from Afric to Rome. Than which
what can be a more evident Discovery of the Falsehood of your Article?

We conclude. Either must 600. Bishops in the Council of Chalcedon, 87.
Bishops in the Council of Carthage, 60. in the Council of Mileuis, 217. in
the Council of Afric, and among them Saint Cyprian and Saint Augustine (who
All may seem to have conspired to pull down this great Pinnacle of the Roman^
Babel, and principal part of her Article of Catholic Jurisdiction) be judged
deprived of Salvation; or else must we say, and profess, Cursed is this your
Article, of The Catholic Roman Church, without which there is no Salvation.

And now have we finished the Consideration of the Roman Church, after her
first Foundation, in the Ancient ages thereof, within the compass of the First
Six hundred years after Christ: and Antiquity in Doctrine (you know) is, of all
humane proofs, the best Argument for Christian Resolution. This Treatise would
grow into a vast Volume, if we should proceed throughout all former Successiue
ages; we therefore rather choose, for breuitie-sake, to hasten to the
Consideration of the Later ages of the Church.

CHAP. XIV. Our Fourth General Consideration is of the Churches Catholic, in
the Last ages thereof; manifesting thereby the Impiety of your Article, The
Roman Catholic Church, without which there is no Salvation.
BY this Consideration we shall be occasioned to give Instances in diverse
Christian Churches, which profess not either that Subjection, or else that
Union with the Pope or Church of Rome, as your Article, viz. The Roman
Catholic Church, etc. does exact.

These Instances are of Three kinds; 1. In Churches of Nations Remote from the
Church of Rome. 2. In Churches of nearer Countries: wherein are the Churches of
Protestants. 3. In the Roman Church it self.

Our First Instance, concerning Remote Churches, not Subject nor united to
Rome, is in the Greek Church. SECT. 1.
But First be it known unto you, that there are Four Patriarkships Christian
at this day dis-united from Rome, to wit, Constantinople, Antioch, Alexandria,
and Jerusalem, the Patriarchs whereof have, of later Times, their Ancient
Patriarchall style, as thus: Hieremias by the mercy of God Archbishop of
Constantinople, Oecumenicall Patriarch: Michael by the Mercy of God Patriarch
of Great Theopolis, or Antiochia: Ioachim, by the Mercy of God, Patriarch of
the Great City of Alexandria: Sophronius by the Mercy of God Patriarch of
Jerusalem and all Palaestina. Whatsoever Christians are under these
Patriarkships, or in other remote Nations, and have not ruinated any
Fundamental Article of saving Truth, set down in our ancient Creeds, and are
united unto the true Catholic Head Christ Jesus our Lord, by a living Faith:
all Protestants esteem Them as true members of the Catholic Church, and
(notwithstanding diverse their more tolerable Errors and superstitions) to be in
the state of Salvation, albeit no-way subject or Subordinate to the Roman
Church. And from this General Consideration, we descend unto our Particular
Instances.

For our more expedite passage, and your expert apprehension of the Validity
of this Instance, we shall Methodically lay down before you Five obseruable
points. First, the Continuance of the No-Subiection of the Greek Church to the
Roman: Secondly, the Disunion and Opposition thereof unto this day: Thirdly,
the Estimation which is to be had of it, in respect of their Religion,
notwithstanding their said Disunion from Rome: Fourthly, the extent of the
said Greek Church; showing the innumerable Multitudes of them: and Lastly,
upon these Premises, a Manifestation (by way of Challenge) and discovery of the
Iniquity of your now Roman Article, which pronounces Damnation upon all
such, as profess not Subiestion and Union with the Church of Rome.

I. The Continuance of the No-Subiection of the Greek Church to Rome. SECT. 2.
BEsides all that which has See above, Cap. 7.
bin copiously already delivered, concerning the Greek Church, we shall in this
place rest much upon your Confessions. Wherefore we would First demand of you,
how many years you think the Church of Greece has bin divided from the
Church of Rome, as a Church distinct, and not subject to the Jurisdiction
thereof. Some of you indefinitely set down Per multas annorum centurias --
Graeci a Latinis diuisi. Alphonsus a Castro de Haeres. Tit. Deus Haeres. 12.
Many Hundreds of years: Whereas your Cardinal more precisely does (although
in his indignation) note how the Graeci ab anno 381. in Conc. Genesis 2.
Patriarcham Constantinop. secundum a Romano Pontifice facere voluerunt, --
Deinde eo non contenti, Anno 451. Patriarcham eum Romano Episcopo parem
efficere conati sunt, and paria ei priuilegia tribuere. In Conc. Chalced. Act.
6. Bellarmin. Praefat. ante Controuersiam de Romans Pont.. Ven^o.
Greek Church opposed it self to the Latin in the year 381. in a General
Council; wherein, contrary to the likeing of the Pope of Rome, a Hundred and
Fifty Bishops constituted a Patriarch of Constantinople, and placed him next
to the Bishop of Rome: And being not content with this (says he) in the year
451. in the Fourth General Council of Chalcedon, by the Consent of Six
hundred Bishops, they endeavored to make the Patriarch of Constantinople equal
with the Bishop of Rome, in the Privileges of his Patriarkship. All this
argues no Subjection of the Greek Church unto Rome.

And albeit some would scrape acquaintance with the Greek Church, in the year
1549, at the Council of In Concilio Florentino scimus Graecos erroris
conuictos, ad fidem Latinorum redijsse. Bellarm. lib. 3. de Romans Pont. cap. ^.
Florence, as though all then had become Subjects to the Pope; yet upon due
examination you your selves find the Grecians there to have been so far
from Subjection to the Pope, that Respondebant Graeci Patriarcham nostrum
minime extra Constantinopolim eligi posse. Surius Tom. 4. Conc. page 489.
They would not permit him to constitute a Patriarch among them: professing
that they could do nothing, without the consent of their own Church. And as
far were they from Subiecting themselves in Doctrine, for when some few
points were propounded, the Greeks answered the Pope, that De summi Pontificis
principatu, de Azymo, Fermentato, Transsubstantiatione Panis in Eucharistia,
Responderunt Graeci, de his, sanctissime Pater, nullam ad haec respondendi
facultatem habemus. Conc. Florent. ibid. quo supr.
They had no license to treat of such matters. Yea and their Emperor
Palaeologus, that was so earnest to piece them together, was himself but
hardly welcomed home to the Greek Church, which was now much more exasperated
against the Roman Church: insomuch that (as Denique Anno 1454. aperte
pronunciarunt Episcopum Constantinop. Episcoporum omnium primum, and summum
Pontificem fuisse. Bellarm. in Praefat. ^nte Controuers. de Romans Pont.. Venio.
you say) They did now Pronounce their Patriarch of Constantinople the Supreme,
and Chief of all Bishops. Thus far therefore have you confessed the
no-Subiection of the Greek Church, from the first four hundred years, unto
the year 1549; which make up 1149 years.

Yet are we not content with this short reckoning, but rather hearken unto your
Jesuit Maldonate, and Prateolus: the first, Graeci maxim hanc potestatem
semper Romano Pontifici inuiderunt. Maldonat. in Mat 10.2.
The Greeks (says he) always envied and disliked the supreme dignity of the
Pope. The other thus: Vsque adeo Romanae Ecclesiae, infesti rebels, vt nec
Romanae Ecclesiae, nec Sacrorum eius Conciliorum Decretis obtemperare vnq^am
voluerint. Prateolus in Haeres. Tit. Graeci.
And they were (good words, good friend) so rebelliously adverse to the Church
of Rome, that they never would obey his Decrees. So they. This is enough to
show the Universal freedom they still challenged from the Dominion and
Jurisdiction of Rome.

II. The Disunion and Separation of the Latter Greek Church from Rome. SECT.
3.
THe No-Subiection does not always argue necessarily a Disunion of
Separation, for the King of France and King of Spain are united in league,
albeit neither of them subject to other; but then only when as Subjection is
due, as it is seen in all Cases of Rebellion. Now this Disunion in Churches
is most commonly either in Faith or in Affection. What kind of Separation has
been a long time between the Greek and Latin Church, we need not tell you,
your own Complaints and cries are loud enough against them. Summum Pontificem
omnesque Latinos pro Excommunicatis habent. Prateolus Elench. Haer. Tit. Graeci.
The Greeks (say you) hold the Pope of Rome and all Latins under him to be
Excommunicate: Yea and In tantum Graeci coeperunt abhominari Latinos, -- vt si
qua^do Sacerdotes Latini super illorum celebrassent Altaria, non prius ipsi
sacrificare volebant in illis, quam ea tanquam per hoc inquinata lauissent.
Baptizatos etiam a Latinis Graeci ausu ^emerario rebaptizate praesumeba^t.
Conc. Lat. 4. Sub Innocent. 3. Cap. 4. apud Binium. Quando Latini super eorum
alta^ia celebrassent, non prius ipsi sacrificare volebant, quam illa iam ab ijs
inquinata lauisse^t. Etiam baptizaros a Latinis rebaptizare praesumebant.
Prateolus quo supra, and Sanderus de Visib. Mon. Ecclesiae. Anno 942. l. 7. p.
425.
So far forth do they abhor the Church of Rome (as your Lateran Council
at Rome notes) that if the Priests of the Roman Church shall chance to
celebrate upon any of their Altars they themselves would not celebrate upon the
same Altars, before they had washed them, as thinking them polluted by the
others sacrificing: Nay and furthermore, they Rebaptize them that had bin
baptized in the Church of Rome.

Will you know one maine reason of this the Greek Opposition? Harken then to
Nilus the Greek Archbishop of Thessalonica: Nostri dissidij causa fuit, quid
Latinis quidam Magistrorum parts sibi sumunt, al^o^que instar discipulorum
habent: sed non ita se habent Patrum Deecreta, quae in hunc vsque diem literis
consignata fuerunt. Dicunt Latini, Papae parts esse Concilia conuocare, de
Ecclesiasticis negocijs statuere: quod si verum est, superfluus est sanctorum
Patrum conuentus. Nilus Archiepiscopus Thessal. De primatu Papae.
The Latins (says he) give us cause to dissent from them, whiles that they
take upon them to be Masters of the Church, and use, as if we were but their
Scholars: Contrary to the Decrees of ancient Fathers, which are extant in
their writings at this day. And the Latins affirm, that it is the office of
their Popes to call Synods, and to determine of all matters Ecclesiastical;
which if it be true, then to what end were the assemblies of holy Fathers in
former Councels? these were all but superfluous. So he.

But yet shall we think that there can be so great distance between the
Greek Church and Protestants, as to Excommunicate them, or to Rebaptize any of
their Profession? Certes no. For, Anno 1584. Patriarcha Ieremias Respon. 2.
page 200. (...), etc.
Ieremias Patriarch of Constantinople, in his Answer to the Protestants of
Wittenberge, did thus far congratulate with them, saying: We give thanks to
God the giver of grace, and rejoice with many Others, that your Doctrine is in
many things so consonant unto the Doctrine of our Church. And it is not long
since the most Reverend Father in God, GEORGE by the Divine Providence Lord
Archbishop of Canterbury Primate and Metropolitan of all England received
Letters from the Greek Patriarch of Alexandria, instiling himself (...).
Cyrill by the Mercy of God Pope and Patriarch of the great City Alexandria:
commending one of his Monks, called Metrophanes Chrysopulus, unto the said
Lord Arch Bishop of Canterbury, that under his Patronage he (though otherwise
learned) might be exercised in our Universities of England, and instituted in
the Rudiments of our Profession. Who purposely avoiding the Romish Sect, did
daily frequent the public Service of our Church, even as other Graecians in
their travels through England willingly use to do. Which may justly confute
the fabulous report of Baronius Tom. 6. page 906. ad finem. Reporting that an
Ambassador was sent from Ma^^us Patriarch of Alexandria unto Pope Clement the
8, by whom he is said to have reconciled himself and all his Provinces of
Egypt unto the Bishop of Rome. Which our Author Master Breerewood in his Book
of Religions has observed, saying, that The matter being more diligently
examined, it proved to be but a trick of Imposture.
Baronius, concerning a late Reconciliation of the Church of Alexandria, to the Sea of Rome. And you have, no doubt, heard of the Epistle to the Patriarch of
Constantinople, unto the Protestant Church at Prague in Bohemia: Epistola
Ecclesiae Constantin^p. ad Ecclesi^m Pragensem. Test I^ello nostro Apolog.
part. 1. page 34.
(...): that is, Wherefore, loving Brethren, and Children, if it be so, as we
hear, and hope, make haste that we may join together in Unity. So then the
Graecians seem to be as accordant with Protestants in Communion, as they are
dissenting from you Romans.

III. The Estimation which is to be had of the Greek Church, in respest of
their Religion. SECT. 4.
Our next Question will be, whether in your own Estimation the Greek Ghurch
be worthy of Christian Communion, or no. The greatest exception that some of
you have taken against them is the denial of the Article, touching the
Procession of the Holy Ghost from the Son. But another Jesuit and Cardinal
will free them from the crime of Haeresie, in this point: Graecus intelligens
dicit Spiritum Sanctum procedere per filium, quod non aliud significat, quam
quod nos dicimus. Tolet. in Ioban. ca. 15. Annot. 25.
The understanding Greeks (says he) saying that the Holy Ghost proceeds by
the Son, signify thereby nothing but that which we our selves profess. So
he. And indeed Faith consists not in the outward Syllables, but in the true
meaning of an Article. Another Jesuit says, Graeci proprie Schismatici
dicuntur, quamuis reuera in eo ipso sint Haeretici, negantes Vnitatem Capitis.
Suarez de Tripl. virt. Theol. Disp. 9. Sect. 1. number. 15.
The Graecians are properly called Schismatikes, by being dis-united from the
Church (meaning of Rome) albeit they also become Haeretikes, by denying Union
with the Head. Others do more favorably say, that Alij opinantur Graecos esse
Schismaticos, quia se Romani Pontificis jurisdiction subtrahunt: Haereticos
autem non esse, quia in praedictis fidei Articulis potius nomine quam re a
Romanae Ecclesiae sensu dissentiunt. Test Az^rio Moral. part. 1. lib. 8. cap.
20.. Decimo.
The Graecians are to be judged Schismatikes, because they withdraw themselves
from the Jurisdiction of the Pope of Rome: but not Haeretikes, because they
agree in the aforesaid Articles of Faith.

IV. The Extent of the Greek Church, Opposite unto Rome, as well in respect of
Time, as of Place. SECT. 5.
IF you enquire into the length of Time, since the Greeks have denied
Subjection to the Church of Rome, this (as you have heard confessed) has been
Always: If how long they have denied Union also with the same Church, this is
(as has been likewise confessed) about 200. years ago. If lastly you seek
to know the Latitude of the Greek Church, whereby you may the better guess at
their number, A Mr. Breerwood in his book of Religions.
faithful Servant of God, and one excellently studied in this Argument of
Diversities of Religions, has delivered unto us the just extent thereof;
observing that the Grecians acknowledge Obedience unto the Patriarch of
Constantinople, under whose Jurisdiction are in Asia the Churches of Greece,
Macedonia, Epirus, Thracia, Bulgaria, Podolia, Moscouia, Walachia, Russia,
together with the Islands of the Aegean Sea, a good part of Polonia, Dalmatia,
and Croatia, Countries subject to the Turk: Grecians dispersed in all these
Countries, together with other Greek Churches, deny the Primacy of Rome.
Besides the same Author adds, that the Melchytes are of the same Religion of
the Grecians, and the greatest Sect of Christians in the East: and after a just
view taken of the number of the Countries, wherein the Greek Religion is
professed, he concludes, that If the Greek Church be compared with the now
Roman (excepting the new Addition of the Indians) the Greek Church would
far exceed.

V. Our Discovery of the extreme Impiety of your Article, by way of Challenge.
SECT. 6.
YOur Article requires a Necessity both of Subjection and of Union unto the
Church of Rome, upon infallible danger of Damnation: In the Premises you have
before you the same Necessity of Subjection to Rome, denied by the Ancient
Fathers of the Council of Chalcedon, about the year 450. after Christ; and so
continuing in the Greek Church unto this day: and the Necessity of Union
denied by the same Greek Church 200. years together, and all this by
Professors, in your own judgment (excepting for the denying of this Romish
Article) no Heretics, and in number Exceeding the Multitudes of them (the
Indians excepted, and yet the Indian Conuerts, if you examine their Faith, are
but poor Catholics, God wot!) who call themselves the Roman Catholics. How
then shall we not account it a Luciferian pride, in your Roman Pope, to take
upon him to ascend unto the Throne of God, and to pronounce Sentence of
Damnation upon so infinite Christian souls? who (while your Bishops, excepting
their raising of Persecutions against Protestants, live in peace, and fare
deliciously every day) do suffer daily grievous and lamentable Persecutions and
Oppressions under the Turkish tyranny, for the Gospel of Christ. What man is
there, in whom there are any bowels of Christianity, who will not rather
condemn your Article, as a Praesumptuous, Pernicious, Sacrilegious,
Schismatic Delusion, and execrable Fascination of men's souls, by the which
they are held fast under that Roman thraldom?

A particular Instance, for the Corroboration of the former Argument, in
Ignatius Patriarch of Constantinople. SECT. 7.
BAronius Baronius Anno 869. number 68. and Anno 878. a nu. 6. ad number. 42. Papae
mandatum ab Ignatio impetum non inuenitur.
does present before you Ignatius the Patriarch of Constantinople, who lived
about the year of our Lord 869. (in your own judgment) An excellent man.
Whom notwithstanding John the then Pope pronounced Excommunicate, except within
30. days the said Ignatius should Excommunicate certain Bishops in Bulgaria;
for that the Pope then made claim to that Province, as belonging to the
Roman Church. But the Popes Excommunication against Ignatius was contradicted
by the Patriarchs of Alexandria, and Antioch: and as for Ignatius himself, He
is not found (says your said Cardinal) to have obeyed the Popes command.
Nevertheless, God graced this Ignatius with Miracles after his death. All this
you have in Baronius.

CHALLENGE.
HEre you have (to omit the Opposition of the Two other Patriarchs) Ignatius
the Patriarch of Constantinople (for ought that can be proved to the contrary)
living and dying a person Excommunicate from the Church of Rome; and
notwithstanding acknowledged by you to be one worthy, whose life should be
Registered in the Body of your public volume of Binius Tom. ^. part. 2. page
862. Vita Sancti Ignatij Patriarchae Constantinop.
Counsels; and after his death having the witness of God, by his Seal of
Miracles, that he was his own servant and Saint. As if you would teach us this
Syllogism. Every one that dies Excommunicate, out of the Church of Rome,
dies out of the Catholic Church, and is consequently Damned. But Ignatius, a
godly man in his life, and blessed after his death, dyed Excommunicate out of
the Church of Rome. Ergo the same man, godly in his life time, and Blessed
after his death, is immortally Damned. Either must you thus conclude, or else
condemn your Article of Necessity of Subjection and Union to the Roman
Church, without which None can be saved, to be justly damnable. For as for the
Comment of Baronius, who acknowledging him thus Excommunicate, and so dying,
yet notwithstanding says that he departed this life in the Popes Baronius quo
supra.
Communion; we have nothing to say, but only Ridle me this Ridle, because we
are to yield to the truth of the Story, and not unto the figment and fancy of a
Papal Commentator.

Our second Instance is in the Churches Christian in Assyria, dis-united from
Rome. SECT. 8.
YOu have a Narratio Cardinalis Amulei ad Conc. Trid. a Papa. Agnoscitur quod
in tam longinquis nationibus, quae nobis vix nota sunt, verae fidei cultus
viget, and Christiana Religio non minori fortasse, quam apud nos pietate
ex^olitur, and conseruata Doctrina quam S. Thomas docuit. -- Huic Patriarchatui
subiectos esse ducenta millia, -- apud hos, annos mill ducentos Ecclesiae
dignitas and salutaris doctrina permansit, etc. Extat haec Professio in libro
qui inscribitur Acta Concilij Tridentini, page 195. Inscriptio literaru^
huiusmodi: Literae Illustrissimi Domini Marci Antonij Cardinalis Amulei ad
Legatos Concilij Trid. super Professionem fidei Patriarchae and Assyriorum
Orientalium.
Narration commended by Pope Pius the 4. unto the Council of Trent, concerning
Abdisu Patriarch of the Assyrians, and all Churches under him, subiecting
themselves to the Church and Pope of Rome. Our intended Breuity will not permit
the Repetition of so large a Narration. Take unto you summarily those
Aduertisements, which are proper to this Cause in hand. It gives us to know,
1. That the Nation of the Assyrians was so far remote from Rome, that At Rome
it was scarce known that there was any Church there. 2. That there was Two
hundred thousand Christian Professors within the Patriarchship of Abdisu. 3.
That their Faith was sound, and form of worship pure, and so had continued, as
they had received it in the beginning from Saint Thomas the Apostle. And 4.
that many of them oftentimes had suffered Martyrdom by the malice of Infidels,
for the profession of our Lord Christ. This and much more in the Narration made
in the Council of Trent, by your Cardinal.

CHALLENGE.
THis Story is noted by our Gentillettus in Examine Conc. Trid. lib. 4 Sess.
21.. 20. Festiua fabula, etc. And if it were not indeed fabulous, why had it no
better acceptance, in the Council of Trent it self, than a plain neglect? as
a late Story set out, concerning that Council, does show.
Gentillettus to be merely Fabulous. Not, that there are not Christian
Churches in Assyria, professing the Catholic Faith, and to have so continued
from the Apostolic times; but that there was no such Submission of the said
Churches, made by Abdisu, to the Pope of Rome. Notwithstanding, supposing the
Tale of Robin-Hood to be true, and granting unto you that the said Churches of
Assyria had subjected themselves to the Pope, according to the Tenure of the
Narration it self; then may we lawfully dispute (as Saint Paul often did)
though not from the truth of the thing believed, yet from the Faith and
credulity of the Believer.

You therefore that believe (as the Story teaches) this Narration of a Nation
of Christians, continuing in the sincere Faith and holy Worship, as they had
received it from the Apostles, for the space of 1500. years down-wards, (yea
many of them with Constancy even unto death:) Tell us, do you believe that so
many thousand thousands, which had been within the compass of those times, are
notwithstanding Damned, because they did not formally profess Subjection to
the Church of Rome, or not? If you say they are Damned; This were impiously
calumnious against the Apostle Saint Thomas, that taught them not your Article
of the (now) Roman Faith: If you say they are not Damned, then are you damned
in that your Roman Article, which denounces Damnation against all them that
do not believe, that without Subjection to the Roman Catholic Church there
can be no Salvation. Howsoever you, yet far be it from us, who are Ministers
of His Gospel, that pronounced Salvation to them of little Faith; that we
should open, where he shuts, by setting broad-wide the Gates of Hell to
swallow up in despair such as he has called to the Profession of the Gospel
of Life.

Our third Instance, concerning Remote Nations, is in other Churches Christian,
viz. Egyptians, Aethiopians, Armenians, Russians, and the like, not subject to
Rome. SECT. 9.
WHen Protestants, in Confutation of a Sacrilegious abuse in the Church of
Rome, by allowing of Public Service in an unknown tongue, thereby depriving
God of a principal part of his Worship, even the understanding of the
Worshipper, and Gods people of their comfort, do object unto you the Examples
of the Churches of the Egyptians, and the like; they can receive no better
Answer than that which the yellow choler of your Cardinal would vouchsafe
them: Bellar. lib. 2. de Verbo Dei cap. vlt.. vlt. Vel Haeretici, vel
Schismatici fuerunt.
We are no more moved (says he) with the Examples of these Aethiopians,
Egyptians, etc. than we are with the Customs of the Lutherans, because they
were either Heretitkes or Schismatickes. So he; plainly notifying unto you,
that were they only Schismatickes by denying Subjection to the Church of Rome,
yet that alone, without any suspicion of Heresy, might be held sufficient (in
his opinion) to conclude them in the state of Damnation: and indeed there are
scarce Any, among these, challengeable for any Fundamental Heresy. Whom
therefore See hereafter, Cap. 15.. 25.
Protestants embrace as Partakers of that which Saint Jude calls S. Jude.
The common Salvation.

CHALLENGE.
AS often as we read how graciously Christ the Son of God entertained the
woman diseased with a Bloody issue, by affoording the Operation of a Divine
virtue to cure her malady, at the very Matthew. 9.20.
Touching of but the hemme of his garment; so often are we to acknowledge that
Super-abundant grace of God in Christ, even to the [(...)] men of Matthew. 14.31.
Small Faith: nay once to one bringing with him a believing unbelief, and
saying, Lord I believe, help my unbelief. But here behold infinite souls of
professed Christians, whom you dare not directly charge with Heresy, and yet
(O the cursed maliciousness of the pride of Rome!) must they all be Damned,
and, by one Roman Article of Necessity of Subjection to the Church of Rome,
are excluded from all possibility of Salvation. The like must be said of
multitudes of other Christians in Afric, and Asia, besides Iaponia; wherein
not long since has been reckoned to be See Mr. Breerwood his book of
Religious.
Two hundred thousand Christians. To omit other Countries Christian, too many
to be recited.

Our second kind of Instance, in respect of Churches nearer to the Territories
of Rome, yet not Subject to the Roman Church, which are the Churches of
Protestants. SECT. 10.
WHole volumes would not suffice to contain the Exceptions, which we may
justly take against the Church of Rome, not only in respect of her Professors,
and their differences in Doctrine, but even in your Profession and Religion it
self, as well Moral as Theological: but you had rather that we should give
Answer to your Calumniations. Know therefore, First that the number of
Protestant Professors is not (in comparison of yours, that will be the only
Catholics) so very a Pusillus Grex, that you can have any Reason to contemn
it. For if so, then would not your Cardinal so greatly envy and malign the
Extent and latitude thereof; who, speaking of Protestants, says that Haeretici
( loquitur de Protestantibus) nostri tempo^is, cum satis multas and amplas
Prouincias obtinent. Angliam, Scotiam, Daniam, Noruegiam, Suetiam, and
Germaniae, Poloniae, Bohemiae, Hungariae non exiguam partem. Bellarm. in
Praefat. ante Controu. de Pont. Rom.. vnde Et lib. 3. de Romans Pont. cap. 22..
Et hoc Et. Postea.
They at this day possess so many and ample Provinces, as England, Scotland,
Denmark, Norway, Sweuia, and no small part of Germania, Polonia, Bohemia, and
Hungaria. Yet he pretermitteth, France, Heluetia, Ireland, and many other
places, where these Professors are visible.

I. CHALLENGE, in Particular.
ALL these Churches of Protestants may seem to contain in them one Moity of
the Christian world, in the Western parts thereof, whose greatest Error, which
you can impute unto them, is that They, for their Faith, immediately depend upon
Christ Jesus, as the Head of the Catholic Church; and their greatest vice,
that they impugn the Popes Indulgences, the nourceries of all vices; and their
greatest Schism, that they will be divided from that Church of Rome, which
proudly and impiously divides her self from all other Churches of the world.
And must all These, that are willing to sacrifice their lives for Christ, and
his Ancient Faith contained in the Catholic Creeds, be necessarily Damned, for
denying of one new Article of Necessity of Subjection to the Catholic Roman
Church? which Article (as has been plentifully proved) does manifoldly
contradict the sense of the Article in the Apostles Creed, concerning The
Catholic Church.

II. CHALLENGE, in General.
OUR Question still is concerning the Church Catholic, which is the whole
Church of Christ, consisting of all Particular Churches, as the members and
parts thereof. You have heard of the multitudes of Remote Churches Christian in
Greece, Assyria, Egypt, Aethiopia, etc. The like instance have you heard of
the Churches of Protestants, in Denmark, Saxonia, Bohemia, etc. Try now
whether that Objection, made by Optatus against the Donatists, may not some-way
check you. Si apud vos tantummodo esse vultis, in Dacia, Misia, Thracia,
Achaia, Macedonia, and in tota Graecia, vbi vos non estis, non erit. -- in
Ponto, Galatia, Cappadocia, Pamphyli^, Phrygia, etc. in duabus Armeniis and in
tota Aegypto -- vbi vo^ non estis, non erit. Et per tot innumerabiles insulas,
and caeteras Prouincias -- vbi vos estis non erit, -- vultis vos solos esse
Totum, qui in omni Toto non estis. Optatus lib. 2. paulo post initium,
You (says he) will have the Church to be only where you are, but in Dacia,
Misia, Thracia, Achaia, etc. Where you are not, you will not have it to be, nor
will you have it to be in Graecia, Cappadocia, Egypt, etc. And innumerable
other Isles and Provinces, where you are not. His Reason; For you will have
your selves only to be the Whole, who are not in every Whole. So he. Tell us
now, when ever any Church could more profess it self to be Whole, in respect
of other Churches, than that which will have it self only to be called The
Catholic or Universal Roman Church? or else to be more Alone than she that
excludes from hope of Salvation all other Churches which are not subject unto
her?

Our third kind of Instance is in the Church of Rome herself: proouing that
this Article, The Catholic Roman Church, without which there is no Salvation,
becomes pernicious to them that will be called the Body, or Members thereof.
SECT. 11.
BY this time we are drawing near to the Gates of Rome, to try what peace
there is within her walls, and what security can be had in Apocalypticall
Babylon; for so is Rome called by Saint John, according to the common
Interpretation of your own Doctors. And in as much as we are now to fight
within her own Territories, in this conflict we shall endeavor to make good
upon you Two most Obseruable Positions. The first concerns the (almost)
desperate estate of your Church of Rome; the Next is the Safety and security of
the Churches of Protestants.

The danger of the Church of Rome, and some Members thereof, is that it is made
twice Damnable; Once, by the Article which it professes, viz. The Catholic
Mother, and Mistress Church of Rome, without Union, and Subjection whereunto
there is no Salvation: Next, and more especially, by the Apostolical Article,
as it is understood in our Christian Creed, of believing THE CATHOLIC CHVRCH.

The State of the Question, by Comparison of the Head, and Body of the Roman
Church together; according to the sense of your now Article, The Catholic
Roman Church, without which, etc. SECT. 12.
THe Church of Rome consists of a Pope, and his Subordinates, as of an Head,
and a Body; yet so, as the Body your Church takes the Denomination to be
called Catholic from the Head the Pope, as the Successor of Peter; and not the
Pope from the Church. Your Article of believing The Catholic Church of Rome,
etc. consists of many other Articles, and joints, which ought to be
observed, because every one contains in it, according to your Faith, a
Necessity of Belief. As 1. The Necessity of Believing that there ought to be
Vnum in terris Vicarium, Iudicem, etc. Costerus Enchirid. Tract. de Pontif.
An Universal Judge upon earth, as the distinct Vicar of Christ: 2. The
Necessity of Believing that this Judge ought to be but Vnum, non duo, alioqui
monstrosum corpus. Baronius and Bellar. supra. Salmeron Ies. Tom. 12. Tract.
68. Qui solus omnibus praesit. Etiam Bellar. de Pont. and de Concilij^.
One Alone; because Two Heads upon One Body, would make it Monstrous. 3. The
Necessity of Believing that this One Head is Supra Concilium, vt aliquando*
defi^itum. Bellar. lib. 1. de Conc. Cap. 7.. Quintum. Nempe in Concilio
Lateranensi 2. Salmeron. Ies. Tom. 12. Tract. 68.. Quarto Argu^^t.
Above a Council; and you may have as good Reason for that, (if, as you fondly
conclude, there be the same Reason of the Ecclesiastical Body, as there is of
the Natural) because it is Necessary that the Head be predominant over the
Body. 4. The Necessity of Believing that this predominant Head must be Romanum.
Be^lar. supra. (Per quem failum est vt) non solu^ Romana Ecclesia vera sit
Ecclesia, sed etiam quae in vrbe Romana est omnibus Eccesijs mundi praesit.
Gordionus Ies. Epitome Controuer. 2. Cap 23.
Roman, so far as to hold that, by virtue of this Head, Not only the Roman
Church taken at large, but even the Parti^ular Roman Church, as it is in the
City of Rome, ouer-ruleth throughout the world. 5. The Necessity of Believing
that this Roman Head must be Visibilem Iudicem, qui possit pronunciare
sententiam, and dicere parti vni, tu cecidisti causa. Tannerus Ies Colloq.
Ratisbon
Visible, because it is the Head of a Visible Church. 6. The Necessity of
Believing this Visible Head to be so Visible, in one Indiuidual person, that
Visibilem hunc; non Indiuiduum vagum, sed personam vndique definitam, vt Hunc
Clemente^ 8. Salmeron Ies. quo supra. Sicut Iudaeis non satis fuit credere
Messiam quendam, sed hunc signatum Iesum a Iohanne demonstratum, ita non satis
erit nobis credere Catholicam quanda^ inueniri congregationem, nisi in specie
hanc ipsam credas esse, quae Romanae Ecclesiae Praefidi sub est -- Eadem ergo
fide diuina, qua me scio in Ecclesia Catholica agere, cognosco non tantum
Romanum Pontificem, sed in singulari hunc signatum Paulum 4. -- ab Electoribus
propositum, dummodo nullum vitium aut defectum in eius eanonica Electione
admissum fuisse constare possit. Salmeron Jes. Tom. 13. in Epist. Pauli in
genere. Part. 3 disp. 2. Aliqui tantum Moralem certitudinem tenent, quam
sufficere dicunt, vt tene amur illi obedi^e in omnibus etiam credendis rebus,
quas de fide este definiuerit: hi sunt Turrecremata, Albertin. Caietanus,
Bannes, Cano, Vega, Corduba, de Castro, and alij -- Alij simpliciter
pro^^^ciant ad fidem non pertinere, quod mihi non placet; atque dico sicut
Christi Ecclesia Visibilis and haec numero ita habere posse hoc numero caput
visibile, atque a^eo de fide esse Hunc hominem, qui communi consensione
acceptus est, vt caput Ecclesiae, cui ipsa obedire tenetur, esse verum
Ecclesiae Pontificem, etc. -- Alioqui constare non potest hoc esse verum
Concilium: -- Nam certitudo Ecclesiae pendet maxim ex coniunctione cum vero
Capite: impossible enim erit me tenere certitudinem, ad credendum quae Hic
definiuerit. Suarez Jes. lib. de Trip virtute Theolog. Disput. 10. Sect. 5 number
2.
It is as necessary for every one to believe THIS man (as if you should say
This Clement, or this Urban) to be the Head, as it was necessary for the Jews
to believe THIS JESUS, when he was revealed unto them: because if there be not
infallible belief of his person, there can be no certainty in his Decrees. And
therefore it is requisite that you believe This man to be the true Head, with
an infallible Faith. 7. The Necessity of Believing the Judgment of this
Visible Head to be Iudex -- cuius iudicium in definiendis rebus fidei est
infallibilis veritatis. Bellar de Romans Pont. Valentinian in. Analys. Suarez de
Trip. Virt. Theol. and Iesuita quis non?
Infalliby true. 8. The Necessity of Believing that the Nota 7. Ecclesiae est
vnio membrorum cum Capite, and Membrorum inter se: and haec vnio facit
Ecclesiam veram. Bellar. lib. 4. de Eccles. Milit. Cap. 10.
Union of this Infallibly-true Head and the Body thereof; as also the Union of
the Members one with another, are A true and proper note of the true and
Catholic Church.

That so many Necessities of Beeleefe do enforce as many Necessities o^
Damnation, partly upon your pretended Head, partly upon your Body and Members
thereof.
All that can be said to this purpose may be reduced to these Observations,
concerning the Head, and Body, and Members of your Church, viz. as it may be
[(...)] a Body without an Head; or [(...)] as having a False Head; or [(...)]
with Multitudes of Heads; or [(...)] One Head repugnant unto the whole Body; or
to the Essential Members thereof; or [(...)] Doubtfully Headed.

I. The Church of Rome sometimes a Body Head-lesse. SECT. 13.
THis happens as often and as long as there is a Vacancy in that See, by
reason of the death of the former Pope, which has been often for Paulo
mortuo, vacabat seeds annum vnum: Eugenio mortuo annos duos: Nicolao 1. mortuo
(vt quidam sc^ibunt) annos Octo, and Menses Septem. Platina in Vitis horum
Pontificum.
One, or Two, and sometimes for Eight years space. Where then is your [ Tibi
dabo claues?] what becomes of the Keys of your Roman Catholic Church? Non
manent formaliter in Ecclesia, nisi quatenus sunt commanicatae inferioribus
ministris, sed manent in manibus Christi, and Pontifici nouo dantur, non ab
Ecclesia sed a Christo. Bellar. lib. 1. de Romans Pont. Cap. 12.. Respondeo
moriente.
These (says your Cardinal,) the Pope being dead, continue not formally in
the Church (will you see a iugler?) except as they are committed unto the
Inferior Ministers, but are in the hands of Christ: and after that a new Pope
is Chosen, the Keys are delivered unto him, not by the Church, but by the
hands of Christ.

CHALLENGE.
(...)! O the Depth of Delusion! Do then, indeed, Saint Peter's Keys fly into
heaven, at the death of every Pope? If so, we demand what you understand by
those Keys, which were promised by Christ to Peter, Mat. 16. saying, To thee
will I give the Keys of the Kingdom of heaven. Cum dictum est Petro. etc;.
Per claues intelligimus summam Postatem in omnem Ecclesiam, non remissionem
Peccatorum, aut ministerium Euangelij, sed principa tum Ecclesiasticu^. -- Quia
dicit, Quod cunque Ligaueris. Ligare autem idem significat, quod praecipere,
and punire paena Excommunicationis Bellar. lib 1 de Romans Pont. Cap. 13. Hic
aperto.
Keys in this place (says he) signify principality of Ecclesiastical
power over all the Church, and not remission of sins: because Christ adds,
saying [ Whatsoever thou bindest upon earth, etc.] Where by Binding is meant
power of Praecept and of punishment, by Excommunication. So he. What power
then is that, which remains formally in the Inferior Ministers of the Church,
at the death of the Pope? if it be the Keys of Principality, then is every
Inferior Priest a Pope: if it be the Keys only of Order and Absolution, then
shall it not be lawful for any Bishop to exercise any power of Jurisdiction by
Praecept, or punishing by Excommunication during all the time of the Vacancie;
be this for the space of Two, Three, Four, or (as it is said to have happened)
Eight years together.

You will easily guess what it was that drew your Answerer into this most
uncouth and extreme corner, wherein never any ancient Father before him set so
much as the least print of his shoe: for your own Binius will tell you a
story to some good purpose. Synodo Constantinop. praesidisse legatos Sedis
Apostolicae, vna cum Menna Constanpolitano Antistite, and sedis Apostolicae
Vicario. Hanc Synodum celebratam dicitis tempore Interregni Pontisicij post
obitum Agapeti, vt constat ex singularum fere Actionum Exordio, vbi Sanctae
Memoriae Agapetus nominatur Binius Tom. 2. Conc. Annot. in Act. 5. Concilij
Constantinop. sub Menna, Anno 536.
In the Interregnum, or Vacancy, between the death of Pope Agapetus, and his
Successor, was celebrated (says he) the Council of Constantinople, wherein
there were present Two Legates of the Church of Rome, together with Menna the
Bishop of Constantinople, and Vicar of (meaning Roman) the Apostolical See.
So he. Here you see the Pope is dead, notwithstanding you observe a General
Council gathered, which is an act that you have called Proper to the Papal
Primacy, and Principality: and in Counsels are commonly Acts both of General
Decrees and Precepts, as also of punishments by Excommunication, in the name of
the Catholic Church. Besides, you may behold here Legates, yet not of the
dead Pope, but of the Roman Church living. If then your Article take place in
that sense, as to deny any Formal power of Keys unto Inferior Bishops, then
is hereby condemned the whole Roman Church, not only ancient, in the
Council of Constantinople, but also at all times of Interim, between the
death of one Pope, and Election of another, whenever they execute any Act of
Jurisdiction. Answer then, we pray you, do you upon this conceit of Bellarmine
judge all these condemned? then may, and must we most justly renounce your
Article, as execrable. Or do you believe that in the Church there remains
Formally the power of the Keys, for the execution of all functions belonging
to the necessary preservation of the Church, and Members thereof? then must it
follow (which your Obiectio. Qui eligitur Pontifex, claues accipit ab Ecclesia.
Huic Bellarminus aptat suum Responsum, quo supra.
Cardinal foresaw right well) that the Pope receives his Authority from the
Church, and not immediately from Christ: and that therefore the Church has no
absolute necessity of a Pope. And so may you bury your Article of Necessary
Obedience to the Papal Monarchy in the grave of every dead Pope, and instead
of that Article you may frame another De Anferibilitate Papae ab Ecclesia, out
of Gersons Instructions; which may serve you for a Catechism. Because if the
Church may consist sufficiently, in that which you call her Widow-hood,
destitute of her Monarchical Head, for Six or Eight years, why not also for
Eighty, yea and Eighty times Eighty, if she would so Decree?

II. That the Church of Rome has sometimes a False Head. SECT. 14.
WHich false Head may be easily seen thorrow many holes; as First to make him
(as you do) Universal Head over the Whole Church of Christ, throughout the
world, is to erect a False Head, as See above. Cap. 6.. 6.
Saint Gregory, once Head of the Particular Church of Rome did often teach; by
calling the Title and Doctrine of Universal Bishop, Profane, Sacrilegious,
Blasphemous, and Antichristian.

2. God never ordained an Head, no bigger then of a wren, to stand upon the
shoulders of a man; and so little (in respect) is One Bishop of One City of
Rome, to be set over the Church Vni^ersally dispersed throughout the whole
world; as you may guess by the exceptions which Saint See above, Cap. 12. and
13. etc.
Cyprian, and after him S. Augustine, and the Churches wherein they lived took
against the Bishops of Rome: accompting them Incompetent Judges in Cases of
Appeal from Remote Nations, by reason of the distance of places; and yet their
Churches in Afric might be said to be near neighbors to Rome, in respect of
many far more distant from thence: therefore an Head extremely
disproportionate, is a False Head.

3. None call that a Necessary and living Head, which was not created by God;
no more can that Ecclesiastical Head be judged Necessary, for the Church of
Christ, which was not instituted by Divine Ordinance. But that the Head of the
Church of Rome was not ordained by Diuin^ Authority, you have (for proof) not
only the Church Catholic, in the Council of See above Cap. 8.. 5.
Chalcedon, but also the Roman Church it self, in the Council of Constance.
Therefore an Humane Head, in pretense of a Divine one, is a False Head.

4. An Head subject to Heresy cannot be truly adequate, and proper to a Body,
which depends upon Infallibility in matters of Faith: But he that will be
called Universal Head is obnoxious to Heresy (as Pope See above, Cap. 6.. 6.
Gregory excellently taught) when he denied that either He, or any Bishop in
the Church ought to be called Universal Bishop of the whole Church; lest that
the same Universal Bishop falling into error, the whole Church (says he)
might err with him. An Example of an Heretical Pope you have had See above
Cap. 8.. 7.
Confessed in Honorius, from the Testimonies of Romish Doctors, of Ancient
Fathers, of Counsels, and of Popes themselves. And certainly that cannot be
but a False Head, which cannot be a True Member of the Body of the Church
Catholic, which no Heretic (as See above, Cap, 2.. 5.
you have confessed) can be.

5. You your selves admit of no Head on earth (of the Visible Body of Christ,
that is, his Church) which is not also so Visible, that a man may point at it
undoubtedly, and Indiuidually, saying of it This is the Bishop of Rome: But you
can have no such Certainty of any Bishop of Rome, both because his Ordination,
without which he cannot be truly Pope, depends upon the Intention of the
Ordeinour, than which what can be more uncertain unto you? as also because you
are often constrained to doubt of the truth of his Election. For you cannot be
ignorant, how plentiful a matter we have now in hand, if we intended to
prosecu^e the manifold Examples that are extant in your own Books, of Popes
who have taken possession of the Roman Chair by Intrusion. One you may
receive from the Relation of your Baronius, viz. of John the Twelfth, who
Johannes duodecimus (dictus ante Octauianus) qui nullo modo dicendus erat
legitimus Pontifex, in cuius Electione lex nulla sit suffragata, sed omnia vis
and metus impleuerint: cumque prae aetate nec Diaconus esse potuit, -- tamen
hunc Ecclesia Romana Pontificem venerata est, minoris esse mali existimans
monstrosum quantumlibet caput far, quam duobus Capitibus infirmari. Baronius
Anno 955. number. 1.3. and. 4.
was no manner of way (says he) to be termed a legitimate and lawful Pope,
because no law was observed in his Election, but all things carried with terror
and Violence; who although, by reason of his young years, he could not be made
so much as Deacon, yet did the Church honor him for her Pope, accompting it a
Less evil to tolerate one, although a Monstrous Head, than to be divided into
many Heads. So he. This is plain dealing, openly confessing what kind of
Heads your Roman Church is sometimes united unto. One, for his life Monstrous,
and therefore a braine-sicke Head; One, for his years, not fit to be so much
as a Deacon (that is, as we may so say, an Elbow of the Church) is made Head
and Chief Pastor thereof; therefore a braine-lesse Head. One that is an
Intruder, and No-way a lawful Pope, and therefore nothing less than a true
Head; because an Example differing from your Rule, which your Jesuit Salmeron
confesses to be this: Diuina fide credo hunc Papam in singulari ab Electoribus
definitum, dummodo nullum vitium aut defectum in eius Electione admissum fuisse
constare possit. Salmeron Ies. Tom. 13. in Epistolas Pauli in genere, part. 3.
Disput. 2.. Angeli.
To believe with a Divine (or, Infallible), Faith THIS singular and Indiuidual
man to be our Pope, who is defined by the Electors; yet so, that it does not
appear that there was any defect or fault in his Election. But behold, here
is one with a Constat, that there was nothing but Defects in his entrance,
because no law of just Election was observed therein; and yet notwithstanding
acknowledged and honored as true Pope of your Roman Church.

6. As the Body cannot boast of Union with a Head, that is Headless, no more
can an Head be truly so called, which is Bodilesse. But we See above, Cap. 2..
9.
have proved that that which you call Principally the Church of Rome, as
resident at Rome, shall have no being, and therefore be no Body in Rome;
namely when as the City of Rome shall be the Seat of Antichrist.

CHALLENGE.
ALas my Masters! what mean you? will you needs condemn your selves, and your
whole Roman Church, by your own Faith? Your Article is, to Believe with an
Infallible Faith, One singular man to be the True Pope of Rome, and Universal
Pastor having Monarchical power in the Church: wherein, by the word [
Vniuersall] you condemn the Roman Church, as it was in the days of Pope
Pelagius the Second, and Pope Gregory the First; See above, Cap. 6.. 6.
both which held the Title of Universal, as execrable, and Antichristian. By
Monarchical, and absolute power, you condemn the Roman Church, in the days
of Pope Damasus, who See above, Cap. 13.. 18.
held himself no Competent Judge, in Cases fore-iudged by a Provincial
Council. By [ True] you condemn the Roman Church, in the days of Pope John
the Twelfth, which acknowledged (for her Pope) Him, whom she knew to be every
way Unlawfully possessed of the Popedom, and therefore no True Pope. Yet what
marvel, if they doubt not to obey false Pastors, who daily Worship false
Saints? By [ Romane] you condemn that Christian Church, which shall be in the
days of Antichrist, when as the City of Rome, from whence the Denomination of
Roman is derived, shall be the Seat of Antichrist. And by believing [ Hunc,
This] Individual Pope to be verily the Pope, with that Infallible Faith,
wherewith you believe any thing necessary to Salvation, you condemn here-in
the Roman Church, throughout the whole Succession thereof, from Saint Peter to
this day; and therein also your own souls, in professing that to be
Infallible, which by reason of many defects, both in the Ordination, and
Election of any Pope, is known to be full of Fallibilities and uncertainties;
as all your own Historians do prove; and as will be further evident De
Facto, in that which follows in the nex Section.

III. The Church of Rome was often divided into Many Heads. SECT. 15.
Schism (as the Apostle teaches) is when the Body is divided, and depending
upon many Heads; as if some held of Paul, some of Cephas, and (but) some of
Christ. So has it often happened in your Church, some depending of one, and some
of another, and some of the Third Pope, and among all these yet could but one
sort hold of the True. You your own selves can reck on for us Schismata Romans
Pontificum Viginti numerantur. Staplet Doctr. Princip. l. 13. c. 15.
Twenty, yea See Onuphrius in Cata^og. Pontif.
Thirty Schisms and Divisions among your Popes; yet is this but a sparing
Account. But we stand not upon the number of their Divisions, but upon their
Duration. Of which your Onuphrius has Registered One for Perniciosissimum and
teterrinu^ Schisma eiusdem ( sc. Vrbani 6.) occasion alio Pontifice ab eisdem
Cardd. qui eum elegerant creato Clemente 7. inchoatum, in 50. Annos productum
est. Onuphrius ad Platinam, in vitae Vrbani 6. Schisma omniu^ pessimu^ and
diuturnius. Ibid. in Catalog. Pontif.
The most pernicious and pestilent (between Urban the 6. and Clement the 7.)
which continued and lasted for Fifty years in the Church of Rome. During
which Schism, what Parts taking and factions there were on foot amongst the
Members of that Church, throughout the most Countries in Europe, it is easy to
imagine.

Your Cardinal tells us of Tempore Iohannis 23, erant Tres qui Pontifices
haberi volebant, -- nec poterat facile iudicari quis eorum verus esset
Pontifex. Bellar. li 4. de Romans Pont. c. 14.. Respondeo.
Three Popes at one time, every one whereof would be accounted the Pope, so
that hardly could any discern which was the true Pope. So you. What Resolution
can your Church have in such a Case? your Jesuit would have us to note that
Lice^ tres illi pro Papis habere^tur, Greg. 12. Ben. 13. Io. 23. donec
concilium Constantiense omnes de gradu deijceret -- ratione naturali id
persuadente, quia cum non esset certus Pontifex, perinde est, ac si Pontifex
omnimo nullus esset. Azorius Ies. Instit. l. 4. part. 2 c* 7.
The Council of Constance put them All down; and this stood with good reason
(says he) because when the true Pope was not certain, it was as much as if
there had been none at all. So he. Moreover, Baronius has found out another
matter of wonderment, how that Sergins 3. Papa illegitimus -- qui ad
sacrilegium nefandum turpissimam impudiciam addidit, -- nihilominus ea
reuerentia -- fideles omnes, praesertim long positi Boreales populi
prosequebantur Romans Ecclesiam, vt quemcunque in ea sedentem audirent,
nomine-tenus Pontificem, eunde^ -- nulla habita eius ingressus discussione, vt
Petru^ colerent. Baronius Anno 908. number. 4.
When Sergius the Third, an illegitimate Pope, intruded himself into that
Seat, by monstrous sacrilege and most beastly filthiness, yet such was the
Reverence (says he) which all faithful Professors, especially the remote
Northern People had unto the Church of Rome, that whomsoever they heard to sit
in that See, although Pope only in name, without any further inquiry
concerning his manner of entrance, they reverenced him as S. Peter himself. So
he.

CHALLENGE.
Look again to your Article of Belief, concerning This One Roman Pope,
without which Faith none can be saved. Now your Church of Rome being divided
into Two Factions, one half adhering to One Pope, and another half to a
Second, your Article requiring Belief of [ Hunc, This only One] does damn
half the Roman Church, for the space of above twice Forty years. And
afterward, so long as it was divided into Three Factions, adhering unto Three
several Heads, your Article of [ Hunc, This singular Pope] damneth Two of the
Three Parts of your Roman Church at that time. At which time the Council of
Constance, the Representative Body of the Roman Church (in this distraction)
using no other remedy but abscission, and cutting off every Head, by removing
All the Three, and choosing a Fourth; your Article challenging the
acknowledgement of [ Hunc] does necessarily damn the whole Roman Church,
either in admitting any of the Three, or else in preferring a Fourth.

As for our Northern Professors of those days, whose Faith your Baronius
extolleth, for their Belief of any Pope, whomsoever they heard named Pope,
were he never so illegitimate, and indeed no Pope at all, (as for Example
Sergius the Third) we are in a great straight, which rather to admire: to wit,
whether the Foolishness of those Northern people, in believing an Ape to be a
Man; or the Faithlesnesse of your Cardinal; who against the Article of his
Faith, requiring [ Hunc Verum, that is, the acknowledgement of This true Pope,
and none else, notwithstanding commends men for entertaining, and honoring a
False one. But alas! what will they not believe, that will needs follow such
Guides, as lead them by the nose, and make them to believe not that which God
prescribes, but what they please, albeit herein also condemned by your own
Article? And moreover, you your selves, that are sworn to believe Infallibly
[Hunc] when as it is possible (for that which has happened, may happen) that
your whole Church cannot discern between Hunc and Hunc, by the same Article
stand you continually condemned, in your own Consciences.

IV. That the Church of Rome is oftentimes troubled with an Head repugnant
sometime to the whole Body; and sometimes to the Several Members thereof.
SECT. 16.
THe First work in a building, is laying a right Foundation, which in every
Dispute is the true state of the Question; and then, Dimidium facti qui been
cepit, habet. The Form of your own Oath will give us good light for this
First point. Bulla Pij 4. pro forma Juramenti etc.
IN. do believe the Catholic Roman Church to be the Mother and Mistress
over all other Churches, and I swear Obedience to the Pope, as to the Vicar of
Christ. You profess then in this to honor the Church of Rome, as Mother and
Mistress over All Churches; and the Bishop and Pope of Rome, as Chief Pastor,
and Head of it. It only remains to know, whether as you have made all other
Churches, divided from this Head, to be Schismatikes out of the Church, and
destitute of spiritual life; so also there may not be a Schism between this
Roman Head and Body; so that, the One being divided from the other, in some
Cases, either of them may become Schismatic.

Your public Professor and Jesuit Suarez is at hand to resolve you: Schisma
(vt distinguitur sine Haeresi) est separatio vel a Capite, -- vel a reliquo
Corpore Ecclesiae. a Capite, temere negando Hunc in Particutari esse verum
Pontificem; -- A Corpore, -- vt si Papa nollet tenere vnionem and coniunctionem
cum toto Ecclesiae corpore, quam* debet, vt si tentaret totam Ecclesiam
Excommunicare: potest hoc modo esse Schismaticus. Suarez Jes. de Trip. virt.
Theol. disp. 12. Sect. 1. number. 2.
Schism, (says he) as it is distinguished from Haeresie, is a separation
either from the Head or from the Body; so as the Body, if it deny its Head
[This true Pope] it is Schismatic; and the Pope the Head, if he deny due
Communion with the Body, as to Excommunicate the whole Church, is also
Schismatic. So he. Whose ingenuitie we must commend, in that he confesses
it possible for the Pope, in some Case, to be a Schismatike. It will be our
part to give some Instance hereof.

That your Church commonly is Doubtfully-Headed; proved by an Instance made in
the state of the great Question of the Supreme Judge in your Church, whether
it must be the Roman Pope, or Council. And First for the Pope. SECT. 17.
IT is necess^ry that that Church, which will needs be Judge of all other
Churches, should first determine with it self who is the Supreme Judge; nor
should she ever take upon her to determine of other Controversies in Faith,
against Protestants, before she have satisfied Protestants in this, whether
Pope or Council be indeed the Supreme Judge. In this Question Roman Doctors
of all sorts have bin distracted in their judgments. To leave all other
Disputes, we desire to know how this has bin determined by any Council.
Bellarmine, although the sworn Proctor for the Pope, yet against such as
labored to deduce a Confirmation of the Popes Judgment above a Council, from
the Councels either of Florence or Lateran, does reject both; Quia Florentinum
Concilium non ^ta express hoc definiuit, and de Conc: Lateranensi quod
expressissime rem definiuit, nonnulli dubitant, an fuerit vere Generale, ideo
vsque ad hanc diem quaestio superest. Bellar. l. 2. de Concilijs. c. 13.. Sed
dum.
So that (says he) the matter is still questionable unto this day.

Is not this Acknowledgement worthy your thrice rumination, to understand that
the Roman Church, which boasts her self to be the Mistress of all
Churches, and Judge of all matters of Faith, is not, after a Thousand Six
hundred years, fully assured whether (Comparison being made between her Pope
and her self.) Hic, or Haec, He, or She, be the Supreme Judge? When then,
and how will you resolve in this so principal a Case? must the Scales still
stand even, that neither of them shall ouer-poise? Not so, for you teach (if
One, as your foreman, may speak for you all) that Quamuis nullo sane Decreto
publico definita sit, -- tacito tamen Doctorum consensu -- plane definita est,
vix vno amplius Doctore Theologo aliam de hac re sententiam tenente, quam quae
ante hanc controuersiam a paucis annis motam apud maiores nostros olim
obtinuerat; Papam viz. Concilio, sicuti Caput corpori praeesse and praesidere.
Staplet. Doct. Prin. lib. 13. c. 15.
Although this case have not been decided by any absolute Decree, yet it is
defined (says he) by the tacit and secret censent of the Doctors of the
Church, scarce any one Divine holding any other opinion herein, than that
which, before that of late this Controversy was moved, was anciently in force;
namely that the Pope is above a Council, as the Head is above the Body. As if
he should say, Sirs, if the Question be whether John an Oak or John a Style be
heir to that Land, because the Witnesses conceal their meaning; without
question they by a tacit Consent are for the Complainant, that John an Oak
must carry the Land. O Quacksaluer!

Consider you not now that the Subject of all this Dispute is The Catholic
Visible Church, whose Consent likewise is to be discerned only by Visible
Characters, whether it be by word or by writing? And are you now come to this
pass, as that in a Cause of so great moment you must depend upon the judgment
of the Tacit Consent of your Doctors? We do not therefore marvel why they
must needs be blind Guides, who themselves have no better Direction, than
dumb Judges. All other Christian Churches in the world stand for the
Authority of a General Council, against whatsoever Pope; which (the Cause of
your Pope having now bin heard) we are to prove from the Roman Church it self.

That the Roman Church is rather Judge, than the Roman Pope, in all Causes of
that Church; by the public Decree of the same Church in it self. First in the
Council of Constance. SECT. 18.
IN the year of Christ our Lord 1415. was celebrated the Council of Constance
in Germany, a place then most fit, consisting (as you know) Constantiense
Concilium Patrum fere Mill, ex quibus amplius trecenti Episcopi. Bellarm. lib.
1. de Conc. cap. 7.
of almost a Thousand Fathers, whereof more then Three hundred were Bishops.
This Synod with an Inprimis begins with this Article; Et primo quod ipsa
Synodus in Spiritu Sancto congregata legitime, Generale Concilium faciens,
Ecclesiam Catholicam Militantem repraesentans potestatatem a Christo immediate
habet, cui quilibet cuiuscunque status, vel dignitatis, etiam si Papalis
existat, obedire tenetur in his quae pertinent ad fidem, -- and Reformationem
generalem Ecc^esiae dei in Capite, and in Membris. Concilium Constable. Sess. 4.
Apud S^rium. Tom. 3. Conc.
The Holy Synod, inspired with the Holy Ghost, being lawfully assembled, and
making up a General Council, which represents the whole Catholic Church,
has immediate power from Christ; whereunto every state and condition, be it
the Papal, or whatsoever, is bound to obey in all things, which concern
either Faith, or General reformation of the Church, whether in the Head or
Members thereof. Thus far that Council: which was expressly confirmed by Pope
Martin, to be held Dominus noster (Martinus Quintus) dixit -- quod omnia, and
singula determinata conclusa and Decreta in materijs fidei per praesens
Concilium, Conciliariter tenere, and inuiolabiliter obseruare volebat: --
Ipsaque sic Conciliariter facta approbat and ratificat, Ibid.
Inviolable in matter of Faith.

CHALLENGE.
TEll us now whether ever the Church of Rome had a Council more ample for
multitude of Fathers, being almost a Thousand; whether ever any Council could
assume more Infallibility to it self, than to be congregated by the Holy
Ghost, thereby making her Degrees Authentical; or whether ever any Council
could Derogate more from the Papal Power, as it is now believed and Attributed
to your Popes, than to subject him to the Determination of a Council, in
matters both of Direction in Faith, and Reformation of manners; or can any of
you require a more fundamental reason thereof, than that which is intimated in
the Decree it self, saying that The Council has its Authority immediately
from Christ? The meaning whereof is (as you are Binius, See above, Cap. 8.. 5.
taught) that the Popes Authority is not of Divine, but only of Humane
Institution: or Lastly, can you expect a stronger confirmation of all this,
than is the Ratification thereof, by the (then) Lawful Pope?

Now then (for now we are come to our conflict, by Comparison) If (as your
Cardinal, and others answer) Binius Tom. 3. Conc. part. 2. Notis in Concilium
Constantiense. Quoad ea, quae nimirum ad fidem pertinebant contra Wicklefium,
etc. Sic etiam Bellarm. l. 1 de Conc. c. 7. Falso. quia generali^er loquitur,
and Causa de Judice Ecclesiae annon est materia fidei? certe Patrum horum
iudicio and decreto de fide esse habetur.
The Pope confirmed other matters of Faith decreed in that Council, but would
not ratify this Decree, as being so derogatiue to his Headship, and supreme
Judicature; then behold (that which we assumed to prove) as great a Difference
between that Assembly of Fathers, which was as much the Representative Body of
the Roman Church, as any can be named. Whence it must as well follow, that
your Pope (if he had hereupon Excommunicated the Fathers of that Council) had
bin a Schismatike, as it does follow, that dividing himself from their Decree,
he could (by your Roman Principles) be no less than an Haeretike. For the
Decree is peremptory, as a matter of Faith: the Reason they gave was concluded
against the Pope, namely that the Pope of Rome is not Head of the Church by any
Divine Ordinance: even as a Thousand years before this, the Fathers of the
Council of Binius. See Confessed above, ca. 8.. 5.
Chalcedon anciently believed.

Another like Example in the Council of Basil. SECT. 19.
IN the year 1431. there was a Council gathered at Basil by the Authority of
Pope A Martino 5. indicta Synodus, ab Eugenio post aliquandiu confirmata.
Binius Tom. 4. Not. in Conc. Basil initio.
Martin the Fifth, and after confirmed by Eugenius; wherein were 90. Fathers,
who having confirmed the Decrees of the Council of Sess. 12. Prius autem ne
quisquam Constantienfis Concilij Decreta. etc. Sess. 4. and 5.
Constance, whereby the Pope is made subject unto a Council, and the Censure
thereof: now at the length Pope Eugenius, perceiving they held this course,
will needs dissolve the Council, and translate it to Florence. The Council
it self withstandeth this, and Sess. 11. Sancta Synodus praecipit, vt praesens
Basileense Concilium per neminem, etiamsi Papalis fuerit dignitatis,
dissoluatur, aut loco ad locum transferri possit.
Commands the contrary, showing thereby, that Sess. 12 Nihil aliud
praetendere videtur, nisi vt Ecclesiam pessundet, iusque sibi and successoribus
acquirat ritum sacrorum Conciliorum abrogandi.
The Pope sought nothing, but, by abrogating of Councels, the destruction of
the Church. Therefore they fairly Sess. 31. Decretum 3. promulgatum de
suspensione Eugenij Papae. Ab omni administra^ione Papatus suspendet Eugenium,
in spiritualibus, and temporali^us.
suspend the Pope: and in the end, according to the judgment of the Council
of Constance, they Decree, as an Sess. 33. Veritas Generalis Concilij super
Papam declarata per Constantiense and Basileense Concilium, est veritas
Catholicae fidei. -- Veritas haec, Papa Ecclesiam hanc congregatam non potest
dissoluere sine ^eins consensu: -- veritatibus his -- pertinaciter repugnans
Haereticus est censendus. -- Sess. 34. Depositio Eugenij.
Universal Truth, that the Pope has no Authority above a Council, nor power
of himself to dissolve it; which truth whosoever (say they) shall obstinately
contradict, is to be judged an Heretic. So They.

Will you now see the Pope and the Council grapple together? The Council has
suspended the Pope, and judges him no better than a Schismatike: The Pope
pronounces the Fathers of the Council Schismatikes, Epistola Synodalis contra
Inuectiuam factam nomine Eugenij Papae, -- qui Epistolae illi exordio dicere
ausus est Patres in Concilio congregatos iam fere septem Annis ab ipso Christi
Vicario, and suprema Apostolica Romana sede Christianorum matre and capite
segregatos esse. --
Separated from the Mother Church of Rome (meaning the Conclaue of some
Cardinals at Rome,) and the Head thereof, for the space of seven years last
past. The Council answers, saying: Nunquid in hoc damnabit Vniuersos
Cardinales, Episcopos, Imperatorem, Reges, and Principes, and denique Ecclesiam
per orb^m dispersum, hoc Concilium approbantem? Haec omnia habentur apud Surium
Tom. 4. Council.
What? will the Pope then damn for Schismatikes all the Cardinals, Bishops,
and the Emperor himself, with Kings and Princes there present, yea, and the
whole Church, which does approve of this Council? In the end (to end the fray)
Jbidem. p. 178. Responsio Synodalis. Cum esset ab omni Administratione Papali
suspensus, tandem huic admonitioni paruit in forma sibi per hoc Concilium
designata.
The Pope (says the Council) did yield to the Admonition made unto him, of
not dissoluing the Council.

Here is presented before you the Roman Head, and (in the Opinion of the
Fathers of that Council) the Catholic Body of the Roman Church, in a
Distraction and Separation either from the other, for Seven years space. As
for the Popes Pretense of his Roman Church, which were but a few Domestical
Cardinals, the Council did not account them worthy the name of the Members of
the Church. This being the Case, whether shall we call the Schismatikes? for so
the one party necessarily must be.

That, in this Case, the Pope is the Schismaticke. SECT. 20.
SOme would think that the Pope could not be the Schismatike, because (which
is your common Argument) the Head, although it be diseased, yet it is not
separated, without the destruction of the Body. If there be any peircing
sharpness in the point of this Reason, it may (to your own mischief) easily
be turned back into your own bowels, as the Fathers of the same Council
wisely did: because (say they) Aeneas Syluius, in Gestis Conc. Basil. Convert
Argumentum: Si vt in naturali etc. Alioquin mortuo Papa, Ecclesia periet. Lib.
1.. Constare.
If the Case could be the same in a Natural Body, as it is in a Body
Ecclesiastical, that as soon as one Head is removed, another might be had,
then in many headaches, would men make often changes of their Heads. And
indeed, if there were not this difference between the Ecclesiastical and
Natural Head, it should follow, that as often as the Ecclesiastical Head, the
Pope, should die, the Ecclesiastical Body and Church of Christ should perish
also. So they.

Come we to their other Reason: Competit Concilio. Ibidem lib. 1.. Opinio.
That which Christ promised to his Church, does more especially agree to a
General Council: now Christ said unto Peter, if he should take any offense,
[Dic Ecclesiae] Tell the Church; the Complainant is not of equal Authority
with the Judge. It were ridiculous, to interpret, that by Church was meant
Peter himself; and as fond to send him unto any Inferior to himself; and no
less absurd had it been to send him to the whole Church diffused euery-where,
therefore Christ meant the assembly in a Council. Besides, The Pope is
Minister, non Dominus Ecclesiae. Conc. Basil. in Epist. Synodal. sispra citata.
Apud Surium.
Minister and but one part, in Comparison to the whole, therefore less, yea in
Authority, for the greatness of the Authority depends upon the [Maior pars]
the greater part of suffrages and voices. So that Synod of Basil.

We might add hereunto the Argument of Nilus the Greek Archbishop of
Thessalonica: See above.. 3.
If that (says he) the Pope had Infallibility of Judgment, to what end were
the cost and labor of troubling all parts of Christendom for gathering
General Councels? Nor he alone, but another more Romish than he could be; Quid
opus erit Generalibus Concilijs, aut Iurisconsultos accersere? -- quorsum
attinet tot Academias in fidei quaestionibus distorqueri, cum ex vno Pontifice
quod verum est audire liceat? Erasmus Annot. in 1. C^r. 7.
If so, (says he) why should the learned in Laws be sought for? Why so many
Universities vexed by discussing of Questions belonging to Faith? etc. So he.

CHALLENGE.
AFter your perusal of these Premises, remember but your Jesuits Assertion:
See above in this Chapter. 16.
If the Pope should divide himself from the whole Church, He should be judged
a Schismatike. But whether the guilt of Schism be in Pope, or Council, your
own guilt in such a Case can be no less than Perjury, who by your Article are
bound to believe, that both Subjection and Union, unto both Roman Church and
Pope are Necessary to Salvation. You have now a Woolfe by the ears, whether
you hold him, or let him loose, you are sure to be bit. Thus much of the
Disunion between the Head and Body of the Roman Church.

The fourth Instance of the Disunion between the Roman Church, and some
Members thereof, in the Examples of France and England. SECT. 21.
AN Appellario Vniuersitatis Parisiensis co^tra Leonem Decimum, in robur, ac
firmamentum sacratissimi Concilij Basile^ensis. Inter alia: Dominus Papa Leo
Decimus, qui Romany plus debito fauens, in quodam coetu, in Romana Ciuitate,
quae contra nos est, nescimus qualiter, non tamen in Spiritu Sancto congregato
-- Sacrum Conciliu^ damnauit. Haec habentur in fasciculo rerum. fol. 35. f.
Appeal was made about the same time of the Council of Basil, against Pope
Leo the tenth, by the University of Paris, in Defense of the Authority of the
same Council: wherein the same University taxes the Session of the Pope and
his Cardinals, as Not gathered together by the Spirit of God; professing
herein, that Not the Popes particular Assembly in the City, but the
Congregation in the public Council is to be called The Church of Rome. And
this Right of Appeal from the Pope is a liberty which the University of Paris
has always challenged to this day; yea and the whole Church of France, whose
King (by his Orator in the Council of Trent) made known the Universal Tenet
of that Church, namely, that The Pope is not Superior to a Council. Which
they still maintain, notwithstanding Pope Pius the fourth his contention by
Arguments, in his letters to the contrary. And how little account they make of
the Trent-Canons, which are the Articles of Faith whereunto you are sworn, is
more than manifest, seeing they have not yet admitted of that Council, within
the Kingdom of France; and therefore are yet at liberty to believe as much
thereof as they list.

Not long after this, in the days of Henry the Eight (then) King of England,
Stephen Gardener, being of the Roman Religion, yet withstood the Roman
Dominion in this kingdom, saying as follows: The Oration of Stephen Gardener
concerning True Obedience. His Testimonies, which are in several pages, are
here joined together, for breuity sake.
The Authority, which the Bishop of Rome would be thought to have by Gods Law,
is no Authority with us, like as no manner of foreign Bishop has Authority
among us. Afterward he descanteth upon the Title of Head, as it is attributed
to the Church and Pope of Rome, and denies him to be the Head by Dominion, but
by Order: in like respect as Appelles was called the Head of Painters, and
Lutetia, or Paris the Head of Universities. As for the other Supremacy, which
the Pope challenges, it is that which Pope Boniface the second begged of the
Emperor Phocas. It is an ambitious vanity for them to be called Supremes, who
are Postremes in that which is least. All sorts of people (in England) are
agreed upon this point, with most steadfast consent, learned and unlearned, both
men and women, that no manner of person bred or brought up in England has
ought to do with Rome. So he. This was the Faith of the Church of England then,
notwithstanding the Bulla Pauli 3. Sub Excommunicationis paena mandamus, ne
vllus Princeps Christianus dicto Henrico ^ut eius fautoribus se adiungat. --
Iisque in virtute sanctae obedientiae mandantes, vt aduersus ipsum eique
fauentes armis insurgant, etc.
Excommunication of the Pope, against the King, and All his Adherents.

CHALLENGE.
IN these Examples (to omit others) you have two most potent Kingdoms
(excepting the Article now in Question) united in Faith, and the one also
professing Subjection to your Church of Rome, as noble Members thereof; who all
(in all the time of their Opposition, if your Article of Necessary Subjection
and Union to the Church of Rome and Pope thereof be of Faith,) are made
liable, with all their people, unto eternal Damnation. Wherefore as we do
complain of the maliciousness of your Roman Article, which denounces Curses
upon all Protestants, and Others of a different Religion from Rome; so may we
cry out upon the madness thereof, by which she strangleth the children of her
own womb, yea and her whole Representative Body, in her late General
Councels, as has been proved.

CHAP. XV. The Determination of the whole Controversy between the Church of
Rome, and the Church of England, together with other Protestant Churches,
concerning the CHVRCH CATHOLIC; to discern whether Side is rather to be
accounted Schismatic, or may more justly plead Soul's Salvation.
First by General THESES. SECT. 1.
THE word, CATHOLIC CHVRCH, is that which you oppose unto us in every Dispute,
as it were a Gorgons head, able to terrify Protestants at the first mention
thereof. Which name, as it is appropriated to the Roman Church, we have
proved to be but a bare name, and indeed Medusa's head painted in a shield, a
mere delusion, able to fear none but Ignorants. For your fuller Satisfaction
herein, We thought good, upon Contemplation of the Premises, to descend unto
this DETERMINATION of the Cause; which we shall perform punctually by
certain Theses, or Positions, by which are repelled those Popular Objections,
which you usually cast as Impediments in our way. This Tractate then we divide
into four parts. I. Concerning All Churches in general. II. Particularly
comparing the Roman Church with other now Remote Churches. III. Comparing her
with the Churches of Protestants, at the time of LVTHERS departure from her.
IV. Comparing her with the Churches of Protestants at this day.

The first part of Comparison, which is by General Theses. I. THESIS. An
Absolute Decay of the Catholic Church was never defended by any Protestants.
SECT. 2.
MAny Papists, in their aduersnesse to Protestants, whom they seek to traduce,
do impute unto them this faithless Paradox, as to say, that the Catholic
Church is sometime extinguished: whereas Multi ex nostris tempus terunt, dum
probant absolute Ecclesiam non posse deficere a fide: nam Caluinus and caeteri
concedunt, sed hoc dicunt de Ecclesia inuisibili ( i.e. Electorum) Bellar. l.
3. de Eccles. milit. cap. 13.
Calvin and other Protestants grant (says your Cardinal) that the Catholic
Church cannot perish. And therefore he tells those MANY that they do but
Loose their time, in proouing the perpetual existence of the Catholic Church.
He might as well have noted in them a Loss of good Conscience, by their
falsely imposing upon Protestants a false Doctrine, which they never taught: as
you may more perfectly see afterward by a Sentence of See after.. 25.
Calvin himself.

II. THESIS. The Church Symbolicall, and properly called Catholic, cannot err
in Faith. SECT. 3.
THat we call the Symbolicall and properly Catholic Church (as it is
Militant) which is set down in the Apostles Symbol or Creed, believed of all
Christians, viz. The multitude of all Christian Believers whenever and
wheresoever dispersed through-out the world, unto which belong all those Royal
Promises, made by Christ unto her, of being Led into all truth, Ioh. 16. Of
having his residence with it Unto the ends of the world, Matthew. 28. Of
Hell-gates not prevailing against it, Matthew. 16. Never shall you find any
Protestant gainsaying this Truth.

III. THESIS. How the Church Representative (improperly called the Catholic
Church) may be said to be subject to Error. SECT. 4.
THe Church, improperly called Catholic, is the Congregation of Christians
assembled in a General Synod (as being the Representative body of the Church
in the Symbol, properly called Catholic) whereof we say no more than Saint
Augustine spoke, to wit, that Plenaria priora saepe a posterioribus emendari.

Aug. l. 2. de Bap. cap. 3.


Sometimes former General Councels may be corrected by the latter. Unto which
sentence of Augustine you could not hitherto give any Answer, but that, which
Saint Augustine (if he were alive) would say is directly contradictory to his
meaning. For Loquitur de materia facti, non iuris: and de praeceptis morum, no^
fidei. Bellar. l. 2. de Conc. c. 7.. Aliud.
Augustine (says your Cardinal) spoke not of matter of Faith, but of Fact;
nor of a point of Doctrine, but of Manners. Whereas the whole dispute of
Augustine in that place is about a Doctrine of Faith, Whether there can be true
Baptism in a false Church. And what has Saint Augustine said herein, which
Some of your own Romish School have not thoroughly avouched? viz. that Concilia
multa rite congregata errasse legimus. Cusan. Conc. lib. 2. cap. 3. and Gerson
lib. de Appellat. Prop. 4. Conc. Generale congregatum Romani Pontificis
authoritate errare in fide potest. Hoc demonstratur aperte exemplo Ephesini
Concilij 2. -- quod Dioscori Haeresi subscripsit. Canus l. 5. c. 4. Conclus. 2.
de Auth. Council.
General Councels rightly gathered, have erred: and that A General Council
so erring does not prejudice the Catholic Church: Because Conc. Generale,
licet sit pars Ecclesiae militantis, tamen non est Vniuersalis Ecclesia. Igitur
temerarium est dicere, quod Generale Concilium contra ^^dem errare non potest.
Occham. par. 1. lib. 5. cap. 25.
A General Council is not the Catholic Church, but only a part thereof: Si
Con cilium haeresin laberetur, -- etiam omnibus in Conc. Generali lapsis,
Potens est Deus ex la pidibus, id est, laicis rudibus and abiectis pauperibus,
and despectis Catholicis filios suscitare spirituales. Occham ibid. cap. 28. ad
8. in fine. Quod dicimus Ecclesiam in fide and moribus errare non posse, sic
accipiendum est, quod Deus ita assistat ei vsque ad consummationem seculi, vt
semper aliqui sint, etsi non omnes, qui veram fidem per charitatem operantem
habeant. Turrecr. Summa de Eccles. lib. 2. cap. 91.
Which erring, yet notwithstanding Some of the Church shall be still assisted
to uphold the truth. So they.

Nor does this any whit impeach the Promise of Christ, to wit, * Whenever two
or three shall be gathered together in my Name, there I will be in the midst
of them. For Christ promising his presence to all Christians, Assembled in his
Name, did not thereby promise that all Christian Assemblies should be gathered
in his Name duly, that is, with sincere hearts to invoke him, and to
subscribe to his revealed Truth. It was an Academicall and Scepticall Paradox,
to say, that because one Sense might be deceived, therefore no Sense was to be
believed. Whereunto the Answer was, that every Sense, as it might be deceived,
so might it also be not deceived, if requisite Circumstances were duly
observed: as namely, if the Organ and Instrument were sound, the Medium rightly
disposed, the Object proper, the Distance due and proportionable. Accordingly
in Councels, if the persons assembled, as it were the Organs, be sincerely
affected to Gods glory, with desire of Truth, as their proper Object; and in
the mayor part thereof not led with the spirit of Contention and Faction, which
is the Cause of unequal difference and Distance; and if their Diaphanum, and
Medium be illuminated with the true light, as Saint Peter calls the holy
Scripture: Then is it not possible for such an Assembly to err in any
principle of Faith.

So then the difference between the Roman Church and the Church of the
Protestants is no more but this, that the Romanists say, that all General
Councels may err, except they be confirmed and authorized by the Pope: but
Protestants say, that all General Councels may err, except they be directed
by the Spirit of Gods word, as our General Councels may err even in things
appertaining to God: wherefore things ordained by them, as necessary to
Salvation, have no authority, except it may be declared that they be taken out
of Scripture. Art. 21
Church of England has truly defined. In which difference we seek no other
moderation than the judgment of the first five General Councels, which in
points of Faith propounded to themselves the holy Scripture, as the only Rule
of their Doctrines: and esteemed of the Popes judgment no otherwise than of a
particular suffrage, and in it self but equal (excepting the Dignity of
Order) unto the voices of other Patriarchs and Bishops, as has been proved.

IV. THESIS. Protestants hold not any greater Inuisibilitie, or rather
Obscurity of the Church Catholic, than that which the Romanists themselves
are forced to confess. SECT. 5.
NOt but that many of you pretend and boast of a Catholic Church, not only
Visible, but also Conspicuously and notoriously Visible, always, both in the
Voluit Christus Ecclesiam suam esse non modo visibilem, sed and valde
conspicuam, vt omnibus innotescat gratia Dei. Coster. Ies. de Eccl.. His. etc.

In conspicuo posita omnibus volentibus eam videre. Salmeron Ies. in Epist.
Pauli in genere, part. 3. disp. 7.


Amplitude of compass, and in the Haec amplitudo, and multitudo, and varietas
Credentium est Nota Ecclesiae. Bellar. lib. 4. de Notis Eccles. cap. 7.
Multitude of Believers; as the Perpetual note of the Church, which our
Savior Christ compares to a City set upon a hill. And you are not ignorant
of the Epistle, which Mr. Fisher a Jesuit presented not long ago unto our
late Sovereign King James of blessed memory; wherein he professes a
Catholic Church to be always so conspicuous, that The whole known world may
take notice of her, yea even in the days of Antichrist shall she be visibly
universal: for she shall be then euery-where persecuted, which she could not
be, except she were every where Visible. So He,

Who never regarded, that the Church of Christ, as it is sometime in luster
glorious as the Sun, so again it is (according to the judgment of Saint
Obscuram Lunam Eccles. etc. Aug. in Psalm. 10.
Augustine, and Saint Ecclesia vt Luna, defectus and ortus suos habet. Ambros.
l. 5 Epist. 31.
Ambrose) sometime as the Moon, which has her increases and decreases. In
which respect we are to observe two Seasons of the Church, the one long since
past, in the days of that Deluge of the Arian Heresy; the other prophesied to
happen in the days of Antichrist. Of both which as well Fathers as your own
Authors say as much, concerning the Eclipse and obscurity of the Church
Catholic, as commonly do the Professed Protestants. The words of your own
Authors amount to no less than a plain Confession, that Ariana Haeresis
Romanum orbem fere peruagabatur. Costerus Jes. Enchirid. Tract. de Eccles..
Postqua^.
The Arian Heresy traveled almost over the whole Roman Orb. Even, Ab ortu
solis and meridie per Graeciam venit in Aquilonem, vbi Gotthi, qui totum fere
occidentem infecerunt, -- pene per annos trecentos durabat. Alphons a Castro
Haeres. lib. 5. Tit. Deus.
From the rising of the Sun to the noone-point, and after passing by the North,
at length it infected almost the whole Western part of Christendom. That the
same Omnes fere toto orb Ecclesias Arianorum consortio pollutos fuisse.
Lindan. Panop. lib. 2. cap. 6. Antiochena primum, tunc Alexandrina, post
Hierosolymitana. -- Et tandem in Occidente Felicem Liberio in Romans sedem
substituit. Jbid. Vno quasi impetu per vniuersum orbem peruagata est. Staplet.
de Causae grassat. Haeres. page 642.
Heresy polluted almost all Christian Churches, and the Patriarchall Seats of
Antioch, Alexandria, and Jerusalem; and at length passing into the Western
parts (meaning the Roman Iu^isdiction) substituted Felix into the Roman
Chair, instead of Liberius; and so ran his Course through-out the whole world
in a trice. When the Church was brought to that low ebb, that the same Pope
Liberius, hearing the Arian Emperor to object the Paucity of Orthodoxe
Fathers, doubted not to make his Answer; Constantio Imperatori multitudinem
Arianorum obijcienti, and Catholicorum pauci^tatem Respondit, Non refer
numerum esse magnum aut parvum: nam Iudaeorum Eccelesia in Babylone constituta
ad tres pueros redacta fuit. Ex Tom. 1. Conc. Salmeron Jes. Tom. 3. Tract. 23.
in verba Luc. [Ad dandam salutem plebi] page 168.
It mattereth not (says he) whether the true Professors be more, or fewer, for
the Church of the Jews was once reduced to the number of Three. So accordingly
Male Ecclesiam Dei in tectis aedificijsque veneramini: montes mihi and lacus,
and carceres sunt tutiores. Hilar. lib. con. Auxent.
Saint Hilaery bewailed the state of the Church, saying, that it had forsaken
Temples and buildings; and was more safe in Mountains, Lakes, and Prisons. And
Greg. Nazianzene speaking of his own Church at that time, Nostri Ouilis hoc
maxim proprium [(...)] esset, quod minime infringi posset; ita vt per saepe
(...), Arca Noe^ vocati simus, vt qui soli orbis vniuersi (...), diluvium
effugissimus. Greg. Nazian. Orat. 12.
It was proper to our Fold (says he) that it could not be broken, insomuch
that we were often termed the Arc of Noah; as those who only escaped drowning
in the flood. So he. Would it not pose you to tell what was the face and
appearance of the Roman Church, when only the Church of Nazianzum was said to
escape the Deluge of that Arrian Heresy?

But how much greater is the Cloud of Obscurity of the Church, prophesied of
in the days of Antichrist? Let your Rhemists shout as loud as they can, that
the Catholic Church is always Rhemists Annot. in Act. 11.24.
Notably visible in her visible Pastors, Sacraments, and names of her
Professors; yet at length, as it were with shouting, they waxing hoarse, tell
you of an The same in their Annot. in 2 Thessalonians. 2.3.
External cessation of all outward Communion from the Catholic Church,
excepting the Communion in the hearts of her Professors. And falling into a
Meditation of these words of the Apoc. Chap. 12. ver. 6. [ The Woman fledd into
the Wilderness;] whereby is meant the Church Catholic, seeking resuge from the
violance of Antichrist, They give you this Note: Annot. in Apoc. 12.6.
At which time for all that (say they) the Church shall not want our Lord's
protection, nor Pastors, nor be so secret, but that all faithful men shall
know and follow her, much less shall she decay and err from the Faith, as
Heretics wickedly feine; but be as the Catholic Church now in England in the
time of Persecution, because it has no public Seat of Regiment, nor open
free exercise of holy function. And although it may be said to be fledd into
the Desert, yet is it neither Unknown unto the Faithful that follow it, nor
to the Enemies that persecute it. So They.

In which one testimony we have an hotch-potch of Truth, Folly, and Falsehood
together. Truth, in acknowledging such an Obscurity of the Church, as that
whereby she is deprived of public government, and free exercise of
Ecclesiastical Function. Falsehood, in obiecting unto Protestants (whom they as
falsely call Heretics) an opinion of Decay and error from Faith in the whole
Catholic Church; which unto your own See above in this Chap. Sect. 2. a
Bellarmine seemed, in effect, to be a lewd Slander. And thirdly, what greater
Folly and absurdity can there be, than to dream (as Master Fisher likewise
has done) of a Church Flying into the Desert under God's protection, that it
should not be known; and yet in his opinion, not unknown to her Persecutors?
With like reason might they assure you, that the Hare is still known to the
Hunter, when she flies into a thicket and place (by God's providence) of such
safety, that neither man, nor dog can hunt her out.

We had rather you should hear the more judicious and ingenuous
Acknowledgements of your other Jesuits Ribera, Pererius, Acosta, Viega^, from
whom you may hear of the Church flying into the Wilderness, to a place
prepared for her of God; So that Mulier fugiet in solitudinem -- locum sibi
paratu^ a Deo. Scilicet, vbi ab Antichristi Ministris aut non inquiretur, aut
non inuenietur. Ribera Jes. Com. in Apoc. 12.6.
She can either not be enquired of, where she is, by the Ministers of
Antichrist, or at least not be found out. Tollet Antichristus de medio omnia
officia publica, -- sed cultus tantum priuatim and occulte seruabicur. Pererius
Ies in Dan. lib. 15. super haec verba. [Veniet tempus.] Omnis Ecclesiastici
ordinis splendour and decus exolitum and sepultum iacet. Acosta Ies. de temp.
nouiss. lib. 2. cap. 15. Ecclesia^u^ aedes sacrae tugurij instar erunt. --
Liturgia extinguetur. Acosta ibid. Cap. vlt. In Apoc. 13. [Et adorauerunt eam
omnes qui inhabitant terram.] Docet innumerabilem eotum multitudinem, qui
Antichristo adhaerebunt. -- Omnes illi nimirum, qui praedestinati non sunt,
quorum nomina non suut scripta in libro vitae. Ribera Ies. in Apoc. 13.7. Haec
sunt quae sacrificium Eucharistiae cessaturum Antichristi tempore confirmant.
Viegas Ies in Apoc. Cap. 13. Com. 2. Sect. 12.
When the Churches service and worship shall be in secret, the Sacrifice of the
Mass shall cease, the Liturgy and form of prayer shall be abolished; and all
shall adore Antichrist, except the Predestinate, whose names are written in the
Book of Life. So they. Did you ever hear, from any Protestant, a
signification of any greater Obscurity of the Church than this is? Which
differs not from the judgment of ancient Fathers, who, speaking of the
Catholic Church, say that Ecclesia est, cui dictum est, Sponsa es sicut luna,
electa sicut Sol. Quando enim Sol obscuratur, luna non dabit lumen suum --
Ecclesia non apparebit, impijs tunc vltra modum saeuientibus. Aug. Tom. 2 Epist
80 ad Hesych. Luna obscurabitur, etc. Haec dies in exitu mundi, iniquitatum and
errorum tenebris obscurata. Chrysostom. Tom. 2. in Math. 24. Hom. 49. Tunc
Ecclesia, quasi senio debilitata, per praedicationem filios parere non valet.
Greg. lib. 19. Cap. 9. in Job Cap. 29.
This Sun shall be darkened, and the Moon shall not give her light: Not
appearing to her Persecutors. And this Mother shall be unable to bring forth
the Children of her womb.

Of Departure from some particular Churches. THESIS. V. All particular Churches
are not to be forsaken for every Unsoundness in either Manners, Worship, or
Doctrine. SECT. 6.
We have Christ his Warrant, in the Case of Unsoundness in Manners, Mat.
23.3. -- Whatsoever they bid you do, that observe and do, but after their
works do not. Shall the Iniquity of the Minister make the promises of God of
none effect? God forbid! Or because they have foul hands, must I have deaf
years? Abel and Cain might offer Sacrifice at one Altar. Peter and Judas
present themselves together at one sacred Supper. The Publican and Pharisee
pray in one Temple. Peruse but the Book of God, the holy Scripture, from the
beginning of Genesis unto the end of the Apocalypse, and you shall scarce find
one example of any particular Church consisting only of sanctified Professors,
without mixture (as in the barn) of both Chafe and Wheat; or without (as the
net) good and badd fishes; or without (as the fold) sheep and goats, still
diverse in dissimilitude of manners, not in division of Sacraments; no not in
the family of Noah, within the Arc. Which we speak to the just Condemnation
of all such Separatists, who (as of old the Donatists) for only scandal taken
at the wicked lives of the Professors, do break the barn, burst the net,
overthrow the fold, and rend the vn-seamed Coat of Christ, by dividing
themselves from the Church of their own Profession.

Next, every corrupt Custom, in the public Worship of God, is no sufficient
Warrant or cause of Separation from the particular Church, wherein we have
been baptized, or have made profession of our Faith; except the form thereof
be some-way Idolatrous. For we read how the High places and Groves were
forbidden of God, Deuteronomy. 12. yet, in the time of their Judges, God suffered their
Sacrifice, Iud. 6. and (as Saint De hoc instituto sic Augustinus in l^b. Iudic.
Deus consuetudinem populi sui, qua, praeter eius tabernaculum, tamen non Dijs
alienis offereba^t. sed Domino Deo suo, sustinebat potius quam vetabat, etiam
sic exaudiens offerentes. Sigon. de Repub. Heb. lib. 2. c. ^.
Augustine, you know, says) God accepted their Offerings.

As for error in Doctrine, your Cardinal will have you understand, that
Ecclesia Corinthiorum and Galatarum, ad quos scribebat Paulus, verae Ecclesiae
erant, and tamen ibi non erat aliquando syncera praedicatio verbi, vt ex
Apostolo cognosci potest, qui dicit se scribere Ecclesijs Dei, quae sunt
Corinthi, vel in Galatia. 1 Cor. and Gal. 1. Et tamen 1 Cor. 15. Arguuntur
Corinthi^, quod docerent non esse futuram resurrectionem; and Galatae per totam
fere epistolam reprehenduntur, quod docerent seruandam esse lege^ Mosis cum
Euangelio. Dub. Sol: sed dices, quomodo erant istae verae Ecclesiae, cum
haeresin docerent? Resp. aliud esse errare, and paratum esse ad discendum, --
aliud nolle discere, and audita veritate nolle acquiescere. -- In Ecclesia
particulari potest esse illud primum, at illud secundum solum in Sy^agogis
Satanae, and Ecclesijs malignantium. Bellar. lib. 4. de Notis Eccles c. 2..
Tertio. The same has Cosmus Philiarchus almost verbatim, Tom. 2. de Officio
Sacerdotis lib. 2. Contra Maereticos. Cap. 8.
Particular Churches may err in some points of Faith, and yet be accounted
true Churches: and he gives instance in the Churches of Corinth and Galatia,
both which Saint Paul styles, Churches of the Saints: albeit the one is
reprehended by the Apostle, for denying the Resurrection, 1 Cor. 15. the other
for teaching a necessary Observation of the Law of Moses with the Gospel of
Christ. Gal. 1. So he. Yet lest you may err, in terming that a True Church,
which is wilfuliy entangled in any Heresy, he gives this Condition, that The
same that err be ready to be reformed, and to obey the truth, as were the
Corinthians and Galatians: Otherwise to be unwilling either to learn, or to
yield unto a manifest truth, is proper (says your Author) unto a Satanicall
Synagogue, and to the Churches of the Malignant. So your Cardinal, and that
most truly.

THESIS. VI. Some Unsound Churches are necessarily to be avoided, and the just
Causes why? SECT. 7.
AS Leprousie, Plague, and whatsoever contagious Diseases are necessary causes
of separation from unsound houses; so Obstinacy of error in Teachers, affected
Ignorance, and obduration of people, Idolatry in Gods Worship, Tyranny, and
Persecution against the true and sincere Professors, may be judged necessary
Causes of Separation from any particular Churches. Against a general
Obstinacy of false-Teachers, opposing to the wholesome doctrine, We have a
Caveat, [(...)] Depart from such, 1 Timothy 6.5. Against the general Obdurancie
of hearts, our Caveat is both Christ's Mat. 10.14.
Shake off the dust of your feet, in departing; and Saint Paul's [(...)] When
certain obstinate persons speak evil of the Word of God, before the people,
he departed from them, and separated the Disciples, Act. 19.9: because else
they should hear nothing but blasphemies against the truth of God. Against the
Corruption of Gods Worship, Idolatrously, the Command is [(...)] Fly from
Idolatry, 1 Cor. 10.4. even as unto the people under the Law, when Bethel, that
is, the House of God, was turned into Bethauen, that is, the House of Vanity
(the Epithet of Idolatry) then the Watchword to the Faithful was, Separate
your selves from among them, Hos. 10. Against Tyranny in Persecuting of
Preachers, or Professors in any one City, the warning is [(...)] likewise Fly
unto another, Mat. 10.23. And lastly, in the time of Antichristian Tyranny and
Idolatry in Romish Babylon, the Spirit says, [(...),] Come out of her, my
people. Apoc. 18.4.

THESIS. VII. No unjust Excommunication, out of a true Church, can prejudice
the Salvation of the Excommunicate, SECT. 8.
YOur Romance Gloss, authorized by Pope Greg. 13. Ad perpetuam rei memoriam,
etc.
Gregory the XIII, will speak as much as need be said, to wit, Matthew 26. --
Intellige claue non errante; alias enim si ligando and soluendo erraret, non
dicitur ligatus apud Deum: frequenter enim fit, vt qui per Ecclesiam militantem
for as mittitur, intus habetur in Ecclesia triumphante, and contra. Glossa in
Extra. Ioh. 22. Tit. 14. cap. 5. Solutum in coelis.
The Keys of the Church erring in her binding and loosing, the party so bound
is not then bound with God: for it happens many times, that he who is
excommunicated out of the Church Militant is notwithstandeng in the Church
Triumphant. So your own Gloss. According as it has been observed by you in
the Blinde-man cured by Christ, and professing the power of Christ, whom
therefore the Church of the Jews [(...)] Cast out of their Synagogues, Ioh.
9.34. That is (says your Cardinal) they excommunicated and separated him from
the communion of Them, who at that time were accounted faithful; but yet happy
was that Blinde-man, who was Excommunicated for the name of Christ. So he.

Excommunicant eum, and a Synogoga and consortio Iudaeorum, qui tum fideles
habebantur: at felix ille Coecus, qui pro nomine Christi absque Synagogis
factus. T^let in Ioh. 9.
And so may we say of Luther, who was as one borne Blind, whilst he continued
in your Church (according to your Assumption) true; until that Christ opened
his eyes, and he for acknowledging the divine light was Excommunicate by your
High Priest. Yet happy man he! who was taken into the protection of Christ,
whom he professed and worshipped. Something more of Excommunication you may
read in the XV. Section Following.

The Second Part is concerning Departure from Rome, more particularly comparing
the Church of Rome with other Churches.
We are approached to the Walls of Rome, and behold we discover in her, just
just Causes of Separation from her; which we shall represent unto you in that
due place, whereunto we now proceed by certain Theses, as it were by just
pases; Comparing her, first, with other Remote Christian Chur^hes.

THESIS. I. The Church of Rome is as subject to Errors, as any other Church.
SECT. 9.
WHat Prerogative had the Church-of your Romans above the Church of the
Ephesians, or Thessalonians, in respect of any possibility of not See above,
Chap. 3. Sect. 5. etc.
Erring? or of Contemning other Churches in respect of her self? to which that
may be objected which the Apostle writ to the Corinthians, to wit, 1. Cor.
14.36.
Came the Word of God first from you? nay came it not Above, c. 3.. ^.
First from Jerusalem to Antioch, and many other places, before Rome; and at
length from Greece to Rome? And after that Rome is established a Church, was it
freed from Erring more than other, through the Primacie, which it challenges
over Others? By what Law? Humane? that could not; Divine? that did not
authorize any such Primacy. Which you are compellable to Confess, except you
will say that the Catholic Church has erred in the General Council of
Chalcedon, which (as has See above Chap. 8. Sect. 5. etc.
been confessed) denied that Rome had her Primacie from divine Ordinance:
except you will also Grant that the Church of Rome it self has erred in her
Ibidem.
Council of Constance; which maintained the same Axiom, to wit, that the
Church of Rome held not her Primacie from divine authority. Lastly, except you
will impeach the Apostle Saint Paul of error; who by his [(...)] taught an
indifferency of all spiritual respect to Rome, with other Churches, as See
above. Cap. 4, Sect. 13. and. 14.
has been proved. Take unto you one infallible Argument, that the Church of
Rome may err in matter of Faith. It has erred, Ergo, It may possibly err.
That it has, one confessed instance may sufficiently resolve you, if it be
pregnant. Such is the doctrine of the Administration of the Sententia
Innocentii primi 600 circiter Annos viguit in Ecclesia, Eucharistiam etia^
Infantibus necessariam esse. Ex Eucharistiae necessitate Innocenttius vrget
Baptismi necessitatem. Maldon. Ies. in Ioh. 6.53. and Tract. de Euchar. p. 200.
Espencaeus l. 2. de Adorat. Euch. cap. 12. Idem probat Binius ex verbis
Innocentij Tom, 1. Conc. p. 585. Edit. 1606.
Eucharist unto Infants, vp^n Necessity of Salvation. A doctrine, by your own
Confession at this day, false: and yet at that day (as is likewise Confessed)
taugh and continued in the Church of Rome for the space of 600 years together.

THESIS. II. That the Church of Rome is more subject to Erring, than any other
Church Christian. SECT. 10.
WHy is it that Christ said, Luc. 5.31.
The whole need not the Physician, but those that be sick? but only to show,
that the state of one in an health falsly-conceited is far more desperate,
than the state of the most extreme disease sensibly ^elt; in as much as that
man is more incapable of remedy, that feels not his own malady, than he
that is sensible of his grief. Such is the Case of the Roman Church, which is
so much more obnoxious to Error, as she is flalsly persuaded she cannot
possibly err, and that upon two notoriously-erroneous Articles, which are
fancied and fained only by her self.

One is, that she believes, as an Article of her Faith, that she (the Roman
Church) is that The Catholic Church, which cannot err. Which See above in
diverse places.
has been proved by the Testimonies of Catholic and General Councels,
Fathers and Martyrs to be an Error in it self. The other Principle is that,
whereon the former depends, to wit, that the Bishop or Pope of Rome is the
Universal Head of the Catholic Church. which in the judgment of a most
ancient and holy See above, Chap. 6. Sect. 6.
Pope, is not only a Profane and Antichristian error in it self, but also
the highway of erring universally: Because (says he) if that One Universal
Bishop err, then must the whole and Universal Church err with him. Where the
same Saint Gregory, upon a particular occasion taken at John the Patriarch of
Constantinople (who ambitiously sought the Title of Universal Bishop) gave
this his foresaid general Doctrine, concerning any Bishop whatsouer, whether
in the Sea of Constantinople, or Rome, or wheresoever. Even as the Apostle,
upon occasion of confuting of one new error among the Galatians, gives them a
general lesson, against all other the like Novelties of Doctrine; Gal. 1.8.
If we, or an Angel from heaven preach otherwise than has been preached unto
you, let him be Anathema, or Accursed.

And that diverse Popes have been Heretics, your own Histories do
sufficiently proclaim, especially in the example of Pope See above, Cap. 8.. 6.
Honorius, whom two General Councels, three Roman Popes his Successors, and
diverse others your own zealous Popish Writers have reckoned among the
Monothelites. But you will say, albeit that Pope were a Monothelite, yet did
not the whole Catholic Church fall into that Heresy with him. True, which
manifests the falsehood of your now Roman Article; in as much as (in those
ancient times) neither did the Church, truly called Catholic, hold the Pope
to be the Catholic or Universal Head of the Church: neither yet did that,
which you abusiuely, absurdly, and falsely call the Catholic Church (to wit
the Church of Rome it self) believe your Article of Infallibility of
judgment in your Popes. A memorable example we have in your Pope See above,
Chap. 12. Sect 3 and 4.
Liberius, who professing himself an Arian, and seeking by his Arian faction
to return to his See, found a bloody resistance by both the Clergy and people
of the Church of Rome, as your selves well know. But now when as the
falsly-vsurped Title of Universal Head carries, in the belief of the new
Church of Rome, a confidence of an Universal truth, in whatsoever new Doctrine
of faith: in this Case that saying of Christ is verified; Matthew. 15.14.
If the blind (such is he, that in the opinion of his Universal Headship,
presumes upon an Infallibility of judgment) lead the blind (such are all
they, who by an Implicit and blind belief adhere unto him, as to an Oracle of
Divine truth) Both shall fall into the ditch.

THESIS. III. There is not in all Scripture any Prophecy of the fall of any
Church Christian from the faith, but only of the Church of Rome; from which it
may sometime be Necessary to depart. SECT. 11.
FOr where can you find in all Scripture (tell us) that the Spirit of God
brandeth any City Christian with the note of certain Apostasy from the
truth, but only the City of Rome? Your own Jesuits have See above, Cha. 4.
Sect. 15.
confessed Themselves, being compelled thereunto by the light of the Revelation
of the holy Ghost (in the book of Revelation, Apoc. 12.) to acknowledge,
saying, The City of Rome is Babylon; there prophesied of to become (before the
end of the world) The Seat of Antichrist; and after to be suddenly and visibly
Destroyed by the vengeance of God. And although they are not more ingenuous in
this Confession, concerning the City of Rome, in the days of Antichrist to
come; than they are (not to dissemble with you) zealous, and indeed obstinate
in denying that it can be meant of the Church of Rome: yet would we feign know,
what you would think of the Church of England, if the like Prophecy were
extant in God's book, pointing out the City of London to be, in times to
come, The Seat of Antichrist? Would you desire a more Popular argument
(especially in these times, wherein the ends of the world are come upon us) to
persuade your people to abhor and detest the Church of England, even for that
City sake?

But you are further to remember (that which has See above, Cha. 4 Sect. 15
etc.
been already proved) that your Church cannot be called The Church of Rome,
but by reason of the Seat thereof, which is in the City of Rome. Which we
now moreover Confirm by the Apostle Saint Paul, who writing to the Romans,
makes this the Inscription of his Epistle, Chap. 1.7. To all you that are at
Rome. And again, ver. 15. I am ready to preach unto you that are at Rome.
Signifying that it cannot hereby be called the Church of Rome, without relation
to a company of Professors, in the City of Rome. Whenever therefore Rome
(as is confessed) shall become that Babylon, and Seat of Antichrist, whereof
the Spirit says to the faithful, Come out of Babylon my people, Apoc. 18.4.
then the necessity of Departure must needs follow.

THESIS. IV. The Church of Rome has long been, and still is the most
Schismatic Church of all other Churches Christian, that carry in them a
Visible face of a Church. SECT. 12.
OH! that this could be justly doubted of: your own supreme Article does
abundantly prove it, to wit, The Catholic Roman Church, without Union and
Subjection whereunto there is no Salvation. By which one Article, as you have
See above from Chap. 8. to 13.
heard, do stand Excommunicate (as much as lies in your Roman Church) and
deprived of all hope of Salvation, the most renoumed godly Emperors, the most
ancient and Reverend Popes, the most grave and Orthodoxe Patriarchs and Fathers
of the first Eight (in your own estimation) General Councels, the most famous
Christian Churches, the most constant Martyrs, Confessors, and Saints of God,
that the primitive times of Christ his Church have known and recorded to
posterity: many whereof are at this day registered in the Roman Martyrologe,
and Calendar of Saints (All which has been fully proved;) than which what
Doctrine of Schismatikes can be more Schismatic?

And what shall we say of the After-ages of the Church, wherein we See above
Sect. 10.
have observed the Church of the Graecians, Aethiopians, Egyptians, Assyrians
(not to mention, as yet, the Churches of Protestants) Armenians, Russians, and
others for extent, more large than Rome; for worship, more pure; for faith,
more sound; and for profession thereof, more constant, by sustaining daily
injuries and thraldomes under the Mahumetans, and other Pagan Enemies: all
which Churches amount to innumerable numbers of Christian souls; who being, by
your Article of The Catholic Roman Church, excluded from your Communion, must
accordingly be held to perish everlastingly.

But pardon us, if we from the Example of these so many Churches Christian, of
so large extent and long Continuance, make bold to use a little Logic with
you, in this manner. That Church, which only divides it self from the
Communion of all other truly professed Christian Churches in the world, the
same is the most Schismatic Church in the Christian world. But your Church
of Rome, only, divides it self peremptorily from the Communion of all other
such Christian Churches. Ergo, it is the most Schismatic of all other.
Herein plainly like to Ismael, Genesis 16.12.
whose hand was against every man, and every man's against him. Until you
shall be able to answer this Argument, you are bound to forbear the obiecting
to any Church Christian Schism from the Catholic Church; and consequently
Separation from Salvation in Christ.

When we talk of a Schismatic Church, we may not let pass the recognition
of the manifold ruptures and Schisms of the Roman Church, in her own womb:
where we have seen not Jacob and Esau struggling for birthright each with
other only, but as it were a rough Esau, sometimes of Two; or rather a
Cerberus and Hydra sometimes of Three heads striving one against another for
the prerogative of Popedom, even for the space of forty or fifty years
together. Sometimes the pretended Head, the Pope, fighting with his whole Body
Representative, in a Council, for the right of Supreme judgment, as you have
heard. In a word, she has almost at all times been so presumptuous, by
Excommunicating Primitive, Successiue, and Modern Churches, which were not
subordinate unto her; and so often distracted in her self, as if all the
Waters of Marah (for so we may call Schism) had exonerated and emptied
themselves into the Roman See. Thus much of the second Part, by Comparing the
Church of Rome with Remote Churches.

The Third Part of this DETERMINATION concerns the Departure of Protestant
Churches from Rome; occasioned by MARTIN LVTHER. SECT. 13.
HEre we enter into the maine question of Luther his departure from Rome,
which has occasioned your impetuous and clamorous outcries against him, as
against an unpardonable and damnable Schismatike: and thereupon, in all your
Conferences and Disputes, you exact of Protestants an Answer to your popular
Octiections, as of, What? Where was Then Your Church? Who were Your
Professors? What were Their Names? and, What is become of Your Ancestors? with
the like. We now desire you but to have so much patience, till we collect our
diverse Theses, and in the end you will find (we hope) that upon a full
Reckoning we shall be indebted unto you just nothing at all.

THESIS. I. LVTHER was unjustly Excommunicated out of the Roman Church. SECT.
14.
IF the odiousness of the very name of Luther among you have not engendered so
obstinate a prejudice in you; as not willingly to hear, or try the justice of
his Cause, then are we without all doubt persuaded, that you your selves will
justify his Departure out of the Church of Rome. Not to spend time. Luther his
Excommunication by Pope Leo must have been either for Manners, or Doctrine:
but it was not for any exorbitancy in his life, Si Luthero fauerem vt viro
bono, quod fatentur and hosts. Eras. To. 8. Epist. Albert. Card Mogunt page
401.
Who (as is testified of him) was accounted a good man, even of his very
Enemies. Which kind of Certificate is the most exact approbation of all
others, as Moses showed, when he made this kind of Appeal, saying, Deuteronomy.
32.31.
Our Enemies being Judges. By which it may appear, what difference of Enemies
the Church of Rome has hatched, whose Professors, in the days of Luther
himself, were so ingenuous, as to esteem him a Godly man. Since when have
risen up spirits of a lying malignancie, that have blurred and bespotted his
life with all the reproachful Notes of monstrous infamy; as if he had had
Seraerius Ies in Tract. de Lutheri Magistro.
Familiarity with the Devil, and was a Winebibber. But Io. 13.16.
The Servant is not better than his Master, says our Savior Christ to his
own Disciples. If therefore the Irreligious have called Christ himself
familiar with Matthew. 12.
Beelzebub, and a Luc. 7.34.
Friend to Publicanes, and Sinners (were they Drunkards, or the like) what
Christian must plead exemption from the virulencie of venomous mouths? But
why do we busy our selves with Impertinencie? we proceed to his Doctrine,
concerning which we are to enquire into the principal Cause of his
Excommunication.

The First and principal Cause of Luther's Opposition against the Pope of
Rome, without which he had not been Excommunicated, was the point of Papal
Indulgences; wherein he condemned the iniquity of the Popes practice, and the
falsehood and impiety of his Doctrine herein: as will be testified by a cloud
of witnesses.

First is the Iniquity and injury done in the days of Luther, by the craft of
Papal Indulgences; howbeit, at the First hearing of this Accusation, your
Cardinal waxing somewhat choleric steppeth forth, desirous as a feed-man to
be heard speak in the Pope his Masters behalf, and calls it Quae rex dicit
de cumulandis opibus per artificium -- Indulgentiarum, satis ostendit eum plus
fidei habuisse calumniis Lutheri and similium Nouatorum, quam simplici
veritati. Bellarmin. Apolog. Cap. 12.. De multitudine.
A Calumny of Luther and such like Nouellists, to say that the Popes heap up
riches by the art of Indulgences. So he. Oh the forehead of some kind of men!
to deny that which the Germane Nation, at and before the days of Luther,
cried out upon, Importabile iam olim increbuit Romans Indulgentiarum onus, quando
sub persona pietatis -- Romans Pontifices Omnem a simplicibus nimiumque credulis
Germanis exuxerunt pecuniarum medullam. Sacri Romans Imperij Principum, ac
Procerum Grauam. 100. apud Fascic. rerum expetend. fol. 177.
As being a burden intolerable, wherewith the Popes, under the color of
piety, extract the very marrow of moneys out of men's purses. Whereof your
Fathers of the Council of Trent took notice, to wit, that the Popes Officers,
in collecting money for Indulgences, gave a Quaestorum abusus, -- quorum
malitia ita quotidie magno fidelum scandalo and querela deprelienditur, vt de
eorum emendatione spes nulla relicta videatur. Conc. Trid. S^ss. 22. cap. 9.
Scandal to all faithful Christians, which might seem to be without all hope
of Remedy. And which your Venetian Doctor will have you to observe, to have
been the First Cause of Luther his Opposition. Iam omnibus constat, and vbique
persona^t historiae, Separationem, quae in Germania ante centum annos contigit,
a potestatibus insultantibus initium habuisse: Notum est eam ab illegitimis
exactionib. and ab inusitatis Indulge^tiaru^ concedendi modis ortum duxisse.
Paulus Ven^t. Apol.
It is now evident to all men (says he) and Histories on all sides write
hereof, that the Separation made an hundred years ago, by the Protestants in
Germany, arose from the unlawful Exactions, and the immoderate grants of
Indulgences. This then was the first point, in the matter of Romish
Indulgences, which moved Luther to preach against them, even the Iniquity of
the practice thereof.

The Second point is the Falsehood of the Doctrine of Indulgences, whereof your
Cardinal testifies, saying; Nostro seculo, ab Indulgentiarum reprehensione
princi^ium fecit Sect^e suae Lutherus, vt perspicuum est ex assertionibus
Articulorum a Leone 10. damnatorum. Bellarm. lib. 1. de Jndul. cap. 1. Lutherum
Papa Haereticum denunciat. Jbidem de offic. Princ. Christ. p. 30.
The first Cause of Luther's dividing himself from Rome was the Popes
pronouncing Him an Heretic, for inueighing against Indulgences. So he. Quod
Doctrinam Indulgentiarum improbaret, primo quoque tempore Procuratores ea de re
Lutheri nomen Romam deferunt; is continuo Deorum contemptor accusatur, causa
agitur; sed quia ad dictum diem non adfuit Romae praesens, vt responderet,
paulo post de^laratur Haereticus. Polyd. Virgil. lib 8. de Jnuent. ca. 4.
And for that his gainsaying the Doctrine of Indulgences (says Polydore) the
Popes Proctors conveyed the name of Luther to Rome, where he is accused; and
because he appeared not at the day, he was declared an Heretic. So he. Now
then, according to the style of all Judicial Courts, let us first hear the
Accusation, and then allow unto him to Answer for himself.

His Accusation is laid down in Pope Leo's Bull against him. Certum est (ait)
in manu Ecc^esiae aut Papae non esse statuere nouos Articulos fidei. Bulla
Leonis-Papae in Art. 26. ^on. Luth apud Binium.
This Luther maintains, as a thing most certain, that it is not in the power
of the Church to appoint new Articles of Faith. This was his Crime, now hear
his answer. Clare est diserte testati sumus, vt si non cogerent nos ad
probandum Articulos impios and blasphemos, nos -- bona ex part Episcopalem
eorum Iurisdictionem defensuros. -- Sed nos ad Satanica sua menadacial cogere
volebant -- and ex alto me despiciebant, quod Indulgentias eorum (bullae enim
erant) Difflassem. Luther de Missae priuata.
I (says Luther) have plainly protested, that if they would not have
constrained me to allow of their impious and blasphemous Articles, I should
have defended a great part of their Episcopal Jurisdiction: but needs would
they compel us to approve of their Satanicall lies, and theref^re disdainfully
despised me, for blowing away (for indeed they were but bubbles) the Popes
Bulls and Indulgences. So Luther.

What has Luther said in all this, which is not justifiable in the Conscience
of every sound Christian? First he held it a way to Heresy, for any Church to
take upon her to create a new Article of Faith, such as he believed the Romish
Doctrine of Indulgences to be. Secondly, he taught it to be a Satonicall lie,
to constitute that for an Article of Faith, which is in it self a mere
falsehood. Thirdly, he proclaimed your Doctrine of Indulgences to be a
Blasphemous Article, because it is not only a new and false Doctrine, but also
the very Nurse of all Impiety. Each point is worthy to be Discussed.

Touching the First point, your Philiarchus will have you to Cauenda est impia
Lutheranorum haeresis, qui dixerunt nullam esse in Ecclesia potestatem condendi
Articulos fidei. Cosmus Phili^r. de offic. Sacord. To. 1. li. 3. c. 2. intio.
Take heed of the Heresies of Luther, in teaching that the Church has no
power to create new Articles of Faith. So he. If this be true, then mark (I
pray you) what fellows, and Companions Luther has, or Patrons rather of his
Heresy, accordingly as your own Doctors will teach you; who do not only
openly profess for themselves, that Ecclesia, quae nunc est, nititur fidei
antiquae, quae fuit Apostolorum tempp. Driedo Tract. de dogmat. l. 4. c. 1.
The now Church ought to rely upon the Doctrine anciently taught in the
Apostles times; but also confess that Asserendum est, Ecclesiam non cudere
nouam fidem, sed antiquam semper stabilire and explicare; nam prop^erea
rec^rrit semper ad scripturam, and Apostolicas traditiones. Et ita docent
antiqui Patres, Irenaeus. l. 3. con. Haeres. c. 2. Hier. in Psalm. 86. Vin.
Lirinen. con. prophanas nouit. -- Hoc tamen non obstante, verum est aliquam
Propositionem explicit nunc credi de fide, quae antea explicit credebatur ab
Ecclesia, quamuis implicit in Doctrine antiqu^ credebatur. Suarez Ies. de
Trip. vir. Disp. 2.. 6. ^um. 10.
The ancient Fathers taught that the Church delivers no new Faith, but
always confirms and explicateth the ancient Faith. Alleging, for proof
hereof, the authority of Irenaeus, Hierome, Vincentius Lirinensis. Nor can any
produce one Father, in all Antiquity, that did not account every new Article
of Faith (that is to say, every new Doctrine made necessary to salvation) to be
no better than a new Heresy. So justifiable is Luther, in this point.

Next, Luther in his first Assumption says, that the Doctrine of the Popes
Indulgence is a New Doctrine of Faith; and that it is imposed upon the Church
of Rome as an Article of Faith. Whereof, if peradventure you should be
ignorant, your own Popes would instruct you. Pope Bulla Pij 4. pro forma
iuramenti fidei.
Pius the IV. sets down this of Indulgences among his other Articles,
concluded of in the Council of Trent, as Necessarily to be believed, upon
danger of Damnation. And Pope See above, li^. p.
Leo the X. took this as his hint, in condemning Luther, for denying any power
to be reside^t in the Church, to establish a new Article of Faith.

An Article ^hen it is made; and that it is also New (which Doctrine of
Indulge^ces you believe to be an easing or helping of Souls out of the pains
of Purgatorie-fier) we hope you may be satisfied from your selves: who teach,
first, that all Doctrine, which is not New, is derived either from Scripture,
or ancient Tradition. But, concerning your Doctrine of Indulgences, some of
your own Doctors have made bold to proclaim, saying, Antonius, and Syluester
Pierias dicunt, nihil express haberi de Indulgentijs nec ex Scripturis, nec ex
dictis antiquorum Doctorum. Test Chemnisio nostro in Exam. Conc. Trid.
It is not found either in Scripture, or in other writings of ancient Fathers.
Whereof also your Roman Champion against Luther, even in this Question
concerning Indulgences, does grant, that In p^incipio nascentis Ecclesiae
nullus fuit Indulgentiarum vsus. Roffens. Art. 18.
There was no use of Indulgences in the beginning of the Church Christian.
Which must necessarily have then been, if at that time it had been a Doctrine
of Faith: except you will confess, that there was then no Purgatory-fier at
all; nor any souls of men departing this life in the guilt of venial sins:
but that all the scores of debts of temporal punishments were then wiped off
at the death of every Christian, in those Apostolical times. And accordingly
give us some reason, how afterward that Fire was kindled, and what was the
fuel that set it on a flame, after the space of 1294. years, when Boniface
the 8. was Pope; Who (as your Agrippa de vanitate Scient. cap. 61.
selves know,) after that the world was affrighted with Purgatory-torments, was
the first that extended and applied Indulgences unto Purgatory. This made your
Friar Castro, in his conjecture of greater antiquity in them, to excuse their
Novelty, saying; Non ideo contemnendas ess^ Indulgentias quod earum vsus sero
fuit in Ecclesia receptus: quia multa sunt posterioribus nota, quae vetustiores
Scriptores ignorarunt. Alphon. de Castro Haeres. l 8. Tit. Indulgentiae.
Indulgences are not therefore to be contemned, as being admitted but of late,
because many things (says he) are made known to posterity, of which the more
ancient times were ignorant.

Behold now the great reverence (forsooth) you have of the judgment of
Antiquity! Besides (to pull up this weed by the roots) the ground of
Indulgences (as you teach) is Thesaurus Ecclesiae spiritualis satisfactionum
est fundamentum Indulgentiarum. Bellar. de Indulg. l. 1. c. 2. Hoc caruisse
dicunt Ecclesiam Doctores Louanienses. Ibidem. Et ex Scholasticis Mayro and
Durandus. Test Suar. Tom. 4. in Thom. disp. 5.. 2.
The spiritual Threasury of the Church, consisting in the satisfactory and
meritorious works of Supererrogation, done by the faithful. Which
notwithstanding (as you likewise know) your Doctors of Louaine, and some
Schoolmen affirm were anciently wanting in the Church. So then your Doctrine
of Indulgences is New in Institution, New in Practice, New in the Extent, New
in the Root and foundation, and every way a New Article. So justifiable is
Luther in his Assumption, calling it New.

Thirdly, Luther called this Doctrine False, yea and Impious also, and
Blasphemous. And false it must needs be, if it be but New. But how naughty also
and impious the vent of Indulgences was, your noble Historian can best report,
giving you an instance in the same Pope Leo: Peccatum in sacris muneribus
dispensandis Leo mox grauiore cumulauit, ande. -- Thuan. Tom. 1. Hist. Anno
Domini 1515.
Who, (says he) unto his sin of ill dispersing of Indulgences, added a far
greater; for although he was of himself prone enough to all licentiousness,
yet by the instigation of Cardinal Puccius in whom he had great confidence, he
gathered huge sums of money, by sending his Breeues abroad, every where
promising expiation of all sins, and life everlasting upon a certain price,
which any should give according to the haynousnesse of his offense. Then rose
up Martin Luther a Professor of Divinity in Wittemberge, who first confuting,
and then condemning the Sermons which were made for Indulgences* at length
questioned that power, which the Pope assumed to Himself in the same Breeues.
So he. And what other (we pray you) can be the Consequence of this piece of
Doctrine, but that which (if you be to seek) you may learn from experienced
Authors within your own Church, who say (as appears in the Margent) that
Tempore cumprimis Bonifacij noni Pont. quando huiusmodi venia plena manu non
concedebatur modo, verumetiam (test Platina) vti quaedam merces vendebatur, --
minus multi a malefactis abstinebant, and clauium potestas multo vilior erat.
Polydor. Virg. de Jnuent. lib. 8. c. 1. Edit. Lugd. 1558.
When first Indulgences were set on sale, with full Pardons, men did less
abstain from wickedness, and the keys of the Church became vile. That Pope
Leo the 10. was Reuertor ad Indulgentias, vt illud verissime dicam, Romanos
Pontifices nimium indulgentes fuisse. Masson. in vita Leon. 10.
Too too indulgent, in granting Indulgences. That Popes are the most expert
Alchemists, (By Aurum pro plumbo mut^mus, negligentias (hem lapso calamo!)
indulgentias passim admittimus. Exhort. apud Fascic. rerum expetend. fol. 38.
Turning their lead into gold through their Negligences, otherwise called
Indulgences) Noting, that Papal Indulgences to Sinners works Negligence in
well doing. That They Exercent in populum tyrannidem, quaestu suo omnia
metientes. -- Non sedent in Cathedra Euangelica, sed Simonis Magi, autipsius
Caiphae. Eras. i^ Matthew. 23.3.
Measuring all things by gain, tyrannize over the people, sitting in the seat
of Simon Magus, or else of Caiphas.

We might easily load you with multitudes of Inuectiues of your own Authors,
against the Impiety of Papal Indulgences; so justifiable is Luther in his
Opposition against them: insomuch that Erasmus held it Impium esset, Lutherum,
in ijs quae recte dixit, indefensum relinquere. Eras. Epist. Rectori Scholae
Erford.
An Impiety not to defend him. This Luther, who (in the opinion of the Popular
Auditors) so far overcame his Adversary Ecchius in a Disputation held at
Lipsia, that your Castro does instance in this Example, and thereupon prefixeth
a Rule; Non est public disputandum cum Haeretico, praesertim pertinaci. -- --
Sunt enim saepe Haeretici in disputando disertissimi, and sciunt optime
disputationum retia tendere. -- Huius rei exemplum nobis praebuit publica
disputatio cum Luthero Lipsiae habita, vbi vir doctiss. Ecchius cum Luthero
disputans, etc. Alfonsus a Castro lib. 1 de Punit. Haeret. cap. 29. page
182.183.
To avoid public Disputation with (as he accounts, and calls Protestants)
pertinacious Heretics.

The Sum of All may be comprised in a few words. The Patrons of Romish
Indulgences, by making it an Article of Faith, do Canonize and Deifie a
Nouelty, a Falsehood, and a very Baud of all Impiety: Quilibet pro pretij
solutione peccandi impunitatem sibi pollicebatur, hinc stupra, incestus,
adulteria, periuria, homicidia, and tota malorum Lerna. Orthunius Gratius de
Grauaminibus Germaniae.
Whence (to use your own words) Adulteries, Incests, Periuries, Homicides, and
the spawne of all evils did arise.

THESIS. II. LVTHER had necessary Cause to Depart from the Church of Rome.
SECT. 15.
IT is not (as you See above in this Chapter Sect. ^.
have heard) the corruption of a Doctrine, which can always drive a man out of
the Church, except other properties of necessary Remoouing do concur. What
these are, you may call to your See above, Sect. 7.
remembrance: Which may be observed in this Case of Luther, and justify him
before God and Man. As first the general Obstinacy of contrary Teachers, such
as were the Romish, of whom Luther complained, saying, See the last Sect. lit.
q.
They [Alto fastu] with high disdain contemned my Preaching against
Indulgences. Secondly, Luthers hearing (if he had stayed) the way of Truth
often blasphemed. Thirdly, Luthers complaining of violent forcing of men to
subscribe unto New Articles; this is Tyranny. And lastly, he further charge
them with Compelling him to submit to Satanicall Doctrines, speaking both of
the vileness of Indulgences, and the Idolatry of and in the Romish Mass.
Albeit any One of all these had been a sufficient cause for him, to warrant his
Departure out of Romish Babylon.

THESIS. III. LVTHER and his Followers were far more safe, for their Souls
state, in that Separation from the Church of Rome, and less Schismatikes than
They, whom he forsook. SECT. 16.
ALL sound knowledge is by understanding of the true Causes of things. It is
the Cause that distinguishes a Martyr from an Heretic; and the same just
Cause also truly and essentially unites one with the true Catholic Church,
discerns him both from an Excommunicate (properly so called) and from a
Schismatike. Attend then to that, which your Cardinal would have you to MARK.
Aduerte, sententiam Excommunicationis iniusta^ nullam nec quoad Deum, nec quoad
Ecclesiam ligare. Tolet. Ies. Instit. Sac. l. 1. cap. 10.
Mark (says he) that an unjust sentence of Excommunication is of no force at
all. Accordingly Saint Augustine; [Iniusta vincula iustitia disrumpit:] Unjust
bonds are more justly broken then kept. Of this somewhat more has been said in
a See above, Sect. ^. Thesis 7.
former Thesis. This known, it will be no hard matter to find out the true
Schismatike. For as it is the unlawful Agent, and not the Innocent Patient
that makes the Fray: so in Excommunication, Si quis illicite quemquam
excommunicat, semetipsum, non illum condemnat. Greg. Epist. vt habetur Indice
ad calcem libri.
Whosoever Excommunicateth another unjustly, condemns not that other, but
himself. Accordingly in Separation from any Church, the Active (if unjust,)
and not the party Passive, is the Schismatike: upon which Suppositition See
above, Chap. 9. Sect 6 and Chap. 4. Sect. 8.
Firmilianus Concluded against Stephen Pope of Rome, that the said Stephen was
the Schismatike, by his Excommunicating and separating S. Cyprian, with many
Others in the Africane Chuches, and elsewhere, from his Communion. In like
Case, well said once your Benno Cardinal. de vita Hild. Eusebius Liberij
communionem deserendo -- eu^ ligauit. Apud Fascic. Rerum. fol. 41. cap. 2.
Cardinal Benno, that Eusebius did bind Liberius, by forsaking his Communion:
Even as did also the Africani Antistites Vigilium Romans Episcopum damnatorem
triu^ Capitulorum a Catholica communione, reseruato ei Poenitentiae loco,
recludunt, Victor Episcopus Tunnunensis in Chron.
Africane Bishops in their Synod, by Excluding Pope Vigilius out of their
Communion, in the days of Justinian.

Now, that Luther was unjustly Excommunicate by your Pope, the first Thesis
has fully proved. And that Luther was a Passive in this Separation, appears
not only by his own Complaints, saying, See above, Sect. 15. at q.
I was Compelled, Constrained, etc. but also by the Proceedings of Pope Leo
against him. Else, why is it that your own Thuanus, speaking of this
Separation, said that Non defuerunt, qui iam tum culpam in Leonem ( Papa^)
reijcerent. Aug. Thuan. Hist. l. 1. Anno 1515. page 25.
Some in those days laid the fault upon Pope Leo? More fully your Cassander,
an Author selected in those days by the King of the Romans, as the chiefest
Divine of his time, and one most fit to be Consulted with, concerning the same
Separation of Protestants: Non negarim tamen multos initio pio studio ad
acriorem reprehensionem quorundam manifestorum abusuum impulsos fuisse, and
praecipua^ causam huius calamitatis and distractionis Ecclesiae illis
assignandam, qui inani quodam fastu Ecclesiasticae potestatis instati recte and
modeste admonentes superbe and fastidiose contempferunt and repulerunt. --
Neque vnquam, credo, controuersia apud nos de externa Ecclesiae vnitate
extiti^^et, nisi Pontifices Romans hac authoritate ad dominationis quandam
speciem abusi fuissent, eamque extra fines a Christo praescriptos ambitionis
and cupiditatis causa extulissent. Cassander Consult. Art. 7. de Ecclesia vera.
I cannot (says he) deny many of them, in the beginning, to have been moved
and provoked with a pious zeal to a sharp reprehension of manifest Abuses,
and that the principal cause of this calamity and Disunion is to be imputed to
them, who superciliously and disdainefully contemned such godly Admonitions.
Neither yet ever had there been (as I am persuaded) any Contention about the
external Unity of the Church, except the Popes had abused their authority to
an ambitious and Domineiring manner of Rule, above the limits which Christ
prescribed to his Church. So He.

But it will be said, Why did not Luther seek remedy and redress of his
wrong somewhere? where (we pray you) should he have sought it, can you tell? By
Appealing to a General Council? why, that means was barred by the Popes
Extrauagant denouncing him to be Quicunque decreuerint, -- seu delibera^erin^,
etc vt ad futurum universal Conc. a nobis vel Successoribus nostris Romans
Pontificibus contra praedictam Constitutionem appellare liceat, possit, vel
debeat; Anathematizamus Apud Nauarram. Tom. 2. Com. de Datis, number. 15.
Anathema, whosoever shall so much as consult or deliberate to Appeal from the
Pope to a future General Council: Albeit this preferring the Popes judgment
before a Councel's is, by the sentence of two Romish Councels, (as See above,
Chap. 13. Sect. 18.19.
namely Constance and Basil) held a Doctrine, of all others, most
Schismatic. Oh! but he being but a Sheep, cited to Rome, should have
appeared before Leo his Pastor, notwithstanding the Popes high indignation
against him. As though you could be ignorant of the Apologue of the Sheep and
the Lion at their meeting, the end whereof could be no other then this, Ora
Leonis habes; for the sheep to run headlong into the Lions mouth. A Fable,
which of later times the Venetian Fulgentius, the French Abbot of Boys, and
after them the Dalmatian Spalatensis verified (seely Sheep!) with the loss
of their lives.

THESIS. IV. The Romish Objections, urged against this Separation of LVTHER,
are notably frivolous. SECT. 17.
STill we say, that an ill Cause oftentimes bewrays it self as much by the
frivolous Objections of an Opponent, as it is discovered by the just Evidences
of a Defendant. There are but four kind of Objections, (besides such as have
been already answered) which you do usually urge against Luther.

THESIS. V. The I. Objection, in respect of LVTHER'S former Vow to the Pope, or
Church of Rome, is vain and idle. SECT. 18.
IT is true, Luther had been a Vowed, and (if you will) a sworn Vassal to the
Pope, and to the Roman Church. And so was once your own Stephen Gardener,
sometimes Bishop of Winchester; whose answer in like case may satisfy your
Curiosity, and controlle your scurrilitie in this point. He, in his book of
True Obedience to the King (notwithstanding the Popes Breeues to the contrary)
enlarges himself in his Answer, after this manner following. Step. Gardener
in lib. de vera Obed. fol. 54. according to the English Translation.
Some (says he) pull me backward, asking why I enterprise so to teach
Obedience, as that I do disclose my own Disobedience to the authority and
power (meaning of the Pope,) for whose Defense I was bound by my Oath, to
defend his authority to my possible Power. Where is his keeping of Oaths
become? (say they) where is his fidelity? He was sworn to defend the Rights
of the Church of Rome, and now professes himself an open enemy ther-unto.
But this their talk no more moves me, than the bumbling sound of an old
barrel, because where unlawful Oaths, there also unlawful Vows are not to
be kept; for none are to swear to any wickedness. Thus your own Bishop; and
after illustrateth this by an elegant Similitude. A certain married man (says
he) when he thought, by just likely-hoods, his first wife was dead, did, as one
that had been freed, take another wife by the authority of the Church, and
consent of her Parents, by which wife after some years he had children. But
lo, his former wife, unlooked for, returns again, and requires to have her
husband again, that had done ill in marrying another. The man maruailing
hereat, and being loath to be divorced from his latter wife, makes long
delays, yet at length brought into Law, and being cast, gave way to the Truth,
and takes his first wife again, by the judgment of the Church. When now the
Parents and friends of the latter wife made the like wonderment, as these men
do against me, saying unto him, thou hel-hound, thou wicked couena^t-breaker,
etc. And if a man would consider this business, shall he not see, as it were
in a glass, the very image of that Husband in me? For indeed I (seeing I
believed that no such Truth of obedience had been, etc.) I compelled my self
in a second Covenant, and thereto plighted my troth. Wherefore I thought that I
had kept lawful Company: but when the TRVTH came, which is every man's first
wife married to him in public Baptism, which will require the first Promise at
al men's hands, to her I applied, to her I cleaued, and from my second knot, as
of none effect, by the judgment of my Church, I departed. And shall any man
think it indifferent, that I shall be called a Liar, because I obey the Truth?
etc. I am by most grave judgment of the Truth divorced from the Church of
Rome, which it was not lawful for me to keep still, and am compelled to take
my wife, TRVTH, to me when she comes again. Thus far B. Gardener.

The right and accurate Sense of this Similitude may, as the beams of the
Sun, dispell the foggie mist of Romish error, concerning the Question we now
have in hand; it being taken from the consideration of our Christian Vow made
in Baptism. Wherein we are to observe the Parties betrothed together, which
are the Soul of a Christian, and the Truth of God in Christ: and secondly the
Parties, and (if I may so say) Parents, by whose consent and Authority this
marriage is made, which in the inward is our Father, even GOD in the unity of
Three persons, Father, Son, and holy Ghost; and in the outward, is our
spiritual Mother mentioned in our Creed, at the rhyme of our Vow in Baptism,
The holy Catholic Church.

It especially therefore concerns every Votarie, that has vowed himself in
Baptism, to learn to acknowledge his true Father, his true Mother, and his
own true Wife. For Father, he is baptized in the name of the Blessed Trinity,
in the unity of one God everlasting, not in the name of any man whatsoever; as
Saint Paul proves against the Schismatikes in the Church of Corinth, that
would seem Some to hold of Cephas, that is, Peter; Some of Paul, as though the
Gospel or Truth were Paul's or Peter's: he answers them, No: his Reason is
interrogatiuely, 1. Cor. 1.13.
Were you baptized in the name of Paul? As much as to say, He only is
essentially your spiritual Father, in whose Name you are baptized.

Secondly, the Mother is mentioned, in our Vow at Baptism, to be The holy
Catholic, or Universal Church; not any particular Church, though by the
particular Church I am brought into the Catholic. We say, not any Particular
Church, because every Particular Church (as See above.
has been Confessed) may possibly err, and Apostate from Truth. But the
Catholic is built upon a Rock immovable as the earth, yea or the highest
heavens.

Lastly, the Wife, whereunto every Soul is betroathed in Baptism, is only
that Truth, which was first revealed by Christ unto his Apostles, as the
Apostle teaches; Gal. 1.9.
If any preach any other Gospel, than that which you have received (that is to
say, already) hold him Accursed.

Now give us leave to try what kind of Marriage is made by your Votaries in the
Church of Rome. First, by believing the Infallibility of the Pope, in
whatsoever Revelations, which he shall propound to be believed of all
Christians; it is to assume a new Father, which is thus proved. If I (says
Saint Paul) or an Angel from heaven preach otherwise, let him be Accursed: but
who in all the Church of Rome will say, Though the Pope teach us otherwise then
was Apostolically and Primitiuely taught, from the immediate Doctrine of
Christ, I shall account him Anathema?

Next, the Party baptized in your Church is Catechized to believe the Church
of Rome to be The Catholic and Mother Church of all other Churches: which we
through-out this Treatise have proved to be an Imposterous, Schismatic, and
Blasphemous Article. First Imposterous, because The Catholic Church, mentioned
in the Apostles Creed, was extant in the days of the Apostles, diverse years
before Rome was (that we may so say) Baptized, to have the name of a Church.
Secondly Schismatic, because it being (as has been showed) but a Particular
Church, and usurping the Title of The Catholic Church, does thereby
peremptorily divide her self from All other Churches of Christ, which both for
Truth, and Extent make a far more Catholic Church than she is. Thirdly
Blasphemous, in Damning, by this Article of the Catholic Roman Church, all
the most glorious Christian Fathers, Martyrs, Professors, and Churches as well
Primitive as Successiue, (which are infinite) that have denied Subjection to
the Roman Church. All which Particulars have been proved at large.

In the last place, each Christian in Baptism being espoused to his wife
Truth, which can be but One, even that whereof Saint Paul spoke, saying, 1.
Cor. 15.1.
That which you have received before: and accordingly Saint Jude, S. Jude ver.
3.
Contend for the Faith, which once was delivered to the Saints: therefore every
other New Article of Faith, as it were a later Consort and wife that shall be
admitted, is no true loyal wife, but an unlawful Concubine and strumpet. So
then, so many Concubines may the Church of Rome be said to betroath her
Children unto, as she has set down New Articles in her Roman Creed, and
imposed upon all her Ecclesiastikes, under the bond of an Oath. Among which is
your Article of Indulgences; from which, as from a supposititious wife, Luther
necessarily made his divorce, returning unto the Primitive Truth, whereunto in
holy Baptism he had formerly plighted his Troth.

THESIS. VI. Your Second and most Popular Objection against LVTHER, (in his
Opposition to your Roman Church) urging in him to prove his Doctrine by
immediate Succession, and by Naming his Teachers Before him; is as fond as the
other. SECT. 19.
I. FOr the no-Necessitie of Name, we read first that our Savior Christ,
answering a question concerning Divorce, whether it were lawful for the
husband to put away his wife at his pleasure, or no (an Abuse which, by the
hardness of the Jews hearts, had continued among them many hundred years)
sends them to Gods first Institution of Marriage, set down in the beginning
of Scripture saying; Matthew. 19.9.
From the beginning it was not so. But how? Flat contrary, Genesis 2.24.
Therefore shall a man leave Father and Mother and cleave to his wife, and they
shall be one flesh. Willingly passing over all mention, or meaning of any
former Teacher, for the space of thousands of years. Teaching us thereby;
first, that there can be no truer Doctors than Gods word; secondly, no better
Argument, than Proof that It was not so from the beginning.

II. Saint Cyprian, being busied in a Question concerning Baptism, Non debemus
attendere quio alius ante nos fecerit, sed quid qui est ante omnes Christus
prior fecerit: neque enim hominis consuetudinem sequi oportet, sed Dei
veritatem. Cyprian Epist. 63. And although Saint Augustine confuted Cyprians
Assumption, yet he justifies his Proposition.
We are not to regard (says he) what any has done before us, but what he
did, who is before all, Christ our Lord; not following the Custom of men, but
the Truth of God.

III. Suarez your most celebrious Spanish Jesuit, and public Professor;
Aliquando solum constat de initio ( Traditionis) per negationem, quia potest
constare in aliquo temporeprope initia Ecclesiae no^ fuisse, etc. Suarez. Ies.
de Trip. vir^. Theol. disp. 5.. 4. nu. 4. See this Testimony set down at
large in the next Sect lit. 2.
Sometimes (says he) we know the beginning of a Tradition only Negatiuely,
because it may appear that sometime it was not so near the beginning of the
Church. So he, in your public Schools, teaching you, that if it may be
showed, concerning any Doctrinall Tradition, that there was a time near to the
beginning of the Church (namely in the days of the Apostles) when it was not
taught; it will be a sufficient Confutation thereof, to prove it to be but an
humane Invention, without any further inquiry after the Names of Persons, who
in succeeding ages have gone before us.

IV. An Example we may take from your own former Relation of a Tradition
professed by Pope Innocentius the first, who taught that Innocent. 1. ad Conc.
Mileuet. Epist. 25. -- Ex qua constat. Innocentij sententia, Eucharistiam
Infantibus necessariam esse, ex loco Ioh. Nisi manducauerits, etc. Binius Tom.
1. Conc. ex Rescript. Innoc. Pa^. Haec Innocentij sen^entia, quae Eucharistiam
infantibus necessariam fuisse -- (quae 600 circiter Annos viguit in Ecclesia)
iam reiecta est. Maldon. Ies. in Ioh. 6.53. and Espen. de Adorat. Euch. l. 2.
c. 12.
The administration of the Sacrament of the Eucharist was necessary to Infants,
for their Salvation. Which doctrine and practice continued about 600. years in
the Church (namely of Rome) but since is rejected thereby. So you. Here had
been a Matter for your Obiectors to have argued upon, if they had lived at the
end of those 600. years when this Error was first rejected. Would they have
said, Show us that any Fathers by name, for 600. years passed, ever taught the
contrary? or else we must continue this custom still. Thus should they
condemn the Present Church of Rome, which has rejected that Custom. Or would
they have said? We regard not the time of the Continuance thereof for so many
hundred years, seeing it may be proved, that before that time there was no
such Doctrine: And the Institution of Christ, which requires Remembrance in
them that partake of this Sacrament, does instruct us otherwise. And so must
they (as they ought) condemn the former Roman Church in the days of
Innocentius, and from henceforth silence themselves, in exacting the Names of
Persons, who immediately before that time had taught the Contrary: because
(according to your Jesuits Confession) it is lawful in such a Case to proceed
Persaltum, Negatiuely saying; It was not so, near the beginning of the Church,
Ergo, it is not a necessary Tradition. Which was the very Apology that See
above Sect. 15.
Luther made against the doctrine of Indulgences, in his first Opposition
against your Church of Rome: and the same is the defense of Protestants, in
their whole Profession at this day.

V. But supposing a Necessity of Names, why ask You names? As though the
Church of Rome had been then The Catholic Church, without which there was
none then, or before the days of Luther, who rejected the doctrine of Romish
Indulgences, and of Papal Jurisdiction, as well as he: when (as you have
heard) there were, even since the Apostles times, the Churches of the Grecians,
Aethiopians, Egyptians, Assyrians, Russians, and indeed a world of faithful
Christians, that wanted not names, who Communicated not with the Church of Rome.

And what means this Importunity, or rather perverseness, to seek for that,
which is by your own Historians set before your eyes, the Protesters against
your Romish Novelties before Luther, whom they call Albigenses, Waldenses,
Wiclefians, Hussites? etc. Could these be so called by your selves (who
persecuted them under these names) without Names? Yet know, that this diversity
of Names may not argue the Sects and differences of their Religion, no more
than many names given unto the same River, passing through diverse countries,
can argue a diversity of the streams. But these Professors and their Names you
may understand, if you will read Doctor Vssher (now) L. Prim^t^ of Armagh.
H^st. Eccles. Doctor Crakanthorp. in Defens. Eccles. Anglican. and Doctor
Feateleys late Conference published.
Them, who have purposely entreated of this Subject; who are furnished with
answers, and can show you, out of your own Authors, their Innocent
conversation of life, their Multitudes in number, their Consent, and Constancy
in their Profession, by enduring of Imprisonments, banishment, deaths, and
whatsoever Cruelties your Inquisitors could inflict on them. And were these
then Namelesse, trow you?

VI. And if this may not content you, what then if we shall name them Romans
(for such were Luther, Melancthon, and other Protestants at the beginning of
their Opposition) as sound Members of an unfound Particular Church? from whence
it was lawful and necessary for them to depart as has been proved. Thus much
in confutation of your Vulgar Objection by Six Answers, which deserves only
this brief Answer, It is frivolous, and superfluous.

THESIS. VII. Your Objection, That all Changes of Doctrines have been
Notorious in the Persons, and Places of their first Beginnings, is false. SECT.
20.
A principal Objection, wherewith your Cardinal does colourably delude his
Disciples, is this, In omni insigni mutatione semper ista sex demonstrari
possunt: 1. Author eius: 2. Dogma. 3. Te^pus quo coepit 4. Locus vbi. 5. Quis
eam oppugnuuerit. 6. Exiguus coetus vnde coeperit. Bellar. l 4. de Notis
Eccles. c. 4.. In omni.
In all Changes of doctrines in any Church, the tokens there are visible in the
Author, Time, Place, and Person oppugning the same. So he; that so he may
justify many Errors, which must therefore seem Truths, because there is none
of these visible Notes of Changes to discover them. We answer, that this your
Objection conctradicteth the ordinary growth of Heresy, the experience of
former Heretics, the Changes of Doctrine in the Romish Church, and the
Confession of your own Schools.

I. The nature of Heresy, as Saint Paul describes it, 2. Tim. 2.17. is like a
Cancer, or Gangraena: Graeci Latinique morbum intelligunt, horrendu^ sane
vulnus, vel potius vlcus quod in foeminarum praesertim mamillis enatum, nisi
cito subventum fuererit, putrescit, and quod in corpore sanum est putridum
reddit, -- and paulatim omnem corporis partem occupat. -- Sic Haeretici, etc.
Espencaeus in illum locu^ 2. Tim. 2
By which (as you know) both the Greek and Latins understand that ulcer,
which is bredd in woman's papps, which if it be not prevented, does putrify by
by little and little, until it possess all the parts of the Body. Therefore
an insensible grows at the beginning.

II. The experience of an hundred Heresies, whose Authors have not been
notorious, might be propounded unto you; but that taste may suffice, which
your own Abstinentes quo tempore viguerunt, non memoratur. -- Acephali, quorum
nullus Author repertus est, a quo originem traxisse dicere^tur. -- Aquarij, --
quis huius Haeresis Author fuerit, and ex quo tempore coeperit, nemo est qui
indicat. -- Praedestinati, -- quis horum du^. fuerit, nescitur Prateolus
Elench. Haeret.
Prateolus does offer unto you, by an Instance in the Abstinents, of which
(Heretics) it is not remembered (says he) what time they lived. In the
Acephali, of which kind (says he) the first Author is not found. In the
Aquarij, whose Author (says he) is not mentioned by any. And in the
Predestinati, whose first leader (says he) is not known. We migh reckon up
the Alogiani, Anthropomorphitae, Aphthratodocitae, Collyridiani, Gnostici,
Concerning all whom, and many others (as the Angelici, Apostolici, Cainani,
Catharistae, Ophitae, Passionistae) because you your selves cannot tell us from
whom they first arose, [or By whom they were impugned, it appears that you
object you know not what.

III. And as though (forsooth) no such Gangrene or disease could be found in
the body of your Church; how then (to speak only from your own Confessions)
has grown the opinion of the foresaid Necessity of the Sea above in the last
Sect. lit. r.
Administration of the of the Eucharist unto Infants, not only with no
Opposition, but even with the great approbation of your Popes? how your Custom
of Communicating but in one kind, whereof you your selves grant a Quae quando
primum vigere coepit in aliquibus Ecclesijs, minime constat. Valent. Ies. de
Euchar. c. 10. p. 499.. Haec igitur.
Non constat, or Ignoramus, when it first began? Whereas for a Thousand years
cantinuance, the Contrary was held (as you Constat vniuersalem Christi
Ecclesiam in hunc vsque diem, Occidentalem vero seu Romanam mill amplius a
Christo Annis -- vtramque panis and vini speciem omnibus Christi membris
exhibuisse Cassa^der Consult. Art. 22, initio.
know) in the Catholic Church, yea and in the Roman Church it self? Or how
will you answer for the Corruption of your Roman Worship, whereof we have
your Fathers in the Council of Trent decreeing, that Cum multa. iam temporum
vitio, sieve hominum incuria ac improbitate irrepsisse videantur, quae a tanti
Sacrificij dignitate aliena sunt, etc. Conc. Trid Sess. 22. Deret. De
obseruand. and euitand. in celebrat. Missae.
Because many Corruptions have crept into the celebration of the Roman Mass
either by the error of the time, or negligence, and improbity of men,
therefore an order must be taken to purge them. So They. Are not diseases,
diseases, because we can but conjecture the first Cause or time of their being?
The former Confession of your Professor and Jesuit before pointed at, and now
set down at large, will give us the vpshot. Traditio alia perpetua ab initio
Ecclesiae, alia temporalis, cuius initium cognoscitur, -- seu positive quo
annovel tempore inceperit: -- aliquando vero solum constat de initio per
negationem, quia potest constare aliquo tempore, prope initia Ecclesiae non
fuisse in illa tal^m consuetudinem vel doctrinam, at postea in illa inueniri:
nam tunc recte colligitur, huiusmodi Traditionem habuisse initium post
Apostolos, etiamsi determinatum tempus, in quo inceperit, ignoretur: -- quae
cum non sit vniuersalis in tempore, non potest per se fidem facere Catholicam,
quae debet esse tempore ^niuersalis. Suarez. Ies. de Trip. virt. Disp. 5.. 4.
number. 4.
Some Traditions (says he) are perpetual in time, even from the beginning of
the Church: Others are only temporal, the beginning whereof may be known
sometimes positiuely what time they began, and sometimes only negatiuely, by
being able to show what time near the beginning of the Church such a custom
or doctrine had no being, though afterward it was invented. Whereby it may be
justly collected that such a Tradition had it is beginning after the Apostles,
albeit the certain and determinate time, in which it began, be not known.
Which Tradition, because it is not universal in time, it cannot beget any
Catholic belief. So he, even such an He, whom your Roman Church esteems
for the most eminent and general both Doctor and Proctor of her Cause, at this
day. By which Sentence are avoided both your former Objections of the Necessity
of giving of Names of Authors before Luther; and of demonstrating the Time,
Persons and Place of the beginning of Errors in the Church. As also there is
reached unto Protestants a strong engine to the utter overthrow of your now
Roman Creed, consisting of more then 12. new Articles, concerning Worshipping
of Images, Purgatory, Indulgences, and the like: which can never be showed to
have sprung in the ages af Antiquity bordering on the Apostles time; and
therefore, according to this former true and necessary Rule set down by your
Jesuit, can beget no Catholic Belief.

THESIS. VIII. Your last Objection, of Continual and Personal Succession in
all Ages, is frustrate. SECT. 21.
LEst that Succession and not Succession may seem to alter the Case, because
the Roman Church is by Personal Succession of Catholic Pastors, the
Protestant Church is by Secession and Departure; whereas true Succession does
manifest a true Church, even as no true Succession does notify a false Church,
(as you use to say:) you need do no more but cast your eyes upon your own
Historians, who reporting the great deluge of that horrible Heresy of the
Arrians, declare that in the most Churches Christian ^he true and Orthodoxe
Bishops were removed out of their Bishoprics, and cast into Banishment. As for
example the Chief Patriarks, Ex Alexandrina Athanasium exturbant Ariani, a
Constantinopolitana Paulum, Liberium a Romana sede, etc. Lindan. Pa^op. l. 2.
c. 6.. Quanquam. Legere est egregiam Catholicorum ab exilio reuersionem. Espen.
in Tim. l. 3. Digress. ca. 18. Bozius de Signi^ Eccles.
Liberius out of Rome, Athanasius out of Alexandria, Paulus out of
Constantinople, etc. Again, the Wheel of God's providence turning backwards,
the Arian Heretics lost their Bishoprics and Patriarkships, the Orthodoxe and
Catholic Professors succeeding in their places. We demand, will you then
indeed say, that Succession in place is absolutely an affirmative Note of a
true Church? How then shall those Churches be judged Heretical, wherein
Arians immediately succeeded Catholics? Or is not Succession negatiuely a Note
of no true Church? How then were not the Churches false, wherein Catholics
immediately succeeded Heretics? So then, if you pronounce any Church true, by
the Succession of Persons only, you do but waste your wind: if by the
Succession of Doctrine, then Luther's doctrine being truly Apostolical, his
Church cannot be but truly Catholic.

The Fourth and last part of this DETERMINATION concerns the state of the
Churches of Protestants, after the days of Luther; and their more just Cause
of Continuing this Separation from Rome. SECT. 22.
WHy should we not think that after, our justification of the first Departure
of Protestants from the Church of Rome, you should expect some Addition, for
the Defense of our Continuance of that Separation; lest otherwise some might
surmize, that now sure the Council of Trent (pretending a General reformation
of all Abuses) the Protestants might have iuster Cause to reunite themselves
to the Church of Rome.

THESIS. I. Protestants are Generally Excommunicated by the Church of Rome.
SECT. 23.
YOur Pope of Rome does by his Bulls yearly bellow out his Bulla Coenae per
Sixtum Quintum Papam. vide Tolet. Ies. de Instruct. Sacerd. lib. 1. cap. 18.
Excommumications, Anathematismes, or Curses ( by name) against all Lutherans,
Caluinists, Hugonots, and all Protestants; together with all their Defenders,
Favorers, Receivers, Readers of their Books, without speceall License,
whosoever they be.

THESIS. II. Protestants are Unjustly Excommunicated. SECT. 24.
ALl the Causes, for which Scripture has authorized a Departure from any
visible Church, do accordingly justify our Separation from the Church of Rome.
I. Falsehood, by Creation of a Forma Iuramenti per Pium Quartum^
new Creed; consisting of so many Articles. II. To a false Faith is joined
false Worship, by Idolatry; not only by the vulgar, in Worshipping of
Relikes, Images, and Saints Idolatrously ( Espencaeus, Vines, Polyderus.
as is witnessed by your selves:) but also generally, by the Adoration of your
Romish Moloch in the Mass, Wherein that, which after Consecration you adore,
take it at the best, is but a Christ (as you Suarez Ies. To. 8 Qu. 76* Resp.
53.. 1. and 13.
teach) void of all sense, natural power of motion, and faculty of
understanding. Which Doctrine, touching the glorified body of Christ, We
think to be Blasphemous.

Take it as it may possibly be, and then by your own general Confession (in
all probability, Five hundred to one) after Consecration the thing you adore
is but Bread still, which is a possible (yea and, as you your selves term it,
a material) Idolatry. And take it as we are ready to prove, to wit, that it
is infallibly still (even after Consecration) the substance of Bread; and
consequently your Adoration is really, necessarily and formally Idolatrous. All
these points are to be fully proved in a Treatise to be entitled CHRIST HIS
MASS; which in due time may salute you in like manner as this does, if God
permit.

III. To Heresy and Idolatry your Church joins Obstinacy, not that we can
deny but that the Fathers of the Council of Trent Sacrosancta Generalis
Tridentina Synodus in Sp. Sancto legitime congregatas, praesidentib. in ea
eiusdem Sanctae sedis Apostolicae legatis and Nuntijs, Omnibus and singulis
sieve Ecclesiasticis sieve secularibus personis vniuersae Germaniae cuiuscunque
gradus etc. -- qui ad Oecumenicum hoc and generale Conc. accedere voluerunt, vt
de rebus ijs. quae in ipsa Synodo tractari debent, omni liberate confer,
proponere, and tractare. -- Ac articulos, quot illis videbitur, tam scripto
quam verbo offerre, proponere, and cum Patribus, five ijs qui ab ipsa sancta
Synodo delecti fuerint, confer, -- necnen. quando illis placuerit, recedere
possint, -- plenam Securitatem, quam saluum conductum appellant, -- concedit.
Conc. Trid. Sess. 13. cap. 8. Saluus conductus datus Protestantibus.
decreed A safe Conduct and full security to all Protestants in Germany to
come to that Council; and (according to the tenure of that same Decree) To
propound, whether by word or writing, what Articles they would, and with free
liberty to dispute thereof. So they. And was not this a Fatherly
Consideration, shall We think? but your Thuanus will tell you of diverse
Protestants that came to the Council, desiring of the Popes Legates to have
liberty to dispute, according to the former Decree: When One of them Aug.
Thuanus de quibusdam Protestantibus, qui tempore Conc. Trident. ad Synodum
venerunt, habito Saluo Conductu. -- Ad ipsum Monfortium veniunt, orant vt cum
Collegis det operam, vt ad postulata respondeatur, and disceptatio de
controuersis Religionis Capp. inchoetur. Postridie -- Patres in Legati
Pontificij aedes conueniunt. -- Virtem bergicus Confessionem iam Concilio
exhibitam publicauerat, quod moleste admodum tulere Patres. -- Dixerunt
Protestants, suos venisse Theologos, vt doctrinam, eo libro comprehensam,
tue^ntur. Cum nihil ad ea responderetur, and Sleidanus vbi domum redeundum esse
diceret, -- Toletanus licere quidem respondit, neque repugnare quo minus
abirent. -- Igitur Theologi, qui remanserant, postquam Causam suam Caesaris
Oratoribus probauerant, Tridento discedun. Thuan. Hist. sui temp. Tom. 1. lib.
7. Anno 1552.
Exhibiting their joint Confession to the whole Council assembled, published
the same, whereat (says your Historian) the Fathers of the Council were
greatly offended: then after it was made known, that the Protestants were
ready to defend their Confession. But they could have no answer to it, and
therefore desired leave to be gone, which assuredly obtained, they commended
their Cause to the Emperors Orator, and departed from the Council.

Where are now our great Disputers of Rome, who can teach Protestants Logic,
and all manner learning, as you use to boast? if ever they ought to appear,
then doubtless in their general Synod, when the most selected Scholars were
assembled for the discussion of al Questions. John Husse in the Council of
Constance had Safe Conduct to come and Dispute for himself, but that was all:
for that Conduct was but a trap to catch him in, and so to burn him, as they
did. In the Council of Trent the Protestants are promised, with their
Safe Conduct, a liberty of Disputation, but are not allowed it, when they
offer themselves: yet no sooner, almost, are they come, but they are saluted by
your Tridentines; as Christ was by the Gadarenes, when they wished him to
Matthew. 8.34.
depart out of their coasts. What greater argument can there be of a perfidious
promise, then to grant a Disputation under a solemn Instrument, in the name of
the Pope, and the whole Council, in pretense of Satisfaction to all
Consciences, and not to perform it? or of Impotencie in your Cause, than not
to endure to have it discussed? or yet of Obstinacy in your Errors, than to
reject the ordinary means of Detecting them, allowed unto all Adversaries, in
all ancient Councels? This directly confirms the Censure, which that Phoenix
of learning Master Isaac Casaubon, gave of your Church. Indubitatum est, and
omni certo certius debet haberi (errant grauissime qui aliter iudicant, and
nescio quae media consilia sectantur, quae nulla sunt) ineundae concordiae
nullam amplius neque rationem, neque spem in terris omnino superesse. Casaub.
in Epist. ad Jacobum Regem, ante Exercit. in Baronij Annals.
He is foully deceived (says he) whosoever he be that will be a Medijst,
thinking that there can be any Reconciliation with the Church of Rome, a thing
to be utterly despaired of.

To all the former Crimes, your Church adds Tyranny: your Positions are
Excommunications to all that deny Subjection to the man of Rome: After
Excommunications come Eradications against States, Laws, and Kingdoms, by
Conspiracies, Rebellions, and all hostile Machinations; yea and against
whatsoever inferior Persons, whenever there is ability, either by general
Massacres, or by particular torments. Nor are your hands shorter than your
tongues, for As we have heard, so have we seen KINGS wallowing in their
goreblood, shed by your desperate Assassines: Rebellions, Seditions, and
Combustions in all Christian Kingdoms have been raised by the fiery spirits
of the Disloyal Ignatians: Nullum simile sauitiae exemplu^ in tota Antiquitate
reperiri. Natalis Comes. Circiter sexaginta millia hominum circa i^lud tempus
trucidata, etc.
a Massacre in France, for Cruelty (as witnesses your own Historian) not to
be parallelled by any example in all the antiquity of former times. But you
would not that England should be less noble than France, in the excellency of
your mischief; witness your Acheronticall POVVDER-PLOTT for the destruction
of the three Estates of this whole Kingdom; an Example beyond all examples of
ages past; and, for the heinousness thereof, hardly credible in the
generations to come. Add hereunto your Inquisition now established in the most
parts of the Romish Jurisdiction, by Pope Paul the Fourth, as See above, Cha.
6. Sect. 2. lit. x.
The only fortress of Popedom, and esteemed the chiefest means to preserve
the Romish Profession; what is it but that Lion's Den to all them that are
caught (except they shall abjure the Doctrine of Protestants) -- Vestigia nulla
retrorsum.

THESIS. III. In the Continuance of this Separation, Papists are rather
Schismatikes than Protestants; and consequently in the Heresy of the
Donatists. SECT. 25.
GLadly would your Cardinal make an alliance between the Schismatic
Donatists and Protestants; be you so good as hear his Charge. Donatistae
Ecclesiam ex solis justice constare volebant, and inde collegebant, Ecclesiam
visibilem periisse ex orb terrarum. Eadem est Doctrina Calui nistrarum,
Eccelesiam visibilem multis seculis perijsse, nunc solum esse in partibus
septentrionalibus, vbi ipsi sunt. Bellarm. de Notis Eccles. cap. 9. and Bozius
de signis Ecclesiae, Tom. 1. lib. 5. page 377.
The Donatists (says he) held that the Church Catholic consisted only of
just persons: whence they concluded that the whole visible Church was perished
upon earth, and that it was only in Africa, where they were. Well, but what is
this to the Tenent of Protestants? Caluinists likewise (says he) hold the
whole visible Church of Christ to have perished for diverse ages, and that now
it is only in the Northern parts among themselves. So he. But how truly and
conscionably, Calvin himself will prove, in reproving your Roman Church for
Quod magnifice Ecclesiam vestram commendatis, quasi alia in mundo esse videatur
-- Cum vos Africam, Aegyptum, Asiam Ecclesias non agnoscitis, numquid apud
Graecos dicetis perijsse Ecclesiam? Calvin. Instit. l. 4. c 2.. 2.
Magnifying her self, as being the only Church on earth, and for not
acknowledging the Churches of Afric, of Egypt, of Asia, and other Christian
Churches. And dare you say (says Calvin) that the Church is wholly perished,
which was among the Graecians? Thus plainly shows Calvin that his opinion was
not to deny the African, Egyptian, Asian, and Grecian Churches to have
continued visible parts of the Catholic Church.

Try we, in the next place, what affinity the Church of Rome may seem to
have with the Schismatic Donatists. Saint Augustine (as your Cardinal
confesses) did justly deride the Donatists for that they, Augustinus Epist.
48. ad Vince^t. merito ridet Donatistas, qui ex verbis illis mystice explicatis
[Indica vbi cubas in meridie, Can. 1.] colligebant Ecclesiam Christi in sola
Africa remansisse. Bellarm. l. 3 de verbo Dei, c. 3.. Quocirca.
from the mystical speech in the Canticles, concerning the Church, the Spouse
of Christ, saying, [Tell me where my beloved lies at noone day] gathered that
the Catholic Church remained only in Afric. And is not this your Article,
viz. The Catholic Roman Church, without union and subjection whereunto there
is no Salvation, a manifest appropriation of a Privilege proper to Rome, as
remaining always a Catholic Church? The Differences are, They challenged this
Prerogative, as due to Afric in the South, you to the Roman Church in the
West. They erred by a false Interpretation of a Text of Scripture, which was of
mystical Signification [ In meridie;] you from another of figurative Sense [
See above, cap. 4.
Tu es Petrus, and super hanc Petram] as though it were meant necessarily of
Peter: or if so, did Consequently authorize the Pope. Both which have been
confuted, as egregiously false. As for the Reason of the Donatists Separation
from the other constituted Churches in Africa (that which was the true mark of
a Schismatike) it was without just Cause, when they neither did, nor could
object either error in Doctrine; or Superstition in worshipping; or tyranny
constraining men to oppose the ancient truth; but especially (That which See
above in this Chap.
Cannot be a just Cause) the mixture of godly and wicked Professors in one
Communion. If you shall require any further justification of this our
Separation, and evidence that herein your Romanists are the Schismatikes,
recall to mind that which has been said hereof in a former Section.

THESIS. IV. In the Continuance of this Separation, the Union of Protestants
with the Catholic Church is both more True and more Universal than is the
Union of the Romanists. SECT. 26.
TRue union We call only that, which is only in Gods truth, and for Truths
sake, otherwise (as S. Hilarie says) Per speciosum pacis nomen in vnitatem
perfidiae subrepimus. Hilar. Pictau. Lib. ad Constantium August.
It is not union of faith, but of perfidiousnesse; nor Christian communion, but
Antichristian conspiracy and coniuration. Unjust Unities there are many among
men, the first of compulsion and terror, which may be called Vnio Leonina, as
when beasts, for awe of the Lion, go in troops, and follow at his beck. The
Second is Vulpina, a crafty combination made and maintained by Foxes. The
Third is Asinina, the heard of seely Ignorants. Loud and frequent are the
boasts of your Catholic Union, never regarding whether it have the Characters
of these kinds of Unions, now spoken of: although that none can be more
Tyrannous, than that which (as you See above, Chap. 5.. 2.
have been instructed by Pope Paul the IV.) uses the extent of the
Inquisition, as the only Fortress and support thereof. None more crafty than
that Church, which is fed at home (as with natural sustenance) with false
Legends, and fained Miracles, and preserved abroad with Aequiuocations, and
Mental Reseruations; and specially by Politic Maxims, for alterations of
States. Lastly, there can be no greater blockishnesse, than to be wholly guided
by an Implicit faith of believing you know not what, according to your COLIERS
FAITH, which because it seems so commendable unto your Cardinal Hosius, I
will deliver it in his own words. Tutist^mum fuerit exemplum sequi Carbonarij
cuiusd am ex quo cum vir doctus quaesiuisset animi causa, quid crederet,
Symbolum recitauit, interogatus quid praeterea crederet, respondet, quod
Ecclesia credit Catholica: Ille vero, quid credit Ecc^esia? quid inquit, ego
credo: Cumque subinde alter quaereret, circulo hoc vsus Carbonarius nil aliud
respondit, quam se credere quod Ecclesia credidit Catholica, Ecclesia quod
ipse. Fertur autem euenisse postea, vt vir ille doctus, cum de vita
periclitaretur, vrgente Satana quid crederet, neque se miser satis explicare
posset, venit ei in mentem Carbonari^, nec alia fuit eius vox audita, praeter
hanc, vt Carbonarius. -- Cuius nisi sibi succurrisset exemplum, ingens se dixit
periculum and discrime^ aditurum. Hosi^s de Authoritate sacrae scripturae lib.
3.. Quae rit Brentius.
It will be most safe (says he) to follow the Example of a certain Colier, of
whom when a learned man asked him, for his souls behoof, what he believed,
he repeated the Apostles Creed: and being asked what he believed more, said,
that which the Catholic Church believes: But what (quoth the other) does the
Catholic Church believe? that which I believe, quoth the Colier: The other
being still urgent, the Colier used the same Circle, and made no other Answer,
than that he believed as the Church believed, and the Church, the same that
he believed. Some while after it happened, that the same learned man was by
sickness in danger of death; at what time Satan tempted him, urging him what
was his belief, insomuch that he poor wretch was not able sufficiently to
express himself; but calling to mind the Coliers Answer, he himself made
no other Answer to the Devil than this; AS THE COLIER; Confessing afterward
that he had bin dangerously assaulted, had not this example of the Colier
helped him. Thus far your Cardinal of your Colier, like an Horse in a Milne
going all in a round, as if he would teach you that this Implicit Faith were
the only safe Circle (God bless you) to keep out the Devil.

Wherein you are little inferior to the Jewish Rabbines, who taught their
Disciples, Memento potius sermonis scribarum, quam Sermonis legis Mosis. Apud
Buxdorf. de Synag. Iud. c. 1.
To have rather regard to the words of the Scribes, than to the Law of Moses,
the word of God. Whom also they instructed, that (in case the Judge once passed
sentence) he must be absolutely believed, Nec declinabis ad dextram, nec ad
sinistram.] Hic dicit Glossa Hebraica, si dixerit Tibi quod dextra est finistra
vel finistra dextra, talis sententia est, tenenda. Lyranus Com. in Deuteronomy. 17.
Though he say that the right hand is the left, or the lest the right.

In all this you cry Pax, Pax, when as indeed it is nothing else but a
paction and accordance in Error and Idolatry. The whole College of Priests
were against Ier. 18.
Jeremy: All the Priesthood, with the Scribes and other Sects, conspired
against Christ; So little cause have you to glory in the nature of your Union.
As for Union with the Church Catholic, there is no other difference than this:
Protestants (as you have heard) stand in Christian Union with Graecians,
Egyptians, Asians, Assyrians, Aethiopians, and all Churches Christian, that
have not overthrown the fundamental Articles of faith. Whereas the Roman
Church, by Excommunicating all other Christian Churches from her, has
Excommunicated her self, and made a Separation from all other Christian
Churches. And therefore being alone is nothing less than Catholic. Eccles.
4.10.
Vae Soli!

THESIS. V. The Protestants granting it possible for Some to be saved within
the Church of Rome; and the Papists denying that any can be saved in the
Churches of the Protestants, is but a Sophistical proof that there is more
Safety in the Roman Church. SECT. 27.
MAny Protestants grant ( Breerly in his Apology.
say you) that some may be possibly saved within the Church of Rome: whereas
the Papists absolutely deny that Any, adhering to the Churches of Protestants,
can be saved. This Argument to the Ignorant may be an efficacious enchantment
to persuade to Popery; which to the judicious and Discreet Reader will
appear to be but Childish, and ridiculous, whether we consider your Denial,
or our Grant. The first, because your Denial proceeds not either from Truth,
or Conscience. Not from Truth; because first our Separation from you (as has
See above in this Chap.. 14.15.
been proved out of your own Authors) was for Truth and equitie-sake. And
secondly what Conscience can it be in such Obiectors, which the more Ingenuous
among you will gainsay? acknowledging it possible that such as are divided
from the outward Communion of your Church, (if yet they ruin not the
Foundations of Faith,) Horum (Cypriani nempe, and aliorum Patrum) modestiam and
mansuetudinem si qui hodie quoque immitarentur, etiamsi ab Ecclesiae societate
seclusi viderentur, and in aliquo errore per ignorantiam versarentur, non
putarem tamen ab interna illa Ecclesiae Societate, quam animo and voluntate
colerent, alienos esse habendos. Cassan. Consult. Art. 7.
May by their inward will otherwise be joined unto her. Such as was (says he)
the case of Cyprian, from the Church of Rome.

Now what Christian is there, opposite to the Church of Rome, but he has a
desire and will that she were as Orthodoxe in faith, and as sincere in worship
as ever she was, that so he might be united unto her? Nay, we dare herein
appeal to many of your own Consciences, nothing doubting but that many of you
conceive Salvation toward all Protestants, that in faith and repentance finish
this their earthly pilgrimage: accordingly as Serarius, and Muhusinus, both
Jesuits, at Mentz.
Some (we speak from knowledge) even of the Society of the Jesuits have done,
in desiring the prayers of Some Protestant; yea and (to use their own words)
Ex animo desiring the same. And yet did these also as bitterly inueigh against
Protestants, as did other of their Sect: which shows that your Authors
tongues and pens are not directed by the same spirit.

Howsoever, you your selves will condemn your Obiector of folly, after that
you have heard some Instances. First then in the Donatists; They held all men
damned that were not of their Church. Whereas Saint Aug. de Unit. Eccles. cap.
12. See this point below in in the next. at z. a.
Augustine, their principal Adversary, did think that Some of them were in
the state of life. Would you suffer your Obiector hereupon (if he had lived in
those days) to have persuaded Saint Augustine, by reason of this odds of
opinion, to leave the Catholic Church and turn Donatist?

Secondly, in the Grecians. Graeci credunt, in Azymo conficientes grauiter in
Euangelium peccare, and haeresin quanda^ in praxim deducere, and vocant eos
Azymitas. -- Ecclesia Latina definiuit in vtroque posse confici. Salmeron Ies.
Tom. 9. Tract. 4. page 24.
They (you know) at this day condemn the Church of Rome, for consecrating the
Sacrament in unleavened bread, for which cause they call them Azymites and
Heretics, as impugners of the Gospel. But yet you excuse Them, in their
Consecrating with leauened bread, saying They may lawfully do it. Here is then
great odds also in these Censures. Would you thereupon advise your Fathers of
the Council of Trent necessarily to confess, that the Church of Rome has for
a long time been Heretical in that point, and therefore ought to forbear to
Consecrate in Azymes any more?

A third Instance you may receive from Pagans. The Indian Priests, called Mr.
Purchasse in the 2. Edition of his Relation of the world, page 490. out of
other Authors.
Bramenes, believed and taught, that to take bread from the hand of a Christian
is Sacrilege: whereas Christian Doctrine says to the Christian, 1. Cor. 10.27.
If an Infidel bid thee to a feast, whatsoever is set before thee eat, etc. In
which difference the Paynime may seem to have the advantage. Is there
therefore more safety in the Conversation of the Infidel, because there is
less truth in his exception against the Christian? A mad man thinks that all
other men are beasts; a sober man confesses that mad man to be a man. Hence
then, by Romish sophistry, the mad man must be judged to be in the better
Case.

But how far, and why do Protestants conceive hope of Salvation in Some,
dying in the Church of Rome? both these points are very considerable. They say
that Some, for their belief in Christ, although otherwise entangled in
Antichristian blindness, yet by reason of Invincible ignorance (being both
without Affectation of ignorance, and void of the means of receiving the
light of Truth) may nevertheless be in the state of life. But as ^or Them,
that may hear the preaching of the word, for their Conversion, and will not;
upon all such (in the judgment of Protestants) is the saying of our Savior
Christ spoken of the Jews verified, Ioh. 15.22.
If I had not come and spoken unto them, they should not have had sin; that
is, their Damnation is, now, more just. Hence it is, that Protestants teach,
that of two Papists, professing the same Romish doctrine, the one in Spain,
the other in England, the Spanish may be saved, and the English damned. The
reason is plain, the first desired light of judgment in necessary doctrines:
the other may possibly see the light, but loves the darkness of error and
superstition more than the light of Truth. The error of the first being purae
negationis, or incapacitie to come to the knowledge of the Truth, the error of
the other being prauae dispositionis, through the perverseness of their will.

If you demand, why Protestants have so charitable an opinion of some
Romanists, you are to understand, that it is in regard of that (without which
they cannot be saved) that they died in the belief of this Protestant Article
of Faith, which is, To be justified by remission of all their sins, through
the satisfactorie righteousness of Christ, apprehended by Faith; and not by
the legal justice of Perfection of inherent righteousness in themselves; as
your Council of Conc. Triden^. Sess. 6. cap. 7.
Trent has decreed. And this opinion we find verified, in the experience of
many Papists, who howsoever in their life time they profess and magnify your
doctrine of Perfection of works; yet on their deathbed, as soon as the least
glimpse of the Majesty of Gods Tribunal is revealed to their consciences, and
the books of their Consciences begin to be unclasped, and so laid open, that
they cannot but read their sins (which in their life time they held as
Venial) to be written in capital letters, and to be Deadly; then they take
Sanctuary in the wounds of Christ, from whence flies the Ocean of all
Expiatorie merit and satisfaction, by which it is impossible but every
faithful Penitent should receive life.

Even as did of late Cardinal Bellarmine, who writing his own last Will and
Testament, casts the anchor of his hope upon the same Rock which we do,
saying; Precor vt me in Electorum suoru^ numerum, non aestimator meriti, sed
veniae largitor, admittat. Testam. Card. Bellar.
I pray God to receive me into the number of his Elect, not as weighing my
merits, but as pardoning my offenses. So just cause have you to thank God,
that the doctrine of Protestants, concerning Justification, has brought Some
of you, (as it did your Ecchius and others) to their Justifying Faith, and by
it to Salvation.

Neither yet do Protestants (a point to be observed) In this their former
Grant, yield more safety to the Members of the Church of Rome, in such a Case,
than they do to whatsoever Heretics, whose belief does not undermine the
Fundamental Doctrine of Faith. Will you see, in a Similitude, what we conceive
of your Church? Of many men that are in a Pesthouse, infected with the Plague,
some happily may be saved: and yet it were but a damnable Presumption for sound
men to run headlong into the Pesthouse, thereby, as much, as in them lies,
making themselves guilty of their own deaths. And whether your Roman Articles
of a New Faith, whether Idolatry, whether professed Obstinacy in errors,
whether Tyranny over both bodies and souls of men, and whether necessary
Perjury, in swearing to your foresaid false Articles, be plaguey diseases or
no, judge you.

THESIS. VI. Your common Objection, (What is then become of the souls of our
Forefathers?) more justifies the Protestants Separation from Papists, than it
can the Separation of Papists from Protestants. SECT. 28.
Honor and love, which man naturally owes to his Parents and Progenitors, is
felt in every man's heart, as a forcible motive to draw on a conceit in the
Child, both of their godliness, and also of their after-blessednesse; and
consequently to enforce an inclination to adhere to their Religion, whatsoever
it was. Which we, in our experience, find in your Disciples to be the greatest
bar and hinderance unto us, for their Conversion. Which Motive, if it be
alone, is only preualent in them, who consult only with flesh and blood: yea
verily, and this your Jesuits will not deny, who tell us, from their
experience among the Acosta Ies. de Indorum Salute.
Indian Pagans, that the like conceit of the souls of their forefathers was
the greatest reason of their obstinacy in Paganism. Whereas, if the matter be
rightly discerned, the whole interest that man has in his natural Parents is
bodily only (for man's Soul is not by Traduction:) in which respect the
Apostle sets a plain Antithesis between our natural Fathers, whom he
calls the Heb. 12.9.
Fathers of our flesh, and God, whom he names The Father of Spirits, saying;
Heb. 12.9.
We have had fathers of our flesh which corrected us, and we gave them
Reverence: shall we not much rather be in subjection unto the Father of Spirits
and live?

Howsoever it be in me, as a man, surely, as I am a Christian man, this is not
by generation, natural, but by spiritual Regenaration; and Faith is a gift of
this Spirit. Therefore do the Fathers of our flesh, after our natural birth,
send us to the Priest to be baptized, and to receive a spiritual birth,
wherein we are not baptized in the name of our Parents, nor do we vow to
profess the faith of our natural Progenitors, but in the name, and to the
profession of Christ, for Hab. 2.4.
The just shall live by his own Faith. Not but that we ought to have a
reverend estimation of the state of our Ancestors, to imitate them in faith and
godliness, as it is written; Heb. 6.12.
Be you Imitators of them, who in faith and purity obtained the promised
inheritance. Yet not simply Imitators neither, but with a [(...), or Quatenus]
1. Cor. 11.1.
Be ye followers of me, as I am of Christ.

Let us now descend from the Thesis to our Hypothesis. First to answer your
Objection against Protestants, which stands thus: If your Religion be the
Truth, what then is become (think you) of all our and your Ancestors, who for
many ages lived in that, which you call Papisticall Faith? Take unto you an
Answer, which may reciprocally satisfy both you and us, accordingly as we are
both directed by Saint Augustine, and Saint Cyprian, two ancient and godly
Fathers. Qui sententiam suam quamuis falsam, ac peruersam, nulla pertinaci
animositate defendunt; praesertim quam non animositate suae praesumptionis
pepererunt sed a seductis, and in errorem lapsis Parentibus acceperunt,
quaerunt autem cauta sollicitudine veritatem, corrigi parati, cum inuenerint;
nequaquam sunt inter Haereticos deputandi. Aug. Epist. 162. ad Donatist. in
initio.
They (says Saint Augustine, concerning the Donatists, who were known to be
notorious Schismatikes) that do defend their false opinion without pertinacie,
especially if it be such as they are no Authors of themselves, but which they
have received from their seduced Ancestors, yet cautelously seeking after the
Truth, and prepared to embrace the same, so soon as it shall be revealed; Such
(says he) will not I account Heretics. Accordingly Saint Cyprian; Si quis in
Antecessoribus nostris vel ignoranter, vel simpliciter haec non obserua^it, nec
tenuit quod nos Dominus exemplo and magisterio suo do^uit; potest simplicitati
eius Indulgentia Domini concedi; nobis vero non poterit ignosci, qui nunc a
Domino admoniti instructi sumus. Cyprianus Epist. 63.13.
If any of our Elders (says he) have not observed thus much, either through
their ignorance, or simplicity, not holding that which Christ has taught and
commanded us, such may through the mercy of God find pardon: whereas we stand
without pardon, if, against our knowledge, we shall reject the admonitions of
Christ.

This agrees with that of holy writ, spoken of them who were ignorantly
plunged in rebellion, and therefore as being excusable, are said to have gone
in 2. Sam. 15.11.
Simplicity. If hereuponn we shall enter into Comparison with you, by
supposing an error in both Churches, yet cannot the ignorancee of the
Protestants be called Affected, because they are willing (as the Apostle
directs) 1 Thessalonians. 5.21.
To try all things, and ready to keep that which is good. Nor are they
stupidly and wilfully ignorant, led by the nose, hood-winked through an
Implicit Faith, as your Profession teaches. Which one point makes the state
of Protestants far more justifiable than yours can be.

Come we now (seeing that you will needs) to the Censuring of Forefathers,
wherein three points will be very considerable for our Justification, in
comparison of you. I. Is by examining whether side is more peremptory, in
damning of any other Christian Churches. II. Whether are guilty in condemning
the more sincere, ancient, and Orthodoxe Fathers. III. Whether do by their
Profession judge and deliver over to Satan greater multitudes of forefathers
and professed Christians.

The first point is more than evident: for the Article of your Creed is
absolutely to judge as damned (without all possibility of Absolution) all
Christians whatsoever, that are not professedly Papists. We far more
Christianly display Christ opening his arms of mercy unto all that believe in
him, without wilful blindness in erring, and obstinacy in transgressing: and
also we believe that All such as seek the knowledge of the Truth with a simple
heart, are not secluded from life, which issues from Christ to all, who shall
by Faith Matthew. 9.20.
Touch but the hemme of his garment.

Secondly, well it were you would understand what Forefathers ye or we
condemn, for some may be more condemnable than others, as may be discerned by
that Testamentarie Exhortation which Ioshuah gave to Gods people immediately
before his death. Josh. 24.14.
Fear ye the Lord (says Ioshuah) and serve him in sincerity and Truth, and
put away the gods, which your Fathers served on the other side of the flood,
and in Egypt, and serve you the LORD. The people, to whom he spoke, had three
kind of Forefathers; some immediate, and those were of the same profession
with Ioshuah; Some rather mediate, and (as it were) once removed, namely they
that had Apostated from Gods worship to Idolatry, in serving strange Gods: And
some Primitive, such as were Abraham, and the other Patriarchs in the direct
line of the Messiah. The first, and last rank of Fathers they were taught to
hear and imitate; only from the middle sort, that had declined from God, the
people were commanded to depart, as from Fathers of a damnable condition.

Will you be tried by this Example? Your Proselites are taught to condemn
their Protestant Parents and Progenitors, being of the Reformed Religion; and
the Articles of your New Creed have condemned the ancient Fathers of Primitive
times, as has been proved to the full. We honoring the memory of all
Fathers of the Primitive ages, yea of the Popes of the Church of Rome for more
than 600. years space, do only condemn them (although not absolutely) who
were the Forefathers of the middle order, who degenerated from their first
integrity, and were drowned in Superstition.

Thirdly, as for the numbers of Forefathers damned by your new Roman Creed,
they are innumerable. For what millions of millions of the truly ancient
Fathers were not (as See above, per titum.
has been proved) Subject to your Roman Church, and therefore have incurred
your sentence of Damnation? What myriads of myriads of souls of Grecians,
Assyrians, Egyptians, and others, professing the same Christian Faith, do not
your cursing and cursed Romish Deuteronomy. 27.12.
Mount Ebal daily damn to the pit of hell? And yet you blush not to object
unto Protestants their Damning of their Forefathers. God grant that this make
not to your greater Damnation.

THESIS. VII. The Protestants, at this day, stand more Justifiable in their
Separation from Rome, than did either the Ancient Primitive Churches in her
Excommunicating of Them, or yet LVTHER and his FOLLOWERS in their Departure
from Her. SECT. 29.
IT is high time We end this Task, which We conclude in this Thesis; for
Proof whereof be you pleased to call to mind the Romish Excommunications
denounced, first, against the Asian Churches, and that only for a matter of
Ceremony: next against Saint Cyprian, and the Africane and Numidian Bishops
and Churches, in a Question of Rebaptization; which was but One, and that no
fundamental Error: then against Theophilus and Cyrill, both Bishops of
Alexandria; together with Acacius and Atticus, both Bishops of Constantinople,
only about Admitting or not Admitting of the Name of Chrysostom into the
Diptikes, or Tables of Commemoration: then against the Opposition of the
Churches of Afric in the days of Saint Augustine, only against the
pretended Jurisdiction of Rome, in the Case of Appeals: All which, with many
other Catholic Churches and Fathers as well Greek as Latin, have contemned
the Pride of the Church of Rome in Primitive Ages, when as other wise the
Bishops of Rome were Godly and Orthodox.

But LVTHER contented with Rome, not about Ceremonies, or Jurisdictions, but
about the Soul's life, both in the point of the Justification of a Sinner
before God; and of the religious and spiritual Worship, properly due to our
Jealous God: which Contention was begun before the Council of Trent Secondly,
after that was a General free Council desired, as a Remedy for all Diseases
in the Church: but alas! whiles Rome would needs be that Catholic Church, the
Remedy was turned presently into a Poison; so desperate is her Case. 1. By
enthralling All to the pleasure of the Pope, which is a depriving of the Church
of Christ of her Liberty. 2. By authorizing her Idolatry. 3. By giving
Safe Conduct to Protestants, for the discussion of their Opinions, and yet not
suffering Them to Dispute in their Council, (an Argument of their Obstinacy.)
4. By Decreeing and Creating a CREED, consisting of above XX. new Articles of
Faith, as Necessary to Salvation. Whence it will follow, by the Apostle's
Doctrine (pronouncing him Anathema that shall Preach any thing, as Necessary to
Salvation, Gal. 1.8.
BESIDES that which was then preached) so many Articles must necessarily be so
many Heresies. 5. By imposing the Belief of these Articles upon all Professors
under a Curse spiritual, and a temporal Punishment, which is the Extremity
and height of Tyranny And lastly by prescribing them to be professed of all
Ecclesiastikes under the Form of an Oath; which infers (almost) in every
Article an inevitable Perjury, as well as in this one Article, which has been
discussed thorow-out this whole Treatise: whereby you Swear that The Church of
Rome is THE CATHOLIC MOTHER and MISTRIS-CHVRCH, and the Pope of Rome The
CATHOLIC PASTOR of the Church, without Union and Subjection unto whom there is
no Salvation. Which we have proved, according to our first Assumption, to be
FALSE, IMPOSTEROVS, SCANDALOVS, SCHISMATIC, BLASPHEMOVS, (Respectively) and
euery-way DAMNABLE.

LAVS DEO.
FINIS.
Faults escaped in some Copies.
PAge 4. in the marg. at the letter g. line 13. Idem (Add) de Trip. virt.
disp. 9. etc. Page 7. marg. letter c l. 16 (lege) nouam reuelationem veritatis.
P. 9. marg. let. f. l. ^7. Sal. (supple) Salmeron Ies. in Epist. etc. P. 14. l.
6. professed for possessed. P. 20. letter g. 18. (lege) vt aliquando is. Ib.
for Pater (lege) Pastor. P. 23. marg. lit. b. l. 18. (lege) apud Bin^um P. 33.
marg. lit. p. l. 5. (lege) (...) P. 34. marg. lin. antepenult. (lege)
Couar^uvias. P. 36 l. 2. dele verbum (about) P. 38. marg. lit. fl. 1. (lege)
Qui dicunt P. 46. l. 21. Luc. ^2. (add) ver 32. P. 47. marg lit. h. l. 7.
(lege) designauit P. 49. l. ^. Matthew 16. (add) ver 17, 18 P. 54. l. 14.
Obeying, for Obtaining. P. 79. l 3. in the white line, (supple) CHALLENGE P.
81. l. 6. Sect. 8. for 4. P. 88. marg. lit. e. number. 25. se primum, for primam.
P. 94 l 7. continue for conniue. P. 97. lit. d. lin. penult. conterd. for
concord. P. 97. marg * See hereafter (add) p. 107. (o) P. 109. l 10. first,
for fifth general P. 111. marg lit. c. l. 2. (lege) Mennam. P. 123 l. 23.
Father (dele) of. P. 125. marg s. See above (add) at the lit. d. P. 132. l 1.
declare. P. 136. l. 24. (lege) Lindanus P. 146. marg. lit. n. l. 16. Legatur,
for Legatus. P. 147. marg.* See (add) above page 143. at y. and below in the
next Chap. (add) p. 162. P. 150. marg fl 9. Sed and Impater (lege) Sedet
Imperator. P. 157. l. 12. (lege) against. P. 171. l. 7. read Counsel P. 186.
marg. lit. a. l. 29. (lege) Canticum P. 188. marg lit g l. 1. (lege) Latina. P.
192. l. 23. (lege) generally. P. 201. marg.* See above, for Chap. 1. (lege)
Cap. 5.. 8. P. 211. marg. lit. o. l. 11. (lege) Enchiridion. P. 221. Thirteenth
(lege) Foureteenth. P. 225 l. 14. (lege) Obiectors. P. 232. l. 15, 16. (lege)
But if it were reasonable, etc. P. 3^4. l. 9. I compelled for coupled. P. 349.
l. 11. before, And, prefix the numerall VI. and Ibid l. 29. make that number
VII. Page 347. l. 4. urging (dele the word) in.

Some other Errors there are committed, especially in the margent, as
superfluous letters, wrong Interpunctions, mis-Accents in some Greek words,
most-what occasioned by the smallenesse and falsnesse of the letter: which the
judicious and ingenuous Reader may observe, and well amend.


