A COMMENTARY UPON THE BOOK OF THE PROVERBES OF SOLOMON.

Published for the edification of the Church of God.

The words of the wise are as goads, and as nails fastened, they are the
chief of choice, delivered by one shepherd:

Ecclesiastes 12.13. printer's or publisher's device DEVS IMPERAT ASTRIS



AT LONDON, Printed by Richard Field for Robert Dexter dwelling in Paul's
churchyard at the sign of the Brazen serpent. 1592.

TO THE RIGHT NOBLE LORD, THE LORD EDWARD, EARL of Bedford, grace mercy and
peace, from God the Father, and from our Lord Jesus Christ.
AMONG sundry means and helps of furthering of the Gospel of Christ Jesus,
(right noble Earl) whereby, since the time of the blessed Apostles, much good
has bin done to the Church of God: the vvriting and printing of godly
treatises has been one of the chiefest. For as hereby not only ancient
heresies of all sorts have long ago bin confuted and laid in the dust, but in
later times the nevve damnable doctrines of the Antichrist of Rome, convinced
and quite in a manner ouerthrovvn: so not only the principal points of true
religion, have excellently been handled and generally made known, but many
obscure and hard places of the sacred Scripture illightened and unfolded. For
this cause being desirous to employ my poor talent to the greatest advantage
that I can, and to use the best means I am able of doing good, I thought good
to bestow my labor and leisure in furthering of the Church of God by ink
and paper, and to write a comme^tarie on some part of Canonical Scripture,
and namely on this excellent book of the Proverbs. The causes why I rather
chose to handle and interpret this book then any of the other, as they were
very many, so among the rest these were the chiefest, to wit, that the
moral sentences therein contained are most fit to be considered in these
carnal times, that they are the very keys of knowledge, and rules of all
righteousness, that sometimes I had publicly read and expounded them all, and
finally, that they are peerless pearls, meet to be presented unto such
persons of high degree as your Lordship is. There is no parcel of the vvritte^
word, but you may receive exceeding fruit thereby, if it please your Lordship
to look thereinto: so that if you take any part of the Scripture to read or
to exercise your self in, you can not take amiss as we are wont to say. The
sacred histories, contained in the five books of Moses, and in the books of
Joshua, Judges, Ruth, Samuel, Kings, Chronicles, Ezra, Nehemia, Hester,
whereunto the Gospels and the Acts of the Apostles are to be added, will tell
you things past and done many years ago. The prophesies, among which the
Revelation of S. John is to be numbered and does indeed excel, will shevve you
what things are to come to pass hereafter, and were, after the uttering of
them, to be accomplished in their times. Ecclesiastes or the book of the
Preacher, will admonish you of the vanity of the world, a point very
needful as for all mortal vvights, so especially for noble personages to
consider. In the Epistles of S. Paul, James, Peter, John, and Jude, you may
see and hear what the Lord says to the Churches, and what duties he
requires at the hands of all Christians. By the Psalms of David, and the song
of songs, you may be taught and stirred up to pray and sing, inasmuch as the
mones and groans of the Prophets in the one are registered every where, and
the voice as it were of the bridegroom and the bride resounded in the other.
To conclude, the lamentation of the Prophet Jeremy, which Gregory Nazianzen
never read but the tears did trickle down his cheeks, vvil move you to mourn
for the afflictions of Sion, and dravve you to perform that duty whereunto
the Apostle exhorts, when he wills us to weep with those who weep.
Even as then the busy be, when she flies into some fair and pleasant
garden, and lights sometimes here and sometimes there as it falls out,
sucketh out some sweetness out of every flower and herb vvhereon she
sits: so your Lordship looking into the volume of the sacred Scripture, and
reading sometimes this parcel thereof, sometimes that, shall receive by every
book therein such comfort and profit, as will cause you to prefer the same
before the honey and the honey comb. But if there be any part of the word of
God among the rest, which may be called a garland of heavenly flovvers, or out
of which your Lordship may reap most precious fruit, it is this vvorthie
book of Salomons Proverbs. For herein, as it were in a cristall glass, you
shall see the nature of God, the manners of men, the comely countenance of
virtue, the ugly shape of vice, the image of the true church, and the state of
the whole world. How many and how notable things are herein spoken, of
Gods Predestination, providence, justice, wisdom and mercy? How divinely
are the natures, the offices, and the works of Jesus Christ herein described?
How lively are adulterers, drunkards, sluggards, misers, proud, vvrathfull,
foolish, and envious persons, herein painted out as it were in their colors?
On the contrary side, how excellently are the properties and rewards of the
faithful, the just, the meek, the thriftie, the liberal, and the wise,
declaclared and pictured as it were in the parables of this book? To
conclude, how notably is the use of lots, the force of gifts, the power of
affections, and the disposition of sundry brutish creatures, therein
expressed? So many points of great importance and of singular fruit, being
comprehended in this one little book of Salomons Proverbs, you can not (most
noble Earl) better bestovv your labor, then in meditating therein both night
and day, and in binding the sentences thereof, as it were frontlets before
your eyes. Now to the end that the meaning of these divine sayings may be made
manifest unto you first, and so to other into whose hands this small treatise
shall come, I have translated the text as faithfully as I could, looking into
the translatio^s of the best writers both old and nevve, but especially into
the Hebrew copy, so far forth as my poor talent did enable me and my
leisure suffer. Moreover, to the same intent and purpose, I have gathered into
mine exposition, the pith and marrow only, of all those observations which
either I had by me of mine own, or received from other by whose conference
or vvriting I was helped. Finally, (that as much light might be given to these
sacred Proverbs as well could be for the time by me) in the margent I have
referred the reader to the roots of diverse parables, pointed to sundry
examples, noted here and there some reasons of the translation, and quoted for
proof or declaration, infinite places of Scripture. All the which pains
notvvithstanding, I confess and acknowvledge, that I am far from handling of
many points exactly, which fault my distractions and encumbrances about other
necessary affairs may excuse, the which were so great, as that even I could
not be present, to lend any help to my poor book when it was under the
press, for the which cause I request your Lordship and the courteous reader,
to pardon the escapes of the print, and to correct them according to the
direction of the printer afterward set down. But, it may be there will be
some, unto whom this my simple commentary will seem scant large and full
enough, but too brief, and too much contracted. I answer unto these, that I
follovved brevity of set purpose, lest the volume should be too large and too
dear, and lest I in vvriting or other in reading may be said to loose time.
And yet nevertheless, if the length of a treatise be to be judged not by the
number of the words, but by the matters therein contained, this commentary
is in deed very long. But as concerning large discourses, they are fitter for
sermons then for vvritings, and rather to be used by those who intend to apply
some fruitful instruction, then by those whose only drift is to open and
clear hard and dark places of Scripture. Nevertheless again, to the end
that the mislikers of brevity, may have somevvhat in this commentary which
may like and please their humor, I have somevvhat largely handled the four
last chapters. Now if there shall be any, who carrying ill will or ill minds
in them, will either not be satisfied with a reasonable answer, or seek to
disgrace my labors, because they have an envious eye, and a backbiting tongue,
I leave them as unreasonable and uncharitable men to their crooked vvayes.
Against such cauillers and carpers, your Lordships favor and acceptance of my
book may be no small defense, unto whom I have dedicated it, not only for
that intent but for diverse other, as namely to testify my tha^kfulnesse for
that honorable courtesy and favor which I have found both at your Lordships
hands and in the eyes of the two choice Ladies, your Aunts, the Countesses of
VVarvvick and of Cumberland. And again, in these your young and tender years,
to direct and guide you the best I can in the way wherein you are to walk.
In deed if you shall receive this book only as a nosegay, rejoicing in it for
a day and then using it no more, you can reap no fruit at all in a manner
thereby. But if you shall from time to time address your self thereby, as it
were by a looking glass, it will do you more good then can be spoken. For as
there is no vice from which it will not dissvvade you, so there is no virtue
or praise, whereunto it will not move you. When you shall sit at a table
richly furnished, it will advise you to consider diligently what is set
before you. Pro. 23.1.
When you shall be at your pleasant recreation, it vvil admonish you not to be
drowned therein, nor to love it above measure. Pro. 21.1.
When your revenues and riches shall come in and abound, it will put you in
mind to honor God with your substance. Pro. 3.9.
When it shall please the Lord to lay some cross upon you, it vvil exhort you
not to refuse the chasticement of the Lord. Pro 3.11.
When you shall go about to open your lips to speak of any matter, it will
teach you that vain talk is not seemly in an excellent man or noble person.
Pro. 17.7.
When you shall see the innocent oppressed or the poor any way vvronged, it
will stir you up to deliver them that are unjustly pursued, Pro. 24.11.
and to open your mouth in the cause of all the children of destruction. To
conclude (for it would be infinite thus to follow all the particulars) when
you shall have occasion to choose any servants into your Honorable family, it
will direct you to admit and accept those whose lips are just, Pro. 16.12.13
and who speak upright things, and to reject those who are workers of
iniquity. Wherefore, seeing this book of the Proverbs of Solomon is able to
instruct you in every good way, and to make your Lordship fit to perform
every good work. Accept it (right noble Earl) and meditate therein
continually. Stories record, that Darius propounded great rewards unto those
who could find out witty poesies, that Alexander would never sleep
without Homer under his pillovv, that Pliny would have all men alvvayes
carry Tullies Offices in their hands, and that Sophrons book was found under
the head of Plato when he was dead. If these Princes and Philosophers so
esteemed humane and heathenish vvritings, how dear and near should these
divine sentences and parables of Salomo^ be unto your Lordship? But no whit
doubting, either that you will exercise your self in the sacred Proverbs of
that renowned king, or that you will favorably accept my commentary on the
same, together with my little Catechism as an handmaid adjoined thereunto, I
commit your Lordship to the blessing and protection of the Almighty,
beseeching him, that as he has cast upon you exceeding great honor, and
adorned you with nobility as with a golden chain, so he would in suh sort
enrich and sanctify you with the gifts and graces of his spirit, as that you
may become and long continue, an orname^t of the Gospel, a pillar of the
Church, a pearl of the common wealth, and an inheritor of the kingdom of
heaven.

Your Lordships most humble and hearty vvelvvisher in the Lord Jesus. P. M.

A COMMENTARY UPON THE WHOLE BOOK OF THE PROVERBES.
THE I. CHAPTER.
Verse 1. The proverbs of Solomon the son of David, king of Israel. TWo
things are contained in this first verse, the one the matter, of this whole
book in this word Proverbs, the other the author thereof in these titles of
Solomon, the son of David, king of Israel. Proverbs, are certain general,
short and pithie sayings, used, or to be used in every man's mouth. Albeit
sundry parables are to be found in the writings of the Prophets, the
Evangelists, and the Apostles: yet this book is only in the Scripture
entitled by the name of Proverbs, because it alone powers out continual
parables without intermission, and without mixture of stories, or prayers, or
other matters therewithal. Now, in the second place, Solomon is affirmed to
have been the author of this book, or vtterer of these Proverbs, who was a
peaceable Prince, aunswering to his name, which signifies peaceable, the which
the Lord him self therefore gave him, 1. Chro. 22.12.
because he purposed to grant peace in his days. Albeit there is no mention
of any other Solomon saving this one in the Scripture: yet some other might
afterward be called by this name, for which cause as well to distinguish this
our Solomon from all other Salomons, as to show for honors sake, that he had a
most godly man to his father, it is futhermore said of him, that he was the
son of David. In the last place he is affirmed to have been king of Israel,
not only to set forth the riches of Gods mercy toward him, (who as if it
were too little to fill Salomons heart with wisdom, did moreover set the
crown of dignity on his head) but to assure us, that even he was the author
of the sentences of this book, of whom it is said in the sacred story, 1.
Kings 432.
that he spoke three thousand Proverbs, as also to move us highly to esteem
of these princely sayings, which proceeded from a Prince of high degree, and of
most excellent glory.

2 To know wisdom and instruction, and to understand Or speeches.
the words of prudence.

In this second verse, two ends or uses of the Proverbs contained in this
book are pointed unto. The former end is, the knowing of wisdom and
instruction, that is to say, the attaining of two most excellent virtues: the
later is, the understanding of the words of Prudence, that is to say, the
perceiving or receiving of most notable and profitable speeches and sayings.
Wisdom, is an effectual knowledge of spiritual things which are to be
believed or to be done. Instruction, is a practicing of those duties, which the
Lord requires at our hands, whereby we rightly use our wisdom or knowledge.
The words of prudence, or the sayings of skilfulnesse, are those speeches or
doctrines, whereby a man may be made prudent, to get and to keep instruction
and wisdom.

3 To receive the instruction of understanding, of justice, of judgment, and
of all or Righteousness.
equity.

Sundry particular points or parcels (as it were) of that instruction which
has been mentioned in the verse going before, are now in this specified and
rehearsed. The instruction of understanding, according to the Hebrew phrase may
here very well be put for the instruction which gives understanding, to wit,
of these three points, justice, judgment, and all equity. Justice, is that
virtue, whereby every ones due is given unto him. Judgment, is that virtue,
whereby the straight rule of Gods law is so put into practice, as that nothing
is done but that which has some ordinance of the Lord for a warrant, neither
any thing in any actio^ otherwise performed, then as the statute in the word of
God prescribes or enioyneth. Equity is the virtue, whereby whatsoever things
are true, whatsoever comely, whatsoever just, whatsoever holy, Philip. 48.
whatsoever acceptable, whatsoever of good report, of aine praise, or of any
virtue, are thought on, practiced or followed after.

4 To give unto the simple or Wariness.
sharpness of wit, and to the child, knowledge and or Wittiness.
discretion.

That wisdom which was spoken of in the second verse, is now in this divided
into certain branches, as namely into sharpness of wit, knowledge and
discretion. As the Prophet David affirms in the nineteenth Psalm, that the
testimony of the Lord which is true, gives wisdom to the simple; so in this
place it is said of the Proverbs of this book, that they give unto the simple
sharpness of wit, or wariness. By the simple, here, they are understood, who
are slow of understanding, heedlesse in their dealings, rude or unlearned. By
sharpness of wit or wariness, not only a quick conceit or a good capacity,
but a forecast in foreseeing of dangers and preventing of harms, is meant.
Moreover, as the same Prophet David in the hundredth and nineteenth Psalm
affirms, Psalm. 119.99.
that by the precepts of the word of God, he became more learned then his
teachers, and more prudent then his elders; so in the later part of this
sentence, the Proverbs of this book are said to be profitable, to give unto
the child, knowledge and discretion. By the child in this place that childish
person is noted out, who wants experience or stayednesse, or who like to
children is carried about (as the Apostle speaks) with every blast of
doctrine. Ephesians. 4.14.
By knowledge, an understanding of truth and error, or of the mysteries of the
word, is signified. By discretion, a ripeness of wit, joined with a soundness
of judgment and stayednesse in affection, is insinuated.

5 A wise man shall hear and increase in learning, and a man of understanding
shall attain unto wise counsels.

6 To or To understand.
teach a parable and an eloquent speech, the words of the wise, and their dark
sayings.

This reading of this sentence the words do bear, the matter seems to
require.
7 The fear of God which is the beginning of knowledge, of wisdom, and of
instruction, fools despise.

The words of prudence mentioned before in the second verse of this chapter,
are in these sentences so distributed into their several sorts and kinds, as
that withal is declared, that the godly wise attain unto these speeches of
prudence, but as for the wicked, (who are fools indeed whatsoever worldly
policy they have, or account they carry among such as are like them selves,)
that they despise the reverence of the Lord, which is the fountain of that
knowledge, wisdom, and instruction, which before have been spoken of A wise
man shall hear and increase in learning. Such a one as already in part
knows spiritual or holy things, shall by hearing these parables, see into
divine mysteries more clearly and fully then ever he did. And a man of
understanding shall attain unto wise counsels. Moreover, he that is a profound
clearke, or a singular learned man, shall by these instructions be furnished
with such skill and cunning, that he shall be mighty in words and deeds. For
as concerning the speeches of prudence mentioned before in the second verse, he
shall be able either to understand him self, or to utter to other, That these
four words are to be distinguished, may appear not only by the signification
of the^ in the Hebrewe tongue, but by the use thereof in the scripture, as
Habacuk. 2.6. Eccles. 12.13. See the root of this sentence Job 28.29. That the
fear of God is the beginning of wisdom, is also taught Psalm. 111.10. That
instruction comes by it, is also affirmed in the 15. of this book verse 33.
Examples of the fear of God we have in Noah, Joseph, the midwiues in Egypt.
and Cornelius.
first a parable, or a common proverb, secondly an eloquent speech, or a fine
description of a matter: thirdly, the words of the wise, or choice terms, full
of Art or evidence of the spirit: last of all, their dark sayings, or hard and
obscure riddles, which shadow or cover some secret meaning. Thus then as well
the learned as the unlearned, shall be greatly instructed and helped by these
divine Proverbs, both in deeds and in words, inasmuch as hereby they shall
attain, not only to wisdom or instruction, but to the speeches of prudence
or of understanding. But on the contrary side, the wicked neither will seek
after, neither can be made partakers of these virtues or graces, neither shall
reap any profit by these instructions, or any other like unto them. For as is
added in the seventh verse, the fear of God which is the beginning of
knowledge, of wisdom, and of instruction fools despise. By the fear of God
is here meant, not only that dread of the power of God which respects some
trouble or punishment, but that reuerencing of his majesty whereby it comes to
pass, that a godly man has the Lord always before his eyes, highly esteems
him, takes care not to offend him, and is ready in all things to obey him.
For in regard of his power, he dreadeth him as his Judge, of his glory as his
king, of his strength as his rock, of his care as his shepherd, of his
righteousness, as his lawgiver, of his mercy as his savior, of his love as
the husband of his soul. This reverence or awe of the Lord, is said to be the
beginning or chief point of knowledge of wisdom and of instruction, that is
to say, a principal part or root thereof, because it not only preserves men
from all sorts of sin, but moves and enableth the^ to practice good works
of every kind. Now seeing the wicked or ungodly people of the world, despise
this beginning or fountain of Gods graces, it is impossible that they should
come to the knowledge of the truth, or to the wisdom of the spirit, or to the
obedience of the word. Thus the elect then come to wisdom and such other
virtues, but the reprobate never attain hereunto, because they either neglect
the means of their salvation, or else quench the light or motions of Gods
spirit, so that they want the grace of God through their own folly, as here is
insinuated when it is said, that fools despise the fear of God. Romans 1.19.
That which may be known of God is manifested to them, for God has made it
manifest unto them, but they love darkness more then light, yea they hate the
light because their works being evil, are thereby reproved. Hence it is that
they hold the truth of God in unrighteousness as the Apostle speaks.

8 My son, hear the instruction of thy father, and forsake thou not the
doctrine of thy mother.

9 For they shall be a comely or Attire.
ornament unto thine head, and a chain unto thy neck.

The preface of the whole book being ended, Solomon comes now in the person
of a father or mother, to instruct his son. One duty whereunto children are
here called, is, to hear instruction, that is to say, to open their ears and
hearts, that the admonitions which their parents give them may enter thereinto,
unto the reforming of their ways. Another is, not to forsake doctrine, that
is, when good counsel has been given, not to let it slip or vanish, but to
keep and practice it. This admonition is enforced by a reason which is drawn
from the reward or fruit of obedience. For they shall be a comely ornament unto
thine head, and a chain unto thy neck, that is to say, as jewels and gay
apparel greatly adorn and set out little children, so thy parents instructions
by thee obeyed, shall grace and beautify thine heart and life in such sort, as
that thou shall seem amiable both unto God and man. For by the outward
ornaments of comely attire and of a chain, long life, a good name, honor,
wealth, the favor of good men and of God him self, yea eternal glory and
happiness are shadowed out, whereunto obedient children attain, partly in
this world, partly in the world to come.

10 If sinners entise thee, consent thou not.

Children now are dissuaded from following of evil company and wicked counsel.
All men are transgressors, but by the name of sinners in this place, notorious
offenders as for example thieves or robbers are meant. If then such mischievous
wretches shall entise thee, that is to say, allure thee by flattering speeches
or fair promises, consent thou not, yield not to them, resist them, like not
of their sayings or of their doings. The heart of man is prone by nature unto
all evil. Now if besides the inward inclination there be an outward tempter to
iniquity, a man (but especially a young man) is easily carried away. This advise
then is with all care to be remembered, that when we are allured to any sin by
any person, we consent not.

11 If they shall say, come with us, let us lie in wait for blood, let us
freely hide our selves against the innocent.

12 We shall swalow the^ up alive as the grave, and whole as they that go down
into the pit.

13 We shall find all precious substance, (and) fill our houses with spoils.

14 Thou shall cast thy lot amongst us, or Let there be
there shall be one purse amongst us all, etc.

Solomon in the person of a careful father, comes now to bring in those, who
steal or rob by the high way, making an oration as it were to the young man,
wherein they persuade him to join in a league with them. Hereunto to draw him,
they not only prevent the objection of danger which he might make, remoouing
his fear of incurring trouble as well as they can, but promise unto him great
gain, that the hope of a rich booty, may expel the doubt of having ill
success. If they shall say come with us, let us lie in wayt for blood, let us
freely hide our selves against the innocent. First, here the robbers show the
young man, what course they mean to take, in spoiling travelers of their goods
and lives. They tell him, that they will not openly steal or kill, but lurk
in some bush or corner to such an intent. They affirm, that they will handle
their business so closely, as that they shall never be called into question,
but escape scotfree. Thus by breeding in him hope of lying hid and of
impunitie, they go about to bend him to their bow, and to draw him into their
company. We shall swallow the^ up alive, as the grave, and whole, as they who
go down into the pit. Now the thieves in these words declare, how sure they are
to meet with the pray and to avoid danger. They avouch, seeing they be many
and so strong, that they will quickly take the passengers, bind them fast
enough for making hue and cry after them, and most easily dispatch them. For
even as the grave or the pit destroys and deuoureth those who are put or fall
thereinto; so (say they) we will spoil, strip, bind, and quite dispatch those
that come by the high way, leaving them neither life nor any thing whatsoever,
whereby we may be bewrayed. We shall get all precious substance, we shall fill
our houses with spoyels. In these words, profit is propounded as a lure, to
draw the young man to theft and murder. There is great force in this persuasion,
seeing though a thing be never so unlawful or dishonest, yet if it be
gainefull, commonly all sorts of people greedily follow after it. The sum of
this speech is, as if the robbers had said to the youth, by this course which
we speak of, we shall come to great wealth, meet with a rich booty, and get
store unto our selves of wares, of garments, of silver, of gold and precious
jewels. Thus then these ruffians steal, not to satisfy their need as hunger
bitten the eues are wont to do, but to fulfill their pleasures, and to make
them selves great gentlemen. Thou shall cast thy lot amongst us, there shall
be one purse amongst us all. An objection is here prevented, which the young
man might have made, who might think or say, that he should have but small
part of those prays or spoils before spoken of. Unto this doubt the entising
robbers answer to this effect: albeit we (o young man) who persuade thee to
join with us in taking a purse, as captains or masters in this trade, may
challenge to our selves the greater part of the spoil: yet when we come to
divide it, we will suffer thee to cast thy lot amongst us, that thereby thou
may draw out such a portion as it shall give or assign thee, be it never so
great a one. Now to this end (mates and fellows. all) let every one of us bring
that which we shall take from the travelers unto one common bag, out of which
it being afterward drawn, shall by lot be parted amongst us all.

15 My son walk not in the same way with them, draw back thy foot from
their path.

The wise Solomon now comes to dissuade the young man, from following the
company and yielding to the counsel of these ungodly robbers, whose speeches
have before been set down. Now whereas they had said in the eleventh verse
come with us, the wise father here charge and advises the quite contrary,
saying, walk not in the same way with them, that is to say, neither in
affection like them, nor keep the company, nor any way join with them in
their mischiefs. It is lawful to have such civil dealing as is necessary,
even with the ungodly, and it is meet that the works of charity be performed
toward the^: but in regard of being seduced by them, and of hardening them in
their sins, their company is to be avoided.

16 For with their feet they run unto mischief, and make have to shed
blood. See Esaias 59.7.


The wise father in these words disswadeth his son from the company of the
wicked robbers, by a reason taken from the mischieuousnesse of their minds,
which he lays open. When he says that they run unto mischief, and make
have to shed blood, his meaning is to show, that they follow after wickedness,
even with greediness, for slowing no time to put into practice, even the
greatest mischief that may be, to wit murder, which even nature it self
abhors.

17 Because the net is spread in vain before the eyes of every foul,

18 The coniunctio^ copulative I turn therefore, in which sense it is often
taken in the Scripture.
Therefore they lie in wait for their blood, they hide them selves privily for
their lives.

19 Such are the ways of every one who is greedy of gain, he would take away
the life of the owners thereof.

In these his last speeches, the godly father discovers unto his son the
reason, why the robbers will not openly be seen but lurk in corners. He
resembles them not only to fowlers, but to cunning and skilful fowlers, who
are careful in hiding their trains and nets, that they may not be espied of
the birds. Even as then (says he) bird catchers are wont to use secret net
laying, because if they should openly spread their snares or ginnes in the
sight of the wyly fowls (who then would avoid them) their labor should be in
vain: so these crafty money catchers or thieves do therefore lurk in corners
for blood, because otherwise being seen, See the self same comparison Micha.
7, 2.
they should easily be avoided and frustrated of their purpose. This is the
course which all covetous robbers take, they are ready to take away a man's
life, that they may have his goods.

20 or Perfect wisdom.
Wisdom cries without, she lifts up her voice in the streets,

21 She calls on the top of the throngs, she utters her words at the
entries of the gates, in every city [saying]

After that Solomon has brought in a godly father, warning and instructing his
sons, now he raises up as it were a matrone or Queen mother, provoking her
children unto virtue. Under the name of Wisdom, Christ Jesus is shadowed out,
who is the personal and eternal wisdom of God, in whom all the treasures of
knowledge and understanding are hidden. 1. Cor. 1.19. 1. Cor. 1.30.
He is said to cry, to lift up his voice, and to utter his words, because he
speaks most earnestly, eloquently, and boldly. But this may seem strange,
that he being in heaven, it is affirmed here of him, that he calls without in
the streets, on the top of the throngs, in the entries of the gates. The
answer hereunto is, that the son of God, not only whilst he lived sometimes
upon the earth, published the truth immediately in his own person himself, but
has from the beginning spread, and still reuealeth the same, unto all people,
in all places, at all times, by his creatures, messengers, inspirations, and
secret operations.

22 How long, o ye simple ones, will ye love simplicity, and scorners ori
Desire scorning to themselves
delight in scorning, and fools hate knowledge.

Now Wisdom begins her oration to mortal men, whom first of all in these
words she roundly reproves. The vices for which wisdom rebukes the people of
the world, are partly their dotages, and partly their obstinacy. Their dotage
or going astray is considered in three degrees, their love of simplicity,
their delight in scorning, their hating of knowledge. They are called simple
ones, who offend of ignorance or of frailty. They are named scorners, who
tra^sgressing of knowledge, make but a mock of sin, wherein they delight and
continue. To conclude, they are termed fools in this place, who being void of
grace, not only commit all manner of wickedness even with greediness, but
neglect and contemn yea abhor and rage against all good things. These may be
peradventure worldly wise, or be counted great politickes in the world, but the
word of God acknowledges them for no other, See a like speech Psalm. 4.2. An
example 1. Pet. 3.20.
then most stark fools. The obstinacy of men is reproved in this question,
How long? The sum of this brief demand is thus much, as if wisdom had said
in more words or longer speeches, Will you not only thus grievously sin,
but persevere in so great vices? Will you spend so many days, so many months,
so many years, in vanity and iniquity? Will you always abuse my patience
and long suffering? Will you never profit by the means of your conversion
which I continually make you partakers of? It pitieth me at the very heart, to
see you thus without ceassing to proceed in the way which leads to
destruction.

23 Turn you at my correction, behold, I will pour out my spirit unto you, I
will make known my words unto you.

From reproving, Wisdom comes to exhorting. In this verse, she first
calls men to repentance, and secondly promises them great favor upon this
condition, that they will return from their wicked ways. To turn at the
correction of wisdom, is to return from vice to virtue, or in one word to
repent. By the pouring out of the spirit of wisdom, a plentiful bestowing of
the graces of Gods spirit is meant. Whereas Wisdom promises to make known
her words, it is all one as if she should have said, that she would not only
secretly or inwardly derive or convey the light or sugared motions of the spirit
of God into men's hearts, but also by the outward ministry of the Gospel,
reveal the whole counsel of the Lord unto them. For as the prophet speaks
in the Psalm, Psalm. 25.14
the secret of the Lord is with those that fear him, and his covenant to be a
witness unto the^.

14 For as much as I call but ye refuse, I stretch out my hand but none
regards.

25 But ye withdraw your selves from all my counsel, and yield not unto my
correction.

26 I will also laugh at your or Calamity
destruction, and mock when your fear comes.

27 When your fear comes like an horrible desolation, and your destruction
approaches as a whirlewind, when or Oppression and distress.
affliction and anguish shall come upon you.

Now Wisdom comes from exhorting to vpbraiding of men, and to threatening of
them for their contempt of so great grace as she has offered. First, she
obiecteth unto them their refusing to come at her call or beck. How true this
is may further appear by that parable in the Gospel, wherein is showed that a
great number of those who were bidden to the kingdom of God, Mat. 22.2. etc.
desired to be held excused, some pleading that they had bought a farm, other
that they had bought oxen, other that they had married wives. Secondly, she
obiecteth disobedience to the advice and reproves of the word, as also to the
chastisements of the Lord. For diverse also there are who are content to hear
the word, but they are not amended or reformed by it. How true this is may
appear in those cities of whom mention is made in the Gospel, Luc. 10.13. etc.
wherein many miracles were wrought, and many good instructions taught, but yet
they brought not forth the fruits of repentance. The Lord having thus set the
faults of men as it were in order before their eyes, proceeds to threaten
them with grievous punishments and judgments. I will also laugh at your
destruction (says he) and mock when your fear comes, etc. There is not in
the Lord any such affection of laughing or mocking as is in man, but when in
the course of his providence he so works, that he leaves the wicked in their
miseries, or makes them a mocking stock to the world, he is said in the
Scripture to scorn or to have them in derision, See Psalm. 2.4.
because he deals as a man which scorneth. Now we know, that if no man visit
him who is in adversity, the afflicted person takes it heavily. But if any
shall rejoice at his trouble, this is a double corsey to him. O then when the
Lord himself shall not only not visit, but deride me^ in the time of such
calamities, as like a tempest or whirlwind spoil the^ and throw them down into
evil, must not this needs be unto them a state almost as hard to be borne as
hell it self?

28 Then they shall call unto me but I will not hear, they shall seek me
early but they shall not find me.

29 Because they have hated knowledge, and not chosen the fear of the Lord,

30 Nor yielded unto my counsel, See an example Luc. 16. Zac. 7.13. a type
Heb. 12.17.
but despised all my correction.

Another judgment is herein threatened against impenitent sinners, to wit,
that God will not hear their prayers. This is a sore punishment. For when the
afflicted are forsaken by men, this refuge they have that they may pray to God,
wherein if they find no comfort or help, how wretched is their estate.

31 Thus shall they eat the fruit of their own way, and be filled with their
own wicked devises.

32 For ease slays the foolish, and the or Peace.
prosperity of fools destroys them;

33 But he who harkneth to me shall dwell or Securely.
safely, and be quiet from fear of evil.

These verses contain the conclusion of Wisdoms oration. Thus (says she)
shall they eat the fruit of their own way. This is the golden harvest of the
wicked, that as they sow to the flesh, so they shall reap of the flesh
corruption. And be filled with their own wicked devises. This is also their
cup or portion, that they shall not only be punished, but be made drunk as it
were with the plagues of the Lord, inflicted on them for their wicked deeds.
For ease slays the foolish, security is the cause of the afflictions of the
ungodly, and the prosperity of fools destroys them, the peace and plenty
which sinners enjoy, is their bane. For if they stood in awe of the Lord or
were under the cross, they would walk in obedience of Gods commandments, or
forsake their sins. But because they have the world at will, and suffer no
adversity at all, they are proud and full of all sorts of iniquities, which
cry for the vengeance of the Lord against them. Thus they are settled on their
dregs as was Moab, and fatted as oxen or swine, against the day of slaughter..
But he who harkeneth unto me shall dwell securely, and be quiet from fear of
evil. On the contray side, that person which obeys my precepts or puts my
counsels in practice, shall not only be safe but free from the dread of evil,
which oftentimes is greater then the evil it self. See the root of this
promise Leuit. 26.3.4.
For indeed, the godly not being guilty to them selves of grievous crimes, or
being assured of the remission of all their sins through Jesus Christ, have
peace with God, Romans 5.1.
and a wonderful courage within them selves. Hence it is, that the faithful
man is not afraid either of the terror in the night, or of the arrowe which
flies by day, Psalm. 91.
of the plague which dwells in the darkness, or of the Pestilence which
destroys at noone day. Sometimes in deed such fears may seize on the godly,
or like fittes of an ague shake them, as may trouble their spirits, but these
befall the^ as chastisements for their sins, and are at the last driven away
by the grace and spirit of the Lord. On the contrary side, the ungodly man
flies at the very shaking of a leaf when none pursues him, and has a spirit
of terror and trembling which even dwells within him, and continues with him
until his lives end.

THE II. CHAPTER.
1 My son, if thou will receive my sayings, and hide my commandments with in
thee,

2 To the end that thou may cause thine ears to hearken unto wisdom,
incline thine heart to understanding.

THe wise king in this entrance of the second chapter shows his son, by
what means he may attain to be a fit hearer and receiver of Wisdoms
speeches. The meaning of these two sentences is this, my son, if thou will
follow my counsel, or have purposed to esteem and to lay up my precepts as
jewels; to the end that thou may not in vain hear the voice of wisdom or
the word of God with the ears of thine head or body, withdrawing thy mind
from the love of earthly things, bend it wholly unto heavenly, See Prou. 23.26.
and set it to the practice of the will of God.

3 For if thou call after prudence, and liftest up thy voice to
understanding,

4 If thou shall seek her as silver, and search for her as for hidden
treasures,

5 Then thou shall understand the fear of God, and obtain the knowledge of
God.

See like sayings to these. James: 1 5. Mat. 6.33. A like parable. Mat. 13.45.
Examples. in David Psalm. 90.12. In Solomon. 1. Kings. 3.6. and in Paul Phil.
3.10. See for the fear of God the expos. of the 1. chap. of this book the. 7.
ver. for the knowledge of Obd. John. 17.3.
Herein the godly father proves unto his son, that he shall attain
wisdom, if he set his heart on understanding. For (says he) if thou call
after prudence, if thou by prayer earnestly beggest the grace of God, and
liftest up thy voice to understanding, if thou criest for the light of Gods
holy spirit, if thou seek her as silver etc. if thou take as great pains in
seeking the kingdom of God as worldlings do in laboring after riches, then
thou shall understand the fear of God, then thou shall attain to that
reverence of the Lord which is the beginning of wisdom, and obtain the
knowledge of God: and, to conclude, thou shall come unto that insight which the
faithful have, of the mystery of the Trinity, of the new covenant, of the
favor of God, and of the acceptable will of the Lord.

6 For the Lord gives wisdom, out of his mouth [commeth] knowledge and
understanding.

7 He has laid up true substance for the righteous, [and] a shield for them
who walk uprightly.

8 [A shield I say] to protect the paths of judgment, and he will preserve
the way of his Or of those who^ he has received into favor.
holy ones.

Unto the promise made in the verse immediately going before, a reason is added
in these, taken from the nature of God who is the giver of every good gift. See
for the Lords giving of wisdom and revealing of knowledge. Iam 1.17. Ephesians.
1.17.18.
For the Lord gives wisdom, the gifts of God are therefore by prayer to be
begged, because men in deed may use the means of attaining unto the sight and
feeling of divine mysteries, but it is the Lord alone, who by lightening of the
eyes of the mind, begets this heavenly wisdom. Out of his mouth comes
knowledge and understanding. See for the substance which the Lord has laid up.
Heb. 10.34. Luc. 16.11.1. Pet. 1.4. Psalm. 31.20. See for the shield or
protection of the Lord. Psalm. 84.12. Psalm. 31.20.21.
By his word and by the inspiration of his spirit truth is revealed, and
prudence is wrought. He has laid up true substance for the righteous, he has
treasured up many good things for the just, but among the rest a good and
enduring substance or inheritance in heaven. A shield for them who walk
uprightly, (a shield I say) to protect the paths of judgment. Moreover the
Lord has treasured up for the upright a buckler of defense against evils, to
this intent, that he may maintain whatsoever is just or right, and he will
preserve the way of his holy ones. To conclude, See for the Lords watching over
his. Psalm. 121.4. etc. Item. Psalm. 91.11.
he will watch over the goings out and commings in of the faithful in such
sort, as that they shall not dash their foot against a stone.

9 Then shall thou understand justice, and equity, and every good path.

See for justice judgment and equity the exposition of the 3. v. of the 1.
chap. of this book.
Herein now is declared, that he who calls after prudence and seeks for
understanding, shall not only be endued with holiness, but with righteousness,
and so be enabled to perform the duties of both the tables of the moral law.

10 When wisdom shall enter into thine heart, and knowledge be pleasant to
thy soul,

11 [Then] counsel shall watch over thee [and] understanding shall keep thee,
etc.

In these sentences is taught, that wisdom and knowledge once attained, will
not only make men partakers of most excellent good things, but protect them
from great evils. When wisdom, etc. When the knowledge of God shall be as
sweet unto thee as the honey or honey comb, then counsel shall watch over thee,
and understanding shall keep thee. Then the advice not of flesh or blood but
of Gods spirit, will as a watchma^ look with open eyes that no hurt approach
unto thee. Then again discretion will as a soldier armed with shield and
spear, keep thee safe and sound from evils corporal and spiritual.

12 To deliver thee from Or the way the evil man.
the evil way, from the men that speak froward things:

13 Who leave the paths of righteousness, to walk in the ways of darkness.

14 Who delight in doing evil, and exceedingly rejoice in most vile
perverseness.

15 Who are crooked in their ways, and obstinate stinate in their paths.

Now, one particular mischief from which wisdom preserves those who
possess her, is discovered in these verses, to wit, the seducing of ungodly
men. See for those who speak froward things. Act. 20.30.
These seducers are said to speak froward things, because either they teach
false doctrines, or else entise to the committing of villainies. They are noted
to be such who leave the paths of righteousness, to walk in the ways of
darkness, See for the works of darkness. Romans 13.14.
because they not only refuse to do that which is good, but commit all
wickedness with greediness, giving themselves over unto surfeiting,
drunkenness, chambering, wantonness, and such like vices, which are often in
the Scripture called the works of darkness. Furthermore they are described by
this property, that they delight in doing evil, and rejoice exceedingly in
most vile perverseness, because they take great pleasure in idolatry,
adultery, cousening, and such like abominations, which nature, the
conscience, or reason it self abhorteth. Last of all it is affirmed of these
seducers, that they are crooked in their ways, and obstinate in their paths,
because they are not only great sinners, but unrepentant sinners. For eue^ as
stubburne horses will stray out of the right way, and not be ruled or brought
into the right path again, so these wicked wretches will by no means be
reclaimed, but rush on into all mischief, and proceed forward in all
lewdness. See how dangero usrockes wicked seducers are in the Epistle of Jude.
Now then to be preserved or delivered from naughty men, or from such
dangerous rocks, is a singular mercy of God, and a precious fruit of grace,
or of heavenly wisdom, which the ungodly wanting, fall into the hands of
seducers, that as they have not had a love of the truth, so they may believe
lies, 2 Thessalonians. 2.10. 2. Tim. 3.6.
and that as they have polluted the^ selves with sins, so they may be led
away captive by sinners. By such seducers or tempters, the very elect are
sometimes led aside for the time, but the Lord delivers them in the end out of
temptation, 2. Pet. 2.9.
Apostle Peter plainly teaches.

16 To deliver thee from the strange woman, from the stranger who flattereth
with her lips:

17 Who for saketh the guide of her youth, and forgets the covenant of her
God.

18 For her house tends to death, and her paths toward those who are void of
life,

19 Whosoever go unto her, return not back, neither come unto the ways of
life.

The naughty woman (a second most perilous evil) is herein on the other
side, most lively painted out in her colors. She is called a strange woman in
regard of her condition and disposition, in as much as she seeks to be
familiar with many, though in right she appertains to some one husband. One
of her properties is, to flatter with her lips, or to make her speeches very
smooth. For she entiseth young men to adultery by wanton words and plausible
persuasions, telling them what affection she bears toward the^, what delight
they shall have, that her husband is abroad and so forth. Another of her
qualities is, to forsake the guide of her youth, and to forget the covenant of
her God. This misdemenour of hers, argues her impiety and impudency. For
what greater shamelessness can there be in a woman, then to cast away the vale
of her eyes, yea to reject that her husband, who^ first she chose and was
linked unto, even in her tender years? Again, what greater ungodliness is
there, the^ to break that solemn promise which was made at the times of
affiance and marriage, both before God and his Angels and his people? It is a
great fault to break promise in a small matter, how much more in the greatest
contract or bargain that may be? It is a special favor of God to be kept from
this adulteress or harlor. For as is afterward testified in this book, the
mouth of a strange woman is a deep pit, he with who^ the Lord is angry shall
fall therinto. Yea as is affirmed in the eighteenth and nineteenth verses, her
very house is infectious and deadly. For her house tends to death, and her
paths toward those who are void of life. The place where she keeps is
perilous, yea the very way that leads thereto is dangerous, for which cause
thou art not to come near her habitation in any case. Whosoever go unto her
return not back, neither come unto the ways of life. Whosoever meddle with
her are caught in her snares, which she lays not in vain. Hereof this our
Solomon had experience, which makes him (as it may seem) both so often in
this book to warn men to take heed of the harlot, and in Ecclesiastes to
say, Eccles. 8.28.
that he has found that woman to be more bitter then death, whose heart is as
nets and snares, and whose hands as bands: he (says he) that is good before
God, shall be delivered from her, but the sinner shall be taken by her. Now
furthermore, how true it is, that they who have the fear of the Lord before
their eyes, are safely guarded by aduisement, and preserved by understanding
from the strange woman, may appear in the example of Joseph, who by this
means was kept from yielding to his mistress.

20 To the end that thou may walk in the way of good men, and keep the
paths of the just.

The end why wisdom delivers the faithful out of dangers is here showed
to be, that they may serve the Lord in holiness and righteousness all the
days of their life, following the example of the godly, by whom they may be
directed and made the better.

21 For they that are upright shall dwell on the earth, and the righteous shall
remain therein,

22 But the wicked shall be cut off from the earth, and the transgressors shall
be plucked out of it.

See the root of these sentences in the 11. Deuteronomy. 8. and Psalm 37.2
In this conclusion of the chapter, the wise father pricketh forward his son
by most forcible reasons, to walk in the way of good men, spoken of in the
verse immediately going before. There is (says he) great cause why thou
should shun the ways of the wicked, and keep the paths of the just. For
first, the wicked shall be cut off from the earth, they that are of corrupt
conversation, shall by some particular judgment in this life, or by Gods
vengeance hereafter, be taken away, even as the grass is mowen down; and the
transgressors shall be plucked out of it, such as break Gods laws shall
together with their ungodly posterity, be quite rooted out, as frutelesse
plants or naughty trees. On the contrary side, the upright shall dwell on the
earth and the righteous shall remain therein, the elect and just shall remain
for ever heirs in Christ of heaven and earth.

THE III. CHAPTER.
1 My son, forget not my doctrine, but let thine heart keep my precepts.

2 For they shall heap upon thee length of days, and years of life, and
peace.

IN this third chapter, Solomon exhorts and instructs his son the third
time. In the entrance thereof, he prepares him by a general preface, to
receive the special commandments following. In the first verse he warns him
to look to two points, the one, that he forget not his doctrine, the other,
that he keep his precepts. They are said in the Scripture to forget the word,
who either let good lessons slip out of their memories, as the Disciples of our
Savior often did his sayings, or put not the truth into practice, as that
natural man of whom James speaking, says, that he looks his face in a
glass, James 1.23.
and immediately forgets of what fashion it is. Now, on the other side, they
are said to keep the word in their hearts, who lay up wholesome instructions
in their remembrance, and practice it in their lives, being like herein to the
thrifrie householder, who treasureth up his goods, or to the good ground, Luke
8.15.
which keeping the corn, in time convenient brings forth fruit. Great
rewards are promised in the second verse unto those, who obey good admonitions.
First of all, a promise is made unto them of long life, the root whereof is to
be found in the fourth commandment of the moral law. Secondly a promise is
made also of peace, that is to say of prosperity, even in these outward
things; for godliness has the promises both of this life and the life to
come. But here (may some say) how are these promises performed, seeing
oftentimes the wicked live as long or longer then the godly, and enjoy outward
blessings more then they? To answer briefly unto this doubt, first the promises
of God touching outward blessings are not absolute or simple but conditional.
Secondly, the obedience of the godly is not full but in part, and therefore no
marvel it is, if in part only they are made partakers of outward blessings.
Last of all, the Lord giving his children, in heaven, eternity and glory,
performs a great deal more, then here he does promise.

3 Let not or Goodness, or bounty.
mercy and truth forsake thee, bind them about thy neck, write them upon the
table of thine heart,

4 And thou shall find favor and good success before the eyes of God and man.

In these verses, two points or precepts are summarily propounded, which
throughout the whole chapter afterward are severally handled. To be brief,
herein two virtues are commended, and two rewards promised unto the practice of
them. The former virtue is mercy, whereby, all sorts of duties serving to the
benefiting of me^, are to be understood, as alms, visiting of the fatherless
and widows, and such like. The later is truth, under which gift, faith
unfeigned and sincerity in all actions, is comprehended. For indeed the end of
the law (as Paul speaks to Timothy) is love out of a pure heart, and a good
conscience, 1. Tim. 1.5.
and faith unfeigned. And behold (says David in the Psalm unto the Lord)
Behold thou art delighted with truth, Psalm. 51.8.
and in secret have made wisdom known unto me. Now, even as signs and
frontlets which are bound about the face or neck, are always present: so both
these virtues must always be meditated on and practiced. Again, as notes or
letters written in paper or graven in metal, continue: so these graces must
continually be thought on, and firmly written, not in paper or in stone, but
in the fleshly tables of our hearts. The self same thing is here signified,
which is set down in Deuteronomie, where it is said, lay up these my words in
your hearts and minds, and bind them for a sign on your hands, Deuteronomy. 11.8.
and place them between your eyes. A like phrase is used by the Apostle Paul
to the Corinthians, 2 Cor. 3. Heb. 8.
and by the author of the Epistle to the Hebrews. The rewards promised to the
forenamed virtues being also two, the former of them is favor, whereby is
meant the well liking of the Lord, before whose eyes the hidden man of the
heart in the incorruptiblenesse of a gentle and meek spirit, is much worth and
most amiable. The later reward is good success, that is, prosperity and
acceptance among men, who are wont to love and recompense such as do them
good. This promise then is all one in a manner with that which the Apostle
Paul sets down in the Epistle to the Romans, where speaking of
righteousness, peace and joy in the holy Ghost, Romans 14.18.
he says, that he which in these things serves Christ, pleases God, and is
acceptable to men.

5 Trust in the Lord with thy whole heart, but lean not unto thine own
understanding.

6 In all thy ways acknowledge him, and he will direct thy paths.

The first particular duty which we are exhorted to perform to the Lord, is
herein set down. Trust in the Lord with thy whole heart, doubt not of Gods
favor in Christ, or of the truth of any of his promises, but lean not unto
thine own understanding, on the contrary side, think not by thine own
policy to avoid evils, or to attain unto good things. For in deed so long as
we put any confidence in our own gifts, we can never truly or surely rely on
God alone, or look for help from him only. Yea that which is more, the
wisdom of the flesh is enmity to God, and the natural understanding of man,
is not able to comprehend spiritual mysteries, but disputes against the
plain truth of Gods word or promises. In all thy ways acknowledge him. In all
the actions of thy life, set the Lord only before thee, ask counsel what is
best to be done at his word, calvpon him by prayer, give him thanks, and
refer all things to his glory. And he will direct thy paths. The Lord will
bless thy counsel and enterprises. For it can not be, but that we must needs
find God an approuer and defender of those actions and courses, which we
attempt and go about in his name and fear, having him for our author and
captain.

7 Be not wise in thine own eyes, fear God and depart from evil.

8 So health shall be unto thy navel, and moisture unto thy bones.

In these verses, we have the second duty of piety commended unto us. Be not
wise in thine own eyes, follow not thy corrupt reason, neither in matters of
religion, nor in the ordering of thy life and conversation, but follow the line
of Gods word in all things. For indeed conceit and self love, causes men to
err most grossly, and to think they do very well, when they do very ill, as
also to be secure in their sins, yea to defend them selves in their most
wicked deeds, as may appear in Saules offting of sacrifice, and sparing of
Agag. Fear God and depart from evil. 1. Sam. 13.9. Item 15.13.
Be not so bold as to worship God after thine own conceit, but follow the
direction of his word and reverence his majesty, who will grievously plague
thee, if thou continuest obstinately in thy will worship or evil course of
life. Wherefore, if thou have been overtaken with any sin, forsake it, because
thou can not please God nor do good, before thou have departed from that
which is evil. So health shall be unto thy navel, and moisture unto thy
bones. When thou confessest and forsakest thine iniquity, then if thou art
visited with sickness or any adversity, thou shall be restored to health, and
enjoy the welfare both of body and soul. The Prophet David felt the
experience hereof in his own person: for all the while that he kept close his
sin, Psalm. 32.2.3 4.5. etc.
his humors were turned into the drought of summer, but when he made it known,
or confessed it, then the Lord took away the punishment of his iniquity, so
that on the contrary side, there was health to his navel, and moisture to his
bones.

9 Honor God with thy substance, and with the first fruits of thy whole
increase,

10 So shall thy barnes be filled with plentifulnesse, and thy wine presses
break in sunder with new wine.

These verses contain a precept, wherein the third duty of godliness is
prescribed. Honor God with thy substance, by outward signs of thankfulness,
as by paying of tithes, and by bestowing thy goods on holy uses, declare and
express that reverence and account, which thou have the Lord in. Albeit, where
ability is wholly wanting, the Lord is content with the inward thankfulness of
the mind alone: yet he would have those who are rich or of ability, to declare
the gratitude of their hearts, by outward testimonies and fruits of obedience.
The ninth verse is nothing else in sum, but a repetition or exposition of
that statute of the Lord in Exodus concerning the paying of first fruits and
such like oblations to him. For in the four and thirtith chapter of that book
and the six and twentieth verse, Moses says to the people of Israel from the
Lord, bring all the first fruits, the first fruits of thy land, into the house
of Jehovah thy God. Now albeit we are not at this time tied as the Israelites
in old time were, to bring our corn and wine into the Temple to be offered, or
beasts to be sacrificed, or the first borne to be redeemed with a sum of
money: yet we ought to honor the Lord, by bestowing our goods on holy uses, as
on the maintenance of the ministry and the relief of the poor. For this
cause Paul says to the Galathians, Gal. 6.6.
let him which is instructed in the word, minister to him who instructs him
in all things. Be not deceived, God is not mocked. Now, whereas here we are
exhorted, not only to honor God with our substance, but with the first fruits,
or (as the word also imports) the chief of our increase: this shows, that
it is not enough for us, when God has given us abundance to bestow only a
little and that of the worst of our goods on good uses, no, but we must be very
frank and liberal, sowing plentifully, that also we may reap plentifully.
Truly, if any be endued with zeal or faith indeed, they will not be sparing or
niggardly, but very forward and bountiful in those things, which appertain to
the Lord. An example of the truth hereof we may have in Abel: for whereas Moses
affirms, Genesis 4.4.
that Abel did offer a gift to the Lord of the first borne and fattest of his
flock, the Apostle unto the Hebrews plainly teaches, that he by faith
offered a greater sacrifice to the Lord then Cain, Heb. 11.4.
insinuating that because Abel believed in God, he cared not what cost he
bestowed on his worship. The promise which in the tenth verse is made unto
those who honor the Lord with their goods, imports thus much, that such
shall not want in this world or the world to come, but enjoy store of all good
things. Worldly people commonly think, that if they bestow much on good uses,
they shall go a begging: and, that whatsoever goes that way, is lost. But here
we are taught, that by our liberality toward the maintenance of Gods service,
we do not only not loose, but gain much to our selves. For rhis cause the
prophet Malachie speaks thus to the people of Israel, bring your tithes into
the treasure house, that in mine house there may be food, and try me now
herein says the Lord of hosts, Mal. 3.10.
whether I will not open to you the windows of heaven, and bring forth a
blessing without measure.

11 My son, despise not the chastisement of the Lord, neither faint under his
correction,

12 For whom the Lord loves he corrects, and he v ce ab I turn scourges,
reading it rather ca ab as the Apostle did Heb. 12.6. and as the same word is
used Job 5.17. where see thee root of this instruction.
scourges every son whom he receives.

These sentences wherein a fourth duty of piety is commended, contain partly
an exhortation unto patience, and partly a reason enforcing the same. My son,
despise not the chastisement of the Lord, make not light account of the Lords
visitation, either imputing it unto chance or fortune, or suffering it to
pass without any fruit or profit to thine own soul. Neither faint under his
correction. Torment not thy self with grief, languish not nor pine away,
quail not nor shrink under the crosses which the Lord lays on thee, be they
never so many, so great, or so continual. For whom the Lord loves he
corrects, for the Lord oftentimes suffering his enemies to go unpunished in
this world, in great favor chasteneth his friends as it were, See this place of
Scripture amplified and applied Heb. 12.5.6.
that they should not perish with the world. And he scourges every son whom
he receives. The Lord also schooleth by adversity every one whom he admits
to be his spiritual son or daughter.

13 Blessed is that man who finds wisdom, and the man that gets
understanding,

14 For the merchandise thereof is better then the merchandise of silver, and
the revenue thereof, [is better] then gold.

15 She is more precious then pearls, and all thy delites are not to be
compared unto her.

Now the wise king returns to commend that wisdom, whereof he has before
entreated. Blessed is the man who finds wisdom, happy is he who attayneth
to the knowledge of God, and the man that gets understanding, happy is he
that comes unto the practice of Gods will, for the merchandise thereof is
etc. for the gain which is gotten hereby is exceeding great, Ecclesiafies.
7.13.
seeing wisdom preserves the life of a man, and brings him unto salvation.
She is more precious the^ pearls, etc. To conclude, Mat. 13.46.
wisdom is also more excellent and more pleasant, then all the treasures or
pleasures of this world, Psalm. 19.10. Phil. 3.8.
which are but dung in regard of the excellent knowledge of Jesus Christ.

16 Length of days is in her right hand, in her left hand riches and honor.

17 Her vvayes are the vvayes of pleasantness, her paths are all [pathes] of
peace.

18 She is a tree of life to them that lay hold on her, and they who keep
her are blessed.

The gifts which wisdom bestows on men are rehearsed in these verses.
Length of days are in her right hand, wisdom gives long life, yea
immortality to those who seek after her, whilst in the mean season the
ungodly perish by untimely death, some of them wasting their strength by
adultery, some of them ouerwhelming their stomachs with drink, some consuming
their hearts with envy, some breaking their galls with anger, some being
slain in frayes, some executed by course of laws, finally some being cut of
by the immediate hand of the Lord him self. In her left hand riches and honor.
Moreover wisdom as a bou^tifull Queen, gives to them who obey her, not only
long life, but worldly wealth and earthly glory, or at the least spiritual
graces which are durable riches, and eternal salvation, which is a crown of
immortal glory. Her ways are ways of pleasantness, her paths are paths
of peace. Furthermore wisdom works joy in the holy Ghost, so as that the
spiritual worshipper of God not only practices the word of God with delight,
or meditateth therein with exceeding comfort, Mat. 11.30. 1. Ioh. 5.3.
but seeleth certain sugared motions of the spirit, together with peace, that
is to say inward and outward quietness, so that the godly wise man is at rest
within him self, Phil. 4.7.
and moreover through the favor of the Lord, finds good success in all
things, and prosperity. The stones of the street and the beasts of the field
are in league with him, who walks uprightly. He that is under the shadow of
the Almighty shall not need to fear the arrow nor the noisome pestilence.
Now, because it would be endless to prosecute in this sort, all the particular
fruits which wisdom works in her children: Solomon concludes that, which
was affirmed in the beginning, with an effectual and excellent sentence,
saying, She is a tree of life to those who lay hold on her, and they who keep
her are blessed. That is to say, she saves men's souls, and makes them
immortal. Look then, what a manner of thing the tree of life in Paradise was,
Genesis 3.22.
which was a sign of Gods favor: or the tree of life showed to Moses in Marah
was, Exodus 15.25.
which sweetened the bitter and deadly waters: or the tree of life seen by
John in a revelation was, Revel. 22.2.
which brought forth twelve fruits, and the leaves thereof were for the curing
of the Gentiles: or to conclude, any living or good tree is, which brings
forth fruit whereby men may live: such a thing is the wisdom of God, which
seals us unto our election, brings forth in us the fruits of
sanctification, purges out our corruption, and makes us partakers of
salvation.

19 The Lord, by wisdom has founded the earth, he has established the
heavens, by understanding.

20 By his skill, the depths have been cleft in sunder, and the clouds above
drop down the dew.

In these sentences the praises of wisdom are enlarged by the me^tioning of
those great things, which thereby the Lord has wrought in the world. It ought
not to seem strange unto any, that Solomon having before considered wisdom as
it is possessed by man, now proceeds to speak of it, as it lodges in the
bosom of Jehovah, even the first person in the Trinity, for so this name is
taken in this place. The river and the fountain are both of one nature, and
when pure water has been looked on in the stream, it is a pleasant thing to
behold it in the conduict head. Now, Jesus Christ the wisdom of the Father,
working together with him, is here showed to have wrought four excellent
works of wonder. The first is, the founding of the earth, which being made of
nothing, and being vpheld by nothing save only by the power of God, and yet
being also the mother and pillar of all things, must needs be a foundation and
groundworke of singular skill and cunning. The second is, the establishing of
the heavens, which declare the glory of God as the Prophet speaks. The heat
of the sun, the moisture of the moon, the influence of the stars, the motions
of the celestial globes, are manifest proofs of understanding
incomprehensible. If we marvel at the little clockes which are made by the art
of man, how much more may we justly wonder at the sky, the dial of the world?
The third is, the cleaving of the deepes in sunder. As the mercy of God
appears herein, that the earth as a nurse gives waters as milk, to quench
the thirst of the creatures: so his wisdom does no less show it self, in
that a passage is made in the ground and hardest rocks, for soft and moist
waters to pierce through and to rise up by. Psalm. 104.23.
Now to come to the last effect of wisdom, the Lord in causing the vapors to
ascend out of the earth, to the end that being distilled in the air, they
might fall down as honey drops on the ground beneath: declares his rare and
singular art and cunning. Not without cause then is this reckened among the
works of divine wisdom, that the clouds above drop down the dew, whereby
the withered plants are refreshed, and the parched earth is cooled. And yet all
this while, nothing is said of the frosts, of snow, of hail, of other meteors
or creatures, wherein the great power of the singular wisdom of God
appears. But the sum of all that doctrine which in these sentences is
taught, Ioh. 1.1.
is, that by the son of God all things were made, and are continually
governed and preserved.

21 My son, let not these things depart from thine eyes, keep true wisdom
and counsel,

22 And they shall be life unto thy soul, and a grace unto thy neck.

23 Then shall ^hou go on thy way securely, and not stumble with thy foot,

24 If thou shall lie down, thou shall not be afraid, but whilst thou
restest, thy sleep shall be sweet.

25 Thou shall not be afraid of any sudden terror, or of the destruction of
the wicked, when it comes,

26 For God will be present with thy trust, and keep thy foot from being
caught.

Solomon comes now, to apply that doctrine touching the excellency of
wisdom, which he has taught in the verses going before. In the one and
twentieth verse, he gives his son an admonition: in the rest, he shows him
the fruits which he shall receive by obeying his instructions. My son, let not
these things depart from thine eyes, keep true wisdom and counsel or
aduisement. Even as they who love any thing, continually and constantly set
their eyes on that wherewith they are enamoured: so cast thine eye always and
perpetually meditate on, that heavenly wisdom which descends from above,
James 3.17.
and is contrary to that false and fained wisdom, which is earthly, sensual
and deuillish. And they shall be life unto thy soul, and a grace unto thy
neck. So, by the word of god and his spirit, thou shall be nourished in this
life unto eternal life, yea thou shall also be made partaker of the ornaments
of this life and the life to come, shining as a star on earth and in heaven.
Then shall thou go on thy way securely, and not stumble with thy foot. So,
prospering in thine affairs, thou shall be free from the arrow that flies by
day, neither shall thou commit any such wickedness or incur any such danger
or trouble, as that thou shall fall, or at the least without rising again. If
thou shall lie down thou shall not be afraid, but whilst thou restest, thy
sleep shall be sweet. So not only abroad but at home, not only in the day
time but in the night season (when troubles most stir in the heart and enemies
practice mischief) thou shall be safe and without dread or perplexity of
spirit. Thig is that which the Prophet speaks of in the Psalm when he says,
Psalm. 127.2.
that the Lord gives his beloved sleep. Nevertheless true it is that
sometimes the Lord holds the eyes of his children waking, as he did Danids,
Psalm. 77 4. Job. 7.14.
and troubles them with fearful dreams as he did Job, but when he deals
thus with them, it is either to chastise them for their offenses, or to try
their faith, or to stir them up to prayer, or to warn them of some thing to
come to pass. Otherwise, ordinarily they take most sweet naps, yea even then
oftentimes, when they are in greatest troubles. The case stands otherwise
with the ungodly, who never lightly have peace, but are as a raging sea, only
expecting temporal judgments and eternal condemnation. Hence it comes to
pass, that even in the night season whilst they are a sleep, horrible dreams
affright them, as may appear in Nebuchadnezzar, Dan. 2.1.
and afterward grievous interpretations thereof arise in their hearts, as is
manifest by that exposition, which one of the Midianits gave of his neighbors
dream, when Gedeon made war against that people. Iud. 7.13.14.
Thou shall not be afraid of any sudden terror, nor of the destruction of the
wicked, when it comes, for God will be present with thy trust, See the root
of these sentences Job 5.21. Psalm. 91 and the use thereof Phil. 1.28.
and keep thy foot from being caught. To conclude, so, when thousands shall
fall on thy right hand or ten thousands on thy left, when some pestilence or
sword, or other plague shall sweep away the wicked, thou shall be of good
courage, or at the least have no cause to fear. For not mortal men only, no
nor celestial Angels alone, but the Lord him self shall stand by thee to
defend and succor thee, upon condition that thou put thy trust in him. True it
is, that the godly are sometimes enwrapped in those common calamities, which
befall the wicked: but always as the Apostle speaks, they receive the reward
of their faith, even the salvation of their souls, 1. Pet. 1.9.
for which cause they may be always secure.

27 Withhold not the good from the owners thereof, when it is in the power of
thine hand to do it.

Now, Solomon comes to prescribe those duties, which properly belong to the
second table of the law, See the ground hereof Exodus 22.7.22.14.
as the former did to the first. In this verse, he charge his son, in no
case to keep back from other, the things which are due unto the^, in regard
of their necessity or of right which they have thereunto. The borrower is then
to repay his debt to the lender, the finder to restore that which he has taken
up, to the looser, he which has received any thing into his custody, is to
bring it forth to him who reposed trust in him, the master is to pay the
servant his wages, finally every one is to practice that precept of the
Apostle, owe nothing to any man, Romans 13.8.
but to love one another.

28 Say not unto thy neighbor, go thy way and return, to morrow I will give
thee, when the thing is with thee.

Herein, every one is commanded, in no case to differ the doing of good
deeds. Three causes there are, why gifts should be given and help lent to our
neighbors, without delay. The first is, for that the Lord loves a cheerful
giver. The second, that whilst we differ our help, the souls of our
brethren may faint, or their bodies perish. The last is, that delay is a sign
of an unwilling mind.

29 Practice no evil against thy neighbor, when he dwells peaceably by thee.

Treachery or practicing of mischief against those who dwell in the same place
with us, is here forbidden. Injury is to be done to none, but to do wrong to a
friend or neighbor, yea to devise or practice mischief against one that
abides in the same town or city with us, and therein carries him self
quietly, is above all things to be avoided, as a sin most odious unto God and
man. David pondering the grieuousnesse of this iniquity, Psalm. 7.4.
wishes, that if he had committed it, then the enemy might take his soul,
and lay his honor in the dust. Nevertheless, Treachery.
many now a days exercise this craft as it were, only bending their wits how
to draw into trouble, such simple and harmless people, as dwell where they do.

30 Strive not with any man causlesse, when he has done thee no harm.

Quarrelling or brabling is condemned in this instruction. The meaning hereof
is thus much, in any case neither provoke to wrath nor molest him, who medleth
not with thee, nor has any way offended thee. It is lawful to confer
privately, or to complain to a magistrate, of a wrong offered. But to lay blame
on any one who is not faulty, or to accuse an innocer person, or to contend
with one who is quiet, is to overthrow all humanity and society. Iosia would
needs take up the sword against Pharao Necho, but he perished by it. Now,
whereas here it is said, when he has done thee no harm, these words contain
no warrant of private revenge, or of wreaking our anger upon every one who
gives us just occasion of offense, but a reason proving that we are not to
strive with a man causlesse, whereof this is the sum, that it were an
unreasonable thing to molest those, who have not deserved to be molested.

31 Fret not at a or A man of violence or oppression.
troublesome man, neither choose any of his ways,

32 For the froward is abomination to the Lord, but his secret is with the
upright.

33 The curse of God is in the wicked man's house, but the dwelling of the
righteous is blessed.

34 Surely he will scorn the scorners, James 4.10. 1. Pet. 5.5.
but he well give grace to the humble.

35 The wise shall inherit honor, but shame shall take away fools.

In this conclusion of the chapter, See the root hereof Psalm. 37.25. Job. 5.3.
first, and exhortation not to envy the wicked is contained. Secondly, sundry
reasons are set down, both enforcing this admonition, and those, which before
have been given. Fret not at the troublesome man, neither choose any of his
ways, Neither grudge at the rage or power of any who annoyeth thee or other,
neither be drawn aside by his prosperous estate, to like of his doings. or to
fawn on him. For the froward is ahhomination to the Lord, but his secret is
with the upright. For first of all, God abhors the obstinare as his enemies,
shunning them also as filthy excrements or serpents, but he has a secret
fellowship with the godly as his friends, visiting them in troubles, bestowing
his blessings on the^, talking with them by his word, and drawing near unto
them by his spirit. The curse of God is in the wicked man's house, but the
dwelling of the righteous is blessed. Secondly, God does plague the house of
the wicked, overthrowing their habitations by tempests, putting grief into
their hearts, and sending diseases on them and theirs: but in the mean season,
he blesses the righteous in their goods, their bodies, their souls, and the
places wherein they keep. Surely, he will scorn the scorners, but he will
give grace to the humble. Thirdly, the Lord resists the proud, crossing their
enterprises, overthrowing their estates, pouring on them temporal and eternal
plagues; but he honors the lowly, enduing them with outward blessings, the
inward gifts of his spirit, and immortal glory. The truth hereof may appear
in the examples of the builders of the tower of Babel, Pharao and
Nebuchadnezzar, on the one side: and in Abraham, Job, John the Baptist,
Elizabeth, and the Virgin Marie, on the other. Now, they are called lowly, who
willingly submit the^ selves to the Lord, neither refuse any thing, which
either by the word of God, or his providence, is imposed on them. The wise
shall inherit honor, but shame shall take away fools. Last of all, they who
are wise unto the Lord and their own salvation, shall be advanced to account
and estimation, if not in this life, yet in the world to come, where they shall
be crowned with everlasting glory: but as for those fools, who contemn Gods
word and follow their own fancies, the Lord will make them spectacles of
vengeance and shame, either on earth, or at the day of judgment, in hell. If
then the enemies of God may be pitied by the faithful, for these causes the
godly are rather to take compassion on them, then either in regard of their
rage to be moved to any passion, or in respect of their prosperity which
lasts but a while, to follow their iniquity, which shall be punished for
ever.

THE IIII. CHAPTER.
1 Hear, o sons, the instruction of a father, and hearken to know prudence.

2 For I give you a good lesson, forsake not my doctrine.

THis fourth chapter, contains the fourth sermon of Solomon, wherein he
reports to his sons, the speeches of his father David to him. In these
verses, we have a preface or forespeech, wherein the wise king stirs up his
children to hearken to his instruction, partly by his fatherly authority,
partly by the excellency of the doctrine which he delivers, calling it a
good lesson, even as the author of the Epistle to the Hebrews terms the
holy Scripture, Heb. 6.5.
the good word of God.

3 Whilst yet I was my fathers son, a tender and only one in the sight of
my mother,

4 He nourturing me said unto me, let thine heart hold fast my words, keep my
commandment, that thou may live.

Solomon in these words, sets down the first part of David's speech unto
him, wherein he prepared him to receive his instructions. whilst yet I was my
fathers son, when as yet I was under my fathers wing, by him accounted as his
best beloved child, a tender and a only one in the sight of my mother, and when
as, albeit Beersheba who bare me had more sons by David, 2. Chro. 28.
yet I was her darling and her joy alone. He nourturing me said unto me, let
thine heart hold fast my words, keep my commaundedement, that thou may
live. Then, he bringing me up in the information of the Lord, charged me with
all attention to listen to his admonitions, affirming that they would make me a
partaker of the good things of this world and the world to come. By this
example of David, all Christian parents are to be stirred up, See examples of
like care of bringing up of children in gods fear, in Abraham, Job Eunice and
Bathsheba.
to have regard not only of the bodies but of the souls of their children.

5 Purchase wisdom, purchase prudence, forget not, nor decline from the
speeches of my mouth.

6 Forsake her not, and she will keep thee, love her, and she will preserve
thee.

One of those precepts or exhortations which David gave unto Solomon, is herein
set down and enforced by a reason. Purchase wisdom, purchase prudence,
forget not, nor decline from thee speeches of my mouth. Procure unto thy self
by selling thy commodities and pleasures, and by using the means of cost and
labor, the knowledge of Gods will and the discretion of his spirit, which
graces once attained, never through any negligence in any case forgo. Forsake
her not, and she will keep thee, love her, and she will preserve thee. So
doing, wisdom and prudence as certain watchmen will shield thee that thou
come not into any danger, and if peradventure thou shall fall into some
trouble, they will preserve and deliver thee from destruction.

7 First of all [seeke] wisdom, purchase wisdom, and with thy whole
possession purchase prudence.

8 Magnify her, and she will advance thee, if thou shall embrace her, she will
honor thee.

9 She will set on thine head a comely attire, she will put upon thee a crown
of glory.

Here we have another precept or admonition of David, accompanied with a most
sweet promise. Mat. 6.33.
First of all seek wisdom, purchase wisdom, before all things and above
all things, labor after the kingdom of God, and with thy whole possession
purchase prudence, let nothing in the world be so dear or precious unto thee,
as that thou would not willingly part from it or bestow it, rather then not
obtain the understanding of Gods will, which is as a treasure hidden in a
field, Mat. 13.44.45.
or as a peerlesse pearl, the which to buy, a wise merchant sold all that he
had. Maguifie her, and she will advance thee, if thou shall embrace her, she
will honor thee. If thou shall count all things but dung in regard of the
excellent knowledge of Christ, certainly this grace of God, as a Queen, shall
either make thee honorable in the eyes of profane people, as it did Joseph in
Pharaos sight, or it shall make thee gracious and glorious in the sight of good
men, the Angels, and God him self. She will set on thine head a comely attire,
she will put upon thee a crown of glory. To conclude, wisdom will make thee a
king and priest unto the Lord, yea an inheritor of that crown of glory,
Revel. 1.5.
which the righteous God has laid up in heaven, for those who love him.

10 Hear, o my son, and receive my sayings, and years of life shall be
multiplied unto thee.

11 I teach thee the way of wisdom, I lead thee by the paths of equity.

12 When thou shall walk, thy gate shall not be strait, and if thou shall
run, thou shall not be hurt.

13 Lay hold on her instruction, leave not of, keep her, because she is thy
life.

In these verses, a third precept is comprehended, attended on with reasons as
were the former. Hear o my son and receive my sayings, and years of life
shall be multiplied unto thee. I teach thee the way of wisdom, I lead thee
by the paths of equity. O my child, to the end that that thou may continue
on earth and live for ever in heaven: walk in those good paths of holiness
and righteoushesse, which I as a guide appointed from the Lord, do show thee by
my precepts, and chalk out before thee by my doctrines. When thou shall walk
thy gate shall not be strait, and if thou shall run, thou shall not be hurt.
So doing, wisdom as a guide will direct thee in the right and plain way which
leads to prosperity in such sort, as that always thou shall find liberty
and safety. Lay hold on her instruction, leave not of, keep her, because she
is thy life. Therefore keep the doctrine of the word, and suffer not wisdom
to depart from thee, because hereby thou shall be quickened to fairh, obedience
and immortality. For indeed Jesus Christ is the way, the truth and the life.
And this is eternal life, to know the true God and him whom he has sent,
Jesus Christ.

14 Enter not into the path of the wicked, neither walk in the way of evil
men,

15 Auoydit, go not through it, turn from it, and pass by it.

16 For they sleep not unless they have done a mischief, and their sleep is
taken away, unless they cause some to fall.

17 For they eat the bread of wickedness, and drink the wine of violence.

18 As for the path of the righteous, it is like the glistering light, which
proceeds to shine until the perfection of the day:

19 The way of the wicked is like the darkness, they know not where they
shall stumble.

Herein, David disswadeth his son from having any fellowship with evil men.
These verses contain straight charges, and diverse forcible reasons tending to
this purpose. Enter not into the path of the wicked, come not into the place
where sinners are, rashly or to an ill intent, neither walk in the way of
evil men, continue not in the company, nor live after the conditions of
ungodly persons. Avoid it, go not through it, turn from it, and pass by it.
Fly their presence and doings with might and maine. For they sleep not
unless they have done a mischief, and their sleep is taken away, unless
they cause some to fall. They sin not of frailty but of malice, not by
occasion as it were, but of an insatiable desire of committing wickedness. The
eye of the adulterer wayteth for the twilight, the thief ietteth abroad in the
dark: to conclude, the harmefull man museth on mischief in his bed. For they
eat the bread of wickedness, and drink the wine of violence. They live not of
honest labor, but of goods gotten by hook and crook, and moreover it is
meat and drink to them to do evil. As for the path of the righteous, it is
like the glistering light, which proceeds to shine until the perfection of
the day. The way of the wicked is like darkness, they know not where they
shall stumble. The godly being the children of the day and of the light, 1 Thessalonians. 5.1. 2. Sam. 23.4. Dan. 12.1.2.
are full of blessings, and increase in excellent ornaments, yea attain at
last to perfect glory, and at noone comes to perfect brightness. On the
contrary side, as they who walk in the night go in great fear and fall most
daungerously: so the wicked are full of sins and calamities, which also
sometimes overtake them in those times and places, wherein they least suspect
danger, and when they say peace, peace, as the Apostle speaks.

20 My son, hearken unto my words, incline thine ears unto my sayings,

21 Let them not depart from thine eyes, keep them within thine heart.

22 For they are life unto those who find the^, and wholesome to the whole flesh,
of every one of the^

Before that David comes to deliver new instructions, he prepares his son
in these sentences by a preface to receive them. He first demands an
attentive ear, saying, My son incline thine ears unto my sayings. The
reason hereof is, for that faith comes by hearing, and the ear is the door
at which knowledge does especially enter. Secondly, he requires a watchful
eye. Let them not depart from thine eyes. If the eye be not sanctified by the
word and spirit, envy, pride, adultery, and other vices, will therein have an
habitation. Thirdly, he does also claim a faithful heart. Keep them within
thine heart. If the soul be careless or not inwardly reformed as well as the
outward senses, the seed of the word is lost, which either the fowls of the
air will pick out, or the thorns will choke, or the stones will cause to
wither. For they are life unto those who find them, and wholesome to the whole
flesh of every one of them. The doctrines of the Scripture are able to make men
wise unto salvation, yea whosoever obey them, shall be sure not only to live,
but to live in prosperous health, if not always of the body, yet of the soul.

23 Above all watch and ward keep thine heart, for out of it proceed the
issues of life.

As before David has dissuaded his son from the company of wicked persons,
so now he warns him to take heed, that he have no fellowship with any evil
things. He forbids in this verse the pollution of the heart or spirit. Above
all watch and ward keep thine heart, not only look that thy soul be free
from pride, hypocrisy, and such vices, but above all other things, do this.
Rather look to the cleansing of thine heart, then to the cleansing of thy
well: rather look to the feeding of thine heart, then to the feeding of thy
flock: rather look to the defending of thine heart, then to the defending of
thine house: rather look to the keeping of thine heart, then to the keeping of
thy money. For out of it proceed the fountains or issues of life. Seeing the
heart is the wel-spring of motion, sense, and vigor, the least hurt which
befallerh the heart, must needs bring death, and therefore it stands thee
upon, to look that thine heart be not infected with any poison, but especially
that thy spiritual heart be not venomed with sin; for out of the heart
comes murder, adulteries, and all mischiefs, as our Savior teaches.

24 Remove from thee, the perverseness of the mouth, and put far away from
thee, the naughtiness of the lips.

Now in the second place, David admonishes his son, Col. 3.8.
to lay aside all evil and filthy speaking. The tongue indeed is the most
excellent member in our body, if so be that it glorify God and edify men. But
if it break the bridle or abuse it self in speeches, there is nothing in our
whole body more hurtful the^ it is. We are the^ not without cause willed to
remove from us the perverseness of the mouth, after that we have been exhorted
above all things to look to our hearts. All the vices of the tongue are
comprehended under these two words, perverseness and naughtines. We are then
charged to take heed of blasphemy, heresy, perjury, lying, cursing, jesting,
backebiting, brawling, foolish speaking, boasting, and infinite other such
deformities of the mouth and of the lips.

25 Let thine eyes look directly on before, and let thine eyes lids view
straight before thee.

26 Ponder the path of thy foore, and let all thy vvayes be ordered aright.

27 Turn not to the right hand or the left, remove thy foot from evil.

In this conclusion of the Chapter, we have the last instruction of David set
down. The sum of it is, that his son should keep all the parts of his body
and powers of his soul in the obedience of Gods commandments. Ephesians. 5.15.
Let thine eyes look directly on before, etc. Walk circumspectly, not as the
unwise but as the wise, redeeming the time. For, to take heed to the way, to
look on strait before, and not to turn aside hither or thither, are
properties of a wise traveler. Now what a dangerous thing it is to look awry
never so little, the example of Lots wife may testify. Job considering this
point very deeply, made (as he witnesses) a covenant with his eyes, not to
look on a maid. The root of these precepts is to be found in the fifth of
Deutronomie and the thirty and eight verse, where the Lord speaks thus to
the people of Israel, You shall take heed that you do as the Lord your God
commands you, see that ye decline not, either to the right hand or the left.

THE V. CHAPTER.
1 My son hearken unto my wisdom, bow down thine ear to mine
understanding,

2 That thou may regard counsel, and thy lips preserve knowledge.

Solomon in this Chapter begins a new Oration, whereof this is the Preface.
My son harken unto my wisdom, stir up the affections of thy mind and
apply the powers of thy soul unto my sage doctrine. Bow down thine ear to
mine understanding, apply also the senses of thy body, and listen with thine
ear as they use to do, who are desirous to hear any speech which they think
to concern them. That thou may regard counsel. To the end that by this
means thou may be endued with spiritual policy, and thy lips preserve
knowledge, to the end also, that thou may have the word of God in thy month
as a buckler to repel all the fiery darts of Satan, and namely the
allurements of the harlot, as Joseph did the entiseme^ts of his mistress.

3 Albeit the lips of a strange woman drop as an honey comb, and the roof of
her mouth is softer then oil,

4 Yet her later end is bitter as wormwood, and sharp, as a two edged sword,

5 Her feet go down to death, her steps go down to the grave.

6 Lest thou should ponder the way of life, her paths wander thou know
not [whither.]

In these verses, Solomon describes an harlot, painting her out most lively in
her colors, to the end that his son may grow into the greater detestation
of her. Albeit the lips of a strange woman drop as the honey comb, and the
roof of her mouth is softer then oil. Although the naughty woman's words
flow from her without pressing, and are sweet to flesh and blood, inasmuch as
they tickle the senses with promise of joys and pleasures: although also they
are without any roughness, yea they are very plausible, foopling the vains
and sinews with flatteries and smooth shows: yet her latter end is bitter as
wormwood, sparpe as a two edged sword. Nevertheless for all this, her effects
are most grievous and deadly, being sorrow of heart, shame, destruction and
damnation. Her feet go down to death, her steps go down to the grave. As she
her self is near to a plague, so she leads her lovers unto misery and
punishment both of body and soul. Lest thou should ponder the way of life,
her paths wander thou know not whither. To conclude, unto the end that thou
may not find or discern the way of holiness and righteousness wherein
thou art to walk: her speeches, gestures, and dealings are so crafty and
crooked, as that like by-pathes full of turnings, they will lead thee hither
and thither, and cause thee to stray in such sort, as that thou art sure to
miss the kingdom of God, for no unclean person shall inherit the kingdom of
heaven as the Apostle witnesses, Heb. 13.14.
but on the contrary side, fornicators, and adulterers the Lord God will judge.

7 Now therefore (o sons) hearken unto me, and depart not from the words of
my mouth.

8 Put thy way far off from her, and draw not near to the door of her house,

9 Lest thou give thine honor unto other, and thy years to the cruel:

10 Lest strangers be filled with thy riches, and thy labors be in another
man's house:

11 And thou mourn at the last, after that thy flesh and thy body have been
consumed

12 And say, how have I hated instruction, and my soul despised correction,

13 And have not hearkened to the voice of my teachers, and not inclined mine
ear to mine instructors?

14 So the Hebrew word here used is taken. Psalm. 81.15 cahal a counsel, gneda
a multitude howsoever assembled.
Within a little space, I am in all evil, in the midst of the congregation
and assembly.

In these verses, the spiritual father, partly admonishes his son to use
all means whereby he may be preserved from adultery, partly alleges sundry
reasons to this intent and purpose. One means of avoiding the allurements of
the strumpet, is listening to good counsel or the word of God, contained in
these words, Now therefore o sons hearken unto me. Another is, flying of the
place where she keeps, Put thy way far off from her, and draw not near to
the door of her house. For in deed as it is in our common proverb, he that
would no evil do, must do no thing which longs thereto. Men will shun the
door of an house infected with the pestilence: much more then is the
habitation of the harlot to be avoided, who is infinitely more contagious and
dangerous then any plague. The first reason set down by the holy Ghost to
dissuade men from passing by the way where the adulteress keeps is, lest
thou give thine honor to other, lest thou loose by this means thy beauty,
strength, and good name. The second reason is, lest thou give thy years to the
cruel, lest thou by this means incurring the fierce wrath of the naughty
woman's husband, or kinsfolk, or friends, be cut off by their cruelty as
Shechem was by Shimeon and Leui, before the natural course of thy life be
expired. The third cause is, lest strangers be filled with thy riches, and thy
labors be in another man's house. Lest also like the prodigal son, thou spend
thy goods upon harlots, bauds, ruffians, and ill companions, yea even that thy
substance, which thou have got by labor and earned dearly with the sweat of
thy brows. The last argument is, lest thou mourn at the last, finally lest when
it is too late, thou howl and cry as the beasts which are drawn or stricken
to be slain, or as desperate men are wont to do, after that thy flesh and body
have been consumed, when as now thy vital spirits have been spent, and thy
carcass plagued and pined with some sore disease, and say, how have I hated
instruction, etc. and then thou feel and acknowledge with grief, that a
Prophet was sent to thee. Within a little space I am in all evil, in the midst
of the congregation and assembly. Suddenly in a short time, I am made an open
spectacle of shame and vengeance, in the place of araignement and execution,
before the bench and the common people. All these reasons are taken from humane
damages; and as concerning the last, it can not thoroughly be understood,
unless it be considered, that adulterers under Moses law were punished with
death.

15 To let pass diverse other reasons, these words and verses I expound not
Synecdochically as does Iumus, but Allegorically of the use of wedlock,
because the same state is usually in the scripture shadowed our by the same
borrowed speeches which here are used, as Number. 24.7. Deuteronomy. 33.28 Esa. 48. 1.
Psalm. 68.27. Esa. 51. 1. Ovid as an echo unto Solomon, resoundeth these
sentences in verse thus lib. 2. de remedio amoris, Explenda est sitis ista tibi
qua praeditus ardes. Cedimus, e medio ^am licet amne bibas. Sed bibe plus etia^
quam quod praecordia poscunt. Gutiure fac pleno sumpta redu^det aqua. Et fruere
vsque tua nullo prohibente puella, Illa tibi noctes auferat illa dies. See a
like admonition Eccles. 9.9.
Drink water out of thine own cestern, and liquour out of the midst of thine
own well.

16 Thy fountains shall disperse them selves abroad, thy streams of water in
the streets.

17 They shall be thine in several, and not other men's with thee.

18 Let thy well spring be blessed: and rejoice in the wife of thy youth.

19 Let her be a most lovely hind, and an amiable Roe:

20 Let her pappes suckle thee at all times, dote in the love of her
continually.

In these verses, a remedy of that foul vice of adultery is prescribed,
which a little before has been condemned. Drink water out of thine own
cesterne, etc. enjoy thine own yoke fellow, for marriage is honorable among
all, etc. Thy fountains shall disperse them selves abroad, etc. Rather here
enjoy thy delight to the full, then go astray with strangers. Let thy well
spring be blessed: Let thy wife become a fruitful vine, that thou may have
plenty of children of thine own, lawfully begotten in honest wedlock. And
rejoice in the wife of thy youth. Live chearefully with her whom the Lord has
first matched with thee and linked unto thee. Let her be a most lovely hind and
a most amiable Roe. Even as the Heart being most fond of the hind, follows
her up and down and solaceth him self with her: or as the Roe buck, being
exceedingly enamoured with the female Roe, deliteth in her, and wandreth with
her: so walk, talk, and refresh thy self with thy wedded spouse, loving her
most dearly all the days of thy life. Let her pappes suckle thee at all times,
dote in the love of her continually. Finally, even as the little infant
contenteth himself with the breasts of his mother or nurse; or as they who are
stricken in years dote greatly on those things which they like: so, being
satisfied with her alone, (whatsoever wants or frailties she has,) let her
seem of all other most beautiful, yet let her be a peerless pearl in thine
eye.

21 And why o my son, should thou or Dote on.
go astray with a strange woman, and embrace the breast of another man's wife,

22 Since every man's ways are before the eyes of the Lord, and he pondereth all
his paths?

23 His own iniquities shall take the wicked man, and he shall be held by the
cords of his own sin:

24 He shall die for want of instruction, and for that he wandereth in his
great folly.

In this conclusion of the chapter, the spirit of God adds a divine reason
dissuading from adultery, unto those humane, which before have already been
set down to this intent. And why o my son should thou go astray with a
strange woman, or dote on a strange woman? Great cause there is, why thou
should fly all liking of other women besides thine own wife, and why thou
should not be so bold as to come near unto an harlot. Since every ma^s ways
are before the eyes of the Lord, in as much as God plainly sees the most secret
actions that are done, yea the very inward cogitatio^s of the heart. And he
pondereth all his paths. Yea and since the eternal God examineth all the deeds
and thoughts of men and judges them in justice. His own iniquities shall take
the wicked man, wherefore, howsoever for a time the ungodly person and the
adulterer may go abroad freely or be out of trouble: yet his own sin as a
bailiffe or sergeant shall at the last arrest and apprehend him. For his
conscience shall check him, and summon him before the tribunal seat of God.
And he shall be held by the cords of his own sin. Moreover the troubles of
the Lord, raised up by his transgressions, shall as iaylors bind him with such
bands or irons as it were, that he cannot possibly escape, being kept together
with the evil Angels in chains of darkness against the day of judgment. He
shall die for want of instruction. At the last, death and destruction as the
Lords executioners, shall take away his life from him, yea they shall torment
him in hell fire. Now all this shall befall him for want of instruction, for
his ignorance, his carelessness, his disobedience, See a very like saying Job
36.12.
and for that he wandreth in his great folly, as also for that he goes astray
with the strange woman, or commits many like abominations.

THE VI. CHAPTER.
1 My son, if thou have promised to be surety to thy friend, or clapped thine
hand with a stranger,

2 Thou have ensnared thy self by the words of thy mouth, thou art caught by
the speeches of thy mouth.

3 Do this now my son, and deliver thy self, in as much as thou art come into
the hand of thy neighbor, go to, submit thy self and be importunate with thy
neighbor.

4 Grant no sleep to thine eyes, nor slumber to thine eye lids;

5 Deliver thy self as a Roe out of the hand (of the hunter) and as a bird,
out of the hand of the fowler.

Herein the wise king warns men, first not to enter into suretiship; then, if
peradventure they have through unadvisedness incurred this danger, to use all
good means of getting out thereof. My son if thou have promised to be
surety to thy friend, if thou have in words told thy friend that thou will see
his debt satisfied, or clapped thine hand with a stranger, or if by any sign or
leaving of earnest, thou have bound thy self to one with whom thou have no
acquaintance, to see him contented for that which thy neighbor owes him, thou
have ensnared thy self by the words of thy mouth, thou have cast thy self
into danger, and made thy self a debtor to another by thy promise, thou art
caught by the speeches of thy mouth. Thou art taken and held by thy proffering
of thy self to be surety. Do this now my son and deliver thy self, inasmuch
as thou art come into the hand of thy neighbor: go to, submit thy self, and
be importunate with thy neighbor. First, request in humble manner the creditor
to be favorable unto thee, secondly urge the debtor to satisfy his own debt.
Grant no sleep to thine eyes, nor slumber to thine eye lids. Do this with all
speed and diligence. Deliver thy self as a Roe etc. After the example of the
beasts and fowls who labor by all means to get out of the nets and from the
pursuit which is made after them, endeavor thou to come out of the bonds of
suretiship. All suretiship is not here forbidden or simply to be condemned.
Epist. to Philema^ 19. verse.
For Paul offered him self to be surety unto Philemon for Onesimus. Only
then rash suretiship is prohibited, and when the danger thereof is incurred by
folly, a wise endeavoring to be free from this snare and the trouble thereof,
is advised. Thus the word of God teaches men not only to be wise unto
salvation, but unto their wealth, and unto their quietness.

6 Go to the Pismire o sluggard, behold her ways and be wise.

7 For she having no guide, taskemaster, nor ruler,

8 Prepares her meat in the summer, and gathers her food in the harvest.

9 How long will thou lie o sluggard, when will thou arise out of thy sleep?

10 By a few sleeps, a fevv slumbers, a little folding of the hands to or Rest.
sleep,

11 Thy poverty comes on thee in the mean season, as a speedy traveler,
and thy or Needinesse.
necessity as an armed man.

Slothfulness is condemned in these verses. See after 24.33. also 30.25.
Go to the Pismire o sluggard. O slothful man, if the law of God or the example
of good men move thee not to walk painfully in thy calling, go to the little
ant. Behold her ways and be wise. Consider her industry and forecast,
learning by her example to be diligent and provident. For she having no guide
taske-master, or ruler, prepares her meat in the summer and gathers her
food in the harvest. For albeit she has no schoolmasters to teach her, no
ouerseer to call her to account, finally no Magistrate to compel or punish her
as men have, yet by a certain instinct of nature, she provides and gets in
her victuals, whilst yet it is fair and warm weather, and whilst there is
much corn growing in the fields or spilt on the ground. How long will thou lie
o sluggard etc. O thou drowsy sluggard, will thou consume so much time in
sleeping and lying in thy bed? By a few sleeps etc. Whilst thou thus
multipliest thy naps and slumberings, thy poverty comes on thee, etc. want
ouertaketh thee, as a swift traveler does one who walks slowly, and need
meets with thee, as an armed man does one without a weapon, who is not able
to resist him.

12 The lawless person, the or The wicked man. See this phrase applied to
Antichrist 2 Thessalonians. 2.3.
man of sin, walks with a froward mouth,

13 He winketh with his eyes, he speaks with his feet, he teaches with his
fingers,

14 Wily imaginatio^s are within his heart, he practices mischief
continually, he stirs up contentions:

15 Therefore shall his destruction come speedily, This exposition is confirmed
by the signification of the Hebrewe word compounded of bell and gnol, and by the
use thereof in the scripture and in the Sanhedrim, where it is said, that they
are men of Belial who have shaken of the law of heaven from their neck.
he shall be suddenly broken without recovery.

A notorious wicked man is herin partly described and partly threatened. First
he is called a lawless person, because he will not be subject to the yoke, of
Gods law or man's law. Secondly he is termed the man of sin, because he even
has sold him self to do wickedly. Thirdly it is said of him, that he walks
with a froward mouth, for that with his tongue he blasphemeth God, and either
reprocheth his neighbor, or entiseth him to error or some wickedness. He
winketh with his eyes etc. He abuses all the members of his body, and namely
these three, his eyes, his feet, and his hands, to be signs of lewdness. Wyly
imaginations are within his heart, his mind is fraught with crafty devises, he
practices mischief continually, he from time to time works iniquity, even
as an artificer labors in his trade. He stirs up co^tentions, finally he
makes debate in all places. Therefore shall his destruction come speedily, etc.
for this cause the Lord will quickly overthrow him, and plague him most
grievously.

16 These six things does the Lord hate, yea these seven are abomination to
his soul.

17 The haughty eyes, a lying tongue, and the hands that shed innocent blood,

18 An heart that plotteth wicked devises, feet that be swift in running to
mischief,

19 A false witness that or Forgeth.
speaks lies, and him that raises up contentions among brethren.

We are taught in these verses, that albeit the Lord abhors all sorts of
sins, yet there are some particular vices which he after a special sort
detesteth, See an example touching pride in Herod, touching falsehood, in
Ananias and Sapphira, touching murder in Cain, touching craft in Iezabel,
touching mischieuousnesse in the Pharisees who compassed sea and land to make a
Proselite, touching false witness bearing in the accusers of Steven, and
touching makebates in Abimelech Judges 9.
and uses most severely to revenge. First of all, he most extremely hates the
haughty eyes, that is to say, pride together with the proud person, who
shows his haughtiness by outward signs, as namely by his looks. Secondly,
a lying tongue, that is to say, falsehood together with the liar, who exercises
his tongue in telling untruths. Thirdly, the hands that shed innocent blood,
that is to say, murder together with the murderer, who embrueth his hands in
guiltless blood. Fourthly, an heart that plotteth wicked devises, that is to
say, craftiness together with the wily fox, who be^deth his wits to devise
evil. Fifthly, feet that be swift in running to mischief, that is to say,
mischieuousnesse together with the harmful person, who abusing his feet,
walks and posteth with Satan his ringleader, from place to place to do some
villainy. Sixthly, the false witness who speaks lies, that is to say, the
bringing in of an untrue evidence, together with the forger of the same. Last
of all, him that raises up contentions among brethren, that is to say, the
sowing of strife together with the makebate, who sets at variance them who
by nature, religion, or any such bond are brethren.

20 My son observe thy fathers commandment, and forsake not thy mothers
instruction,

21 Bind the^ alvvay upon thine heart, [and] tie them about thy neck.

Solomon intending in this chapter again, to dissuade his son from
adultery, prefixeth in these words a preface containing his advise. My son
observe etc. my child lay up thy parents counsel as a most precious treasure,
and keep it safely as most costly jewels.

22 It shall lead thee when thou walk, it shall vvatch over thee when
thou sleep, it shall talk with thee when thou vvakest.

23 For the commandment is a or Lamp.
lantern, and doctrine a light, and reproves of instruction a way of life,

24 To preserve thee from the naughty woman, [and] from the flattery of the
strange vvomans tongue.

Herein Solomon shows the reasons of that his advise, which he did set down
in the two verses going before. It shall lead thee when thou walk, the
counsel of thy godly parents, or the word of God by them applied unto thee,
shall as a guide direct thee in thy calling, actions, and iourneys. It shall
watch over thee when thou sleep, it will be also as a watch man to preserve
thee from temptations, troubles and dangers in the night season. It shall talk
with thee when thou wakest. Finally it will likewise be as a familiar friend
unto thee, conferring with thee in the morning or in the day time, of the
mercies of God, of the promises of the word, and of spiritual matters. See
Psalm. 19.8. See Psalm. 119.105.
For the commandment is a lantern, for the law of the Lord is as a bright
lamp which in the night season shines in a dark chamber; inasmuch as it
enioyneth that which is good, and forbids that which is evil. And doctrine
a light, the instruction of the word is again as the light of the Sun, which
in the day time manifests the way which is to be gone. For in like manner the
doctrine of the scripture manifests truth and error. And reproves of
instruction a way of life. Finally, rebukes for sin, or the admonitions of Gods
word, are like the way or path which directly brings men to their iourneys
end, or to the place whither they would go. For as wholesome reproves pull us
from our vices so they do hold us in our duties. To preserve thee from the
naughty woman, the word of God I say is such, a sovereign preservative as
has bin spoken of, to keep thee from the adulteress, and from the flattery
of the strange woman's tongue, and to preserve thee from being seduced by the
entising speeches of the harlot.

25 Desire not her beauty in thine heart, neither let her catch thee with her
eye lids.

Now Solomon comes to warn his son, that he be not drawn to go astray by
any prouocations unto unchastity. Desire not her beauty in thine heart,
albeit she is fair, yet look not on her to lust after her. Neither let her
catch thee with her eye lids. Neither yet suffer her wanton or pleasant looks,
to be a net to entangle thee or a fire to inflame thee.

26 For by a whorish woman one is brought to a morsel of bread, and the
adulteress hunteth for life, which is precious.

Two great hurts arising unto men by following after strange women, are here
specified as sufficient reasons to dissuade every one from the foul sin of
adultery. One is, the loss of goods. For by a whorish woman one is brought to
a morsel of bread. Through whordome men come to extreme poverty. For the
harlots have one part of their substance, who haunt their company, baudes and
ruffians another part, officers before whom they are often conue^ted another
part: the rest consumes through a secret curse of the Lord, and thus at last
all comes to nothing. Another mischief is the loss of life it self. For
the adulteress hunteth for life, which is precious. The vile harlot not only
brings a man to beggerie, but to death and destruction, being in this respect
like unto hunters, who seek after the life of the poor beast. For the
adulteress seeks by all means to draw her companion to commit folly with
her, whereby it comes to pass, that he is laid open to her husbands rage,
the magistrates sword, and Gods wrath. Now, because she uses craft and deceit
to entangle her lovers, it is not only here said of her that she hunteth, but
in the book of the Preacher, Eccles. 7.28.
that her heart is as nets, and her hands as snares.

27 Can any take fire into his bosom, and his garments not be burnt?

28 Can any walk upon burning coals, and his feet not be burnt?

29 So is he that goes in to his neighbors wife: whosoever touches her,
shall not be unpunished.

Now, the wise king comes to amplify the former reasons, which here he does
by a most fit similitude. There is great likeness between the adulteress and
fire, both in the property of inflaming and consuming. Can any take fire in
his bosom etc. Even as it is impossible, that fire should not consume those
clothes or that body which it touches: so it can not be, but that the
adulterous woman, will undo or hurt at the least very sorely, both in outward
things and in his person, him, who commits folly with her. The consideration
hereof caused Job to say (from whom it is likely that Solomon took this
comparison) that the sin of adultery is such a fire, Job. 31.12.
as would (if he had committed it) have consumed him unto destruction, and
quite rooted out all his increase.

30 A threfe is not despised, who steals to satisfy his soul when he is
hungry,

31 But if he be taken, he repayeth seven fold, he makes recompense with any
substance of his house:

32 As for him who commits adultery with a woman, he is void of
understanding, he who shall do this, destroys his own soul.

33 He shall receive a blow and blame, and his reproach shall not be blotted out,

34 For the fierce rage of a man is in jealousy, and he shows no mercy in
the day of revenge,

35 He has no respect to any ransom, and he rests not, albeit thou
profferest many gifts.

The reasons before set down tending to dissuade from adultery, are in this
conclusion of the chapter enlarged by a comparison between the lesser sin
and the greater. A thief is not despised who steals to satisfy his soul.
Albeit it is a shame to steal, yet theft is not so foul a fault as to defile
another man's wife. True it is, he who did steal to preserve his life, was by
the law of God to be punished, for he was to make full restitution or to be
sold: Exodus 22.1.
but he was not to be put to death or to be noted with public infamy: at the
least when he had made restitution, all his discredit was to cease. As for him
who commiteth adultery with a woman etc. The case stands otherwise with the
adulterer, who considers not the greatness of his sin, or of Gods
judgment against it, and therefore is void of understanding, for he deserves
death and by the law of God he is to die. He shall receive a blow and blame,
and his reproach shall not be blotted out. He who commits adultery shall be
pursued by the whorish woman's husband unto death, and executed by the
magistrate, neither only shall he live and die like a strained and spotted
man, but even when he is dead, his infamy shall remain. For the fierce rage
of a man is in jealousy. Although effeminate persons can put up the wrong
offered them in the defiling of their wives: yet those who have any manhood in
them, will not, neither possibly can. Indeed private revenge is unlawful, but
the secret motions of nature will so work in this case, that men will pursue
those before the magistrates even unto the death, who have done them wrong in
their chiefest treasures, which are more dear unto them then life. How true
this is, may appear in the example of that Leuite of whom mention is made in
the book of Judges, who seeing his wife to have been shamefully abused, sent
the parts of her dead body to the tribes of Israel with this message, Iud.
19.30.
Consider the matter, consult, and give sentence. To conclude, the husband
which is inflamed with jealousy or rage for wrong offered unto him in his
wife; will never be reconciled nor rest, till he has been revenged of his
adversary the adulterer even unto the full. Now if man will not pardon the
offense this way done to him, how much more will God punish the transgression
of his law in this case, yea how much more severely will he revenge such
villainy?

THE VII. CHAPTER.
1 My son, observe my words, and lay up my precepts within thee.

2 Keep my precepts and thou shall live, and my doctrine, as the apple of
thine eye.

3 Bind them to thy fingers, write them on the table of thine heart.

4 Say unto wisdom, thou art my sister, and call prudence thy kinswoman.

5 That she may preserve thee from the strange woman, from the adulteress who
flattereth with her lips.

THis Chapter, wherein Solomon still entreats of adultery, consists of a
Preface contained in these verses, and a parable, which first is propounded,
the^ applied in the rest of the Chapter. After what manner we are to receive the
word of God, the wise king shows first in these speeches, My son observe my
words etc. If a man have jewels he will not cast them in every place, but he
will keep the^ as safe as he can, under lock and key. Such carefulnes would
the holy Ghost have us also use, in hiding and keeping good instructions in our
hearts. Keep my precepts and thou shall live, and my doctrine as the apple of
thine eye. The instruction of the word is the same to the soul, which the eye
is to the body. For as the body without the sight of the eyes, runs upon
many things that hurt it, and falls at every little stumbling block. So the
soul most fearfully rusheth into sins, if it want the light and direction
of the word. As therefore we are most careful to keep our eyes from hurt, so
should we be as charie and wary, to preserve the admonitions of the Scripture.
When Nahash the Ammonit offered to make a conenant of peace with the children of
Israel upon condition that they would pull out their right eyes, albeit they
were in great distress, yet would they not yield thereunto. In like manner
then, let us not for any thing in the world, part with the good instructions
which once we have received, yea let us sooner part from our eyes, the^ from
them. Let us rather (as is added) bind them to our fingers, and write them on
the tables of our hearts, let us have them (I say) at our fingers ends, never
suffering the^ to vanish or to perish. To this end every one is admonished in
the last place, to say unto wisdom thou art my sister etc. The love between
brethren sisters and kinsfolk is very natural, and again their familiarity
very great. They often feast one another as did Jobs children and they live
lovingly together as did Marie, Martha and Lazarus. In like sort then, we are
not to be strangers in the word, but we must be daily conversant therein,
loving it most dearly and following it most carefully. Thus if thou embracest
and entertainest prudence, then, she will preserve thee from the strange woman.
The sum of these words is, that for as much as no man by himself is able
enough to take heed of the harlot, and the word of God is an only sovereign
preservative against this evil: therefore it is with all diligence to be kept
and regarded.

6 For as I looked through the window of mine house out of a casement,

7 I saw among the fools, I marked among the lads, a witless youth,

8 Who passing through the street near unto her corner, went the way toward
her house,

9 In the twilight, at evening ride, in the^ blackness of the night, and the
darkness.

Now, the wise king begins to propounde his parable, describing in these
verses the foolish and wa^ton young man, which was drawn at last to commit
folly with the naughty woman. As I looked through the window of mine house.
They that will stand in their cha^bers or look out of the windows of their
houses, may hear and see many such things done and said, as here are spoken
of. But Solomon through the window of his mind did view and behold the customs
and behavior of wantons. I saw among the fools etc. He considered and found
by observation, that some rash and ungodly youth with whom God is angry for
former sins, falls through his own corruption, into the deep pit of the
mouth of the harlot at the last. Who passing through the street near unto her
corner. Here he would give us to understand, that the vain young man by going
the way where the harlot dwelt, was brought at last to commit whoredom. In the
twilight, at evening tide, in the blackness of the night and the darkness.
He considered what was done and said, from evening to morning, and all night
long, as also how the adulterer is wont to stray abroad when it is dark.

10 Now behold a woman came forth to meet him, in whorish attire, and subtle
in heart.

11 She is a babbler [and] stubburne, her feet abide not within her house,

12 Now she is without, now in the streets, and she lies in wait at every
corner.

The wise king having described the wanton youth, proceeds to paint out the
naughty woman in her colors, Now (says he) behold a woman came forth to
meet him etc. An immodest strumpet, light in her apparel, and cunning as well
to hide her craft as to deceive, spying the wanto^ youth out of her house,
took this occasion to tempt him unto folly. She is a babbler and stubburne,
etc. She has these three ill properties: first, she is not sparing of words,
but very talkatiue. Secondly, she is not of a meek spirit, but disobedient to
God and her husband, yea very stout. Last of all, she is not an house-doue, but
a gadder to and fro. Now she is without, now in the streets. She has this
property also, to lie in wayt for the chastity of men in every place, as
Thamar did when she sat in the high way, to tempt Judah unto whoredom.

13 Then she taking hold on him, kissed him, and hardening her face, said unto
him,

I have at home sacrifices of thankesgiuings, this day have I paid my vows:

15 For this cause I am come forth to meet thee, whilst earnestly I seek thy
face, in good time I find thee.

Those speeches of the harlot are here set down, wherein she entreats him to
sup with her. Then she taking hold on him kissed him. The whorish woman
saluteth the young man in a most bold and wanton manner, not with an holy but
with a filthy kiss. As Potiphars wife laid hold on Joseph to stay him, so she
lays hold on the young man, to draw him toward her house. I have at home
sacrifices of thanksgiving. Since I have very good fare at home (says she) I
pray thee come and sup with me. God commanded in his law, that when any offered
peace offerings for their prosperity, part of those sacrifices should be burnt,
part given to the Priest, part reserved to be eaten by the^ who brought the
same. Of this part then she speaks in this place. For this cause I am come
forth to meet thee, etc. Here is great good will pretended, but this love was
not true love in deed, because none can love his neighbor aright, but he which
loves God as he ought. The sense of these words is as if she should have said,
Because I bear thee most entire good will, I have not sent a messenger for
thee but come my self, and what good luck is this that I meet with thee?

16 I have decked my bedsted with couerlits, with sundry picture works, with
curtains of Egypt.

17 I have perfumed my bed, with mirrhe, aloes, and cynamome.

The harlot in these words entreats the young man having now supped with her,
to stay and lodge in her house all night. The reason which she brings to this
intent, is taken from the ornaments and furniture of her bedding: I have
princely lodging for thee (says she) therefore I pray thee refuse not to stay
with me all night.

Come thy way let us take our fill of love until the morning, let us delight
our selves with amorous joys.

19 For mine husband is not at home, he is gone a far journey,

20 He took in his hand a bag of money, at the day appointed he will return
home.

The naughty woman in these verses entiseth the young man, unto the very act
of adultery. To this end she brings two reasons, whereof the one is
pleasure, (a subtle bayte to take the young manby,) the other is security,
telling him that her husband is gone a far journey, which long absence of her
husband, is confirmed by two fignes thereof, the great bag of money which he
took with him, and the set day, wherein he appointed to return.

21 She drew him by or The store of her craft.
her great craft, by the flattery of her lips she prold him on.

22 He follows her forthwith: as an ox goes to the slaughter, Ce gneces el
musar, evil, I turn these words as Drusius does, who thus re^dreth them in
Latin Sicut stultus ad castigationem compedis. Pro. class. 1. lib. 4.
and as a fool to the correction of the fetters,

23 Until a sharp pointed weapon cleaves his liver: like as a bird hasteneth
to the snare, not knowing that it is set for her life.

The force or issue of the strange woman's oration, is declared in these
verses. First of all, herein she is resembled to a schoole-mistresse, which
leads and draws her nouices and scholars, to follow her and do what she
prescribes or persuades. Secondly, he (the young man I mean) is resembled,
first, to an ox which follows the drouer to the shambles, where he is knocked
on the head. For indeed in like manner the wanton youth follows the harlot to
her house, where the good man coming in at unawares reuengeth him. In the next
place, the young man is compared to a foolish malefactor, led to the prison,
there to be kept in chains until the day of execution, at which time the
executioner thrusts him through with some sharp pointed sword, That the
executioners in those times used with the sword to thrust through or kill
malefactors, may appear 1. Kings 2.25. and other places of Scripture.
to the end that his heart or liver being cleft or cut in sunder, his life may
quite be taken away. For after this manner it fares with the witless youth,
who either by the harlots husband or the public magistrate, is at last taken
and put to death. Last of all, the young man is likened to a bird, which flying
greedily toward the lure, is caught in the snare to her destruction. For he
committing folly with the naughty woman, is by one means or other plagued and
revenged.

24 Now therefore (o sons) listen unto me, and hearken to the words of my
mouth.

25 Let not thy soul go astray toward her ways, wander not aside toward her
paths,

26 For she has wounded and struck down many, and mighty men of all sorts
have been slain by her.

27 The ways to her house [are the wayes] to the grave, going down to the
secret vautes of death.

In this conclusion of the chapter, Solomon comes to apply the former parable.
First, he shows the remedies of adultery, one whereof is the hearing of the
word, another, the flying of the place where the harlot keeps. Secondly, he
declares the ruins which the adulteress has wrought in the world, whereof
one is, that she has slain innumerable people, as may appear in the
destruction of the old world: the plaguing of the Israelites for their
wantonness, and the wars between the Grecians and Trojans: another is, that
the mighty potentates of the world have also by her means been brought to
misery or death, as Sampson, David, this our Solomon with infinite other.

THE VIII. CHAPTER.
1 Does not wisdom cry, and understanding lift up her voice,

2 On the top of the high places, standing by the high way in the place of many
paths?

3 At the side of the gates, in the coming in of the city, in the entry of
the doors, they sing, saying,

THe excellency of wisdom and understanding is at large set down in this
chapter, which contains two points, the one the manner of their calling unto
men to come unto them, in these three verses (the exposition whereof is set
down in the interpretation of the twentieth and one and twentieth verses of the
first chapter of this book:) the other is, the sum or matter of their
proclamation or oration, in the rest of the chapter.

4 O men I call unto you, and I utter my voice unto the sons of men.

5 O ye simple ones understand wariness, and o ye fools be wise in heart.

In this beginning of the proclamation, the persons called by understanding or
wisdom (even by the personal wisdom of God Jesus Christ) are described. O
men I call to you, etc. I Jesus Christ call all estates of people to hear my
doctrine, both those who are of high degree, as namely on the one side, the
noble, the learned and the rich: and those that are of low degree, as the
poor, the simple and contemptible.

6 Harken, for I will utter excellent things, and the opening of my mouth shall
propound upright things.

7 For the roof of my mouth shall record truth, and wickedness is
abomination to my lips.

8 All the speeches of my mouth are just, there is nothing in them crooked or
awry.

9 All of them are easy to the prudent man, and plain to those who find
knowledge.

10 Receive mine instruction and not silver, and knowledge rather then most
fine gold.

11 For wisdom is better then pearls, and no delites can be matched with her.

The son of God declares herein the excellency of his doctrine, to the end
that every one should hearken thereunto. First he says, I will speak of
excellent things. The doctrine of the word is full of majesty and royalty.
For it does entreat, not of base arguments but of divine and rare points, as
of election, regeneration, faith, and the glory which is to come. Secondly,
the word of God is upright. For it is perfect, and able to make a man wise unto
salvation, in it is nothing wanting, nothing unsound. Thirdly, the word is also
true. For whatsoever God has said, See Psalm. 19.
it shall come to pass; whose word has been tried as the silver seven times
in the fire. Fourthly, the speeches of Christ are just, condemning all things
which are unlawful, and commanding all things which are lawful. Fifthly, the
word of God is plain and easy. For albeit the natural man perceives not the
things which belong to God, yet the spiritual man discerns all things.
Wherefore if the Gospel be hid from any, it is hid from those, whose eyes the
God of this world has blinded, that they cannot see the truth. Sixthly, the
word is also profitable, yea more profitable then gold. For what would it
profit a man to win the whole world, and to loose his soul eternally, which by
the word of God is saved? Last of all, the word of God is also most sweet and
pleasant. For it rejoices the heart and sweeteneth the soul like an heavenly
kind of honey. And who would not now rather hearken, to the royal, upright,
true, just, easy, profitable and pleasant speeches of wisdom: then the vile,
wicked, flattering, impure, subtle, and in very deed most bitter words of the
harlot?

12 I Wisdom dwell with or Wariness.
Prudence, and find forth the knowledge of politic devises.

13 The fear of the Lord, the hatred of evil: contemptuousnesse and
haughtiness, and the way of wickedness, and a mouth of perverseness, I hate.

14 Counsel is mine, and substance, prudence is mine, strength mine own.

Herein Jesus Christ proceeds to make him self further known, and more and
more amiable, by entreating a while of his own divine virtues. I Wisdom dwell
with Prudence or wariness. The Son of God Christ Jesus, is most circumspect,
witty, prudent and politic himself, and the worker of these graces in
mortal men. The fear of the Lord, the hatred of evil, etc. The son of God
is also most righteous. For he loves the good and detesteth the evil, Psalm.
45.
wherefore God even his God has anointed him with the oil of gladness above
his fellows. Counsel is mine and substance etc. The son of God is also a
cou^seller as Esaias calls him. For he is both of the privy counsel of his
father, and the aduiser of his church. Moreover he has strength in him being
the arm of God to conquer sin with hell and Satan, and is able to do
whatsoever he will Substance or the being of things is likewise his, for he
causes all creatures to be and subsist.

15 By me kings reign, and rulers decree justice.

16 By me Princes bear rule, and all the noble judges of the earth.

Now Christ Jesus speaks of his excellent and wonderful works. By mekings
reign etc. There is no power or potentate but they are from me the son of
God, yea by me also they discharge their functions, for I give all magistrates
and worthy persons their places and graces. The chief monarkes of the world,
come unto their scepters by the power and permission of the son of God. Law
giuers and counselors, by his direction and inspiration give advise and invent
politic laws. Inferior rulers and Lieutenants, keep their places,
countenance and authority by his assistance, whereunto also they rise, by his
secret disposing of matters. Finally judges and justices, who use to keep
courts and to sit on benches, do by him, from him and for him, pronounce
sentence, handle matters of state, execute laws, and finally determine all
cases.

17 I love them who love me, and they who seek me earnestly find me.

18 Riches and honor are with me, enduring wealth and righteousness.

19 My fruit is better then gold, yea then right pure gold, and my revenue
then most fine silver.

20 I walk through the way of justice, through the midst of the paths of
equity,

21 To cause my lovers to wherit substance, and I replenish their storehouses.

The heavenly wisdom of the Father Jesus Christ, affirms in these sentences,
that he bestows all happiness on his true worshippers. For first, he loves
them who love him, that is, he gives them his grace and favor, like a friend
talking, walking, dining, supping with them, and secretly chearing up their
hearts. Secondly, he bestows on them the riches of the mind as knowledge,
temperance, patience, and such like virtues, which remain in the faithful for
ever, and which are more precious then gold or any metal, more pleasant then
grapes or any fruits of the trees. Thirdly, he does impute his righteousness
unto the^, sanctifying them also by the holy spirit, which leads them in the
ways of the Lords commandments. Last of all, he will glorify them in the
world to come, causing them to enjoy the presence of God for evermore.

22 Jehovah possessed me in the beginning of his ways, before his works,
before all time.

23 Before the world was I anointed, before the beginning, before the first
beginning of the earth.

24 Whilst yet there were no depthes was I borne: vvhilest yet there were no
springs abounding with waters,

25 Whilst as yet the mountains were not settled, before the little hills, was
I borne.

26 As yet he had not made the earth, or the plains, no nor the groundworke,
[or] the dust of the world inhabited.

Herin the son of God entreats of his being and of his calling to the
office of a mediator. Iehoua possessed me in the beginning, etc. I the eternal
word of God, was with God the Father at the beginning, Ioh. 1.1.
being of one and the self same essence with him and the spirit. Before the
world was I anointed etc. I was appointed to the office of a mediator betwixt
God and man, Psalm. 110.11.
from all eternity. Whilst yet there were no depthes was I borne etc. Heb.
1.2.
I had my person from the person of my father, from all eternity, being
begotten before all creatures and to continue for ever.

27 When he made firm the heavens, I was there, when he set the round
compass on the outside of the deep,

28 When he strengthened the upper clouds above, when he made firm the
fountains of the deep:

29 When he prescribed his decree to the sea and the waters, that they pass
not his commandment: when he laid the foundation of the earth.

Now Jesus Christ declares, that he did work together with the Father in the
creating of the world at the beginning. For first, as concerning the heavens,
he made hard and fast as the adamant, those liquid waters, whereof they consist.
Secondly as touching the air, called here the compass on the deep, he so
framed the clouds, as that like bottles or glasses, they were and still are fit
vessels to contain the waters above. Thirdly, he formed the floods, springs
and seas, binding up the waters herein as it were in certain swaddling bands.
Last of all, he laid the earth at the beginning, as the ground work or
foundation of the whole world.

30 Moreover I am with him as a nourisher, and I am a daily delight, chearing up
before him at all times,

31 Chearing up his earth in the world inhabited, and my delites are with the
sons of men.

As before Christ Jesus has showed that he created all things, so now his
intent is to declare, that he governs the whole world, bearing it up by the
word of his power. Moreover I am with him as a nourisher. Furthermore, I the
son of God being God coessential with my father, together with him preserve
all things as a nurse, reaching out my hand to feed them and cherish them. And
I am a daily delight, chearing up before him at all times. In me also the father
is continually well pleased, Ioh. 5.6.
to who^ I am a singular recreation as it were. Chearing up his earth in the
world inhabited. Again, I am the joy of the earth, Psalm. 36.
which, together with all the creatures therein I refresh, causing my sun to
shine and my dewes to fall upon them. And my delites are with the sons of
men. Act. 14.17.
But (to conclude) I chiefly love and solace mortal wights, whose hearts I
fill with joy and gladness, to whom I give the use of all my creatures, whom I
endue with reason and other excellent gifts, finally whose redemption I am, and
on whom I bestow my word and spirit.

32 Now therefore o sons hearken unto me, for blessed are they that keep my
vvayes.

33 Hear instruction and be wise, and withdraw not your selves.

34 Blessed is the man who harkeneth unto me, attending diligently at my gates
from day to day, waiting at the posts of my doors.

35 For whosoever finds me finds life, and has obtained favor of the Lord,

36 But he who sins against me hurts his own soul, all they who hate me,
love death.

From teaching, Wisdom now comes to exhort. Now therefore o sons harken
unto me etc. The case thus standing as has been declared, give not ear to the
harlot, but obey me the personal wisdom of God. Blessed is the man who
harkeneth unto me. Happy is every one who hears the word of God and keeps
it, seeking also by prayer for the grace of God, and knocking continually at
the gate of his mercy. For whosoever finds me finds life. For this is
eternal life to know the true God and him whom he has sent Jesus Christ. All
they that hate me love death. They that reject me draw on them selves
damnation, wherefore, if any love not our Lord Jesus Christ, let him be anathema
maranatha.

THE IX. CHAPTER.
1 or Perfect wisdom.
Wisdom has built her house, she has hewn out her seven pillars,

2 She has killed her beasts, she has mingled her wine, she has furnished
her table,

3 And having sent forth her handmayds, she calls throughout the assemblies
and the high places of the city.

This chapter is a confirmation of the former doctrine, namely, that the son
of God Christ Jesus is to be loved and obeyed, and the harlot as most contrary
to him, to be abhorred and avoided. It presents two points unto our view,
one, the feast which the Lord calls us unto, the other the banquet of the
strumpet. Unto the former point appertain, first the works of Christ mentioned
in these verses: secondly his words set down in those which follow. One work
of his is, that he has built an house and hewn out his seven pillars. 1. Tim.
3.16.
The meaning hereof is, that the son of God Christ Jesus, has a Church in
this world so orderly and firmly built, Esa. 55.5.
that the gates of hell shall not prevail against it. Another work of his is,
That he has killed his beasts, mingled his wine, and furnished his table. The
meaning hereof is, that Jesus Christ has prepared spiritual dainties for the
souls of men, Mat. 22.1.^.
to feed them even unto eternal life. A third work of his is, that he has
sent forth his handmaydes etc. The meaning is, that the son of God has
caused the Gospel to be preached by his Prophets, Apostles, and other
messengers, so that his servants have gone forth to call those that were
bidden, unto the banquet.

4 Whosoever is foolish, let him turn in hither, whosoever is void of
understanding, to him she says,

5 Come eat of my meat, and drink of my wine which I have mixed.

6 Oye simple ones forsake your error and live, and walk in the way of
understanding.

Herein, those words are set down, which the son of God speaks to the guests
invited to his banquet. Whosoever is foolish, etc. The meaning is, that the son
of God offreth his grace to repentant Publicans and sinners, and to all sorts
of ignorant and ungodly people, upon condition that they believe, and forsake
their impieties and iniquities.

7 He which instructs a scorner, gets him self reproach, and he which
reproves a wicked man, [purchaseth] him self a blot.

8 Rebuke not a scorner, least he hate thee, reprove a wise man, and he will
love thee.

9 Give [instruction] to the wise man and he will become the more wise, cause
the righteous man to understand, and he will increase in learning.

10 The fear of God is the beginning of wisdom, and the knowledge of holy
things, of understanding.

11 For by me thy days shall be multiplied, and years of life heaped upon
thee.

12 If thou be wise, thou shall be wise for thy self, but if thou be a
scorner, thou alone shall suffer.

These speeches wisdom or the son of God, directs as it may seem to the
messengers of the Gospel. First, he tells the^, what persons are not be
reproved. He which instructs a scorner, gets him self reproach. The
meaning is, that the Lord would not have pearls cast before swine or holy
things given unto dogs. Mat. 6.7.
For indeed such as despise God and all godliness, and are obstinate in their
sins, will do nothing but rail or hurt him, who tells the^ of their
faults. Give instruction to the wise man, and he will become the more wise.
Here in the second place, he declares who are to be taught and rebuked, to
wit, the wise who are sound in judgment, and the righteous, who walk in some
obedience to the word. The reason why these persons are to be instructed is,
for that such will by this means wax the wiser as Apollos did by the direction
of Aquila and Priscilia, and for that they will also bear good will toward the
rebuker, as David did toward Abigail, after that she dissuaded him from
revenging him self on Naball. Now the points wherein the wise and the just are
to be instructed in be, the fear of God, which is the beginning of wisdom,
and the knowledge of holy things, of understanding. What the fear of God is,
has been showed in the exposition of the seventh verse of the first Chapter of
this book. What the knowledge of God or of holy things is, has been declared
in the exposition of the fifth verse of the second Chapter hereof. For by me thy
days shall be multiplied. The son of God in these words promises eternal
life to those who know his father and him. If thou be wise, thou shall be wise
for thy self, but if thou be a scorner, thou alone shall suffer. In this
conclusion of his speech the son of God threateneth the disobedient with
plagues and eternal condemnation. The meaning of this saying is, that when the
godly have done all that they can, they advantage not God, (yea still they are
to him unprofitable servants) but only they benefit them selves, for the Lord
will bless those that walk uprightly. On the contrary side, they that sin,
cannot possible hurt God, who is out of their reach, but as malefactors them
selves carry their crosses at the time of execution, so the wicked person shall
him self alone bear his own indgement. The consideration hereof caused Elihu
to say unto Job speaking of God, if thou sinnest, what do thou to him? or if
thy transgressio^s be many, Job. 35.6.7.
what can thou do unto him? if thou art just, what give thou to him? or
what does he receive at thy hands?

13 The foolish woman is full of babbling, the simple woman even knows nothing,

14 And yet sits at the door of her house, on a seat in the high places of
the city,

15 To turn aside passengers, who even go on straight in their paths.

Now the wise king offreth to our consideration the works of the harlot, and
her feast. First of all, this enchaunting and vain woman, sits at the door
of her house. The adulteress abiding near to the place where she keeps,
watches all oportunities of getting mates unto her, on a seat in the high
places of the city. She also shamelesly and openly shows her self, and
entiseth companions in public assemblies: to turn aside passengers, who
euengo on straight in their path. This she does, not only to Ieade away
captive the ungodly, but to entangle through the wanton lusts of the flesh,
such as had in deed escaped from those, who have their conversation in error or
going astray. 2. Pet. 2.


16 And whosoever is foolish, let him turn in hither, and whosoever is void of
understanding to him she says,

17 Stolen waters are sweet, and hidden bread is pleasant.

The words of the strange woman, and in her of all seducers are herein set
down. As wisdom invited the foolish and ignorant to her house, so does she
the same persons unto hers. This sort of people she calls by name as it were,
because unrighteous and unstable persons not well grounded in the truth easily
yield unto the baytes of seducers. To them she promises water and bread, even
those things which belong to the nourishment of men, as if that she also would
preserve her guests in life. But it is very diligently to be observed, that
her waters are stolen waters and hidden bread, even delitesome pleasures and
profits, howbeit unlawful and forbidden.

18 But he knows not, that those who are void of life are there, and that her
guests are in the valleys of the grave.

Well, some wanton or fool goes into this houswifes house, but this is hid
from him, that her followers days are cut off, and that her lovers are in the
dark dungeons of death and destruction.

THE X. CHAPTER.
1 The Proverbs of Solomon. A wise son rejoices his father, but a foolish son
is an heaviness to his mother.

CHildren are admonished in this verse, to honor their parents. He only is a
wise son, who knows and fears God. Such a child brings comfort unto his
godly father, by the virtues which are in him, the good report which goes of
him, and the blessing of God on him. On the contrary side, he is a foolish
son, who is an heretic or wicked liver. Such a child brings sorrow to both
his parents, but chiefly to his mother, who loves him most tenderly, and being
the weaker vessel, can not but grieve extremely.

2 The treasures of wickedness profit nothing, but righteousness delivers
from death.

Noah, Lot and Baruch may be examples.
Righteousness is commended in this verse. All goods ill gotten, or wrongfully
kept from the lawful owners, are treasures of wickedness. Such wealth be it
never so great, has no force, to turn away Gods judgment, or to redeem a
man's life in the day of trouble. But just and plain dealing so pleases the
Lord, as that it may be said, that righteousness delivers from death,
because the just are preserved by the Lord from common plagues in this life,
and from eternal destruction.

3 God suffers not the soul of the righteous to hunger, but he scatters
the substance of the wicked.

As righteousness delivers from death, so from famine. See examples in the
Israelits and (...) Elias.
The godly in this world ordinarily want no necessaries. In the time of common
dearth, the Lord provides for them extraordinarily. The lions then hunger (as
it is in the Psalm) but they who fear God want nothing On the contrary side,
the goods of the wicked being consumed by some casualtie or Gods curse, it
falls out that they very often suffer famine.

4 He which deals with a deceiptful hand, shall become poor, but the hand of
the diligent makes rich.

Although God will not suffer the just to hunger, yet they must not be idle or
steal, but labor for their living. Crafty artificers and thieves or robbers,
imagine that the high way to be rich, is to cosen, or to filch and purloyne.
But goods ill gotten prosper not, and so not only idle persons but deceiptfull
people become poor. On the contrary side, they that plye, their calling,
following the same early and late with an earnest mind, through Gods blessing
on their labors, not only attain so much wealth as is sufficient to
maintain them, but abundance of riches, so that they have wherewith to relieve
other largely, who stand in need.

5 He which gathers in summer, is a son of understanding, [but] he which
sleeps in harvest, is a son of confusion.

As it is meet that every one be painful in his calling, so all are to take
and observe the fittest oportunities of procuring their own welfare. He is
said to gather in summer, who redeemeth the time, So did Joseph.
and makes his best advantage of the season. He sleeps in harvest, who
fondly lets slip the most convenient means or occasion of doing or
receiving good unto him self or his.

6 Blessings are on the head of the righteous, but violence covers the mouth
of the wicked.

Such righteous men as before have been spoken of, shall be endued by the Lord
not with one benefit alone but with manifold blessings. Neither will the Lord
in a sparing measure make them partakers of his benefits, but he will power as
it were from heaven whole showers thereof upon their heads.: so that both their
bodies and souls shall be full of them. On the contrary side, violent
punishments, as strangling, drowning, burning, slaying, shall in such sort rise
up out of wicked men's misdeeds, as that they shall choke them, and stop their
breath.

7 The memory of the just man shall be blessed, but the name of the wicked
shall rot.

Among other blessings wherewith the Lord crowns the righteous, a good name
is one of the chiefest. Ordinarily so it is, that the remembrance of the godly
whether absent or dead, is very sweet and like a precious ointme^t. But this
is that point which here the holy Ghost would have us especially to observe,
that the praise of the righteous increases with the time, and endures from
generation to generation. On the contrary side, all the present fame and glory
of the wicked, shall decay in time, and be turned into infamy. For their
iniquity being detected, the very mention of them shall stink as a putrified
thing.

8 He who is of a wise heart, will receive instruction, but he who is foolish
in his lips, shall be beaten.

He is of a wise heart, who provides well for his welfare, and warily shunneth
dangers and troubles. Such a one will receive instruction, that is to say,
harken unto and obey good counsel, as a means of his safety and prosperity.
On the contrary side, he is foolish in his lips who desires rather to speak
him self then to hear other, or who abuses his tongue in any sort. This fool
shall be beaten, that is to say, scourged with manifold troubles and calamities.

9 He who walks or In uprightness.
uprightly, walks securely, but he which peruerteth his vvayes, shall be
made an example.

The innocent person who commits no evil, and the weldoer who practices
that which is good, fears no danger, neither shall meet with any plague. On
the contrary side, whosoever follows wicked ways, as theft, adultery,
murder, or such like vices, not only is in continual fear of trouble, but in
this world or the world to come shall (without repentance) be made an open
spectacle of vengeance. See the root hereof in the six and twentieth chapter
of Leuiticus.

10 He who winketh with the eye, shall have sorrow, and he who is foolish in his
lips shall be beaten.

Two sorts of wicked people who pervert their ways are herein threatened. The
one of them is dissemblers, noted out by this property of winking with the
eye. For as before has bin affirmed in the sixth chapter of this book, the
lawless person, the wicked man walks with a froward mouth, he winketh with
his eye, etc. wherefore his calamity shall come quickly. The other sort of
ungodly people are those, who are foolish in their lips, who have been spoken
of in the exposition of the 8. verse of this chapter.

11 A spring of life [besprinkleth] the mouth of the just man, but violence
covers the mouth of the wicked.

A fountain of waters is a comfortable thing, and was a rare jewel among the
Jews. Whereas then it is said that a spring of life or living waters
besprinkleth the mouth of the righteous, the meaning is, that continual plenty
of good things shall befall them from the Lord, so that they shall not want
any thing meet for them, or perish by thirst. What is meant by violence
covering the mouth of the wicked, has been showed in the exposition of the
sixth verse of this chapter.

12 Hatred raises up contentions, but love covers or A multitude of sins.
all offenses.

Ill will obiecting every fault be it never so secret, and provoking the party
maligned unto wrath, by this means stirs up brawling and fighting. On the
contrary side, brotherly charity, forgiving injuries, concealing secret
faults, and reproving misdemeanors in a friendly sort; by these means so
covers offenses of all kinds, that both he lays many sins aside who has
offended, James 5.20.
and secret transgressions break not our to the knowledge of other, nor are
blazed abroad to the dishonor of God, the offense of the weak, and the undoing
oftentimes of the offender.

13 Wisdom is found in the lips of the prudent man, but a rod on the body of
the fool.

14 The wise lay up knowledge, but or Brus^ug.
destruction is near to the mouth of the fool.

In the former of these verses is showed, that gracious speeches do usually
flow out of the mouth of him who is discreet, so that his glory or ornament
as it were, is to be found on his lips, upon which eloquence, or a gift of
speaking wisely, sits. In the later part of this former verse is also
declared, that on the contrary side, the shame and punishment of the wicked is
on their backs or bodies, inasmuch as they are never free from strokes or
wounds, inflicted on them by the Lord or by men, for their evil actions or
fond speeches. In the fourteenth verse is taught, that as they who are
discreet, in silence treasure up knowledge to them selves, so fools by babbling
and unadvised speeches, treasure up and procure many troubles and calamities
unto themselves.

15 The substance of the rich man, is his defenced city, the poverty of the
poor is their breaking.

Herein the commodity of riches on the one side, and the discommoditie of
poverty on the other, is declared. The rich man's substance is his defenced
city. The wealth of the rich man preserves him from many evils, and again
ministers unto him many good things. The poverty of the poor is their
breaking. On the contrary side, penury like a mighty hammer breaks both the
hearts and bodies of poor people, who by reason of want, can not resist the
force of their adversaries, and are hindered from attaining to learning and
offices.

16 The labor of the just man is unto life, the revenue of the wicked is unto
sin.

The use and abuse of riches, herein is touched. The just man is said to get
his goods unto life, because the drift of his labor is, that he and his family
may have whereof to live. On the contrary side, it is affirmed, that the
revenue of the wicked is unto sin, James 43.
because he earneth goods to spend them upon his lusts or some ill uses.

17 He that keeps instruction, is in the way to life, but he who forsakes
correction goes astray.

The fruits of obedience and of disobedience are herein showed. He that keeps
instruction is in the way to life. He that obeys admonitio^s, walks in the
high way to eternal life. But he who forsakes correction goes astray. On the
contrary side, he that disobeyeth or contemns reproves or chastisements,
wandering from the paths of prosperity, runs headlong into destruction.

18 He that is [a man] of deceiptfull lips, hides hatred, and he that is a
fool utters a reproach.

Secret dissembling and open reuiling are herein condemned. He that is a man of
deceiptfull lips, hides hatred, he that speaks fair cloketh malice. And he
that is a fool, utters a reproach, he that is rash or unadvised, breaks out
into open railing.

19 In many words sin cannot be wanting, but he that refraineth his lips is
wise.

Multitude of words or babbling is herein showed to be the wel-spring of many
vices. In many words sin can not be wanting, he that talks much offends
much, inasmuch as among a multitude of words, he must needs lightly utter some
superfluous, false, or offensive. But he that refraineth his lips is wise. He
that keeps silence or speaks sparingly, is prudent. It is no fault to utter
many speeches which do edify, but to have a talkatiue tongue, or to prattle
without ceasing, is not only a sin of it self, but a fountain of many
sins.

20 The tongue of the just man, is as fined silver, [but] the heart of the
wicked is little worth.

21 The lips of the righteous man do feed many, but fools dye for want of
wisdom.

In the former of these verses, the speech of the godly is affirmed to be
precious and excellent. The tongue of the just man is as fined silver. As the
fined silver is pure from dross, so the talk of the godly is pure and
precious, and not only void of vanity, swearing, babbling, or such vices, but
full of excellent instructions and admonitions. But the heart of the wicked is
little worth. As for the mind of the wicked man, it is like unto dross rather
then unto silver. Hence it is that out of the ill treasure of his heart he
brings forth ill things. In the later of these two sentences, the profit
which arises to many by the speeches of some one good man is declared. The
lips of the righteous man do feed many, the doctrines of godly Christians and
teachers, nourish the souls of many people unto eternal life. But fools die
for want of wisdom. As for the ungodly, they perish and die the second death
of the soul, through neglect or contempt of good instructions.

22 The blessing of the Lord makeeh rich, and it does ad no sorrow with it.

The favor of the Lord is here showed not only to be the cause of all
prosperity, but to give wealth without woe and store without sore. The blessing
of the Lord makes rich. The favor of God ministers necessaries unto the
godly, who by the Lords good success on their labors come to goods, without
vexatio^ of mind or great toil of body.

23 It is as a pastime to a fool to commit wickedness, but wisdom [is the
delite] of a prudent man.

In this verse is observed, that as the ungodly rejoice in doing of evil, so
the godly with joy follow after that which is good. It is as a pastime to a
fool to commit wickedness. The practicing of iniquity, (as of theft,
drunkenness or adultery) is as it were the game of the wicked man. But
wisdom is the delight of the prudent person. On the contrary side, learning or
godliness is as it were the recreation of the well disposed person.

24 That which the wicked ma^feareth shall come upon him, but God will grant
the desire of the righteous.

That which the wicked man fears shall come upon him, the evil which the
conscience of the evil doer threatens him withal, whether it be shame, Psalm.
^45.19.
death or damnation, or any plague whatsoever, shall surely befall him. But
God will grant the desire of the righteous. On the contrary side, God will give
the just in time convenient, those good things which their hearts wish or put
them in hope of.

25 As the whirlewind passes, so is the wicked no more, but the just man is as
an everlasting foundation.

As the whirlwind quickly vanishes, Psalm. 37.20. item 35.
so the ungodly man shall quickly be destroyed, but he who is upright shall
remain firm on earth or in heaven, being like to mount Sion which cannot be
removed.

26 As vinegar is to the teeth, and as smoke to the eyes, so is the slothful
person to the^ that send him.

As vinegar makes the teeth to ache, or as smoke causes the eyes to smart: so
the negligent messenger or workman fretteth and vexes his masters mind.

27 The fear of the Lord increases the days, but the years of the wicked are
cut short.

The reverence of God is a means whereby men attain to live long in this
world, or for ever hereafter. On the contrary side, wickedness either
brings men to untimely death in this world, or by death cutteth them of from
the years of immortality in the life to come.

28 The hope of the righteous shall be gladness, but the expectation of the
wicked does perish.

The just receiving at the last the thing which they have hoped for, conceive
great joy in this respect, that they have not hoped in vain. On the contrary
side, the wicked not receiving the thing which they looked for, do fret within
them selves, and rage against the Lord.

29 The way of the Lord is strength to the upright man, but a breaking in
pieces to the workers of iniquity.

The Lord in the course of his providence keeps and encourages the just, but
plagueth and crosses the wicked.

30 The just man shall never be removed, but the wicked shall not dwell on the
earth.

The righteous shall continue for ever in heaven, the ungodly shall quickly be
rooted out of the earth.

31 The mouth of the just is fruitful in wisdom, but the tongue of the froward
shall be cut out.

The tongue of the godly man plentifully utters good instructions, as a good
tree brings forth good fruits, but the evil tongue shall be hewn down by
the axe of Gods judgments.

32 The righteous man's lips shall find favor, but the mouth of the wicked the
reward of frowardness.

He that speaks gracious words shall be blessed, Psalm. 52.7.
but he that abuses his tongue shall be plagued.

THE XI. CHAPTER.
1 False balances are an abomination to the Lord, but an upright weight is
acceptable to him.

THis sentence is a stream flowing out of the statute of the Lord, which is
set down in the nineteenth chapter of Leuiticus, and the five and thirtith
verse. There says the Lord, thou shall practice no unrighteousness in any
office, in measures, or in weight, etc. Not only deceit it self, but the
deceiptful scales as the instruments of craft, are abomination to the Lord.
Now surely not without just cause does the Lord abhor such as use false
balances. For first, they abuse the measures of justice, and secondly hereby
they most hurt the pore. On the contrary side, an upright weight does so please
the Lord, as that he will prosper those who use faithful dealing in their
trades or bargains.

2 When pride comes contempt comes also, but with the lowly is wisdom.

Herein is showed, that as deceit is punished by the Lord, so pride shall be
revenged. When pride comes etc. When stateliness goes before, infamy
follows after. For what say people of an arrogant person, but behold he is a
stately fool. But with the lowly is wisdom. With the modest is such
prudence, as not only is worthy of honor, but aduaunceth them to dignity and
preferment.

3 The uprightness of the just guides the^, but the unrighteousness of
transgressors shall destroy them.

Righteous dealing causes men to have good success, but wickedness
overthrows them in such sort, as that they are as cities broken down and
brought to desolation.

4 Riches profit not in the day of wrath, but righteousness delivers from
death.

Goods even justly gotten are not able to save a man in the time of
destruction, See before 10.2. an example. 1. Tsoph. 18.
but then the righteous are preserved by the Lord.

5 The righteousness of the just man directs his way, but he which is
wicked, falls in his wickedness.

Balaam loving the wages of unrighteousness may be an example.
A good cause has good success, but an ill enterprise or action, has many
crosses, and brings great troubles on a man.

6 The righteousness of the just delivers them, but the deceiptful are
caught in their own mischief.

They that are innocent being in trouble, are freed from it by the providence
of God favoring and clearing their upright dealing. Mardochai and Haman may be
examples.
The crafty being in great power or prosperity, through the just judgment of
God are brought into trouble for their subtlety and iniquity.

7 When the wicked man dies, his expectation perishes, the hope of his
strength perishes.

So long as the ungodly live in prosperity, Job. 8.14.15.
they put their trust in their riches or friends, persuading the^ selves that
if any danger come, they shall be delivered by these means. Psalm. 49.
But at the time of death or in extreme adversity, they find that all the
things wherein they did put affiance, can stand them in no stead, and that all
their wealth and glory does forsake them. To conclude, then the sinner
perceives, that all the hope he had of the mercy of Christ, vanishes and is
turned into despair.

8 The just man is delivered out of trouble, See the 21.18. of this book. An
example Dan. 6.25.
and the wicked man comes in his stead.

O behold also this work of Gods providence, or point of daily experience,
that the ungodly man succeeds the just man in his troubles. The righteous are
in adversity, but by the help of God they wade out of it, and their
adversaries or some malefactors come into it through his just judgment.

9 The hypocrite corrupts his neighbor with his mouth, but the just are
preserved by knowledge.

One wicked man seduceth another, 2. Tim. 2.13. 2 Thessalonians. 2.
deceiving and being deceived. But as concerning Gods children, they through
the wisdom of the word as by a buckler, resist and repel those who tempt
them to any error or sin.

10 For the prosperity of the just, the city rejoices, and when the wicked
are destroyed, there is singing.

11 By the blessing of the upright, the city is exalted, by the mouth of the
wicked it is destroyed.

When either the godly speed well and are advanced, or the wicked are disgraced
and put to death, See examples 1. Sam. 18.6, Hest. 8.16.
the well disposed multitude is not only inwardly glad, but outwardly
signifies this internal joy by testimonies of mirth. Great cause there is why
cities in these cases should thus be affected and carry them selves. For the
societies of men are greatly benefited, by the doctrines, counsels and prayers
of the good, which are their blessings: as on the contrary side, kingdoms are
brought to ruin by the mischievous speeches of the wicked.

12 He who is void of understanding, reprocheth his neighbor, but he who is
prudent, will keep silence.

The harebraind man, uses to break out into opprobrious speeches, wherewith
he loadeth sometimes his enemy sometimes his very friend. But he who is
prudent, See examples in Shimei and David.
is so far off from railing, or from giving of taunt for taunt, that he
behaueth him self as a deaf man, neither will seem to hear any of his
slanders or speeches by whom he is reviled.

13 He who walks as a talebearer, reuealeth a secret, but he which is of a
faithful mind or Conereth.
concealeth a matter.

Talkers and walkers from place to place, disclose both the secret intents and
faults of their friends. These packe-horses of Satan are in all places to be
found, but God in his law gives an express commandment to his worshippers
to take heed of this vice, Leuit. 19.16.
saying, Thou shall not walk among thy people with tale carrying. But he which
is of a faithful mind, concealeth a matter. Such a one, as is a friend not in
shows only but in truth, and has power over his affections, concealeth those
faults, purposes, words and deeds of his friends, which with a good conscience
may be kept close.

14 Where prudent counsels are not, the people run to decay, but in the
multitude of counselors, there is health.

See an example in Reheboans.
Without sound advise a common wealth perishes, but by the politic counsel of
many wise governors, it florisheth. For where sound advise out of the word of
God is not given, how can the people but be greatly hurt both in their bodies
and souls, and contrariwise? Now if good counsel be not obeyed, it is all one
as if it were never given.

15 He who becomes surety for a stranger, shall wholly be broken, but he who
hates those who clap hands is secure.

The rash person who stands bound to pay another debt, smarteth thoroughly
for his folly, but he is not only without trouble but without fear, who
misliketh such as use to enter vndaduisedly into suretiship.

16 A gracious woman obtains honor, and strong men obtain riches.

See examples in Hester and Abigail.
A woman endued with virtue, especially if also she have a comely personage, is
in her standing place greatly reverenced and esteemed. On the other side, the
mighty men who are strong in body, get store of wealth by their diligent
labor.

17 The liberal person does good to himself, but he who is cruel, troubles
his own flesh.

Herein the holy Ghost entreats of alms or liberality. Psalm. 112. after 24
25.
First whereas it is said, that a liberal man does good unto himself, the
meaning is, that he who releeueth other, shall him self in his weldoing find a
blessing from the Lord, who will increase his store, or otherwise do him good.
So much this phrase signifies, both here and Eccles. 12.4.
Secondly, whereas it is added, that he who is cruel, troubles his own
flesh, the sense is, that the niggard and the cruel oppressor of the poor, by
this means hurt them selves, drawing the vengeance of God on their own pates.

18 The wicked man gets him self a deceiptfull reward, but he who sows
righteousness, has a sure recompense.

Every wicked man who sows unto the flesh, Gal. 6.7.8. Ioh. 5.
shall of the flesh reap corruption, but the godly person, who sows unto the
spirit, shall of the spirit reap life everlasting.

19 The righteous man sows to life, but he who follows wickedness, unto
his own destruction.

He who walking with a sincere heart, is not weary of well doing, shall
inherit Gods kingdom, as contrariwise, the wicked shall find the wages of
sin to be death.

20 The froward in heart are abhominatio^ to the Lord, but the upright in way
are acceptable to him.

God hates such as suffer sin to reign in them, Romans 8.1.
but he favors those, who walk not after the flesh but after the spirit.

21 Though hand join in hand the wicked man shall not escape scotfree, but the
seed of the righteous delivers it self.

Albeit the euildoer has often many friends which seek to bring him out of
trouble when he is therein, The Israelites, may be an example.
yet in spite of the pie (as we say) he is oftentimes condemned or punished,
neither can the whole country save him, as we speak. On the contrary side, the
innocent, not indeed without the wonderful power of God, but without the help
of any mortal man, escape out of danger and affliction, even maugre the heads
of most mighty adversaries.

22 As a jewel of gold in a swines snout, so is a fair woman or Void of
reason.
which lacks discretion.

In this comparison, beauty is compared to a ring or ouch of gold in regard of
the excellency and good use thereof. The woman void of discretion, is
resembled to a sow, which is a most brutish, filthy and abominable creature,
yet not so bad as the wanton or wicked woman, who walloweth in the mire of
unchastity, riot, scolding, pride, or such other vices. Is there any thing
more uncomely or more loathsome to behold, then that such beasts should
shamefully abuse the good graces and gifts of God, as beauty, eloquence, and
knowledge of the word? But that which is set down in this true proverb, has
befallen the^, they return as dogs to their vomit, 2. Pet. 2.22. Romans 2.9.
or as swine to their wallowing in the mire.

23 The desire of the just [findeth] good, the hope of the wicked, indignation.

The godly have at the last that prosperity which they wished, but the
ungodly, contrary to their expectation, meet with troubles and Gods vengeance.

24 Some there are who scattering are the more increased, and some who sparing
otherwise then is meet, come to poverty.

25 The liberal mind shall wax fat, and he which gives bountifully, shall
power forth.

Examples hereof we have in the widow of Sarepta Abraham and Job.
In the former of these two verses is showed, that the stock of the frank
giver is increased by giving, as on the contrary side, the substance of the
niggard waxes less and less by sparing. For in deed God blesses the
liberal, enriching them both with outward benefits and the gifts of his
spirit, but he curses and crosses the covetous. In the five and twentieth
verse is declared, that the liberal person shall not only wax richer but be
exceedingly wealthy, so that he shall become fat in goods and possessions, yea
that the more he gives, the more he shall be able to give, being herein like
unto the wels, which the more they are drawn, the more they abound with water.
For he gives and lends all day long, Psalm. 37.26.
and his seed is full of blessings.

26 The people will curse him who keeps in his wheat, but a blessing shall
be on his head who sells it.

See an example Nehem. 5.2.3.
It is an execrable thing to withhold the selling of provision to this end, that
men may make a private commodity thereof, not caring though they undo the
common wealth. On the contrary side, it is a blessed thing to set corn or
other provision to sale in the time of dearth, and to sell it at a reasonable
rate. For by this means the poor people are fed and preserved alive, who
therefore wish all good to him, who has brought forth necessaries in time of
extreme want and famine.

27 He who earnestly follows after that which is good, gets good will, but
him, who seeks after evil, it shall befall.

Such a one as even sets him self to do good to the people among whom he
lives, in their goods, bodies, or souls: shall win and have their hearts
and find Gods favor. Again, he who bends him self to annoy his neighbors
or any, shall meet with their hatred or some evil.

28 He which trusts in his riches shall fall, but the just shall flourish as a
branch.

The man who puts confidence in his wealth, Psalm. 52.9. Psalm. 92.13.
shall fall from prosperity, and wither as the naughty fruit or leaf which
falls from the tree. On the other side, he who walking uprightly trusts in
the Lord, shall be in a flourishing estate.

29 He which troubles his own house shall inherit the wind, and the fool
shall be servant to the wise in heart.

The prodigal fool and improuident householder, who does not rightly govern
his family or dispose his household affairs, but spends his goods
prodigally, See an example in the prodigal son.
or suffers them to wast and consume for want of good husbandry: shall at
last want money, food, and all necessaries, yea be constrained to sell him
self to be a drudge to some rich man or other, who has been a wiser householder
then he. For commonly unthrifts are brought to such extremities, that either
they take up money at interest, or beg, or go unbidden to other men's tables,
or offer their service for small wages.

30 The fruit of the righteous man [is the frute] of a tree of life, and he who
is wise, wins souls.

The very earthly treasures which the just man provides for him self and his
against a dear year, not only tend unto the nourishing of his own body and
others, but are very good and precious, so that they may fitly be called fruits
of a tree of life. But if the provision which he makes for the body be of
such use and excellency, how comfortable and profitable are his doctrines and
admonitions, and how much more worthily may they be called fruits of a tree of
life indeed? Now furthermore, it is a point of singular wisdom in a man, so to
govern his affairs, that he be not a slave as the fool before spoken of, See
an example in Abraham.
but rather a possessor as it were of souls and servants. Moreover, by good
means to win also the souls and hearts of men unto love and good liking, it
is yet an higher point of policy. But (to conclude) the top as it were of all
wisdom consists herein, Dan. 12.3. Luc. 1.17. Luc. 5.10. James 5.20.
by spiritual doctrines or admonitions, to win and convert the hearts and
souls of men to God, and to turn or draw them unto the obedience of his word.

31 Behold the righteous man shall be recompensed on the earth, how much more
the wicked man and the sinner?

If God spares not sin in his own children, or those who walk in the
obedience of the spirit, but even corrects them sharply for their offenses,
how much more will he punish it in those, who are profane or notorious
offenders, either in this world or the world to come? Behold, behold the truth
hereof, in Job, David, Moses, Zachary, with infinite other such examples in
the Scripture, 1. Pet. 4.17.18.
yea behold it in daily experience, seeing affliction begins at the house of
God, but where then shall the wicked and ungodly appear?

THE XII. CHAPTER.
1 He who loves instruction, loves knowledge, but he that hates correction,
is brutish.

HEre is showed, that adversity is the best University as it were. Heb. 12.10.
He who loves instruction, that person who joyfully receives admonitions and
afflictions and profits thereby, loves knowledge, waxes daily more learned
and more godly, but he which hates correction, as for ^im who repineth or
grudgeth at the Lords scourges, he is brutish, he remains as a brute beast in
his error and rudeness.

2 The Lords favor aduanceth the good man, but he condemns the wicked person.

So he did on the Amalechites.
As a just judge will exalt the weldoer, and pronounce the sentence of
condemnation on the malefactor: so God will bless the innocent and condemn
the ungodly, upon whom he will both pronounce and execute, the decree of some
temporal plague or of eternal destruction.

3 A man shall not be established by wickedness, but the root of the
righteous shall not be removed.

As a wise gardener will pluck up the weeds in his ground, but will not touch
the roots of the good herbs to hurt them: Col. 2.7.
so the Lord will destroy the wicked as plants which he never planted, but will
spare yea preserve and cherish the godly, founded and rooted on Jesus Christ.

4 A virtuous wife is her husbands crown, but she who makes him ashamed, is
as rottenness in his bones.

Wives are herein divided into two sorts. Some are called virtuous, that is to
say, such as fear God, reverence their husbands, govern their families
orderly, and live chastely. These are crowns to their husbands, that is to say,
comforts and a glory to them. For such wives cheer and nourish their
husbands, preserve their wealth or increase the same. Some wives again are such
as cause shame, that is, who so miscarrie the^ selves, that their husbands
blush to hear of or to see their unchastity, their sloth, their pride, their
busy toungs. These are as rottenness in their bones, that is to say, an
inward and deadly corsey, and an evil, not only eating their flesh, but
tormenting them most miserably.

5 The thoughts of the just are right, the subtle devises of the wicked are
deceit.

The wicked do abuse their reason, which the godly use as they ought to do. The
thoughts of the just are right. The upright man bends his wits, how most to
glorify God and to benefit his neighbor, devising how he may best do right to
every one. But the subtle devises of the wicked are deceit. The wicked
think on wicked things, musing on their beds or conspiring together, how they
may color their mischief that it be not espied, and defraud or circumuent
their neighbors. They study as it were the Art of cousening.

6 The words of the wicked lie in wayt for blood, the mouth of the upright
delivers the^.

The Scribes and Pharisees may be an example.
The ungodly abuse their toungs also and not only their thoughts, both which the
righteous use aright. The words of the wicked lie in wayt for blood. The
questions, conferences, and speeches of the wicked, tend to entrap the
innocent. The mouth of the upright delivers them, the godly will preserve by
their pleadings or answers, such as the wicked endeavor to slay.

7 The wicked overthrow them selves and are not, but the house of the righteous
shall stand.

The ungodly by their sins draw on them selves and theirs utter destruction,
but the godly man's house and children shall long continue. For this cause David
says in the Psalm, that the wicked shall fail from the earth, Psalm. 104.
so, that they shall be no more.

8 A man shall be commended for his understanding, but he which is of a froward
mind shall be despised.

Certain causes both of estimation and contempt are herein showed. The
fountain from whence credit or account springs, is discretion and knowledge.
For this cause it is said, that a man shall be commended for his understanding,
or for his prudent mouth. The meaning is, that the multitude will magnify him,
who excels in learning, or utters gracious speeches. On the contrary side,
he which is of a froward mind shall be despised. Want of wit or of a wise
carriage of a man's self, causes contempt, so that he who misbehaueth him
self, becomes contemptible and a by word by this means.

9 He who debaseth him self, and yet has a servant, is better then he who
boasts him self, and lacks bread.

The meaning of these words is, that the person which sets his hand to all
works, who carries a low port, and who is content with the name, place and
account of a mean yeoman, and yet has wherewith to maintain him self and a
family, is more to be commended and in better estate, then he who carries the
countenance of a great gentleman, ruffleth it out in silks and veluets, and
boasts of his parentage, and yet is in debt, or has not sometimes a penie in
his purse, or food sufficient for his dinner or supper.

10 The righteous man regards the life of his beast, but the bowels of the
wicked are cruel.

Pity is now commended, and hard heartedness condemned. The righteous man
regards the life of his beast. A just man will not over toil the poor dumme
creature, nor suffer it to want food or looking to. But if he be so pitiful to
his beast, much more is he merciful to his servants, his children, and his
wife. As for the very bowels of the wicked, they are cruel. For they are
unmerciful to their beasts, See an example in Balaam striking his ass, in
Dalila betraying Sampson, and in the Jews crying crucifige on Christ.
unnatural to their children, hard hearted to the poor, and bloody
persecutors of the people of God.

11 He which tilleth his land, shall be satisfied with bread, but he who
follows vain things, is void of understanding.

The diligent person shall have plenty, but the spend-thrift who follows
carding, dicing, or such like vanities, shall in time to come want necessaries,
as now he wants wit.

12 The wicked man desires a defense against evils, but the root of the
righteous gives [frute.]

So did Cain.
They that do evil wish for pardon of their lives, and a privilege or
protection, against troubles, death, and condemnation, but all in vain. For in
deed at the last Gods judgment takes hold on them. On the contrary side,
the root of the righteous gives (fruit.) The godly being rooted and grounded
in Christ, and as trees planted by the rivers of water, are not only preserved
from evils, but prosper and flourish in good things, Psalm. 1.3.4.5.6.
bringing forth fruit in due season, as it is in the Psalm.

13 The evil man's or Destruction
snare is in the transgression of his lips, but the just man wadeth out of
trouble.

Wicked men by their rash speeches cast the^ selves into such troubles, out of
which they cannot deliver them selves: See an example in Daniel and his
accusers.
but although sometimes the innocent being falsely accused, are brought into
question or molested, yet they escape at the last as a bird out of the snare of
the fowler.

14 A good man is satisfied with the fruit of his mouth, and the or Work.
recompense of a man's hands shall reward him.

Albeit the opening of the mouth is a small matter, yet it shall be recompensed
by the Lord with great blessings, when it is done in wisdom. For such as use
their toungs to Gods glory and the edification of their brethren, instructing
them and exhorting them from day to day, shall be loved by God and man, and
taste many good blessings. Now, as good words, so good works also, shall be
rewarded. For the recompense of a man's hands shall reward him. That is to say,
2. Cor. 5.10. Mal. 2.5.
not only the wicked shall be plagued for their ill doing, but the godly shall be
blessed for their well doing. The reward here spoken of, is not a reward of
merit but of mercy to the godly, whose good actions are crowned with comfort
and good success, as the evil deeds of the wicked have a curse or cross
attending on them.

15 The way of a fool is right in his own eyes, but he who harkeneth to
counsel, is wise.

Self liking is here reproved, and hearing of advise commended. The way of a
fool is right in his own eyes. The co^ceipted person thinks his own course
to be best, and (as if he were a very wise man himself or sufficient by him
self to deal in any matter) he uses no advise of other. But he who harkeneth
to counsel is wise. That is to say, he who enquireth after and practices the
good advise of other, provides well for his own welfare.

16 The wrath of a fool is made known the same day, but a prudent man
covers reproching.

The meaning hereof is, that the furious person presently shows some sign of
his choler, but he who is godly wise suppresseth angry speeches, gestures and
behavior. For this phrase, the same day, both here and elsewhere in Scripture,
Psalm. 84 11.
notes out a very short time. Thus the people in Ezechia his time, covered a
reproach when they answered not a word to Rabsakeh.
So likewise by covering a reproach, abstaining from reuiling and railing is to
be understood.

17 He tells the truth, who declares that which is just, but a false
witness [vttereth] deceit.

He who tells that which is agreeable to the matter in question and the
circumstances thereof, boldly and constantly avouches that which is sure and
certain, not mingling therewith any thing which is doubtful or untrue. On the
contrary side, he who makes no conscience of lying, Such were the false
witnesses who rose up against Steven.
colors his forged accusations with plausible speeches, and faceth down an
untruth.

18 Some utter vverdes like the pricking of swords, but the tongue of wise men,
is a medicine.

Evil speakers and slaunderers (as here is showed) hurt their neighbors not
lightly but most grievously, in body, goods and name. For some (as Ezechiel
speaks) carry tales to shed blood. But the tongue of wise men is a medicine.
The godly uttering wholesome and seasonable speeches, heal the innocent who
have bin troubled, by pleading for them: foes at variance, by persuading them
to peace: and finally the heavy hearted, by comforting them.

19 The lip of truth shall be established for ever, the lying tongue, scant for
the space of a moment.

He who speaks truth shall live long in this world and continue for ever in
the world to come, but God will quickly destroy all those that speak lies.
Psalm. 5 7.


20 Deceit [recoyleth] on the heart of those who plot mischief, but joy upon
the counselors of peace.

As for example Achitophel who for grief hanged him self. Thus Mardoches
advise which he gave to Hester, rebounded into his heart with joy.
Evil counsel most hurts those who give it. For such as are the authors of
any mischief, meet with some grievous plague inflicted by God or man upon
them, which brings bitter sorrow into their hearts. But joy upon the
counselors of peace. Such as make concord between neighbor and neighbor, or
give any advice tending to their brethrens welfare, are blessed.

21 No evil shall befall the just man, but the wicked shall be full of misery.

22 Deceiptfull lips are abomination to the Lord, but they who deal
faithfully, are accepble to him.

In the former of these sentences, a promise of preservation is made to the
righteous, and a threatening of destruction is denounced against the ungodly.
No evil shall befall the just man. Psalm. 91.
Either no affliction at all shall betide the righteous person, or only such
adversity, as shall rather further then hinder his salvation. For as the
Apostle speaks, 2 Cor. 4.8.
we are pressed down in every thing, but not oppressed, shaken with doubting,
but not given over to despair, persecuted, but not forsaken, cast down, but
we perish not. But the wicked shall be full of misery. The ungodly shall be
filled full of infamy, poverty, Psalm. 32.10.
heart-griefe, and infinite other plagues.

23 A prudent man hides knowledge, but the heart of fools proclaims folly.

The wise man boasts not of his cunning, not utters all that he knows as
fools are wont to do, who either speak of good things unseasonably, or talk
of ill things continually.

24 The hand of the dilligent shall bear rule, but the idle, shall pay tribute.

The meaning hereof is, that as labor brings men not only to wealth but to
honor, so sloth brings on them not only poverty but bondage. For in deed
the idle come often to such need and misery, as that they offer them selves to
be bondslaues to the rich.

25 Heaviness in the heart of man presses it down, but a good word cheareth
it up.

On the one side here, the force of inward sorrow or care is showed to be
exceeding great. For in deed as it causes the mind to faint, so it makes the
hand to be slow to work. On the other side, the efficacy of a comfortable
speech is declared to be no less, the which not only drives heaviness away,
but bringing joy into the heart, reuiueth all the senses of the body, making
them fit to discharge their duty.

26 The righteous man is more excellent the^ his neighbor, but the way of the
wicked deceives them.

The just man is better then the wicked man in many respects and by infinite
degrees. First, his birth is the more noble, for he is borne again of the word
and spirit. Secondly, his deeds are more commendable. Thirdly, his death is
sweeter. Last of all, his life is more blessed in regard of the favor of God
toward him, and good success in his affairs, which point is here especially
meant. For, the way of the wicked deceives them. Their prosperity is at last
turned into adversity, and their rejoicing into mourning.

27 The deceiptfull man shall not roast that which he has caught in hunting,
but he which is diligent shall enjoy the precious substance of a man.

Like as an hunter oftentimes rosteth not the venison which he has taken,
which peradventure either the dogs devour, or the keeper of the park takes
away: so oftentimes the wicked man enjoys not that which he got by fraud. On
the contrary side the just man possesses gold, silver and such other precious
things in account among men.

28 In the way of righteousness is life, and the pathway thereof is immortal.

Godliness brings unto men the good things of this life and of the life to
come.

THE XIII. CHAPTER.
See the exposition of the first verse of the 10. chapter
1 A wise son hearkeneth to the instruction of his father, but a scorner will
hear no rebuke. An obedient child will obey any counsel of his parents which
is good, but one that is stubburne, will abide no reproof.

2 A good man eats the fruit of his mouth, but the soul of transgressors,
violence.

3 He which keeps his mouth, keeps his life, but destruction shall be unto
him, who opens his lips wide.

THe godly man who uses his tongue aright, shall obtain the good will of his
neighbors and Gods blessing, two precious fruits which good speeches bring
forth. As for the wicked man, who breaking Gods laws abuses his lips, he
shall reap for his labor hatred, wounds, and Gods curse. Surely the case so
stands, that he who sets a watch before his lips, by this means
preserves him self from many harms, yea sometimes from death. But as
concerning him, whose mouth as a common strumpet spreads it self to all
filthy communication, or opens it self to talk lauishly, he shall be sure
to meet with much trouble, and in the end he shall be quite overthrown.

4 The sluggard lusts, and yet his soul has naught, but the soul of the
diligent, shall be made fat.

To the diligent, a promise herein is made; against the slothful, a threatening
is denounced. The sluggard lusts and yet his soul has nothing, Idle people
wanting all necessaries, are wishers and woulders, but never good householders.
Sometimes they wish for money, sometimes for raiment, sometimes for food, but
all in vain. But the soul of the diligent shall be made fat. On the contrary
side, they who take great pains in their callings, waxing very rich, are
satisfied with great ple^tie of all necessaries and comforts.

5 The just man hates a false matter, but it causes the wicked man to
stincke, and to be ashamed.

Whereas it is said, that the just man hates a false matter, this doctrine is
taught, that an upright person not only misliketh evil, Romans 12.
but detesteth it as a foul or filthy thing. This saying the^ notably agrees
with that admonition of S. Paul, abhor evil and cleave to that which is
good. It accords also with that exhortation of Jude, hate the very coat
which is defiled with the flesh. Now, whereas it is added, that it causes the
wicked man to stincke and to be ashamed, the sense of these words is, that
evil dealing makes the ungodly to be abhorred as stinking carions, and to
live as spotted men in the earth. For the wicked man cease not (as it is in
the Psalm) till he has practiced his sin which is to be hated. Psalm. 36.


6 Righteousness preserves him who is upright in way, but wickedness
overthrows the sinner.

The meaning of this sentence is, that notorious offenders and hypocrites are
usually plagued in this world for their sins, Ezech. 9.
whereas they who keep them selves in the obedience of Gods laws, are spared
and passed over in the midst of great and common calamities.

7 Some vaunt them selves to be rich, when they have nothing, other feign them
selves to be poor, when they have great substance.

It is the custom of vayneglorious fools (as here is observed) to make show
of great riches when in deed they are poor, because they affect the name and
account of Ge^tlemen. On the contrary side, covetous misers not only in words
compain of great want in the midst of abundance, but to avoid taxes and such
other charges, carry so low a port, that oftentimes they are thought and seem
scant worth a groat, when they have hundreths or thousands lying by them.

8 The riches of a man are the ransom of his life, but a poor man hears not
rebuke.

Here is showed, that both riches and poverty have their commodities and
disco^modies. The riches of a man are the ransom of his life. As this is one
of the vanities under the Sun, that riches oftentimes are reserved unto the
hurt of the owner thereof, in as much as for the same he is envied, accused yea
sometimes also condemned: so wealth again has herein a great commodity, that
a man taken captive in war, by money ransometh his life, being drawn into
suits of law, by money mainteineth his right, being sick, by money gets all
sorts of remedies, finally being in want, obtains all outward things in a
manner by money or money worth. On the contrary side, poverty is a sore estate,
which (as we use to say) causes the old wife to trot, but this singular
commodity it has, that because the poor man has nothing to give or pay, no
quareller sueth him, no thief sets on him, no magistrate seazeth on his
house.

9 The light of the just shall rejoice, but the candle of the wicked shall be
put out.

The prosperity of the righteous is here compared to the light of the day or
to the sun, which rejoicing to run his course, continues firm from time
to time in the sky. In like manner then the welfare of the godly, shall
increase and remain constant. The glory of the ungodly on the contrary side,
is fitly resembled unto a candle. For even as a lamp or candle burns but a
while, and quickly consumes, so all the pomp and flourishing of the wicked,
shall suddenly decay and vanish in a moment. For this cause it is said in a
certain Psalm, that light is planted unto the just man. This makes Bildab to
affirm of the wicked man on the contrary side, Psalm. 97.11. Job. 18.6.
that the spark of his fire does not shine, and his candle is put out in his
tent.

10 Through mere pride a man makes contention, but wisdom is with the well
advised.

The cause or fountain of strife and of peace is here opened and declared.
Through mere pride a man makes contention. The conceit of a man's own
excellency breeding in him contempt of all good counsel, makes his
affections fierce, and stirs him yea emboldeneth him to provoke his
neighbors unto wrath, or to contend with them whatsoever comes of it. But
with the well advised is wisdom. As for those who follow the advice of Gods
word or spirit, they are endued with that wisdom which is peaceable, whereby
they avoid all occasions of strife, yea sometimes they pacify wrath when it is
kindled.

11 Substance gotten by vanity shall be diminished, but he which gathers
with the hand shall increase [it.]

Goods ill gotten will quickly consume, but he who plyeth his calling faithfully
shall thrive. He is said to gather with the hand, who gets any thing in a
lawful calling with a good conscience, whether he labor with his body or his
mind.

12 The hope which is differred, makes the heart sick, but a desire which
comes is a tree of life.

This verse shows the danger or hurt of delay, and the comfort of present
good things. By hope the thing hoped for is meant, whether it be some
comforatble news, or some acceptable person. Even as meat long kept from the
hungry stomach makes the body weak: so the thing longed for, prolonged,
causes a feeble soul. See an example in Jacob Genesis 45 26.
For the mind wanting the thing expected, grieueth because it does not
presently enjoy it, and fears that it shall never have it. On the contrary
side, a desire which comes or is present, is a tree of life. The sight or
receiving of the good thing which has been earnestly wished for, heals the
malady of the heart and reuiueth the spirits.

13 He which despises the word, shall be destroyed, but he which reuerenceth
the law, shall have peace.

Contempt of the word of God is threatened in this verse, and a reward is
promised to obedience. So were the Israelites, so were Corasin, Bethsaida and
Capernaum.
He which despises the word shall be destroyed. That person who co^temptuously
rejects the commandment of God or will by no means be subject thereunto,
shall be plagued at the last with some fearful and grievous punishment. But
he which reuerenceth or fears the law, So did Iasiah.
shall have peace. Whosoever trembles at Gods word, and puts it into
practice, shall enjoy prosperity. For as the Psalmist says, See Psalm. 117.
Esa. 66.2.
there is great peace to those who love Gods law.

14 The doctrine of a wise man is a welspring of life, to depart from the
snares of death.

The meaning of this sentence is, that the word of God wisely applied, is
profitable, first, as a spring of water, to enrich the receivers thereof with
manifold good things, secondly, as a faithful guide, to preserve them from
sundry evils, as from sin and death.

15 Grace gives good success, but the way of transgressors, is rough.

Obedience to the word of God meant here by grace, causes men to prosper, the
Lord being with them so long as they serve him. But the way of transgressors is
rough. The life of sinners is full of troubles and miseries by reason of their
sins, and like away which is rugged or full of thorns.

16 Every wise man deals with knowledge, but a fool lays [his] folly open.

Wisdom is now commended and folly condemned. Every wise man deals with
knowledge. Every one who is prudent, does his affairs exactly, not only
setting down the means of attaining his enterprises or the order of his
matters according whereunto he will then proceed, but forecasting the issues
and preventing the hindrances of his attempts. But a fool lays open his
folly. On the contrary side, he who is unskillful or indiscreet, goes rashly
and rawly about all things, and by his rude and imperfect works, bewrays and
lays open his own ignorance and vanity.

17 A wicked messenger falls into evil, but a faithful ambassador heals.

Trusty and unfaithful dealing in messages, is now spoken of. A wicked
messenger falls into evil. He who does his arrant slouthfully or guilefully,
not only much grieueth other, but hurts him self, drawing by this means on
him self, both his masters displeasure and Gods judgment. On the contrary
side, a faithful embassour heals. A trusty messenger freeing his masters
mind from doubts, fears and griefs, so heals the malady thereof, as a
Physician cures the diseases of the body. For which cause, as the leech of
the body uses to have his fee: so this ambassador or Physician of the soul,
shall have the good will of men and the blessing of God for his recompense as
it were.

18 Poverty and shame shall befall him who withdraws him self from
instruction, but he which regards correction, shall be honored.

The spirit of God herein entreats of chastisements. Poverty and shame etc.
Job. 5.17. Iam. 1.12.
He that will not obey good counsel, lightly even in this world comes to
beggerie and infamy. For the Lord will despise those who despise him. But he
which regards correction shall be honored. He which yields to wholesome
advise and profits by chastisements, is made partaker of many good things,
and namely of credit and dignity. For those who honor God, he also will honor.

19 The desire present is pleasant to the soul, but it is an abomination to
fools, to depart from evil.

Herein is showed, how glad men are when they enjoy their pleasures, and how
loath they are to part from them. The desire present is pleasant to the soul.
Vain people are exceedingly glad when they are made partakers of those things
which they wish, be they never such foolish toys or unlawful delites. But it
is an abomination to fools to depart from evil. On the contrary side, it is
a deadly grief unto the wicked, to be weaned or pulled from their sins or
vanities.

20 He which walks with the wise, shall be the wiser, but he who keeps
company with fools, shall wax the worser.

In this verse is declared, that there is great force in the company which a
man keeps, to change him into the better or the worse. He is said to walk
with the wise, who is often in their company to hear their words and to see
their behavior. Such a one waxes wiser, that is, more learned, zealous and
religious then he was before. But he who keeps company etc. Such a one as
joins in fellowship with the ungodly, shall be the worse in two respects, the
one that he shall be infected thereby, the other, that he shall be plagued
therewith.

21 Evil pursues sinners, but that which is good, rewards the just.

Since as a pursuiuant troubles, Psalm. 34.22.23.
attacheth, and slays the wicked man, but Gods blessing as a reward of
mercy, makes a recompense to the upright person for all his pains in doing
of his duty.

22 The good man leaves an inheritance to his childrens children, and the
sinners goods are laid up for the just man.

The godly person not only him self enjoys his goods whilst he lives, but
when he dies leaves the same in such sort to his children, as that also their
children through Gods mercy inherit the same. On the contrary side, the
wicked man is so far off from leaving his goods to his posterity, as that
from him by Gods providence they are often rolled upon the righteous person,
who is his heir as it were against his will.

23 The poor The which were before untilled and so not helped by labor or
s^^le.
plowing up new ground have much food, but some consume them selves thorough
slothfulness.

The meaning of this Proverb is, that a little ground well tilled, or a little
stock well employed and followed, brings through Gods blessing great
abundance and great advantage, as on the contrary side, great wealth or a large
patrimony, is through idleness brought to little or nothing.

24 He which spares his rod, hates his child, but he which loves him,
chasteneth him betimes.

The cockering father, who seldom or never corrects his son, is truly said
to hate him. For he is an enemy, if not in affection, yet in this his action,
to his welfare. On the contrary side, he which loves him chasteneth him
betimes. He which tendereth the good estate of his child, whilst he is yet
yo^g provides a teacher to instruct him, and twigs to correct him.

25 The just man eats to the satisfying of his soul, but the belly of the
wicked shall want.

They who serve God aright, and labor faithfully in their callings, shall have
plentiful store of necessaries. On the contrary side, the ungodly shall
suffer extreme penury.

THE XIIII. CHAPTER.
1 A wise woman builds up her house, but a foolish woman pulls it down
with her own hands.

A Christian matrone on the one side, and an ungodly wife on the other, is here
described. Even as a cunning carpe^ter going about to build an house, lays it
on a foundation, heweth out timber for it, and finally at length raises up the
frame: so a godly matrone or good houswife, founding her family on the
knowledge of Christ, by laboring faithfully in her calling, fills her house
with store of necessaries. On the contrary side, such a woman as being void of
the fear of God, neglects her calling, or prodigally lauisheth out her
husbands goods, overthrows the state of her family, and consumes all that
is in her house.

2 He which walks uprightly, fears God, but he who is crooked in his ways,
despises him.

Good works are here showed to be proofs or testimonies of the fear of God.
Many deceive them selves with a show of godliness, but every one shall know
whether he fears God or no, not by the outward profession of religion which
he makes, but by his doing of Gods will. On the contrary side, a dissolute
life, is an evident demonstration of the profaneness of the heart.

3 In the mouth of a fool, is a staff of pride, but in the lips of the wise,
their own preservation.

The good tongue has herein a reward promised, but the evil is threatened. In
the mouth of a fool is a staff of pride. He who abuses his tongue, shall
smart for his folly. For, as he who carrying a staff in his hand, strikes
every one therewith, is oftentimes him self well cudgelled for his labor: so
he who smites other with his tongue, shall at last be beaten for his rash
speeches. But eue^ as he who carries a buckler about with him, preserves him
self from many blows: so he who speaks prudently or answers discreetly,
by this means preserves him self from much danger and trouble.

4 When there are no oxen, the barn is Or empty.
clean, but store of fruit [commeth] by the strength of an ox.

Husbandry is commended in this verse. When there are no oxen, where the
means of husbandry are neglected, the barn is clean, there is want of
necessaries, but store of fruit comes, there is abundance of needful
provision, by the strength of an ox, where tillage or plowing with oxen is
diligently used. An ox is here mentioned, as a principal means of riches, in
as much as it being a good labourer, draws the teame, helps the plough, and
treads out the corn.

5 A faithful witness will not lie, but a false record, breaths forth lies.

Neither for fear nor favor will the just man tell an untruth. On the
contrary side, the wicked man powers and faceth down lies.

6 The scorner seeks wisdom, and she will not be found, but knowledge is
easy to him who is prudent.

Not only he is a scorner, who derideth all godliness, but he, who professing
Religion lives wickedly. Now, as it is the custom of men, when such come to
the doors of their houses who^ they care not for, to refuse to see them or to
speak with them, but if peradventure friends come to visit them, then to show
them selves, yea to run out to meet them: so the grace of Gods spirit
estrangeth her self from the proud and ungodly, but appears and draws
near unto the modest. For he who is holy and humble, easily attaineth the true
knowledge of God and of his son Jesus Christ.

7 Depart from the presence of a foolish man, and [from him] whom thou
perceiuest not to have the lips of knowledge. Before. 4.26. See an example in
Paul. 1. Cor. 9.26.27. Euilim ialits ashem. Every fool makes a mock of sin
or of araignement. This interpretation is received, agreeable to the words, and
confirmed by diverse places of this book as. chap. 2.14. chap. 10. verse. 23.14.
c. 5. v. 15. c. v. 20. Ratso^ sometimes a kind affection, either of man to man
or of God to man, sometimes that thing which is to be accepted.


This is as much as if it were said, shun the company of the wicked, and
hearken not to the counsel of seducers.

8 The wisdom of the prudent man is to take heed unto his own way, the
folly of fools, to deceit.

Even as he is a wise trauailour, who so looks to his way, that he suffers
not him self to be lead aside out of the right path: so he is a wise
Christian, who looks that he be in a good course, and suffers not him to be
drawn aside to sin. But such as walk unwisely, either deceive other, or are
themselves seduced.

9 Fools make a mock of the punishment of sin, but among the righteous, is
favor.

The wicked make a light matter both of sin and of Gods judgment, for which
cause the Lord causes them to feel his wrath unto the utmost. But among the
righteous is favor. On the contrary side, the good will of the Lord is toward
the righteous, compassing the^ about as a shield. The Prophet David sets
down certain speeches in the 5. Psalm very like unto this sentence. Thou o
Lord (says he) do bless the righteous person, thou causest that favor
does compass him as a shield. But speaking of the wicked, araigne them o Lord
(says he) let them fall from their counsels. etc.

10 This translation is that, which the Geneua Bible sets down, and diverse
good authors allow. The sense which is given, is confirmed not only by
Hieromes interpretation and the expositio^s of some other, but by the
signification of the words, and the suit of the matter. Zar here is taken for
alius aliquie as chap. 22.
The heart knows the bitterness of the soul thereof, and a stranger shall
not meddle with his joy.

The force of sorrow is herein declared: The heart, that chief part of the
body, which is the fountain of life, knows the bitterness, discerns and
feels the deep and extreme sorrow, of the soul thereof, of that mind or
spirit, which dwells as it were with it in the same earthly tabernacle of
the body. And a stranger, and other man who soever, shall not meddle, shall not
enter into the afflicted heart, with his joy, with his merry speeches or jests,
or what delites soever they are which he uses to refresh the pensive heart
withal. When as the^ one man's heart is heavy to the death or extremely sad,
any other shall not be able with his mirth to please or ease the same. For
surely the heart which aketh with pinching pain, and the soul which soaketh
in suds of pensive sorrow, takes small pleasure in pastime or in mirth, but
rather refuses all comfort and flies sporting, as a thing most contrary to
it. Outward delites heal scratches as it were or smaller griefs, but not
deep wounds or extreme heaviness.

11 The house of the wicked shall be destroyed, but the tent of the righteous
shall flourish.

The dwelling and household of the ungodly, Job. 5.3.4.5. Also. 24.
shall be overthrown, but the habitation and family of the just, shall
increase and spread.

There is a way which seems right in the eyes of men, but the end thereof, is
the high way to death.

Some course of life there is, as namely continuing in sin, which pleases
flesh and blood for a time, seeming either pleasant, profitable, or just, but
at last it brings destruction.

13 Even by laughter the mind is made heavy, and in the end, rejoicing [is
turned] into mourning.

Vain and ungodly pleasure brings losses, sorrow, James 4.7.
diseases, yea sometimes death. Iollitie is turned into wayling and weeping
oftentimes. This sentence the^ accords with that threatening of our Savior,
we be unto you which laugh, for you shall weep.

14 A man of a froward mind shall be filled with his own ways, but a good man
is severed from him.

The ungodly person shall not only taste of Gods wrath, but be made drunk as
it were with all his plagues. But a good man is severed from him, the righteous
man is not plagued together with him by the Lord (who always spares his when
he punishes the wicked) but on the contrary side, See an example in the
Israelites and the Egyptia^s. Psalm. 4.4.
he is abundantly blessed by him, so that the just man also is filled with his
ways. Know then that the Lord has severed to him self, him whom he receives
into favor.

15 The simple man believes all things, but the prudent man takes heed to
his steps.

Such a one as is ignorant of Gods word or void of the discretion of his
spirit, crediteth all speeches whether true or false, certain or uncertain.

16 The wise man fears and departs from evil, but the fool hazardeth him
self, so venterous is he.

He who is wary, See the exposition of the 12. ver. of the 27. chap.
dreading hatmes as he ought, shu^neth both the actions and places of danger,
whereinto the ungodly rush very rashly.

17 He who is swift to wrath works folly, but a man full of vvyles is
hated.

Two contrary vices are herein compared together, to wit, hastiness and
subtilitie. He is swift to wrath, who is quickly moved to anger upon every
light occasion. Such an unadvised and moodie fool, works folly, See a like
sentence before in the 12 chapter, and in the 26.25.26. verse.
that is to say, by speech or deed shows such signs of his folly, as that
he makes him self a mocking stock to all. On the contrary side, he is
counted a man of wyles, who outwardly faineth good will, but inwardly intends
revenge, being occupied in musing on the means or opportunities of
accomplishing of the same. This dissembler not only hates his neighbor in
his heart, but is him self hated or worthy to be hated. For, in as much as he
is so close an hypocrite, he deserves to be odious, neither can he lightly be
in other account, since he may be suspected to plot some mischief.

18 The simple inherit folly, but the wise crown them selves with
knowledge.

Such as are of little wit or understanding in spiritual things, not only
commit wickedness but inherit the punishment thereof, namely Gods vengeance.
Thus then the ungodly are heirs as it were to troubles and plagues, these are
their portion as the Prophet speaks in the Psalm. On the contrary side, the
prudent only increase in the gifts of the holy Ghost, but at the last attain
honor and glory, yea even that crown of righteousness, which the just judge
has laid up for them.

19 Evil men bow the^ selves before the good, and the wicked at the gates of
the just man.

As it is meet that the righteous rule, the ungodly obey: Thus we read that
Haman bowed to Mordecai, and that Iosephes brethren came to him.
so by the disposition of the divine providence it often comes to pass in
this world, that the faithful are the head, the ungodly the tail as it were.
For evil men bow them selves before the good, the ungodly often serve the
godly and reverence them in most humble manner, because they are rich or lifted
up unto honor. And the wicked at the gates of the just man. Transgressors also
often come to the rich ma^s doors, either for alms, or favor or counsel.

20 The poor man is hated even of his neighbor, but the rich man's friends are
many.

He who is in adversity, is forsaken not only by strangers but by those who
are near unto him in dwelling or in kin. On the contrary side, every one
fawneth on the wealthy and claims kindred of the^, nevertheless, these
friends of the rich man, are not true friends indeed, but they are so called,
because they pretend great friendship, how soever in very truth they are
friends not to him but to his goods, which only they love.

21 He who despises his neighbor, is a sinner, but he who shows mercy to
the poor is blessed.

As he who forsakes or reprocheth his poor brother, commits a grievous
offense, so shall he be araigned and punished as a notorious evil doer. On the
contrary side, he who is merciful to the needy or afflicted shall find
mercy. That to deal hardly with the afflicted is a grievous sin, it may
appear by that speech which Job uses to his friends who were so bitter unto
him, when he says unto them, you rush upon the orpha^t, Job. 6.26.
when you dig a pit for your friend. Moreover, that the word sinner is taken
in the Scripture for one who being guilty is arayned or condemned, is manifest
by that speech of Bathsheba to David in the book of the Kings, 1. King. 1.21.
otherwise, I and my son Solomon shall be sinners, that is, in danger of death
or condemned to dye.

22 Do not they who devise mischief, go astray? but mercy and truth shall be
unto those, who practice that which is good.

The meaning of the former part of this sentence is, that it is a most certain
truth confirmed by daily experience, that the inuentors and workers of evil
things, have ill success or perish. For by the borrowed speech of going astray
(which to do is a dangerous and uncomfortable thing) missing of a man's purpose
and meeting with some trouble is meant. Thus much Eliphaz also teaches in the
book of Job, when speaking of the Lords ouerthwarting of the wicked in their
ill enterprises he says, Job. 5.12.
He makes frustrate the devises of the crafty, so that their hands are able
to do nothing. etc. The sense of the latter part of this parable is, that the
Lord shows favor and performs his promises unto those, who study to
glorify him and to do good to their neighbors.

23 In every labor there is increase, but the talk of the lips only,
brings want.

Some gain is to be gotten by every kind of work, as even by making of a
button of the tagge of a point. But by vain and idle prattling or talking, that
which a man has consumes. For whilst much talk is spent, much time is lost,
whilst much time is lost (little or nothing being got) much of the stock is
consumed.

24 The riches of the wise, are their crown, the folly of fools [remaineth]
folly.

It should not be so indeed, yet so it comes to pass, that wisdom in a
poor man is contemned. For be a man never so learned, if he be not wealthy, he
is not esteemed but may sit well enough without doors. See an example in Job.
Job. 29.2.3.4.5.6.7. etc.
But when as both wisdom makes him to use his wealth aright, so wealth
makes him the more admirable and the more to be accounted of, in as much as it
is (as it were) a crown of authority and glory to him. On the contrary side,
let a fool be never so rich yea let him be clothed in scarlet or purple, he
neither will nor can be any other the^ a Naball still, remaining foolish for
all his wealth, and co^temptible for his folly.

25 A true witness delivers lives, but a deceiptfull one, forgeth lies.

He who testifies the truth oftentimes saves the lives of the innocent, but a
false witness is a hammer as it were or a sword to slay men.

26 In the fear of the Lord there is strong hope, who is wont to be a refuge
to his children.

27 The fear of the Lord is a well spring of life, to depart from the snares
of death.

The sonlike awe of the Lord or reuerencing of his Majesty, See before. 1.7.
is herein commended in two respects. The one is, for that it makes men
courageous and strong of faith in troubles. The other is, for that it
ministers unto them store of all good things. For thus much is meant by a well
spring.

28 In the multitude of people, is the honor of a king, but by the want of
people [commeth] the destruction of a Prince.

Nothing is more sure, than that in the multitude of people is the honor of a
king. For that ruler which has store of subjects under him, may in time of
war be guarded by them, receives from them much tribute, and by them is
witnessed to be just and merciful, seeing otherwise, so many would not live
under him. Nevertheless, it is again as true on the other side, that by the
want of people comes the destruction of the Prince. For, that Prince which
wants people, wants reverence, revenues and defense.

29 He who is slow to wrath abounds with understanding, but he who is of an
hasty mind, raises up folly.

The patient man is exceeding wise, in as much as he cutteth of quarelling, and
knows how to vanquish him self, but the furious man by foolish words
gestures or deeds, kindles strife.

30 A sound heart is the life of the flesh, but envy is the Or rather the
magot of the bones. For the Hebrew word Rachab signifies so much.
rottenness of the bones.

A quiet mind causes health to the body, but fretting at a man's own trouble
or else another prosperity tormenteth the poor carcass without and within.

31 He which oppresses the poor, reprocheth him who made him, but he who
shows mercy to him that is in need, honors him.

That person which deals hardly with the poor hurting them in body, goods,
or name, Mat. 25.40.
sins highly against God, whom in his creatures he disgraceth as it were. So
again, he which does good unto those that want, does good unto the Lord whose
workema^ship and people they are, and thus honors as it were the master in
his servants.

32 The wicked man Or driven on forward.
casts him self away, in his trouble, the righteous man has hope, in his
death.

The difference between the godly and the wicked in the day of adversity here
is showed. The ungodly person when he is in trouble, either thrusts him self
through with many sorrows of mind, or wounds his body, laying violent
hands on him self as Judas did. On the contrary side, the godly man flies to
the Lord and puts his confidence in him, when he is in greatest extremity
and torment. Great and grievous were the troubles of that holy servant of God
Job, who was even in a manner brought unto deaths door. Nevertheless, in the
midst of all his adversity he made this protestation, Job. 5.15.
that he would trust in the Lord although he should slay him.

33 Wisdom rests in the heart of the prudent man, but [that] which is within
fools, See like senie^ces 33. chap. 12.23.13.16.
makes it self known.

The meaning of this proverb is, that wise men can keep counsel, but fools
can hold no secret. Wisdom so rests in the heart of the prudent man, as that
he utters not that which he knows indiscreetly or vaingloriously. But that
which is in the heart of fools, so makes it self known, as that he
publishes and bableth whatsoever he knows, be it good or bad. As we use to
say in our common proverb, in it is and out it must.

34 Righteousness exalts a people, but sin is a reproach to nations.

The cause of the safety, and again of the ruin of common wealths, is herein
declared. Righteousness exalts a people. The knowledge of God and the
executing of wholesome laws, cause the inhabitants of a land to prosper and to
be praised. But sin is a reproach to nations. Again, the vices and sins of
countries, make them infamous, and in the end overthrow them. Thus in old time
the jews were reproched for their stiffeneckednesse, Ierem. 18.10. Ezech.
16.49.
and the men of Creta for their lying. Thus also in these days some countries
are infamous for drunkenness, other for pride, all almost for one peculiar
vice or other.

35 The kings good will will be toward an understanding servant, but his wrath
will be toward him who causes shame.

A godly ruler will affection and advance a faithful and prudent subject and
officer, Psalm. 101.6.
but he will rebuke, correct, or put away him, who does his business so
untowardly or fondly, as that thereby he receives some discredit or is ashamed.

THE XV. CHAPTER.
1. A soft answer turns away wrath, but a bitter word, stirs up anger.

See an example on the one side in Gedeon Iud. 8.2. etc. On the other in
Naball, who by his currish answer moved David to great anger.
A Speech wherein fair words are used or titles of reverence given, causes
displeasure to cease. But a bitter word stirs up anger, sharp and
reproachful terms move choler. The reason hereof is manifest. For by the
speaking of an hard word, the cause of anger is increased. Again by uttering
of a gentle speech the matter of wrath is diminished.

2 The tongue of the wise sets forth knowledge, but the mouth of fools,
powers out folly.

The prudent person speaks in such sort, as that his speeches carry a grace
and force with them, which he places and orders rightly and wisely. The
indiscreet man on the other side, has no regard either to the matter or manner
of his speech. Col 4.6.
Let then your speech be gracious always and powdered with salt, that you may
know how to answer every man.

3 The eyes of the Lord are in all places, beholding the wicked and the good.

Here is observed, that the all-seeing spirit of the Lord vieweth and
pondereth all the corners of the world and all sorts of persons. This is all
one with that which the author of the Epistle to the Hebrews means when he
says, Heb. 4.
that all things are naked and manifest before him, with whom we have to do.
For, as concerning the quarters of the world, Psalm. 139.
Lord whither shall I go from thy spirit, or whither shall I fly from thy
presence. If I clymbe up to heaven thou art there, if I lay my bed in the
grave, behold thou art there also. Now, as touching the persons of all sorts,
the Lord is in the temple of his holiness, the Lords throne is in heaven,
whose eyes behold and whose eye lids try the sons of me^. The Lord tries the
just man, Psalm. 13.
but his soul hates the wicked man, and him who loves violence.

4 The healing of the tongue is as tree of life, the mischieuousnesse of it, is
as a breach made by the wind.

As a tree which brings forth pleasant and wholesome fruits, Job. 8.1. James.
3.
is a precious and profitable thing: so the tongue which conuerteth and
comfort the hearts of me^ is a rare jewel. On the contrary side, as a
blustering wind which throws down trees and houses does much harm: so a
venomous tongue which causes troubles and great calamities, is one of the
greatest evils in the world.

5 A fool despises his fathers instruction, but he which regards a rebuke,
is very wise.

He who is an enemy unto his own well fare, See the 10.1.
will not be ruled by good counsel, but he who is content to be reproved,
tendreth his own happy estate.

6 In the house of the righteous man, there is great or Strength.
treasure, but the wicked man's revenue, wastes of it self.

The meaning of this sentence is manifest, namely, that the goods of the just
remain and continue firm unto them and theirs, and that sinners substance
co^sumeth none in a manner can tell how. The root of this sentence is to be
found in the book of Deutronomie, Deuteronomy. 28.17.
where the Lord, first, makes this promise to those who fear him, that he
will bless their baskets and their barnes, and secondly threatens the
transgressors of his laws, that he will curse them in their baskets and their
kneading troughes, yea in the fruit of their belly and of their ground.

7 The lips of the wise scatter knowledge, but the heart of the fools, that
which is not good.

The godly wheresoever they come, speak to the edification of their brethren.
In their houses they Cathechise their children, in the company of their
neighbors, they entreat of Gods word and works, finally in the Church if they
be teachers, they publish wholesome doctrine. On the contrary side, the wicked
out of the ill treasure of their hearts bringing forth evil things, spread
abroad errors and vanities.

8 The sacrifice of the wicked is abomination to the Lord, but the prayer of
the righteous, is acceptable unto him.

The judgment which the Lord carries as well concerning the wicked as the
just, herein is revealed unto us. The sacrifice of the wicked is abhominotion
to the Lord, not only all the labor but all the cost which the unfaithful,
or wicked livers bestow on the worship of God is in vain: See an example in
Cain and Abell.
yea it is nothing else but a sin and provocation of the wrath of God. The
reason hereof is, for that God respects not men's actions but their persons.
Sacrifices were at this time not evil in them selves, but as they proceeded
from the wicked, they were evil, for it is an abominable thing to God, that
the wicked man should take unto him before his sight the person of a just man.
On the contrary side, the prayer of the righteous is acceptable unto him. Even
the least service of the believer who walks in the spirit, is precious and
acceptable to the Lord, because he accepts him in Christ.

9 The way of the wicked man is abomination to the Lord, but he loves him,
who follows after righteousness.

That wicked course of life which the ungodly lead, is called here the way of
the wicked. This is said to be an abomination to the Lord, because the just
God abhors unrighteousness as a most foul and filthy thing. From hence it
comes, that so many plagues fall down from heaven upon the sinner, and that
(as the Psalmist speaks) the way of the wicked does perish. Psalm. 1.
Now, he is said to follow after righteousness, who is not could or slow in
doing that which is good, but with might and main pursues after what soever
is upright and just. True it is, we can never attain unto perfect
righteousness while we live in this world, but with our whole endeavor we must
follow after it, making it as it were our gain. Him, who thus follows after
righteousness, the Lord loves. The meaning of this speech is, that God in
Christ not only favors or accepts the just person, but that he uses to
bestow many benefits on him, as signs and tokens of his fatherly good will.
Hence it is, that they who walk uprightly, have oftentimes such wealth,
estimation, honor and prosperity in this world. Hence it is, that always
they who fear the Lord, are endued with the graces of Gods spirit, and abou^d
with joy of the holy Ghost. Finally hence it is, that the true worshippers of
God, are preserved from so many dangers of body and soul, and that oftentimes
miraculously. For indeed, the love of God is to be considered not only in the
affection, but in the effects of his good will. This sentence is therefore
diligently to be observed, because diverse think they are in the love of God
and shall find savor through Jesus Christ, howsoever they commit all sorts of
wickedness even with greediness, or proceed in their evil course of life
until the last gasp. But either such do greatly deceive them selves, or the
spirit here sets down an untruth, which once to imagine were most horrible
and impious.

10 or An evil chastisement shall be.
Instruction [seemeth] evil unto him who forsakes the way, he who hates or
Reproof.
correction shall dye.

The ungodly are in this sentence threatened with destruction. Instruction
seems evil unto him who forsakes the way, the doctrine whereby the sinner
is warned and instructed, displeases him, as being in his eyes too sharp and
bitter. For which cause, he shall meet with some grievous adversity and
scourge, inflicted by God or man. He who hates correction shall dye. As for
him, who not only forsakes the way of virtue, but hates reprofes or any
chastisements whatsoever, he shall either before the time loose this temporal
life, or after this life, dye eternally.

11 Hell and destruction are before the Lord, how much more the hearts of the
sons of men.

There is nothing hidden from the all-seeing spirit of the Lord be it never so
secret. Hell and destruction are before the Lord, God not only sees the
outward things which are on the face of the earth or of the waters, but he
knows also the state of the dead and damned, who have their being in the
grave or the infernal pit. The condition of the deceased, is of all other
things most hidden from the eyes of man, seeing the dead never return, and are
in most secret and deep places. For this cause, Job attributes this praise
unto God as being peculiar to him alone, that hell is naked before him, and
destruction uncovered in his sight. Job. 26.6.
But now if God knows that which is most deep, much more does he know that
which though it is deep, yet is not so deep, the heart of man I mean.
Wherefore the spirit of God reasons thus, how much more the hearts of the
sons of men? Hence it is, that Jeremy speaks after this sort, the heart of
man is evil and unsearchable, who shall know it? I the Lord who search the
heart and try the reins. For he which knows those things which have unto
men no being, much more does know those things, which although they are secret,
yet they are.

12 A scorner loves not him who rebukes him, neither will he go unto the wise.

He is a scorner, who either in words scoffeth at Religion, or so carries him
self as that by his lewd and offensive conversation, he witnesses, that he
makes but a jest or mock thereof. Such a wicked man, esteems not but hates
not only the doctrine but the person of him, who tells him of his faults.
Moreover, he abstaineth both from the company, the house, and the school of
learned men. Hence it is, that profane people are so good fellows, with those
who are like them selves, but such strangers with their godly neighbors and
their faithful teachers.

13 A joyful heart makes a or Glad.
good countenance, but by the sorrow of the heart, the or Breath.
spirit is broken.

The spirit of God herein speaks to the heavy hearted person, as tender
mothers are wont to do to their children who cry, when they tell them that if
they whine thus, they will mar their faces. A joyful heart makes a good
countenance. A merry and quiet mind makes not only the whole body
healthful, but the face (which is the glory thereof, and wherein the senses
are specially seated) comely. For, the affections of the mind, pearce into the
whole body, but especially work in the countenance. Hence it is, that when the
heart is cheerful, the eye is quick, the cheeks are ruddie, the blood is
clear, the skin is fair. On the contrary side, by the sorrow of the heart
the spirit is broken. Heart grief not only marreth the look, but dulleth the
spirits in such sort, as that the sorrowful wight, neither has the perfect
use of his wits, neither can with ease draw his breath.

14 The heart of the prudent man seeks knowledge, but the mouth of fools is
fed with foolishness.

Herein is declared, that every man seeks after that, wherewith he is
delited. The heart of the prudent man seeks knowledge, the soul of a man
endued with understanding seeks for learning as the proper food thereof, to
the end that thereby it may increase in wisdom. But the mouth of fools is
fed with foolishness. Not only the inward soul of the fool is delighted
with vanity, but the outward parts of his body, rejoice therein, so that with
open and gaping mouth as it were, he swilleth in and feeds on vain speeches
and foolish toys.

15 All the days of the afflicted person are evil, but a good heart, is Or a
merry heart. Or his days who has a merry heart are a continual feast. But
the sense is all one.
a continual feast.

Great difference there is between a woeful wight and a merry hearted man. All
the days of the afflicted person are evil, he who being under some great
adversity, is vexed in mind as one not well contented with his estate, can
neither sleep, eat work, nor joy in any thing at any time, but both night
and day seems long and grievous unto him, because the grief which pained him,
causes him to mislike what soever is present. How true this is, it may appear
in Job, who being pressed down with manifold and sore afflictions, co^plaineth
and cries out under the burden of the same, that he had as an inheritance the
mouths of vanity, and that painful nights had been appointed unto him. When
(says he) I laid me down, I said when shall I arise, and measuring the
evening, I am full with tossing too and fro, Job. 7.3.4.
unto the dawning of the day. But a good heart is a continual feast. On the
contrary side, he who being in prosperity carries in him a cheareful mind, or
being in adversity is of good courage, or being in any condition of life, is
content with his estate, and quiet in his conscience passes away his life and
days so pleasantly, as they do the time, who being at a wedding feast, there
taste of dainty delicats, see most deliteso me spectacles, and hear most sweet
instruments of Music. For indeed a merry heart continually refreshes a man
with security, and comfort him in all adversity. But this is diligently to
be observed, that none can have a cheerful mind indeed, but only such as
through faith in Christ having peace with God, pollute not their consciences
with detestable iniquities. For indeed evils enter in into such, to trouble
their minds, to profane their joys, and to pull the^ from the continual
feast of security here spoken of, who either walk in the committing of gross
offenses, or are close hypocrites and dissemblers.

16 Better is a little with the fear of the Lord, then a great treasure, and
trouble therewith.

Better is a little, Psalm. 37.16.
a small portion of goods is more profitable and comfortable, with the fear of
the Lord, with godliness causing a contented mind, yea and working joy in the
holy Ghost, than great treasure, the^ the abounda^ce of wealth, and trouble
therewith, with fear, care, sorrow, or the check of an ill conscience. For
what good can the greatest store of treasures or pleasures do a man, when he
has not an heart to enjoy them?

17 Better is a dinner of green herbs where love is, then a stalled ox, and
hatred therewith.

Better is a dinner of green herbs where love is, slender fare where concord
and hearty good will is, is indeed better cheer, than a stalled ox, and
hatred therewith, tha^ dainty dishes with ill will or brawling. For indeed
love recompenceth the slenderness of the fare, but hatred and brawling causes
most delicate meats to seem unsavory.

18 An angry man stirs up contention, but he that is slow to wrath
appeaseth strife.

The angry man, the furious person whose very presence is hurtful, stirs
up contention, makes debate where none was before, but he that is slow to
wrath, as for him, who can suffer much, appeaseth strife, he causes contention
already raised to cease, so profitable is the very presence of the patient man.

19 The way of a slothful man is as an hedge of thorns, but the path of the
righteous is [as] a paued causey.

The way of a slothful man, the course which the sluggard takes in going
about his affairs, is as an hedge of thorns, is slow and hard. For he goes
creepingly about his business, yea his fears and griefs prick him and stay
him like thorns or briars. But the path of the righteous is as a paued causey.
The order which the godly man takes is most plain and easy, who so readely
and lustely runs on in the works of his calling, as if he walked on a paued
causey.

20 A wise son rejoices his father, but a foolish man despises his mother.

A godly child at all times by his obedience comfort his father. But a
foolish man despises his mother, an ungodly youth when he comes to man's age,
makes no account of his parents, but especially conte^neth or disobeyeth her
who bare him, being a great heaviness unto her by this means. This sentence
then teaches, that we owe obedience to parents both whilst we are young and
whilst we are old.

21 Foolishness is a joy to him who is destitute of understanding, but a man
of understanding will walk uprightly.

Foolishness is a joy to him who is destitute of understanding, a vain man is
delited in seeing hearing and doing of vain things. But a man of understanding
will walk uprightly. The joy of a prudent person, is to make his paths
straight or to do the will of God.

22 Without counsel thoughts come to naught, but by store of cou^sellors they
shall be established.

Intentes not advised on, vanish or have unlucky issue, but those enterprises
which are considered on or debated by learned counsel, are afterward executed
with very good success.

23 Joy comes to a man by the Or speech.
answer of his mouth, and how good is a word in his season?

This sentence contains a comme^dation of wise speeches. Joy comes to a man
by the answer of his mouth. A gracious speech brings gladness to him who
uttered it. For he rejoices, either for the honor which is given him for his
words, or for the profit which he sees other thereby receive. And how good
is a word in his season. How profitable and delitesome is counsel or
instruction, given in time of necessity, and when it falls out well?

24 The way to life above [is walked in] by the wise man to the end that he may
depart from hell below. Mat. 7.13.14. Col. 3.2. Phil. 3.20.


There is a double way, the one straight which leads to life, and this only
the wise do find, the other broad, which leads to destruction, and this the
ungodly walk in, but the prudent avoid it. Wherefore, the meditation of the
faithful is on holy things, yea their conversation is heavenly, to this end,
that not being entangled with sin or the world, they may be preserved from
destruction and da^natio^. Thus then does the path of virtue bring the godly at
last to lifeaboue, who^ not only it raises up to heavenly thoughts and
actions, but lifts up in the end to celestial glory.

25 The Lord will destroy the house of the proud, but he will establish the
border of the widow.

This sentence commends the justice of God, unto the terrifying of mighty
oppressors, See the root hereof. Exodus 22.22.
and unto the comforting of the poor people, who are insinuated in the name of
the widow, whose estate is of all other most grievous, because she being
desolated of her husband, lies open to all wrongs, but especially to the
injuries of great and wealthy men. The Lord then will destroy the house of
the proud, God often overthrows their families yea pulls them up by the
roots, who in the pride of their hearts have oppressed the poor taking from
them either their lands or goods. But he will establish the border of the
widow. The Lord will restore the poor to their right, or else by some means or
other he will so defend their possessions and fields against the power of the
mighty that they shall not be able to pull the^ out of their hands.

26 The thoughts of the wicked man are abomination to the Lord, but the
words of the pure, are pleasant words.

All things which proceed from the wicked as for example even their thoughts
are unclean and abominable in the sight of God. On the contrary side, Tit.
1.15.
not only their thoughts but the words of the godly which flow from the good
treasure of their hearts, are acceptable to the Lord and as a clean and sweet
sacrifice before him.

27 He which is given to gain troubles his own house, but he which hates
gifts shall live.

Covetousness is herein threatened. He which is give^ to gain troubles his
own house. Such a one as gets goods by hook or crook, or is addicted to
evil gain, Hab. 2 9.
is a cause and occasion of many evils in his estate and family. But he which
hates gifts shall live. On the contrary side, such a one as abhors bribes
given to pervert justice or to any such ill intent, shall live in prosperity
and peace.

28 The heart of the righteous studieth to speak, but the mouth of the wicked
or Powers.
bableth out evil things.

A good man out of the good treasure of his heart brings forth good things,
See the root hereof Psalm. 37.30.31.
but an evil man out of the evil treasure of his heart, brings forth evil
things. The heart of the just man studieth to speak, the upright person
premeditateth what to say and when and how to utter his words. But the mouth
of the wicked powers forth evil things. The mouth of the ungodly ca^ neither
be silent nor speak well, but pratleth and bableth, vaynely, rashly,
offensiuely and lewdly.

29 The Lord is [farre off] from the wicked, but he hears the prayer of the
righteous.

See the root hereof or a like sentence. Psalm. 145.18.
God is far off from the ungodly not in place but in help. On the contrary
side, God is near to those who fear him, not in presence only but in favor,
grau^ting their prayers and succouring them in their adversities.

30 The light of the eyes rejoices the heart, and a good hearing makes the
bones fat.

Those things which are teceiued in by the eye or ear, have great force to
affect a man. The light of the eyes rejoices the heart, a sight pleasant and
acceptable to the eye, reuiueth the spirits, and a good hearing makes the
bones fat, a good report but especially the doctrine of the Gospel which is
the voice of joy and gladness, not only comfort the mind, but causes
the body to be in good plight.

31 The ear that hearkeneth to the or Reprose.
correction of life, shall lodge among the wise.

The care that hearkeneth, the person which hears and yields obedience, to
the correction of life, to wholesome reproves which teach men to live well
here, and lead them to life eternal, shall lodge among the wise, shall not
only in this world have a place yea honor also among the learned, but
hereafter reign with them in Gods kingdom.

32 He that Or withdraws him self from instruction.
refuses instruction, despises his own soul, but he that obeys
correction, possesses his own heart.

He that refuses instruction, the contemner of good counsel, who neither is
wise him self nor will be taught by other, despises his own soul, by want
of knowledge and grace, lays open his life to destruction. But he that
obeys correction, possesses his own heart. On the contrary side, he who
does profit by rebukes, preserves his soul from death and from Gods wrath.

33 The fear of the Lord is the instruction of wisdom, and before honor
[goeth] humility.

The fear of the Lord, the reverence of God, is the instruction of wisdom,
Job. 25.28.
is that which makes a man wise or which as a schoolemistres teaches wisdom.
For the fear of God gives a man many good lessons. And before honor goes
humility. And lowlynesse of mind brings a man to glory.

THE XVI. CHAPTER.
1 The preparations of the heart are in man, * Or speech.
but the answer of the tongue is from the Lord.

THe preparations of the heart are in man, oftentimes a man has whole armies
as it were of thoughts in his mind, therein placed in an exact order as in
battle array, but the answer of the tongue is from the Lord, but when a man
has set down how to speak, the uttering of his mind is as God shall open
his mouth. Here then is taught, that when a man has obtained a former grace of
thincking well, he stands in need of a second grace, namely to speak well,
without which he shall never be able to utter aright any part of that matter or
one of those words, which he has thought on or cond by heart.

2 All the ways of a man are pure in his own eyes, but the Lord pondereth the
spirits.

All the ways of a man are pure in his own eyes, a man looks only on his
outward actions which seem fair and clean in his sight, so that therein he
pleases and justifies him self. But the Lord pondereth the spirits. On the
other side, the Lord considers the inward intentes and affections of the
heart, yea he weighs them and proves them, even as a good Magistrate, tries
the measures of his subjects by the common standard.

3 Commit thy works unto the Lord, * Or cast thine affairs. See the root
hereof Psalm. 37.5 55.23. See this sentence alleged. 1. Pet. 4.
and thy thoughts shall be directed.

Commit thy works unto the Lord, whereas thy troubles and thy labors in thy
calling, are as it were certain weighty burdens which lie on thy back,
torment not thy self with care, but roll them as it were upon almighty God,
and thy thoughts shall be directed: for so thy desires shall at last happily
be accomplisheth. Now, by what means or after what sort we are to cast our
affairs on God, the Apostle Paul declares in his Epistle to the Philippians
when he says, Phil. 4.6.
be careful for nothing, but in every case, let your petitions be made known
unto God, by prayer and supplication with thanks giving, and (so) that peace
of God which passes all understanding, shall keep your hearts and minds in
Christ Jesus. Thus did that worthy Queen Hester, who although it was present
death for her to go in to the king (unless she should find special favor
in his eyes) yet she so committed her ways to the Lord, (having first used
prayer and fasting) that saying to her self if I perish, I perish, she boldly
entered into his presence.

4 The Lord has made all men for him self, yea even the wicked man, unto the
day of evil.

Predestination is here spoken of. The Lord, the eternal God by whom all
things have their being, has made, has not only foreknowen but or dained,
all me^, as well Jews and Gentiles young as old, rich as poor, See for this
doctrine the whole 9. chap. to the Romans
for him self, for the setting forth of his wisdom, power, justice, and
glory. Yea even the wicked man, he has ordained the reprobate person him self
also (who because he is an enemy to Gods glory may seem not to have been
appointed or created to his glory) unto the day of evil, to the day of
Judgment and of execution, that so in this vessel of wrath, the justice of
God may be declared. The original cause of the damnation of men, is in them
selves, seeing they are wicked of them selves without any compulsion offered on
the Lords part. But (as here is showed (the will of God which is a rule of
justice, is the fountain not only of election, but of reprobation. Thus God
is without fault in refusing the wicked, since he is indebted unto none, but the
wicked are most justly condemned, because by their sins they are indebted
unto God.

5 Every one who is proud in heart, is abomination to the Lord, though hand
join in hand, he shall not be unpunished.

See examples in Pharao, the builders of Babell. Nebuchadnezar, and Herod.
The Lord will plague every high minded person, who neither by any aid nor by
any art shall be able avoid his Judgment. Some are not very lofty in their
looks nor glorious in their apparel and yet have in them most stout hearts,
and proud spirits. These are abominable in Gods sight and shall be plagued as
well as the gay and boasting peacockes of the world.

6 By mercy and truth iniquity is purged, and by the fear of God evil is
departed from.

It is most sure and certain, that sins are covered and pardoned unto men,
not by the virtue or excellency of their good works or merits, but by the
tender mercy of God in Christ, Luc. 1.72. Psalm. 25.10. Psalm. 85.9.10.
and by his performing of his promises in him. Nevertheless, it is also an
undoubted truth, that by unfeigned repe^ta^ce, the judgment of God is
prevented, when as iniquity is broken off, by practicing of that which is
good. The Prophet Daniell teaches this doctrine most paynely, when he says to
Nebuchadnezar, break of thy sins with righteousness, and thine iniquities
with mercy toward the afflicted, Dan. 4.27.
that thy prosperity may be prolonged. Thus then, by mercy and truth
iniquity is purged, sin committed is remitted by the mere grace of God in
Christ, in whom all his promises are yea and amen, but moreover, when
pitifulness and faithfulness is practiced, temporal chastisements for foul
faults threatened or inflicted, are stayed or removed, the Lord being well
pleased with such sacrifices of obedience, albeit the sacrifice which Christ
has offered on the Cross is only meritorious, who is the only propitiatio^
for our sins. And by the fear of God evil is departed from. The awe or
reverence of the Lord, is that thing which makes men to shun sin, so that
abstayning from iniquity, they incur not the wrath or indignation of the
Lord. This verse the^ teaches whereby the pollutio^ of sin may so be washed
away, as that it shall not cry for vengeance, and again whereby, it may so be
avoided, as that it shall not be able to infect us.

7 When the Lord favors the ways of a man, he makes his enemies at peace
with him.

See examples in the I sraelites and the Egyptians, in David and Saul. in
Ahasuerus and Mordecha^ and a like sentence. Job. 5.23.
When the Lord favors the ways of a man, at what time God is reconciled to
an upright person, he makes his enemtes, he causes those who were his
adversaries for the time, to be at peace with him, not only to lay aside their
hatted, but to bear good will or to enter into a league of friendship with him.

8 Better is a little with righteousness, then a great revenue with wrong.

A small stock gotten, prospers better and is more to be esteemed, then
great wealth scraped together by injury and oppression.

9 The heart of man purposes his way, but the Lord orders his steps.

Man purposes as we say, but God disposes. Many iourneyes are often intended,
many courses are devised, but God causes things to come to pass, as he sees
good.

10 A divine sentence shall be in the lips of the king, his mouth shall not
transgress in judgment.

Kings in old time did use to sit in judgment. Hence it is that here it is
said, a divine sentence shall be in the lips of the king. The meaning hereof
is, See the root hereof. Exodus 23.2. An example. 1. King. 3.27.
that a Prince or ludge should have a gift of searching or ferretting out the
truth. His lips shall not transgress in judgment, he should never give a rash
or false sentence on any matter.

See the root hereof. Deuteronomy. 1.17 I tem. 25.13. a like charge. 2. Chron. 19.6.
11 The beam and scole of the balances of justice, belong to the Lord, all the
weights of the bag, are his work.

All the parts of the balance and all things thereto belonging, are the Lords
ordinance, yea he has also commanded that they be used aright.

12 It should be an abomination to kings to commit wickedness, for the throne
is established by justice.

It should be an abhominatio^ to kings to commit wickedness, it is the part of
rulers so to abhor the working of iniquity, See an example in David. Psalm.
101.
as that they neither the^ selves commit gross vices, nor allow them, but
rather detest the^ in other. For the throne is established by justice. The
cause why Princes should above all other abhor iniquity is, because the
royal crown and authority is maintained, not so much by strength as by
equity, which subjects love and God does bless.

13 Righteous lips [should be] the delight of kings, and he who speaks right
things, is to be loved [by them.]

Righteous lips should be the delight of kings, wise and faithful speeches
should please Princes, and he who speaks right things is to be loved by them,
the person also who utters the truth or gives sage advise, is to be
entertained in their courts and to be esteemed.

14 The wrath of a king is as messengers of death, but a wise man will pacify
it.

The wrath of a king is as messengers of death, the fury of Princes is of so
great force, as that it is a sign of some heavy vengeance or of* present
death, See an example. Hest. 7.8.
being herein like unto messengers which are sent to slay a man. But a wise man
will pacify it. A prudent person by some gracious speech or witty devise, will
overcome and appease the indignation of a Prince, See an example. in Ioab. 2.
Sam. 14.
although it is very forcible and very terrible.

15 In the light of the kings countenance is life, and his favor is as a
thick cloud of the latter rain.

In the light of the kings countenance, in the cheerful and loving look of
the Prince is joy and comfort, and his favor is as a thick cloud of the
latter rain, his good will also is very beneficial and profitable. For as
the latter rain does much good to the ground and causes the fruits of the
earth to revive and flourish, so the favor of the king is not only very
comfortable, but very fruitful.

16 How much better is it to get wisdom then gold, and to get prudence, how
much more to be desire, then silver.

Seeing the possession of wisdom bestows temporal and eternal life on men,
is it not infinitely to be preferred, Ecclesiastes. 7.11.12.
before corruptible metals as gold and silver?

17 To depart from evil, is the fortress of the upright, he which keeps his
way, keeps his life.

The forsaking of sin or abstaining therefrom, Psalm. 34.13.14.15.
as it were a bulwark preserves the righteous from Gods judgments, so that
he who orders his way aright, saves his own soul.

18 Pride goes before destruction, and an high mind before a fall.

Hawghtinesse and arroga^cie are the causes of confusion and of manifold
calamities yea of utter ruin, which oftentimes even in this life befalls
proud persons as their proper reward.

19 Better it is to be of an humble mind with the lowly, than to divide the
spoils with the proud.

It is more profitable and commendable indeed, together with the afflicted
people of God to be bruised in heart and low in port as captives usually are,
See an exomple in Moses Heb. 11, 25.
than after the manner of insolent conquerors who divide the spoils, to be
stately in behavior or to practice any tyranny.

20 He which hearkeneth to the word obtains that which is good, and blessed
is he who trusts in the Lord.

He that exercises him self in reading and hearing the word of God, shall
thereby find great comfort and instruction. So also he which believing the
word, Luc. 1.45. Heb. 4.1.
puts his confidence in the power and mercy of God, shall attain to many
benefits both temporal and eternal. But without faith the word profits not
at all.

21 He who is wife in heart is to be called prudent, but the sweetness of the
lips gives instruction.

He who is wise in heart, he which knows much, is to be called prudent, is to
be commended as a learned man, but the sweetness of the lips, but an
elequent or gracious utterance, gives instruction, edifieth and profits the
hearer.

22 Understanding is a well spring of life to them that have it, but the
doctrine of fools [is a well spring] of folly.

Understanding is a well spring of life to them that have it, true knowledge
ministers continual instruction to those who therewith are endued, being in
this respect like to a fountain which flows with tunning waters. But the
doctrine of fools is a well spring of folly. As for the instructions which
seducers give, they do but infect peoples minds with errors and vices, so
that although their doctrine flows from them, yet it is but as a spring of
filthy or deadly waters.

23 The heart of the wise man guides his mouth wisely, and by his lips he
ministers instruction.

The heart of the wise man, the mind of the learned man, guides his mouth
wisely, moderateth his mouth for matter and manner of speech, and by his lips
he ministers instruction, and the wise man by his gracious utterance, edifieth
the hearers.

24 Pleasant speeches are as it were an honey comb, sweetness to the soul and
health to the bones.

Pleasant speeches, cloquent words and sayings, are as it were an honey comb
sweetness to the soul, delight the mind as honey does the taste of the mouth,
and health to the bones, and cure also the body, which they refresh and
oftentimes restore to health.

25 There is a way which seems straight to a man, the end whereof is the high
way to death.

The committing of sin in the beginning seems a good way unto man in regard
of pleasure or profit, but in the end it works destruction.

26 He which is troublesome troubles him self, for his mouth [recoileth] upon
him self.

He which is troublesome, Thus with Tremelius I interpret this verse, being
lead into this sense, by the suit of the sentences going before and following,
by the signification of the words, and specially by comparing of the 15.16.17.
verse. of the 7, Psalm herewith. Psalm. 7.14. etc.
the busy body who troubles his neighbors, troubles him self, draws
trouble upon his own pate, for his mouth rocoileth upon him self, for his
slanderous or hurtful speech, whereby he went about to harm his neighbor,
causes him to be hates or to be punished, being found false in the end.
Behold then he shall travail with wickedness, for he has conceived a
mischief, but he shall bring forth a lie. He has made a pit and dug it,
and is fallen into the pit that he made, his mischief shall return upon his
own head, and his cruelty upon his own pate.

27 Awicked man diggeth up evil, and in his lips is as it were burning fire.

A wicked man diggeth up evil, a malicious person secretly practices mischief
against his neighbor to undermine him thereby, and his lips is as it were
burning fire, and in his mouth are railings as hot and as hurtful as coals
of juniper.

28 A froward person sows strife, and a tale teller separateth a chief friend.

A froward person sows strise, a treacherous backbiter makes conte^tion, and
a tale teller separateth a chief friend, and a secret whisperer causes
division, yea such a separation, as that the greatest friends in the world
forsake each other.

29 A mischievous man intiseth his neighbor, to the end he may lead him aside
into some evil way.

A seducer, by fair or crafty speeches, persuades and prolleth on his
neighbor, to go to that place wherein he may be in danger, or to do that
thing which may be hurtful to his body or soul.

30 He which wincketh with his eyes, does it to devise mischief, he which
biteth his lips, works harm.

He which wincketh with his eyes, that person who uses often to shut his eye
lids, does it to devise mischief, commonly thinks on some evil which yet for
the time he keeps close and dissembleth. He which hiteth his lips. But that
person who in his angry mood shows by some sign in his lippes-that he is
ossended, works harm, does not stand devising, but presently executes some
mischief.

31 The gray head is a crown of glory, Or which is found.
when it is found in the way of righteousness.

The gray head is a crown of glory. Hoarie hairs are a singular ornament. For
indeed, first, they are a garland which not the art of man, but the finger of
the Lord has fashioned and set on the head. See the root hereof. Leuit. 19.32.
Secondly, they do wonderfully become the ancient person. Last of all, they
are a sign of many troubles passed and dangers escaped. When it is found in
the way of righteousness. This silver crown of gray hairs is then most
glorious, when it is seen on the head of a just man, who commonly attayneth to
it, whereas the wicked man is cut of in his youth. For indeed, Job. 5.26. Psalm.
91.16.
old age and the white head, is a reward of a life which has been led
uprightly.

32 He who is slow to wrath is better then the mighty man, and he which rules
his own mind, is better then he which wins a City.

He who is slow to wrath, he which is of a patie^t mind, is better then the
mighty man, is more excellent then he who is strong of body. He is I say the
more excellent, because the patient man can bear reproaches, which are more
intolerable to be indureth, the^ the greatest burdens which are wont to be laid
on the backs of those, who are strongest. And he which rules his own mind,
is better then he which wins a city. Moreover, such a one as subdueth his
affections, is a greater co^queror then any Captain or Emperor for he
subdueth those things which are most strong as sins and Satan, and which are
more invincible then Towers and Castles.

33 The lot is cast into the lap, but the whole disposition thereof, is of the
lot.

This sentence teaches, See examples. Act. 1. Ion. 1. Iud. 7.1. Sam. 10
that all things so come to pass by the providence of God, as that the very
lot which of all other things seems to stand most upon chance or fortune, is
thereby ordered.

THE XVII. CHAPTER.
1 Better is a morsel of dry [bread] [if] peace be with it, then an house full
of Or of fat beasts which are slain.
sacrifices with strife.

BEtter is a morsel of dry bread, a little homely fare in a poor cottage with
joy and quietness of mind, is more to be esteemed then an house, full of
sacrifices, with strife, then store of dainty dishes in a Princely Palace,
with brawling or contention. For indeed, peace is better then all delicates.

2 A wise servant shall have rule over a lewd son, and he shall divide the
inheritance among the brethren.

He which being by condition a bondsman, carries him self dutifully toward his
master, through Gods providence is appointed sometimes to be guardian or
governor of some one of his children, and specially of such a one, as is rude
and dissolute youth. Now moreover, sometimes also he is so trusted by his
master, that he leaves unto him his goods, to distribute the same among all
his sons.

3 The fining pot is for the silver and the Or chrusible.
furnace for the gold, but the Lord tries the hearts.

As the vessels which the gold-mith, Mal 3.3. Iere. 6.27. Psalm. 26. James. 1.3.
1. Pet. 1.
prove the metals of gold and silver, so God tries not only the hearts of the
elect, but of all men. Here the^, the Lord is resembled to the refining
vessel, the hearts of men to gold and silver.

4 The wicked man hearkeneth to lying lips, and the deceitful man gives
heed to the perverse tongue.

Herein is declared, I cannot here co^ceale that Cyprian in his 4. book Epi.
9. Ad Pupianum, readech this verse thus, following it may be some other copy.
The evil man hearkeneth to the tongue of the wicked, but the tust man gives no
heed to lying lips. Truly, according to this interpretation, the parts of
this sentence are most fitly opposed.
that to hear tales or false reports willingly, is a great fault and a
property of an ungodly person. The wicked man hearkeneth to lying lips, he
who is given to do evil, listeneth willingly to false suggestions, and the
deceitful man gives heed to the peruers tongue. On the contrary side again,
the dissembler hears with joy secret wispering or slanders, which tend to
the hurt of his neighbor.

5 He that mocked the poor man, reprocheth him that made him, he that
rejoices at [his] adversity, shall not be unpunished.

That person who derideth the afflicted for their affliction dishonoreth God,
whom in his creatures he disgraceth. Again, he that is glad to see his poor
neighbor in misery or therein shall insult over him (as Shimei did over
David) shall surely be revenged.

6 Childrens children are the crown of the elders, and the glory of children,
are their fathers.

Young imps, are a garland of comfort and of praise unto their ancestors. For
in them they live, Psalm. 128.6.
and by them they appear to have been fruitful. On the otherside again, it
is a great honor to children, to have descended from many worthy progenitors.

7 Excellent talk becomes not a Or fool.
vain man, much less does vain talk become an excellent man.

Excellent talk, grave speech concerning weighty matters or holy things as
faith and repentance, becomes not a vain man, beseems a contemptible
person or dissolute liver, much less does vain talk become an excellent man,
corrupt and unsavory communication then, does far worse become one that
excels other in virtue or authority. For example, it becomes not a churl
to boast of liberality or to talk thereof, but it less becomes one that is
francke, to promise that which he does not or will not perform. Again, it
beseems not a profane Atheist to talk of Religion, but it less beseems a
professed Christian, to swear, to lie, or to use such filthy talk as is
common in the mouths of Protestants now a days. Moreover, it is an absurd
thing that a simple or unlearned man, who neither knows one letter of the
book nor understands the principles of Religion, should discourse of the
deepest mysteries of Divinity, or dispute of the controversies of these times.
But it less befitteth learned or godly Preachers, to teach lies, to rail, to
scoff, or to stuff out their Sermons with many vain or foolish fables.
Finally, it is unmeet for a mean person to occupy him self in speaking of
matters of state or the highest points in common wealth affairs: but then it
must needs be more unmeet for any worthy personage, to spend time in talking
of games and pastimes, of dice and cards, of bulls and bears, or such other
toys or vanities.

8 A gift in his eyes who therewith is delighted, is as a very pleasant
precious stone, it prospers, whither soever it tends.

A present is so welcome to a covetous man, as that it obtains any thing at
his hand. For whether it be given to get an office, or to find pardon of an
offense or to appease wrath, or to win favor, it has a prosperous success.

9 He which covers a transgression, seeks love, but he that repeateth a
matter, separateth the chief friend.

He is a good preserver of concord who lets a fault slip or burieth in
silence an old offense, Col. 3.13.
but he which rippeth up old matters, makes variance between most loving
friends, or estrangeth him from him self with whom he had most familiar
acquaintance.

* Or more wringeth.
10 One reproof enters more into him that has understanding, then an hundred
stripes into a fool.

An admonition by words be it never so short, not only grieueth but bettereth
the wise and humble person. On the contrary side, even correction by stripes
be it never so sharp or continual, little or no whit at all pierces or
amendeth the obstinate wicked man.

11 The wicked man seeks rebellion only: at the last a cruel messenger shall
be sent against him.

The ungodly man proceeding on in his sins, shall meet at the length with
some instrument or vial of Gods vengeance.

12 Or it is better to meet a she bear. etc. So does Paul. 2 Thessalonians. 3.2.
See an example in the men of Creta. Tit. 1.12.
Let a she bear robbed of her whelps meet a man, and not a fool in his
folly.

Solomon here prays, that the godly man be delivered from unorderly and
unreasonable men. Of all wild beasts, a bear most exceeds in rage. Now if at
any time she be robbed of her whelps, her fierceness is doubled. It is then a
dangerous thing to be met on sudden by a bear. But it is yet more perilous,
for a man to meet a ruffian or a furious person. For a bear may be tamed by
art, but a fool will not be persuaded. A bear may be shunned by swiftness,
but a wicked man pursues his neighbor to the death. A bear hurts the body
only, a fool body goods and name together. To conclude, a bear does harm
only with tooth and paw, but a mischievous man with heart, hand, tongue and
weapon.

13 Whosoever rewards evil for good, See a like sentence Psalm. 7.7.8 9. a
discourse hereof Psalm. 10^. an example Ier. 18.
evil shall not depart from his house.

Whosoever rewards evil for good. Whosoever he be which is so unthankful,
as not only to render good for good, but to recompense well doing with hurt or
evil, evil shall not depart from his house, shall, not once only but
continually be plagued, not in his person only but in his family.

14 He that begins strife, is as one who opens the waters, wherefore
before the contention be or flush out
meddled with, leave off.

He that begins strife. That person who first provoke his neighbor to
brawle or to fight, is as one who opens the waters, is like him who vnlocketh
the sluice or cutteth the ground or bank, whereby a pond or river is hemd in.
For he can no more stay the strife which once he has begun, then he which has
broken the ground, can hinder the water from flushing out, or stop it at his
pleasure, the which waxes still greater and greater from time to time. Mat.
5.25.26
Wherefore before the contention be meddled with. If then thou be wise, contend
not unnecessarily, but agree with thine adversary quickly, before the action
be commenced, or his wrath be kindled.

15 He which justifies the wicked man, and he which condemns the just man,
are eue^ both an abomination to the Lord.

As well he, See the fountain hereof Exodus 23.^.
who in the seat of judgment absolueth the malefactor, as he which punishes
the weldoer, commits an heinous sin, which God will severely revenge.

16 Why is there a price in the hand of a fool? to possess wisdom? nay he
has no he art.

Who can but disdain ungodly rich men, who have great means of attaining unto
learning and of doing good works, but either they have no hunger after these
things, or no capacity to comprehend them?

17 A friend loves at all times, and is borne a brother in adversity.

See examples in Abaham who ventured his life for Lot when he was carried away
captive, in David and Ionatha^ and in Ruth and Naomi.
A friend loves at all times, he that bears hearty good will to a man,
shows him self kind unto him continually, neither is there any day or time,
wherein he embraces him not in his affection. And is borne a brother in
adversity. Now, when some great affliction falls out, then is this loving
friend manifested to be a brother in very deed, inasmuch as he shows the
naturalnesse and soundness of his affection, by cleaving to his neighbor in
his trouble, and by comforting him all manner of ways.

18 A man destitute of understanding touches the hand, promising suretiship,
before his friend.

A rash fool proffereth him self to be surety for his friend, before he be
entreated by him to take this burden upon him in his behalf.

19 He which loves rebellion, loves strife, he which exalts his gate,
seeks destruction.

He which loves rebellion. Such a one as is cross or overthwart in his
dealings, opposing him self against God and man, loves strife, draws
trouble on him self, which always does follow such perverseness. He which
exalts his gate. Again, he who in the pride of his heart preferring him
self above other, carries an higher port the^ his ability does bear or
require, seeks destruction, by this his misbehauiour so overthrows him
self oftentimes, as they do which seek to cast them selves down headlong
from some high place.

20 He who is of a froward heart shall not find good, and he which has a
crafty tongue, shall fall into evil.

Both he whose heart is unsound, shall want blessings, and he whose tongue does
flatter and deceive, shall find heavy judgments.

21 He who begets a fool, [begetteth him] unto his own sorrow, and the
father of a fool shall not rejoice.

The parents of such children as prove stubburne, have been the authors of
sorrow unto them selves, neither shall they be able to take comfort in any
thing in the world, seeing their graceless imps, will be a perpetual thorn
in their hearts.

22 A joyful heart causes good health, but a Or a broken spirit.
sorrowful mind, dries up the bones.

Great force there is as well in joy as in sorrow. A joyful heart causes good
health. A merry mind quickens the body together with all the senses
thereof, conuaying thereinto a vital vigor. For the reviving of the body
proceeds from the heart, which being in good te^per, it can not be but that
all the other parts must also be in their right tune. But a sorrowful mind
dries up the bones. On the contrary side, a heavy spirit causes sickness
and diseases. For when the heart is sad, the spirits are drawn back, the
humors are dried up, the very bones them selves are filled with aches.

23 A wicked man takes a gift out of his bosom, to pervert the ways of
judgment.

A wicked man, one who has an ill mind or an ill cause, takes a gift,
draws forth a bribe, out of his bosom, secretly and closely, to pervert or
wrest the ways of justice, to pervert or stop the law, which is the life of
the common wealth.

24 Wisdom is in the face of the prudent man, but the eyes of a fool [roue]
to the end of the earth.

He who is endued with discretion carries calmness in his brows, modesty
in his eyes, gravity and stayednesse in his looks. On the contrary side, he
who is simple or vain, shows signs of lightness and inconstancy in his
countenance.

25 A foolish son is a vexation to his father, and a bitterness to his
mother.

A lewd child, is not only a matter of sorrow to his parents, but provoke
them also unto wrath and choler.

26 It is not good to punish Or also the just, to wit with the wicked.
even the just man, to strike the well disposed, is contrary to equity.

Not only to kill, but to scourge or fine any for well doing, is a great
sin which God will severely revenge.

27 A wise man spares his words, and a man of understanding is of a cool
spirit.

28 Even a fool when he holds his peace is counted wise, and he which
stops his lips, prudent.

The discreet person is silent, even when he is provoked unto wrath, neither
only does he moderate his speeches but his affections. Moreover, even the
ungodly and unlearned person, putting up a wrong with patience and keeping
silence, Here with the Greek interpretors and Jerome I read letaanah
occasionem quaer^^, which reading also by some of sound judgment in our time
is thought to be the truth.
is thought and said in that respect and for that time, to be very wise and
wary.

THE XVIII. CHAPTER.
1 He who separateth him self, seeks a quarrel, he medleth in every matter.

That person is said to separate him self, who seuereth him self from other
in heart or course of life. Such a one seeks a quarrel, that is to say,
wayteth for some occasion or opportunity of falling out or bralling. Ep. Iud.
19. ver.
To conclude, he medleth in every matter, he stirs very busily in every
thing which is done, and catches at every word which is spoken, to the end he
may take some occasion of breaking concord, or provoke his neighbor unto
strife.

2 A fool is not delighted with understanding, but with those things, which
are in his own heart.

Albeit, most profitable instructions are taught or most sound arguments
brought to convince the conceited person of his error or evil course of life,
yet he is so far off from resting therein, that he wonderfully pleases him
self in those fantastical imaginations only, which his blind or froward
heart, deuiseth or ministers unto him.

3 When the wicked man comes contempt comes also, and with the vild person
reproach. Before. 11.2.


Disgrace and infamy follows the notorious offender every where.

4 The words of an excellent man's mouth, are as deep waters, the well spring
of wisdom, is like a flowing river,

Even as deep waters fail not but are plentiful, or as a flowing river is
never dry nor stands still but runs continually, so the godly speeches of
a man endued with knowledge, are not superficial but sound, not barren but
fruitful. For out of the good treasure of his heart bringing forth good
things, he cease not out of his lips to power forth daily instructions.

5 It is not good to respect the person of the wicked, to overthrow the just
man in judgment.

It is a great sin by regarding of some thing in the ungodly adversary, the
which is without the cause, as honor, friendship, or a gift, Exodus 23.2.3.
to condemn or wrong the innocent person.

6 The lips of the fool make strife, and his mouth calls for stripes.

7 A fools mouth is his own destruction, and his lips, a snare to his soul.

8 The words of the whisperer are as flatterings, but they go down into the
inward parts of the belly.

Every one herein is warned again, to take heed that he abuse not his tongue.
The lips of the fool make strife, even as moles raise up hills whithersoeuer
they go, so rash people stir up strife wheresoever they become, and his
mouth calls for strips. The words which proceed out of the mouths of the
wicked, cause them oftentimes to be smitten and wounded. A fools mouth is his
own destruction, etc. The speech of the ungodly person some times causes hi^
to be called into question and works his utter undoing. The words of the
whisperer, etc. The secret backbiters tale, Psalm. 52.21.
is smooth as the oil, but it cutteth like a sword, so that he can both bite
and cry, as we say in our English Proverb.

9 He that is negligent in his business, is even brother to him, who is a
waster.

The idle person is another spendthrift as it were. For as the prodigal person
consumes his goods by lauishing them out, so the sluggard suffers his
possessions to decay by not looking to them or laboring to maintain them. The
one spends all, the other gets nothing, and thus as both are unthrifty,
so both fall into extreme poverty at the last.

10 The name of the Lord is a strong tower, the righteous man runs unto it,
and is exalted.

11 The rich man's substance is (as it were) his defenced City, and as an high
wall in his imagination.

In the former of these two verses, resorting unto the Lord by faith in the
time of trouble, is commended. The name of the Lord, the protection and favor
of God toward the elect in Christ, is a strong tower, is a sufficient defense
and a sure refuge against all dangers. The just man runs unto it, So did
David Asa, Iehosaphat and Hezechia.
he who is justified by the blood of Jesus Christ and sanctified by the holy
Ghost, in time of affliction, speedely, by faith, repentance, prayer, and
fasting repaireth hereunto, as men in time of war run to castles or
fortresses, that they may be safe from danger, and is exalted, and so is
preserved from the rage of troubles, and kept out of the reach of all his
adversaries. In the eleventh verse, confidence in riches is condemned. The rich
man's substance, etc. abundance of earthly treasures seems a strong defense
against evils, and a means of avoiding all dangers, unto the wordly rich man.

12 Before destruction the heart of a man is haughty, Luc. 14.12. Iam. 4.6.
Pet. 5.5.
but lowlynesse goes before honor.

Security is the forerunner of a fall, See the exposition hereof, before.
12.2.16.18.15.33.
humility of preferment and of all good blessings and graces.

13 For one to answer a matter before he has heard it, it is a folly and
shame.

It is a note of rashness and a great discredit unto a man, to give a verdite
upon causes not thoroughly known unto him, or to pronounce an hasty sentence
upon any person.

14 The spirit of a man bears out his infirmity, but a Or according to
Tremellius a broken spirit who can lift up*
wounded spirit who can bear?

This sentence teaches, that the diseases of the mind are more heavy and
grievous the^ the diseases of the body. The spirit of a man bears out his
infirmity, the mind of a man if it be courageous or sound, susteineth with
patience the diseases of the body or any outward cross whatsoever. But a
wounded spirit who can bear? as for a soul full of bitter grief, the body
ca^ not carry with comfort, no thing can ease, no person ca^ quiet. Albeit
women in travail do commonly forget all their pains and greatly rejoice when
they have brought forth a male child into the world, yet the wife of Phineas,
because her heart was full of sorrow for the taking of the Ark of God, neither
could nor would receive any comfort by her newborn son. So likewise,
although Music is a medicine as it were to a pensive mind, and men are wont
to take chief delight in their harpes and violes, yet the Israelites being as it
were resolved into mourning and tears at the waters of Babylon, hung up their
instruments on the willowes in that place, as things without force to minister
any comfort unto them. Nothing then besides the grace of God alone, can cure a
wounded or broken spirit^, not melody, not feasting, not any outward blessing.
No person can lift up a mind extremely cast down, excepting only God him
self not child, not father, not friend, not neighbor, not husband, not wife,
the greatest outward comfort in the world.

15 The heart of the prudent man possesses knowledge, and the ear of the wise
seeks knowledge.

The heart of the prudent man, the soul of that person who is endued with
understanding, possesses knowledge, keeps and holds fast that which it
has already learned, and the ear of the wise seeks knowledge, they that
regard their own welfare, endeavor by hearing of other, to increase their
knowledge and to know that which yet they have not learned.

16 A man's gift enlarges him, and brings him before great personages.

There is great force in gifts or presents, both to deliver me^ out of
trouble and to bring them into favor. The gift of a man enlarges him, a
present delivers a man out of close prison, and brings him before great
personages, moreover, it makes a man gracious in the eyes of great states and
leads him into their presence.

17 He that is first in his Or plea.
cause [seemeth] just, but his neighbor comes, and makes inquiry of him.

See an example in Tsibaes complaint and Mephibosbeths defense.
There is great force in orderly proceedings unto the discerning of cases and
deciding of controversies. He that is first in his cause seems just, he that
speaks first in a matter, makes oftentimes such a show of truth or right, as
that although he has indeed the worser part, yet he seems to have the
better. But his neighbor comes and makes inquiry of him. Afterward, the
other party pleads in the second place, and inueigheth against the former
person, detecteth his sleightes, confuteth his arguments, finally proves his
own cause to be most sound and good. Thus as we use to say in our English
Proverb, one cause is good till another be heard, for which cause we are to
hear both parties speak, before we determine ought on either side.

18 The lot causes contentions to cease and makes a partition among the
mighty.

In some cases, as namely in those which otherwise can not be well decided, the
lot or straw as we use to speak, must be man of law. The lot causes
contentions to cease, the lot quickly ends controversies, which otherwise are
endless. For it reuealeth Gods will, and furthermore, it being moved by the
immediate finger of the Lord, every one that has any spark of reason and
Religion, will rest therein and yield thereunto. And makes a partition among
the mighty. Moreover, the lot is a means, whereby spoils and inheritances
are divided not only among mean persons, but the wealthy, the strong, and
the honorable. As concerning lots, they were much used amongst the people of
the Jews as may appear by sundry places of the Scripture, neither is the use
of them now unlawful, Number. 33.1. Sam. 10. Act. 1. Jonah. 1. Iud. 7.
but warrantable by the word of God, so that it be taken upon just occasions
always, and joined with calling on the name of God. These cautions observed, a
lot may lawfully be used, either in dividing of possessions, or in choosing of
officers to some place or dignity. But when a lot is cast to inquire what
success men shall have in their affairs, or to set up some odd bankerout
with the deceiving and disaduantaging of many, or to play and to make sport, it
is abused. Here occasion is offered to discourse, whether cards and dise be lots
as some very learned and godly writers judge them to be, but because mine
intent in this Treatise is not to dilate matters, but to touch all things
briefly, nor to enter into controversies, but to expound the sense of the
parables of this book, I pass this point over. Nevertheless, this one thing
I can not let slip or pretermit, concerning the vain pastime of dising (and so
consequently of carding) that even one of our own Prophets old Chaucer by name,
has noted in his writings to be full of spots, as late Divines teach that it
has the nature of lots, howbeit abused. For says he.

Dising is the very mother of leasings,
And of deceit and cursed for swearings,
Blasphemy of God, manslaughter and wast also,
Of battle naughtiness and other more.
It is reproof and contrary to honor
For to behold a common diser,
And ever the higher he is in estate,
The more he is holden desolate.
If that a Prince does use hazardie,
In all governance and policy,
He is by a common opinion.
Holden less in reputation.
Lords may find other manner of play
Honest enough to drive the day away.
19 A brother offended, Or falling away.
is harder to win then a strong City, and their contentions are as the bar
of a Castle.

The war between natural or spiritual brethren, is here showed to be
unreconcilable. A brother offended is harder to win then a strong City, a
kinseman or friend displeased or falling away and departing, See an examples in
Cain, and Abell, and in Paul and Barnabas.
resists all entreaties, gifts, and means of reconciliation more stoutly
and stiffly, then a defended town does the assaults of the weapon or the
Ambassages which are sent for the entreating of peace. And their contentions
are as the bar of a Castle. Moreover, the strifes of brethren are as strong
as most strong bars, neither can be broken off by any means.

20 With the fruit of a ma^s mouth, shall his belly be satisfied, with the
revenue of his lips, shall he be filled.

21 Death and life are in the power of the tongue, as every one deliteth to use
it, he shall eat the fruit thereof.

The tongue herein is compared unto a fruitful tree, to declare that even as a
man eats of such fruits as he has, so shall he have such an estate, as he
has a tongue. With the fruit of a man's mouth shall his belly be satisfied,
etc. According as every one uses his tongue, so good things or evils do befall
him and that in great abundance. Death and life are in the power of the tongue,
etc. A man by abusing his tongue, in teaching, accusing, witnessing, and
speaking, may undo and destroy him self and other. On the contrary side
again, a man by using his tongue aright, in exhorting, testifying, giving
advise, and talking with every one, may save his own soul and his neighbors.

22 He who finds a wife, finds a good thing, and obtains favor of the
Lord.

Now, the spirit of God entreats of matrimony. He who finds a wife,
finds a good thing. Whosoever meets with a virtuous wife, meets with an
excellent blessing. In deed, some wives by reason of their corruption are
crosses to their husbands, but here the spirit of God alluding to the
institution of God that it is not good for man to be alone, Genesis 2.
comme^deth such a wife as is an helper to her husband in all good things. And
obtains favor of the Lord, even as that poor man, upon whom a Prince
bestows his daughter, finds grace in his eyes, so that person is accepted
and favored by the king of heaven, to who^ he grants in marriage a godly
wife, who is one of his own daughters.

23 The poor man speaks [with] Or speaks supplications.
prayers, but the rich man answers roughly.

The course of men's behavior both in the state of adversity and of
prosperity, is touched in this verse. The poor man speaks with prayers,
beggars, bondmen, prisoners and such like afflicted persons, See an example in
the Israelites speech to Pharao Exodus 5.
carry them selves very submissely toward the wealthy and the mighty. But the
rich man answers roughly On the contrary side, they who have abundance of
goods or are in authority, use to revile and to rate the poor as dogs.
Commonly thus it is, but yet not always. For some of the lowest sort speak
most disdainefully, and again, some great personages behave them selves most
courteously. This sentence then is thus to be understood, that usually poor
people are lowly in their behavior, and the rich scornful and haughty.
Nevertheless, it may also generally be taken thus, that they who are poor in
spirit always show humility in their speeches and actions, whereas the rich
according to the world, manifest their insolency by word and deed continually.

24 A man that has many friends is Or to maintain friendship.
to show him self friendly, but some one lover there is, who Or cleaves, to
wit in hearty good will above a brother.
is nearer then a brother.

Amity is entreated of in this sentence. A man who has many friends is to
show him self friendly, he who has great acquaintance, is to hold in with
every one of his well wishers, to which end he is not only to take heed least
by strangeness of offering of discourtesie he loose the liking of any, but to
endeavor by all signs and pledges of good will, to knit the hearts of all
faster and faster unto him. But some one lover there is who is nearer then a
brother. Now moreover, among many friends there is some one especial and
extraordinary loving mate, whose heart above all other, yea above a natural
brother, is glued unto his neighbor in such sort, as that he is ready to do
any thing for his good, yea even to dye for him, which no common friend or
kinsman lightly will do. Wherefore above the rest, See an example in David and
Jonathan.
such a one is to be loved and made much of, for indeed the only load stone of
love, is showing of love again, not only in words but in deeds.

THE XIX. CHAPTER.
1 Better is the poor man who walks in his uprightness, then he who is of
froward lips, for he is a fool.

THe praise of uprightness is set down in this verse. Better is the poor
man, etc. The godly poor soul who fears the Lord and deals justly with
men, albeit he wants necessaries or is little set by in the world, yet is in a
more happy estate seeing he is acceptable to the Lord, then a wealthy wicked
man who gets his goods by lying or abuses his tongue to evil speaking.

2 He whose mind discerns not that which is not good, offends as he does,
who is hasty in his feet.

As he who wants the eyes of the body or with his feet is too swift and
runs too hastily wandreth out of the right way or stumbleth at some stone,
so he who wants discretion the eye of the mind, or follows his affections
in such post have as that he will not or ca^ not mark or see what is unlawful
or vnco^uenient for him, sins and transgresses.

3 The foolishness of a man overthrows his way, and his heart fretteth
against the Lord.

Repining against God is here condemned. The foolishness of a man overthrows
his way, Iam. ^ 13.
concupiscence and sin draws upon a sinner sundry troubles, yea sometimes
death it self. And his heart fretteth against the Lord. Now, when the
offendour sees him self to be plagued, he accuses God as the author of his
evil and adversity, or murmureth against him for dealing so sharply with him.

4 Riches gather many friends, but the poor man is separated from his
neighbor.

New friends daily join them selves to the wealthy, but every one forsakes
and disclaymeth him, who is afflicted or needy.

5 A false witness shall not be unpunished, Exodus 23.1.
and a forger of lies shall not escape.

All those, who testify or devise lies, shall surely and severely be revenged.

6 Many sue unto the face of the francke person, and every one is a friend to
him who gives gifts.

7 All the brethren of the poor man hate him, Deuteronomy. 19.18. See an example in
Jobs friends Job. 6.14.15. etc.
how much more are his friends far off from him, though he be instant in
words, yet they are not [disposed to hear.]

A great number faune upon those who are rich and liberal, to the end that
they may receive some profit by them, but as concerning him who is in
adversity, even his nearest kinsmen despise him, and what marvel is it then,
if they who are of no kin unto him at all, be so changed and estranged from
him, as that when he requesteth their help they do not relieve him, nor will
hear on that ear?

8 He which possesses his * soul, Or heart.
loves him self, and he which keeps wisdom, shall obtain that which is
good.

That person who possesses his soul in patience, or holds fast the truth in
the midst of all temptations or troubles whatsoever, provides well for his
own welfare. Moreover, he which not only hears but keeps the word of God,
shall find comfort in affliction and many blessings both of this life and of
the life to come.

9 A false witness shall not be unpunished, and he who forgeth lies shall
perish.

The reporter and inuentor of lies, shall be grievously plagued.

10 Pleasure is not comely for a fool, much less for a servant, to have rule
over Princes.

A scourge is rather meet for a wicked man then receations or pastimes, which
either he abuses, or is unworthy of, seeing he, having not weried or
exercised him self in any earnest matters or good works as wise men are wont
to do, deserves not to taste the sweetness of any solaces or delites. But if
recreation or pleasure which is but a light vanity as it were, See the
exposition of 22. verse of the 30. Chapter.
become not a vain fool: how much less then does authortie or dignity
(which things carry with them so great a weight of glory, especially when they
are exercised over noble personages) beseene one of a servile disposition and
condition?

11 The understanding of a man makes him slow to wrath, and his glory is, to
pass by an offense.

Heavenly wisdom causes a man to be long suffering and patient. Moreover, it
is a thing very praise worthy, sometimes to put up a wrong and to take no
notify of an offense.

12 The indignation of a king, is as the roaring of a young Lion, but his good
will, is as the dew upon the grass.

The force of the affections of Princes is herein declared. The indignation of
a king, etc. As the roaring of a young Lion is most strong and terrible, so the
displeasure of a Prince is most fearful and deadly. But his good will is as
the dew upon the grass. See afterward. 20.2.
On the contrary side, as the dew of heaven refreshes the herbs of the field
and causes them to flourish, so the kings favor is most comfortable and
profitable.

13 A foolish son, is a trouble to his father, and the contentions of a wife,
are [like] a contitinuall dropping.

14 House and substance are the inheritance of fathers, but a prudent wife, is
from the Lord.

Whereas it said that a foolish son is a trouble to his father, the meaning
hereof is, that ungodly children by their wickedness cast their parents into
sorrow, infamy, diseases, and sundry other calamities. Now furthermore, the
co^tentions of a wife, are affirmed to be like a continual dropping, because
as showers of rain do hurt buildings, and annoy those persons which are
therein all night or all day, so brawling women, by their scoulding, greatly
and continually molest their families and their husbands. Such an ungodly wife
then is a great cross, but on the contraryside, to insinuat that a virtuous
wife is as great a blessing, it is added that house and substance are the
inheritance of fathers, but a prudent wife is from the Lord. It is true, that
children receive their inheritance from God, but this they do by the hands of
their parents, as by means. For those goods which auncesters grandfathers and
fathers have gotten with great labor or kept with care, they leave to their
posterity from hand to hand. Thus the^ a good patrimony comes from
parents, but an happy matrimony proceeds immediately from the Lord, who
directs the suitor to a good choice, who moves the heart of the virtuous
woman to like of him, finally, who bestows this his daughter not on every one
but on such a one, as he does singularely favor.

15 [He who is giuen] to slothfulness which causes to fall a sleep, and the
deceitful Or soul.
person, shall suffer hunger.

Both they who by drowsines work not that which is good as the Apostle
speaks, and they who being crafty, do that which is ill, getting their
living by hook or crook, shall in the end come to penury or beggerie.

16 He that keeps the commandment, keeps his own soul, but he which
regards not his own ways, Or being punished shall dye.
shall be punished with death.

That person which walks in the obedience of Gods laws, shall be spared in
the time of vengeance and always shall be blessed, but he which cares not how
he lives, shall perish and be made a public spectacle of shame.

17 He which gives franckly to the poor, lends to the Lord, and he will
recompense him, that which he has given.

He which does good to the poor, 2. Cor. 9.9.10.
does not give his goods but lend them, not to a mortal men, but to God, not
to his loss, but to his great advantage, seeing the Lord will return them
back again with usury.

18 Correct thy son whilst there is hope, but lift not up thy soul to kill
him.

Chastise thy child by words and stripes, whilst yet he is not grown
stubburne, but being young, may by this means be amended. Nevertheless, in
any case exceed not measure in thy correction, Ephesians. 6.4.
for so thou may be a murderer of thine own child in thy furious mood.

19 He who is of great wrath will be punished, albeit thou let him escape Heb.
and proceedest so to do which is all one in sense. This interpretation is
confirmed by the judgment of all expositors in a manner and by like places in
this book, as 29.22.14.17.14.29 Tremellius is thought here to have gone awry.
oftentimes.

He who is furious and moodie, will on day meet with some trouble or
punishment in goods or body, although thou pardon him diverse times. For his
anger returning, will cause him to do some mischief or commit some folly, for
which, either some private person or public Magistrate, will cause him smart.

20 Hearken to counsel and receive instruction that thou may be wise at the
last.

O man whosoever thou art, hear and obey the word of God, to the end that
howsoever thou have spent the former part of thy time in vanity and
wickedness, yet in the end thou may attain to grace and everlasting glory.

21 Many devises are in a man's heart, but the counsel of the Lord shall stand.

The intentes of men's minds and the cogitations thereof are infinite,
changeable, contrary to each other, and so vain, as that they never oftentimes
come into act. But as concerning the decree of the Lord, it is not only one
and the same, but in due season is put into execution.

22 That which is to be desired by a man, is his bountifulness, but he that is
poor is better then he that is a liar.

Liberality is now commended. That which is to be desired by a man, etc.
Albeit all virtues and good things are to be labored after, yet in as much as
is it an happy thing to give rather the^ to receive, a man is after a special
sort to endeavor, that he may be bountiful and give alms to the poor.
Abraham did so desire to extend his liberality to those who stood in need,
that he sat at his door to wait for guests. But he that is poor is better
then he that is a liar. Nevertheless, he who has nothing to bestow on good
uses, yea who has scant so much as will suffice him self and those who depend
on him, is more acceptable to the Lord and more to be esteemed by men, then the
great rich men of this world, who are Atheists or hypocrites, and give their
goods to the poor only to be seen and commended.

23 The fear of the Lord brings life and he who therewith is endued, shall
remain satisfied, and shall not be visited with evil.

The reverence of the Lord makes those happy who have it always before their
eyes, unto whom it brings plenty of all good things, and from whom it
turns away all sorts of evils.

24 The slothful man hides his hand in his Or sleeue.
bosom, and will not put it to his mouth again.

Nice and dainty sloth is herein condemned. The hand is the instrument of
working. The bosom is a place of warmth and ease. The mouth is not far from
the bosom, and must of necessity be fed. Thus much then here is mea^t, that
some are so slothful, as that they will not set their hands to most easy
and needful works, as for example to take their food or to comb their
heads.

25 If thou smite a scorner, he who is simple will be made wary, and if thou
reprove a prudent man, he will understand knowledge.

He which erreth of simplicity, or sins of infirmity, will receive profit
both by the punishments which are inflicted on obstinate offenders, 1. Tim.
5.20. Act. 5.11.
and by the rebukes which are applied unto the godly, after that they have gone
astray.

26 He which spoileth his father [or] chaseth away his mother, is Or which
causes blushing and shame.
a son of confusion and shame.

That child who robs his father of his goods, or turns his mother out of
doors, not only shameth his parents, but shall him self come to confusion
and destruction.

27 O my son, cease to swerve from the words of knowledge, to the end that
thou may hearken to instruction.

Herein every one is called to repentance. Cease o my son. etc. Let it be
sufficient for thee o man to have spent the former time of thy life in
ungodliness and unrighteousness. Now therefore, lay aside all thy vanities
and vices, Psalm. 119. v. 101
that thou may rightly hear and obey the word of God.

28 A wicked witness mocketh at judgment, and the mouth of the ungodly
swalloweth up iniquity.

29 But judgments are prepared for these scorners, and stripes for the back
of fools.

A wicked witness mock that judgment. A false witness makes no account of
truth or equity, and the mouth of the ungodly swalloweth up iniquity,
moreover, they who have not the fear of God before their eyes, utter lies
without any shame or remorse, making no bones thereat as we use to speak. But
judgments are prepared for these scorners, nevertheless, these deriders shall
not go unpunished for many decrees are set down concerning the plaguing of
them. And stripes for the back of fools. Moreover, rods yea great scourges,
are made ready for the ungodly.

THE XX. CHAPTER.
1 Wine is a mocker, Or headie drink.
strong drink is raging, and who soever ouershooteth him self therein, is not
wise.

THis sentence warns every one, Pro. 30.4. Ephe. 5.18.
to take heed that he abuse not wine or strong drink. Three evils proceed
from the abuse hereof. The first is iollitie, for wine makes men secure,
talkatiue, wanton, and vain. Esaias. 28. Ose. 4.
The second is contention, for strong drink causes brawling, fighting, and
murder. The last is foolishness, for when the wine or strong drink is in,
the wit is out, for which cause the Prophet says, that fornication wine and
drunkenness take away the heart.

2 The Or terror.
fear of the king is as the roaring of a young Lion, he that provoke him,
sins against his own soul.

As there is naturally such force in the voice of a young Lion, who roareth
more strongly then the old, Before. 19.12.16.14.
as that by the sound thereof, all the beasts which hear it are astonished
and stricken down: so the rage of a Prince is very terrible and deadly, to the
subject against whom it is incensed.

3 It is an honor for a man to cease from strife, but every fool will be
meddling.

It is a commendable thing to end contention, See an example in Abraham. Genesis
13.
but to begin or to maintain a quarrel is great folly.

4 The slothful man who will not plough because of winter, shall beg in
summer, when he shall have nothing.

The tender and fearful sluggard, who abstaineth from labor by reason of the
hardness of the present time, shall fall at the last into extreme want.

5 The counsel in the heart of man is like deep waters, but a man that has
understanding, will draw it out.

A secret intent of the mind is cunningly hidden and closely concealed
oftentimes, but he who is endued with discretion, either by propounding of
questions, or by observing of gestures, sounds and fisheth out the secret
purpose of him who is so close.

6 Many commend the man who Heb. the man of his bounty. Drusius says he dare
pawn all that he is worth that this sense which is set down is the natural
meaning of this sentence. Pro. Class. 2. lib. 1. Pro. 289.
is bountiful unto the^, but who can find a faithful man?

There are in a great number who magnify those who have bestowed benefits on
them, but few there are who in adversity especially, or when need requires,
show them selves to be constant friends or keep touch in word and deed, or who
declare them selves to be thankful by requiting courtesies received.

7 The just man who continually walks in his uprightness [is blessed] and
blessed shall his children be after him.

It shall go well with the righteous and their seed. Psalm. 127. Job. 5.25.


8 A king that sits on the throne of judgment, Or winnoweth all evil in
his eyes.
chaseth away all evil with his eyes.

A judge personally sitting on the tribunal seat, and faithfully exercising
his office, by his presence and examining of matters, finds out and punishes
all sorts of misdeameanours.

9 Who can say I have purified mine heart, I am clean from my sin.

Is any in this world able truly to say I have sanctified my self, Romans
3.10.11.
or I am without all relics of natural corruption? Job could not, Daniell
could not, Paul could not, and who then can?

10 Diverse weightes and diverse measures are even both abomination to the Lord.

The Lord abhors all means and instruments of injustice. Before. 11.1,
16.^1.


11 Even a child is known by his doings, whether his work be pure and right.

Indeed the proof is all, but yet young impes oftentimes declare by certain
signs, what they are and what they will be. Even a child is known by his
doings, not only the old, So did Daniell on the one side and I smaell one the
other.
but the young show by their actions or behavior, whether his work be pure
and right, whether the thing he does be sincerely performed by him or no, or
proceeds from a true and plain heart.

12 The Lord has made both these, even the ear which hears and the eye
which sees.

The Lord has not only formed all the parts of men's bodies and namely these
two the ear and the eye, Exodus 4.11. Psalm. 94.9.
but he it is who enableth and quickneth the^ to do their office.

13 Love not to sleep least thou come unto poverty, open thine eyes, and thou
shall be satisfied with bread.

Sleep not too much that thou become not a beggar, watch in thy calling, and
thou shall have plenty.

14 It is naught it is naught says the buyer, 1 Thessalonians. 4.6.
but when he is gone apart, he boasts.

Albeit the ware cheapened is well worth the money demanded by the seller, yet
the covetous buyer, to the end he may get it very cheap, disprayseth it to
the utmost, and says, that it is not worth half so much as it is prised at,
but when he has bought the thing and is come home, the^ he will say to his
friend, had I not a good penieworth? it is even worth twice as much as I paid
for it. Thus to deal is to call good evil and to speak contrary to a man's
own knowledge and conscience.

15 There is gold and a multitude of precious stones, but the lips of
knowledge, are a most precious treasure.

Worldly treasures are herein compared with true and gracious words. There is
gold and a multitude of precious stones, there are in the world metals and
stones of great price, but the lips of knowledge, are a most precious
treasure, but plain dealing in word and deed, is the best jewel: for indeed
the one come out of the earth, the other are given from heaven. The one are
esteemed by men, the other by the Lord, the one are corruptible the other
immortal, the one serve unto the uses of this life, the other are profitable
to edify the soul, Balaam him self saw thus much, for which cause he said to
Balaak, that if he should give him an house full of gold and silver, he could
not go besides the word of God.

16 Take his garment who is surety for a strange man, and a pledge of him who
is surety for a strange woman.

Rash suretieship is again forbidden in this verse. Although the garment of
thy poor brother who flies unto thee in his necessity to borrow somewhat of
thee, Exodus 22.26.
is not in any case to be kept by thee from him, neither yet his pawn to be
retained* yet when any person who is indeed in poor estate, shall so dissemble
or take on him the person of a rich man, as to offer him self unto thee to be
surety for another, thou may with a good conscience deal straightly with
him, and require thine own of such a one.

17 The bread of deceit is sweet to a man, but afterward his mouth shall be
filled with Or sharp stones.
gravel.

Great reason there is why all men should take heed of crafty dealing. For,
the bread of deceit is sweet to a man. In the beginning goods ill gotten are
very pleasant and delitesome to a crafty person, but afterward his mouth shall
be filled with gravel. Nevertheless in the end, he shall for the same meet
with troubles. For such sweet meat as we say will have sour sauce.

18 Establish thy thoughts by counsel, and by prudent advise make war.

In all matters of doubt whatsoever, seek for and follow the direction and
counsel of wise and faithful men, but especially bend thine own wits to
devise all the policies in the world and take advise also with other of skill
and experience, in so weighty matters as war is, Luc. 14.
wherein the life of many a man is hazarded.

19 To him who discloseth a secret, going about as a Or backbiter.
tale bearer, and to him who flattereth with his lips, join not thy self.

Take counsel with wise me^ about thine affairs, but make not blabs
acquainted therewith, neither refer thy matters unto those who will but faune
upon thee or gloss with thee saying as thou say and doing all things to
please thee, not regarding their own duty or thy good.

20 He who curses his father or his mother, shall have his candell put out in
obscure darkness.

That child does curse his father or his mother, See the root of this
sentence. Exodus 21.17.
who wishes some evil unto them or reuileth them. His candell shall indeed be
put out, for his prosperity and life shall be taken away. See beneath. 30.11.
This shall be done in obscure darkness, in as much as all his glory shall
not only be taken away but turned into extreme misery in a day of wrath and
vengeance. Disobedience then to parents is threatened in this sentence.

21 An heritage is hastily gotten at the beginning, but the end thereof shall
not be blessed.

Substance by ill means or with greediness heaped together in short time, at
the last vanishes or is accursed.

22 Say not I will recompense evil [but] wayt on the Lord, and he will save
thee.

Neither in heart intend, nor in speeches threaten revenge. Possess thy soul
rather in patience, Romans 12.19. See the fountain of this precept. Leuit. 19.18.
looking for defense from the Lord. So doing, thou shall be preserved by him
from the future dangers, and delivered out of thy present troubles.

23 Diverse waightes are abomination to the Lord, Before. 11.1.
and false balances are not good.

All means and measures of injustice are detestable in Gods sight, and
hurtful to those men, who use them.

24 Amans steps are of the Lord, but what does a man understand of his way?

God not only knows, but rules all the thoughts, Psalm. 139.
words, deeds, and goings of a man. On the contrary side, man perceives little
or nothing of the counsel or dealing of the Lord in governing the world.

25 It is a Or snare.
destruction for a man to devour that which is consecrated, and after vows
[made] to call back. See the root of this precept. Deuteronomy. 23.21. alike
instruction. Eccl. 5.3. an example of the danger of breaking it. Act. 5.1. the
warrant of vowing. Psalm. 76.11. what doings are not to be vowed. Deuteronomy. 23 18.
Judge. 11.30. gather what a vow is out of the 30. Number. 3.4.5.6. verse. See an
example in Judas, who was a thief from the beginning. That it was the custom
of husband men among the Jews, to thresh the harder corn with a cart wheel,
may be gathered out of the 28. Esaias. 27.28. ver.


Sacrilege is here condemned, two sorts whereof are also specified. The one
is, the taking away of a thing which has already been dedicated to the Lord,
in these words, it is a destruction for a man, etc. The other is, a differring
or withholding of the thing which is in heart vowed or in speech has been
promised to Gods worship or service. Both these kinds of sacrilege, are called
a destruction, because they draw the plagues of the Lord on such as commit
them. The^ a thing consecrated is devoured, when the Lord or the Church or the
poor, are defrauded of that which has been given to holy uses. Now, they
after vows call back, who make promises to the Lord, but after, wish they had
not made them, or do not perform them.

26 A wise king fanneth the wicked, and turns the wheel over them.

Even as the husbandma^ by winnowing seperateth the chafe from the good
grains, so the good Magistrate seuereth the evil from the good. Again, as
the husbandman thresheth the hard corn with a carte wheel. so a just ruler
inflicteth sharp punishments upon the wicked.

27 Man's soul is as it were the candle of the Lord [whereby] he searches all
the bowels of the belly.

The excellent gift of reason bestowed on mankind is herein commended. Man's
soul is as it were the candle of the Lord. The mind of man is not brutish as
is the heart of beasts, but so illightened with understanding, as that it may
fitly be called, the lamp of the eternal (whereby) he searches all the
bowels of the belly. A man by this spirit of his endued with reason, seeks
out and pearceth into the nature all things which are most obscure, neither
only knows his own estate, but fisheth out the secrets of other, with whom
he has to do.

28 Bounty and truth preserve the king, and by bounty he vpholdeth his throne.

Virtue is that, whereby the crown is especially maintained. Bounty, that
virtue which consists not only in pardoning of offenses, but in giving of
alms or gifts freely to those who stand in need, and truth, and that virtue
also, which gives every one his due, as namely honor to the good and
punishment to the wicked, preserve the king, are the bucklers or bulwarks
whereby the royal person of the Prince is defended from evils. And by bounty
he vpholdeth his throne. Nevertheless, howsoever both these virtues are
indeed so necessary, as that if either both of them or but one of them be
wanting, the Prince cannot possibly remain long in safety: yet bounty is
the chief pillar of the state or kingdom. For when as strangers are
nourished, the poor relieved, the fatherless defended, schools erected, the
Preachers of the word maintained, to conclude all the works of mercy practiced,
this is that which wins the hearts of the subjects, in whose good will the
strength of a land does especially consist, as on the contrary side, nothing so
soon overthrows the throne of a Prince, as the ill will or hatred of the
people under him.

29 The glory of young men is their strength, the honor of the aged, is the
gray head.

This sentence insinuates, that both the young and the old, have their
several ornaments wherein they may rejoice, and for the which also they are to
be reverenced. The glory of young men is their strength. Albeit they that are
of tender or green years, want oftentimes wisdom or experience, which
commonly are to be found in the ancient, yet have they courage of mind and
strength of body, whereby they are enabled to follow their callings, to fight
for their countries, to do acts of great same and renown. No man then is to
despise the younger for their green years, but rather even in this respect to
esteem them the more. Now on the other side, the honor of the aged is the
gray head, Albeit also they who are stricken in years, are weak in body or
want the use of their senses, yet the silver crown of hoarie hairs, which the
finger of God has set upon their head, does make them venerable in all places
where they come, so that they carry an authority or majesty with them as it
were. Hence it is that in the law the Lord gives this commandment specially
to the younger sort, directing his precept to eury one of them in particular as
it were, Rise up before the hoarie head and honor the person of the aged man.
Leuit. 19.
Were this commandment of the Lord so practiced in these times as it ought to
be, there would not be so great sauciness or malapartnesse in youth, as
usually appears every where.

30 Blewnesse and wounds serve to Or are a purging for.
purge the wicked man, and strokes that pearse into the bowels of the belly.

This instruction teaches us, how needful a thing it is for the ungodly, to
be scourged and punished for their offenses. Blewnesse and wounds serve to
purge the wicked man. Even as beating (which blewnesse follows) and launcing
(which leaves a wound behind) is fit and profitable for diseased and naughty
iades: so sharp punishments and cutting corrections in the flesh and in the
skin, are meet for evil doers, and for those, who otherwise will not be
reformed. And strokes that pearse into the bowels of the belly. Yea moreover,
as goads or spurs are requisite and necessary for stubburne and stiffenecked
beasts, who will not stir unless they be touched and pricked to the quick:
so most grievous and inward plagues and troubles, pearsing the bones and
entering to the heart, are needful for obstinate and heinous offenders. True
it is, albeit an unrepentant wicked man be never so much corrected or sharply
dealt with, yet his corruption will not quite be tamed or wholly purged out. But
yet nenerthelesse, punishment for the time somewhat restrains the most
ungodly wretch in the world. Now, as for those penitent sinners, who have done
amiss through ignorance or infirmity, the scourges or punishments which they
sustain for their offenses, not only scour out of them many vices to which
before they were given, but work in them many good virtues. So then, not only
afflictions for righteousness sake, but corrections for sin, are profitable
for Gods children, in as much as they are by these purged from much dross,
like as by the other, they are declared to have in them much fine silver as it
were.

THE XXI. CHAPTER.
1 The kings heart is in the hand of the Lord as the rivers of water, he
turns it whither soever it pleases him.

EVen as rivers of water are moved by the hand of the Lord hither and thither,
See a like comparison Revelation. 1.16.
so that sometimes they ebb, sometimes they flow, sometimes they run forward
sometimes they return backward, sometimes they are rough, sometimes they are
calm: so the hearts of Princes and of all men, are by him disposed and altered
according to his will and power, unto favor or hatred, to one affection or
another.

2 A man seems straight to him self in all his ways, but God pondereth the
hearts.

A man justifies him self oftentimes in all respects, when as God who
searches the reins, See before. 16.2.
finds many things amiss in him.

3 To do justice and judgment, is a thing more acceptable to the Lord then
sacrifice.

Works of charity practiced toward men, are here preferred before the
exercises of Religion, which concern the worship of God. The reason hereof is,
for that the Lord had rather be served by those actions which are profitable to
men, then by those which to them are unfruitful. For this cause it is said in
the Epistle to the Hebrews, that by such sacrifices as good works are, Heb.
13.
God is well pleased. When as the exercises of Religion are performed with
faith, they are acceptable to the Lord as was the sacrifice of Abell: but
because justice and judgment are the greater points of the law, Micha. 6.6.
when other things are alike, the Lord always prefers them. As for the
outward exercises of Religion which the wicked who practice al iniquity
perform, Ose. 6.6.
they are so far off from being acceptable unto the Lord, Esaias. 1.10.
that they rather are abominable in his sight.

4 The haughty look, and the proud heart, [to conclude] the Or plowing.
light of the wicked is sin.

We are herein taught, that all the actions of the wicked are abominable in
the sight of God. The haughty look and the proud heart, the stately gestures
and mind puffed up. To conclude, the light of the wicked is sin, and to be
brief, whatsoever the wicked do, even their civil and religious actions, yea
their consciences and their souls are polluted. Tit. 1.15.
For unto the unclean all things are unclean, and that which is high in the
sight of man, Luc. 16.15.
is abomination in the sight of God.

5 The thoughts of the diligent man are only unto profit, but the hasty man's
tend only to poverty.

They who bend their wits and apply them selves, to find out and to use the
means and opportunities of enriching their estate, shall wax wealthy. On the
contrary side, such harebraynes as run all on head in making hasty
bargains, or in doing things they care not how, undo them selves.

6 Treasures gathered together by a deceitful tongue, are vanity tossed too
and fro [of men] who seek death.

Goods gotten by falsehood, have two evils. First, they are unstable, vanishing
away as the dust flies before the wind. Secondly, they are hurtful, bringing
sometimes temporal death, but always eternal destruction on the owners
thereof.

7 The calamity of the wicked shall Or cut them in sunder.
destroy them, because they refuse to practice that which is right.

The great afflictions of the ungodly shall cause them to houle and cry and
shall overthrown them, for that they will execute justice, or do that which
is good.

8 Or the way of a peruers man is strange.
The way of some man is perverse and strange, but as for the pure man his
work is right.

The course which impure men take, See the same phrase. Job. 8.6.
is overthwart and contrary to nature, to reason, or to the law of God. On the
contrary side, the action of the upright person, is agreeable to equity and to
the law of God.

9 It is better to dwell in a corner of the house top, then with a contentious
woman in a Or an house of company.
wide house.

A brawling wife is here showed to be a great evil. The Jews houses were
broad and open in the top. Now then, Chap. 19.13.23.24.
it would be a very in convenient abiding, for a man to dwell in such a place,
so subject to the wind and weather, as that it were more tolerable to dwell in
a cave of the earth. But not only to dwell on an house top but in a corner of
an house top, is yet more incommodious. For how can a man so much as stir
him, when he is pent up in so narrow streights? Nevertheless, to have
fellowship with a brawling wife, is yet an harder estate then this. For she
with her scoulding tongue will disquiet her husbands mind, hinder him in his
calling, and cause rest to depart from his eyes. And what though the house be
wide wherein thou dwell with such a contentious mate, or there are diverse
therein, with whom thou may have society? See the punishment of this sin.
Psalm. 109* 16. See an example in the Edomites. Psalm. 137. Also in the brethren
of Joseph who were touched with no compassion toward him.
Thou shall be quiet in no corner of thine house, neither shall thou receive
any joy by the presence of any person.

10 The soul of the wicked man wishes evil, his neighbor has no favor in
his eyes.

The bloody minded man, wishes for and seeks his neighbors, harm. His
neighbor has no favor in his eyes. He will by no pity, due unto his friend
or the poor afflicted person, be stayed from doing of that mischief, which his
soul desires. For indeed, he has no pity or mercy, or reverent regard
unto any.

11 When the scorner is punished he that is simple waxes wise, and when a wise
man is instructed, he receives knowledge.

This verse shows two means, whereby a simple or unwise man may attain unto
wisdom. See before. 19.25.
The one is, the destruction of the wicked, the other is, That mashkil
signifies to consider appears. Psalm. 41.1. that beth is of the masculin
gender manifest.
the instruction of the godly.

12 The righteous man considers the house of the wicked man, which
overthrows the ungodly Or which throws the ungodly into evil.
for [their] wickedness.

The just person beholds and pondereth, how the place wherein sinners dwell,
oftentimes falling down on them or being full of curses, reuengeth them for
their impieties and iniquities. How true this is Eliphaz declares in the book
of Job, who says that he had seen the fool well rooted, Job. 5.3.
whose habitation by and by he cursed. The Prophet David likewise affirms in
the Psalm, Psalm. 37.36.
that he had beheld the wicked man flourishing as a laurel, whom seeking a
while after, he could no more find. For this cause the Lord would have Abraham
behold the smoke of the sinful Cities set on fire, that by the house of the
wicked he might receive instruction, yea and by their overthrow, minister
instruction to his own family.

13 He that stops his ears at the crying of the poor, shall him self cry
and not be heard.

The unmerciful are threatened in this sentence. He is said to stop his
ears at the crying of the poor, See an example in the rich miser.
who does not pity or relieve the afflicted. Luc. 16.
A double calamity shall befall this merciless man. For first, he shall cry
so that he shall be in some necessity or misery. Secondly, he shall not be
heard, so that in his adversity he shall not obtain deliverance or succor.

14 A gift in secret turns away anger, and a present in the bosom vehement
wrath.

A token of submission and good will closely offered, See. 17.18. also. 18.16.
appeaseth displeasure and ends strife.

15 To do that which is just [bringeth] joy to the righteous man, but
destruction [shall be] to the workers of iniquity.

Well doing brings forth a blessing unto a man. On the contrary side, Psalm.
55.29. Psalm. 6.8.
sin leaves a sting of terror behind it, and draws destruction after it
upon the transgressor.

16 A man that wandereth out of the way of wisdom, shall remain in the
congregation of the dead.

He which following his own lusts leaves the truth and forsakes the fear
of God, See an example. 1. Pet. 3.19.
shall at last come to an hard inn and find a restless kind of resting in
the grave and in hell.

17 He that loves pastime shall be a poor man, and he that loves wine and
oil shall not be rich.

Prodigality is the high way to beggerie. He that loves pastime, such a one
as is drowned in gaming, hawking, hunting, carding, difing, and such like
vanities, shall in the end become a beggar. And he that loves wine and * oil
shall not be rich. Or ointment.
So likewise such a one as batheth him self in sweet delites or is given to
all sorts of superfluities shall not be wealthy. Me^tio^ is made of wine and
of an ointme^t, See an example in the prodigal son Luc. 15. Psalm. 23.
because these two things were the chiefest solemnities of feasts, among the
Jews in those times.

18 The wicked man shall be a ransom for the just man, and the transgressor,
for the righteous.

A way of causing plagues to cease, is here chalked out. The wicked man, shall
be a ransom for the just man. The ungodly person shall be as it were a price
for him who is godly, in such sort, as that when he is punished or destroyed,
See example. 2. Sam. 21. Iosu. 7.20. Hest. 8.7. Dani. 6.25.
Gods wrath shall cease and not proceed to take hold on the just man. For the
sinners head does pay and satisfy as it were for him, who though he be not
void of sin, yet has not committed so great a crime. And the transgressor
for the righteous. Moreover, many innocent people being delivered out of
trouble or freed from some plague by the Lord, shall indeed escape, but so, as
that some one notorious offendour succeeding in their adversity, shall dye as
it were for the rest. Such a sacrifice is so sweet in the Lords nostrels, as
that when in the time of any great calamity it is performed, the plague
commonly does cease, as if that by sinful blood, sin were purged after a
certain sort.

19 It is better to dwell in the wilderness, then with a contentious and
angry woman.

The desert, is a solitary place, wherein necessaries are wanting, and
dangers abounding. Nevertheless, it is more tolerable to abide in the
wilderness among wild beasts, then to dwell in never so fair or plentiful
an house, with a brawling wife.

20 In the house of the wise man is a Or desired.
pleasant treasure and ointment, but a foolish man deuoureth it.

Thriftnesse is commended in this divine instruction. In the house of the wise
man is a precious treasure and ointment. There is in the storehouse of a good
husband, plenty of necessaries and delights. But a foolish man deuoureth it.
On the contrary side, the unthrift by riot or voluptuousness, lauisheth out
his whole patrimony, and his great substance.

21 He that follows after righteousness and bounty, shall find life,
righteousness and glory.

He that follows after, that person who ensues with earnestness,
righteousness and bounty, equity and liberality, shall find life
righteousness and glory, Mat. 6.33.34.
shall obtain life temporal and eternal, justice imputed and inspired, honor
from man and from God. For indeed, godliness has the promises both of this
life and of the life to come.

22 A wise man goes up into the City of the mighty, and casts down the
strength of the confidence thereof.

This instruction teaches, that wisdom can do much even in war,
Ecclesiastes. 9.14.
yea more then strength, which yet therein is commonly most respected. A wise
man goes up into the City of the mighty, After. 24.5.
one prudent person by his policy scaleth the walls of the town wherein
many valiant men dwell or keep, and casts down the strength of the
confidence thereof. Neither only does he climb up the walls, but he throws
down by his wisdom, the towers and castles thereof.

23 He that keeps his mouth and his tongue, preserves his soul from
affliction.

He that bridleth his mouth and his tongue from lying, babbling, slaundering,
railing, backbiting, and such like vices, keeps him self from many trouble^
as from futes of law, from blows, and from death it self.

24 Stately, haughty, scornful is his name, that in his fury works pride.

That person who in his moodinesse because his will is crossed or his desire
contraried, shows contempt of other or boasting him self, by this his
dealing procures no credit to him self, but rather perpetual infamy, so
that afterward he is counted or called, one that is vainglorious, high minded,
and co^temptuous.

25 The desire of the slothful man slays him, because his hands refuse to
work.

26 All the day long he coueteth greedelie, Psalm. 37.2^.
but the righteous man gives and spares not.

The slothful person is therefore starued with hunger, because he will set his
hand to nothing. Hence also it comes to pass, that (as we use to speak) he
is indeed a wisher and woulder but an ill householder. On the contrary side,
the just man who laboring diligently in his calling, serves God also
sincerely, has not only sufficient for him self and his family, but gives
unto the poor all day long.

27 The sacrifice of the wicked is an abomination, how much more when he Or
offreth is wickedly.
brings it with a wicked mind?

Wickedness makes the exercises of Religion detestable in Gods sight. The
sacrifice of the wicked is an abhominatio^. Esaias. 1.11, Mich. 6.7. Psalm. 50.^.
The ordinances of God rightly observed but performed by unholy persons,
provoke the Lord to wrath. The reason hereof is evident. For as the foul
vessel poluteth precious liquour, so the uncleanness of him that sacrifices,
defiles the sacrifice. How much more when he brings it with a wicked mind?
Now then, how much more must a sacrifice needs offend the majesty of God,
when it is offered that he should wincke^t some great sin, or when it is not
rightly performed? Esaias. 26.3.
This is all one, as if that a dog should be sacrificed, or the blood of
swine offered.

28 A false witness shall perish, but he that hears, shall speak for ever.

He which devising lies reports those things which he has neither seen nor
heard, shall be put to silence or punished with temporal or eternal death. On
the contrary side, he who testifies no other thing save only that which he
has heard or knows to be true, shall continue speaking and find good.

29 A wicked man hardens his face, but he who is upright, orders each of
his ways aright.

As a traveler who sets his face to go to any place, proceeds on his
journey, albeit he meets with many lets therein or is told of more, so the
ungodly person goes on in his sins obstinately, although he has often been
crossed therein or warned thereof. On the contrary side, the just man walks
warily and soberly in this world, examining his actions whether they be such as
are to be left off or proceeded in.

30 There is no wisdom, and no understanding, and no counsel against the
Lord.

The vanity of worldly politickes is herein laid open. There is no wisdom,
there is no plotting of matters, and no understanding, no subtle devise or
invention also, and no counsel, finally, no advise or debating of cases,
against the Lord, able to withstand or overthrow the Lords will or purpose.

31 The horse is prepared against the day of battle, but salvation it self is
of the Lord.

As before has been showed, that no policy prevails against the Lord,
(...) the root ^ereof. Psalm. 3.9. see like sayings ^cl. 20.9. (...) 33.16.17.
so here is declared, that no power can do any thing without the Lord. The
horse is prepared against the day of battle. Means unto war, as namely the
horse and the rider are made ready by men. But salvation it self is of the
Lord. As for the conquest, and preservation in the conflict, these things
proceed from God alone.

THE XXII. CHAPTER.
1 A [good] Or fa^^^
name is to be desired above great riches, favor is better then silver or gold.

IN this verse is declared, that credit or reputation, is a great good thing. A
good name is to be desired above great riches. That glory or fame which is
gotten by well doing, is more excellent then all the treasures of this world.
The reasons hereof are many and manifest. First, a good name makes the
speeches and actions of the person in account, acceptable. Secondly, a good
name remains after death. Thirdly, it is a means of aduauncing a man
oftentimes. Last of all, it does good to a man's children, who for their fathers
sake are the more esteemed and the better helped. Some may here object, why but
do we not see that the wicked are in great reputation? what then, is credit or
renown so excellent a thing? Tush, the fame of the wicked is only but a
shadow of a good name, the root whereof is virtue only. It may again be
demanded, if a good name spring from virtue or be so great a blessing, how
falls it out, that many worthy servant of God live obscurely and are in no
reckening in a manner? God sees obscurity as well as poverty to be meet and
profitable for some of his children. Last of all, some may thus argue, that if
a good name be a most precious jewel, then reproach or infamy wherewith the
best are commonly most spotted and loaded, is one of the greatest evils that
may be. The answer hereunto is ready and easy. Ill report deserved by
misbehauiour is an extreme misery, but reproach for well doing is a glory,
which Moses preferred before all the treasures of Egypt. Heb. 11.
Now, on the other side again, favor is better then silver or gold. The love
and good liking of men, (always adjoined to the good will of God toward us) is
to be prised above money. For first, a ma^s cause usually is ended, as he is
friended. Secondly, as we are wont to say in our English Proverb, a friend in
the Court is better oftentimes then a penny in the purse. Last of all, in war
a man escapes with his life by finding grace in the sight of his enemy. Hence
it comes to pass, that the scepter and the sheepehooke are often joined
together. To conclude, by this means the good of the whole Church of God is
sometimes procured.

2 The rich and poor meet together, the Lord is the maker of them all.

In sundry places the wealthy and needy concur upon occasions. Now, lest
in this meeting of theirs, the poor man be despised or the rich man envied,
this is to be considered, that both of them are created by the Lord according
to his image, and that both of them rece^ue from him their estate and
condition. For indeed, poverty and riches, fall not out by chance or fortune
but by the will and providence of the Lord.

3 A prudent man sees the Or evil.
plague and hides him self, but the foolish go on still, and are punished.

The first property of the wise man is, that he sees the evil, to wit by the
illightening of Gods spirit, which gives unto him a sense and feeling of the
greatness of sin and of the certainty of the punishment thereof. Every one
does not perceive this, yea a man may have all the precepts of Divinity in
his heart and in his head, and yet not see the danger of sin or of Gods
wrath, unless it be revealed unto him by the Lord him self after a peculiar
manner. The second property of a prudent man is, upon the sense of the plague,
to force him self by all lawful means to escape. It may here be demanded,
how we are to fly, when we discern the plague to be coming. The answer
hereunto is easy, that the name of the Lord is a strong tower, the righteous
man flies unto it and is exalted. Another question may here be moved, whether
it be lawful to fly evil air and places infected with the pestilence. This
doubt may briefly be thus resolved, that a man may lawfully avoid any
unnecessary danger or perilous place, whereunto he is not tied or bound by
his calling or charity. But withal these instructions are to be observed,
that men in the time of the plague are especially to fly to God, that they are
to shun sin, that they are to take heed of inordinat fear, that they are
not to leave their callings, that they are not to neglect the love of their
brethren by reason of a fond and childish fear of infection. For hence it
comes to pass, that when there is any pestilence walking in city or
country not only some sick folks be suffered to dye away without all
keeping, but the women also great with child are forsaken in their need,
brethren are left of their brethren, and parents shunned by their children.
Whereas then it is further added, that fools going on are punished, this is to
be understood of unnecessary dangers or of such plagues, which by some means
they may lawfully avoid. In which latter part of the sentence, not only the
blindness but the boldness of carnal men is reproved, who proceed in wicked
actions or walk on in dangerous places, without any change of mind or
withdrawing of the body, until they be overtaken with some calamity, or
overthrown by some judgment of the Lord. For example, the rash man goes to
every one that has the pestilence or some such sore disease, and at the last
he is infected. The gamester goes on in his dising and in the end comes to
poverty. The robber on the high way ceasseth not to follow his wicked trade,
and at last he is apprehended and executed. The wanton walks on toward the
house of the harlot, and in the end he commits folly with her. To conclude,
all sorts of sinners securely proceed in their impieties and iniquities, but
at one time or other they meet with some heavy judgment of the Lord.
Wherefore let every one pray unto the Lord, that he may not be so brutish as to
run into the snare which is before him, but that he may have a quick sight
to epsy and foresee, and a mighty power to shun and escape all sorts of
evils which may any ways hurt him, in goods, in name, in body, or in soul.
Psalm. 143.9.
The safest and best hiding of a man's self in danger, is flying unto God.
Luke. 21.20.
But it is also lawful sometimes to hide not only the heart but the head, and
to change the place. Even as the^ the Serpent hides him self when he spyeth a
danger, but the seely bird flying on without fear, meets with a snare or
bullet oftentimes so he that is wary, preuenteth or auoideth perils, but he
that is simple going on in perilous actions or places, is punished with one
affliction or other.

4 The reward of humility [with] the fear of God, is riches, honor, and life.

The reward of humility, the merciful recompense of meekness or lowlynesse
toward men, with the fear of God, joined with the reverence of the Lord, is
riches, honor, and life, is store of good things, as namely wealth and
advancement and length of days, which things men especially desire.

5 Thorns and snares are in the way of the wicked man, [but] he which takes
heed to his soul, shall be far off from them,

Thorns and snares are in the way of the wicked man, sickness grief and shame
with sundry other evils, befall the ungodly person. He which takes heed to
his soul, shall be far off from the^. They who watch over their hearts and
walk uprightly, are far from these crosses.

6 Teach a child according to the trade of his ways, and when he shall be old,
he will not depart from it.

The way of a child, is first the fear of God; Ephe. 6.
secondly, learning or trades; thirdly, Dan. 1.3.
civility or good behavior. Teach a child thus according to his way, Genesis
33.3.
and when he shall be old he will not depart from it. For albeit good doctrine
once learned in youth may quite vanish away, yet lightly it does not perish,
but the vessel always retains some sent of the liquor, wherewith it was
seasoned at the beginning.

7 The rich man rules over the poor, and the borrower is servant to the
lender.

The rich man rules over the poor, he that is wealthy commands the needy
people, yea sometimes he makes them his drudges. And the borrower is servant
to the lender. Exodus 21.2. Mat. 18.25.
Moreover the debtor oftentimes sells him or is sold as a bondsman by course
of law unto the creditor, to satisfy the debt.

8 He that sows iniquity shall reap affliction, and the rod of his anger
shall consume [him.]

He that sows iniquity shall reap affliction, Job. 4.8. Gal. 6.8.
he that goes about to trouble other shall be troubled him self, and the rod
of his anger shall consume him. That thing whatsoever wherewith he vexed or
oppressed other, shall cause him to smart yea to decay or perish.

9 He that has a good eye shallbe blessed, for he gives of his bread to the
poor.

So did the widow of Sarepta and the Shunamite.
He that has a good eye, he that has a pitiful and bountiful eye, shall be
blessed, shall receive store of spiritual or temporal blessings, for he
gives of his bread to the poor, since he bestows necessaries on the needy.
Unto him also it shall be said at the day of judgment, come thou blessed of my
father. Mat. 25.


10 Cast out the scorner and strife will go out, so contention and reproach
will cease.

See a like precept 2 Thessalonians. 3.14. And an example in Sarah, who did cast out
Ismaell.
Cast out the scorner, remove the quarellour and the obstinate person out of
thine house or jurisdiction, and strife will go out, so variance willbe at an
end, so contention and reproach will cease, so also defending and proving,
together with railing or reuiling, will be hushed.

11 He which loves pureness of heart [and] in whose lips [is] grace, the
king will be his friend.

The Prince will favor such a one, Psalm. 101.6.
who out of a sanctified heart, vtteteth wise and gracious words or speeches.

12 The eyes of the Lord preserve [the man] of understanding, but he
overthrows the Or affairs.
words of the transgressor.

The eternal God with a merciful eye, favors and keeps him from hurt,
who knows him aright. On the contrary side, Psalm. 34.16.
the eternal with an angry face rejects the prayers, ouerthwarreth the
speeches, and to conclude, Job. 5.12.
ouerturneth the estate of the ungodly man.

13 The slothful man says, a Lion is without, I shall be slain in the
street.

In this verse, the behavior of sluggardes when they are called about their
work, is notably painted out. The sense hereof is, that the idle person does
indeed so behave him self, as if one called to go abroad, should plead that
therefore he will not go out of doors, because a Lio^ is in the strets. By the
slothful man, such a one is meant, as deliteth in idleness or loytering. By
the Lio^ abroad, some great danger is shadowed out. Whereas it is said by the
sluggard, I shall be slain in the street, he shows that he fears, not
only some harm, but death it self. Thus much then here is taught, that
although it is not the use of idle persons, to utter the self same words
which are set down in this place, yet indeed they always so behave them
selves, as if they spoke them. For the slothful hinder themselves from their
work, by fainyng of lets and fearing of dangers, as loss of favor, of
goods, of liberty, and of life, having always one excuse or other, either in
their mouths, or in their hearts. For, when they are moved or exhorted to
follow their trades or to serve God, they allege the hardness, the
impossibility, the trouble, the danger of the matter. Unto the sluggish
person, watching, fasting, praying is a Lion. He that is afraid to confess his
faith or to show his zeal, says often in his heart, I dare not make known my
Religion or declare my love of the truth, least the persecutor slay me. Thus
the sluggard flies small troubles as if they were great, and fears uncertain
dangers, as if they were certain. But put the case o slothful man that
there were a Lion abroad indeed, yet when thy calling binds thee to go
forth, thou art to proceed to the works thereof, setting aside all vain
excuses and fond fears. Did David leave his fathers sheep, because of the
Lion? did Daniell cease from praying unto God, because it was decreed, that he
who should so do, should be cast into the Lions den? Has not God made a
promise to those who walk in their callings, that they shall tread upon Lions
and not be hurt? Sluggishnesse then, is in any case to be shaken off, which
causes a man to fear the dangers of this life more then God, yea which
oftentimes causes him to imagine that a moule hill is a mountain, a Lamb a
Lion, an easy matter, hard, a small danger, great.

14 The mouth of strange women is as a deep pit, he who is a detestation to
the Lord, shall fall therein.

They are called here strange women, who are harlots or wantons. The mouth of
such strumpets, is compared to a pit, because with their speeches they go about
to entangle the simple, and to cause them to fall into fornication. It is said,
that he who is a detestation to the Lord shall fall therein, because the Lord
uses to revenge a notorious offender, Eccle. 7.26.
whom he loatheth for his former sins, by this most fearful judgment, that
delivering him up into a reprobate sense, he suffers him to be seduced by the
mouth of the adulteress, and chaseth him as a beast into that pit. Romans 1.26.


15 Foolishness is bound up in the heart of a child, but the rod of correction
will drive it away.

Foolishness is bound up in the heart of a child, frowardness, stubburnnesse,
and vanity or wickedness, dwells in all the members of a youth; but
specially has abode in their minds. For their reason is weak, their will
perverse, their whole heart inclined to all evil. Hence it is, that Job
affirms, that man newborn, Job. 11.12.
is like a wild ass colt. But the rod of correction will drive it away.
Nevertheless, chastisement by stripes, remoueth and beats out the corruption
which is in a child.

16 [Both] he who oppresses the poor to increase his own substance, and he
which gives to the rich, shall surely come to poverty.

That person who pulls to him self the goods of such as stand in need,
shall at last be punished with penury. Again, he who in the humor of
vainglorie, spends his own goods on the wealthy, by sending them rich
presents or by feasting them sumptuously, shall come to want in the end.

17 Incline thine ear, and hearken to the words of the wise, and apply thine
heart unto my knowledge.

18 For it shall be pleasant, if thou keep these sayings in thy belly, and if
they be directed together in thy lips.

19 To the end that thy confidence may be in the Lord, I have showed knowledge
this day unto thee.

20 Have not I written unto thee most Princely sayings in counsels and in
understanding,

21 Making known unto thee that which is certain, and speeches of truth, that
in thy speeches thou may return the truth to those who send unto thee?

A grave exhortation, enforcing the precepts going before and following after,
is contained in this place of Scripture. It contains certain admonitions,
and certain reasons enforcing the same. The former admonition is, incline
thine ear, etc. apply with all diligence thine outward senses to the
instructions of this book. The latter is, and apply thine heart unto my
knowledge. Moreover, bend the inward powers of thy soul to my doctrine. The
former reason is, For it will be pleasant, if thou keep these sayings in thy
belly, etc. For if thou shall remember and talk of my lessons, they will be
unto thee sweeter then the honey or the honey comb. To the end that thy
confidence may be in the Lord, etc. The second reason is set down in these
words. The sum of it is, that the doctrine of this book is to be embraced
by every one, since he shall receive this double fruit thereby, that both he may
be confirmed thereby in the true faith, See a like sentence. 1. Pet. 3.15. Item
Romans 15.14.
and be enabled to render a reason of his belief and doings, to every one who
shall call him to account.

22 Rob not the poor because he is poor, neither tread down the afflicted in
the gate.

23 For the Lord pleads their cause, and will spoil their soul who spoil
them.

Rob not the poor because he is poor, do wrong to no man, but in no case to
the poor man, least of all in this respect, that he is not able to resist thee
or to revenge thee. See the root hereof Exodus 22.21. etc.
Neither tread down the afflicted in the gate, above all things, abuse not
thy might even in the seat of justice, to overthrow the right of the afflicted.
For the Lord pleads their cause, for God much mightier then thou, is the
defendor of the needy and of the comfortless. And will spoil their soul who
spoil them. And will take away their life who put them to death.

24 Make no friendship with an angry man, neither go with a furious person.

25 Lest thou learn his ways, and receive Or a snare.
destruction to thine own soul.

Make no friendship with an angry man, choose not him to be thy friend who is
given to wrath, neither go with a furious person, and avoid the very presence
of a moodie man, lest thou learn his ways, lest by his example thou be
infected with his vices, and receive destruction to thine own soul, and lest
thou meet with a deadly blow at his hands. For indeed, furious people are
wont in their moodynesse, sometimes to slay their nearest and dearest friends.

26 Be not of the number of them who Or clap.
touch the hand, nor of them who promise to pay debtes.

27 If thou have not wherewith to make recompense, [why causest thou] that the
[creditor] should take thy bed from under thee?

Be not a rash surety, for by this means, thou shall cast thy self into thy
creditors danger in such sort, Before. 20.16.
as that he may by law distraine upon all thy goods, the very bed whereon thou
lie not excepted.

28 Thou shall not remove the ancient bounds, which thy forefathers have set.

This Proverb teaches, that those things are not rashly or lightly to be
changed which by law or by the custom of the elders are received. Thou shall
not remove the ancient bounds. Thou shall not encroch unlawfully on other men's
possessions, nor deceitfully displace the mark of thine inheritance, which
being removed, the grounds or lands would be confounded, See the ground hereof
Deuteronomy. 23.10. Item. 27.17.
from whence strife yea slaughter uses oftentimes to arise. Which thy
forefathers have set. Those bounds I say thou art in no case to remove farther
upon a covetous mind, the which thine ancestors have fixed, as signs whereby
right may be discerned from wrong.

29 Have thou seen a man diligent in his business? he shall stand before
kings, he shall not stand before mean persons.

This sentence commends diligence, or quickenesse in dispatching matters.
Have thou seen a man diligent in his business? do thou observe by thine
experience, one, which applies his wits and senses, speedely and painfully to
dispatch and perform matters, or who does things with great nimblenesse and
dexterity? he shall stand before kings. He shall be received into the service
of Nobles and Princes who are wont to esteem and to advance those that are
painful. He shall not stand before mean persons. He shall not be suffered to
live obscurely, or have some base office. Here it may be objected, how is this
saying true, since many painful people are unprovided for, whilst idle serving
men, yea most wicked ruffians, are entertained in great men's houses? Truly
these times are most corrupt, but Solomon herein only observes, that
oftentimes it comes to pass, that such as are very laborious, are hired and
advanced before other. Now, howsoever sometimes it is to be seen, that they
who are most diligent are most neglected in this world, yet herein they are to
comfort them selves, that hereafter they shall stand before the king of glory
in heaven. For when the Lord shall come to call his servants to account for the
talentes which he has credited them with all, he will say unto him whom he
finds dilligent, well good servant, Luke. 19.17.
because thou have been faithful in a very little thing, take thou authority
over ten Cities. The drift of this instruction is, by the account and honor
which follows those who are laborious in their callings or affairs, to move
every one to embrace and practice diligence, which commonly is a thing most
acceptable to those who bear rule; as on the contrary side, sluggishnesse or
slownesse in matters, is odious and grievous unto them. Wherefore, let every
one be diligent and faithful both in temporal and spiritual works, which
doing, he shall be sure either to be advanced by men, or to be glorified by
the Lord.

THE XXIII. CHAPTER.
1 When thou shall sit to eat with a ruler, Temperance.
consider diligently that which is before thee:

2 Otherwise, thou should put a knife into thy Or jaws.
throat, if thou were of agreedy appetite.

3 Desire not his dainty dishes, for it is deceiptfull meat.

AT all times beware of surfeiting, Luke 21.34.
but especially when thou come to a table richly furnished with store of
dainties, else, by distempering and ouercharging thy stomach, thou may cast
thy self into some dangerous disease. For indeed delicious fare is a bait,
which will easily deceive thee, if thou take not great heed.

AT all times beware of surfeiting, Luke 21.34.
but especially when thou come to a table richly furnished with store of
dainties, else, by distempering and ouercharging thy stomach, thou may cast
thy self into some dangerous disease. For indeed delicious fare is a bait,
which will easily deceive thee, if thou take not great heed.

4 Ouertoile not thy self that thou may become rich, Moyling and drudging
after riches. So Jerome and the 70. turn hatagniph. Psalm. 127.2.
cease from thine own wisdom.

5 Will thou lift up thine eyes to those things which are not [to be had]? for
they make them selves wings, like the Aegle, which flies up toward heaven.

Be not a drudge of the world, See a like sentence in the son of Syrach chap.
11. v. 11. which may confirm this exposition.
vexing thy body or tormenting thy mind to get riches to thy self, which God
will not have thee attain, but other enjoy. For, what madness were it for
thee, without Gods blessing, to gape after and to droile and moile for wealth,
which thou may perceive to fly from thee as an Aegle, in such sort, that
the more pains thou take, the poorer thou art? Niggardliness. See a like
saying in the son of Sirach. 14.10.


6 Eat not his meat, who has an evil eye, and desire not his dainty dishes:

7 For, as though he thought it in his mind, he will say unto thee, eat and
drink, but his heart is not with thee.

8 Thou shall vomit out thy morsel which thou have eaten, and shall loose Thy
speeches, not which thou vtterest but hear the miser speak, as thy morsel,
not which thou have given him, but eaten at his table.
thy pleasant speeches.

Frequent not the table, borrow not the goods, use not the help of any snudge,
for he will speak fair, but indeed he makes more account of his meat,
(...) of thee. This his hollow heart will so grieve thee ^^en thou perceiuest
it, See an example in Jacob, who found Labans promises which he made at the
first, to vanish at the last, and his entertainme^t to work his
discontentement. Mat 7.6. Before. 9.7.
that thy meat which thou ^ast eaten will do thee no good, and the friendly
words which thou have heard him welcome thee with, shall but vex thee
exceedingly and vanish, without any comfort on thy part, as without truth on
his.

9 Speak not in the ears of a fool, for he will despise the wisdom of thy
sayings.

Cast not pearls before swine, or holy things unto dogs. If thou talk of
wisdom before profane people, they will but scorn thy words be they never
so excellent, because they understand them not, or because they are contrary to
their humors.

10 Remove not the ancient bounds, Encroching.
and enter not into the fields of the fatherless,

11 For their revenger is strong, Before. 22.28. Item. 22.23. Exodus 22. where
see the root hereof.
he him self will plead their cause against thee.

Encroch not upon any man's possessions, but especially take heed of wronging
those, who are without help or defense of man. For, albeit they are weak, yet
God is the Lord God of hosts, albeit they find no patrones in the world, yet
he will plead their cause.

12 Apply thine heart to correction, James. 1, 31.
and thine ears to the word of knowledge.

Profit by rebukes and chastisementes receiving them with meekness, and
apply the outward parts of thy body to get knowledge and instruction.

13 Withdraw not chastisement from the child, Parents.
when thou shall strike him with the rod, he shall not dye.

14 Strike him with the rod, and thou shall deliver his soul from Or, from
(...) See for correction Pro. 13.24.19.18.22.15.29.17.
the grave.

Correct thy children according to their deserts, for a rod will break no
bones, but save them from destruction.

15 My son, if thine heart be wise, mine heart, Or, I also.
even mine, shall rejoice,

16 And my reins shall leap for joy, whilst thy lips speak upright things.

Envying of the wicked.
17 Let not thine heart envy sinners, but [let it remaine] in the fear of God
all the day long:

18 For surely there is a reward, Ioh. 3.3. 1 Thessalonians. 3.8.
and thine hope shall not be cut off.

O man whosoever, if thou be sanctified in thy thoughts and affections, my
soul will be glad, but if also thou can bridle thy tongue, I shall yet more
rejoice. Be not so moved by the prosperity of the ungodly, See even an
exposition hereof Psalm. 37. ite^ 73.
as either to fret thereat or to follow their manners, but rather continue in
well-doing. For first, the ungodly shall be plagued in the end. Secondly, thou
shall have a crown of glory.

19 Hearken (o my son) and be wise, and direct thine heart in this way.

Banqueting or feasting.
20 Be not of the number of those who are bibbers of wine, or of those who glut
the^ selves with flesh:

21 For the drinker and feaster shall become poor, and the sleeper shall be
clothed with rags.

Give not thy self to intemperancie, See an exposition hereof Romans 13.13 Ephesians.
5.18. 1. Pet. 4.3.
and avoid the company and custom of drunkards and gluttons or banquetters.
For excess in eating and drinking (as also in sleeping) brings extreme
poverty.

22 Hearken to thy father who has begotten thee, I thus place the destinction
following Jerome, and the oppositio^ of the parts of this sentence. Holiness
and profaneness.
neither despise thy mother, when she shall be old.

23 Buy truth, and sell not wisdom and instruction and understanding.

24 The father of a righteous son does greatly rejoice, he who begeteeth a
wise child, is glad in regard of him.

25 Let thy father and thy mother rejoice, and let her who has borne thee,
skip for joy.

O man who art of thy self ignorant, lend an ear to the Lords deputies and
the instruments of thy life or welfare, especially then, when, like as thou art
very young, See for the exposition hereof. Mat. 13.24. Revel. 3.22. Esaias. 55.1.
John. 17.17. Heb. 12.16.
so they are very old. Following then their counsel like a wise merchant or
purchaser, with parting from thy commodities and pleasures, and by using all
means of attaining to Gods kingdom, get unto thy self true knowledge, true
righteousness, and true discretion, which done, never in any case sell the
grace of God, as Esau did his birthright for a mess of pottage, or as
unthrifts do their lands and possessions, but continue rooted and grounded in
the true knowledge and faith of Christ. Thus, if thou shall among other vices,
shun profaneness, and on the contrary side embrace holiness, thou shall be
a comfort to thy natural and spiritual parents.

26 My son, give me thine heart, and let thine eyes diligently observe my
ways:

27 For a whore is a deep ditch, Adultery.
and a strange woman a naraow pit.

28 Moreover, she lies in wait as a robber, and multiplieth transgressors
among men.

O man; beware moreover of that foul sin of adultery and of the entisements
of the harlot. My son, o thou who art bound unto me by a strong bond of
obedience, give me, renouncing thy self, frankly bestow on me the Lord, See a
like phrase and an example. 2. Cor. 8.5. See an example in David. Psalm. 73.25.
(who will be reverenced and loved both in my deputies and my self) thine
heart, thine affection and soul, as a spouse or wedded wife, delighting in me
alone and not in any stranger, and let thine eyes diligently observe my ways,
make also a covenant with thine eyes, not to look on a woman to lust after
her, observing my commandment, not to commit adultery. For a whore is a deep
ditch, and a strange woman a narrow pit. For as a deep ditch is a dangerous
place, whereinto a man may easily fall, but he can hardly come out from thence;
and as a narrow pit is a very troublesome hole, wherein a man can not stir
him self or be at ease, so a naughty woman brings distress and trouble to
her companions. Moreover, she lies in wait as a robber, furthermore, even as
a thief lurketh in a den or bush to get a pray, so the wanton woman lies in
wait, and uses bayts to steal the hearts of men, and multiplieth
transgressors among men, yea, she prevails with many, thus increasing the
number of notorious offenders in the world. Give not thine heart then to her
but to the Lord, being as it were enamored with that wisdom, which is holy,
pure, and peaceable.

29 To who^ is woe? to whom alas? to whom is strife? to whom is babbling? to whom
are wounds Or, without revenge. That is, such from which the drunkard cannot
defend him self, by reason that he is not his own man.
without cause? to whom is the redness of the eyes?

The question here is asked, who that person is, unto whom so many evils
befall, as that he is a complainer, a groner, a quareller, a footstool for
every one to beat, and a monster in face, having red eyes, and a countenance
of the same color.

30 Even to them who tarry long at the wine, to them that go and seek out
mixed wine.

The answer unto the demand set down in the verse going before, is herein
contained. The sum of it is, that he is the miserable man before spoken of,
who spends much time in drinking, or who seeks out the places where the
best liquor is. For, in those hot countries mixed wine was most acceptable and
desired, which therefore here is named, to note out most pleasant drink.

31 Look not thou upon the wine when it appears red, [or] when it shows
his color in the cup [or] stirs very kindly.

An admonition is now given to every one, to avoid the occasions of
drunkenness. But thou (o my son) if thou tenderest thine own welfare,
avoid the prouocations unto drunkenness, neither be so moved by the pleasant
color or lively spurting of wine, as to take too much of it.

32 In the end it will bite as a Serpent, and sting like an Or Hemorroug which
causes a man to bleed to death.
Asp.

The harm which at the last strong drink brings to a man, is here generally
and summarily set down* Like as then, a Serpent greatly hurts a man with the
biting of his mouth, and as the asp kills a man with the sting of his tail,
so the wine which thou powrest in excessiuely, will trouble thy brain, torment
thy belly, and cast thee into deadly diseases.

33 Thine eyes shall behold strange women, and thine heart shall speak
perverse things.

One particular inconvenience of drunkenness is now showed. Strong drink
immoderatly swilled in, will make thee have eyes full of adultery, and an
heart full of lewdness.

34 And thou shall be like him, that lies in he midst of the sea, and like
him, who lies on the top of a mast.

Another special inconvenience of drunkenness is declared in this sentence.
Wine or strong drink will make thee stagger as thou go, and cause thee to
think that all things swim.

35 Some have stricken me, [shalt thou say] yet have I not been sick: some have
beaten me, yet I have not felt it, when I shall awake, I will go on, I will
seek after this, yet more and more.

Two other particular harms besides those which already have been named, are
herein specified. To conclude (o my son) strong drink or wine, will both
make thee senseless, so that thou shall not feel the blows which are given
thee when thou art tipsie, and (which is worse) it will make thee so sensual,
as that like a dog returning to his vomit, thou shall from time to time
thirst and seek after the pots which will be thy bane.

THE XXIIII. CHAPTER.
1 Envy not the wicked, See the 17. verse. of the former Chapter.
neither desire to be with them,

2 For their heart imagines destruction, and their lips speak mischief.

SEeing the ungodly do most wicked acts and speak most mischievous words,
neither earnestly desire their prosperous estate, neither covet to be in their
company.

3 Through wisdom an house is builded, and by understanding it is established,

4 And by knowledge the inward rowmes [thereof] are filled with all precious
and pleasant substance.

Great use there is of wisdom every way. First, hereby an house is erected.
Secondly, made strong and polished. Last of all, filled with all store of
necessaries and delites.

5 [Let] a wise man be with Or with strength. Ecclesiastes. 9.13.14.
the forces of strength, and the man of understanding who fortifieth might:

6 For by policy thou shall make war Or for thy self.
unto thine own good, and by the multitude of counselors obtain safety.

The use of wisdom in the field is also great. Let a wise man be with the
forces of strength, etc. Let a prudent person lead and rule the army, and such
a one who by his skill can add strength to the mighty soldiers. For, thou
shall win the field, not by strength but by policy, and thou shall be
protected from danger, not by the might or multitude of armed men, but by the advice and counsel of many wise men. Before. 21.22.


7 Wisdom is too high to a fool, he cannot open his mouth in the gate.

There is moreover great use of wisdom in the judgment hall. Wisdom is too
high to a fool. The simple or foolish man is so pressed down with earthly
cares and pleasures, that he cannot attain to understanding or wisdom, which
hides her self from scorners. Hence it is, that he cannot open his mouth in
the gate. By reason that he wants a gift or faculty, he is not able to
speak in public assemblies, nor called to deal in matters in the seat of
judgment, which was in old time placed in the gates.

8 Him that studieth to do evil, [people] will call a most misciheuous man.

Such a one as even upon his bed deuiseth sundry ways of bringing iniquity to
pass, shall be counted and called both by private persons and Magistrates, a
most abominable and notorious offender.

9 The wicked deed of a Or of folly or frayltie.
fool is Or as a sin to be condemned.
a sin, but [the evil fact of a scorner] is an abomination to every man.

There are degrees and differences of sins. The wicked act which through
frailty or error is committed by a simple or ignorant man, is to be punished
and blamed, seeing ignorance or frayltie excuses not in the whole but in part.
As for the sin or crime, which is done by one who offends of knowledge and of
pride and fury, in as much as it is committed with an high hand, as it is most
severely to be revenged, so every man cannot but most abhor it.

10 Art thou faint in the day of adversity? is thy strength Or straight. I
read this sentence interrogatiuely with Drusius, the words well bearing or
requiring an interrogation.
small?

11 Deliver them that are drawn to death: for should thou withdraw thy
self from the^, who go down to the slaughter?

12 If thou say, behold we knew not of it: shall not he who pondereth the
hearts, understand it? and does not he know it who preserves thy soul? does
not he also recompense every man according to his works?

Every one is here exhorted according to his place and power to help the
afflicted. Art thou faint, See an example in the states of Judea. 1. Sam.
14.46. and in Hester. Hest. 8.4
etc. What, do thou in the day of trouble carry thy self fayntly, through
want of courage not succouring those who are oppressed? Deliver them, etc. Be
not thus faint hearted, but rather by all lawful means and by thy power if
thou art a Magistrate, rescue those who are unjustly molested or condemned. If
thou say, etc. Now, if thou seek excuses or pleadest ignorance, as that thou
know not, whether they be in trouble or no, or whether their cause be good
or bad, or how to help them: shall not the searcher of the hearts perceive
whether thou dissemblest or no, or shall not he who preserves thee in safety
and prosperity (to the end that thou may succor such as are in misery)
consider thy dealing with thy poor brethren, and him self deal with thee
according to thy desert?

13 My son, Psalm. 19.11.
eat honey, for it is good, and the honey comb, which will be sweet to the
roof of thy mouth,

14 So shall the knowledge of wisdom be unto thy soul, if thou find it: and
there will be a reward, and thy hope shall not be cut off.

Let the word and grace of God (o man) be sweet and comfortable to thee as the
honey and the honey comb, which if thou obtain, it will go well with thee.

15 Lay no wayt (o wicked man) at the house of the righteous, and spoil not
his resting place,

16 For a just man falls seven times and rises again, but the wicked Or
fall, or are overthrown. See Job. 5.27. Psalm. 37.24. Psalm. 34.19. See an
example. 1. Sam. 19.11.12. verse.
perish in evil.

Neither seek by craft to entrap or apprehend the innocent or godly person,
neither by violence oppress or molest him. For, although the troubles of the
righteous man are many, yet God in time delivers him out of them all. On the
contrary side, the ungodly so fall into adversity, as therein they are
forsaken and overthrown.

17 Be thou not glad when thine enemy falls, and let not thine heart rejoice
when he stu^bleth,

18 Lest in the eyes of the Lord beholding it, it seem evil, and he turn his
wrath from him upon thee.

Triumph not over thine adversary, when he is afflicted, yea, be far off
from conceiving any uncharitable joy proceeding from secret hatred in this
respect, lest the Lord ceasing to punish him, turn him self to plague thee,
which thing will be smally to thy comfort.

19 Fret not at the wicked, See before. 23.17. Also in this chap. 1. verse.
Psalm. 37.33. Before 13.9.
neither be envious at those who are evil.

20 For there shall be no end to the euilman, the candle of the wicked shall be
put out.

Grudge not at the tyranny or prosperity of the ungodly person, who shall not
bring his intended mischief to an end, and whose great glory shall be turned
into extreme misery.

21 My son, fear God and the king, Shonim. Such as vary or change laws,
divine, or humane, as Antiochus did. Daniell. 7.74. in which place this very
word is also set down.
and meddle not with those who go about alteratio^s,

22 For their destruction shall suddenly arise, and who knows the ruin of
them both?

Warning is here given to every one, to be subject unto higher powers. My
son, o man whosoever, fear, reverence in heart and obey in deed, God, the
eternal, chiefly, always, and then only, when men can not be pleased but
that he must needs be displeased. And, moreover, for the Lord and in the Lord
honor and obey, the king, the chief ruler as the head next under the Lord,
together with his under officers. And meddle not with those who go about
alterations, but in any case, allow not off, be not in company with, See
examples in Corah and his company, in Nadab and Abihis, in Theudas and Judas.
Act. 5.
nor follow after, such as swerve, square, or vary, from the holy laws of God
concerning religion, or the wholesome laws of Princes touching policy, or as
seek to abrogate or change either of the^, to the end they may stir up
sedition, or establish their own fancies. Against this divine charge or precept
two sorts of people offend, who yet will seem to be great obseruers thereof.
The first are they, who give unto Caesar that which is Caesar's, See like
sayings Mat. 22.21. Luc. 21.18. Romans 13.1. 1. Pet. 2.13.
but give not unto God that which is Gods. For though they pay tribute to
Princes, or observe diligently their positive laws, yet they break the laws
of God, teaching false doctrines and corrupting his worship. The second are
they, who as concerning the exercises of religion, or sanctification of the
Saboth, give unto God that which is Gods, but withal give not unto Caesar that
which is Caesar's. For either they refuse to pay duties to the Prince, or they
take up arms against him, or they will not be subject to his good laws, but
rather seek to change or abolish the^. The rule here given is, that not only
the Lord but the magistrate, neither the magistrate alone but the Lord also
must be obeyed. But a question here may be demanded, what if the magistrate
command things contrary to Gods laws? The answer hereunto is, that then the
rule of the Apostles is to be put in practice, who teach, that it is better to
obey God then man, albeit in these cases also, every one is so to obey God, as
that still he be subject to the higher powers, as concerning the honoring of
the magistrates person, the reuerencing of his office, the enduring of his
sword, the not resisting of his authority, which can not be done with a good
conscience, for which cause the Apostle Paul affirms, that it is meet to be
subject, not only for fear but for conscience sake. For their destruction
shall suddenly arise. Great cause there is, not to meddle with rebels, seeing
in a moment they shall be most grievously plagued. And who knows the ruin of
them both? Moreover, seeing at unawares the authors of sects and seditions
together with their followers, shall utterly be destroyed, great cause there is
to fear God and the king, without meddling with those who seek alterations.

23 Also these things pertain to the wise: to have respect of persons in
judgment is not good.

These precepts ensuing, describe also those duties which concern the prudent,
and which whosoever put into practice, shall in so doing deal wisely. See
before. 18. chap. 5. verse. And the root hereof Deuteronomy. 1.17.
Among these, this is the first, that in giving of sentence to regard any
outward thing, is a very evil and hurtful thing.

24 Him, who says to the wicked man, thou art righteous, the people will
curse, the nations will abhor.

25 But to them who rebuke [him] shall be pleasantness, and each good man's
blessing shall fall upon them.

All well disposed people will cry out on and detest, See an example in Job.
Job. 29.11.12.13.
such corrupt judges as justify the ungodly person, so on the contrary side,
well affected people will wish a blessing on that magistrates heart, who
reproves or corrects the evil doer, yea the Lord him self will pour his
blessing on him.

26 [Men] will kiss the lips of him, See this phrase in this sense. Psalm.
2.12. Genesis 41.40.
who answers upright words.

All good people will not only love but reverence and honor him, who gives
an upright sentence in judgment or speaks wisely.

27 Prepare thy work without, and make ready thy things in the field, and
after, build thine house.

Proceed orderly in all thine affairs, See an example in the 31. of this book.
looking to things of greatest necessity in the former place, and to things of
less importance, in the latter. For example, as concerning household affairs,
first labor about and look unto, thy corn, thy vineyards, and thy cattle
abroad, all which are means of maintaining life, and then raise up thy roof,
and trim thy dwelling. Against this golden rule three sorts of people offend.
For example, first, they who prefer pleasure before profit, secondly, they,
who prefer earthly things before heavenly, last of all, they, who prefer
spiritual things of less necessity or experience for them to deal in,
before those spiritual matters which are more weighty and more necessary. Of
this number are they, who occupy themselves in private exercises of religion,
when they should be present at the public assemblies of the Church, as also
they, who meddle with controversies of the church, before they are grounded in
the principles of the word. Of the second sort are they, who more labor after
the goods of this world, then the kingdom of God. Of the first kind they are,
who make great feasts or bestow much on their pastimes or recreations, before
they have a good stock or good commings in. These courses are all of them
preposterous, not according to the word, which in all matters wills us
orderly to proceed, but according to flesh and blood.

28 Be not a witness rashly against thy neighbor, nor deceive [him] with thy
lips.

Neither without just cause or lawful calling, testify against thy neighbor
in public place, neither by flattering speeches beguile him, pretending that
friendship toward him, which thou do not bear him in thine heart.

29 Say not I will do to him as he has done to me, I will recompense this man
according to his work.

Boast not, that thou will follow thine adversary in his evil course, rather
remit all revenge, considering, not what he has deserved, but what the law of
God requires at thine hands.

30 I passed by the field of the slouthful man, and by the vineyard of the man
destitute of understanding,

31 And lo, it was all grown over with thistles, [and] nettles had covered the
face thereof, and the stone wall thereof was broken down.

32 Then I beheld, and considered it in my mind, I looked upon it and received
instruction.

33 By a fevv sleeps, a fevv slumbers, See the 6. of this book 8.9. etc.
a little folding of the hands in lying down,

34 Both thy poverty comes on thee as a speedy trauellour, and thy needines
as an armed man.

First, here, Solomon sets down the condition or estate of the goods of the
negligent or improuident person. I passed. etc. I have by experience observed,
that the sluggard lets all things run to decaie, in his field, body,
soul and charge. Secondly, he shows by himself, what use we are to make by
the view of such examples. Then I beheld, etc. I rejoiced not in this man's
fall, but by his woe learned to be wise, and to walk the more discreetly in my
calling. But though we have seen many whose state has decayed, whose houses
shut up, whose credit empaired by carelesnes, yet not one of us among an
hundredth can say, that we have received instruction hereby. Thirdly, he
touches the subtlety of this sin. By a few sleeps, etc. By multiplying thy
naps and deferring of the time. Last of all, he declares the misery of the
slothful person. Both thy poverty etc. Sudden misery comes on thee, and
strong to overthrow and confound thee.

THE XXV. CHAPTER.
1 Also these are the Proverbs of Solomon, which the men of Hezechia King of
Judah, gathered together.

THese Parables ensuing, were by the servants of Hezechia copied out of sundry
writings, and peradventure out of the public Monuments or Chronicles, wherein
the sayings and acts of Solomon were set down.

2 The glory of God is to conceal a thing secret, See the root hereof. Deuteronomy.
13.14. See an example. Job. 29.16.
but the kings honor is to search out a thing.

Because the Lord has no equal or superior, to whom he stands bound to
render a reason, it is a point of honor unto him, to have some ways so
insearchable, as that no creature can know the same, which to do, both men and
Angels are not only unable but unworthy. The case stands otherwise with
earthly princes, who as they are commanded by the Lord to inquire into matters,
so then they are commended by men, when they boult out the truth in hard cases.

3 The heavens in height, and the earth in deepenesse, and the Kings heart, Or
is unsearchable.
can no man search.

Infinite should the care and wisdom of a king be, See an example in this our
Solomon. 1. King. 4.
who should be able to reach unto most high points of knowledge, and to pierce
into most profounde secrets.

4 Take away the dross from the silver, and there will proceed a vessel for
the finer.

5 Take away the wicked from the king, and his throne shall be established
in righteousness.

Princes are to punish offenders. See the same comparison. Mal. 3.3.
For as the Goldsmiths separating with fire the refuse metal from the pure,
causes a fine cup to arise: so a wise ruler, by cutting off evil doers,
causes his land to flourish and establishes his scepter.

6 Take not honor unto thy self before a king, Usurping of honor, or
intruding of a man's self into high places.
and stand not in the place of great personages.

7 For it is better that it be said unto thee come up hither, then that thou be
thrust down before a worthier person, which thing thine eyes do see.

Neither ambitiously seek nor boldly intrude thy self into those high places
whereunto thou art not called: See the same paerable. Luc. 14. The same reason.
Luc. 18.
for he who exalts him self shall be brought low: which thing is testified
by daily experience to be most true.

8 Go not forth hastily to sue any, Going to law.
consider what thou will do at the last, when as thy neighbor shall have put
thee unto shame.

Run not out of thine house upon every trifling occasion, Deuteronomy. 19.16.
to brabble or to law with him who is thine adversary, lest if thou receive
the foil, Mat. 5.25.
the judge deliver thee to the iaylor, and thou be cast into prison.

9 Debate thy matter with thy neighbor, but reveal not another secret,

10 Lest he who hears blame thee, and thine infamy do not cease.

If at any time thou must needs have any dealing in law, Blabbing.
plead thy case without defacing thine adversary or blasing his secret
offenses, lest the vmpire or judge blame thee as a cruel pursuer, and so thou
be spotted with perpetual infamy.

11 As golden apples with pictures of silver, Eloquence.
so is a word spoken fitly.

Gold of it self and by it self, is precious and excellent, but when both it
is brought into some pretty form, as for example into the fashion of an apple,
pear, or cherrie, and wrought about or embroidered with fair and curious
picture-workes and fruteryes, as with silver leaves, Ephe. 4.2.9.
branches, and trees, then it is much more comely and glorious. In like manner,
a sage or pithie sentence, is in it self acceptable and commendable, but when
it is uttered with a grace and in time and place, it becomes exceedingly
pleasant and gracious.

Teachers and hearers.
12 As a golden earing and a jewel of fine gold, so is a wise reproouer, to an
obedient ear.

Like as a precious jewel and a golden earing joined together, See an example
in David and Abigail. 1. Sam. 25. And a like saying. Psalm. 141
are a mutual bewtifying the one to the other, and most fitly do agree, so a
mouth which utters precious reproves and admonitio^s, and an ear which
listeneth to them with attention and humility, are not only suitable and well
met, but a mutual honor each of them to the other.

13 As the cold of the snow, in the time of harvest, Messengers.
so is a faithful messenger unto those who send him, for he restores his
masters soul.

That ancient people in the hot countries used to cool their drink in
summer, with snow water which to that end they reserved, many glories testify.
Even as snow water which is most cold put into drink to cool the same, is
very pleasant in the hot countries, and refreshes those who labor hotly in
the harvest: so a speedy and trusty messenger, by his good news, greatly
reuiueth the heavy and longing mind, of those who sent him about their
business.

14 As clouds and vvind without rain, so is the man who boasts of a false
gift.

Like as clouds and wind without rain, Se the same comparison in the Epistle
of Jude.
not only are barren and without water, but making show of showers which they
have not nor pour down, deceive oftentimes the husband man's expectation and
grieve his heart: so vain promisers of liberality, and hypocrites, are not
only without grace and good works, but by their false promises and shows of
bounty and holiness, delude and offend those who hoped for some goods or
goodness from them.

15 By long suffering a Captain is allured, Long suffering.
and a soft tongue breaks the bones.

By patient silence, even those who carry a most stout mind as for example
warlike Captains, See examples in Gedeon Iud. 8.2. and in Abigail. 1. Sam. 25.
are easily pacified and quickly overcome. Moreover, albeit lightly soft things
break not hard, yet gentle speech does so deeply pearce and has such force,
that it not only suppleth the veins of the stubburne heart, but mollifieth as
it were the very bones.

16 When thou find honey, eat that which is sufficient for thee, lest being
filled therewith, thou vomit it up.

17 Withdraw thy foot from the house of thy neighbor, Friends. Moderation.
lest being filled with thee, he hate thee.

When thou have found a table or house like in sweetness unto honey, haunt it
not without all modesty, lest thy friend be weary of such a daily guest, but
rarely and sparingly resort thereunto, that so thou may always be welcome and
acceptable.

As an hammer and a sword and a sharp arrow, See the same coparison Psalm.
120.3.4. Also 55.22. Before. 12.18.
so is that man who witnesses a false testimony against his neighbor.

As the hammer which breaks hard things in pieces, See an example. 1. King.
21.13.
and the sword which cutteth fast things in sunder, and the arrow which
pearceth into things most secret, are weapons of destruction: so a false
witness many ways works deadly hurt to his neighbor.

Such is also the hope of a sinner in the day of his visitation, as is further
showed. Job. 8.14. See examples in Job forsaken by his friends, in David
rejected by Naball, and in Mephibosheth deceived by Tsibah. Niter, is neither
saltpeter, nor salt, nor chalk, but a kind of earth hardened by the sun,
white in color, bitter in taste. See Bellonius de Nitro. That liberality in
due season reuiueth the body and soul appears in the 31. Job. 19.20. verse.
That vinegar dissolueth niter Aristotle teaches. 4. Meteor. 6. That Music
eases a troubled mind is manifest. 1. Sam. 16.24.2. Kings. 3.15. Dan. 6.19.
Doing of good to our enemies.
19 As a broken tooth or a foot out of joint, so is trust in one that is
unfaithful in the day of trouble.

As a broken tooth fails and paineth him who goes about to chew his meare,
and as a foot out of joint disappointeth and tormenteth him, who sets it on
the ground to go: so the hope which has been reposed in a friend who starteth
aside in adversity, does fall away and turn into indignation.

20 He which puts on a garment in the cold season, is as vinege on niter,
or as he which sings songs to a sad heart.

The liberal person who clotheth him that is naked in extreme cold weather, as
when it is frost or snow, causes his numnesse to relent and depart out of his
body, and softeneth the stiffenesse of his joints, as vinegar dissolueth and
loses the dry niter (which sometimes is so by a stone), and moreover, cheareth
up his spirits, like as a sweet singer by his delitesome dittie and pleasant
voice, driving away sorrow from a pensive mind, raises it up unto joy and
comfort.

21 If thine enemy hunger, feed him with bread, and if he thirst give him
water to drink,

22 For [so] thou shall heap as it were burning coals upon his head, and God
will recompense thee.

Be far off from suffering thine enemy to perish, See the r^^^e hereof Exodus
23.4.5.
rather nourish him, yea minister not one alone but many benefits unto him,
according to his necessity. Thus doing, thou shall overcome evil with good,
yea thou shall inflame him to love thee by thy benefits, See examples hereof
in Saul 1. Sam. 24 17. and in Elizeus. 2. Kings. 6.22.23. Romans 12.20.
which will seem so many burning coals unto him. But, put the case he
remains obstinate or be not able to requite thee, yet God who commands
thee to love thine enemy, will repay thy good deeds and cost unto thee.

23 As the Northvvest vvinde ingendreth rain, so does the Or secret.
whispering tongue, a Or sad.
lowering look.

As the wind in Iudaea coming from the Northwest, causes not a drought but
rain, by reason of the situation of the great sea, which is Northward: so the
sly or backbiting tongue, causes sadness in their countenance and frowning in
their looks, who are therewithal bitten.

24 Better it is to dwell in a corner of the house top, then with a contentious
woman in a wide house.

This sentence has before been expounded in the 21. chap. 9. verse.

25 As cold waters to a weary soul, so is a good hearing out of a far
country.

As cool waters quench the thirst and restore the strength of the feeble and
weary trauellour: See an example in Jacob. Genesis 47. And in Peter's tidings. Acts
12.
in like sort, good news much longed and looked for, assuage the grief and
cheer up the spirits, of him who hears them out of a far country.

26 As a well troubled with the heel, or a spring which is corrupted, so is
a righteous man cast down before the wicked man.

Like as when the mud is stirred up in a fountain, or any filthy thing is
cast into a spring, See examples in Habachucke. Hab. 1. in Jeremy. Ier. 12.
and in David. Psalm. 73.
the clear water thereof loses his grace and use by this means, and this is
taken in ill part: even so, to see the righteous molested or defaced by the
ungodly, is not only a vile indignity, but such a spectacle, as cannot but
move great indignation.

27 It is not good [for men] to eat too much honey: so, the seeking of their
own glory, is not glory.

As honey immoderately taken, breeds diseases and does much hurt: See an
example in David smarting for numbering of his people.
so, greedy hunting after praise or honor (things in sweetness like to honey) is
no commendation but a shame and an hurtful thing.

28 As a city broken down, without a wall, so is every one who has no
power over his spirit.

As a town vndefenced is not able to resist any assault, but lies open to
enemies and to spoil: so he who cannot bridle his vain glory, wrath, lust,
or such other affections, falls into great sins and incurreth many troubles.

THE XXVI. CHAPTER.
1 As the snow Or for.
in the Summer, and the rain in the harvest [are not meet]: so honor is
unseemly for a fool.

Fools or ignorant and wicked persons, are by no means to be advanced unto
the bearing of any office, or unto dignity. For, even as snow in Summer and
rain in harvest are unseasonable and hurtful, which in these times would
hinder the grows of the herbs and the inning of the corn: so, to prefer
the unfit to places of rule, or charge, or account, which they become not but
abuse, to the hindering of virtue and marring of the Lords harvest, is an
unseemly and hurtful thing.

2 As a Or byrd.
sparrovv [vseth] to wander, and a swallovv to fly, so the curse which is
causeless, shall not come.

The curses of the wicked are not to be feared or regarded, neither can do any
harm. For, even as the birds which continually roue up and down in the air,
set no foot but pass from place to place: so, devilish bannings or
execrations vttred without desert, and peevish censures whereof rage only is
the root, shall vanish and never seize upon the innocent person.

3 Unto the horse [belongeth] a vvhippe, to the ass a bridle, and a rod to
the fools back.

The ungodly are to be punished with sharp correction. Even as the horse in
the cart or chariot, is to be remembered and driven on with the whip, and as the
ass in the high way, is to be guided with the bridle, without which he will
continually, (by reason of his simplicity,) go astray: so, censures, fines,
priso^s, and torments, are needful for offenders, who without such byts and
scourges as it were, will neither abstain from vices, nor do their duty.

4 Answer not a fool according to his folly, lest thou also become like unto
him.

5 Answer a fool Or according to.
unto his folly, lest he be wise in his own eyes.

Wicked men are as well to be reproved by words, as corrected by stripes.
Answer not a fool according to his folly, in replying to a wicked man, follow
not his vanity or rage, speaking rashly as he does, or giving taunt for
taunt, lest thou also become like unto him, to the end, thou be not
transformed into his image as it were, or be counted a fool as well as he.
Answer a fool unto his folly, nevertheless, sometimes pass not over with
silence, but confute the error, and reprove the misdemeanour of the ungodly
person, with all wisdom and gravity, lest he be wise in his own eyes, that
he be not too proud, but perceiving his dotage or sin, be humbled or
confounded.

6 As one who cutteth [his] feet, [or] who drinks some hurtful thing, so
is he who sends a message by a fool.

It is a dangerous thing to send unfit messengers on arrants, for as he who
stumbling, or chopping any thing, breaks or cutteth his feet, feels great
pain, or as he who suppeth in poison in steed of drink, is in great danger
of death and much troubled: so, he who sends a message by one that cannot
carry it well or do it aright, having his affairs either not done or ill done,
receives much vexation for his folly.

7 As the legs of the lame man are lifted up, so is a parable in a fools
mouth.

A good speech in an evil or foolish man's mouth is unseemly, for, even as the
lame man's legs are lifted up unequally and vncomelily: so, a witty saying or a
good instruction, beseems not him who is lame in discretion or crooked and
offensive in life, but silence rather is to be enjoined such a one. Psalm. 50.16
17.


8 As he who puts a stone into a Or Stock bow.
sling, so does he, who gives honor to a fool.

Unfit men are not to be promoted unto rule. For, as he who puts a stone or
pellet into a Stock-bow or gunne, does he knows not what hurt, so he who
prefers the ungodly or unfit unto any dignity and office, by putting a
sword into a mad man's hand as it were, is an occasion of much harm. For, let
the wicked have power joined to their will, and they will trouble and stone
those who are under them.

9 As a thorn Or coming into the hand.
in the hand of a drunkard, so is a parable in the mouth of fools.

The ungodly man will not only abuse his place or hand, but his speech or that
grace, wherewith he is endued. For, even as a drunkard catching or getting
some sharp thing as a thorn or briar into his hand, therewith strikes all
that are by and does much hurt, so, the wicked person misapplying some good
sentence, or having in his mouth some sharp and biting proverb, goareth and
vexes those who are in his company.

10 Every one Or smarteth. So this word is taken, Esai 53. This sense is
confirmed, first, by the native and simple signification of the Hebrew words.
For Mecholel properly is to wound or hurt. Shachar properly is to hire. Guober
being put alone, as here, does never in the scripture to my remembrance
signify a transgressor, but one that passes by. Secondly, by the suit of the
matter entreated of in this chapter. Other reasons I pass over.
much hurts [himselfe,] who both hireth the fool, and hireth all that pass
by.

It is a dangerous thing, for a man to hire into his service, tag and rag as we
use to say. For, every one who without choice admits into his house or
sets about his business he cares not whom, entertaining the simple and
ungodly man, and even those who are unknown, shall be sure to smart for his
folly, seeing either his work will be done but untowardly, or his goods
will be wasted, or contention will arise in his family, or one inconue^ience or
other will fall out.

11 As a dog returns to his vomit, so a fool repeateth his folly.

The ungodly often fall into the same sins. Even as the dog has this
filthy quallitie, that feeling his stomach ouerloaden, he goes to the grass,
and casts up that which troubled him, but yet afterward when he has so done,
he returning back takes up again the filthiness which annoyed him: so, many
a wicked man, feeling himself ouerburthened with sense of sin, tastes the
word of God, and being moved therewith, Heb. 6.2.
lays aside his misbehauiour for a season, but afterward, being tempted a
new of his own concupiscence, he is again entangled in his former errors
and pollutions, 2. Pet. 2.21.22.
rerurning to his first heathenish course of life and state of nature.

12 Have thou seen a man wise in his own eyes? there is more hope of a fool
then of him.

Conceited people are incurable. Have thou seen a man wise in his own eyes?
See an example in the penitent Publican.
know thou any who being simple or full of infirmities, yet imagines him
self to be prudent and very holy? there is more hope of a fool then of him.
He who is ignorant or dissolute in life, will sooner be brought to knowledge
and repentance then such a one.

13 The slothful man says, an huge Lion is in the way, a Lion is in the
streets.

See the exposition of this verse before, in the notes on the 13. ver. of the
22. Chapter. Only here observe, how the sluggard amplifieth the imagined
dangers which he fears. For he says, that not only a Lion but an huge Lion
is in the way.

14 As the door Or is turned about.
turns upon his hinges, so does the slothful man upon his bed.

In the former sentence was showed, what does withhold the sluggard from going
abroad. Herein now is declared, what he does at home, to wit, he there sleeps
even till noone. As the door is turned on the hinge in such sort, as that
sometimes it is moved to one side sometimes to another, and yet always
remains unremoved from the hinge: so the sluggard, even when he sleeps not
nor needs his bed any longer, turns in his bed sometimes to this side
sometimes to that, often purposing to rise, but, for all that, lying down
still.

15 The slothful man hides his hand in his bosom. and Or he is wearied.
it grieueth him to put it to his mouth again.

Before we have heard what the sluggard does in his bed, now here is showed
whar he does when he is risen out of his warm nest. See the sense hereof
before, in the exposition of the 24. verse. of the 19. Chapter.

16 The sluggard is vviser in his own eyes, then seven men who call him to
account.

Sloth not only makes men full of excuse, drowsy and idle, but conceited.
For, See an example in that slouthful servant who hid his talent.
the slouthful man imagines that he does wisely in taking his ease and in
hiding his talent, yea and far better the^ those, who take pains in their
callings or go to hear Gods word. Albeit then his master or many other, call
him to account, yet he justifies him self before them, and prefers his own
wisdom before theirs.

17 He that passes by and Or rages.
medleth with the strife [that belongs not] unto him, is as one that takes
a dog by the ears.

Busy bodies do great hurt unto them selves. Even as he who takes a dog by
the ears, which he by no means ca^ abide to be touched, causes him to bite
him, or to fly in his face: so he who medleth in another man's quarrel,
provoke him to rail on him, or to do him a mischief.

18 As a madman that casts Or firehoopes.
firebrands, arrows and deadly things,

19 So [dealeth he] who deceives his neighbor and says, am I not in jest?

Such as in meriments craftily hurt their friends, are to be condemned. As
bedlem people who fling about all that comes to hand, are to be avoided and
blamed, so mad merry me^ are to be shunned and reproved, Ephe. 5.4.
who under the color of sport, hurt their neighbors.

20 Without vvood the fire is quenched, and without a Or whisperer.
talebearer, strife cease.

Tale cariers are to be removed from the societies of men. As when fuel is
put to the fire, it is nourished, but when it is taken therefrom, it goes out:
so, if there be a whisperer in any society, he makes much anger and debate,
but if he go away to some other place or be banished out of the company, all
contention is hushed and at an end.

21 As the dead coal [is to kindle] the burning coals, and vvood the fire, so
a contentious person is to kindle strife.

Another cause of strife is the contentious or angry man, who is wont to strive
about every light trifle. As therefore the dead coals being put to the burning
coals, increase the heat and the flame, and as wood being added to the fire,
nourishes it, so, the wrathful and quarrelsome person, raises up strife,
causing a little variance to grow to a great broyle.

22 The words of the Or whisperer.
talebearer are as flatterings, but they go down into the bowels of the belly.

See the meaning of this verse before, in the exposition of the 8. verse, of
the 18. Chapter.

23 As silver dross ouerlayed upon an earthen pot, so are fauning lips, and an
evil heart.

24 He that hates, vvil counterfeit with his lips, but Or within him.
in his heart, he lays up deceit.

25 When he shall show his voice very Or pleasurable.
gracious, trust him not, for there are seven abominations in his heart.

26 He hides hatred by deceit, but his malice shall be discovered in the
congregation.

27 He which diggeth a pit, shall fall thereinto, and on him who rolleth a
stone, it shall return.

28 [A man] of a deceit full tongue hates those whom he would destroy, and he
who has a flattering mouth, causes ruin.

Treacherous dissemblers are herein notably described. As silver dross, etc. As
the dross of silver seems to be silver and makes a fair show, when yet it
covers under it an earthen vessel: so fair words oftentimes seem pleasant
and glorious, when yet they hide a mischievous heart under them. He that hates
will counterfeit with his lips. etc. That person who carries a secret grudge in
his heart, will oftentimes outwardly show great courtesy and feign him self as
the Hebrew word does signify to be another kind of man then he is. When he
shall show his voice gracious or grace as it were his voice, trust him not,
etc. Albeit he shall speak never so fair, yet put no confidence in him, for
as he is full of courtesy, so he is full of subtlety. He hides hatred by
deceit, etc. He covers by his colored speeches the inward rancor of his
mind, but his spite or malice shall at one time or other by one means or other,
openly be detected. He which diggeth a pit, etc. The dissembler shall feel,
that mischief which he prepared for another. For even as sometimes it comes
to pass, that the pit which a man diggeth to catch his neighbor in, takes
his own foot, and that the stone, which a man casts upward to hit his
neighbor therewith falls on his own head: Psalm. 7.
so the evil which the wicked person prepares for the innocent, on a sudden
contrary to his expectation, returns upon him. Eccl. 10.
A man of a deceiptfull tongue hates those whom he would destroy, and he who
has a flattering mouth, causes ruin. A close and still dissembler, will
carry a grudge toward those whom he seeks and purposes to trouble and undo.
Again, such a one as can tell how to gloze, and having learned the flattering
style, speaks smoothly and plausiblie, by this means persuades their
overthrow and affects their ruin, whom he maligneth, tickling some or other
but especially Magistrates in the ears, and stirring them up to persecute his
a duersaries, as if they were great evil doers, when they are indeed most
righteous persons.

THE XXVII. CHAPTER.
Presumption or security.
1 Boast not of to morrow, because thou know not what a day may bring
forth.

Forget not thine infirmity or mortality, See an example James. 4 13.
neither set down things to come so certainly in thine heart, as if that thou
could do what thou would. For where thou look for a furtherance, there
may be an hinderance, neither can thou tell whether time to come will bring
forth unto thee health or sickness, loss or gain, life or death.

2 Let astrangers mouth praise thee, Vain glory.
but not thine own mouth, another man's lips, but not thine own.

Speak not thy self vaingloriously of thine own wisdom or good deeds, but
let those who never knew thee or are of no acquaintance with thee, commend
thee, and stay till thy neighbors praise thee.

3 A stone has heaviness and sand vveightinesse, but the wrath of a fool,
is heavier then them both.

4 In anger is cruelty, Wrath. Rage.
and in wrath an ouerflovving, but who can stand before envy?

See an example in the Israelites, to whom the Egyptians rage was more grievous
then their burdens.
It is not so hard or grievous a thing to carry heavy burdens, as to bear the
displeasure of a furious person. When anger does but begin to arise, it
presently thirsts for blood like the horseleach. Now, when it increases
waxing greater and greater, it overthrows the welfare, good name, and life of
many. But when it comes to the height, so that it grows to fierceness,
spite and envy, then as a flame it consumes all sorts of persons, Job. 5 2.
yea the fool himself in whose bosom it rests.

5 Open rebuke is better then secret love. Secretloue.


6 The wounds of a friend are faithful, but the kisses of an enemy are to be
detested.

Reproving of friends for their offenses and wounding of them by sharp words,
is better then either good will no way expressed, or outward signs of
friendship tending to deceive. For first, Leuit. 19 17. Mat. 18.15.
God commands us to rebuke our brethren, secondly, sharp reproves do win
men to repentance, last of all, as secret love engenders suspicions, so the
flattery of enemies works mischief.

7 The soul which is full, Psalm. 141.5. Hunger.
Or treads under foot.
despises an houie comb, but to the hungry soul, every bitter thing is
sweet.

Hunger is the best sauce, wherefore a moderation is to be used in meares and
drinks, and all sorts of delights.

Changing of a man's dwelling or calling.
8 As a byrd which vvandreth from her neast, so is a man which vvandreth from
his place.

None is to leave the standing place whereunto God has assigned him. For, even
as a silly bird which unnecessarily, by reason of a certain lightness wherewith
she is carried, wandreth from place to place, does not only by this means
leave her young ones in great danger, but wearieth her own wings and
hazardeth her own life, meeting sometimes with a net, sometimes with a pellet:
so, the person who rolleth from house to house, or rashly changes his charge
or profession, by this his inconstancy greatly hurts himself and his, in
often remoues meeting with manifold losses and troubles.

9 As an ointment and perfume rejoice the heart, so does the Hebrew.
Sweetness. Friends. A friends counsel is called sweet, Psalm the 55.
Friendship is resembled to an oiniment, Psalm 153. That a friends counsel
does much delight and is very good, may appear in the example of Jonathan
comforting David in the Lord, and of Iethro aduising Moses to appoint of ficers
under him.
sweet advise of a friend, [reioyce every one] rather then a man's own
counsel.

10 Thy friend and thy fathers friend forsake thou not, neither enter into the
house of thy brother in the day of thy calamity: a neighbor near, is better
then a brother far off.

Even as there is great force both in a precious ointment and perfume, unto the
quickening of the spirits and comforting of the senses: so, the advice of a
friend does greatly ease and refresh a perplexed and pensive heart, but a man
is not so fit or able (be he never so wise), by himself or his own
cogitations, to comfort himself when he is sad. Seeing there is so great use
of a faithful friend, break not off familiarity or amity with an old or
tried acquaintance, but maintain friendship with him and use him in thy
necessity. Enter not then rather into the house of thy kinsman then of thy
friend in the time of thine affliction, for nature is not too much to be
trusted, neither are brethren commonly kind, but unnatural rather to their
brethren in adversity. See an example in Joseph's brethren. 1. Pet. 2.17.
Cherish also neighborhood as a kind of friendship which is very necessary
and profitable. For, one who is near both in affection and place, may and will
at a pinch help and pleasure thee more, then a natural kinsman far off in
dwelling, albeit he bear thee much good will. As we say in our English
proverb, if thou have a good neighbor, thou shall have a good God-morrow.

11 My son, be wise and rejoice mine heart, Children.
that I may be able to answer him, who would feign reproach me with some matter.

O my child, by thine obedience and discretion, fulfill my joy, that I may
prove to the face of mine adversaries, who would gladly pick an hole in my
coat and stain me with some infamy, that I have performed the duty of a
good father toward thee.

Wisdom or wariness:
12 The prudent man foreseeing an evil hides him self, [but] fools going on
still are punished.

The prudent escape danger by their avoiding of perilous places and actions,
See before. 22.3. where this sentence is at large expounded. Suretishi.
but the foolish by their simplicity fall into evil.

13 Take his garment who has been surety for a strange man, and take a pledge
of him, who has become surety for a strange ewoman.

Make the rash surety smart for his folly, See the 20. chap 16. verse.
according as he deserves to do.

14 Unto him who blesses his friend, with a loud voice, betimes in the
morning, rising up early, a curse shall be imputed.

Importunate flattery.
Impornate flattery or flattering importunity, is hateful and often condemned
by those, toward who^ it is expressed. To him who blesses his friend, that
person who saluteth or praises his neighbor, with a loud voice, after an
importunate manner and so as all may hear, See an example in Absalon. 2. Sam.
15.
betimes in the morning, in a season of good luck as it were, rising early,
showing him self with the first or before all other, to the end that he may
seem the chiefest well willer or valentine as it were, a curse shall be
imputed, in stead of a great reward looked for, shall for this his fauning and
unseasonable dealing, but be the more suspected and ill spoken of.

15 A continual dropping in the time of a most vehement shower, Women.
and a contentious woman are alike.

16 [Euery one] who hides her, may as well hide the wind, she bewrays her
self, as the ointment of the right hand.

As a great shower of rain wetteth those who are in it, and rotteth the timber
in houses: so a brawling woman vexes and hurts her husband and family.
Again as none can stop or stay the blowing or whisteling of the wind, nor yet
hinder a strong ointment held in the hand, from sending forth a fragrant odor
or perfuming the place wherein it is round about: so a contentious or brawling
woman, causes the house wherein she is to ring with her scolding, neither can
any stay her from outrage or outcryes.

17 As Or as one sharpeneth iron with iron. See the same phrase Heb. 10.24. and
the same argument Ecclesiastes. 4.5.
iron sharpeneth iron, so the face of a friend sharpeneth a man.

As if any whet iron with iron, he makes it by this means bright and fit to
cut withal, so, the countenance, presence, and speech of a friend, whetteth a
and zeal.

18 He that keeps his figtree, shall eat the fruit thereof, so, he that is
serviceable to his master, shall come to honor.

As the husbandman watching his trees with a vigilant eye, See like
exhortations. Tit. 2.9. Ephe. 6.50. Collos. 3.21. a performance of this promise
in Jacob Genesis 31.38. and in Joseph Genesis 39.1. etc.
and pruning them with a diligent hand, tastes at last of the sweet fruits
thereof: so, the servant who is ready to please his master and tendant about
him, shall at last by him, or by the Lord in heaven, be advanced and blessed.
Inferiors then or those who are in subjection, whether servants or subjects or
wives or professors of the word, must make this reckoning and account of their
superiors and rulers, that they are unto them their peculiar charge whereon
they must attend, and the special hope of their honor and preferment. They
must therefore think and say thus with them selves, surely this is the fig
tree that I must watch and keep, this is that same olive tree that I must
look unto: I must not suffer this to be spoiled or destroyed, I must nor
suffer their goods to be wasted, their good name trodden under foot, neither
any of the graces of God, as much as lies in me, to decay in them.

19 As the water [sheweth] face to face, so man to man [sheweth] the heart.

As water, a certain dim kind of glass, This interpretation is confirmed
by the signification of the Hebrew words, and by the consent of the best
expositors, as also by a like sentence in the 19. Ecclesiasiasticus. 26. John.
2.16. Afterward. 30. chap.
shows face to face, represents the countenance therein imprinted, to the
countenance which beholds the same: so man to man shows the heart, in like
manner, one man makes known his mind unto another.

20 The grave and destruction can never be full, so the eyes of man can never
be satisfied.

As the grave which consumes infinite carcases, is always ready to receive
more, and as death which destoryeth all living things, makes no end of
devouring: so the appetites and senses of the covetous and worldly man, are
never satisfied.

21 [As] the fining pot is for the silver and the furnace for the gold: Or so a
man for his praise. This interpretation is confirmed by a very like sentence in
this book 12. chap. 8. verse, and by another like saying in the book of
Sirach. Ecclesiasticus. 27.5.
so a man's praise is by his mouth.

Even as silver is tried and purified by the fining pot, and gold by the
furnace: so a man is proved and praised by the speech and according to the
talk which proceeds out of his mouth.

22 Though thou should bray a fool in a mortar among barley with a pestell,
yet will not his foolishness depart from him.

We are taught in this sentence, that the wickedness of the reprobate is
incurable. Though thou should bray a fool in a mortar among barley with a
pestell, albeit thou should take never so great pains in reproving or
correcting a fool, yea if thou should put him into prison or into a mortar
indeed: yet will not his foolishness depart from him, neuerthesse, the
hardness of his heart and his wickedness will not be removed from him. For
the grains of corn would at the last be broken or ground to powder, but his
obstinacy or stubburnesse will never be overcome. One kind of grinding which
people in old time used, was, to put their parched corn into a mortar, and to
beat it therein unto powder. Unto this custom the wise king alludeth in this
place, insinuating that no beating will amend an obstinate wicked man. How true
this is, may appear not only in Pharao, whom all the plagues of Egypt could
not better, but in that unrepentant malefactor, who was crucified together with
our Savior Christ Jesus, who^ neither the sight of the son of God, nor the
reproof of his fellow, nor his own pains which he suffered on the cross,
could soften or amend.

23 Be diligent to know the state of thy flock, and take heed to thine herds.

24 For is the hidden store for ever? and Or crop of the year: so the same
metaphor is used. Psalm. 65.12.
will the garland last from generation to generation?

25 As Soon as the hay discovers it self, and the tender blade appears,
let the grass of the mountains be got in.

26 The lambs shall be for thy clothing, and the goats for a price of a
field.

27 Moreover, so much goats milk as is sufficient, shall be for thy meat,
for meat for thy family, and food for thy maids.

Be diligent to know the state of thy flock, and take heed to thine heardes.
See that thou be a good husband, with thine own eyes looking to thy cattle,
and considering daily the condition and the number of them. For is the hidden
store for ever? etc. Great cause there is why thou should look to thy goods
very carefully and painfully, seeing not only things mar unless an eye be
had unto them, but the stock spends, and the opportunity of getting wealth
and providing necessaries slideth away. As Soon as the hay discovers it
self, etc. Wherefore, as soon as it is time, mow down thy grass, and lay it
up against winter, yea in general use all good means aforehand, of providing
against time to come. The lambs shall be for thy clothing, etc. Be also a
good sauer and moderate in thine apparel and food, for so of thine own
flock thou shall reap such a commodity, as that thereof thou shall have skins
to cover thee and wool to keep thee warm, besides money wherewith thou
may pay thy debtes, or purchase more land. Moroeuer, so much goats milk,
etc. To conclude, be not only sober in thine apparel and thriftie in thine
expenses, but sparing in thy diet, and so thou shall have wherewith to feed
and sustain, thy self and thy family.

The intent of the spirit in these last sentences is, not to prescribe a
general rule to all men of apparel, or food, but only to show, that such as
walk painfully fully in their calling shall not want their daily bread, but
have wherewith to maintain themselves and theirs.

THE XXVIII. CHAPTER.
1 Every wicked man flies, when none pursues, but the just [are] like a
young Lion, which is courageous.

The force of the conscience in men, is showed herein to be great on either
side, either to work terror. or security. This sentence is a confirmation of
that threatening of the law, which is set down in the ^6. of Leuit. 17. ver. In
the former part of this sentence is declared, that even then, when outward
troubles be not present or near: yet the ungodly are tormented and vexed in
their spirits, as if there were great molestatio^s on them or toward them. The
vengeance of God, the sting of conscience, and the temptations of Satan cause
them as Hindes or Does to fly and remove out of their places, or out of the
comfortable estate, wherein they are. This befalls not one wicked man alone,
but all the ungodly who are in the state of nature, defend an evil cause, go
about some mischief, and commit that, which is evil. Their remembrance of
their sins, their dreams, the sightes of their eyes, and the rumors of Gods
wrath, make them in perplexity, and at their wits end. See an example in
Cain. Indeed whilst things go prosperously with the ungodly, and whilst
hardness of heart benummeth and possesses them, they commit sin with joy,
and not only despise, but destroy other. Nevertheless, when the Lords hand
shall but work a little against them, and the biting of their own consciences
return, then all their courage falls down on a sudden, and as dastardes
they take themselves to flight. On the contrary side, the righteous man is
confident as a young Lion, which is of more courage then the old, neither
fears to meet with any beast, but walks securely and confidently in every
place. Wherefore, it is no small but an exceeding great confidence, which is in
the faithful man, who being justified by faith, and purged from his sin by
Christ, has peace with God, and being certain of a good cause, and a witness
to himself of an upright heart, dreadeth no danger nor objection. Every one
then is to labor to have a good conscience, which only shall bring sound and
constant boldness to a man. There be four sorts of consciences; or the
conscience rather is affected after four sorts. First, there is a conscience
both troubled and good, secondly, there is a conscience both quiet and good,
thirdly, there is a conscience both troubled and evil, last of all, there is a
couscience both quiet and evil.

2 In the sinning of a realm.
For the transgression of a land there are many Princes thereof: but by a
prudent and skillful man, it prolongeth the state.

As the force of the conscience is great, so likewise great is the efficacy of
sin, that it polluteth the place, where it is committed, crying for vengeance
up into heaven. It has many fearful effects, but among other, this, that it
causes the Lord to take away good Princes, and that it makes many rulers
succeed one an other. For hereby it comes to pass, that there are great
oppressions, marvelous vprores, and new laws in the common wealth. But where
men on the contrary side are prudent and wise, so that they fear God, and
worship him rightly, there the Prince prolongeth his life, and the state
continues in one stock or form of government. Unto the godly King the Lord
makes expressly this promise, that so he decline not from this precept,
neither to the right hand, ^eut. 17.
nor to the left, he shall prolong his days in his kingdom, he and his
sons in the midst of Israel. Now if those which are near unto the King, be
also virtuous and wise, or the people obedient unto the Lords laws and
zealous, this shall be also a great preservation to the person of the Prince,
and safety of the common wealth, as may appear in the speech of Elizeus,
calling Elias the chariots and horsemen of Israel.

3 Whether here (...) is to be read or (...) I leave to the consideration of
the learned.
Apoore man oppressing the needy, is [like] rain sweeping so clean, as that
it leaves no food.

The rage of a poor wretch dealing with poor people, is also a thing of great
efficacy. Nature indeed and the grace of God so works, that the godly
afflicted, which are in misery, pity and succor such as are in affliction.
But some are unnatural and fierce, as that servant in the Gospel, that took
his fellow, who ought him an hundredth pence by the throat; saying, pay me that
which thou owe. Therefore, even as a great tempest or flood of water,
sweeping away, and choking the seed, and oppressing as it were the ground,
makes it barren, and brings a dearth: so the merciless poor man spoyleth
an other who is needy, of his goods, his food, his garments, and all that he
has. We may here observe then, that inhumanitie reigns not only in the
rich, but in the poor, yea in them sometimes most of all other. But as for
those, who fear God whether poor or rich, they have learned that lesson of
Paul, that they put on the bowels of compassion. Col 3.


4 They, which forsake the law, praise the wicked, but they which observe the
law, make war with them.

The judgment of the ungodly is very corrupt and perverse. Such as give
themselves to idolatry, covetousness, lying, drunkenness, do not only
commit these sins, but commend them in those, who are like themselves. For in
their affections they like very well of them, in their speeches they call them
good teachers, professors, subjects, neighbors, in their deeds they flatter,
maintain, and advance them. But on the contrary side, they, which love the
truth, live soberly, and fear God: not only dispraise them, but strive with
them. They rebuke them rou^dly, convince them, oppose themselves to them, yea
they spare not to punish them, if they be magistrates. Nevertheless, neither
are the evil to be dispraised for their good actions, nor the good to be
allowed in their faults. The cause of the diverse judgments of men, is the
diverse courses of life, which they take. But to justify the wicked (as before
we heard out of this book) is abomination unto the Lord.

5 Men Of evil.
given to evil, perceive not what is right, but they which seek the Lord,
perceive all things.

The natural man perceives not the things, which belong to God, but the
spiritual man discerns all things. For the wicked are so blinded by natural
ignorance and malice, that both Christ and the law to them is a mystery.
Albeit sometimes they are lightened in their understanding: yet their knowledge
never is sincere, full or effectual. They err in opinion, they perceive not
their particular duty, what is to be done, what is to be believed. In mind
they are corrupt, and unable rightly to practice their duties, they are not
able to discern between true doctrine and false, the right course of teaching
and the wrong. But such as seek the Lord in his word unfeignedly, shall know
all things needful for salvation, for avoiding of error, yea sometime for
temporal good, finally for the discharge of the duties of their calling,
wherein the wicked have no understanding. Psalm. 82.

6 Better is the poor man who In his uprightness then he which is perverse in
his ways.
walks uprightly then he who peruerteh his ways, though he be rich.

Men are to be esteemed not according to their wealth, but virtue. See chapter
19.1.

7 He, which keeps the law is a prudent son, but he, which keeps company
with banquetters, shameth his father.

Among sundry vices, which young men are to take heed of, riotousnesse is one
of the chief, whereunto that age is peculiarly inclined. Godly parents charge
their children to live soberly, and to take heed of wasting and prodigality.
He then which keeps this law of God, and other duties, which parents out of
the word teach and apply to their children, is a wise son. For by this means
he auoydeth the wrath of God, who in his law commanded such children to be
punished as were dissolute and disobedient unto their parents. Deuteronomy. 21.
Moreover by this means he rejoices and honors them, who have begotten him,
and well brought him up. But on the contrary side, he, which not regarding the
law, spends his time and his substance in feasting and gaming, is not only
foolish, but a blemish unto his father, for what will be said, but that such a
one brought not up his children well, or that such a stock is naught, or if
the parents of such a prodigal youth see him come to poverty, cast into
prison, or drawn to punishment for his sin, how can they but blush, and even
hang down their heads for shame?

8 He which increases his substance by usury and Or give frankly.
interest, shall gather it for him, who will be liberal to the poor.

As the Lord allows not the wastfull spender, so neither does he like of the
unjust and cruel getter of goods. Such are said to get their goods by usury
and interest, who in lending or letting the same to hyre, byte and oppress the
poor, either by an hard bargain, or by misreckoning them. Now it may be these
cormorantes sometimes do gather great wealth into their hands, pilling and
polling the poor, who stand in need of their help, and borrow of them after
the hardest rate. But by the just judgment of God, such an heir shall succeed
those miserable oppressors, as will lend to the poor, looking for nothing
again, and pity their wantes: for either the children, or the kinsmen, or the
friends, or the executors of these misers prove liberal or prodigal persons
oftentimes. Let therefore, as the Apostle exhorts, none oppress or circumuent
his brother in any matter, seeing the Lord is the revenger of all these
things. There are many, which cry out against usury, who are most grievous
oppressors and usurers indeed. Some buy of the poor, which are indebted a
field very cheap, and sell it very dear. They are usurers. Some suffer their
poor neighbor to fetch much on the score, and then set on more then was
taken, or make him pay double the worth, of that which he has fetched. These
are usurers. Some get a great deal of bad money, and pay it away. These also
are usurers. Now usury is not only in money, but in other creatures, Deuteronomy. 23.
Give not usury to thy brother, usury of thy money, usury of thy meat, usury of
any thing, that is given to usury. As therefore such as lawfully gain by money
or other creatures offend not: so such, as unlawfully gain by corn, wine, or
other such merchandise, no less are usurers, then such as abuse their money. It
may be diverse here expect some large discourse of usury, but they may be
satisfied by the brief handling of three needful points pertaining to this
question. First what is usury properly taken, secondly why it is unlawful,
thirdly what is to be thought of the usual compacts and dealings of usurers in
these times. Usury properly taken is a simple binding of the receiver or
borower of money or goods to repaie the whole sum received, and the advantage
thereof agreed on, be it more or less. This simple binding or compact is
unlawful, first, because it is contrary to charity and equity as may appear
in that it is a thing unequal, that the sum decaying through no negligence,
or fault of the receiver, but by Gods providence or some casualtie as by fire
and water, he is bound to so great inconvenience, as to make it good.
Secondly, because the Lord has enacted a law quite contrary to this dealing,
as well touching borrowing as hyring, the equity whereof still remains as
being grounded on Gods will and nature. The law of borrowing is this. Exodus
22.14.15.
If any borrow ought of his neighbor and it be hurt, or else dye, the owner
thereof not being by, he shall surely make it good: If the owner thereof be
by, he shall not make it good. Mark here, the principal in such cases is not
to be required. The law of hiring follows. If it were a thing hired, it came
for his hire, he shall not repay it, (for that is to be repeated.) Mark here,
the vantage may be required, but not the principal. Now, this is evident, that
in usury the thing is lent or hired. By the equity then of the law of God, to
bind both to the principal and to the vantage is a sin and unlawful. Hereby
appears that the co^pacts now a days in use are ungodly, yea and that they
are horrible sins, and plain murderings both of the rich and poor. Every on
almost now, which has a stock of money to spare, will let it out, if the end
be considered, seeking his own cmmoditie, if the persons, to Christians, if
the manner, binding them simply, whether God bless the^ or no, to pay such a
sum of money after ten or more in the hundred. Otherwise, if the borrower do
not, to prison he must, his wife and children staruing in the mean season.
And can there be more cutthroat dealing then this? Much more may be said, but
it is needless, the sum is this, there may be a gain agreeable to charity
in hiring, in letting, in borrowing and lending, but all usury is unlawful, I
mean, all simple binding and compelling of any rich or poor, to repay the
principal and the advantage.

9 Whosoever turns away his ear from hearing the law, even his prayer [is]
abomination.

Sinners may flatter them selves and namely adulterers, murderers, and such
usurers, and stubburne children, as before have been spoken of, but if any
willingly and wittingly turn away his ear from knowing or obeying the will of
God, so that he will not lay aside his iniquities or impieties, not only his
sins shall provoke God, but even his prayers: and they shall not only be
rejected, but be abominable, and matter of offending and incensing the Lord to
wrath. As therefore such a one did refuse to hear God speaking in his law: so
the Lord will in justice refuse him speaking to him by prayer. Therefore above
all things be more ready to hear, then to offer the sacrifice of fools.

10 Whosoever leads aside the upright into an evil way, shall him self fall
into his own pit: but the just shall possess that which is good.

Seducers are herein threatened with the Lords judgment. They are fitly
resembled unto thieves or robbers who lead true men out of the way oftentimes
to spoil them of their goods. For even so the wicked are seduced and seduce
others, 2. Tim. 3.
drawing them into danger, unto the committing of sin, or unto heresies. But
they shall fall into their own snare, as did the accusers of Daniell, Act. 13.
Elimas the sorcerer, Saul, Haman, Achitophell. In the mean time they, who are
upright, or sincerely and constantly serve the Lord, shall not only escape the
evils, which seducers labor to bring them into, but attain and enjoy riches,
honor, glory, and salvation.

11 A rich man seems wise in his own eyes: but the poor man who is prudent
finds him out.

Conceited arrogancy usually accompanying abundance of wealth, is now
reproved. It is the custom not of godly rich men, but of wealthy worldlings,
both to ascribe the getting of their goods to their own wisdom, and to like
wonderfully well of their own speeches, actions, and courses. Wherefore not
without cause does Paul will Timothy to put the^ in mind not to be high
minded. Now again it is the manner of foolish poor people, who measure all
things by wealth, to flatter them as the multitude did Herod, crying out, it is
the voice of God and not of man. But the godly poor man, who knows the word,
and is endued with the spirit of discretion, will so search and find the rich
man out, that he will discern, and if need require, declare him to be either
an ignorant or wicked person, John. 9.
as may appear in blind Bartimaeus his conference with the Pharisees.
Nevertheless, as this ought to humble the rich, that the poor go sometimes
beyond them in spiritual gifts: so ought it not to breed any malapertnesse in
the poor, who should always be far off from dealing saucilie with their
betters.

12 When the righteous triumph, there is great glory: but when the In the
wicked men's rising up.
wicked are listed up, a man is sought for.

Tyranny is spoken of in this sentence, a vice most contrary unto the mild
and righteous government of the just. For their reign brings forth glory as
a most precious fruit, so that it causes Religion to flourish, peace to
abound, ple^tie to be in every place, to conclude, temporal and spiritual
blessings to spread far and near. What miracles were done in the
wilderness, whilst Moses ruled? What conquests had Joshua? What peace was
under Solomon? What zeal under David? On the contrary side, wicked rulers make
havoc of Church and common wealth. They seek for the godly to slay them, the
rich to spoil them, all, to molest the^. But of this point more hereafter in
the exposition of the 28. verse of this Chapter, as also in the interpretation
of the second verse of the next Chapter.

13 He which hides his sins, shall not prosper: but he, which confesses and
forsakes them, shall receive mercy.

Hypocrites are threatened with a miserable judgment. He, which hides his
sins, either by denying that evil, which he has done, or lessening it, or
else continuing in it, shall not prosper, but shall be left and remain in grief
of mind, poverty, sickness, or some other trouble, as David was until such
time, Psalm. 32.
as he confessed his sin against him self. But he which confesses his
sins, to the Lord, as Job did, Job. 31.33.
and not only acknowledges them in words, but indeed and affection
forsakes them, shall not only be forgiven, but obtain many graces and
blessings, as did the prodigal son. It is not always necessary to publish
secret sins to men, which may but breed offense, and infamy, and dishonor
to the Lord. Nevertheless, sometimes this also is to be done, both publicly
and privately. But both manifest and secret offenses are always to be
acknowledged unto the Lord, and sin is always to be forsaken. It is no
marvel, if diverse many years together are not taken from the rack of the
Lords visitation, seeing they will not confess their iniquities to him, as
they ought. See a like promise. Job. 8. chap. 4.5.6.7. verse.

14 Blessed is the man, who greatly fears always, but he which hardneth his
heart, shall run headlong into evil.

Security is a forerunner of Gods judgments, but the man is happy, which
fears always. Indeed whosoever is possessed or tormented with a servile
fear, is most miserable. But he, which is endued with a sonlike fear, so that
he dreadeth to swear vainly, to profane the Saboth, or to sin against God,
he, which works on his salvation with fear and trembling, so that he
stands in awe of the Lord, not only in the Church, but out of the same:
finally, he which reuerenceth the Lord continually, so that he fears him not
for an hour, or day, or month, or by fits, (as some, which have an aguelike
fear now and then upon them) but all the days of his life: is most happy. For
such a one does no evil, the Lord hears his prayers, and makes him at the
last an inheritour of his kingdom. The secure people of the world on the
contrary side, harden their hearts, both by resisting the word, and by not
profiting by the Lords works, and by not yielding unto the motions of his
spirit. They do therefore but treasure up wrath against the day of wrath, and so
fall at last into sin, into trouble, into the jaws of death, to conclude,
even into hell. For when they say peace, peace, then sudde in destruction
comes on them.

15 A wicked ruler over the poor people, is as a roaring Lion, and a rouing
bear.

The rage of tyrants is here fitly compared to the cruelty and ravening of
bears and Lions, 1. Sam. 17.
which pray on the lambs and on the sheep. For as the Lion frayeth the poor
beasts with his roaring, and prays on the^ with his teeth, and as the bear
searches the^ out, and teareth them with her paws: so ungodly superiors of
all sorts threaten, oppress and slay, such as can make no resistance. They
which are of the lowest degree are sometimes as fierce as bears or lions, but
rulers should be pastors, not wolves, and parents, not tyrants. Not only
diverse Magistrates are tyrants, but many householders are bears and lions in
their families. But Christian masters must remit their threatenings, and lay
aside all bitterness, Ephe. 4. and 6.
wrath and outcries. The inferiors, which are oppressed, are as the sheep of
Christ to bear injuries patiently. They are also to pray to be delivered from
such lions, and to assure them selves, Psalm. 22.
that they shall at last in some sort tread them under foot. Psalm. 91.


16 A governor Understandings.
void of all understanding, and much in oppressions [shall shorten his dayes]:
but] he which hates gain, shall prolong his days.

As tyranny, so covetousness ought to be far, as from all men, so chiefly
from rulers. Politic Pharaos imagine they deal wisely, when they lay grievous
burdens on the Israelites. Foolish Rehoboams think it the most prudent course,
to scourge the people with scorpions. But such rulers, who are much in
oppressions, incroaching the peoples lands, getting their goods by hook and
crook, and exacting extreme tribute, estraunge their subjects hearts, offend
God, fall into many foolish and hurtful lusts, which plunge men into
destruction, and therefore have indeed no understanding. But he that is so
far from covetousness, that he is a man (as Iethro would have rulers be)
which even hates gain. (that gain I say which is unjust), shall wax old in
the favor of the people as Samuel did, and be beloved of all me^ and blessed
of the Lord. 1 Samuel 12.
Let then the conversation of every one be without covetousness, as the
Apostle exhorts, and let every one be content with the things, Heb. 13.
that are present. Would any know a covetous man? Look on his conversation,
his bargains, his housekeeping, etc. Would a covetous man know whether this
root of all evil be in him self or no? Let him look on his mind, his
cares, his fears, his desires. But above all other, Psalm. 119.
let Magistrates say to the Lord with David, Incline mine heart to thy
statutes, and not to covetousness.

17 Let a man pursued for the blood of a Soul or life.
fly to the grave: let none uphold him.

Magistrates are not to pardon wilful murderers. By Moses law they who flue
any at unawares, might have cities of refuge, Exodus 21.22.
and be preserved from death by the rulers, but he which offered violence, and
maliciously slew his neighbor, was to die without mercy. They, which maimed
their neighbors, were to pay eye for eye, tooth for tooth. But he, which took
away life, Genesis 9.
by man was to be deprived of his life. Magistrates may be moved by rewards to
show such favor, Number. 35.
but the Lord would have no reward taken for a man-slaier. Pity may sometimes
incline them to mercy, but the Lord would not have their eye to spare them.
Magistrates then being the deputies of the Lord, are to execute this law on
wilful murderers, as Salomo^ did on Ioab. 1. Kings. 2.
When men take no vengeance on him, which sheddeth innocent blood, God pursues
him, as he did Cain. The Papists impiety is here notably detected, who did set
open sanctuaries and privileged places unto all sorts of notorious offenders.

18 He which walks uprightly shall be saved, but he, who is perverse in His
two ways.
his ways, falls In one.
therein.

This is the course, which magistrates are to observe in their judgments
imitating the Lords example, namely on the one side to defend and spare the
righteous, who neither declining from the right hand nor the left, walk
circumspectly in the straight way of the Lords precepts, and on the other, to
punish the transgressor, who either does that, which is wicked, or deals
unlawfully in those actions, which are lawful. Those then, who either use
deceit in their best actions, or commit gross sins and walk therein, shall
at one time or other be taken napping, as was Shimei, 1. Cor. 10.
and be plagued in some one of their iniquities, as were the Israelites. If
magistrates always punish not the wicked and cherish the good, as they ought:
yet surely the Lord will.

19 He which tilleth his land, shall be satisfied with food, but he, which
follows vain [persons], shall be filled with poverty.

Disorderly walkers, who do nothing, Before 12.10. and 23.21.
but go up and down as busibodies, have been often before reproved, and here are
taxed again. Amongst other upright ways this is one, that a man diligently
follow his vocation. When husbandry or any such trade is well put in ure, it
will through the Lords blessing, yield unto a man sufficient to content him,
and to maintain his family, as may appear in the rich estate, whereunto Jacob
came by the Lords blessing on his industry. The provident then and the diligent
shall have food to kill hunger with, garments, wherewith to cover them, and
money for good uses. But the good companions and youths of this world, which
follow hunting, halking, carding, dicing, stage players, and such vanities, or
are vagabonds roging up and down the country, shall not only want
necessaries, but be filled with poverty, bondage, grief, and misery, as was
the prodigal son.

20 A Of faithfulnesses.
faithful man is full of blessings: but he, which hastes to wax rich, shall
not be unpunished.

As unthriftiness shall be punished by the Lord: so posting to be rich, shall be
revenged by him, A man of faithfulness, (to speak as the spirit does in the
original tongue) who deals plainly and truly not only in word but deed both
with God and men, not only in one matter, but all, shall be much inblessings,
shall be made partaker not of one good thing only, but of many. His credit
shall be great, he shall have peace of heart, his store shall increase, he shall
have children, unto him at last it shall be said, Come thou blessed of my Father.
Now as touching those, who make have to be rich, or who (as Paul speaks)
will be rich (as it were, whether God will or no) who get their goods by hook
and crook, or by playing the parts of drudges and snudges, to conclude, who
labor after wealth, but use not to call on the name of God, nor regard his
word, these make commonly more have then speed, seeing they are not unpunished,
but fall into temptation and a snare, meeting with some loss or cross in
steed of gain and advantage, as birds hasting to the pray are often in their
flight stricken and stayed with a pellet. Achab made have to Naboths vineyard,
but at last drank a cup of bloody grapes for his posting.

21 It is not good to accept The face.
persons: for [so] a man would transgress for a morsel of bread.

Of the number of such as make have to be rich, are they, who respect persons
in judgment. He that is infected with this vice, albeit he be a man of high
calling in the common wealth, and although there is no comparison between
truth or justice and a morsel of bread: yet will he easily be hired and
brought to hold his peace, or to give a false sentence for a little paltrie
gain, for a dinner, yea for a morsel of bread. Not only Magistrates are to
take heed that they be far from this sin, but other also. If Ministers are
given to this vice, they will teach false doctrine or smoother the truth, that
they may still enjoy the rich men's trenches. If people be carried away with it,
you shall see them extol a Papist for a little relief at his door.

22 A man of an evil eye makes have [to get] riches: but he knows not that
poverty shall befall him.

Of the crew before spoken of, are moreover miseserable niggards, who are noted
to be men of an evil eye, because with the eye they desire other men's goods,
envy their neighbors prosperity, and grudge those, who come unto their
tables, the very meat which they eat. Such Labans spare, and care, and toil
exceedingly, imagining through their industry and pinching, both to attain to
abundance and always to live in plenty. Yet at last by some casualtie or by
death, poverty, which they fly by all means comes unto them, Luke. 12.
Luke. 16.
as may appear in the rich glutton described in the Gospel. See this parable
expounded in the Psalm. 39.49. Also often before in this book.

23 He which reproves a man, in the Or after me, (...) Tremellius takes it.
end shall rather find favor then he, Softeneth his tongue.
which flattereth with his tongue.

The vain and needy people of this world, seeking by all means to enrich
them selves, use flattering speeches to this intent, knowing that fair words
make fools feign. But yet, as here is showed, they, which reprove, shall find
more favor, then they, which flatter. Indeed many find fault with other, and
control them, but because they do this with an harsh spirit and in an
indiscreet manner, their speeches make them rather odious the^ gracious unto
the parties rebuked. But he, which reproves his neighbors justly, wisely,
charitablie, and that to a good end, and as Paul speaks to Titus, that they
may be sound in the faith, he shall reap a precious fruit after his labor.
True it is the wicked and sottish people of the world will hate them most,
which rebuke them most for sin. For with such, flattery gets friends and
truth hatred. Nevertheless, they, which have any spark of grace, or are wise,
will bear good will to a reprouer, and hate a flatterer. The consideration of
the reprouers affection, and his reasons, will win the party reproved to
amendment, and raise up in him a great liking of that man or that woman, who
told him of his fault, as may appear in the example of David. Psalm. 141.
Let us then rather by wholesome rebukes labor to profit our friends then
seek to please them by soothing speeches. O says flesh and blood I shall
loose my friend and gain, if so I do. But fie upon such lothnesse to
displease, as betrayeth a friend eue^ unto Satan him self. Let rather the
commandment of our Savior move us to reprove our brother between him and
us. Ezech. 13.
Let woe threatened by Ezechiell hold us back from sowing pillowes under every
elbo^.

(...) He which spoiling his father or his mother says, it is no sin is
companion to a man who is Destroyer, or spoiler as Exodus 32.23. before 13.^0.
a murderer.

Robbing of parents or spoiling of them by any means, is a great and grievous
sin. To steal from a stranger is no small fault, which sin those, who
commit are justly punished with death. It must needs then be a detestable kind
of robbery and injury, when not strangers, but parents shall be not lighty
endamaged, but spoiled by their children, and that without scruple of
conscience and securely. A notable example hereof we have in Micha, of whom
mention is made in the books of Judges, Iud. 17.
who although he had stolen from his mother eleue^ hundred shikles of silver:
yet made he no conscience to disclose his theft, or to restore it, until such
time, as he heard his mother wish a bitter curse unto the thief, and then he
acknowledged his fact, not of any remorse of heart, but only to avoid the
curse which his mother had pronounced. Thus does the heart of ungodly children
seduce them oftentimes, who say, these goods belong unto me, they are mine own,
I have my part in them, why should I not take them, use them, and spend them?
But howsoever such a wretch may delude him self, he is in the fault and
punishment to be joined not a common thief and robber, but with a destroyer
and murderer. That the word here used signifies thus much may appear. 64.
Esaias and Exodus 12.23.
The Lord in Deuteronomy. 21. expressly commands that such children be stoned to
death. Of this generation are all children, who pilfer from their parents,
spend their goods riotously, incur debt, and make their parents pay it, put
their mothers by from their right after their fathers decease, or as Lords over
their parents goods, do what they list with them.

25 He which Broad.
is high minded, stirs up strife: but he which trusts in the Lord, shall be
made fat.

The high minded are here beaten down, for that such are meant by those who
are of a large soul may appear by that expectation of Paul to Timothy, ^ Tim
7.17.
which may serve as a perfect exposition of this sentence. Co^mau^d the rich of
this world, not to be high minded, nor to trust in the uncertainty of riches,
but in the living God, who gives unto us all things richly unto fruition. The
which last words also declare what is meant here by being fat, which being a
borrowed speech, taken from those who are in good plight of body, notes out the
abundance of Gods blessings. He then, which is high minded, secure, and frolike
in regard of his outward prosperity, ^uke. 12.
as was the rich glutton, says that he shall never be removed, Psalm. 30.
as David did, and despises his neighbors, oppresses them, and raises up
unnecessary wars and strifes, ^ Chro. 18.
as did Iehosaphat, when he provoked the Syrians, by the which iarres and
contentions he must needs be vexed and somewhat pulled down in his estate. But
he, which is humble in all estates, and trusts in the Lord, Psalm. 131.
as the Prophet wills Israel to do, shall prosper in body and in soul, and
be satisfied with peace of heart and many good things, Psalm. 63. and 92.
(as it were) with marrow.

26 He which trusts in his own Heart.
soul is a fool: but he, which walks In wisdom.
vvisely, shall deliver him self.

They that are wise in their own eyes fall into the sin before condemned,
and are here fitly reproved. Such trust in their heart, as imagine that they
have no need of the help or advise of other, and refuse to follow the
direction of the godly wise, giving the^ sound counsel out of the word. For
these devise new conceits, practice such forms of worshipping God, as are not
found in his word, take evil courses and yet persuade the^ selves, that
therein they do God good service, and that in them they shall find good
success. David numbering the people of Israel, imagined he did very wisely in
so doing, neither would he at the first hear Ioab aduising him to the
contrary, but at the last he cried out, I have done foolishly. Then how soever
conceited persons or deuilish politikes seem wise unto them selves: yet they
have no understanding in very deed. Be not therefore wise in your selves,
says Paul. And woe be to those (says Esaias) who are wise in their own eyes.
But he which not only hears the good advise of other, (which many do, who
yet are thereby never a whit the better) but puts it into practice, shall
both be preserved from imminent dangers, and delivered out of present troubles
or inconveniences, even as Moses found rest unto his soul by following
Iethr^es counsel, and Naaman health in his body by obeying the advice of his
captive handmayd and other servants. For indeed one man stands in need of
another, as do the members of the body.

27 To him, which gives to the poor [shalbe] no want, but he which hides his
eyes [shalbe] full of curses.

Unmercifulness toward the poor draws on men the Lords curses and crosses.
Albeit diverse fear they shall beg, if they give unto the poor: yet the
cheerful and liberal giver of alms shall be so far from wanting, that he
shall have abundance, and gain by his spending. But that vile and miserable
wretch, who is so far off from pulling the coat from his back, therewith to
cloth the naked, or from staying the meat from his mouth, with it to feed
the hungry (which yet every Christian ought rather to do, then to see his
poor brother perish) that he will not so much as look on the Lazar, or hear
the voice of the beggar, shall by him be cried out against, and by the Lord
cursed in his body, cursed in his goods, cursed in his soul, cursed in his
children and in all things.

28 When the wicked are lifted up, a man hides himself, but when they perish,
the righteous are increased.

Tyranny yet once again is entreated of in this conclusion of the chapter.
When the wicked rule, they raise up such a storm, that the just being sought
for to be slain or molested, get them to some foreign countries, as did
David, or lurk in dens, as did the prophets in Achabs time, or pray in
corners, as did the disciples, when the sacrificers of the Jews raged, or fly
as birds unto some shelter or other. But when the ungodly perish, then the
righteous swarm as a company of bees in a sunny day, returning from other
countries, multiplying in towns and cities, filling whole churches, winning
and converting many to the truth by their doctrine and example, showing their
faces boldly and openly. The chief use of this doctrine is to teach us, not to
be trobled at the changes of the world or troubles of the times. In the time of
good (says Ecclesiastes) enjoy that, Ecclesi. 7.
which is good, and use the time of evil, Bees suck sweet honey out of the
bitter time: so the godly must draw comfort and joy even out of hard times and
grievous afflictions. A Christian without the cross is not worth a pin.

THE XXIX. CHAPTER.
1 A man, Obstinacy.
Of reproves.
who often having been reproved, hardens his neck, shall suddenly be so
broken, Or as that there can be no remedy.
as that he cannot be cured.

THe fearful estate of those here is showed, who by no means will be
reclaimed from their wicked ways. In the former part of this sentence, the sin
of obstinate persons is described, in the latter, their punishment is declared.
This is their sin, that even as the stubborn horse and brute beast will not be
ruled with byt or bridle, but when the yoke is to be put on, resist and with a
stiff neck reject it: so obstinate people, continue in their sins, and grow
harder hearted daily, not enduring to hear the truth, persecuting their
teachers, and fretting against the troubles, which the Lord brings on them as
bridles and yokes to subdue and tame their pride and fierceness. Yea though
such have been told of their faults not once, but an hundred times, and the
Lord himself has schooled them for the same by sickness, infamy, poverty,
and diverse crosses, yet they do securely and boldly proceed in swearing,
lying, adultery, murder, theft, and such other vices, persuading themselves
either that no evil shall betide them, or that they shall go through it well
enough. The punishment, wherewith such obstinate wretches shall be revenged is
remediless destruction. Neither will the Lord be a long time in bringing them
to ruin, as they by the space of many days, months or years together
refused correction, but he in an hour of some short space will quite overthrow
them. Of all other sins then obstinacy is most to be avoided, seeing other
transgressions of all sorts may find pardon, when repentance follows them,
but hardness of heart does nothing but treasure up wrath against the day of
wrath. This was that sin, which often the prophets upbraid the Jews withal.
Esaias says, Esaias. 48.4.
That their neck was a sinew of iron, and their brow brazen, for which cause,
(as he also testifies) they were smitten on the head and in the heart. Esaias.
1.5.6.
Yea (says he) there is no soundness from the sole of the foot unto the
head. Jeremy also complaining of and lamenting the unrecoverable plague of the
Israelites, takes up such speeches as these. Iere. 8.22.
Is there no gum of balm in Gilead? Is there no physician there? For why
has not the daughter of my people recovered?

2 When the just are increased, the people rejoice: but when the wicked man
rules, the people sigh.

This sentence shows, Tyranny.
that such is the estate of the people, as is the disposition of the governor.
In the former part is affirmed, that when good magistrates bear office,
howsoever some wicked rascals or rebels may be sorry therefore: yet godly
people, and generally the multitude will be glad, for they shall enjoy their
lives and goods quietly; by the defense of such, and under their rule religion
shall flourish in their congregations, the Lord himself will bless their land
with plenty and many good things, finally, they shall be free from grievous
taxes, plagues, seditions, and many miseries. The wise King who wrote this
divine parable, saw in himself the particular experience of that general
observation, which here he sets down. 1. King. 1.40
For being anointed King over Israel by Sadock, the whole people went up after
him playing on pipes and rejoicing so greatly, that the earth did ring and
cleave (as it were) with their voice. David his father also being advanced by
Saul, so carried himfelfe in his wars against the Philistines, that the
Israelitish women moved by his worthy and valiant exploits unto rejoicing,
sung in triumphing wise, that Saul had slain his thousands, and David his ten
thousands. The latter part of the sentence declares on the contrary side,
that the rule of the wicked, ministers matter of grief and misery unto the
whole multitude. The estate of the poor people, over which foolish persons or
cruel persecutors have the rule or tyrannize, becomes lamentable sundry
ways. First the Lord himself usually plagueth the land with judgments from
heaven, wherein an enemy of his, holds the scepter. Secondly wolves in such
a kingdom, having the place of shepherds, but the nature of devouring
beasts, spoil, oppress, and eat up the silly lambs and sheep. Thirdly,
the people living without all good order or means of their prosperity, fall
daily into all sorts of sins and pits of destruction. Sundry occasions then
of grief being continually offered the people, through the carelessness or
cruelty of evil governors, if peradventure they dare not openly complain for
fear of further trouble: yet how can they but sigh secretly in corners?
Certainly so did the Israelites oppressed in Egypt, and Elias persecuted by
Achab and Iezabell. Even as then the welfare of the sheep depends on the
shepherd, and even as such is the constitution of the body as is the
disposition of the head: so the condition of the people answers in woe or
wealth, to the goodness or badnesse of the magistrates.

3 A man that loves wisdom rejoices his father: but he, that keeps
company with harlots, vvasteth his substance. Fornication.


This drift of the spirit in this instruction is to declare, that whoredom
brings beggerie at the last. Two sorts of love herein are spoken of, one
spiritual, another carnal. The spiritual love is commended, which is a
wonderful liking of and following after wisdom. Such as are enamoured with
this virgin of heavenly wisdom (which is holy, peaceable, moderate, full of
mercy and good works, Iam. 3.17.
as James speaks) shall not only by this means please the Lord, or be
profitable unto themselves, but comfortable unto their parents. Sundry ways
does a wise son cheer up his fathers heart. First by the virtues, which are
in him. Secondly by the fame, which is spread of him. Thirdly by the hope,
which his father conceiueth that he will be thriftie. Last of all, by his
liberality and kindness toward his parents, if peradventure by reason of
his gifts, he be at any time exalted to honor as Joseph was, who also in this
respect rejoiced his father. As concerning the carnal love spoken of in the
latter part of the sentence, that is condemned and threatened with poverty. The
vain youths of this world having shaken off the yoke of obedience and
despised wisdom, fall in love with naughty women, with whom they are daily
conversant, making them good cheer, bestowing gifts on them, and mainteining
them in brave apparel. Hereby not only they defile themselves with wandering
lusts, but spend their patrimony, and consume their parents goods, so bringing
sorrow upon them in stead of the joy, wherewith they ought to labor to comfort
them. Such a lewd course took the prodigal son, who having wasted his
substance, was put to feed with the swine. Among other reasons then dissuading
from whoredom, this is not the least to be regarded, that strumpets are
dangerous rocks and vnfatiable gulphes.

4 A king by judgment establishes his realm, but a man A man of offerings.
which is a slave to gifts that are offered, destroys it.

Herein again the holy Ghost admonishes rulers of their duty. Injustice.
He entreats in this verse of two matters, one, the executing of judgment,
an other, the avoiding of bribes. In the former place is showed that judgment
is the prop or pillar of kingdoms: when justice is ministered without
partiality, in such sort that the godly are rewarded and the wicked punished,
and every man has right done to him, the Lord will bless the land, the good
will love their Prince, the bad shall be cut off, and not be able to do any
hurt. This may be observed throughout the stories of the kings of Judah, that
all the while they gave themselves to set up true religion, or to punish sin,
their kingdoms were in peace, and they got the victory over their enemies. In
the latter part of this sentence is declared, that the receiving of bribes is
the overthrow and bane of a common wealth. The reasons hereof are manifest and
sundry. First to respect persons (which bribe takers do) is an abomination to
the Lord, and therefore such a transgression as pulls down his vengeance on
the place wherein it is committed. Secondly by this means no place being left
for right but for gifts, there must needs grow factions and mutinies. Last of
all, a window being set open through such partiality to hope of impunitie, all
sorts of sins (the plagues of common wealths) must needs daily multiply and
increase.

5 A man, which flattereth his friend, spreads a net against his feet.

In this sentence is declared, Flattery.
that flatterers are a very hurtful and pernicious kind of people. They are
fitly here compared unto hunters. For even as the hunter spreads the hay or
net to in tangle the poor beast, which comes by it: Rom 16. Luke. 20.29.
even so flatterers be sweet speeches or salutations seduce the hearts of the
simple, and by their shows of friendship and righteousness go about to get some
advantage at their hands, thereby to draw them into trouble. Of this wicked
dealing Micheas complains, Mich. 7.2.
saying, The good man in perished out of the earth, and there is none upright
among men, as many as are, lie in wait to slaie, every one hunteth his
brother with nets. Flattery then is no better then a secret or subtle kind
of murder, in as much as thereby diverse are drawn either to receive errors,
or to commit sin, and so to fall into the snare of endless damnation, or
into danger of law or hazard of life.

6 In the transgression of the wicked man, there is a snare: but the just man
sings and is merry.

Here is showed what an hurtful thing sin is in general, Disobedience.
as before was declared how dangerous an evil flattery is. How soever the act
of iniquity is joined with pleasure: yet the end and wages thereof is pain
and death. The snare here spoken of is some loss or cross, as poverty,
sickness, grief of mind, punishment of law, and the wrath of God, all which
pursue and follow the offender. Hence it comes to pass, that in as much as
the plagues of this world or of the world to come commonly molest the wicked,
they are in fear, sorrow, silence, shame, and confusion. But the just man
sings and is merry. There is none so righteous as that he is without sin,
but such are called just here, who are justified by faith in Christ, and
sanctified in some acceptable measure by the spirit. In as much as the
faithful walk in their callings with an upright conscience, and are blessed
by the Lord many ways exceedingly, they both outwardly magnify him with
psalms and hymns and spiritual songs, and inwardly are cheerful, being
filled with joy of the holy Ghost. Indeed none are more in afflictions then
they, but they are so far off from mourning in this respect, that they count
it exceeding when they fall into manifold trials. When the Apostles were beaten
for publishing the Gospel, Acts. 5.41.
they went out from the face of the council, rejoicing that they were counted
worthy to be disgraced for the name of Christ. Paul and Sylas being cast into
prison, Acts. 16.25.
praised and sang even at midnight.

7 The righteous man knows the cause of the poor: the wicked man applies
not his mind to know it.

Negligence in judging or determining cases in controversies, herein is
condemned. By knowing of a person or cause, oftentimes in the Scripture the
protecting, favoring, and furthering thereof is meant. Thus the Lord is said
to know the way of the righteous, and to know those, who are his, that is, to
favor them, and to take care for them. Here then is meant, that although the
poor man has no money to give bribes, or wealthy friends to take his part:
yet the godly man discerning his cause to be right, by all means and with all
pains defends it against the rage of the mighty adversary. Such an upright
judge was Job, who protests that in the days of his prosperity and
authority he was a father to the poor, Job 19.
and searched out the cause, which he did not understand. So David prophesying
of Christ in the Psalm, affirms that he should defend the poor people,
Psalm. 62.4.
and save the sons of the needy. But the wicked man, as the same Prophet
complains in another place, and here Solomon testifies, has no regard,
Psalm. 82.
or applyeh not his mind to know it, either because he gives him self to
pleasure, or because the poor is not able to give bribes.

8 Of scorning.
Scornefullmen Blow, that is by blowing inflame.
set a City on fire: but the wise turn away wrath.

Here is showed that deriders of God and godliness, such as either jest at
other, or in rage conte^ne other, do much hurt to the society of mankind. The
hurt which they do, is like the hurt of fire, yea much greater then it. For
they overthrow Religion, peace, concord of neighbors and love of friends. This
they do eitheir by their false doctrines, malicious speeches, evil examples,
or wicked practices. How true this is may appear in Demetrius, who set Ephesus
in an uproar. Indeed sometime this crime is laid to their charge, who are of
all other furthest from it, as it was by Achab to Elias, and by Tertullus to
Paul. The reason hereof is, because the wicked cannot or will not put a
difference between the fire and sword, which our Savior came to put into the
world, and that fiame, which Satan and his instruments kindle. As for those,
who are endued with the wisdom whereof I ames speaks, which is peaceable
and lowly and heavenly, they are so far off from kindling of dissentions, or
raising up tumultes: that either by their authority or counsel or gravity
or long suffering they appease all the strifes, and quench (as it were) the
fires, which arise and begin to kindle: when Seba the son of Bochri through
his sedition and pride had subdued the City Abela, and by reason of his
conspiracy it was now in danger of overthrowing, a certain wise woman
delivered and freed it from the siege, by appeasing the wrath of Ioab, who went
about to destroy it. 2. Sam. 20.


9 If a wise man debate a matter with a fool, whether he be moved to wrath, or
whether he smile, yet is there no quietness.

They are noted with infamy in this sentence, who are irreconcilable and past
amendment. Albeit the wise pacify some unruly people, as in the sentence
before set down has been affirmed: yet other there are, who never ca^ or'will
be persuaded to cease from their tumultes or wicked course, which they have
entered into. Two means commonly are used by the godly and prudent servants of
God, unto the reclayming of fools (by whom proud, wrathful, stubburne,
ignorant and wicked persons here are meant) from their folly and madness. The
former of these is, to be moved, as here Solomon speaks, that is to say, to
be in good sadness, to deal earnestly, to look with a stern and austere
countenance, to allege weighty reasons, or to use forcible speeches of
persuasion and round represhension. The Apostle Paul calls this manner of
dealing a coming unto offenders with the rod. The other means is smiling, or
as the same Apostle speaks, the spirit of mildness, that is to say, humble
entreatie, fair speeches and friendly looks, tokens of good will, common or
special courtesies, and such like gentle means of winning men's hearts. Let now
a godly or peaceable person come to instruct or pacify a froward or wilful
fool, he labors in vain. For either because he is proud, he contemns
fair entreaties, and gentle courtesies, or because he is fottish and furious or
malicious, he no more regards reasons or rought dealing, then feathers or the
wind. Such fools the Pharisees were, whom whether our Savior confuted by
reasons at any time, or allured by soft speeches, and a meek conversation, he
prevailed with the^ never a whit. The other Jews were for the most part of the
same disposition, who like froward children would neither mourn after the
doleful pipe of John the Baptist nor dance when Christ Jesus went about to
stir them up to gladness by a more cheerful pipe and tune, then his
forerunner sounded.

10 Bloody men hate the upright person: but the just seek His soul. So
beneath 24.
after him.

Here is showed that this is the proper note and a certain sign of wicked,
hurtful, and merciless men, to be at deadly enmity with every one, who has
any goodness in him. The principal reasons of this hatred are, that the light
of the one reproves the darkness of the other, and the course of both their
conuersations is quite contrary. Cain being a bloody man, at the beginning of
the world in a manner hated Abell to the death. Esaus wickedness is in the
scripture offered to our view in the hatred he bare to Jacob. Saul's, in his
dealing with David, the Pharisees, in their raging against our Savior. This
must needs be a great sin, seeing the enmities, which are exercised against
the godly endued with heavenly graces, redound unto God the author of every
good thing. But they, who fear God, seek the soul of the righteous, Psalm.
142.
that is, love him, and labor to preserve his life. For so this phrase is used
in the scripture, and is here to be taken, as the opposing of the latter part
of the sentence unto the former, manifests. The bloody hate the upright to
the death, but the just love his life most dearly. Every one then is to take
heed that he be not among the number of those, who love not good men, as Paul
admonishes. 2. Tim. 3. Always the godly have showed themselves careful of
practicing love toward the saints, as may appear in Obadias feeding of the
prophets in a cave, Ebedmeleches drawing of Jeremy out of the dungeon, the
disciples compassing of Paul, and letting him down in a basket.

11 A fool utters his whole mind, but a wise man In the latter part.
holds it back.

As before often in this book the sin of blabbing and babbling has been
reproved: Before. 14.33.^5.2.28.
so here again it is checked. The root of it is folly, for when men have no
discretion, nor power of themselves, either they blaze abroad their own
secrets, or prattle of their friends intents, sayings, and doings, or object
unto their adversaries the faults, which they know by them, or express and
bewray the trouble and misery of their own hearts, and estates. But he who
has a stay of himself, and is endued with discretion, will reserve his
speech until the fittest seasons, that therein it may be most forcible, and
thereby do most good, yea sometimes he will pass things over with perpetual
silence. This wisdom was in Jacob, who kept in his mind, when his daughter
was ravished, and in David, who answered not when Shimei railed on him, and in
Gamaliel, who commanded the Apostles first to be put out, and then spoke his
mind.

12 All the servants of a ruler, which hearkeneth unto lies, [are] wicked.

Another vice is here condemned, to wit, the receiving of false tales, or
opening the ear willingly to hear evil reports against any. This sin is to
be avoided by all, according to the commandment of the Lord. Thoushalt not
receive a false report, Exodus 23.
nor put thy hand with the wicked to be a false witness. It is contrary to the
law of God and to charity. He, that carries Satan in his ear, is no less
blame worthy, then he which carries him in his tongue. Untruths are
cherished and fostered as it were by those, who are too light of belief. But
this credulity in admitting of every vain and false rumor, is especially to
be shunned by rulers in church, common wealth, or private families. For all the
inferiors commonly follow the example of their superiors. Again, when servants
see their masters delighted in hearing complaints and tales, to please them,
or to win favor, or to discredit the good, they will bring many lies into
their ears. Moreover, the governors, which are given to this vice, will not
delight in any under them, who will deal plainly and truly, but will put such
out of their service. Thus it comes to pass, that all the servants of such a
ruler are wicked, being either heretics or flatterers, or whisperers, or given
to some such vice. Indeed sometimes it may fall out, that an Obadia may lurk in
Achabs court. But this is rare, and commonly the sway goes another way. Who
were Saules courtiers but Doeg and such backbiters? Such then, as are the
superiors, usually, such are those, who are under their power and government.
If the master and mistress in a family be zealous, zeal will be found
oftentimes in the lowest servant, which goes to the door, as may appear in
Rhode. If they be lukewarm, it may be observed, that their children, and those,
who attend on them, be neither hot nor cold. Finally if the heads of the
family be profane, amongst those, who are in the household, nothing is to be
perceived, but irreligiousnesse, worldliness, brawling, pride and wantonness.

Of the poor man and the man of industry.
13 He * that is rude, and he that is witty, meet together, the Lord
lighteneth both their eyes.

This instruction tends to dissuade us from partiality. To this end is
showed first, that there are two sorts of people in the world of a diverse
disposition, the one poor in wealth or gifts of the mind, the other rich and
endued with abundance of outward blessings or spiritual graces. In one word,
some are baser and some more exellent. Secondly, these people of contrary
estates or dispositions by the course of the divine providence, are said to
meet together, either in church or street, or some private house, or any
place upon occasion. The learner comes to the teacher to hear, the poor to
the rich to receive alms, one for one intent, another for another. Thirdly, The
Lord lighteneth both their eyes. There is no respect of persons with that
heavenly son, ^^hn 1.9.
who lighteneth every one, who comes into the world. In the Lord both of them
live, move, and have their being. The father of mercies causes his Sun to
shine, Act. 17. ^at. 6.
as well on the one, as on the other. He created and redeemed them both. None
therefore is to be despised by such as fear God for his wants or low degree.
^^o. 22.2. ^^mes. 2.
Brethren says James, Have not the faith of Christ in respect of persons.

14 The throne of that king, * In faithful^^sse.
who faithfully judges the poor, shall be established for ever.

Magistrates are advised in this instruction to follow the example of the Lord,
who regards both the poor and the rich. In like sort then rulers are to
defend not only the wealthy in their right, but the needy. Yea in as much as
the poor, the fatherless, and the widow are weak, subject to many dangers,
and not able to resist the violence of the mighty, good rulers are especially
to protect them, and deliver them from the hand of the oppressor. So doing,
they shall be established for ever, that is a long time, as this word is often
taken in the scripture. A fuller exposition of this sentence, is to be fetched
from the 7. verse of this chapter, and from the 14. chapter. 20. verse, and the
28. chapter. 5. verse.

15 The rod and reproof give wisdom: but a Or boy.
child left to himself, shameth his mother.

After that Solomon has given an admonition to magistrates, whereby they might
be directed in well governing the common wealth, he gives now certain
precepts, concerning the right ordering of youth in a private family. This
admonition tends to stir up parents to train up their children in the fear
and nurture of the Lord. In the former part of it a blessing is promised unto
discreet and moderate correction. The rod, that is to say, stripes, when
occasion shall require bestowed on a child, and a reproof, that is, a rebuke
by words, give wisdom, that is to say, make him modest, dutiful, religious,
and a practiser of Gods commandments. For indeed true wisdom consists not
in learning, or knowledge of worldly or spiritual matters, but in practicing
the law of God with a conscience. This fruit of correction as it is precious in
it self: so it must needs be comfortable to the parents of that child in whom
it is. For as before has been affirmed, A wise son makes a glad father. But
as it follows in the latter end of this sentence. A child or boy left to
himself shameth his mother. Then a boy is left to himself, when he is neither
chastened with the rod, nor controlled by words, but cockered, as Adoniah was
by David. This fault is often to be found in fathers, but yet commonly it most
of all reigns in mothers, who if they have sons, especially, cannot abide
that in their tender age they should be spoken to, or sharply dealt withal.
For this cause here the holy Ghost especially directs his speech to mothers
and threateneth them. It is then a fault in parents, only to use admonitions,
and not therewithal corrections, which are necessary, or to neglect both the
one and the other means of bringing their children to amendment. What child
is it (says the Apostle) whom the father corrects not? Cockering parents
will say, if so they do, they shall make their children foolish, but here a
promise is made of the contrary, namely that they shall make them wise. But this
point has been entreated of before, in the 22.15. and 13.24. and 23.13.14.
Only thus much may here be observed, that such as at Gods commandment will not
correct their children with the rod, would hardly with Abraham take the
knife, to slay them, if the Lord should enjoin this for their trial.

16 When the wicked increase, sin increases: but the just see their fall.

As in the former verse, the precious fruit of the use of correction has been
declared: so here the fearful hurt and inconvenience, which falls out by the
neglect thereof is insinuated. Hereby it comes to pass, that wicked persons
increasing in age, in number, in power, increase in sin also, being not babes
in malitiousnesse, but growing to the top of all impiety and iniquity. Even
as a man proceeds to his just stature by degrees, and the body, which is
little at the beginning, waxes great in process of time: so is it with sin.
Every man (says James) is drawn aside, and deluded by his own
concupiscence, and concupiscence having conceived brings forth sin, and
sin being perfected, brings forth death. Now then, sin and the wicked man
are as it were twins even borne together, and both loving, living, and
growing together in like sort* And even as the thorn or briar whilst it is in
the bud or green, may be handled and hurts not, as afterward it does, but
the longer it continues and grows, the sharper and more harmfull it waxes:
so the elder the wicked man is, the more sinful he becomes, and the more the
ungodly increase either in number or strength, the more wickedness spreads,
till at the last by a general backsliding, all flesh corrupt their ways. At
the beginning of the doctrine of the Gospel, the Jews were somewhat pliable,
and the most obstinate of them, raged not so much as at the last they did
against our Savior. The Egyptians oppressed not the Israelites at the first,
but at the last they came even to drown their infants, and to make most vile
bondslaues of them. But as here is added, that the righteous shall see the fall
of the wicked: so the Israelites at length he held the Egyptians drowned in the
sea. David notably painteth out this matter in the Psalm, saying, Psalm. 58.10
Whilst as yet your prickles shall not be felt, the prickles of eglentine, he
will destroy both that which is quick, and that which is dried up. The just
shall rejoice, when he shall see vengeance, he shall wash his feet in the
blood of the wicked. As this teaches parents in time to apply correction: so
also it serves to encourage the godly, who are not to be troubled, but rather
to lift up their heads, when they see the ungodly to increase every way.

17 Chastise thy son and he will bring thee rest, he will also give pleasures
unto thy soul.

Other excellent fruits beside that wisdom which was mentioned in the 16.
verse, are showed here to spring from nurturing and correcting of children. It
is a grief to parents to deal sharply with their children, which when they do,
lightly their bowels yearne within them. But first here quietness and rest is
promised unto them for their pains. Their well nurtured children shall as it
were bring the chair unto the^ of ease and refreshing. They will so dutifully
behave them selves in all respects, that their parents shall need to take no
thought for them, they may quietly lie on their beds, or securely sleep
therein. Again, they will so diligently dispatch their parents affairs, that
they may sit at home and take their rest. This is one excellent fruit indeed,
but another is also added in the last words, He will also give pleasures unto
thy soul. Even as ground well tilled and dressed, or trees well pruned and
looked unto, bring forth to the husbandman sweet flowers and dainty fruits
and food: so the well nurtured child will utter such gracious speeches, do such
righteous deeds, have such comely gestures, and practice such obedience and
thankfulness toward his parents, as that his fathers soul shall much more
delight in such virtues of his, then Isaacs soul delited in venison, or the
sauerie meat, which Jacob brought unto him. See examples of the truth hereof
in Isaac, Jacob, Joseph.

Or when the ^ision is not.
18 * When there is no vision, the people are made naked, but blessed is he that
keeps the law.

Both the ignorance of ministers and the disobedience of people, ^^om private
fa^ilies Solomon ^^mmeth to the church. Sam. 3.2. Sam. 9. ^say. 1. ^mos. 8.
herein are taxed. By the vision is meant the doctrine of the word of God,
which the Prophets (who were called in old time seers) received by visions and
by reuelatio^s. The vision is said then not to be, when sound doctrine is not
taught at all, but there is a miserable famine of the word. Again, when as the
word is sometime expounded, but not sincerely, diligently, and soundly, so that
the people may be as sheep without shepherds in the midst of great plenty of
such as take on them to be teachers. Math. 9.
Moreover, when of the preaching of the word is made light account, 1. These. 5.
so that prophecy is despised as a thing not necessary. Last of all, when God
has in vengeance shut up the eyes both of teachers and hearers, so that the
word of God, or the vision is to the learned as letters sealed, which he cannot
open, and to the unlearned, as letters, which he cannot read. Esaias. 29.9.
Alas how can it be, but that people must needs be made naked, when by reason
of the want of the vision, they must needs lie open to Gods wrath which hangs
over all unbelievers, and, as a company of naked souls, and like to the
Israelites, whom Aaron is said to have made naked, want Jesus Christ the robe
of righteousness, and happiness, want faith, want mortification and
sanctification, Ephe. 6. Math. 22.
want the whole armor of God and the wedding garment? How is it possible but
that their souls must needs be pined away, and starued for want of spiritual
food and comfort in the midst of temptations and afflictions? Amos. 8.
And will it not come to pass, that such poor people walking as heathen in
the darkness and vanity of their minds, will rush into errors, fall into
idolatries, break out into blasphemies, run into all sorts of sin, follow
after witches, finally degenerate into the nature of brute beasts, and wax
worse the^ they? But on the other side. blessed is he that keeps the law.
Diverse hear the word, but it is to their condemnation, and therefore the
outward enjoying of the exercises of Religion makes not any happy, but rather
those it makes most miserable, who only are partakers of them, and are not
with them partakers of Gods spirit, or transformed thereby into the image of
Christ, but remain unreformed, prattling hypocrites, such as only have an
outward show of godliness, but deny the power thereof in their deeds. But the
happiness of that man on the contrary side, is unspeakable, who is not a
forgetful hearer, James. 1.
but a doer of the word, who believes in Christ Jesus, who brings forth
good fruits as a tree planted by the rivers side, and that in due season and
without withering, finally, who grows daily in all sorts of gifts of the
holy Ghost. For this sound and true Christian, shall by the means of the word,
which he firmly keeps, be directed in all his particular actions, preserved
from sinning against the majesty of God, comforted in the midst of all his
afflictions, and after that God has poured upon him many blessings in this
world, be made an heir of the kingdom of glory, which is in heaven. Although
profane Esaus shall seek this blessing with tears, they shall not find it,
but as our Savior testifies in the Gospel, blessed is he, (and surely he
only) who hears the word of God and keeps it.

19 A servant is not to be chastened with words alone, when as understanding,
yet he answers not.

Stubburne and disobedient servants are here showed to be of so vile a
disposition, as that rebukes by words alone will not make them do their duty,
and therefore they must be beaten with stripes. Some servants are so stout,
that when they either are called to come to their masters, they will not come,
making show that they hear them not, or when a question is asked of them, they
will hold their peace of a cursed stomach. These are of the number of those, who
when they hear, do not answer, and such birds as can speak and will not
speak, must be made to speak. But such again are of this sort, who though
they say, they will do all which their masters enjoin them, yet answer not
their commandments by putting them into practice, in which sense the word of
answering is often used in the Scripture, as where the Lord is said to answer
those his suitors, whose prayers he grants. It seems that our Savior had
relation to this proverb, when he says, in the Gospel, that the servant,
which knows his masters will, and does it not, shall be beaten with more
stripes then he which knows it not. Let servants in families according to the
exhortation of the Apostle, be subject unto their masters, It Is. ^.
serviceable in all things, not gainsaying them. Let those, who profess the^
selves to be the servants of God, when they know their duty out of the word,
not neglect to practice it, lest the Lord lay on them his scourges of poverty,
sickness and other afflictions.

20 Have thou seen a man hasty in his words? There is [better] hope of a
fool, then of him.

As disobedience and sullenness is a bad property in servants: so likewise is
a quick and talkatiue tou^g here condemned both in them after a special
manner, and in all generally as a great fault. The fool, which is slow of
speech, and speaks sparingly, sins and offends for want of matter or of
wit. But the pratler, which is quick and busy of his tongue, so that he
gives his neighbor or master a cross answer, and quip without any study,
offends by reason of an ill habit, and an arrogant spirit. This vice of
babbling is at all times to be taken heed of, but especially in prayer, Eccles.
5.2. and 10.
as the wise king exhorts in the book of the Preacher, saying, make no have
with thy mouth, and let not thy mind beswift to utter any thing before God.
For a fuller exposition of this sentence return to reuiew the notes set down
on the 26. chapter of this book and the 12. verse.

21 He that brings up his servant daintily, from his youth, shall In his end.
at the last be bereaved of his children.

As all are the worse for liberty: so here is showed that such, who be of a
servile estate or condition, thereby of all other are most spoiled and
corrupted. Servants are then brought up daintily, when they are lifted up to
great offices, whereof they are not worthy, or clothed with fine apparel, or
fed with good cheer, or suffered to have too much ease, or familiarly spoken
unto and entertained. When they are tried to be faithful, they may be trusted
lawfully with great matters, and put in high places as was Joseph. But to
aduau^ce or let loose the bridle unto some natures, is to spoil them,
according as this wise king found by experience, 1. King. 11.28.
who placing Jeroboam his servant over the family of Joseph and his works or
munitions, felt him at last an heavy adversary and rebel. And indeed the
insolency of such beggars set on horseback, is intolerable, as is insinuated
in the latter part of this sentence. They will not only beat their fellow
servants, as is showed in the parable of the Gospel, but slay or put by and
hurt their masters children. Zimri the servant of Ela king of Israel was by
him so advanced and esteemed, as that he was placed Captain and ouerseer over
the half part of his chariots. 1. King. 16.11.
But within a while Zimri affecting to be a Lord, not only slew Ela his good
master, but the whole stock of Baasha Elaes father.

22 A man of wrath
A wrathful man stirs up strife, and a A Lord of anger.
furious man is full of transgressions.

As too much remissness: so wrath is to be taken heed off. Let anger be kindled
never so little in any, the wrathful person will provoke such as he deals
withal, unto brawling, or fighting, either by his irefull looks, or cross
speeches, or hasty strokes and blows. But if anger increase in any great
measure, so that it burning into a flame, makes the person therewith enflamed
furious, it not only breeds contention, but brings forth a great number of
sins of sundry sorts. For the furious person curses, swears, slaundereth,
enuieth, murmureth, and is ready to commit murder. See a very like sentence,
James 3.16.

23 The hautinesse of a man casts him down, but honor lifts him up, who is
cast down in spirit.

This point has often been handled, as namely in the 22. Chapter of this book
and the 15. verse, also in the 28. Chapter and the 17. verse. Briefly the
meaning of this sentence is thus much, to wit, that the pride of heart lifted
up either in regard of some gifts whether outward or inward, or by reason of
some secret rebellion and contempt of God, shall be an occasion of bringing that
hautie person to low degree and wa^ts, who before was of high estare and endued
with many blessings. Again, that on the contrary side, the humility and low
linesse of the spirit cast down under the mighty hand of God and giving honor
to men, shall be as it were a pillar to uphold all those graces and blessings,
whereof the party therewith endued is already made partaker, and furthermore
as a step to greater honor, shall increase his dignity and prosperity in every
respect. For he that lifts up him self, shall be brought low, and he that
humbles himself shall be exalted. Adam, Pharaoh, and Nebuchadnezzar may be
witnesses on the one side, and David. the virgin Marie, and Elizabeth, on the
other, of the truth of this sentence.

24 He that is partner with a thief, hates him self, and he, which hearing
cursing, declares it not.

We are herein taught to be far off from communicating with sinners, as to
rebuke and reprove those offenses, whereunto we are privy. All men generally
count it a wicked thing to steal, and many, who are even without all fear of
God, will not rob or pilfer themselves, but a great number make no bones to be
accessory unto evil doers, and are glad when they may have any share in a rich
booty manfully gotten. Howsoever such may think themselves to be better then
thieves: yet the Prophet Esaias makes them all one with them, Esaias. 1.
when he says, thy Princes are the fellows of thieves. Now here is showed
that not only these partakers with evil doers are in fault, as well as they,
but that they shall not escape punishment. For thus much is meant when it is
said, that they hate their own soul or them selves, that is to say, they make
them selves subject to danger of law, to infamy, and to the wrath of God, in
as much as thieves and robbers shall not inherit the kingdom of God. 1. Cor.
6.
The Lord by his Prophet threatens such, affirming, that in as much as they
saw a thief, Psalm. 50.
they consented to him, and were partakers with the adulterer, therefore he
would reprove them and set their sins in order before them. But as he draws
on him self the Lords judgments, who communicates with thieves in their
spoils, and evil deeds: so he also offends and casts himself into his
wrath which hearing cursing, declares it not, that is to say, who hearing any
to blaspheme, to swear, or otherwise abuse his tongue, tells him not of his
fault, if he be such a one, who^ it is wisdom to reprove. This to be the
natural sense of these words may appear by that mother sentence, unto which
this verse is referred, which is set down in the fifth Chapter of Leuiticus 1.
verse. Also when one has sinned and he has heard the sin of blasphemy,
whereof he is witness whether he has seen it, or whether he has heard it, if
he tell it not, surely he shall bear his iniquity. In which place as
appears by the suit of the whole Chapter, Thus Tremellius and Iunius also
take it.
the Lord speaks not of public but of private offenses, and not of
accusations brought unto Magistrates, but of private admonitions. Many a one,
who hears his neighbor use most execrable speeches, herein thinks him
highly to offend, and is ready in heart to condemn him. But although he let
him proceed, or open not his mouth at all to declare his fault unto him: yet he
blames not himself, because he knows not or does not consider, that his
suffering of his neighbors sins to pass without any controlment used by
him, makes him subject to the punishment due thereunto. Well then to stir up
every one to pull his neighbor out of the fire, here is showed, that silence
kept in such cases, causes us to incur the recompense due to other men's
offenses. Let us then, as the Apostle exhorts, follow the nature of light,
which not only has no fellowship with darkness: but reprooueth and
declares the works thereof. Let us practice the commandment of our Savior,
if our brother offends us, to tell him between us and him. If our brother (I
say) for as for scorners, another course is to be taken with them.

25 The The trembling of a man.
fearful man lays a snare before himself: but he, which trusts in the
Lord, is placed on high.

As in the verse going before, the effects of communicating in sin or winking
thereat, have been showed: so in this the contrary workings of infidelity and
faith are declared. The spiritual fear and sonlike reverence of God, is a
fountain of life, as before in this book has been affirmed. Again the
natural fear of dangers, of troubles, and of death is not to be reproved, so
long as it keeps in compass, or is sanctified by the spirit of God. But here
a slavish and hellish fear is spoken off, springing from infidelity, and
troubling the mind above measure, with the dangers or evils of this life or the
world to come. This fear works a snare, even death and destruction, even as
the Apostle says, the sorrow of this world does. For first, he which fears
the faces of men or troubles, runs by this means into many sins, as to
leave his calling, to trust in carnal helps, and to deny the truth of God.
Secondly, he gives the adversaries great advantage over him, whom by reason of
his fear, he is not able to resist, and who on this occasion are emboldened.
Thirdly, by extreme passions his senses are bound, his spirits dulled, his
body cast into diseases, and his mind fails and faints. Last of all, in
as much as he doubts of the favor of God, by this means he does incur
eternal damnation, seeing the featfull shall have their portion in the lake,
which burns with fire and brimstone. As then the fearful beasts and byrds
fall into pittes, and inwrap themselves in snares: in like sort the timorous
persons draw the judgments of the Lord upon themselves. There are a great
number in the world, which are far from this fear, and yet no nearer to
happiness, if not further off from it then the timorous. For they fear
neither God nor man, but presumption embraces their necks as a chain. Their
destenie has before been set down, that they shall fall into evil. But he,
which trusts in the Lord, is placed on high. The person, which is secure of
the good will of God, which constantly suffers afflictions, and valiantly as
a fouldier of Christ, proceeds in well doing, Psalm. 92.
shall be safe and sure under the Lords defense, in as much as he will be as a
rock, as a tower, and as a castle unto him. For first, nothing shall touch
such a one to do him hurt. Secondly, the Lord even in this world will
oftentimes preserve him, as may appear in the 11. Chapter of the Epistle to
the Hebrews. Last of all, his soul after death, shall mount up to heaven as to
a fenced city. David, Daniell and Paul, may be witnesses of the truth of this
doctrine.

27 Many do seek the face of the ruler, but Amans
every man's judgment is from the Lord.

Preposterous suing for favor is here condemned, as before inordinate fear
was reproved. To seek for redress unto rulers, or to sue for favor at their
hands, is not unlawful. But first we must put up our supplications into the
court of heaven. So did Hester and prospered, but the rulers of Israel taking
a contrary course, and going first to Pharaoh, had ill success. Let us then
take heed that we put not our trust in Princes, for they are deceiptfull.
Again their hearts are in Gods hand, finally they have no power, but that,
which is given them from above.

27 The wicked man is an abomination to the tust, and who is upright in way,
is an abomination to the Of iniquitis
wicked man.

The effects of wickedness, and of righteosnesse on the contrary side, are
herein noted. The wicked man is an abomination to the just, that is, the just
abhor the ungodly justly and according to their deserts. For in deed, what
fellowship is there between righteousness and unrighteousness, or the seed
of the woman and the seed of the Serpent? The godly then must needs hate the
wicked, yea they cannot but abhor them even as the dung of the earth, which
me^ remove far from their senses and habitatio^s. Now, he who is upright in
way is an abomination to the wicked man, also on the contrary side, that is,
the godly or righteous person is unjustly hated by reason of the evil
disposition of the ungodly. For otherwise, even the most wicked have cause
enough given them by the righteous to love them. But they hate the just, first
because their works are good, secondly because they will not run to the same
excess of riot with them, thirdly because they reprove their sins, and last
of all because they are not of this world. Indeed the godly love the wicked as
they are gods creatures, but in regard of their sins they hate them, yet in
such sort as the Physician does hate the disease, and not the sick person.
When the wicked man is converted, there will be an agreement between him and
the righteous, but until that time, in as much as they are of contrary
dispositions and courses, there can be no true love between them Of the truth
of this doctrine Cain and Abell, I saac and I smaell, David and Saul, Christ
and the Jews may be witnesses.

THE XXX. CHAPTER.
1 A gathering together of the words of Agur, the son of Iaketh. The saying
of that man concerning Ithiell, concerning Ithiel (I say) and Vcall.

2 Surely I have been brutish [since] I have been a man, neither is there the
understanding of a man in me,

3 Neither have I learned wisdom, or known the knowledge of holy things.

4 Who can ascend up to heaven or desce^d? who can gather the wind in his
fists? who can bind the waters in his cloak? who can establish any bounds of
the earth? what is his name? and what is his sons name, if thou can tell?

5 The whole word of God is most perfectly purified, he is a backler to those
who betake them selves to him.

6 Add not to his words, that he reprove thee not, and thou become a liar.

IN these verses we are to observe, first the title, secondly sundry
instructions. In the title we are to note the author of the parables following,
the authority of them, the first means of publishing them, finally a certain
person or persons concerning them, or whom they concern. The author of them
was Agur the son of Iaketh, whose name elsewhere in the Scripture is not
recorded, but by his proverbs it appears, that he was a man endued with rare
and excellent knowledge. Some think that Solomon is here called Agur, but it
appears that they are deceived, seeing Agur, is here plainly affirmed to have
been the son of Iaketh, but it is manifest that Solomon was the son of David.
Moreover seeing the author of these se^tences shows in the 7. verse that he
made a petition, neither to have much riches nor to be extremely poor, it is
evident that he was not Solomon, whom God called to a kingdom, and greatly
enriched with all store of substance. Nevertheless, albeit Agur was not
Solomon: yet the spirit, which was in Solomon, was in him, yea the same gift of
speaking by dark sayings being bestowed on him, made him in the same kind
with Solomon, to be profitable unto the Church of God. As for the authority of
this book, it may be gathered hence, that it is termed an abstract of Agurs
sentences, or as the Hebrew word does also signify, aprophesie. For herein
thus much is insinuated, that the spirit of God allowed of them, first
inspiring Agur, secondly moving the penners of this treatise to set the^ down
in that order, wherein now we have the^. As touching the means of publishing
these sentences, this was done by Agur him self, and at the first not by
writing, but by word of mouth. For it is not said, the writings, which he
pe^ned, but the words which that (excellent) man spoke. Even as then Solomon
upon occasions uttered parables, which afterward were written: so did Agur.
Finally, as concerning the persons here named I thiell and V call, whether
these words are the names of the Scribes, by whom this treatise was copied, or
whether the friends of Agur were so called, to whom these sayings were uttered,
or whether the son of God is noted by these titles, of whom chiefly the
instructions following entreat, or whether Agur speaking of the father of
lights, says, by I thiell, that is, God with me, and Vcall, or Ve-ucall, I
shall be able: (after which sort Paul speaks of the grace of God with him, and
says that he is able to do all things through Christ, who makes him strong)
the matter is not great, and it comes all to one purpose, for Paul planteth,
and Apollos waters, but God gives the increase. Paul is nothing and Apollos
is nothing, but God is all in all. Let us learn not so much curiously to
inquire after, as wisely to profit by the names and helps of excellent
persons, albeit not thoroughly known unto us. This doctrine Paul teaches the
Corinthians, when he says, whether any ask the question concerning Titus, be
is my fellow, and fellow helper unto you, whether of the brethren, they are the
messengers of the Churches, and the glory of Christ. Therefore show the
declaration of your love, and of our boasting of you, in the sight of the
Churches. Thus much concerning the title. Now as concerning the instructions,
we are therein also to observe four points, whereof the first is, that the
author thereof did not know holy things by the light of nature, the second,
that this is true knowledge to know God the father, and his son Christ, the
third, that the word of God being the means of this heavenly knowledge is most
pure, the last, that this word is to be believed and sincerely obeyed. When as
Agur says, I have been brutish, since I have been a man, and there is not the
understanding of a man in me, he plainly confesses, and openly proclaims,
that of him self he is void of saving knowledge. For he which speaks after
this sort of him self, declares, that he wants his reason, and common sense
in spiritual things. And certainly (as Jeremy speaking more generally
witnesses) Every man (naturally) is more brutish, Ierem. 10.
then that he can perceive, for the natural man perceives not the things
which belong to God, yea the ox knows his owner, Esaias. 1.
and the ass his crib, but I sraell has no knowledge, and the people of God
no understanding. Were it possible that Idolaters should be so blockish as they
are, to kneel down to a piece of wood or of stone, unless they were by nature
brutish? As concerning the second point, the question is demanded, what his
name is, who ascended vpinto heaven, and descended, etc. and what is his sons
name? The answer unto the former question is that it is not any man or
creature, but the true God, only wise, only merciful, and only just, who
only does these actions, as may appear in that they are attributed unto him.
Amos. 9. Psalm 104, Esaias. 40. Job. 38. For first he by his effects ascended and
descended, Genesis 2.1.
perfecting both heaven and earth and all their hosts at the beginning of the
world, neither does he still cease working in these places. John. 3. Ephe. 4.
Indeed our Savior after a special manner ascended into heaven and
descended, but here those works are meant, and mentioned, which the father
works in common with him, as the moving of the sun and the stars, Amos. 9.
and as Amos speaks, the building of his upper chambers in heaven, and the
founding of his armies upon the earth. Again God holds the winds in his
fist. There are no members of a body in the Lord, but these things by a
borrowed speech are ascribed to him, to show that there is some what like in
regard of his effects. Even as then he, which holds any thing in his fist,
has full power over it to dispose thereof: so God disposes the winds, and
rules over the element of the air. Therefore David says, Psalm. 135.
that the Lord makes the lightning and rain, and brings the wind out of his
treasures. Furthermore the Lord binds the waters in his cloak, for as men use
to wrap up things which they will carry, and to tie up loose trinkers in
cloths and clouts: so the Lord incloseth the waters, and compasses them about
with his decree, with the banks of the earth, Job. 38.
and with the clouds, which in this respect Job calls the Lords bottels. The
waters at the beginning were gathered by the Lord into one place, and now the
sea is wrapped as it were in swaddling bands as Job speaks. To conclude, the
Lord establishes the bounds of the earth, even as a cunning builder of an
house. For at the beginning he said, let the dry land appear, and now he so
preserves the earth by the word of his power, that it remains still firm
and immovable. But the name of this true God ca^ not be known aright, unless
also we know his sons name, and therefore the question is demanded, what is
his sons name, if thou can tell? The answer hereunto is, that his name is
wonderful, counselor, the Prince of peace, God manifested in the flesh, and
justified in the spirit, coeternall, coequall, coessentiall with the father, he
also who ascended and descended. Now then let us know the son of God, and we
shall know the true God. For he is the angel in who^ Gods name is written, he
is the graven image of his glory. Therefore our Savior says to his Apostles.
If ye had known me, John. 14.
ye had also known my father. Now the^ the sum of this divine doctrine is
that which John sets down, this is eternal life, to know thee to be the
only true God, and who^ thou have sent Jesus Christ. But as touching the word
of God, which shows these mysteries, it is said, that the whole word of God
is most perfectly purified. Albeit none by nature can perceive the forenamed
mysteries: yet by the word of God they may be understood in some sort, and in
some comfortable measure. Therefore Paul says to the Romans, Say not in thine
heart, who shall go up into heaven, for the word is near in thy mouth and in
thine heart. And every part of this word is pure, both the precepts and the
promises, the stories and prophesies, finally, the law and the Gospel. Nay it
has been purified as the silver in the fining pot most perfectly. For what
iotte or title of Gods word ever fell to the ground? What did God ever say,
which came not to pass? Yea Abraham found it true, even when he was about to
slaie Isaac, the Israelites tried the truth of it in the fiery furnace of
Aegipt, David had perished in his afflictions but for it. Philosophy is vain,
men's words are full of deceit, flesh and blood is fantastical, but the word
never seduceth, never fails any that lay hold on it. God therefore the
author of this word is to be believed, who, as is added is a buckler to those,
who betake themselves unto him. God therefore gives us his word, that faith
thereby being wrought in us, we should fly to him for help, which doing, we
shall be preserved from dangers, from evil men, yea from sin and Satan, by
his mighty power: for the Lord is not only a light, as David speaks, that
is a giver of good things, but a buckler, that is a preserver of us from evil.
Sorrow sticks in us, trouble is on us, temptations cease not to assault us.
Satan prevails against us, because we fly not to the name of God as we
ought. But the word of God must also sincerely be obeyed. Add not to his
words, that he do not reprove thee, and thou become a lier. To search out with
modesty, or to deliver truly the sense of the scripture, is not to add
thereunto, but to consent unto it. But they are said to add to the word, who
infect the purity thereof, or say or do any thing contrary thereunto. Such
adders unto the word, were in old time the Scribes and Pharisees, who taught
for doctrines the traditions of men. Saul also when he spared Agag, added his
own carnal reason to the commandment of God. Agur disswadeth from adding to
the word of God, by a reason taken from the punishment, which the Lord uses to
bring on those, who this way offend. The Lord threatens in the Revelation,
that he will add unto such the punishments written in that book. For this
sin Nadab and Abihu were consumed with fire from heaven, and Vzzah perished
most fearfully. Last of all, the greatness of this sin is showed to the end
it may be avoided. Lest thou be found a liar. To belie men were a great
offense, how much more then to be found a false witness concerning God? It is
treason to falsify and corrupt the Princes coin and image, what high treason
must it needs be then, to counterfeit or corrupt the pure word of God? Let us
learn here to be content with the simplicity of the word in all things, not
adding our own inventions or customs, nor pursuing together with it our
profits and pleasures.

7 Two things I request of thee, forbid them not from me, whilst yet I die not.
so long as I live.

8 Remove far from me vanity, and A word of lying.
lying: give me not poverty nor riches, feed me with the food of mine
allowance,

9. Lest being filled, I lie and say who is the Lord? Or lest becoming poor I
steal, to conclude, Laeie hold on.
I abuse the name of my God.

10 Offend not with thy tongue.
Accuse not a servant unto his master, lest he curse thee, and thou be Or
arraigned.
blamed.

These verses contain a prayer, which Agur made, and an admonition which he
gave. In the prayer we are to observe the preface, which he uses to the lord
before it, and the matter of it. The preface is this, Two things I request of
thee, forbid them not from me, whilst I live. There is no doubt but that Agur
desired even a thousand things at Gods hands, for he stood in need of so many
necessaries, yea and of infinite more, as also we all do. But he begged two
things principally and particularly as most needful for him, in regard of
glorifying God, and his own good. Let us learn by his example to look before
we come to pray, what we stand in need off especially, and to consider what
suits we will put up to the Lord. Now as concerning the time, wherein he
desires to enjoy the things for which he prays, it is so long as he should
live, not for a day, or month, or year only. He does then crave (as it
were) not a lease, but a fee simple of the Lords benefits. So does David, when
he says, Psalm. 27.
One thing have I entreated of Jehovah, that I will request, even that I may
remain, in the house of I ehouah, all the days of my life. The matter of the
prayer consists of certain suits, and of certain reasons of those suits. The
suits are of two sorts, as first for the graces desired, secondly for the
means, whereby those graces may be attained. One of the graces is, Remove
far from me vanity, that is to say, let not pride, unthankfulness,
worldliness, or idolatry, or such like vanities of this world, take hold on
me at any time. The prophet in the psalm affirms this to be one of the
properties of a citizen of heaven, Psalm. 24.
That he lifts not up his soul unto vanity. Certainly it is a very hard
thing not to trust in riches, or not to delight in this world above measure,
and therefore we are no less earnestly then Agur did, to sue for this holy
grace. The other grace by him requested is, That a false matter or a lying
speech, may be removed from him, that is to say all unfaithful dealing, craft,
forgerie, cousenage, perjury and hypocrisy. The prophet in the psalm in like
sort, joins both these together when he says, How long will ye love vanity,
Psalm. 4.
and seek after leasing? This is a special and a rare grace, as may appear in
that all estates of people in all places almost, are given to dissimulation.
Ephe. 4.
The Apostle wills us to put away lying, but before we can so do, we must
pray that the Lord would remove it far from us. Now as concerning the means
of attaining to these two graces, Agur in the former place requesteth, that he
may not have too little, saying, Give me not poverty, that is to say, suffer me
not throughout my life to be in extreme want, as not to have food and raiment,
or the necessaries of this life. It may be thought by some, that this desire to
avoid extreme penury in Agur, was not lawful. For was not Lazarus exceedingly
poor, and yet the servant of God, and not driven by his want to unfaithful
dealing? Again, was not Paul needy oftentimes, and yet walked uprightly,
because he knew how to want, and how to abound? Rather as it may seem, Agur
was to pray for that gift, which Paul had, then that he should not be so
extremely poor. But in as much as Agur does not abhor poverty simply, or
otherwise, then for the danger of sinning, which it brings men often unto,
and might cast him into, and for the obtaining of truth and plain dealing: his
heart being rightly disposed, the prayer which he makes to this intent is
holy, and was acceptable no doubt unto God. In this sort to the end we may
glorify God the better, we may pray against sickness and adversaries, and
wants, including always this condition as he did, (to wit if God saw it good
for him) and to this effect, that we be never tried above that, which we shall
be able to bear. In the next place, Agur prays and says, Give me not
viches, feed me with the food of mine allowance. A servant of God (as appears
in Abraham, David, and Joseph of Arimathea) may have riches, and yet perform
his duty. Agur the^ simply prays not against wealth, or altogether
condemns riches, but he requesteth that he may have the food of his
allowance, that is the daily portion which God has cut out for him in his
decree to the supplying of his wants, Lue. 11.
and the furthering of him in his service, be it never so mean, rather then
such abundance, as would be an hinderance of him in holiness, or an inducement
to commit evil. Thus to pray against abundance, is as lawful, as when we come
to a table well furnished, to beseech the Lord that we may take so much of the
food set before us, as may strengthen our body, and make our souls more fit
to his service, and not cramme in more, then will do us good, or so much as will
oppress our hearts. As concerning the reasons of Agurs prayer, one of them is,
Lest being filled I lie and say, who is the Lord? Although riches in themselves
move not men, nor bring them to forget or blaspheme God, yet when vanity is
not removed from the rich possessors thereof, such effects do always follow, and
therefore Agur here shows, that he made his former prayer not without just
cause, and to an holy end. Sometimes the ungodly rich say with Pharaoh, who is
God, even in open terms and speeches. But indeed all of them deny him, not
accounting of the exhortations of the word, and giving themselves to trust in
Mammon, to ease, to bravery, to surfeiting, and a thousand vices. Deuteronomy 32.
For men are as brute beasts which kick when they are well fed, yea the godly
(as may appear in Iehosaphat) wax worse through abundance, so dangerous a
thing it is to stand on an high mountain of prosperity. The other reason is,
Or lest becoming poor I steal, to conclude, I abuse the name of my God.
Although a true worshipper of God will rather starve then rob: yet necessity
is a sore provocation, moving to take other men's goods away by stealth.
Certainly the estate of such, who are extremely poor, is very grievous and
intolerable unto flesh and blood. He that otherwise would abhor theft: yet
when he is pinched with famine to satisfy his greedy belly, will now and then
pull from his neighbor, or periure himself, or so behave himself, Rom 2.
as that through his misdemeanour the name and Gospel of God is ill spoken
off. To be then in the pit of poverty below, is perilous, as well as to be on
the top of prosperity on high. Thus much concerning Agur his prayer, now as
touching his admonition, Accuse not a servant (says he) unto his master, etc.
That is to say, provoke not, nor wrong the least or lowest person in the world,
but as much as is possible live peaceably with all, and deal rightly with
every one. Great offenses of children and servants are to be made known to
parents and masters, for taking of which course, Joseph is commended in the
scripture. But to complain to the master of every light fault, which the
servant commits, were great rashness, to appeach him falsely great injury,
finally to incense his master to deal roughly with him, great cruelty. Such
cruel dealing is forbidden in Deuteronomie, where the Lord charge, not to
deliver a servant to his master. Deuteronomy. 23.
The reason why men are to abstain from accusing servants is, lest they in the
bitterness of their soul, praying God to revenge and plague their accusers,
those, who have accused these poor creatures, feel his judgments. The curse,
which is causeless, shall fly away, but the Lord hears the curses, which
wrong and misery causes, as appears in the 22. chapter of Exodus 23. verse.

11 There is a generation [which] even curse their father, and do not bless
their mother:

12 A generation clean in their own eyes, although they have not been washed
from their Exerement or dung.
filthiness:

13 Ageneration, whose eyes how hautie are they? and whose eyelids lift up
themselves:

14 Ageneration, whose teeth [are] swords, and their cheek teeth, knives, to
consume the poor cut of the earth, and the needy from amongst men.

Here is showed that accusers of poor servants, and oppressors of the needy
whosoever, are in the number of those notorious wicked people, who of all other
are most ungodly. For four sorts of such wicked persons are in these verses
rehearsed and noted. By the which number of four, the wise Agur in the
doctrine following, goes about to teach us many profitable lessons. The first
of these evil stocks or generations and kinreds are those, Which curse their
father, and bless not their mother: that is (as Paul speaks to Timothy) who
are disobedient unto parents, 2 Timothy 3.
yea and so undutiful and ungracious, that they wish their evil, reproach them
with contemptuous speeches, and in the pride of their hearts rise up against
them. A divine curse pronounced by those, who are called thereunto by the Lord,
and upon just cause uttered, is no sin at all, yea it is a duty sometimes,
albeit seldom to be practiced. But those devilish execrations, whereby without
cause or a calling, evil is wished to any, or any is reviled, are always
grievous and heinous crimes, notwithstanding that they be only bent against
those, that be of the lowest and basest condition. Now then, when as children
shall spit out such poison against those, who bear the Lords person, who are
the authors and preseruers of their life, what greater degree of impiety can
they come unto? And as childre^s cursing of their natural parents is a great
offense: so is the rebellion of any inferiors, against their superiors. Let
then every one take heed that he be not of the number of those, who resist or
speak evil of such, as God has placed over them. Let none be offended, if
such there are in these times. And finally, let parents so train up their
children, that they may be reverent and obedient unto them. The second
generation is of those, who are clean in their own eyes, although they have
not been washed from their filthiness. These here spoken off, are hipocrits,
who either being blind with ignorance, see not their errors and iniquities: or
else by reason of malice, perceive not that they do amiss. For although they
do continue in the filthiness of their transgressions: yet notwithstanding
they think that they are in a good estate. Of this sort are the Papists, who
worship idols, and teach damnable doctrines, and yet boast themselves to be the
Catholic Church. Likewise they which call evil good, as Esaias speaks, and
good evil, justifying themselves in their profaning of the sabbath, their
swearing, and their gross evil actions, and false opinions, as if all were
well. Finally those, which say one thing, and do another, walking in their old
evil ways, notwithstanding their profession of religion. There is none but
naturally he is polluted with sin, nevertheless as concerning the elect, they
are washed, they are sanctified by the name of the Lord Jesus, 1. Cor. 6.
and by the spirit of our God. Let therefore, (as the Apostle exhorts,)
every one lay aside all pollution of the flesh and of the spirit. 2. Cor. 7.1.
The third stock or kindred as it were, is of those, Whose eyes are hautie,
and whose eye lids lift up themselves. The proud people of the world are here
noted by the signs of arrogancy, to wit, the casting of the eye upward, to
behold high and lofty things, and the lifting up of the eye lids unto the same
intent and purpose. For the eye is as it were the star of the forehead, and the
glass of the mind. Look what affections are in the heart, they are easily
discerned by the eye. The Apostle Peter notes out wantons hereby, that their
eyes are full of adultery. Jacob perceived by Labans looks, that his good will
was not toward him as in former times. David going about to clear himself
from pride, speaks thus unto the Lord, O Lord I am not high minded, I have no
proud looks. Psalm. 131.
As then the humble man is known by his lowly looks, his reverent speeches,
his modest apparel and his plain gate: so the proud person is discerned by
his stately gestures. Indeed many can dissemble notably, yea it is now counted
a comely and courtly grace to speak courteously, or to give the wall, which
they often will strive to do, whose hearts yet are full of pride. But even these
at one time or other, by one sign of pride or other, will plainly bewray the
hautinesse of their spirits. For first they, that are proud of their wealth and
such outward things, will manifest their lofty minds, either by coy looks or
disdainful speeches, or affecting the higher places, as did the Pharisees.
Again those, who have received spiritual gifts, and in regard thereof are
puffed up, will with the Corinthians either by vaunting them selves, or
censuring other, declare to all, how they stand upon slippers. Finally even
they which have received no gifts at all, but by reason of a pride in the
heart, despise their neighbors and rebel against God, may be discerned
oftentimes by their poisoned malice, and vain behavior, as toades by their
swelling, and bladders by the puffing of them up with wind. The fourth
generation is of those, whose teeth are swords, and whose cheek-teeth are
knives, to consume the poor out of the earth, and the needy from among men.
Cruel oppressors are noted by this last stock or kindred, who are showed to
destroy the poor by their accusations, tyranny, strength and wicked dealings,
even as bears, or lio^s, or wolves, and such beasts, who having sharp and
strong teeth, devour the silly sheep and lambs. By these comparisons the
cutthroate dealing of the wicked is often expressed in the Scripture. David in
the Psalm speaking of his deadly enemies, says, I am among the huge lions,
Psalm. 57.5.
I lie among the firebrands, among me^, whose teeth are spears, and arrows,
and whose tongue is a sharp sword. Solomon going about to note out false
accusers, there is (says he) one that speaks words like the pearcings with
a sword, Prou. 12.18.
but the tongue of wise men is health* John in the Revelation describing the
persecuters of the Church, Revel. 9.8.
which should arise, affirms, that their teeth were as the teeth of lions.
Such are, not only tyrants, but slaunderers, extortioners, heretics and idol
shepherds. For such either spoil men of their lives, or most cruelly destroy
their souls. In all ages there have been such, and now are great numbers of
them, but woe be to the^ (says Jude) for they have gone the way of Cain. The
fatherless, the widow, the poor tenant, and the underling, can not resist or
withstand these oppressors. But the Lord will take their part and revenge their
wrong.

15 The horsleach has two daughters give, give: Genesis 48.22.
there are three things which are insatiable, [yea] four, which do not say,
hoe.

16 The grave, and the The shutting up of the womb.
womb, which is shut up: the earth is not satisfied with waters, and the fire
does not say hoe.

These similitudes seem all to tend to express the condition of the people of
the fourth generation before mentioned, whose insatiable desires can never be
satisfied, even as the things here spoken off, never say there is enough. In
the former of these verses Agur declares, that in the course of nature there
are four things which cannot be sufficed, and in the latter, he shows, what
these four things are. The two daughters of the horsleach cry, give, give,
that is to say, two things are not sufficed, but call for more and more, yea
three things, yea four things are not satisfied. This to be the meaning of
this sentence, may appear in that Agur both before and after observes the
number of four, and in that Amos uses a like phrase, when he says, for three
transgressions and for four, that is for four. The wise man then here rises
up to the number of four, as it were by certain steps and degrees. As if that
he should have said, the horsleach (is a worm keeping in the water, which
having once begun to suck man or beast, leaves not the skin until she be
full of blood,) has two forkes in her tongue wherewith she sucketh blood, which
in regard of their greedy insatiableness may be called, give, give, yea three
things there are which are not satisfied, yea four things which say not hoe.
The nature of the things them selves further may induce us thus to understand
this place. For first the grave in the Hebrew tongue has his name of craving,
and it is as it were a mouth, which never being filled, always cries no hoe.
Habakuk speaking of the insatiable covetousness of the Babilonian expresses
it by this comparison of the grave, saying, that he enlarges his soul as the
grave, Habacuk. 2.5.
and is as death, which is not satisfied, but gathers to him self all
nations, and assembleth to him self all people. Before in this book has also
been affirmed, Prou. 27.20.
that as the grave and destruction ca^ never be filled: so the eyes of man can
never be satisfied. In like sort again the barren womb is not satisfied, but
says, give, give. It pleases the Lord to lay upon some the cross of
barrenness, so that they have no children which may resemble them, or bear
their names, or be their heirs. These commonly take their estate heavily, and
as wonderfully in this respect they are cast down, so infinite is the desire,
wherewith they covet so great a blessing. The truth hereof may appear in
Rachell, who perceiving herself to be barren, came to Jacob her husband and
said, Gene. 30.1.
give me children, or else I dye. But the word here used of the shutting up of
the womb may be referred not only to those, which are barren, but which are
incontinent. And indeed such, as the Apostle Peter speaks, have eyes full of
adultery, 2. Pet. 2.14.
and which are not satisfied with sinning. Such were the Gentiles, who, as
Paul affirms of them, gave themselves to the working of all uncleanness
with greediness or insatiableness. A third thing, which is insatiable is the
earth, which being dry by reason of the heat of the Sun, and sandy, is not
satisfied with waters, but drinks up great showers of rain and floods, which
sometimes ouerflow the same, so that within a short time, no remnants of them
are to be seen. Psalm. 63.
David in this respect goind about to express the desire, which he had to be
in the Lords house, My soul (says he) thirsts after thee as the dry
lands. In the revelation of S. John it is likewise said, that when the Serpent
did cast water after the woman, which was covered with the Sun, the earth
opened her mouth, and drank up that river of water. The last insatiable thing
here mentioned is the fire, Which never says hoe. Every one knows, that a
little fire is able to consume whole woods, yea whole kingdoms and nations.
Therefore James speaking of the desolatio^ which the tongue works, says,
Behold how much fuel a little fire kindles. And before in this book, the
wrathful man in regard of the hurt which he does, has been resembled to fire
and burning coals. These properties and operations of the creatures are
natural, to wit, of fire to consume, and of the earth to drink up water. But
here they are set down, not only to make the works of God known unto us, or
to move us to consider the courses of nature, but to reprove sin, and namely
concupiscence, or an insatiable coveting of evil things. By the like pictures
does Jude reprove the hypocrites, when he calls them clouds without rain,
wandering stars, trees without fruit, and so forth. Yea by these comparisons,
the scripture often rebuleth the inordinate affections and dealings of men and
women carried about with manifold lusts, as the Apostle speaks, who in
general are insatiable as all these creatures, and in particular courses like
to every one of them.

17 The eye that mocketh his father, or despises the instruction of his
mother, the ravens of the valley shall pick out, and the The sons of the
Eagles.
young eagles shall eat up.

As in the verses immediately before set down, the estate of the last
generation has been at large painted out: so in this, the destiny and lot of
rebellious children and stubborn inferiors spoken of in the first generation,
is declared. In the former part of this sentence, the fault of disobedient
children is declared, which is, that they scorn their parents and despise
them. They are so far from honoring them, that they laugh at their
infirmities, transgress their commandments, strike them, or curse them, or
use some like misdemeanour toward them. Examples of this disobedience we have
in Esau, Cham, Absalom, and Adoniah, and Ismael. In the latter place the
punishment is showed, which shall fall on such rebels, their eyes shall be picked
out, and eaten up, that is, they shall be put to death, yea an infamous death,
according as the Lord wills in Ex. 21.17. For by the eye which is a part of
the body most dear, the whole person is meant, and by the digging out thereof,
the vengeance, which shall fall on the person, is noted. But moreover the
ravens shall dig out their eye, or the young eagles eat it up. As nothing is
more precious then the eye, so nothing more ravenous the^ the raven, or more
able to devour then the young lusty eagle full of strength and vigor. Here
then is showed, that the birds and fowls of heaven shall pray upon the carkases
of disobedient children, which shall not be buried, but want this honor: yea
and that those parts, which have been made the seats of scorning, and abused
as instruments of sin, shall principle be revenged and plagued. Indeed in this
life, all stubborn children are not plagued with this punishment, but the like
or the same befalls them in this world, or else in the world which is to
come, shall befall them. When troubles and wounds betide ungracious youths in
this life, surely these are the Lords ravens and eagles. And these sometimes
put out the right eye or take away the life. But when the foul feendes of hell
shall have leave to fly to and pick at their souls, and bodies, and when the
eagles of Satan shall be gathered about their carcases and feed on their eyes,
then will be the torment indeed: and then shall this threatening be fully
accomplished. O fearful punishment then of disobedience, yet answering unto
the offense. O miserable children, who shall fall into the hands of Satan, and
his instruments in such sort.

18 These three things are hid from me, yea these four I know not.

19 The way of an eagle in the air, the way of a Serpent on a Or recke.
stone, the way of a ship in the deep sea, and the way of a man in a maid.

20 So is the way of a whorish woman, she eats, afterward she wipeth her
mouth, then she says, I have not wrought iniquity.

Agur in these verses having relation to the second generation before spoken
of, by three similitudes declares that adulterers and adulteresses so
cunningly cover their folly, for the most part, as that hardly or not at all
they can be espied or convinced. When as the eagle flies in the air, she so
swiftly passes out of one place into another, that no sign of her passage can
possibly be discerned. Again, when as the Serpent crawleth on a rock, or
stone, he slideth away so quickly and smoothly, that no print of his body, or
proportion of any part thereof does remain. Finally when as the waters have
come together in the place, where a ship has sailed, no monument or note of
the passage of it does any where appear. In like sort, adulterers and
adulteresses so cunningly dissemble their wickedness, as that notwithstanding
they continually commit folly, yet they are not suspected, nor can be convinced
of unchastity. David so colored his wicked way with Bathsheba, by going about
to make Vriah drunk, and by causing him to be slain, as that even the way of
a Serpent on a rock might as soon have been traced out, as it. So likewise
Potiphers wife covered her wantonness with such cunning, as that she seemed
innocent to her husband, and Joseph in fault. Moreover, as here further is
showed, even as some servants, which have eaten a thing, which they should not,
can cleanly wipe their mouths, and make show that they never touched it: so
harlots, when they have been most unchaste, will seem to be free from all
vnchastirie. But albeit there neither is any apparent sign of unchastity in
the adulterer, which defiles the married or unmarried woman, nor yet in the
adulteress, which deals deceitfully with the guide of her youth: yet
fornicators and adulterers says the Apostle, the Lord will judge. Their
wickedness is hid from men, but the Lord knows their thoughts and their
words. The wise cannot trace them, but he can detect them and find them out.

21 Under three things the earth is moved, yea under four [which] it cannot
bear.

22 Under a servant, when he reigns, and a fool when he is filled with meat.

23 Under an hated [woman] when she is married, to conclude [vnder] an
handmaid, when she is made heir to her mistress.

As there are four secret things in the world: so are there four intolerable
burdens of the earth, even certain evil persons of the generation of those,
who have before been affirmed to have hautie eyes. One sort of these very
troublesome people are servants that reign, that is to say, men of a slavish
disposition, and of a low condition, advanced to high place, and as it were
beggars set on horsbacke. These will beat their fellow servants, and play the
tyrants, neither can the common people ordinarily well brook them. Another
sort of intolerable wretches are fools filled with meat, that is to say,
wicked men abounding in wealth, or faring deliciously every day. For these do
nothing but despise the poor, as Naball did David, deck themselves in brave
apparel, neigh after their neighbors wives, and over charge themselves with
surfeiting and drunkenness. A third sort of makebates, are wives hated for
their ill conditions or deserts, who cause much strife in the family, and
sometimes great hurly burly in the common wealth. The Jews as may appear in
diverse places of the scripture, Deuteronomy. 21.15.
and namely in Deuteronomie, had many of them, contrary to the law of God, two
wives. Now it fell out oftentimes that one of these was hated, the other loved.
Hence sprang much envy, much grief and strife, as may appear in Rahell and
Leah, and in Annt and Perimnah. Yea although the married woman be the only
wife of her husband: yet if she be despised in his eyes, she not only is vexed
her self: but molesteth him and the whole household besides. Now if she be also
put away by a bill of divorce, and marries another, this must needs be an
occasion of greater variance and mischief. The last sort of disturbers of
humane societies, are handmaides, which are made heirs to their mistresses,
that is to say, such maideseruants as succeed them in goods, favor, and place.
For these servants, when as once they are married to their masters, commonly
know not how to use their prosperity aright, but deal very insolently as Agar
did. Hence arise complaints of the servants, of the children, yea of the
husband himself oftentimes.

24 These be four small Of the earth.
things in the earth, nevertheless they are wise [yea] exceedingly wise:

25 The Pysmires, a people not strong, which yet prepare their meat in summer:

26 The hill Mise, a people not mighty, which yet make their houses in a rock.

27 The Locusts have no King, yet they Yet he proceeds.
all march on in a flock:

28 The spider catches hold with her hands: and is in Of a Prince.
princely palaces.

As sundry sorts of vices have their pictures in nature: so likewise have
sundry kinds of virtues, for to begin with wisdom the light and guide of all
virtues, there are sundry creatures which being prudent in their kinds, may
teach men in many points to be wiser then commonly they are. First the Ant a
poor silly worm, yet by an instinct of nature, given to labor and
forecasting, provides necessaries long aforehand. Not only philosophers
witness, but experience teaches, that she trudging and drudging up and down,
whilst yet the seed is abroad in the field in the summer time, and the weather
is fair, hoordeth up provision against the winter. Again, although she is but
a small and weak creature, yet does she carry grains sometimes even bigger
then her body. And now then what a shame were it for men, that the Ant should
toil in such sort for the getting of her provision, the Ant observe the season
of her advantage, the Ant foresee the state of times to to come: but they,
endued with reason, with learning, with Religion, neglect the gathering of the
food of their souls, let slip the opportunities of their best bargains about
matters of this life, or not forecast or prevent future dangers? Indeed some
are weak in body but if feebleness hinder not the ant from helping her
estate, why should it a man from releeuing his?

Secondly the hill mise, certain little beasts like partly to a mouse, partly
to a bear, whereof was great store in Siria, have their habitation in a rock.
Albeit they have no weapons to defend them selves with, nor strength of limbs:
yet this wit they have, to dig or find out holes in stony places, whereunto
to fly upon occasion, and wherein to lay their young ones safely. If the
contemptible mise have such wit in providing well for their own safety, as
also of their young ones: much more in men should this reason be found, as also
the means used by the^, to make their estate secure. This is to be done by
the^ principally by flying to God in prayer, by building on the rock Christ
Jesus, finally by seating them selves, where are the exercises of the word: But
secondly they may also, yea they ought to use the protection of Magistrates, the
help of friends, the advice of lawyers, to conclude whatsoever person or
thing, may be a refuge unto them against wrong or injury.

As concerning the locustes, whether they go forth to solace them selves, or
whether to destroy a country, this property they have, that continually they
keep company together, not only holding their standing places or observing
their opportunities of rising up and resting, but in all respects marching as
it were in battle array. These locustes are certain flies with long legs,
which by touching the corn burn it in part and devour the residue. Now by
reason of their flocking in such heaps it comes to pass, that although if
they were several alone or a sunder one by one, they might easily be
destroyed. yet being in multitudes, yea armies as it were, Exodus 10.
great hosts of men are not able to resist them, as appears in the Scripture.
When as the^ these creatures which are weak neither have any Captain to lead
them, thus join hand in hand, and live in concord, what a shame is it for men,
which have the word of God and rulers among them to be their guides, yet to be
so wonderfully divided as they are oftentimes, yea so infinitely drawn a
sunder, as that scant four or five shall be found in a great assembly professing
the same Gospel of Christ Jesus, who join in the same good cause, or hold the
same opinion, or are united by the same affections together? But behold (says
the Prophet) how good and pleasant a thing it is for brethran to dwell even
together: yea behold this I say in the Locusts.

Last of all the spider is a creature very contemptible, but her art does
greatly help her, and commend her. For she using her feet on both sides as
hands to work, spinneth so fine a thread, and frames so curious a web, that
she seems to build unto her self, and to inhabit not a poor or rude
cotage, but a Princely and glorious palace. Let us then learn by her example
this point of wisdom, to strive even to excel in some trade or gift of
mind. For the art will maintain the artificer, yea often the gift, which is
excellent, aduaunceth him which is therewith endued, unto an high place of
dignity in Church or common wealth, as may appear in the examples of Joseph,
Daniell, David, with diverse others mentioned in the Scripture. The spider is
not to be followed indeed in her venomous disposition, but in her art to
imitate her is a praise. Wherefore the virtuous woman is commended in the
chapter ensuing for setting her hands to the wherue, and her fingers to the
spindle. Before also it has been said in this book See thou a man, which is
diligent in his affairs, he shall stand before Princes, and not among mean
personages. It is a thing praise worthy to attain unto any mean faculty of
good things, or to stand in the second or third place among the virtuous.
Nevertheless, every Christian is to labor to be exact in his works, to
follow after spiritual gifts with a jealousy, finally to seek after such a
spirit of wisdom as was in Bezaleell and Aholiab.

29 These three things Do well in marching, do well in walking.
order well their going, yea these four things are comely in their pace.

30 An aged lion most valiant among the beasts, which retireth not back
forfeare of any.

31 [An horse] which has his loins girt up, Or a goat.
and a goat: and a king against whom Not to rise up against him.
none rises up.

As Agur in the former verses has showed us four schoolemaisters of wisdom:
so now he represents here unto our view, as many paternes of comeliness. The
first of these is the lion, which going to any place trembles not by the way
nor flies back, though he see the eliphant or the tiger or the bear, but
proceeds on forward with a valiant courage. The second is the horse, which
having his loins girt up, not only praunceth it gallantly, but courageously,
Job. 39.22.
and swiftly rushing into the battle as the Lord him self testifies in the
book of Job, goes not back at the sight of the sword, nor is terrified at
the rattling of the quiver, nor troubled at the shrill sound of the trumpet. The
third is the goat, who being the ringleader of the flock, not only walks
before the same, with a certain stateliness, but with cheerfulness, first,
in the sight of the rest, climeth up the craggie rocks and mountains. The
last is a king, against whom none rises up, or on whom a most honorable guard
of his officers attends, before whom the enemies quake, for whom the
subjects pray, unto whom all, that are under his jurisdiction, yield
obedience. Such a king carrying in him the courage of a lio^ fears not the
face of any person, nor cease for any danger to go forward in good actions.
Again girding up his loins as the horse he encountereth with his adversaries
and takes vengeance on them. To conclude imitating the goat in this respect,
he leads by his example the people committed to his charge unto all virtuous
actions and exercises of Religion. In these respects the Scriptures sometimes
compare the Monarchs of this world unto these beasts, as namely in the 7. and
8. of Daniell. But in as much as these patterns of comeliness are propounded
to this intent, to teach all sorts of men to deal orderly in matters, and to
walk seemelily in their calings, both Magistrates, Ministers, and private
persons are to learn hereby, to walk more orderly then usually they do.
Nevertheless every one is to take heed that he be not too stately, or lift up
him self against his neighbor, into which sin yet if any through infirmity
have fallen, he is to recover him self out of the same by following that
divine counsel, which is given in the verses following.

32 If thou have been foolish in lifting up thy self, or if thou have thought
[some euill] put thine hand on thy mouth.

33 For [as] the pressing of milk draws out the butter: and the wringing of
the nose draws out blood: so the pressing of anger draws out strife.

Those, who have been overtaken with anger, are herein exhorted not to sin
nor let, the sun go down upon their wrath. If thou have been foolish in
lifting up thy self, if by some contemptuous speech or boasting behavior thou
have bewrayed thy folly, or if thou have thought, yea if only thou have been
puffed up in mind, or conceived some mischief in thine heart, put thine hand to
thy mouth, be silent, do so no more, abstain from executing it, Common with
thine heart on thy bed, and be still. For as the pressing of milk draws out
butter, as the vehemency of stirring the cream causes it at last to take an
other nature, and the wringing of the nose draws out blood, as the rubbing of
the nostrels to much, causes blood to fall into the same: so the pressing of
anger draws out strife, to much provoking either of a mild or of an hasty
nature causes brawling, yea sometimes bloody blows. A notable example of the
truth hereof see in Asahell 2. Samuel. 2.21.22.

THE XXXI. CHAPTER.
1 A gathering together of the words of king Lemuell, wherewith his mother
instructed him.

THis chapter consists of two parts, the one the title, the other the
discourse it self. In the title, which is contained in this entrance thereof,
two persons are specified, the one, Lemuell, or Lemoel, the other, the mothe^
of this Lemuell. Solomon is called Lemuel, by taking away the first letter of
his name in Hebrew to wit Shin, and by adding to the last letter thereof the
word El, which signifies God. This name was given unto Solomon by his mother,
that thereby he might be put in mind, that as his parents had dedicated him to
the Lord, so the Lord had promised to be his father. The sentences set down in
this chapter, are called the words of king Lemuell, not for that they were
uttered by him, but for that they were committed by him to writing, when as now
he was a king. They are then the words not of Solomon but of Salomons mother,
but who she was, it remains now to be inquired. It is manifest, that the
mother of Lemuell was Beersheba, who indeed once fell most grievously, but
afterward unfeignedly repenting, she walked in the fear of the Lord, a
testimony whereof we have in that care which she had of informing her son
therein, which how notably she did, may appear in the precepts following in
this chapter.

2 What my son, and what o son of my womb, and what o son af my vows?

The title of this chapter being ended, the discourse it self follows, which
contains partly a preface, partly sundry precepts. The preface comprehended
in this verse, declares, how Bathsheba used three reasons, to persuade or
allure Solomon unto the receiving of her instructions. The first reason is
taken from the bond of nature, what my son? This argument may thus be
concluded, a son ought to obey his parents, thou art my son: thou ought
therefore to obey me. The second, is drawn from the right of desert. What o
son of my womb? Thus it may be framed, he which has been bought most
dearly, ought to obey most dutifully, thou have cost me much pain, thou
ought the^ with all reverence, to kearke^ to my voice. The third is derived
from the rule of piety or Religion, and what o son of my vows? It may thus
be made plain, he for whose welfare sacrifices have been offered and promises
made unto the Lord from time to time, is tied in conscience to obey that person
in lawful things, who has made and performed such solemn vows in his
behalf, thou art he for whom sacrifices have been offered, and I am she who for
has made such vows, conscience then binds thee to hear and regard my
precepts.

3 Give not thy strength unto women, nor thy vvayes to them who cause kings
to be destroyed.

The Preface being finished, certain precepts now follow, wherein Bathsheba
partly informs Solomon how to carry him self in the government of the
common wealth, and partly directs him as concerning the estate of a private
family. The former kind of instruction is of two sorts, the one showing what
vices Solomon is especially to shun, the other declaring what duties he is to
practice. The former vice from which Bathsheba disswadeth her son, is
fornication. Give not thy strength unto women, nor thy ways to them who cause
kings to be destroyed. See the root of this precept Deuteronomy. 17.6. The same kind
of speech. 1. Cor. 6.18.
In that she wills him not to yield his strength unto women, she shows that
fornication will not only dull his wits, but weaken the constitution of his
body. In that she calls strange women, See examples of the truth hereof in
Hamor and Sechem and in David.
those, who cause kings to be destroyed, she declares that they do much hurt
not only to the persons of Princes, but to their states and crowns also.

4 Far be it from kings (o Lemoel), far be it from kings, to bib in wine,
and from Princes The desire of.
to desire strong drink.

5 Lest Or he.
they drink and forget the decree, and change the judgment of any that are
afflicted.

6 Give ye strong drink unto him that is ready to perish, and wine unto them
that are bitter in heart.

7 Let him drink that he may forget his Or poverty.
affliction, and remember his misery no more.

The second vice from which Bathsheba disswadeth Solomon, is drunkenness,
whereof she speaks in these words. Far be it from Kings o Lemoel, etc. The
use of wine is not forbidden Princes in these words, See a precept of this
kind, Leuit. 10.9. and 1. Tim. 3.
but the abuse or immoderate use thereof, from which as private persons should
be far off, so especially magistrates. Great cause there is why rulers above
all other people should take heed of bibbing in wine, Lest they drink and
forget the decree etc: seeing otherwise they being ouershot, may so for the
time loose their wits, as that they neither can remember the written law, nor
discern the truth. Rather then, Give ye strong drink unto him that is ready
to perish, and wine unto them that are bitter in heart. In this verse is
declared, that strong drink which is poison to Princes, is a medicine to the
afflicted. The sense of it is this, reach out a large cup of comfortable drink
to that party, who by reason of famine or weakness, or weariness, is at
deaths door. Bestow also a good cup of wine, (which creature makes glad the
heart of man,) on him, who in consideration of his losses or crosses, is
swallowed up with extreme sorrow. Let him drink that he may forget his
affliction, and remember his misery no more. Let him, who by reason of some
outward adversity is ready to perish, take a plentiful draught of strong
drink, that being therewith refreshed, he may not think of the matter of his
affliction. Moreover, afford a large cup of wine to him who is inwardly
troubled in mind, that by this means the thorn of grief which pricketh his
heart, may wholly or in some part be pulled out. It is far from the intent of
the spirit of God, to allow excess or carowsing in any, neither does the
doctrine confirm or warrant the corrupt custom of offering strong drink
either to malefactors drawn to execution, or to sick persons laboring on
their deaths beds for life, at which time they ought to be most sober and
watchful. Only, these instructions tend to declare, that some, as namely
those who are in extreme adversity, cannot only bear a large quantity of
strong drink without hurt, but receive much good thereby, which being taken in
the same measure by some in prosperity or authority, would utterly overthrow
them, or make them unfit to follow their callings.

8 Open thy mouth for the dumme, in the cause of all the Sea this phrase. Psalm.
79.11.
children of destruction.

9 Open thy mouth, judge righteously, and plead the cause of the afflicted and
the poor.

The virtue which Bathsheba would have her son especially to remember in the
course of his government, is here specified and commended by her unto him. See
Exo. 22.23. Ier. 23.6. Before. 24.10.11.
Open thy mouth for the dumme, speak boldly in the behalf of the oppressed,
who because they cannot or dare not plead for themselves, may well be called
dumme. In the cause of all the children of destruction. Maintain the cause of
all who are wronged, neither only of those who are unjustly pursued, but of
those who deserving no such matter, are condemned or near to be executed. Open
thy mouth, judge righteously, etc, minister justice courageously and
indifferently to every one, but especially maintain the cause of the
fatherless, widow, stranger, and poor person.

10 Who shall find a virtuous woman? for her price is far above the pearl.

Bathsheba comes now to describe and commend a good huswife. Her most rare
excellency is showed in this verse. By demanding the question she declares,
that many find bewtifull and rich women, but few a good or godly wife, who is a
special gift of God. By comparing a virtuous woman with pearls, she
insinuates that she is not only a rare but an excellent blessing of the Lord.
For it is well known, that precious stones or pearls, are in great account
among all people. Moses praises the rivers of paradise by the precious stones
which therein are found. John resembles the pillars of heaven unto precious
stones, and the gates thereof unto pearls. In the garments of Aaron the Lord
would have diverse precious stones placed, to the end they might be most
precious and glorious. Thus much then here is showed, that an honest matrone is
a singular jewel, and the glory of a family.

The heart of her husband trusts in her, and he shall have no need of spoil.

12 She will do him good and not evil, all the days of her life.

Herein is showed, how the virtuous woman behaueth her self toward her
husband, who is the chief in the family, or among those with whom she is
conversant. The heart of her husband trusts in her. Her husband whether he be
absent or present, never doubts either of her chastity, or of her secrecy,
or of her care in looking to her family. And he shall have no need of spoil.
Moreover, he shall not want any necessaries, or through poverty be compelled
to rob or spoil abroad, because this good matrone will fill his house with
plenty of all things needful or delightsome. She will do him good and not
evil, all the days of her life. The virtuous wife is constant in her love
toward her husband. In youth, in age, in prosperity, in adversity, in
sickness, in health, she does what good she ca^ unto him, in his body, his
soul, and his estate. She provides such food as may nourish him, she stirs
him up to serve God, she saves his goods as much as is possible. She lowreth
not on him with her looks, she crosses him not in her words, she vexes him
not by her deeds. If she know any thing which will please or profit him, about
that she goes with all speed. If she perceives ought that will offend or hurt
him, that she auoydeth and shunneth with all care.

13 She seeks woole and flax, and works it chearefully with her hands.

The labor wherein this good huswife exercises her self, is specified in
this sentence. She seeks woole and flax, she does occupy her self in those
works, which as they are proper to her sex, so are they profitable for her
family, in as much as woole and flax being trimmed and perfected, serve to
make couerings and cloathings. And works it chearefully with her hands. She
not only prepares the matter of work, but labors her self with a delight
and courage.

14 She is like the ships of merchants, she brings her food from a far.

Herein the painfulnesse and providence of the virtuous woman is painted out by
a very fit similitude. As then merchants ships carrying forth some one
commodity to foreign countries, return thence bringing home sundry other for
it; so she sending out or selling her cloth, therewith buyeth corn, oil, and
spices, and by her wisdom brings into her house, the things which growing
in other shires or countries came from far. Thus she is fraught as full of
necessary provision, as any vessel on the sea is with wares.

15 And she rises vvhiles it is yet night, and gives the portion to her
household, and the Or according to some the task.
ordinary to her maids.

First here, the watchfulness of the good matrone is commended. She rises
whilst it is yet night. She is stirring betimes in the morning even before the
light, being unlike to the nice dames of these days, This vigilancie is often
commended in the Saints, as in Abraham, Genesis 22. and in Joshua. Ios. 3.
who soke in their beds till noone oftentimes. Secondly, her humanity or
equity toward her servant, is praised. She gives the portion to her
household, and the ordinary to her maids. Albeit she rayseth up her seruannts
betimes to work, yet she is not cruel toward them, but gives them their
food in due season. To this duty householders are exhorted 1. Tim. 5. Col 4.1.
See Genesis 16.1. 1. Chro. 16. for proof hereof.
Householders and rulers in old time did not give their servants so much food
as they would devour, but they gave to every one a certain portion of bread
and meat.

16 She considers a field and gets it, and with the fruit of her hands
she planteth a vyneyard.

Now Bathsheba declares, how a good houswife increases her substance by all
good means. She considers a field and gets it. She by her diligent labor
having gotten money or money worth, after due consideration of every thing,
bargaineth for a parcel of ground, whereby great commodity may redounde unto
her, in as much as land being well tilled, brings forth corn and much good
fruit. And with the fruit of her hand she planteth a vyneyard. Moreover, by the
gain of her labor she purchases a vineyard, which being a precious
possession, she sets it with most choice plants. She is then unlike to those
Iezabels who by wicked means draw unto them selves or their husbands, 1.
Kings. 21.
poor men's fields and vineyards.

17 She girdeth her loins with strength, and strengthens her arms.

Herein is showed, after what sort the painful wife follows her business.
She girdeth her loins with strength, etc. As one ready to run a race, or to
wrestle with a champion, she flies about her work, and sets on it with a
courage. Her garments hang not loose about her, but she tucketh the^ up that
she may be the more nimble. She is then unlike to many nice dames, who will set
their finger to no work, nor scant stir about the house.

18 She tastes that her merchandise is good, her candle is not put out in the
night season.

As before the virtuous woman has been commended for her early rising, so now
she is praised, for her late sitting up about her work. She tastes that her
merchandise is good, she finds by experience, that her selling of cloth is
profitable, her candle is not put out in the night season, for this cause she
sits up late at her work, being loath to loose any time.

19 She puts her hands to the wheel, and her hands handle the spindle.

As before this painful matrone was brought in dressing and carding her woole
and flax, so now she is presented to our view, spinning and perfecting the
same. This work is most agreeable to that sex, most needful for the family,
and may be followed at all times, for which causes it is not by women to be
neglected.

20 She opens the palm of her hand to the poor, and stretches out her
hands to the needy.

The virtuous matrone is commended now for her liberality. So should all do.
Ephe. 4. So did Abigail. 1. Sam. 25. and Dorcas Act. 9.
She opens the palm of her hand to the poor, She gives plentifully to
those who want, and stretches out her hands to the needy. Moreover, she
franckly reaches out her alms to those who are in necessity. She is then
unlike to those saving cribs among us now a days, who will rather see the
poor members of Christ perish then bestow a penny on them.

21 She fears no hurt to her family thorough the snow, for all her family
is clothed with double.

The wise matrone is here praised for her forecast. She fears no hurt to her
family, etc. she provides aforehand shift of warm and thick clothes for all
under her roof or government, that they may be harnessed against the extreme
cold of winter.

22 She makes her self Or couerlit^.
carpets, fine linen and purple is her array.

Now, the good huswife is commended, for her furnishing of her self with
ornaments meet for her degree. She makes her self carpets, etc. Of the
woole and flax which she got at the beginning, she works and prepares store
of comely couerings for board and bed, and garments for her body. Fine linen
and purple were the richest attire in ancient times, as may appear in that it
is said of the rich man in the Gospel, that he was clothed in purple and fine
linen. God disaloweth not in women decent apparel, no nor rich attire, so that
they keep them selves within their degrees, and be of a lowly mind. But if
they be proud or love gay garments, God will give them a sackcloth in steed of
a silk gown, Esaias. 3.
and rags in steed of their starched and painted ruffes.

23 Her husband is known in the gates, when he sits with the elders of the
land.

The praise of the virtuous matrone is herein enlarged, by the care which she
has of providing comely apparel and rich ornaments for her husband. Her
husband is known in the gates, etc. her husband also shines as a star in
those costly and curious robes, which she by her cunning has made for him, in
regard whereof also he is the more noted, spoken off, and reverenced in the
place of judgment, where he sits on the bench with the other rulers of the
country. For in old time, women especially were exercised in making and
working of garments, who have a gift given them by the Lord that way, so that
oftentimes they excel men in needle works. In old times also, judgments and
contracts were exercised and kept, Ruth. 4.1. Genesis 23.18. 2. Kings 7.17.
not in the market place as among us; but in the gates of towns or cities, as
appears in diverse places of the Scripture.

24 She makes Or lawne, or cambricke.
sheets and sells them, and gives girdles to the merchants.

Bathsheba now reports, that the good houswife co^te^teth not her self only,
with preparing of garments for the use of her servants, for her own use, and
for her husbands use, but that she makes comely ornaments to sell, to the end
she may enrich her estate. The Hebrew word translated sheets, does not only
signify any such fine linen as lies on the bed, but any linen vesture
which men wear, or fine cloth wherein the body is enwrapped when the life is
departed out of it. Iud. 14.13.
This is then a thing praiseworthy in householders, and namely in the
mistresses of families, when they will not only have a care to save, but set to
their hand to get a penie as we say.

25 Strength and honor is her clothing, and she laugheth at times to come.

The virtuous woman is herein affirmed to be inwardly decked with sundry gifts
of the holy Ghost, See like sayings 1. Tim. 2.9. ^-Pet. 3.3. See the same
phrase in the same sense, Psalm. 93.1.
as with garments. Strength and honor is her clothing, courage or patience,
together with comely behavior, consisting in sobriety, chastity, and such
like virtues, are as it were her spiritual apparel. She endures all labors
and adversities constantly and without shrinking. Again, she carries her
self in all meekness, modesty, See this phrase in this sense, Job. ^9.10.25.
and as it were with a grace in all her actions. And she laugheth at times to
come, she is secure as concerning the losses or crosses which in time to come
may befall her. She fears not the danger of child bearing, or death, or the
day of judgment. Yea on the contrary side, she rejoices to think, what
rewards of her pains she shall receive in the end. Even as the^ a valiant
soldier putting on him strong and bright harness, marches boldly in the
field, not fearing the spear nor sword of the adversary: so she albeit a
woman, yet taking to her the courage of a man, yea being armed with the whole
armor of God, is patient in enduring present afflictions, and secure as
touching troubles to come. Let then Christian women deck them selves with
modesty and sobriety, rather then with frizled hair, or gold, or pearls, or
costly attire. Let them be afraid of no terror, considering, that as if they
continue in the faith and in sobriety, they shall be saved even in the state
of bearing of children, so it is a thing praiseworthie in them, who by
constitution of body are weak, and by disposition of mind timorous, to be so
sanctified by grace and fortified by Gods spirit, as to endure all things to
the glory of God, and to fear nothing which God has forbidden to fear.

26 She opens her mouth in wisdom, and the law of grace is in her tongue.

See examples in Abigaile, Sarah, Hester, the Queen of Sheba Mary, Elizabeth
and Priscilla.
The virtue whereby in this verse the holy matrone is praised, is the right
guiding of her speech. She opens her mouth in wisdom, she talks not
rashly, vndiscrretly, or unseasonably of matters, but prudently and soberly.
And the law of grace is in her tongue. Moreover, she speaks not of toys or
of trifles, but of faith, of repentance, of the fear of God, of such other
duties and points of religion. This is that whereof the Apostle Paul speaks,
when in his Epistle to Titus he requires of Christian matrones, that they
instruct the younger unto sobriety, to be lovers of their husbands, and lovers
of their children. Tit. 2.3.
There are many of this sex, who are so far off from uttering gracious or
godly speeches, that as if that Satan reigned in their tongues, they
continually power out blasphemies, lies, and evil words of all sorts. But some
again there are, who abstain from such corrupt communication, yea who take
delight in talking of matters of religion, but yet howsoever the law of grace
is in their tongues, yet they open not their mouths in wisdom. For they
talk of good things without a grace, or otherwise then becomes them, yea they
do nothing almost but talk, not being able to keep silence when they should.

27 She ouerseeth the ways of her household, and eats not the bread of
idleness.

The virtuous matrone is in these words further commended for her faithful
discharging of her duty in her calling and house. See a precept to this
intent. 1. Ti. 5.14.
She ouerseeth the ways of her household, as her mouth is seasoned with grace,
so her eyes are watchful to see what every one does, and to look that
nothing be lost which ought to be saved. She is resembled here unto one, who
standing in his watch, moves his eyes hither and thither to see who is coming
and who is going. But here also this is to be observed, that she goes not
about to spy what is done in other men's houses, but that she ouerseeth her
own. Moreover, as is added, She eats not the bread of idleness. Psalm. 127.
She is not an idle beholder of the ways of her family, but she sets her
hand to labor her self among the rest. Thus she eats not the bread, for
which she never took pains, but the food of labor or travail as the prophet
speaks in the psalm. And surely he that will not labor, 2 Thessalonians. 3.
ought not to eat.

28 Her children rise up and call her blessed: her husband also praises her,
saying,

29 Many Or daughters.
women have done virtuously, but thou surmountest them all.

30 Favor is deceitful, and beauty is vain, a woman that fears the Lord,
she shall be praised.

31 Give her of the fruits of her hands, and let her works praise her in the
gates.

In this conclusion of the Chapter, Bathsheba declares, that the virtuous
matrone of whom she has spoken all this while, gets exceeding praise unto
her self, by her wise governing of her house. Her children rise up and call
her blessed, her sons and daughters come up to preferment and honor, by
reason that they have been well brought up by her. Moreover, they testify in
word and deed, that their mother has not neglected them, nor let them done
what they list in their youth, but brought them up in the fear of God and good
qualities, for which cause they extol her. On the contrary side, many children
now adays curse their mothers, because they cockered and spoiled them when
they were young, and indeed well may they, seeing for want of good education in
tender years, they come in elder age to misery and shame. Her husband also
praises her saying, neither only do the children of the godly matrone
commend her, but her husband also praises her, concluding her in thought and
speech, to be the only paragon of the world. Many women have done vertuosly,
but thou surmountest them all. To the end that the husband of this virtuous
wife, may highly extol her according to her desert, herein he compares her
with other women, who have very well discharged their duties, but not so
worthily as she. Many women etc. Thou surpassest even the most excellent
matrones that ever lived. Favor is deceitful and beauty is vain, a woman
that fears the Lord, she shall be praised. Now, the loving husband to the
end that he may show, that a virtuous woman is only and truly worthy to be
praised, compares her with those, whom the multitude is wont most to esteem
and commend. Favor is deceitful, comeliness of personage or an outward
grace, is as a shadow which has no substance. Moreover, it causes men
oftentimes to go astraie. Finally, under it, many vices are hid. For diverse
that have well favored countenances, have ill favored conditions. Beauty is
also vain. A good color or a good complexion, is but a fading flower, which
by sickness, sorrow, age, and death, withers and decaieth. Indeed these two
things, are of themselves good things, for the which sundry women in the
scripture are praised, As Sarah, Genesis 12, Rebecca, Gen 24. Rachel, Genesis 29.
Abigail. 1. Sam. 2* 5. Hester, Hest. 2. See the same judgment of the Spirit of
God. 1. Pet. 33. 1. Tim. ^.9. Such women were Nanna, Debora. Marie, and
Elizabeth.
but they are but frail good things, and inferior to the fear of God. For
this cause it is further more said, That, a woman that fears the Lord, she
shall be praised. The garland of praise is only to be set on her head, who
believes in God, repents of her sins, practices good works, and walks
faithfully in her calling. Give her of the fruits of her hands, and let her
works praise her in the gates.

In this last verse, husbands are provoked to recompense the pains of a
virtuous wife with due rewards. Give her of the fruits of her hands, eue^ as in
games and conflicts, the conquerers are both rewarded with some price, and
praised openly in some public assembly by a solemn proclamation: so let the
virtuous matrone hitherto spoken off, enjoy and receive necessaries and worldly
goods, which she has gotten with her own hands, and let her be commended,
not in corners alone, but in public places. Diverse husbands are so wicked and
dogged to their wives, that although they be not only well given, but so
painful and gainful in their callings, that they even by their industry
maintain all; yet they keep them oftentimes without a penny in their purse,
neither will they afford them a good word. But how so ever such miserable
wretches deal thus hardly with their faithful and painful yokefellowes, yet
such virtuous women as dutifully walk in their callings, shall be commended
always by the good, and rewarded by God himself. But (to conclude this point
and therewith this treatise) the praise of a virtuous woman is here so largely
set down, and so exactly handled, not only to the end that Solomon might be
directed in the choice of his wife, but that the price of such a jewel, being
made known to all, the goodness of the Lord in giving such an helper to man,
may appear the more clearly, such an helper I say, as may not only greatly
further him in the affairs of this life, but as a fellow heir of glory, go
hand in hand with him unto heaven, there to remain for ever with Christ, in
whom is neither male nor female, who is the head of man as man is the head of
the woman, but the head of Christ is God even the Father, to whom with the
Son, and the Spirit, three incomprehensible persons in one infinite essence,
be all praise and glory, both now and for evermore. Amen. Amen.

FINIS.
Faults escaped.
Page 7. line 23. [My son] is left out. p. 19. l. 5. judgment is left out. p.
24. l. 10. read them for it. p. 34. l. 2. read or for of. p. 51. l. 21.22. one
verse is made two. p. 79. l. 3. to is left out. p. 88. l. 18. read godly for
podly. p. 105. l. 12. read in their weldoing, not for their weldoing. p. 107.
l. 11. read acceptable. Here the exposition of the 22. verse is left out. p.
109. read the 11. 12. and 13. line in the English letter, which are not the
text but the paraphrase. p. 119. l. 19. forth is left out. p. 120. l. 13.
read him self. p. 123. l. 18. not is left out. p. 125. l. 12. read of for
or. p. 122. the exposition of the second part of the 16. verse is left out. In
the same page l. 32. for rich read just. p. 130 l. 3. read as a tree. p. 131
l. 8. read and spread p. 143. l. 31. read to avoid. p. 135. l. 10. read a
small stock well gotten. p. 137. l. 9. read desired. p. 141. l. 19. read
endured. p. 141 l. 29. read Lord for Lot. p. 142. l. 17. read a rude. p. 142.
l. 23. read the goldsmith uses. p. 143. l. 27. read beseems not. p. 146 l.
1. read not to render. p. 155. l. 31. read noted it. p. 158. l. 18. read not
of but or. p. 161. l. 19. for notify read notice. p. 167 l. 33* leave out in.
p. 169. l. 4. leave out to. p. 189. l. 25. for him read himself. p. 251. l.
22. with is left out p. 209 l. 17. read as for all. p. 252. l. 1. read place
for expectation. 295. l. 3. which is left out.

Gentle reader, seeing (as Augustine truly witnesses) a small error, yea a
point out of his place, does oftentimes of a catholic sentence, make an
heretical, and corrupt or darken the sense of the Author, diverse faults
having through want of help, escaped in the printing of this book, let me
entreat thee to interpret all things into the best part.

Imprinted at London by Richard Field for Robert Dexter, dwelling in Paul's
church yard at the sign of the Brazen serpent. 1592.

printer's or publisher's device DEVS IMPERAT ASTRIS




