LONDONS Mourning garment, or Funeral Tears: worn and shed for the death of
her wealthy Citizens, and other her inhabitants.

To which is added, a zealous and fervent Prayer, with a true relation how many
have dyed of all diseases, in every particular parish within London, the
Liberties, and out parishes near adjoining from the 14 of July 1603. to the 17
of November. following.

At London printed by Raph Blower. 1603.

To the Right Worshipful, Sir John Swinnerton Knight: one of the worshipful
Aldermen, of the honorable City of London: VV. M. wishes Earths Happiness, and
Heavens Blessedness.
RIght Worshipful and grave Senator: if my knowledge and learning, were
answerable to my good will and affection: this my poor labor now mourning in
a sable Weed, should be as great and precious, as to the contrary it is weak,
and slender. And knowing that the Virtuous mind, respects not so much the
valewe of the gift, as the good will of the giver, emboldeneth me to present
this small Pamphlet to your Worships view; most humbly craving pardon for my
rash attempt, which if to your wonted clemmencie I do obtain. I shall liken
my self to a poor Debtor owing much, freely forgiven of all his large
reckonings and dangerous accounts, and bound in duty to pray for your Worships
long life, with increase of honor.

Your Worships at Command, WILLIAM MVGGINS

Londons mourning garment, and Funeral Tears.
With heavy heart, and sighs of inward Cares,
With wringing hands^ explayning sorrows woe,
With blubbered cheeks, bedewde with trickling tears
With mind oppressed lamenting griefs that flow,
London lament, and all thy losses show:
What al? nay some, all were too much to tell,
The learned Homer could not pen it well.
Ay me poor London, which of late did flourish,
With springing MARCH, the tidings of a King:
And APRIL showers, my blossoms so did nourishe,
That I in MAY, was calde a famous thing,
Yea Towns and Cities did my glory ring:
Nay through the world my golden fame so grew,
That Princes high, crossed Seas, my seat to view.
And like to AGAMEMNONS gallant train,
Throughout my streets, with stately steps did go,
Where them with welcomes, I did entertain;
Pleasing their liking, with each several show,
Where they in me, much treasure did bestow,
Honoring the Church with Prayers, the Change with gold,
Where Princes bought, and beauteous Virgins sold.
To add more glory to my prosperous state,
My Sovereign Lord, most high and mighty King,
Made often repair, both Moining, Eu'en and late,
To me both gainefull, and a pleasant thing:
My heart was glad, my voice SOL, FA, did sing,
My head did muse, not struck with sorrows sad,
But how to make, my crowned Sovereign glad.
And as a Bryde, against her Nuptial day,
Does deck her self, with fair and rich attire,
Accompanide with Damsells fresh and gay,
To plight her faith, to him she did desire
Even so did I with zeal as hot as fire.
Prepare my self against this day of joy,
To give him welcome, with VIVE LE ROYE.
My Magistrates were all so ready pressed
In skarlet rich, this potent Prince to greet:
My wealthy Freemen also wrought their best,
Preparing Pageants in each famous street^
My Marchant-strangers labored hands and feet,
And scattered coin, like IVPITERS showers of Gold,
Hoping with joy this CAESAR to behold.
And as those men the wealthiest in my Bower,
Was never sparing in this good intent,
So did my Artisauts with all their power,
For love or gain, to work were ready bent.
PIGMALION forth his skillful Caruers sent?
Cunning APPELLES with his pencill drew
Prospectious strange, for King and Peers to veiw.
But oh, a sudden qualme does cross my heart
twixt cup and lip are dangers often we see,
Unwelcome death approaches with his dart,
Yelping, oh, LONDON, thou must yield to me:
I must hau^ roots and branches for my fee.
The fruits full ripe and blossoms that might grow
Are mine, not thine, the Fates decreed it so.
Drowned in deep seas (poor Lady) thus I lie,
Unless some speedy help a comfort yield:
Is there no wife nor widow that will hye,
And reach a hand that has some sorrows felt,
My griefs are more then I my self can welde,
Help some good woman with your soules-sigh deep,
For you are tender hearted and can weep.
What none? nay, then I see the Proverb old is true,
The widows care is st^dious where to love,
Since women are so fickle, men to you,
LONDON laments, will ye her plaints remove.
I hear no Echo; men like women prove,
VVidowers for wives, widows for husbands seek,
Before the tears are dried from their cheeks.
To children then I will my sorrows show,
Whole Parent^ lately in the grave were laid;
Their hearts with sighs will cause fresh tears to flow,
And reach a hand for sorrowing LONDONS aid.
Come children mourn, I cry but am denayde,
Their Parents riches so inflames their breast,
That they long since did wish them at their rest.
Where, or to whom, may I my voice set forth?
Men mourn for men, where friendship long has bred:
Fie no (good Lady) there is found small troth,
The living Friend deceiues the friend that is dead,
Robbing his children with a subtle head:
By reason he executor, made the drown
By wresting Law, the riches are his own.
Oh (helpless Lady) whither shall I ^lye,
To find true mourners in this sad lament?
To aged people; no, their heads are dry,
They cannot weep, long since their tears were spent:
To middle age? (alas) their wits are bent
To purchase lands and livings for their heirs,
Or by long life, ^o gain which other spares.
The loving servant may yet help at need,
That now has lost his Master and his stay,
Sending forth sithings till the heart does bleed:
Oh, LONDON, thou in vain to him do pray,
His power and wits he bends another way:
His Masters custom, shop, and trade to get,
Is all the tears, the blithe young man can let.
Is there none then, that will take Londons part?
And help to sing, a welcome unto woe?
Is there none found, that feels a present smart?
Nor none a live, that can c^use Tears to flow?
If any be? then freely them bestow.
Two mourn together, swage e^h others grief,
Weep on a while, and I will be the chief.
I hear no answer yet in these estates,
Let me but study, where, and whom to seek,
Oh, now I have bethought me, come on mates,
For you and I, must mourn it by the week:
And never will, new tears, be long to seeke^
For Parents love, unto their Children dear,
In judgment sound, nothing can come more near.
The love of Parents, are like Graftes that grow,
Ever increasing, till it prove a tree:
The love of Children, like the melting Snow,
Ever decreasing, till an end there be,
Daily experience, proves this true we see,
Love to the Children, evermore dependes:
But to the Parents, seldom re-discendes.
And now I have, with travel, grief and pain,
Found forth two mourners, that will Agents be:
Choose which of us, shall settle to complain,
Or if you will, leau^ all the chardge to me:
Only I with you, to abandon glee.
And to my voice, prepare your glowing Ears,
With sighs and groans, and sometimes scalding Tears.
And if to high my warbling notes ascendes,
Judge me not bold but zealous in my love:
If that too low, think that with sigh^s for friends,
My voice is hoarse, yet I again will prove,
The utmost power, I can for to remove,
Your too forgetful, sorrows which are dry,
And place them now, a fresh in memory,
Art thou a Father, or a Mother dear?
Had thou a Son, or Daughter of thy side:
Were not their voice, sweet music in thy Ear,
Or from their smiles, could thou thy countnance hide.
Nay, were they not, the glories of thy pride?
I doubt too much, thy love on them were set,
That whilst thou live, thou can not them forget.
Remember well, you Dames of London City,
As for you men, i will leave you for a while,
Because small pains, deserves the lesser pity,
And you are stronger, sorrows to begyle:
A space we will, your company exile,
And bid you farewell, till another day,
When time and place, will give you cause of stay.
And now my hearts, old Widows and young wives,
You that in silence, sit so sad and mute:
You that wring hands, as weary of your lives,
Hear London speak, she will express your suite.
I know your sighs, is for your tender fruit.
Fruit in the budde, in blossom ripe and grown,
All dear to you, now death has made his own.
And as the greedy Wolf, from harmeles Ewes,
Robbs them of Lambs, sucking their tender Tett:
And in his Rigor, no compassion shows,
But gormondizing, kills them for his meat.
Even so deaths fury, now is grown so great,
The tender Lamb, will not his fury stay.
Both Lambs and Ewes, he swalowes for his pray.
Witness I ca^, poor LONDON for my part,
What palefac't Death, within five Months has wrought^
Seven hundred Widows, wounded to the Heart,
With their sweet Babes, which they full dearly bought^
Some dead newborn, some never forth were brought,
You Mothers weep, if ever you bore any,
To think how sore, Death did perplexe so many.
Not yet content, he Rages up and down,
And secretly, his heavy visage shows:
In every street, and corner of the Town,
Emptyeing whole hou^es, soon whereas he goes,
Taking away, both old and young G^d knows,
The weeping Mother, and the Infant clear,
The loving Brother, and the Sister dear.
Oh, mothers sigh, sit and shed tears a while,
Expel your idle pleasures, think on woes:
Make not so much as countenance of a smile
But with down looks, which inward sorrow shows,
And now a fresh, remember all your throws,
Your g^ipes your panges, your bodies pincht with pain,
As if this instant, you did them sustain
Let not so much, forgotten be of you,
As the least qualme, that then your hearts oppressed:
No nor the smallest, dolor did ensue,
As heavy wincks and too too little rest;
Remember al, the sorrows of thy breast,
Which in the bre^ding, bearing and delivery,
You did endure, with pain yet willing
Again bethink you, at that instant hour,
The little diff^r^nce, was twixt li^e and death:
When as the insant, with his naked power,
Labored for life, to have his right^ull birth,
And with the sickly, Mother gaspt for breath,
The one ne^e dead, as nigh to death the other,
Sore to the babe, worse Travel for the Mother.
If any Mother, can forget this smart,
Her for a woman, I will never take:
And out of Londons, favor may she part,
And all such brutish, strumpets for her sake:
For such light hus-wiues, I a wish will make,
That never any, may approach my City,
Ever to want, and no heart them to pity.
And now ^eturne I, to you honest wives,
Who grieuing sits, and sighing send forth Tears,
Which to your Husbands, live chaste and true lives,
And with your Children, passes forth your years,
To you that Londons, Lamentations hears.
And are true parteners, in my pla^nts and mones,
Experience shows it, by your inward gro^es.
The Child newborn, the Mother some de^le well
Are all the griefs, and sorrows at an end:
No cares and troubles, yet I have to tell,
Though Child be swath'de, and sickly Mother mende,
The feeble Infant, many a fret does send.
Which grieves the Mother, till she weep again,
To hear and see, the Infant in such pain.
And with her seeble, hand and weakly strength,
She plays and d^llyes, for the babyes good:
And to her milke-white, breasts does lay at length
The pretty fool, who learnes to take his food.
His only means, to nourish life and blood,
He fed^, she paynd, he draws, poor Mother yields,
Whose loving breasts both shutes and prickings feels,
And when the Babe does gather strength a maine,
Most strongly laboring at his mothers dugge.
She patiently endures all the pain,
Su^fering his lipp^s her nipple still to lugge,
And with her arms most closely does it hug,
As she should say, draw child and spare not me,
My breasts are thine, I feel no pain with thee.
Though that poor heart her breast does ache full sore,
And inwardly sell prickings she indures,
Till eyes gush tears, and lips reach kisses store;
Which in true mothers gladsome joys procures,
And to more a^dent love them still allures:
That toares and kisses greet the Babe together,
Like to sunshine when it is dropping weather,
Ymmagin here, the pretty Lamb does cry,
The Mother strong, and times of Custom past:
Will, she then leave it, to the worlds broad Eye,
No, whilst her life, and vital powers last,
The Mothers love, to Child is fixte so fast.
She stills it straight, and lays it to her breast,
With kisses more, then VENUS could digest
And with her Arms, she heaues it high and low,
As if a cradle, it sweet fool lay in:
Doubt you not to, she kisses did bestow,
And if it smile, a fresh she does begin.
On pretty look, a hundred kisses win
My more then sweet, unto her Child she says,
I would not for, a Kingdom wish thy Death.
Now is her mind, full straight with inward ioy^
As if all things, she thought should come to pass:
Uttering forth Sighs, unto her pretty boy,
Shall Death have thee, and lay thee in the grass,
I Will rather go, to Earth from whence I was,
Fell Death go seek, for crooked age and old,
My Child is fair, unfitting for the molde.
I hope to see, more comfort and more joy,
Of this sweet Babe, which cost my life almost:
I pray thee grimme Death, do not him annoy,
Go get thee further, to some other Coast.
To kill an Infant gives small cause of boast.
There Is many living, that would gladly dye,
Take them away, but spare my Child and I.
Chaste LONDON wiues^ me thinks I see you all,
Each several Mother, hau^ng greefes to show,
And with your greefes, I see the Tears do fall,
The only Physic, women can bestow,
Oh, that I could, but ease your heart sick woe,
LONDON would spare, no labor cost not time,
To wipe the water, from your blubbered Eyes.
But I a skillful Surgeons part will play,
First search the sore, then minister things meet:
Unto your memories, I your plants will lay,
Causing a fresh your heavy eyes to greet.
Then gentler salues, I mean persuasions sweet;
This is the surgery wounded LONDON lays
To all her Patients, that her hests obayes.
One tender mother cries loud and shrill,
Wringing her hands, my children both are dead:
Sweet loving Henry, and my eldest gyrle,
Ah Besse, my wench thou had thy mother sped
With sorrows, that will never from my head.
Thy forward wit to learning and to awe,
A sweeter daughter never woman saw.
Thy flaxen hair, thy color red and white,
Thy years full ten, thy body straight and tall,
Thy countnance smilling, neither sad nor light,
Thy pleasant eyes, thy hands with fingers small,
Thy manners mild, thy reading best of all,
With needle pregnant, as thy Sampler shows,
Patient in death like sucking Lamb she goes^
My hopes were that I might have kept thy life
To see more years, and be a beutious Maid;
To see thee matched, and be a LONDON wife,
To see thy childe-bed, and be safely laid,
To see thy children in the street have playde:
To cheer my age, as should a loving daughter,
But thou art gone, and I must follow after.
My little HENRY, oh, that pretty fool;
That often has made my sorrowing heart full glad,
His words were Mamma: sit, here is a stool,
Some bread and butter I have nothing had;
I Will busse you well, (good Mamma) be not sad,
Up on cock-high, I will sit in your lap,
Where often (poor sweeting) he has caught a nappe.
And if sometimes, he heard his Father chide,
As household words, may pass twixt man and wife:
Unto my Husband, presently he hyed
As he should say, I will appease the strife;
And with his Childish ^hirth, and pleasvres rise.
Abates the heat, and makes us both to joy:
To see such nature, in the little Boy.
But Death, oh Death, that hater of my wealth
Has slain my D^ughter, and my little Son:
Both of them proppes, unto my wished health
Both to have kept. I would barefoote have run:
Fell ATROPOS, her fatal stroke has done;
With the eternal. I believe they rest,
Oh, happy Babes, for ever they are blessed.
Step after Step, I see an other come,
Casting her hands, abroad, as she were wood:
Seeming to tell a heavy tale to some,
But silly Dame, thou art not understood;
Speak mildely, lowly, not with chafing blood:
For hasty speech, has seldom reason shown,
When soft deliverance, makes the matter known.
I am a Widow poor, Christ show me pity,
Feeble and weak of years, three score and ten:
I had two Daughters, married in the City,
Both of them well, and unto honest men;
They had my loves, and I had ^heirs again:
With them I hoped to spend my aged years,
And to be buried, with their funeral tears.
To them I gave, that little I possessed,
With them to dwell, as long as life ensured:
Three Months with one, my Custom was to rest,
Then, with the other, I like space endured:
With us the Devil, no iarres nor brawles procured.
But lived and lou'de, as quiet as might be,
I bore with them, they daily honoring me.
But now alas, a heavy Tale to tell,
As with my Chickins, I at pleasure slept:
Comes the great Puttocke, with his Tallantes fell,
And from me quite, my youngest Chicken swept;
Then to the other, he full nimbly leapt,
Seazing on her, as he had done the other,
Oh greedy Death, could thou not take their Mother?
My age is fitter for the yawning Grave,
Their years more tender in the world to stay:
My bones are dry, and would their porcions have,
Their Lymmes were nimble, and a while might play;
My blood is cold, theires hot, mine wears away.
They both were matched, and fruit might bring forth store
I old and withered, and can yield no more.
Thou cruel lean, and ill deformed Death,
Thou great intruder, and vn-welcomde guest:
Thou palefac't hog, thou shortner of long breath,
Thou mighty murdrer, of both man and beast:
Why do thou not, inuit me to thy feast?
And on my body, show thy fury great
That lackes house, lodging, sight, and what to eat.
With lamentations, and with Tears good store,
Ymmagin now, you hear a Mothers grief:
She most of all, her sorrows does deplore,
Vttring forth words, as helples of relief,
She is depriu'de, of all, both less and chief;
As Well her Children, as her Husband good,
With laboring servants that did earne their food.
Ah my sweet Babes, what would not I have done?
To yield you comfort, and maintain you heer^:
Early and late, no labor would I shun,
To feed your mouths, though hunger pincht me near;
All three at once, I would your bodies cheer.
Twain in my lap, should suck their tender Mother,
And with my foot, I would have rockt the other.
Me thinks I see them still, and hear their cries
Chiefly a nights when I on bed am laid,
Which make fresh tears go from my watery eyes,
When I awake and find I am deceived;
Sweet pretty Babes, Christ has your souls received;
Fair Babes to me, you nere shall come again,
But where you are, I trust aye to remain.
Your loving father took a great delight,
Often in Arms to have those children small,
And now he has them ever in his sight,
Not one or two, the heavens possess them all,
Father and Babes obayde when Christ did call.
They all are gone, I only left with breath,
To bide more sorrows in this wretched earth.
Poor and in want young widddow left am I,
Kindles and friendlesse, lacking means to live,
Had but my servants stayde their work to plye
Their labor, would some comfort to me give,
My hopes are like to water powrde in syue.
Only I trust God will increase my health,
That I may work and hate dishonest wealth.
Many more sorrows might I here repeat,
Of grieved Mothers for their children dear,
But times are precious and work too great
For my hoarse voice to show and utter here,
Only I pray you listen and give ear
To LONDONS sorrows, which so many are,
My clacking tongue cannot them hal^e declare.
And as with pain I did endure to tell
Your too too heavy and vnwelcom'd woes,
Wherein poor LONDON labored to do well,
But wanting gifts, the best she can she shows
The willing mind, that all she has bestows,
Must needs be reconed for a friendly part,
Deserving thanks, with as cheerful a heart,
Excuse me then, and hear me too, a while,
For many sorrows compass me throughout:
Never since BRVTE set footing in this Isle,
Nor nere since it was walled round about:
More blessed news, nor happy spring cold sprout;
Then did to LONDON, in this present year,
When Englands CAESAR came this City near.
All went as^aunt, happy that Merchant was
Which had rich wares to please his Chapmans eyes
The finest shagges, wrought stuffes, and purest glass,
Rare cloth of gold, and silks of every dye:
Who for his money could know where to buy,
Both went and sent to fetch in wares good store,
Not doubting sale for that and three times more.
And as they thought a while it did continue,
Doings waxt quick, and wares a pace did sell,
Great men of honors with their retinue,
Approch't my City minding here to dwell,
Houses and Chambers were let dear and well,
There was no corner in me did remain,
But the true Owner might employ to gain,
With ICARVS, I soring then aloft,
Bathing my limbs in heat of highest son,
Till waxen wings with melting heat were soft,
And had no power me from the waves to shun,
Down must I fall, my glory quite undone,
He sits above that looks down below,
Comm^nding powers his justice here to show.
And with King DAVID'S chance does me correct,
Spreading his Plague, where pleases him to strike;
Because in health his laws I did reject,
Trusting in menes, in man, in horse, and pike:
Boasting of riches, beauty and such like.
Never redeeming of swift passing times,
But still committing new and ugly crimes.
And to the end, none dwelling in my City
Should think themselves more safer then the rest,
Judging their slights and not Gods lasting pity,
To be the cause why they with health are blessed;
Gods judgment upon all degrees are pressed,
From poorest beggar, to the wealthiest Squire,
From youngest infant, to the oldest Sire.
For if the aged people he should spare,
They would attribute to themselves too much,
And say their bloudes are dry, their bones so bare,
The Pestilence their bodies cannot touch.
If middle age should escape, their wits are such,
That through their dyet^ or by letting blood,
They won the victory, and the Plague with-stood.
The frolic youths would judge the strengths the mean,
Boasting of joints, arms, legs and sinews strong,
The little infant being weak and lean,
Wants substance for the Plague to work upon.
These are excuses, but effects have none;
Gods Messenger (the Plague) does fear no States,
But strikes both lowest and the highest Mates.
Now for the rich which have of gold such store,
Feeding their bodies with dilicious fare,
Keeping great fires, stir not out of door,
Using perfumes, shunning infected air;
Shall they escape? No, the Plague will them not spare:
Because they shall not think their heaped treasure,
Can keep them longer then it is Gods pl^asure.
If rich men dye, and poorer people stay,
They will exclame with hate and deadly ire,
Saying with surfects they cousume the day,
Wallowing in ease like dirtie Swyne in mire,
Judging their scarcity and their thin atyre
The only Physic, poisons to with stand,
But they like others have given death their hand.
If any then should escape deaths heavy sight,
And claim a pardon for a longer day;
The zealous Preacher and the godly wight,
Which for themselves, and sor their hearers pray,
Might hau^ some favor in this world to stay:
But God says no, they shall yield to their kind,
Lest they prove haughti^ which remain behind.
There are a people that do leawdly live,
Swaggering and swearing, prone to every sin,
Shall those men escape? No, they account shall give
Of all the vices they have wallowed in.
Such wretched Caytiffes, made the Lord begin,
To strike poor LONDON^ with thy heavy rod,
For pleasing Satan, and offending God.
What should I say my sorrows are so many,
One for a thousand I cannot repeat,
Within my liberties scarce any,
Which have no^ felt Gods wrath and mighty threate,
Either by death, or sickness fell and great,
If Parents scap'de, the children had their part,
If both remain, their servants felt some smart.
The sick bequeather of his wealth by Will,
Not only dead, but his executors too,
And eke the Scriuener that did make the Bill,
All in one fort-night have paid death their due,
The like unto the Landlord does ensue,
Both wealthy father, and succeeding heir,
With their poor tenants ended have their care.
The joyful Brydegroome married as to day,
Sick, weak, and feeble before table laid,
And the next morrow dead and wrapped in clay,
Leaving his Bride, a widow, wife and maid.
Which sudden change does make her so dismayde,
That griefs and sorrows does perplexe her heart,
Within three days she takes her husbands part,
Much might I speak of other sad laments,
And fill your ears with new and several woes,
Spending a week, repeating discontents,
Which needless is, where all both sees and knows,
How many thousands death and graves enclose:
Making me (LONDON) which long time has slowrish't
Scorned of those which I both fed and nourish't.
And thos^ that have my glory most set forth,
Boasting that I for beauty did excel;
Now to approach unto me are so loath,
As if my presence were a swallowing hell:
Within their houses they refuse to dwell,
And to the Country fly like swarms of Bees,
Where wealth and credit many of them leese.
But most of all my sorrowing heart does grieve,
For such as work and take exceeding care,
And by their labor know not how to live,
Going poor souls in garments thin and bare,
The belly hungry, of flesh lean and spare.
Pawning and selling clothes, and what they ^aue,
To seed their children which for food do crave.
And when poor hearts their hunger once is stayed,
The day ensuing brings the like distress:
The painful Parents working all their trade
For new supply, fell famine to suppr^sse,
But all in vain their woes are nere the less.
Their work being made, abroad poor souls they trott,
From Morn to Noone, from Noone to Night, God wott.
Offering their wares, and what they have to sell,
Unto such Tradesmen as have small pity,
But they like NABALS, will not with them mell,
Unless for half the worth they may it buy:
The rich man laughs, the poor in heart does cry,
Shedding forth tears in sorrow to his wife,
This world does make me weary of my life.
The Wife does weep, the needy servants play,
The Children cry for food where none is bought:
The Father says, I cannot sell to day,
One jot of work, that all of us have wrought;
In every shop, I have for mo^ey sought.
And can take none, your hunger to sustain,
Tears part from him, the Children cry amain.
What shall we do? a counsel straight they take,
Meat must be had, our people must not starve,
Wi^e, take such things, and go without A LOATE,
In HOVVNDES DITCH, pawn them, our great need to serve,
They will make sure, if that a day we swa^ue;
All will be lost, our garments are their own,
Though for a pound we give a shilling lone.
Besides the Bill a powling groat will cost,
And every Month our pawn must be renewed,
So was my Lease to griping usury lost,
The first beginner of my sorrows brewed,
And ever since want upon want insew'd.
My bedding forfeite for a thing of naught,
My brass and Pewter, want of conscience bought.
If now our clothes which clad out naked skin,
Should thus be lost, as was our other good,
Alas, (poor Wife) what case are we then in,
Such shamefast Beggars never asked food.
If honest labor could this grief withstood,
We would have reckoned day and night as one,
To work for meat, rather then make such moan.
O you of LONDON, now hear LONDON speak,
Especially you Magistrates of might,
And wealthy Citizens, whose store is great,
I gently woo you to have good foresight,
And cast your eyes upon the needy wight,
Though fear of sickness drive you hence as men,
Yet leave your purse, and feeling heart with them.
Remember all, your riches are but lent,
Though in this world, you bear such power and sway:
Remember too, how soon your years are spent,
Remember eke, your bodies are but clay,
Remember death, that rangeth at this day.
Remember when, poor Lazers woes did end,
The full fed glutton, to hell, did descend.
Remember rulers, of each publycke charge,
The several branches, of your private oath:
Remember them, that use a conscience large,
And on themselves, the needyes stock bestow'th,
He robbes his God, and his poor neighbors both.
He that graunts blessings, to the poor that lends,
Gives treble cursings, to those it miss-spends.
Remember likewise, God has placed you here,
To be as nursing, fathers to the poor,
Let then your kindness, now to them appear,
Give much and be, no niggards of your store:
G^d in his wisdom, gave it you therefore.
Put forth your tallents, and gain ten for five,
so shall you in, the heavenly City thrive.
One other boon, does mournful LONDON crave,
Of you on whom, her weal and woes depend
When in the senate, house with counsel grave,
You sit debating, causes how to end.
Make some decree, poor working trades to mend,
At least set down, some order for their good,
That each man may, with labor earne his food.
Restrain the number, of devouring drones,
That sucks the hunny, from the laboring bees.
Catching by peece-meale, in their bribes and lones,
Men's whole estates, which are of poor degrees:
And brings them quickly, on their naked knees,
Four groates a month, for twenty shillings lent,
Is like winds tempest, till the house be rent.
The number, numb^rlesse of houses vain,
Which beer and ale, forsooth make show to sell:
Under which couller, does such vices rain
My cheek does glowe, my toongue refraines to tell,
Offending God, and pleasing Satan well,
Like wicked SODOM, does my Subburbs lie,
A mighty blemish, to fair LONDONS eye.
Reform these things, you heads of LONDON City,
Punnish lewd vice, let virtue spring and grow:
Then Gods just wrath, now hot will turn to pity,
And for his children, you again do know:
Your former health, on you he will bestow,
The Plague and Pestilence, wherewith he visites still,
To end or send, are in his holy will.
You see the runner, in his race is tript,
Well when he went, dead ere his iourneyes done:
You see how soddaine, beauties blase is nipt,
Which sought all means, deaths danger for to shun,
You hear what success, follow them that run:
Most true report, does tell us where and how,
The Countries plauge, exceedes the Cities now.
Since then it rests, in Gods mighty power,
Who when he please, can bid his Angel stay:
Or if he will, destroy you in an hour
A thousand years, being with him as one day,
Why should you not, to him for mercy pray.
Desiring pardon, with a contryte heart,
And from your former, wickedness depart.
If this you will, incontinently do,
The Lord in pity, will his judgments cease,
And many blessings will he power on you:
Health and long life, Honor and happy peace,
Your Foes shall quail, your friends shall still increase,
Your VViues shall flourish like a fruitful Vine,
Your Children prosper, and your griefs decline^
Your Terms shall hold, your men of Worth shall stay,
Your Merchants traffic, and great riches gain,
Your Trades-mens sorrows shall be done away,
True loyal servants shall with them remain:
Your Artisants shall never more complain,
Their honest labor so shall thrive and speed,
That they shall give to others that have need.
And I that long have been a loathed Dame,
shall frolic then with mirth and inward glee,
Renowned Lady, now must be my name,
O famous LONDON, who is like to thee;
Thy God is serude by men of each degree,
Thy Churches filde, thy Preachers burn with zeal,
Thy glory shines, O blessed Commonweal.
My crowned CAESAR and his Peerlesse Queen,
Comes now tryumphing with their princely son,
Deck^t with rich robes the like was never seen,
Nor never none more welcome to LONDON,
Me thinks I see the people how they run,
To get them room this happy sight to see,
That this may come say all Amen, with me.
FINIS.
A godly and zealous Prayer unto God, for the surceasing of his irefull Plague,
and grievous Pestilence.
O LORD God Almighty, the Father of mercies and God of all consolation, we
miserable distressed creatures, wounded with the multitude of our grievous
sins, repair unto thee (the Physician of our souls) for Balm to cure our
Sores. O Lord, we acknowledge and confess our own unworthiness: great is thy
goodness toward us, and great is our ingratitude toward thee. Thou have
opened the Windows of Heaven, and powered out thy blessings upon us, as out of
a storehouse or treasury: thou have given us of the fat of the earth, and
fed us with the dew of heaven: peace and plenty have been our portion, and
inheritance these many years: the sword has not devoured us, hunger and
famine have not come near us: the knowledge of thy word has flourished amongst
us: And whereas other Nations sit in darkness, and grope at Noone day, being
overwhelmed with the fogges and mystes of error and supersticion, we still
enjoy the fruition of thy glorious Gospel, and the sun of righteousness still
shines clearly in our climate: whose sweet influence might hau^ caused us
(had we not been barren trees) to have brought forth much fruit. But alas, in
vain has the doctrine of thy son Christ Jesus, dropped as the deaw: in
vain have the sweet distilling showers of thy mercies been powered out upon
this Land. For we have not yet brought forth the first fruits of the spirit:
we have had the first, and the latter rain; but we bring forth ye fruit of
righteousness, neither first nor last: our Wine is bitter as the Wine of Sodom,
and our grapes as the grapes of Gomorrah: we are become as the seed of the
wicked corrupt children, disobedient servants, a rebellious people, and now
that we are rich, and are waxen fat, we spurn with the h^ele, like ye unruly
Heifar, we are sick of long prosperity, and have surfeited of peace and
plenty: fulness of bread has caused us to ^^n against three, and we have
wearied thee with our iniquities, they are too sore and heavy a burden for us to
bear. Therefore is thy visitation come amongst us, and thine hand i^ sore
against us: therefore have thou armed thy self with displeasure, like a man of
war, thou have prepared thy instruments of wrath, thou have whet thy sword,
thou have bent thy bow, thou have put thine hand to the quiver, thou have shot
^ut thine arrows of indignation against us, like a Gyaunt refreshed with wine,
have smitten us, and we are wounded at the heart. Woe unto us, for the voice
of lamentation and mourning is heard in our Cities, as when thou slewest the
first borne of Egypt. Our houses are left desolate, and men abhor their own
inheritance. We are one afraid of another, men hardly trust themselves, yea,
scarcely the clothes of their backs. Where are our solemn meetings, and
frequent assemblies: men stand a far off: the Streates and high ways mourn:
traffic cease: merchandise decays: the craftes-man and cunning artificer
is ashamed of his poverty. These things do we justly suffer for our sins,
at thy hands; O God, and yet still we go forwards in our sins, like the
swift Dromedorie in his ^ourse: Or like the Ass in the mountains, which
draws in the air at her pleasure, we have not comforted the weak and feeble
knees, we have not wept with them that weep. We have not had that sympathy,
and fellow-s^lling of each others misery, which ought to be in the members of
Christ, Nay, often times while one prays in the bitterness and anguish of
his spirit, another blasphemeth in the pride and presumption of his heart.
Hear one groueleth on ye ground, gasping and gaping after life, there another
walloweth in the sincke of sin, and puddle of iniquity, vomiting up his own^
shame. O God, how displeasing a spectacle is this to thin^ eyes: how harsh
music (and distempered harmony) is it to thine ears. Therefore thine hand is
stretched out, to smit^ off the withered branches of those trees which are
corrupt. O Lord, thou know that it is not in man to direct his own ways.
Turn us unto thee, and we shall be turned. Draw thou us, and we will run after
the smell of thine ointments. Touch our ^linty hearts, and our eyes shall gush
out with water, as the stony Rock which Moses smote: Then will thou repent
thee of this evil, when we have repented us of our sins: then will thou
turn from us thy fierce wrath, when we have turned from our iniquities: Then
will we offer up with the calves of our lips a sacrifice of praise and
thanksgiving, when thou have raised us up, out of the pit of our grieved
desolatio^, then shall thou put mirth and gladness into our hearts. Most
merciful Father, let it be enough that we have hitherto borne the storms of
thy displeasure, now let thy angry Angel hold his destroying hand: let us not
all dye in our sins for whom Christ dye^, that we might live unto thee, take
away thy cup of indignation from us, and let us drink no more of the dreg^ of
thy fury; save the remnant that are left with thy preservatives of grace, Send
thy good Angel unto the ^ings Court, and give him charge over his Majesty,
that the arrows yt fly by night touch not his sacred pers^n, nor come nere
his princely Progeny. Let treachery, and conspiracy blush and be ashamed and
confounded at their presence: let prosperity attend them on the right hand and
on the left: Lord give unto the Nobles, and Senators of this Land, the spirit
of wisdom, counsel and understanding: the spirit of true fortitiude,
courage^ and magnanimity. Inspire the Ministers of thy Gospel with knowledge
of thy word, inflame their hearts with a fervent zeal for thy glory: give unto
all Superiors, discretion and moderation: unto all inferiors, loyalty and
obdedience. More perticulerly, for our selves, We pray thee bless our down
sitting and our vprising, bless our going forth, and our coming in: save us
from the noisome Plague and pestilence, which i^ the rod of thy fury, and the
hammer of thine indignation, which breakest in pieces like a Potters vessel
irrepentant sinners, therefore suffer us not, we beseech thee, to walk any
longer in the stubburnesse of our own hearts, least we hoard up vengeanc^ for
our selves in the day of wrath. O Lord illuminate our vnderstanding^, reform
our irreguler disordered affections, mortify our sins, let them dye in this
nights rest, that to morrow when we awake, we may shake off sins, and live
unto righteousness, never fea^ing to go foreward from grace to grace, from
virtue to virtue, until we have arrived at the haven of rest: whither Christ
bring us, which bought us for his mercies sake: To wh^m with the Father and the
holy Ghost, be all honor, power, and dominion, for evermore. Amen.

FINIS.
A true Relation of all that have bin buried of all diseases, in every several
Parish; as well within the City of London, and liberties thereof, as also in
the out parishes near thereunto adjoining, from the 14 of July last past,
1603, to the 17. of November following.
Albones in Woodstreet 174 Alhallowes Lumbarstr. 107 Alhallowes the great 278
Alhallowes the less 220 Alhallowes Bredstreet 27 Alhallowes staynings 121
Alhallowes the wall. ^11 Alhallowes Hony-lane 14 Alhallowes Barking 411 Alphage
at Cripplegate 168 Androwes by the Wardrope 282 Androwes Eastcheape 104
Androwes undershaft 159 Annes at Aldersgate 140 Annes Black Friars 240 Auntlins
parish 34 Austines Parish 91 Bartholmew at the Exch: 76 Bennets at Pauls-wharf.
190 Bennets Grace-Church 39 Bennets Finck 93 Bennets Sherhogg 26 Buttols
Billinsgate 18 Christ Church parish 323 Christophers parish 36 Clements by
East-cheape 46 Dennis Back-church 105 Dunstones in the East 222 Edmunds in
Lumbard-st 72 Ethelborow within Bishopsg 156 S. Faithes 101 S. Fosters in
Foster-lane 93 Gabriel Fan-Church 66 Georges Buttolph-lane 35 Gregory's by
Paul's 260 Hellens within Bishopsg. 95 James by Garlick-hith 136 John
Evangelist 9 John Zacharies 131 John's in the Walbrooke 133 Katherines
Cree-Church 391 Katherines Colemans 180 Laurence in the Jury 86 Laurence
Pountney 157 Leonards Foster-lane 239 Leonards Eastcheape 50 Magnus parish by
the Bridge 107 Margrets New fishstreet 81 Margrets Pa^tens 51 Margrets Moses
67 Margrets Lothbery 99 Martins in the Vintry 242 Martins Orga^s 89 Martins
Iremonger lane 25 Martins at Ludgate 19^ Martins Outwich 38 Mary le Booe 26
Mary Bothaw 39 Mary at the hill 1^9 Mary Abchurch 120 Mary Woolchurch 48 Mary
Colchurch 10 Mary Woolnoth 85 Mary Aldermary 75 Mary Aldermanbery 78 Mary
Stayning^ 49 Mary Mountawe 47 Mary Sommersets 193 Matthew Friday-street 16
Maudlins in Milke-street 32 Maudlins by oldfishstreet 128 Mighels Bassie shaw
135 Mighels Cornehill 119 Mighels in Woodstreet 151 Mighel^ in the Ryall 99
Mighels in the Querne 59 Mighels Queene-hith 128 Mighel Crooked lane 139
Mildreds Poultry 79 Mildreds Bredstreet 39 Nicholas Acons 32 Nicholas
Cole-Abbay 139 Nicholas Olaue 80 Olaues in the Jury 40 Olaues in Hartstreet 186
Olaues in Siluer-street 111 Pancras by Soperlaue 18 Pete^s in Cornehill 132
Peter's in Cheap 45 Peter's the poor in broadstr, 44 Peter's at Pauls-wharfe 95
Steuens in Colman-street 339 Steuens in the Walbrok 22 Swithins at London-stone
116 Thomas Apostles 83 Trinity Parish 116
Without the Walls of London.
Androwes in Holborn 1178 Barthelmew the less Smith^ 84 Barthelmew the great
Smit^ 200 Brides Parish 907 Buttols Algate 1465 Buttols Bishopsgate 1202
Buttols without Aldersg. 556 Dunstones in the West 484 Georges in Southwarke
895 Giles without Creeplegate 2455 Olaues in Southwarke 2459 Saviors in
Southwarke 1858 Sepulchers parish 2219 Thomas in Southwark 245 Trinity in the
Minories 39 Clements without Templeb. 624 Giles in the Fields 439 James at
Clarkenwell 716 Katherines by the Tower 639 Leonards Shoredich 856 Martins in
the Fields 458 Mary Whitechappel 1534 Magdalens in Barmondsey -- street. 578
Bridewel precinct. 103 At the Pesthouse 134
The true Number of all that have bin buried, as well within ye City of London:
as also within the liberties and Subburbes thereof, of all diseases, since the
first beginning of this Uisitation, is 37717.

FINIS.

