The Skillful Mountebanke. OR, Come, and I Will cure you.

It has not so much power as Patience, yet it is a Plaster for all Sores.

By Ioannes Baptista Guardano Lodovico puncto.

A Frenchified Italian, and borne in Backlersberry.

LONDON: Printed by I.O. for Thomas Lambert and are to be sold at his Shop
near the Hospital gate in Smithfield. at the Sign of the Horse-shooe, 1638.

The Names of the Cures.
1. A Cure for Melancholy. 2. A Cure for a maidens Timpany. 3. A Cure for the
Green Sickness. 4. A Cure for the Falling Sickness in man's estate. 5. A Cure
for Cuckolds.
The Skillful Mountebanke.
If any man be troubled with Melancholy, let him take this following Medicine.
IF his Melancholy proceed by Love, the passion is somewhat dangerous, and
difficult to cure; the things that must be compounded for the Remedy, are hard
to come by.

The Medicine.
TAke the Juice of three well mads (and as well told) Jests, applying them to
the Patients spleen, that they may as it were tickle him; if he begin to
laugh, there is some sign of Health: let him be then forthwith carried to a
warm Bed, which must be carefully made by a perfect Virgin of five and Thirty
years of Age, but very beautiful, and one whose Lip no man did ever touch
since she was five years old. When the aforesaid Bed is made, let this
aforesaid Virgin be caused to be put into it; but let me tell you one thing by
the way, you must leave them so; it is not a Rush matter for watching by him
with a Rush-candle, he will be well enough by Morning, I Will warrant, if he can
sweat upon it. But before he rises, you must provide this Cordial for him:
The stones of a Goat, the guts of Crabs, the brains of Sparrow^, Monkies
marrow, Pith of Oxen, with the yelkes of five new laid Eggs, laid by an Hen
of the Game: all these compounded together, if he may have the continual
company of his Virgin had fellow, will in one half year drive his Melancholy
quite from him; if not, he is not a man of this World: Therefore we will speak
no more of him, but proceed to ye next discase.

If any Maiden be sick of a Timpany, let her repair to my Medicine, which is
here set down.
IF this Virgin be so sick of Cupid, that the Disease is come to a Timpany,
let her with all speed possible remoove her self to some old Midwifes house
for Forty Weeks, where there is change of Air, keeping a spare Diet as she
travailes, and always after using lawful exercises. till she be married:
Then if she have any more Wit than ever any of her Sex had, which is, to keep
her own Counsel, she is past all danger: withal she must have a great
care, that the Tympany which she left behind her, come not in her Husbands
sight, least it breed a worse Disease: And so much for a Lympany.

A Cure for the Greene-Sicknesse.
IF any Virgin have made so little use of her Time* that she is punished with a
disease called the Green s^cknesse, so that her color begins to fade, and
her flesh is covered with a yellowness, let her take my counsel: First of
all, let her forsake the former diet she used, which was to feed upon Sea
coal Cyndars, Ashes, Chalk, and Oatemeale; loame wall, and parched Pease,
Beans, and dry Biscuit; for unless these causes be taken away, it is almost
impossible that any Medicine should work upon her: then let her Father or
Mother (if she have any) provide for her a man of courage, full of metal and
very active: let her parley with him a little, if he can take my counsel, he
shall quickly convert her pale color to Red, and her Melancholy to laughter,
it is not amiss, (if they can agree together) if the Banes of Matrimony be
asked betwixt them, she will be the fitter to receive her Cure, and he to play
the Physician; but if the Maid b^ very far gone, so that she requires
present help, let the Banes alone, ^^ee'le go a nearer way to work: A
License may be had, and it is a (...) walk to Pancridge; if these Rules be^
observed, and if she be of a mild nature, not froward, choleric, and
hasty, but is contented to lie with him every Night without a Fee, in Forty
Weeks the Green Sickness may be converted to a chopping Boy, or a bouncing
Girl, which will keep her I Will warrant her, from ever having it again: So
much for the Green sickness.

If any man's Estate be troubled with the Falling Sickness, let him hearken to
me.
WHen a man does first begin to be sick of this Disease, there there be a
couple more that do attend upon his body, which if they fasten, will hardly
be got off, and they are these: The one is called a Sergeant, the other a
Yeoman, two such dangerous Diseases, that if he be once but Encountered by
them, he is like to lie by it.

This Falling Sickness in a man's estate is very hard to cure, yet if it be let
run, it is ten to one but that it comes to a worse Disease, which is called
a Rupture, but in plain English a Broke; which is a Disease, that if it have
leave, will have such power over him, that all the wisest Glaziers in London
shall scarre sodder him again. And to say Truth, his hopes must be, that he
may have a fair wind for Ireland, or else the Disease will perish him: but if
he take my counsel, it shall never come to this: therefore mark my Advice;
if he be a Shopkeeper, let him keep him to his Shop, keep trusty Servants
and true Prentises, and let him avoyde the dangerous exercise of Ducking, lest
he come home again singed like a Fire, Drake; it is a very ill sign of his
thriving: Let him deal with honest men, and have a care his name be not to
much used in other men's Books; let his fair Tongue and his fair dealing be
joined together, to invite good Customers, and a fig for the Falling
Sickness.

If any married man be troubled with a a pain in the Forehead, let him look
out, for I have a Medicine for him.
When a man is troubled with this Disease, it is a horrible sign that he has
married a light Wife, and that being the greatest cause of his Disease, it must
(for ought I see) be taken away from him before the Cure can be perfected,
which (I must confess) is; somewhat hard to perform; for they are grievances
yt will most commonly hang upon a man till they are even ready to hang
themselves, and that is more than a point next the worst: Therefore the best
counsel I can give him, is this; let him eat, drink, and be merry; let him
not show himself sad and melancholy in company, lest he give his Ieering
enemies too much advantage over him: yet he is thus happy, he shall be sure to
be Ieer'd by none but the brethren of his own company, and then he may cry
Cuckolds all arow, and make them mad that first thought to make him so: let him
but make much of their wives, and kiss their children, the world will rather
think him a politic Whoremaster, than a patient Cuckold, the defamation of
the one* will control the reproach of the other; and whereas he was before
pitied for a wronged man, in this pitiful manner: 'Twas great pity an
honest careful man should have so ill a wife: They will say then, Let him
alone, for I Will warrant, he will give her as good as she brings. This is a
report in this Age, more pleasing to a man than the shameful name of Cuckold:
and when two Combatants wound each other equally, neither of them can boast the
glory of the Battle: This is the surest way for his Cure I think, and the
surest way to break the heart of his wife; for we are to believe, the first
cause that made her so light heel'd, was to be revenged upon him for some
petty quarrel betwixt them, because he would not let her see such a
Puppit-play, or some such petty business; perhaps he would not make her a
Gown of such a new Stuff as she defir'd, but he breaking the neck of her
revenge in this manner, it is very possible that she may very shortly and her
days in Melancholy like a direct envious person, destroying her self because
she cannot kill another.

And if you think this Medicine will procure
Your ease, you are welcome to the Cuckolds Curo.
But if these do your patience wrong,
Hark, and I Will cure you with a Song.
The Song.
ARe any Pooles that would be wise?
Are any falling that would rise?
Is any rich that would be poor,
I Will purge his substance in an hour:
Is any bound that would be free?
I Will do it, let him repair to me.
I come to cure what ere you feel
Within, without, from head to heel.
Are any of their strength beguiled,
They cannot get their wives with child?
If they be barren, they shall see
I Will fit them with a remedy,
If once I take them in my hands,
They soon shall have more heirs then lands.
Then come to me what ere you feel
Within, without, from head to heel.
If any Usurer would have
A preservation against the grave,
Let him not yoke him to a Wife,
I Will promise him a longer life:
But if he marry, ten to one
I Will lay, he can be cured by none.
Yet come, I Will cure what ere you feels
Within, without, from head to heel.
If any Lady would be proud,
That with no virtues is endowed.
I Will puff her with one praise or other,
Shall make her nicer than her Mother:
Such mighty power has my calling,
But not to keep^ her pride from falling.
Then come to me what ere you feel
Within, without, from head to heel.
If any Landrosse be afraid
That she shall lose the name of Maid,
Yet not be married, let her be
Rid of that fear, and come to me;
I Will run the hazard of a curse,
She shall grow better, or else worse.
Come then to me what ere you feel
Within, without, from head to heel.
Has any got a night disease,
So that he cannot sleep for fleas?
Is any sorrowful or sad,
Disguised, Lunaticke, or mad?
Does any cutpurse lie and linger
In torment for an itching finger?
He shall be cured by my expressions.
If he avoid the quarter Sessions.
Then come to me what ere you feel
Within, without, from head to heel.
FINIS.

