THE WORMING of a mad Dog:

OR, A SOPPE FOR CERBERVS THE Iaylor of Hell.

NO CONFVTATION BUT A sharp Redargution of the bayter of Women.

By CONSTANTIA MVNDA -- dux faemina facti.

Virg: Aen: 1. Sigenus humanum and mortalia temnitis arma,
At sperate Deos memores fandi atque nefandi.
LONDON Printed for LAVRENCE HAYES, and are to be sold at his shop near
Fleet-bridge, over against St. Brides Lane. 1617.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVL LADY her most dear Mother, the Lady PRVDENTIA MVNDA,
the true pattern of Piety and Virtue, C. M. wishes increase of happiness.
AS first your pains in bearing me was such
A benefit beyond requital, that twere much
To think what pangs of sorrow you sustained
In childbirth, when mine infancy obtained
The vital drawing in of air, so your love
Mingled with care has shown it self, above
The ordinary course of Nature: seeing you still
Are in perpetual Labor with me, even until
The second birth of education perfect me,
You Trauaill still though Churched often you be.
In recompense thereof what can I give,
But what I take, even that I live,
Next to the heavens it is yours. Thus I pay
My debt by taking up at interest, and lay
To pawn that which I borrow of you: so
The more I give I take, I pay, I owe.
Yet lest you think I forfait shall my bond
I here present you with my writing hand.
Some trifling minutes I vainly did bestow
In penning of these lines that all might know
The scandals of our adversary, and
I had gone forward had not Hester hanged
Haman before: yet what here I wrote
Might serve to stop the curs wide throat,
Until the haltar came, since which I ceast
To prosecute what I intended, lest
I should be censured that I undertook
A work that is done already: so his book
Has escaped my fingers, but in like case
As a malefactor changes place
From Newgate unto Tiburne, whose good hope
Is but to change his shackels for a rope.
Although this be a toy scarce worth your view,
Yet deigne to read it, and accept in lieu
Of greater duty, for your gracious look
Is a sufficient Patron to my book.
This is the worst disgrace that can be had.
A Ladies daughter worm'd a dog that is mad.
Your loving Daughter CONSTANTIA MVNDA.

To Joseph Swetnam.
WHat? is thy shameless muse so fleg'd in sin
So cocker'd up in mischief? or have bin
Trained up by Furies in the school of vice,
Where the licentious Devils hoyst the price
Of vncought mischief, and make a set reward,
For hell-hound slanderers that naught regard
Their reputation, or the wholesome Laws
Of Virtues Commonwealth, but seek applause
By railing and reuiling to deprave
The mirror of Creation, to out-braue
Even heaven it self with folly: could the strain
Of that your barren-idle-donghill brain,
As from a Chymick Limbeck so distill
Your poisoned drops of hemlocke, and so fill
The itching ears of silly swains, and rude
Truth-not-discerning rusticke multitude
With sottish lies, with bald and ribald lines,
Patcht out of English writers that combines
Their highest reach of emulation but to please
The giddy-headed vulgar: whose disease
Like to a swelling dropsy, thirsts to drink
And swill the puddles of this nasty sink:
Whence through the channels of your muddy wit,
Your hotch-potcht work is drawn and the slimy pit
Of your inuectiue pamphlet filled to th'brim
With all defiled streams, yet many swim
And bath themselves (oh madness) in that flood
Of mischief, with delight, and deem that good
Which spoils their reason, being not understood.
When people view not well your devilish book,
Like nibling fish they swallow bait and hook
To their destruction, when they not descry
Your base and most vnreuerent blasphemy.
How in the ruff of fury you disgrace
(As much as in you lies) and do deface
Natures best ornament, and think thou have done
An act deserving commendation;
Whereas thy merits being brought in sight,
Exclaim thus on thee, Gallows claim thy right.
Woman the crown, perfection, and the means
Of all men's being, and their well-being, whence
Is the propagation of all humane kind,
Wherein the bodies frame, th'intellect and mind
With all their operations do first find
Their Essence and beginning, where does lie
The mortal means of our eternity,
Whose virtues, worthiness, resplendent rays
Of perfect beauty have always had the praise
And admiration of such glorious wits,
Which Fame the worlds great Herald sits,
Crowning with Laurel wreaths and Mittle bows,
The tribute and reward of learned brows,
And that this goodly piece of nature be
Thus shamefully detested, and thus wronged by thee.
How could your vild vntutour'd muse infold
And wrap it self in envious, cruel, bold,
Nay impudent detraction, and then throw
And hurl without regard your venomed darts
Of scandalous reuiling, at the hearts
Of all our female sex promiscuously,
Of commons, gentry, and nobility?
Without exceptions has your spungie pate
(Void in it self of all things but of hate)
Sucked up the dregs of folly, and the lees
Of mercenary Pasquils, which do squeese
The glaunders of abuses in the face
Of them that are the cause that humane race
Keeps his continuance: could you be so mad
As to deprave, nay to call that bad
Which God calls good? can your filthy claws
Scratch out the image that The Almighty draws
In us his pictures? no! things simply good,
Keep still their essence, though they be withstood
By all the accomplices of hell: you cannot daunt
Not yet diminish, (how ere you basely vaunt,
With bitter terms) the glory of our Sex,
Nor, as you michingly surmize, you vex
Us with your dogged railing, why! we know;
Virtue opposed is stronger, and the foe
That Is queld and foyld, adds but more
Triumph to the conquest then there was before.
Wherefore be advised, cease to rail
On them that with advantage can you quail.
THE WORMING OF a mad Dog.
THE itching desire of oppressing the press with many sottish and illiterate
Libels, stuffed with all manner of ribaldry, and sordid inventions, when every
foule-mouthed malcontent may disgorge his Licambaean poison in the face of
all the world, Tincta licambaeo sanguine t^la dabit, Ovid in Ibin.
has broken out into such a dismal contagion in these our days, that every
scandalous tongue and opprobrious wit, like the Italian Mountebankes will
advance their pedling wares of detracting virulence in the public Piatza of
every Stationers shop. And Printing that was invented to be the storehouse
of famous wits, the treasure of Divine literature, the pandect and maintainer
of all Sciences, become the receptacle of every dissolute Pamphlet. The nursery
and hospital of every spurious and penurious brat, which proceeds from base
phreneticall braine-sicke bablers. When scribimus indocti must be the motto of
every one that fools himself in Print: it is ridiculous! but when scribimus
insani should be the signiture of every page, it is lamentable our times so
stupidly possessed and benumd with folly, that we shall verify the Proverb,
L'vsanza commune non e peccato, sins custom house has non sine priuilegio,
writ upon his doors, as though community in offense could make an immunitie:
No! use of sin is the souls extortion, a biting faenorie that eats out the
principle. Yet woeful experience makes it too true, consuetudo peccandi tollit
sensum peccatt, as may be seen by the works of diverse men that make their
pens their pensils to limme out vice that it may seem delicious and amiable;
so to detract from virtue and honesty, as though their essence were only in
outward appearance of goodness, as if mortality were only circumscribed
within the conditions, of our sex, caelum ipsum petimus stultitia, foolish man
will reprehend his Creator in the admirable work of his generation and
conservation: Woman the second edition of the Epitome of the whole world, the
second Tome of that goodly volume compiled by the great God of heaven and earth
is most shamefully blurd, and derogatiuely rased by scribbling penns of savage
and vncought monsters. To what an irregular strain is the daring impudence of
b^^d-fold bayards aspired unto? that they will presume to call in question even
the most absolute work composed by the worlds great Architect? A strange
blasphemy to find fault with that which the Privy Council of the high and
mighty Parliament of the inscrutable Tri-vnitie in Heaven determined to be very
good. Genesis 1*
To call that imperfect, froward, crooked and perverse to make an arraignment
and Beare-baiting of that which the Pantocrator would in his omniscient
wisdom have to be the consummation of his blessed weeks work, the end,
crown, and perfection of the neuer-sufficiently glorified creation. What is it
but an exorbitant frenzy, and woeful taxation of the supreme deity. Yet
woman the greatest part of the lesser world is generally become the subject of
every pedanticall goose-quill. (...).
Every fantastic Poetaster which thinks he has lickt the vomit of his
Coriphaeus and can but patch a hobling verse together, will strive to represent
unseemly figments imputed to our sex, (as a pleasing theme to the vulgar) on
the public Theater: teaching the worser sort that are more prone to luxury,
a compendious way to learn to be sinful. These foul mouthed raylers, qui non
evident vt corrigant, sed quaerunt quid reprehendant, that reprove not that
they might reform, but pry into actions that they might carpe and cavil: so
that in this infamous profession they far exceed the vildest kind of
Pharisaicall ostentation, and so surmounting beyond all comparison railing
Anaxarchus, Aut vt Ana archus pila ^^nuaris in alta. Ovid in I^in. Benuenuto,
(...).
who for his detracting and biting tongue was pestled to death in a brazen
mortar. Who as a learned Tuscan speaks, gli miseri vanno a tentone altreuolte
a carpone per facer mercatantia dell' altrui da lor inuentata e seminata
vergogna, impudicamente cereano l'altrui deshonor erger la meretricia front
and malzar la impudiche corna: these wretched miscreants go groaping, and
sometimes on all four, to traffic with other folks credits by their own
divulged and dispersed ignominy. That impudently seek by others dishonor to
set a shameless face on the matter, and thus to put out their immodest horns
to butt at, and gore the name and reputation of the innocent, being so besotted
with a base and miserable condition, and blind in themselves, they blush not
in their tongues to carry the gall of Rabilius, and in their chaps the poison
of Colimachus in their mouths, the flame of mount Aetna in their eyes,
Jupiters lightning which he darted at the Centaures, in their thoghts Bellonaes
arrows, in their serpentine words the bitterness of Sulmo against Orbecca,
blending and commixing all their discourse with epaticke aloes and unsavory
simples, Plus aloes quam mellis habent.
deriuing all their ingredients of their venomed Recipes from the Apothecaries
shop of the Devil. Notwithstanding, as the same learned man metaphorically
speaks, Cotesti vsei scangerati, citta senza muro, naui senza gouerno, vasi
senza coperto caualli indomiti senza freno non considerano. These wide
open-dores, these unwalled towns, these rudderlesse ships, these vncouerd
vessels, these unbridled horses do not consider that the tongue being a very
little member should never go out of that same iuory gate, in which, (not
without a great mystery) divine wisdom and nature together has enclosed, it
signifying that a man should give him self either to virtuous speech, or
prudent silence, and not let tongue and pen run up and down like a weaponed
madde-man, to strike and wound any without partiality, uery one without
exception, to make such an universal massacre (for so I may term it, Un coup
de langue est p us dan gere^x qu' un coup de lance. (...).
seeing words make worse wounds then swords) yet lest villainy domineere and
triumph in fury, we will manicle your dissolute fist, that you deal not your
blows so unadvisedly. Though feminine modesty has confined our rarest and
ripest wits to silence, we acknowledge it our greatest ornament, but when
necessity compels us, Sop^o (...) A^ (...)
it is as great a fault and folly loquenda tacere, vt contra grauis est culpa
tacenda loqui, being too much provoked by arrainments, baytings, and rancarous
impeachments of the reputation of our whole sex, stulta est clementia --
periturae parcere cartae, opportunity of speaking slipped by silence, is as bad
as importunity vpheld by babbling (...). Loqui quae de^^^ est meli^s quam tacere.
Know therefore that we will cancel your accusations, trauers your bills, and
come upon you for a false indictment, and think not it is our waspishnesse that
shall sting you; no sir, until we see your malepert sausinesse reformed, which
will not be till you do make a long letter to us, Literam ^^ngam tra^^^^.
we will continue Iuno'es,

Non sic abibunt odia viuaces aget violentus iras animus
Saeuusque dolor aeterna bella pace sublat a geret.
Notwithstanding for all your injuries as Gelo Siracusanus answered Syagrius
the Spartane, You shall not induce me though stird with anger, (...).
to demean my self irreverently in the retribution of your injuries. You idol
muse, and musing being idle (as your learned Epistle begins) shall be no
plea to make your viperous scandals seem pleasing, ipsa excusatio culpa est.
Where by the way I note your untoward nature contrary to all men, for whereas in
all others of your sex by your confession, idleness ingendreth love, in you
hate: you say in the dedication of your book to your mistresses the common
sort of women, that you had little ease to pass the time withal, but now
seeing you have basely wron'gd our wearied and wurried Patience with your
insolent inuectiue madness, you shall make a simple conversion of your
proposition, and take your pastime in little ease: why? if you delight to sow
thorns, is it not fit you should go on them barefoot and barelegged. Your
idle muse shall be frankt up, for while it is at liberty, most impiously it
throws dirt in the face of half humane kind. Li^^ lib. ^.
Coriolanus when he saw his mother and his wife weeping, natural love compeld
him to leave sacking the City for their sakes, ab hoc exemplum cape, but your
barbarous hand will not cease to ruin the fenses, and beleager the forces of
Gynaecia, not sparing the mother that brought forth such an untoward whelp into
the world as thy self, playing at blindman-buffe with all, scattering thy
dissolute language at whomsoever comes next: you never heard of a boy, an
unlucky gallows that threw stones in the marketplace he knew not whither: the
wisely-cynicke Philosopher bade him take heed lest he hit his father. Nomine
mutato narretur fabula de te. You might easily, if you had had the grace,
perceive what use to make of it. But you go forward, pretending you were in
great choler against some women, and in the ruff of your fury. Grant one
absurdity, a thousand follow: Alas (good Sir) we may easily gather you were
mightily transported with passion. Anger and madness differ but in time. Twere
a pleasant sight to see you in your great standing choler and furious ruff
together. Your choler (no doubt) was too great for a Spanish peccadillo, A
little sin,
and your shagge ruff seemed so greesly to set forth your ill-looking visage,
that none of your shee-aduersaries durst attempt to confront your folly. But
now let us talk with you in your cold blood. Now the lees of your fury are
settled to the bottom, and your turbulent mind is defaecated and clearer,
lets have a parle with you. What if you had cause to be offended with some (as
I cannot excuse all) must you needs shoot your paper-pellets out of your
potgun-pate at all women? Remember (sweet Sir) the counsel of Nestor to
Achilles:

-- (...)
(...).
Anim^^ in pectore sortem ^^^ineas, si^i qui been temperat optimus esto.
It had been the part of humanity to have smothered your anger, hoping amends
and reconcilement, and not presently to wrecke your spleen. Architas in Tullie
would have taught you another lesson: Tuscul^ 4.
Quo te inquit modo accepissem nisi iratus essem? But you (like a hare-braind
scold) set your claws in the face of the whole world. But this argues your
leuitie joined with degenerate cowardice: for had you but considered with
mature deliberation that (as Virgil speaks)

(...). 2.
-- nullum memorabile nomen
Fa minea in poena est, nec habet victoria laudem.
It Is a poor atchieuement to overcome a woman, you would never have been so
grievously troubled with the ouer-flowing of the gall, neither would the relish
of your furred palate have been so bitter, as what delicates soever you tasted
should become unpleasing. I read of a mad fellow, which had lost his goods by
sea, that whatsoever ships had come into the port at Athens, he would take a
catalogue of them, and very busy would he be in making an inventory of the
goods they brought in and received, thinking all to be his. So you having
peradventure had some cursed wife that has given you as good as you brought,
whatsoever faults you epsy in others, you take that to heart: you run a
madding up and down to make a scrole of female frailties, and an inventory of
meretriciall behauiours, ascribing them to those that are joined in the sacred
bands of matrimony. Because you have been guld with brass money, will you
think no coin current? Because you have suffered shipwreck, will you
dissuade any from venturing to traffic beyond Seas? Besides, you show your
self unjust in not observing a symmetrie and proportion of revenge and the
offense: for a pelting injury should not provoke an opprobrious calumny; a
private abuse of your own familiar doxies should not break out into open
slanders of the religious matron together with the prostitute strumpet; of the
nobly-descended Ladies, as the obscure base vermin that have bitten you* of
the chaste and modest virgins, as well as the dissolute and impudent harlot.
Because women are women, you will do that in an hour, which you will repent
you of all your life time after. Nay rather, if the ruff of your fury would
have let you looked over it, you would have diuerted the floud-gates of your
poisoned streams that way where you perceived the common shore to run, and not
have polluted and stained the clear and crystalline waters. Because women are
not women, rather might be a fit subject of an ingenious Satyrist. Iuuen. Sat.
Cum alterius sexus imitata figuram est: the reason is,

Quam praestare potest mulier galeata pudorem,
Quae fugit a sexu?
But when women are women, when we sail by the true compass of honest and
religious conversation, why should you be so doggedly incensed to bark in
general? why should you employ your invention to lay open new fashions of
lewdness, which the worst of women scarce ever were acquainted with? imitating
the vice of that Pagan Poet, whose indignation made verses, whose filthy
reprehension opened the doors of unbridled luxury, and gave a president of
all admired wickedness, and brutish sensuality, to succeeding ages; Scal. 3.
lib. P^et. cap. 9*
whom great Scaliger indeed censureth not worthy to be read of a pious and
ingenuous man. That Satyr brands all his Countreywomen with the same mark:

Iamque eadem summis pariter minimisque libido est,
Nec melior pedibus silicem quae conterit atrum,
Quam quae longorum vehitur ceruice Syrorum.
But he lived in a nation earthly, deuillish, sensual, given over to a
reprobate sense, that wrought all filthiness with greediness. But you, sir,
were whelpt in a better age, at least in a better climate, where the Gospel is
preached, and the voice of the Turtle is heard in our land; where you might see
(if you could perfectly distinguish) if you were not in the gall of
bitterness. Matchless beauties and glorious virtues shining together, you
might behold (if outrageous rage had not drawn a filme over your eyesight)
the goodly habiliments of the mind combined with the perfection of outward
comeliness and ornaments of the body. Is there not as many monuments erected
to the famous eternizing of charitable deeds of women renowned in their
generations, as trophies to the most courageous Potentates? In the
commemorations of founders and benefactors, how many women have emulated your
sex in bountiful exhibitions to religious uses and furtherance of piety? I
might produce infinite examples, if need were: but bray a fool in a mortar
(said the wise man) yet he will not leave his foolerie: Neither if whole
volumes were compiled against your manifest calumnies, would you ever be
brought to a palinodie and recantation. We have your confession under your
own hand, where you say you might have employed your self to better use than
in such an idle business. True:

(...), A fool speaks sometimes to the purpose. If you must needs be digiting
your pen, the time had been far better spent if you had related to the world
some stories of your travels, with a Gentleman learneder and wiser then your
self: so you might have beguiled the time, and exposed your ridiculous wit to
laughter: Mr. The Co^^^ Quid enim maiore ca^^^^^^ accipitur v^^g^.
you might have told how hardly such an unconstant bella curtizana de Venetijs
entertained you, how your teeth watered, and after your affections were
poisoned with their heinous evils; how in the beginning of your thirty years
travel and odd, In his first Epistle.
your constitution inclined and you were addicted to pry into the various
actions of loose, strange, lewd, idle, froward and inconstant women; how you
happened (in some Stews or Brothel houses) to be acquainted with their cheats
and euasions; how you came to be so expert in their subtle qualities; how
politikely you caught the daughter in the oven, yet never was there your self;
how in your voyages your stomach was cloyd with these surfets, and therefore
being a traveler, you had reason to censure hardly of women. Have you traueld
half as long again as that famous Pilgrim, which knew the fashions of many
men, (...).
and saw their Cities? Have you out-stript him in time, and come so short of
him in knowledge? Is this all the manners you have learned abroad, these thirty
and odd years? Is this the benefit of your observations? Is this all the
profit your Country shall reap by your foreign endeavors? to bring home a
company of idle humors of light huswiues which you have noted, and divulge
them in print to your own disgrace and perpetual obloquie? Have you traueld
three times as long as an Elephant, and is this the first fruit, nay all the
fruit of your idle addle coxcombe? Certainly you misspent your time in your
travels: for it had been more profitable for you, if you had brought dogs
from Iceland; better for your Country, if you had kept a dog there still.
But it is easy to give a reason of your exasperate virulence, from your being a
traveler: for it is very likely when you first went abroad to see fashions,
it was your fortune to light amongst ill company, who trying what metal you were
made of, quickly matriculated you in the school of vice, where you proved a
most apt Nov-proficient, and being guld of your patrimony, your purse was
turned into a pass, and that by women. Like a dog that bites the stone which
had almost beat out his brains, you come home swaggering:

Prodiga non sentit pereuntem foemina censum,
At velut exhausta redivivus pullulet arca
Nummus, and e pleno semper tollatur aceruo,
Non vnqua^ reputant quantum sibi gaudia constant.
Which if you cannot understand, is to this sense:

A lavish woman thinks there is no stint
Unto her purse: as though thou had a mint,
She casts no count what money she will beslow,
As if her coin as fast as t'ebd, did slow.
Such it may be (I speak but on suspicion) were the conditions of those
minions your minority had experience of in your voyages. Wherefore none either
good or bad, fair or foul, of what estate soever, of what parentage or royal
descent and lineage soever, how well soever nurtured and qualified, shall escape
the conuicious violence of your preposterous procacitie. Why did you not snarle
at them directly that wronged you? Why did not you collimate your infectious
Iauelins at the right mark? If a thief take your purse from you, will you
malign and swagger with every one you meet? If you be beaten in an Alehouse,
will you set the whole Town afire? If some curtezans that you have met with in
your travels (or rather that have met with you) have ill entreated you, must
honest and religious people be the scope of your malicious speeches and
reproachful terms? Yet it may be you have a further drift, to make the world
believe you have an extraordinary gift of continency; soothing your self with
this supposition, that this open reuiling is some token and evidence you never
were affected with delicate and effeminate sensuality, thinking this pamphlet
should assoile thee from all manner of levy and taxation of a lascivious life;
as if, because you cynically rail at all both good and bad, you had been
hatched up without concupiscence; as if nature had bestowed on you all (...) and
no (...). (...) Concupisce^^^.
It Was spoken of Euripides, that he hated women in choro, but not in thoro, in
calamo, but not in thalamo: and why cannot you be liable to the same objection?
I would make this excuse for you, but that the crabbednesse of your style, the
unsavory periods of your broken-winded sentences persuade your body to be of
the same temper as your mind. Your ill-fauoured countenance, your wayward
conditions, your peevish and pettish nature is such, that none of our sex with
whom you have obtained some partial conference, could ever brook your dogged
frompard frowardness: upon which male-contented desperation, you hanged out
your flagge of defiance against the whole world, as a prodigious monstrous
rebel against nature. Besides, if your currish disposition had dealt with men,
you were afraid that Lex talionis would meet with you; Like for like.
wherefore you surmized, that inueighing against poor illiterate women, we
might fret and bite the lip at you, we might repine to see our selves baited
and tossed in a blanket, but never durst in open view of the vulgar either
disclose your blasphemous and derogatiue slanders, or maintain the untainted
purity of our glorious sex: nay, you will put gagges in our mouths, and conjure
us all to silence: you will first abuse us, then bind us to the peace; we
must be tongue-tied, lest in starting up to find fault, we prove our selves
guilty of those horrible accusations. The sincerity of our lives, and
quietness of conscience, is a wall of brass to beat back the bullets of your
vituperious scandals in your own face. It Is the resolved Aphorism of a
religious soul to answer, ego sic viuam vt nemo tibi fidem adhibeat: by our
well-doings to put to silence the reports of foolish men, as the Poet speaks;

Viuendum recte tum propter plurima, tum de his
Praecipue causis vt linguas mancipiorum contemnas.
Live well for many causes, chiefly this,
To scorn the tongue of slaves that speak amiss.
Indeed I write not in hope of reclaiming thee from thy profligate absurdities,
for I see what a pitch of disgrace and shame thy selfe-pining envy has
carried thee to, Vnde altior esset casus and impulsae praeceps immane ruin.
for thy greater vexation and more perplexed ruin. You see your black
grinning mouth has been muzled by a modest and powerful hand, who has
iudiciously bewrayed, and wisely laid open your singular ignorance, couched
under incredible impudence, who has most gravely (to speak in your own
language) unfolded every pleat, and showed every rinckle of a profane and
brutish disposition, so that it is a doubt whether she has showed more modesty
or gravity, more learning or prudence in the religious confutation of your
indecent raylings. But as she has been the first Champion of our sex that
would encounter with the barbarous bloudhound, and wisely dammed up your mouth,
and sealed up your jaws lest your venomed teeth like mad dogs should
damage the credit of many, nay all innocent damsels; so no doubt, if your
scurrilous and deprauing tongue break prison, and falls to licking up your
vomited poison, to the end you may squirt out the same with more pernicious
hurt, assure your self there shall not be wanting store of Helebore to scour
the sink of your tumultuous gorge, at least we will cram you with Antidotes
and Catapotions, that if you swell not till you burst, yet your digested poison
shall not be contagious. I hear you foame at mouth and groule against the
Author with another head like the triple dog of hell, wherefore I have provided
this sop for Cerberus, indifferent well steept in vinegar. I know not how your
pallat will be pleased with it to make you secure hereafter. I Will take the
pains to worm the tongue of your madness, and dash your rankling teeth down
your throat: it is not houlding up a wispe, nor threatening a cuckingstoole shall
charm us out of the compass of your chain, our pens shall throttle you, or
like Archilochus with our tart Iambikes make you Lopez his godson: we will
thrust thee like Phalaris into thine own brazen bull, and bait thee at thy
own stake, and beat thee at thine own weapon, Quippe minuti semper and
infirmi est animi exiguique voluptas vltio: continuo sic collige quod vindicta
nemo magis gaudet quam faemina. It Is your Poets own assertion, that vltion
being the delight of a weak and feeble mind belongs to us. Qu^m diri cons;^^^
facti^ m^ns ^abet a to^itu^ and surdo verbe^^ caedit. Occultum quatieute ^nimo
tortore ^^agellum.
Thou that in thy self feel the lash of folly, thou that confessest thy
self to be in a fault, nay that thou have offended beyond satisfaction, for
it is hard to give a recompense for a slander: thou that acknowledgest thy self
to be mad, in a rough fury, your wits gone a woolgathering that you had
forgot your self (as I think) Nero-like in ripping up the bowels of thine own
Mother: for I have learnt so much Logic to know quicquid dicitur de specie,
dicitur de vnoquoque indiuiduo eiusdem speciei: whatsoever is spoken or
praedicated of the kind is spoken of every one in the same kind: first
therefore to bring you to an impious (...) or inconvenience. Is it not a comely
thing to hear a Son speak thus of his mother: My mother in her fury was
worse than a Lion being bitten with hunger, than a bear being robbed of her
young ones, the viper being trod on. No spur would make my mother go, nor no
bridle would hold her back: tell her of her fault, she will not believe she is
in any fault: give her good counsel, but she will not take it: if my Father
did but look after another woman, then she would be jealous: the more he loved
her, the more she would disdain him: if he threatened her, she would be
angry: when he flattered her, then she would be proud: if he forbore her, it
made her bold: if he chastened her, she would turn to a serpent: at a word,
my mother would never forget an injury, nor give thanks for a good turn: what
an ass then was my Father to exchange gould for dross, pleasure for pain:
it is a wonderful thing to see the mad feats of my mother, for she would
pick thy pocket, empty thy purse, laugh in thy face and cut thy throat, she is
ungrateful, periurd, full of fraud, flouting, and deceit, unconstant washpish,
toyish, light, sullen, proud, discourteous and cruel: the breast of my mother
was the harbourer of an envious heart, her heart the storehouse of poisoned
hatred, her head devised villainy, and her hands were ready to put in practice
what her heart desired, then who can but say but my mother a woman sprung from
the Devil? Page 15.
you from your mother, and so Swetnam is the Devils Grandchild. Do you not
blush to see what a halter you have purchased for your own neck? You thought
in your ruff of fury like Augustus Caesar, to make an edict that all the
world should be taxed, when your self is tributary to the greatest
infirmities: you blowed the fire of sedition with the bellows of your anger,
and the coals are burning in your own bosom, Periculoso plenum opus alea,
tractas and incedis per ignes suppositos cineri doloso. Hor^ O^^^. 2.
Is there no reverence to be given to your mother because you are weaned from
her teat, and never more shall be fed with her pappe? You are like the rogue
in the Fable which was going to the gallows for burglarie, that bit off his
mothers nose, because she chastised him not in his infancy for his
pettie-Larcenies: is this the requital of all her cost, charge, care, and
unspeakable pains she suffered in the producing of such a monster into the
light? If she had crammed gravel down thy throat when she gave thee suck, or
exposed thee to the mercy of the wild beasts in the wilderness when she fed
thee with the pap, thou could not have showen thy self more ungrateful then
thou have in belching out thy nefarious contempt of thy mothers sex. Ingratum
si di^eero ^mnia di^^ro.
Wherefore me thinks it is a pleasing revenge that thy soul arraines thee at
the bar of conscience, and thy distracted mind cannot choose but hant thee
like a bumbaylie to serve a sub paena on thee, the style and penning of your
pamphlet has brought you within the compass of a Praemunire, and every
sentence being stolen out of other books, accuses you of robbery. So that
thou carriest in thy self a walking Newgate up and down with thee, thy own
perplexed suspicions like Promotheus vulture is always gnawing on thy liver.
Besides, these books which are of late come out (the latter whereof has
prevented me in the designs I purposed in running over your wicked
handi-worke) are like so many red-hot irons to stigmatize thy name with the
brand of a hideous blasphemer and incarnate Devil. Although thou art not
apprehended and attached for thy villainy I might say fellonie, before a
corporal judge, yet thine own conscience if it be not seared up, tortures
thee, and wracks thy tempestuous mind with a dissolution and whurring too and
fro of thy scandalous name, which without blemish my pen can scarce deigne to
write, you find it true which the Poet speaks;

Exemplo quodeunque malo committitur, ipsi
Displicet authori, prima est haec vltio quod se
Iudice nemo nocens absoluitur, improba quamuis
Gratia fallacis praetoris vicerit vrnam. Iuuen: Sat: 13.

What sin is wrought by ill example, soon
The displeased Author wishes it undone.
And it is revenge when if the nocent wight,
Vmpires his cause himself: in his own sight,
He finds no absolution, though the eyes
Of judgment wink, his soul still guilty cries.
It Is often observed, that the affections of auditors (and readers too) are more
offended with the soul mouthed reproof of the brawling accuser, than with the
fault of the delinquent. If you had kept your self within your pretended
limits, and not meddled with the blameless and innocent, yet your preiudicate
railing would rather argue an vnreuerent and lascivious inclination of a
depraved nature, then any love or zeal to virtue and honesty: you ought to
have considered that in the vituperation of the misdemeanors and disorders in
others lines; this cautelous Prouiso should direct you that in seeking to
reform others, you deforme not your self; especially by moving a suspicion
that your mind is troubled and festered with the impostume of inbred malice,
and corrupt hatred: for it is always the badge and cognizance of a degenerous
and illiberali disposition to be ambitious of that base and ignoble applause,
proceeding from the giddy-headed Plebeians, that is acquired by the miserable
oppressing and pilling of virtue. But every wrongful contumely and reproach
has such a sharp sting in it, that if it fasten once on the mind of a good
and ingenuous nature, it is never drawn forth without anxiety and perpetual
recordation of dolor, which if you had known, your hornet-braines would not
have buzd abroad with a resolution to sting some tho you lost your sting and
died for it: you would not like the cuttle fish spewd out your inkie gall with
hope to turn the purest waters to your own sable hew; vt non odio
inimicitiarum ad vituperandu^ sed studio calumniandi ad inimicitias
desce^deres, that you would arm your self, not with the hate of enmity to
dispraise vice, but with the study of calumny to make enmity with virtue: yet
it is remarkable that ignorance and impudence were partners in your work, for as
you have of all things under the sun, selected the bayting, or as you make a
silly solaecisme the bearebayting of Women, to be the tenterhookes whereon to
stretch your shallow inventions on the triuiall subject of every shackragge
that can but set pen to paper: so in the handling of your base discourse, you
lay open your imperfections, arripiendo maledicta ex triuio, by heaping
together the scraps, fragments, and reuersions of diverse english phrases, by
scraping together the glaunders and offals of abusiue terms, and the refuse of
idle headed Authors, and making a mingle-mangle gallimauphrie of them. Lord!
how you have cudgeld your brains in gleaning multitudes of similies as twere
in the field of many writers, and thrasht them together in the flower of your
own deuizor; and all to make a poor confused misceline, whereas thine own
barren soyled soil is not able to yield the least co^gruity of speech. It Is
worthy laughter what pains you have taken in turning over Parismus, what use
you make of the Knight of the Sun, what collections out of Euphues, Amadis a
Gaul, and the rest of Don Quixotes Library, sometimes exact tracing of
Aesopicall Fables, and Valerius Maximus, with the like schooleboyes books, so
that if these Pamphleters would severally pluck a crow with you. Furtiuis
nudata coloribus moucat cornicula risum, let every bird take his own feather,
and you would be as naked as Aesops iay. Indeed you have shown as much foolery
as robbery in feathering your neast, which is a cage of unclean birds, and a
storehouse for the off-scowrings of other writers. Your indiscretion is as
great in the laying together, and compiling of your stolen ware, as your
blockishnesse in stealing, for your sentences hang together like sand without
lime: you bring a great heap of stony rubbish comparisons one upon the neck
of another, but they concur no more to sense, then a company of stones to a
building without mortar, and it is a familiar Italian Proverb, duro e duro non
famuro, hard and hard makes no wall, so your hard dull pate has collected
nothing that can stand together with common sense, or be pleasing to any
refined disposition, rough and vnhewen morsells digd out of others quarries,
potsherds picked out of sundry dunghills: your mouth indeed is full of stones,
lapides loqueris, but not so wisely nor so warily cramd in as the geese that
fly over the mountains in Silicia, which carry stones in their beakes lest
their cackling should make them a pray to the Eagles, where you might learn
wit of a goose.

(...). Either speak peace, or hold your peace. Is it not irksome to a wise
and discreet judgment, to hear a book stuffed with such like sense as this,
The world is not made of oatmeale? I have heard of some that have thought the
world to have been composed of atoms, never any that thought it made of
oatmeale: Nor all is not gold that glisters, nor the way to heaven is strewed
with rushes, for a dram of pleasure an ounce of pain, for a pint of honey a
gallon of gall, for an inch of mirth an ell of moan, etc. None above the
scumme of the world could endure with patience to read such a medly composed
of discords. Sometimes your dogrill rhymes make me smile, as when you come,

Man must be at all the cost,
And yet live by the loss:
A man must take all the pains,
And women spend all the gains:
Their catching in jest,
And keeping in earnest.
And yet she thinks she keeps her self blameless,
And in all ill vices she would go namelesse.
But if she carry it never so clean,
Yet in the end she will be counted for a cunny-catching queen.
And yet she will swear that she will thrive,
As long as she can find one man alive.
I stand not to descant on your plain song; but surely if you can make ballads
no better, you must be feign to give over that profession: for your Muse is
wonderfully defective in the bandileeres, and you may safely swear with the
Poet,

Nec font labra prolui caballino,
Nec in bicipiti somniasse Parnasso
Memini. --
Sometimes you make me burst out with laughter, when I see your contradictions
of your self; I will not speak of those which others have espied, although I
had a fling at them, lest I should actum agere. Me thinks, when you wrote
your second Epistle, neither to the wisest Clerk, nor yet to the starkest
fool, the giddiness of your head bewrayes you to be both a silly Clerk, and
a stark fool: or else the young men you write to must be much troubled with
the megrim and the dizzinesse of the brain: for you begin as if you were
wont to run up and down the Country with Bears at your tail. If you mean
to see the Beare-baiting of women, then trudge to this Beare-garden apace, and
get in betimes, and view every room where thou may best sit, etc.

Now you suppose to your self the giddy-headed young men are flockt together,
and placed to their own pleasure, profit, and hearts ease. Let but your second
cogitations observe the method you take in your supposed sport: In stead of
bringing your Bears to the stake, you say, I think it were not amiss to
drive all women out of my hearing, for doubt lest this little spark kindle
into such a flame, and raise so many stinging hornets humming about mine ears,
that all the wit I have (which is but little) will not quench the one, nor
quiet the other. Do ye not see your apparent contradiction? Spectatum admissi
risum teneatis amici? You promise your spectators the Bearebaiting of women,
and yet you think it not amiss to drive all women out of your hearing; so
that none but your self the ill-fauoured Hunckes is left in the Beare-garden
to make your invited guests merry: whereupon it may very likely be, the eager
young men being not willing to be guld and cheated of their money they paid for
their room, set their dogs at you, amongst whom Cerberus that hell-hound
appeared, and you bit off one of his heads; for presently after you call him
the two-headed dog, whom all the Poets would feign to have three heads: You
therefore having snapt off that same head, were by the secret operation of that
infernal substance, converted into the same essence: and that may serve as one
reason that I term you Cerberus the Iaylor of hell; for certainly Quic quid
dicitur de toto, dicitur de singulis partibus: That which is spoke of the
whole, is spoken of every part; and every limb of the devil is an homogeneall
part. Do ye not see (goodman woodcocke) what a spring you make for your own
self? Whereas you say it is a great discredit for a man to be accounted a
scold, and that you deal after the manner of a shrew, which cannot ease her
cursed heart but by her unhappy tongue; observe but what conclusion
demonstratiuely follows these premises:

A man that is accounted a scold, has great discredit:
Joseph Swetnam is accounted a scold*
Ergo, Joseph has great discredit.
If you deny the Minor, it is proved out of your own assertion, because you
deal after the manner of a shrew, etc. where we may note first a corrupt
fountain, whence the polluted puddles of your accustomed actions are derived,
A cursed heart; then the cursednesse of your book (which if you might be your
own Judge, deserves no more the name of a book, then a Colliers Jade to be a
Kings Steed) to be the fruit of an unhappy tongue: thirdly, your commodity
you reap by it, discredit. Nay if you were but a masculine scold, twere
tolerable; but to be a profane railing Rahshekeh, it is odious. Neither is this
all your contrariety you have included: for presently after you profess you
wrote this book with your hand, but not with your heart; whereas but just now
you confessed your self to deal after the manner of a shrew, which cannot
otherwise ease your cursed heart, but by your unhappy tongue: so your hand has
proved your unhappy tongue a lier. This unsavory nonsense argues you to be
at that time possessed with the fault you say commonly is in men, to wit,
drunkenness, when you wrote these iarring and incongruous speeches, whose
absurdities accrue to such a tedious and infinite sum, that if any would
exactly trace them out, they should find them like a Mathematical line,
Diuisibilis in semper diuisibilia. Twould put down the most absolute
Arithmetician to make a catalogue of them: wherefore I could wish thee to make
a petition, that you might have your books called in and burnt; for were it
not better that the fire should befriend thee in purifying the trash, and
eating put the canker of thy defamation, then thy execrable designs and
inexcusable impudence should blazon abroad thy drunken temeritie and temulent
foole-hardinesse to future ages, then thy book should peremptorily witness
thy open and Atheistical blasphemy against thy Creator even in the very
threshold and entrance? but above all, where thou do put a lie on God
himself, with this supposition, Page 31.
If God had not made them only to be a plague to man, he would never have
called them necessary evils: Which I thus anticipate; But God never called them
necessary evils, Therefore God made them not to be a plague to man. Or else
turning the conclusion to the mean thus: But God did not make them to be a
plague, but a helper and procurer of all felicity; therefore God never called
them necessary evils. Were it not (I say) far better for you that your
laborious idle work should be abolished in the flames, then it should
publicly set forth the apert violation of holy writ in sundry places? one in
the beginning (as I remember) where you falsely auerre, that the blessed
Patriarch David exclaimed bitterly against women, and like the tempting devil
you allege half Scripture, whereas the whole makes against your self: for
thus you affirm he says; It is better to be a doore-keeper, than to be in the
house with a froward woman. In the whole volume of the book of God, much less
in the Psalms, is there any such bitter exclamation? But this is the dittie of
the sweet singer of Israel, whereby he did intimate his love unto the house of
God, and his detestation of the pauilions of the unrighteous by this
Antithesis: It is better to be a doore-keeper in the house of the Lord, than to
dwell in the Tabernacles of the ungodly. Now if you have a private spirit that
may interpret by enthusiasmes, you may confine the Tabernacles of the ungodly
only to froward women; which how absurd and gross it is, let the reader
judge. Do thou not blush (graceless) to pervert (with Elemas) the strait
ways of God, by profaning the Scriptures, and wreathing their proper and
genuine interpretations to by-senses, for the boulstering and upholding of your
damnable opinion? besides thy pitifully wronging of the Philosophers, as
Socrates, Plato, and Aristotle, etc. whom your illiterate and clownish Muse
never was so happy to know whether they wrote any thing or no. Your ethnicke
histories, although they rather make against men than women, yet in your
relation you most palpably mistake, and tell one thing for another, as of
Holophernes, Antiochus, Hannibal, Socrates, and the rest which the poor
deluded Corydons and silly swains account for oracles, and maintain as
axioms. The quirkes and crotchets of your own pragmaticall pate, you father
on those ancient Philosophers that most extremely oppose your conceit of
marriage: for Plato made this one of his laws, that whosoever was not married at
thirty five years of age, should be punished with a fine. Further he implies a
necessity of marriage, even in regard of the adoration of God himself: (...):
It Is necessary that there should be a lawful generation and education of
children, that life as a lamp may continue to posterity, that so there might
always be some to worship God. What more divinely or religiously could be
spoken by a Paynim? How then durst you say that the Philosophers that lived in
the old time had so hard an opinion of marriage, that they took no delight
therein, seeing the chief of them were married themselves? I could be infinite
to produce examples and symboles to make you a lier in print: (...). Theognis.
Nothing is more sweet than a good wife. (...), Protagoras.
He that has a good wife, has a merry life. Most famous is that retortion of
Pittachus, one of the seven wise men of Greece, when he demanded a fellow
wherefore he would not take to him a wife, and the fellow answered, (...). If I
take a fair wife, I shall have her common; if a foul, a torment. The wise man
replied, (...), If thou getst a foul wife, thou shall not have her common; if
a fair, no torments. There is as much reason for the one as the other: but it is
but wasting paper to reckon up these obuious sayings. Let that same acclamation
of Horace stand for a thousand others:

Foelices ter and amplius,
Quos irrupta tenet copula, nec malis
Divulsus querimonijs,
Suprema citius soluet amor die.
Thrice and more times are they blessed,
That in wedlockes bands do rest,
Whose faithful loves are knit so sure,
That blameless endless they endure.
But you that will traduce the holy Scriptures, what hope is there but you
will deprave humane authors. You tax Plato and Aristotle of a lascivious life
that by the light of natural reason were chiefest establishers of Matrimony,
both in regard of oeconomicke, Plato ^^^ de leg: Ar^ 1. O^^on. cap. 7.
and politic affairs. do these things deserve commendations of any, but
rather the scorn and reproof of all: what a silly thing it is, let Monsieur
Swetnam judge, when Valerius Maximus relates in his 4. book, Page 49.
a history of one Tiberius Gracchus, that found two serpents in his bedchamber
and killed the male, which by the prediction of South sayers designed himself
to death, because he dearly loved his wife Cornelia, and you like an Ass tell
this tale of Valerius Maximus, as if because Joseph tells a tale of one Bias
that bought the best and worst meat which was tongues, in the market: he that
reads it should say that one lying Ass Swetnam bought the best and worst
tongues; but certainly if that Bias had met with your tongue in the Market,
he would have taken it for the worst and most unprofitable meat, because from
nothing can come worse venom then from it: What should I speak of the
figments of your dull pate, how absurdly you tell of one Theodora a Strumpet in
Socrates time, that could intise away all the Philosophers Scholars from him:
is not the vain and inconstant nature of men more culpable by this ensample
than of women, when they should be so luxuriously bent that one silly light
woman should draw a multitude of learned Scholars from the right way: yet
neither Laertius, nor any that writ the lives of Philosophers make mention of
this Theodora, but I have read of a glorious Martyr of this name, a Virgin of
Antiochia, in the time of Dioclesian the Emperor, who being in prison, a
certain barbarous Soldier moved with lust in himself, and the luster of her
beauty, would have ravished her by violence, whom she not only deterred from
this cursed act by her perswasiue oratory, but by her powerful entreaties by
changing vestments wrought her delivery by him. I would run through all your
silly discourse, and anatomize your basery, but as some have partly been
boulted out already, and are promised to be prosecuted, so I leave them as not
worthy rehearsal or refutation. I would give a supersede as to my quill: but
there is a most pregnant place in your book which is worthy laughter that
comes to my mind where you most graphically describe the difference and
antipathie of man and woman, which being considered, you think it strange
there should be any reciprocation of love, for a man say you delights in arms,
and hearing the rattling drum, but a woman loves to hear sweet music on the
Lute, Cittern, or Bandora: I prithee who but the long-eard animal had rather
hear the Cuckoe than the Nightingale? Whose ears are not more delighted with
the melodious tunes of sweet music, then with the harsh sounding drum? Did
not Achilles delight himself with his harp as well as with the trumpet? Nay,
is there not more men that rather affect the laudable use of the Citterne, and
Bandore, and Lute for the recreation of their minds, than the clamourous noise
of drums? Whether is it more agreeable to humane nature to march amongst
murdered carcasses, which you say man rejoices in, than to enjoy the fruition
of peace and plenty, even to dance on silken Carpets, as you say, is our
pleasure? What man soever makes wars, is it not to this end, that he might
enjoy peace? Who marches among murdered carcasses, but to this end, that his
enemies being subdued and slain, he may securely enjoy peace? Man loves to
hear the threatening of his Princes enemies, but woman weeps when she hears
of wars, What man that is a true and loyal subject loves to hear his
Princes enemies threaten: is not this a sweet commendation think you? is it
not more humane to bewail the wars and loss of our countrymen, then to
rejoice in the threats of an adversary? but you go forward in your paralelling
a man's love to lie on the cold grass, but a woman must be wrapped in warm
mantles. I never heard of any that had rather lie in the could grass then in a
feather-bed, if he might have his choice; yet you make it a proper attribute to
all your sex. Thus you see your cheifest elegancie to be but miserable
patches and botches: this Antithesis you have found in some Author betwixt a
warrier and a lover, and you stretch it to show the difference betwixt a man
and a woman; sed nos hac a scabie teneamus vngues: I love not to scratch a
mangie rascal, there is neither credit nor pleasure in it. You threaten your
second volly of powder and shot, wherein you will make us snakes, venomous
adders, and scorpions, and I know not what; Second Epistle.
are these terms beseeming the mouth of a Christian or a man, which is ouo
prognatus eodem, did not your mother hatch the same Cockatrice egg to make you
in the number of the generation of Vipers? and I take you to be of that brood
which Homer calls (...), always lolling out the tongue, and all the
Historiographers term Scopes that give a most unpleasing and harsh note, quasi
(...), cauilling and taunting, and as Caelius wittily notes them to be so
called, quasi Sciopas, (...) having their face obscured in darkness, so this
your book being but the howling of a night-bird shall circumscribe thy name in
the dungeon of perpetual infamy. Thou that art extold amongst clownes and
fools, shall be a hissing, and a byword to the learned and judicious: in so
much as thine unlucky shrieking shall affect thee with ghastly terrors and
amazements: never think to set forth more larums of your brutishness, but as
Labienus, who was surnamed Rabies madness, because he used such liberty of
his detracting tongue, that he would without regard or discretion, rail upon
all men in his exasperate mood; When all his books and writings were made a
bonfire of (which in those days was a newfound way of punishing untoward
wits) Eam contumeliam (says mine Author) Labienus non tulit neque superstes
ingenio suo esse voluit. Labienus took snuff at this contumelious destruction
of his despised labors, he was unwilling to be the suruiuing executor of his
own wit, whereupon in a melancholy and desperate mood he caused himself to be
coffined up, and carried into the vault where his ancestors were entombed
(thinking (it may be) that the fire which had burned his fame should be denied
him) he died and buried himself together. I do not wish you the same death,
though you have the same conditions and surname as he had, but live still to
bark at Virtue, yet these our writings shall be worse then fires to torture
both thy book and thee: Wherefore transcribing some verses that a Gentleman
wrote to such an one as your self. in this manner I conclude.

Thy death I wish not, but would have thee live,
To rail at virtues acts, and so to give
Good virtues luster. Seeing envy still
Waits on the best deserts to her own ill.
But for your self learn this, let not your hand
Strike at the flint again which can withstand
Your malice without harm, and to your face
Return contempt, the brand of your disgrace;
Whilst women sit unmoved, whose constant minds
(Armed against obloquy) with those weate winds
Cannot be shaken: for who does not mark
That Dogs for custom, not for fierceness bark.
These any footboy kicks, and therefore we
Passing them by, with scorn do pity thee.
For being of their nature mute at noone,
Thou dare at midnight bark against the moon;
Where may thou ever bark that none shall hear,
But to return the like: and may thou bear
With grief more slanders then thou can invent,
Or ere did practice yet, or can prevent,
May thou be matched with envy, and defend
Scorn toward that which all besides commend.
And may that scorn so work upon thy sense,
That neither suffering nor impudence
May teach thee cure: or being ouerworne
With hope of cure may merit greater scorn.
If not too late, let all thy labors be
Contemned by upright judgments, and thy fee
So hardly earned, not paid: may thy rude quill
Be always mercenary, and write still,
That which no man will read, unless to see
Thine ignorance, and then to laugh at thee;
And may thou live to feel this, and then groan,
Because it is so, yet cannot help, and none
May rescue thee, till your checked conscience cry,
This this I have deserved, then pine and die.
Et cum fateri furia iusserit verum,
Prodente clames conscientia; scripsi.
FINIS.

