The Primrose of London, with her valiant adventure on the Spanish coast,
being of the burden of 150. Tun.

Declaring the manner how 97. Spaniards came aboard the same ship, the course of
the skirmish, and how by their valiancie they discomfited them. Whereunto is
added the copy of the Kings commission for the imbarment of all English
Ships. Truly published by Humphrey Mote.



Imprinted at London for Thomas Nelson. 1585.

The valiant adventure of the Primrose.
IT is not unknown unto a few, what danger our English ships have lately
escaped, how sharply they have been entreated, and how hardly they have been
assaulted: so that the valiancie of those that managed them is worthy
remembrance And therefore in respect of the courageous attempt and valiant
enterprise of the ship called the Primrose of London, which has obtained
renown, I have taken in hand to publish the truth thereof, to the intent that
it may be generally known to the rest of the English ships, that by by the
good example of this the rest may in time of extremity adventure to do the
like: to the honor of the realm, and the perpetual remembrance of themselves:
The manner whereof was as follows.

Upon Wednesday being the 26. day of May last past, the ship called the
Primrose, being of 150. Tun, lying without the Bay of Bilbo, having been
there two days there came a Spanish Pinisse to them, wherein was the Corigidor
and six others with him: these came aboard the Primrose, seeming to be
Merchants of Byskie, or such like, bringing Cherries with them, and spoke very
friendly to the master of the Ship, whose name is Foster, and he in courteous
wise bad them welcome, making them the best cheer that he could: as beer,
beef, and biscuit, wherewith that ship was well furnished: and being thus in
banqueting with the master, four of the seven departed in the said Pinnisse,
and went back again to Bilbo: the other three stayed, and were very pleasant
for the time: But M. Foster misdoubting some danger, secretly gave speech that
he was doubtful of these men what their intent was, nevertheless he said
nothing, nor seemed not in ane ontward wise to mistrust them at all. Forthwith
there came a ship-boate wherein was 70. persons, being Merchantes, and such
like of Bisky: and besides this boat, there came also the Pinnisse which
before had brought the other three, in which Pinnisse there came 24. as the
Spaniards themselves since confessed. These made toward the Primrose, and
being come thither, there came aboard the Corigidor with three or four of his
men: but M Foster seeing this great multitude, desired yt there might no more
come aboard, but that the rest should stay in their boats, which was
granted: nevertheless, they took small heed of these words, for on a sudden
they came forth of the boat, entering the ship, every Spanyard taking him to
his Rapier which they brought in the boat, with other weapons, and a Drum
wherewith to triumph over them. Thus did the Spaniards enter the ship, plunging
in fiersly upon them, some planting themselves under the deck, some entering
the Cabbens, and a multitude attending their pray. Then the Corigidor having an
officer with him which bare a white wand in his hand, said to the master of
the ship: Yield your self, for you are the Kings prisoner: whereat the
master said to his men, We are betrayed. Then some of them set daggers to his
breast, and seemed in furious manner as though they would have slain him,
meaning nothing less then to do any such act, for all that they sought was
to bring him and his men safe alive to shore: whereat the master was amassed
and his men greatly discomfited to see themselves ready to be conveyed even to
the slaughter: notwithstanding some of them respecting the danger of the
master, and seeing how with themselves there was no way but present death if
they were once landed among the Spanyardes, they resolved themselves either to
defend the master, and generally to shun that danger, or else to die and be
buried in the midst of the sea, rather then to suffer themselves to come into
the tormentors hands, and therefore in very bold and manly sort some took
them to their iauelings, lances, bore-speares, and shot, which they had set in
readiness before, and having 5 Caleuers ready charged, which was all the small
shot they had, those that were under the hatches or the grate, did shoot up at
the Spaniards that were over their heads, which shot so amassed the Spaniards
on the sudden, as they could hardly tell which way to escape the danger,
fearing this their small shot to be of greater number then it was: others in
very manly sort dealt about among them, showing themselves of that courage
with bore-speares and lances, that they dismayed at every stroke two or three
Spaniards. Then some of them desired the master to command his men to cease
and hold their hands, but he answered that such was their courage in defense of
their own lives, that they would slay them and him also: and therefore it lay
not in him to do it. Now did their blood run about the ship in great quantity,
some of them being shot in between the legs, the bullets issuing forth at
their breasts, some cut in the head, some thrust into the body, and many of them
very sore wounded, so that they came not so fast in on the one side, but now
they tumbled as fast over board on both sides with their weapons in their
hands, some falling into the sea, and some getting into their boats, making
haste toward the City. And this is to be noted, that although they came very
thick thither, there returned but a small company of them, neither is it
known as yet how many of them were slain or drowned, only one English man
was then slain, whose name was John Tristram, and 6 other hurt. It was great
pity to behold how the Spaniards lay swimming in the sea, and not able to
save their lives, four of them taking hold of the ship, were for pity sake
taken up again by M Foster and his men, not knowing what they were: all the
Spaniards bosoms were stuffed with paper, to defend them from the shot, and these
four having some wounds were dressed by the surgion of the ship. one of them
being the Corigidor himself, who is governor of a hundred Towns and Cities
in Spain, his living by his office, better then 600 pound yearly. This
skirmish happened in the evening about six of the clock, after they had laden
20. Tun of goods and better out of the said ship: which goods was delivered by
two of the same ship, whose names were John Burrell, and John Brodbanke,
these being on shore were stayed, and are yet remaining there, God comfort
them, for they are now in prison.

After this valiant enterprise of 28. English men against 97. Spaniards, they
saw it was in vain for them to stay and therefore set up sails, and by Gods
providence avoided all danger, brought home the rest of their goods, and came
thence with all erpedition, and God be thanked, arrived safely in England near
London on Wednesday being the 8. day of June, 1585. In which their return to
England, the Spanyardes that they brought with them offered 5^0. Crowns to be
set on shore in any place, and seeing that the master would not do it, they
were content to be ruled by them, and craved mercy at their hands. And after
Master Foster demanded why they came in such sort to betray and destroy them,
to whom the Corigidor answered, that it was not done only of themselves, but
by the commandment of the King himself, and calling for his hose which were
wette, did pluck forth the Kings Commission, by which he was authorized to do
all that he did: The Copy whereof follows, being translated out of Spanish.

THE KING.
LIcentia de scober my Corigidor of my sigria of Bisky, I have caused a great
fleet to be put in readiness in the haven of Lisbon, and the river of Cyuil.
There is required for the soldiers armor, victuals, and munition, that are to
be employed in the same great store of shipping of all sorts against the time
of service, and to the end there may be choice made of the best upon knowledge
of their burden and goodness: I do therefore require you, that presently upon
the arrival of this carrier, and with as much dissimulation as may be, that
the matter may not be known until it be put in execution: take order for the
staying and arresting (with great provision) of all the shipping that may be
found upon the coast, and in the ports of the said segnoury: excepting none of
Holland, Zeland, Esterland, Germany, England, and other Provinces that are in
rebellion against me, saving those of France which being little, and of small
burden and weak, are thought unfit to serve the turn. And the stay being
thus made, you shall have a special care that such merchandise as the said
ships or hulkes have brought whether they be all or part unladen may be taken
out, and that the armor, munition, takels, sails, and victuals may be safely
bestowed, as also that it may be well foreseen, that none of the ships or
men may escape away. Which things being thus executed, you shall advertise me
by an express messenger of your proceeding therein. And send me a plain and
distinct declaration of the number of ships that you shall have so stayed in
that coast and parts, whence every one of them is which belongs to my Rebels,
what burden and goods there are, and what number of men in every of them, and
what quantity they have of Armory, Ordinance, munition, victuals, tacklings
and other necessary, to the end that upon sight hereof, having made choice of
such as shall be fit for the service, we may further direct you what ye shall
do. In the maane time you shall presently see this my commandment put in
execution, and if there come thither any more ships, you shall also cause
them to be stayed and arested after the same order, using therein such care and
diligence, as may answer the trust that I repose in you, wherein you shall do
me great service. Dated as Barselonia the 29. of May.

And thus have you heard the truth and manner therof-wherein is to be noted the
great courage of the master, and the loving hearts of the servants to save
their master from the danger of death: yea, and the care which the master
had to save so much of the owners goods as he might, although by the same the
greatest is his own loss in that he may never travel those parts any more
without the loss of his own life, nor yet any of his servants: for if
hereafter they should (being known) they are like to taste of the sharp
torments which is there accustomed in their hellish, alias holy house. And as
for their tearming English ships to be in rebellion against them, it is
sufficiently known by themselves, and their own conscience cannot deny it,
but that with love, unity, and concord, our ships have ever been favorable
unto them, and as willing to pleasure their King, as his subjects any way
willing to pleasure English passingers.

The God of heaven preserve the Queens majesty of England, who lives and
rules in mercy, love, peace, and unity, putting up all wrongs whatsoever:
God grant her highness long to reign over England in health, as she has long
continued, and God grant yt her enemies, and all traitors to her highness may
come to confusion, Amen.

FINIS.

